MONTHLY REPORT
AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER
2004
Vol 56
No 8

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1Fax +49 69 5601071Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 13 August 2004.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on theinternet.
The Monthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in summer 2004 5
Overview 6Global and European setting 10
Entry of new currencies into theExchange Rate Mechanism II (ERM II) 19
Monetary policy, banking business
and the capital market 21
Money market management andliquidity needs 22
Index certificates – a new investmentinstrument 33
Economic conditions in Germany 35Foreign trade and payments 46Public finances 54
The Stability and Growth Pactfollowing the European Court ofJustice’s judgement of 13 July 2004 64
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finances in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*External sector 67*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
4Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
5The economic scene
in Germany
in summer 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
6OverviewEconomic recovery still intact, but largely
dependent on export business
In the second quarter, the German economy
again received a considerable boost from ex-ports. The economic recovery, which had al-ready become somewhat stronger in the firstthree months of this year, gained a little moremomentum in the second quarter of 2004.According to initial estimates by the FederalStatistical Office, real GDP in Germany (ad-justed for working-day and seasonal fluctu-ations) grew by 0.5% compared with the pre-vious quarter. Including the growth attainedin the first quarter (+0.4%), this gives an an-nualised growth rate for the current year of1
3/C254%. Consequently, overall average capacity
utilisation is likely to have increased some-what for the first time in nearly three years;hence the pattern of economic developmentseen in the first half of 2004 may well be de-scribed as a slight upturn.
The upswing was again fuelled by exports in
the wake of the expansion of world economicactivity, which continued at a strong pace thisspring. The world economy was still drivenprimarily by the two global centres of growth,the United States and China, although theeconomic growth rates in these two countriesfell somewhat compared with the peak levelsrecorded at the beginning of the year. TheFederal Reserve Bank as well as internationalorganisations recently forecast US growthrates for next year of between 3
1/C252% and 4%.
In addition, the global upturn has increasinglytaken hold in other parts of the world, includ-ing the euro area, and as a result is now morebroadly based.Growth in
second
quarter ...
... once again
export-led

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
7At the same time, however, the German
economy’s high dependence on external eco-nomic stimuli remains the “Achilles’ heel” ofthe economic recovery. As previously, domes-tic demand provided little impetus in thesecond quarter, with the result that invest-ment remained weak on the whole despitethe cyclical improvement and favourable fi-nancing conditions. This was mainly due tothe further drop in demand for constructionwork. Other fixed investment and investmentin machinery and equipment remained stag-nant. The situation was compounded by thefact that households remained very restrainedin their consumer spending. Hence, the econ-omy received no stimulus from this areaeither. Retail trade, in particular, is sufferingfrom the persistently muted level of con-sumer spending, whereas some service indus-tries have experienced a slight improvementin the past few months. This holds true forconsumer-oriented sectors such as the hoteland catering trade but even more so for com-mercial service providers, which ultimatelyalso benefited from the buoyant demand forGerman exports.
One of the main reasons for households’ on-
going spending restraint is the widespreadlack of economic confidence. The tense situ-ation on the labour market and the poor con-dition of public finances, with the implica-tions for future burdens on households in theform of taxes and social security contribu-tions, are unsettling households’ confidencein their income outlook. Evidently, the author-ities have not yet managed to convincinglyconvey the necessity for and the future bene-fits of the large legislative reform packageand hence to give households, in particular,greater planning certainty. Controversy par-ticularly surrounds “Hartz IV”, one of the keymeasures taken to improve the situation onthe labour market.
Measures to bolster confidence are also need-
ed not least in the area of fiscal policy in thenarrower sense of the term. After havingrisen in the past few years due to an un- Half-yearly
 5 bn
%
Memo item
Change in GDP
Domestic demandLin scale
Contribution to growth
on year-on-year comparison2
Net exportsLog scale
Real GDP 1Macroeconomic trends
and demand profile
1At 1995 prices; adjusted for seasonal and
working-day variations. — 2Partly based
on Bundesbank estimations using the un-
adjusted figures of the national accounts
data from 12 August 2004.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−1005
1000
995
990
2001 2002 2003 2004Domestic
demand
sluggish
Uncertainty on
the part of
households
Large public
deficits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
8favourable economic climate and extensive
cuts in taxes and social security contribu-tions, the general government deficitreached 3.9% of GDP in 2003, thereby ex-ceeding the 3% limit stipulated in the Stabil-ity and Growth Pact for the second time insuccession. From the present perspective, nosignificant improvements can be expectedfor the current year either. Given the bur-geoning economic recovery, it is now essen-tial to define the budget figures, at least forthe coming year, in a way that convincinglyconveys the willingness and resolve to con-solidate public finances. This includes stayingbelow the ceiling of 3% prescribed for thegeneral government deficit. This requirementensues not least from the commitmentswhich were entered into within the frame-work of European monetary union andwhich were recognised by the representa-tives of all levels of government (for details,see box on page 64).
In the past few months, the real scope for
household spending has been additionallysqueezed by higher consumer prices. Theyear-on-year rate of price increases in thesecond quarter averaged 1.7%. This largelyresulted from the entry into force of thehealthcare reform and the increase in tobaccotax at the beginning of the year. In addition,the cost of energy rose in the wake of thesurging oil prices. In the past few weeks, thequotations for North Sea Brent crude ex-ceeded US$40 per barrel. The primary causeof this price hike is the unusually rapid rise inthe worldwide demand for energy. Oil pricesare being additionally inflated by a “fear pre-mium” in anticipation of possible productionlosses in the case of major suppliers in theMiddle East, Latin America and Russia. Inmacroeconomic terms, the oil price hike rep-resents a steep loss of real income for oil con-sumers and a gain for oil producers, a factwhich per se will dampen growth.
The desired recovery in domestic demand in
Germany could be additionally hampered byfurther oil price rises. The current level of oilprices is not jeopardising the general recovery,however, especially as most of the economicforecasts made before the recent price surgehad already factored in relatively high oilprices for this year and next. Even so, a con-tinuation of the rise in oil prices or a strongnegative impact on market participants’ ex-pectations would pose a serious threat to thecurrent economic scenario.
On the price front, too, sustained oil price in-
creases would also bear serious risks. How-ever, the current level of oil prices does notwarrant a fundamental correction of theprice outlook for Germany. The average an-nual rise in consumer prices in Germany islikely to remain below 2% in 2004 and 2005,although this is based on the assumptionthat no second-round effects occur and thatthe primary impact on income stemmingfrom the rise in energy costs is absorbed. Thisrequires even greater wage restraint than ifthe situation in the oil markets were lessacute.
Stability-oriented behaviour on the part of all
participants makes it easier for monetary pol-icymakers to ensure price stability in the euroarea in an environment of favourable monet-
Scope for real
spending
squeezed by
government
measures and
surging oil
pricesRecovery
scenario ...
... and price
outlook not
basically
undermined
Favourable
monetary
conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
9ary conditions. At the same time, the some-
what higher upside risks to prices in the euroarea require further close monitoring in orderto maintain confidence in stable prices bothin the euro area as a whole and in Germanyin particular.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
10Global and
European settingWorld economic activity
Global economic growth continued at a fast
pace in spring. Strong stimuli still emanatedfrom the United States and China eventhough real gross domestic product (GDP) inboth countries grew somewhat more slowlyduring the second quarter than at the begin-ning of the year. The Japanese economy con-tinued its upward trend but the increase intotal value added was not as sharp as before.The global upswing became even morebroadly based insofar as output in most otherregions also showed a steep upwards trend.This was boosted not only by rapidly expand-ing exports but often also by more buoyantdomestic demand. This is the case in the newEU member states where investment andprivate consumption rose considerably. Inaddition, the euro-area economic recoverymade good progress in spring but still re-mained quite export-dependent up to theend of the period under review. The majorityof CIS countries, a number of Latin Americaneconomies and the OPEC countries in theMiddle East continued to benefit from the im-proved terms of trade following the price rallyon the international commodity markets.
The generally favourable global economic
outlook has been clouded by increased infla-tionary pressures in the past few months,however. Overall, average consumer prices inindustrial countries – for which up-to-datedata are available – showed a 2.2% year-on-year increase in the April-June period com-pared with 1.4% in the first quarter. Exclud-ing Japan, where consumer prices continuedto fall, the rate climbed from 1.7% to 2.5%.Sharp upswing
in the global
economy
Prices in
industrial
countries

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
11This was primarily attributable to the marked
increase in international crude oil priceswhich, in the case of Brent North Sea oil,amounted to 37% on a quarterly averageyear-on-year in dollar terms and 29% in euroterms. (Oil prices continued to rise after mid-year, reaching a record high in US dollarterms in the middle of August). At 1.5% inthe second quarter, the core inflation rate (iethe year-on-year rate excluding the volatilecomponents of energy and food) for the in-dustrial countries was perceptibly lower thanthe headline rate. It was only 0.3 percentagepoint up on the first quarter. It is a positivesign that the majority of industrial countriesare not suffering any significant second-round effects in the form of greater wage in-creases. Measured on the basis of inflation-indexed bonds (French OATei 2012 and USTIP 2012), long-term inflation expectations(including the risk premium) were at 2.2%and 2.4% in the USA and the euro arearespectively in mid-August.
At 5%, the inflation rate in China reached its
highest level for seven years in June. Not leastfor this reason, the government implementedabove all administrative measures – whichwere sometimes not particularly in keepingwith market principles – in order to curb do-mestic demand, for example, the limitation ofcredit to certain economic sectors. An import-ant factor in this was that the Chinese centralbank’s scope for monetary policy action is ra-ther limited and will remain so as long as theexchange rate is de facto pegged to the USdollar. The first success of China’s efforts tomaintain stability is the fact that, in compari-son with the same period last year, second-quarter real GDP growth (at 9
1/C252%) was
somewhat lower than in the first quarter. Afurther slowdown has been forecast for thesecond half of 2004.
Although permanently high oil prices could
dampen global economic growth, it is unlike-ly – from today’s viewpoint – that they willstop it completely, however. It must also betaken into consideration that the situation onSeasonally adjusted
%
%
%
%
Euro area
2004United KingdomJapanUSAQuarter-on-quarter changeGrowth trends in
selected industrial countries
Deutsche Bundesbank1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
02.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−2.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
2000 2001 2002 2003Boom in China
somewhat
dampened
Burdens
and risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
12the industrial raw material markets did not
deteriorate further at the end of the periodunder review; the corresponding dollar indexhas fallen somewhat since mid-July. Thehigh geopolitical risks continued to squeezegrowth but have at least not increased overthe past few months. On the whole, therehas also been no change in the potential dis-ruptive impact of external imbalances.
Initial calculations show that second-quarter
aggregate output in the USA was up by
3/C254%
on the quarter after adjustment for seasonaland working-day variations; it had increasedby just over 1% in the first quarter. Year onyear, it rose by 4
3/C254%. The perceptible slow-
down in GDP growth in the second quarterwas primarily attributable to an only moder-ate increase in private consumption (+
1/C254%)
after rises of approximately 1% in each of theprevious four quarters. Demand for durablegoods, in particular motor vehicles, actuallyfell in the second quarter. Households’ pro-pensity to buy was subdued as a result of thesharp increases in energy prices, which placeda noticeable strain on the purchasing powerof nominal disposable income. Moreover, thefiscal stimuli which fuelled private consump-tion in the second half of 2003 and at the be-ginning of 2004 have waned. Furthermore,the hike in long-term interest rates in antici-pation of the change in course in US monet-ary policy in the second half of June, appearsto have reduced the volume of mortgage refi-nancing which, until then, had had a strongexpansionary impact on private consumption.
By contrast, commercial investment, buoyed
by positive earnings growth, rocketed by aseasonally adjusted 2% in the second quarterand constituted
1/C254percentage point of GDP
growth. It exceeded the previous year’s levelby 10%. In the aggregate, housing invest-ment even rose by 3
1/C252% in real terms. It may,
however, stabilise slightly during the secondhalf of the year as a result of the increase inmortgage interest rates. After adjustment forprice and seasonal variations, exports climbedby 3%, thereby exceeding the previous year’slevel by 12
1/C254%. Although import growth fell
considerably quarter on quarter (+21/C254%), the
deficit in real net exports remained virtuallyunchanged owing to the higher starting level.
The aforementioned slowdown in private
consumption, over the next few months,could be offset, at least in part, by the ex-pansionary effects of strong employmentgrowth. The wave of concern over the pastyear that the upturn in the USA would passthe labour market by as a “jobless recovery”ebbed considerably during the springmonths. The number of employed peopleoutside the agricultural sector – as deter-mined by the corporate survey – which roseby a total of “only” 0.4% in seasonally ad-justed terms between its cyclical trough inAugust 2003 and February 2004, climbed by0.7% in the four months from March to July.In July, however, there was only a negligibleincrease in the number of new jobs created.
1
Unemployment was at 5.5% at the end ofthe period under review, which was 0.8 per-
1One of the discrepancies in the US labour market statis-
tics, however, is the fact that the number of persons in
work as determined by the household survey rose par-
ticularly sharply in July (+0.5% after seasonal adjustment)
compared with the previous month.USA: slowdown
in GDP growth
in the second
quarter
Improved con-ditions on the
labour market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
13centage point below the peak measured in
June 2003.
The strong interaction between employment
and the hidden reserve in the USA is notablein this respect. For example, the labour forceas a percentage of the total working-agepopulation decreased in seasonally adjustedterms from 67% at the end of 2000 to 66%in spring 2004. Withdrawal into the hiddenreserve, which has been especially apparentamong young people, has helped to improvethe situation on the US labour market overthe past few years. Labour force participationhas started to increase again since the begin-ning of 2004, which is tending to slow downthe decline in the overall unemployment rate.
The increase in the consumer price index (CPI)
has accelerated sharply in the USA since thebeginning of the year. The year-on-year ratewas 3.3% in June as against 1.9% at the be-ginning of the year. This was mainly attribut-able to soaring energy prices over recentmonths. However, the core CPI rate (exclud-ing energy and food) also climbed from 1.1%in January to 1.9% in June. The correspond-ing rate of the deflator for private consump-tion (core PCE inflation), which is now thefocus of the Fed’s price analysis, rose from1.2% to 1.5%. These core rates were drivenup not only by the indirect cost-related effectsof higher energy prices but also by the rise inother raw material prices and the higherprices of imported goods resulting from cur-rency depreciation. Furthermore, enterprises’pricing power has increased once again insome sectors. The Fed assumes, however,that the most recent inflation rise will notcontinue in the second half of the year. Ac-cording to the current forecasts being madeby the members of the Federal Open MarketCommittee (FOMC), the core PCE inflationrate will remain within a range (central ten-
%
%%
of which
16 to 24 year-olds
2004Unemployment2
TotalLabour market participation 1
Total
of which16 to 24 year-oldsLabour market participation
and unemployment in the USA
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, house-
hold survey. — 1Labour force as a percent-
age of the total working-age popula-tion. — 2Persons unemployed as a percent-
age of the labour force.
Deutsche Bundesbank13
12
1110
96
5
46867
66
65
6463
62
61
60
2000 2001 2002 2003Employment
and the hidden
reserve in the
USA
Stronger
inflation, but
favourable Fed
forecast

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
14dency) of 13/C254% to 2% at the end of 2004
and 11/C252% to 2% at the end of 2005.2
The Japanese economy grew by almost1/C252%
on the quarter in seasonally adjusted terms in
the second quarter of 2004. It expanded by4
1/C252% on the year. The slowdown is also to be
considered against the backdrop of the ex-tremely rapid rate of expansion in the winterof 2003-04, when real GDP rose by a season-ally adjusted and annualised rate of almost6%. Exports once again made a considerablecontribution to growth, expanding by 3
1/C252%
on the quarter after adjustment for price andseasonal variations and thereby exceedingthe year-on-year level by 18%. By contrast,domestic demand remained virtually un-changed after rapid expansion in the two pre-ceding quarters. In seasonally adjusted terms,private consumption increased by well over
1/C252% while expenditure on new machinery,
equipment and premises in the industrial sec-tor remained at the high level which it hadpreviously reached. Government investmentwas down once again. In the light of general-ly favourable economic developments, theJapanese government’s cabinet office raisedits forecast for the fiscal year 2004-05, whichbegan on 1 April, from 1
3/C254%t o31/C252%. Posi-
tive growth has been forecast again for thefirst time since 1997 and in nominal terms isexpected to reach 1
3/C254%. Impacted by the rise
in energy prices, consumer prices tended topoint upwards in seasonally adjusted terms inJune and July although there was a 0.1% fallon the year. Excluding energy and food,prices fell by 0.4% in June.According to initial calculations, real GDP inthe United Kingdom was up by almost 1% inthe second quarter of 2004 after seasonaland working-day adjustments which repre-sents a slight rise on the first quarter (+
3/C254%)
and on the year (+33/C254%). Overall economic
growth was fairly balanced in that the manu-facturing sector, which, as an economicstraggler, had previously put the brakes onexpansion, brought its output into line withthat of the construction industry and the ser-vices sector. Private consumption once againplayed a major role in shoring up the UKeconomy, with real retail turnover up by al-most 2% on the quarter in the three-monthperiod from April to June. Given the generallyfast pace of growth in the UK, which has per-sisted for some time now, as well as the lowlevel of unemployment and buoyant con-sumer demand, the relative sluggishness ofconsumer price developments is surprising.The inflation rate – as measured by theHarmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP),on which the UK inflation target of 2% isbased – was 1.4% during the April to Julyperiod and therefore only slightly higher thanin the first quarter. At 2.2% in July, the na-tional index (PRIX), which has a differentmethodology to the HICP , even showed asomewhat smaller rise in prices than in theprevious two months. By contrast, houseprices were up by a huge 20% on the year,which means that they have actually doubledsince the middle of 1999.
2The most recent forecasts of the members of the Fed-
eral Open Market Committee, which were published on
20 July 2004 in the “Monetary Policy Report to the Con-
gress”, refer to the core PCE inflation rate. The February
report focused on the overall PCE rate. It is therefore dif-
ficult to compare the two forecasts.JapanUnited
Kingdom

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
15The countries that joined the EU on 1 May
2004 continue to enjoy a strong economicupturn. In the April-May period, industrialoutput in this group of countries was up by aseasonally adjusted 2
3/C254% on the first quarter
and no less than 133/C254% on the year, with
Hungary, Latvia, the Czech Republic, Lithu-ania and Poland attaining two-digit growthrates between 10% and 17%. Owing tohigher productivity gains, however, the vigor-ous industrial activity in the new memberstates is having only a low impact on reducingunemployment. In May, the standardised ratewas 14.1% in seasonally adjusted terms andthus grossly exceeded the average for the oldEU countries (8.1%). The spread ranged from4.2% in Cyprus to 18.9% in Poland.
Price developments on the other hand have
been rather unfavourable over the past fewmonths. In eight of the ten countries, ie ex-cluding Slovenia and Slovakia, year-on-yearHICP inflation has risen considerably since thebeginning of 2004. The unweighted averageof the inflation rates in the ten new countries– Eurostat does not compile an overall indexfor this group of countries – rose by no lessthan 1
1/C252percentage points to 4.4% from
January to June. This increased upward pres-sure on prices was primarily attributable tohigher energy prices and the fact that insome cases major tax increases came intoforce upon accession to the EU on 1 May2004. The divergence in the inflation rates ofthe individual countries remained stark. Thespread ranged from 1.0% in Lithuania to8.1% in Slovakia at the end of the periodunder review.Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
The economic recovery in the euro area con-
tinued at approximately the same pace asduring the first quarter throughout thespring. According to the Flash Estimate, sea-sonally adjusted real GDP increased by
1/C252%.
Compared with the same period last year, itwent up by 2% (further information on theindividual expenditure components is not yetavailable). According to the short-term fore-cast of the European Commission, aggregateoutput will continue to grow within a rangeof 0.3% and 0.7% in the third quarter.
In contrast to the first quarter, industrial out-
put in the April-May period also tended topoint clearly upwards, exceeding the first-quarter level by almost 1% after seasonal ad-justment and the year-on-year level by 2
3/C254%.
In July, capacity utilisation was considerablyhigher than in April and January.
3Industrial
activity was bolstered primarily by foreign de-mand. The value of goods exported to non-euro-area countries rose by a seasonally ad-justed 5
1/C254% on the first quarter in the April-
May period. Furthermore, there was also aperceptible increase in domestic demand insome member states.
Most of the leading economic indicators
point to a continuation of the upturn duringthe second half of the year. For example, thevolume of manufacturing orders received inthe April-May period exceeded the level of
3Owing to a break in the statistical series at the turn of
2003-04, longer comparisons, for example, with the
long-term average for capacity utilisation, are currently
uninformative.New EU
member states
Sustainedgrowth in the
second quarter
More buoyant
industrial
activity
Favourable
outlook for the
second half of
the year

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
16the first quarter by 33/C254% after adjustment for
working-day effects. According to the most
recent EU survey, industrial confidence has re-mained at the level reached in June. In termsof the components of the confidence indica-tor, better assessments of order books wereoffset by poorer production expectations. Thefact that, according to the investment surveycarried out in the March-April period, indus-trial enterprises in the euro area intend tostep up their real expenditure on new ma-chinery, equipment and premises by 3% thisyear – which is somewhat more than the fig-ure specified in autumn 2003 – is consistentwith this picture. In July, however, consumerconfidence in the euro area remained at thesame depressed level as in the first half of theyear, indicating that a sustained improvementin consumption is unlikely over the next fewmonths.
The persistently sluggish consumer climate is
likely to be the result of, among other things,the beleaguered labour markets in several ofthe larger member states, where the cyclicalrecovery has not yet had much of an impact.Overall, unemployment in the euro area roseinto the spring months. The standardised un-employment rate was 9.0% in June.
The second quarter of 2004 saw a deterior-
ation in the price situation in the euro area. Inseasonally adjusted terms, the HICP was upby 0.8% on the first quarter. In each of thethree preceding quarters it had risen by only0.5%. As inflation in the second quarter of2003 had been relatively low at 0.2%, theyear-on-year rate increased from 1.7% to2.3%. According to the Eurostat Flash Esti-mate, the year-on-year rate was 2.4% in July.
In the period from April to June, inflationary
effects were generated, in particular, by theinternational crude oil markets. For house-holds, energy prices were up by no less than3.3% on the quarter. By contrast, after sea-sonal adjustment, there was virtually nochange in the prices of unprocessed food.Disregarding these two components, con-sumer prices were up by 0.6% on the firstquarter of 2004. This figure takes account ofthe impact of tobacco tax hikes in severalmember countries and the effects of thehealth system reform in Germany. In a year-on-year comparison, the inflation rate for thecore components was 2.1% as against 2.0%in the first quarter. Therefore, excluding the
−3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 % points2004 Q2
2003 Q2Finland
NetherlandsGermany
Austria
Belgium
Ireland
Italy
France
Portugal
Greece
SpainLuxembourgInflation differentials
in the euro area *
* Change in the Harmonised Index of Con-
sumer Prices 2004 Q2 vs 2003 Q2 and 2003
Q2 vs 2002 Q2; deviation of the national
inflation rate from the euro-area average.
Deutsche BundesbankLabour market
Consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
17particularly volatile components, the rate has
remained at 2% for the past one-and-a-halfyears despite considerable spare capacity. Itwould have been significantly lower, how-ever, if numerous administrative measureshad not pushed up prices.
4
At the end of the period under review, therewas a somewhat greater divergence in euro-area price developments. Measured by thespread of inflation rates, it grew from 2
1/C252per-
centage points in the first quarter of 2004 to3
1/C252percentage points in the second quarter.
Other unweighted measurements of diver-gence also point towards a further increase indivergence, albeit maybe only a temporaryone.
5Since the diverging forces were at work
particularly in the smaller countries and theinflation rates in the large countries tendedrather to converge somewhat, the measuresweighted according to the size of the countrydid not indicate a greater degree of disper-sion. Compared with the previous year, dis-counting Finland,
6price developments in the
euro area became more uniform as the priceincreases in several countries with above-average inflation rates were considerablysmaller than before.
Exchange rates
Following the sizeable appreciation of the
euro up to the beginning of 2004 and thesubsequent depreciation, there was compara-tively little fluctuation in the euro exchangerate during the spring and summer months.At US$1.29, the euro had already peakedagainst the dollar in February and then fellthrough to the middle of May when it hitUS$1.18. Since then, the euro’s exchangerate against the dollar has hovered aroundthe US$1.20 mark. A series of predominantlyfavourable economic data for the USA andthe subsequent expectations of a gradualtightening of monetary policy by the Fedstrengthened the dollar. At the same time,however, the US currency was burdened byrenewed concerns about the ability to financethe US current account deficit. In both Mayand June, new record deficits were reportedin the US trade balance for March and Aprilrespectively. Against this backdrop, the eurogradually appreciated again, sometimes trad-ing at US$1.24. The euro’s slight upwardtrend during the period under review wasinterrupted temporarily in mid-June and thesecond half of July. First, in June, growing in-flation in the USA generated the impressionthat the Fed could raise interest rates moresharply and more quickly than previously ex-pected. Secondly, the euro momentarily de-preciated against the US dollar in July afterthe report by the Federal Reserve Chairmanto Congress sparked fresh hope among mar-ket participants as regards the economic situ-ation in the USA. However, subsequent publi-cations of US economic data, in particular thesurprisingly small increase in the number of
4For information on the key index effects of the health
reform in Germany, see Deutsche Bundesbank, The eco-
nomic scene in Germany around the turn of 2003-04,
Monthly Report, February 2004, p 48.
5For example, the European football championship re-
sulted in a more than 30% year-on-year increase in hotel
prices in Portugal in June, which may have temporarily
pushed up the overall index by up to 1 percentage point.
Similar, albeit not so noticeable effects are to be expected
as a result of the Olympic Games in Greece.
6In March 2004, Finland considerably lowered its alcohol
tax, thus bringing the HICP down below the level of theprevious year.Development
of the euro’s
exchange rate
against the US
dollar, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
18jobs in both June and July, then again resulted
in a more cautious economic forecast for theUSA and gave the euro new impetus. The for-eign exchange markets had, to a large extent,anticipated the 25 basis point hike in theFed’s key interest rate on both 30 June and10 August 2004 which meant that these in-creases did not have much of an impact onthe euro-dollar exchange rate. At almostUS$1.23 at the end of the period under re-view, it was approximately 2
1/C252% below its
level at the beginning of the year.
There has been no noticeable trend in the
euro-yen exchange rate over the past fewmonths. Since the middle of May, accompan-ied at times by relatively high volatility, theeuro initially depreciated against the yen.During this period, the Japanese economy re-peatedly reported unexpectedly favourableeconomic data, for example, on the growthin industrial output or GDP , which boostedthe attractiveness of investing in Japan. To-wards the end of June, however, the trendwas reversed in favour of the euro. This wasboosted by reports that industrial outputgrowth in Japan was significantly lower thanexpected as well as by relatively poor labourmarket and retail trade figures. Given Japan’sheavy oil dependency, investors may alsohave been unsettled by the high oil price.Therefore, at 136 yen in mid-August, theeuro had gained somewhat on its value at thebeginning of the year.
Against the backdrop of countervailing deter-
minants, there was little change on the wholein the euro’s exchange rate against the poundsterling during the summer. The pound ster-ling was bolstered by the robust develop-ments in the UK economy and further keyinterest rate hikes by the Bank of England inJune and August. This further heightened theinterest rate advantage of investments in theUK compared with those in the euro area.Furthermore, market participants appear tohave speculated on further increases in inter-est rates. However, the appreciation of thepound sterling is tending to be curbed by re-Log scale
US$
££¥
¥
1999 00 01 02 03Nominal effective
exchange rate 1
1999 Q1 = 100... pound sterling... Japanese yenThe euro’s exchange
rate against the ...
... US dollar
*Monthly averages; daily data as of
2004. — 1As calculated by the ECB against
the currencies of 12 countries. 
Deutsche BundesbankExchange rate of the euro *
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.57110
100
901.25
1.15
1.05
0.95
0.85
MM
2004105
100
95
90
85
80 800.700.75
0.70
0.65140
130
120
110140
JF A J JA... against
the yen...
... and against
the pound
sterling

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
19Entry of new currencies into the Exchange Rate Mechanism II (ERM II)
It is expected that the ten new EU member
states will, sooner or later, also participatein monetary union. Exemption clauses suchas those negotiated by the UK and Den-mark in the Maastricht Treaty are not anoption for these countries. Before accessionto monetary union, however, they must ful-fil the convergence criteria, one of which istension-free ERM II membership for twoyears, whereby the exchange rate must re-main close to the central rate.
Upon the application of Estonia, Lithuania
and Slovenia, on 27 June 2004 the curren-cies of these three countries joined ERM II.The standard fluctuation band of €15%around the central rate was agreed. Estoniaand Lithuania had already fixed the ex-change rates of their currencies to the euroin a currency board arrangement withoutany scope for fluctuation. After assessment,these fixed rates were taken as the centralrates for the Estonian kroon and Lithuanianlitas in ERM II. Furthermore, Estonia andLithuania have waived the scope for fluctu-ation of their currencies within ERM II ontheir own initiative by retaining their exist-ing currency board arrangements. Thesevoluntary and unilateral commitments,however, do not place any additional obli-gations on the ECB.
By contrast, Slovenia had previously
allowed the exchange rate of the tolar tofluctuate within a specific band around adepreciation path as part of a crawling pegsystem (see chart on page 20). From thelaunch of the euro at the beginning of1999 up to Slovenia’s entry into ERM II, thetolar lost a total of 21% in value against theeuro via controlled depreciation. The chart,however, also highlights the fact that thedepreciation rate of the euro-tolar ex-change rate was scaled back over time bythe Slovenian central bank.
The success of Slovenia’s ERM II member-
ship will depend on whether the depreci-ation trend of the tolar against the eurocan be credibly broken. Initial indicationsare encouraging even though the observa-tion period is still very short. The tolar’scentral rate in ERM II was set at its euro ref-erence rate on the last trading day beforeits entry ( 51 = 239.64 tolars). Since then, the
tolar has fluctuated only slightly aroundthis rate. When this report went to press on12 August, the exchange rate of the Sloven-ian currency was 240 tolars to one euro,which is only 0.15% above its central rate.Up to now, therefore, the euro-tolar ratehas remained within a very narrow marginwithout making full use of the allowedfluctuation band of €15% around the cen-tral rate.
Continued tension-free developments in
the Slovenian tolar, as well as the Estoniankroon and Lithuanian litas, will depend pri-marily on domestic economic policy beingstability-oriented. The agreements to in-clude the currencies of Estonia, Lithuaniaand Slovenia in ERM II are also based onfirm commitments by these countries tocontinue in their efforts to preserve macro-economic stability, not least in public fi-nances, and to implement structural re-forms.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
20peatedly expressed concerns – particularly on
the part of the Bank of England – about aprice adjustment on the real estate market aswell as by the trade deficit, which was againsomewhat larger at the end of the periodunder review. As this report went to press,the euro was trading at £0.67, ie 5% belowits rate at the beginning of the year.
As a weighted average against the currencies
of 12 major trading partners, the (effective)exchange rate of the euro hardly changedoverall during the summer. It was trading ataround 2
1/C252% below its value at the beginning
of the year as this report went to press. In realterms, ie taking into account the prevailinginflation differentials between the euro areaand its most important trading partners, theeffective exchange rate of the euro was stillsomewhat higher than its average value sincethe beginning of the 1990s.
On 27 June 2004, the first currencies from
the group of new EU member states joinedthe Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM II); thesewere the Estonian kroon, the Lithuanian litasand the Slovenian tolar (see the overview onpage 19). Apart from the euro against whichcentral rates are set only the Danish kroneparticipated in ERM II at that time. The centralrates of the new currencies against the eurowere set at 31 = 15.6466 Estonian kroons,
31 = 3.45280 litas and 31 = 239.640 tolars.
In contrast to Denmark, the standard fluctu-ation band of €15% to the euro applies tothese three currencies. Estonia and Lithuania,however, may maintain their present currencyboard arrangements for the euro without thisplacing any additional obligation on the Euro-pean Central Bank. Two years of tension-freemembership of ERM II, whereby the ex-change rate should remain close to the cen-tral rate, is one of the prerequisites for theintroduction of the euro in these countries.Log scaleExchange rate of the euro
against the Slowenian tolar
Deutsche BundesbankSIT/ 5 
Monthly data
1999 00 01 02 03270
260
250
240
230
220
210
200
190 Daily data
MM
2004Upper
intervention
point
Central parity
Lower
intervention
point270
260
250
240
230
220
210
200
190
JF A JJA
Effective
exchange rate
of the euroERM II

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
21Monetary policy,
banking business and
the capital marketInterest rate policy and the money
markets
Given the continuing favourable medium-
term outlook for prices in the euro area, theGoverning Council of the ECB has left theEurosystem’s key interest rates unchanged inrecent months. The minimum bid rate for themain refinancing operations, now conductedas variable rate tenders, is still 2%. The inter-est rates on the marginal lending facility andthe deposit facility are also unchanged at 3%and 1% respectively.
As market participants expected interest rate
policy to hold steady, the overnight rate(Eonia) again kept close to the minimum bidrate for the main refinancing operations.There was a strong temporary increase in theovernight rate only in early April, when liquid-ity was scarce at the end of the March-Aprilreserve maintenance period. The situation inthe money market then relaxed again and to-wards the end of the subsequent reservemaintenance period the Eonia fell below 2%at times. In the quarter under review, interestrates on longer-term money market instru-ments were driven mainly by expectations ofa rise in interest rates. In early April, for ex-ample, the rates on 12-month funds, in par-ticular, showed a distinct increase. In Junetheir average spread over the Eonia was near-ly 40 basis points. In the ensuing period, how-ever, the spread on longer-term money mar-ket instruments declined again somewhat.However, up to the end of the period underreview, longer-term interest rate expectationson the money market continued to beupward-oriented.Eurosystem
interest rates
unchanged
given stable
outlook for
prices
Money market
rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
22Money market management and liquidity needs
In the past three reserve maintenance periods, money mar-
ket management by the Eurosystem had to make up for aconsiderable increase in credit institutions’ demand forcentral bank money. Overall, this went smoothly. The de-mand arising from the factors determining liquidity wentup by 532.1 billion or around 20%. This was especially due
to the strong 523.8 billion growth in banknotes in circula-
tion, although the pace of growth is continuing to slow.Owing to the Easter public holidays, the expansion wasparticularly marked in the April-May maintenance period.There was also a distinct net increase of 513.5 billion in li-
quidity needs arising from general government deposits.However, this was caused mainly by unusually largeamounts being deposited in the week before the mid-yearcut-off date (24 to 30 June). By contrast, changes in the netforeign reserves and other factors meant, on balance, thatthe market was provided with liquidity amounting to 55.2
billion. After adjusting for valuation effects, this was main-ly due to increases in the Eurosystem’s euro-denominatedfinancial assets, which are included in “other factors”. The53.4 billion net increase in required reserves created add-
itional demand for liquidity.
The greater demand for liquidity was covered primarily by
527.5 billion being added to the value of the main refinan-
cing operations. However, the volume of longer-term refi-nancing operations was also further increased by 57.9 bil-
lion in the April-May maintenance period. This reflectedthe net 510 billion increase in allotment in the operation
settled on 1 April, which concluded the increase in the vol-ume of these operations from 545 to 575 billion that began
on 29 January. On 11 May, the last day of the April-Mayreserve maintenance period, the Eurosystem conducted afine-tuning operation by collecting fixed-term depositsamounting to 513 billion overnight at a fixed rate of 2.0%.
It was the first fine-tuning operation for almost one year.The overhang caused by unexpectedly low demand forliquidity was thus absorbed, resulting in net recourse tothe marginal lending facility amounting to a mere 584 mil-
lion at the end of the period. In addition, this operationwas successful in stabilising the overnight money rates inthe interbank market. In the run-up to the fine-tuning op-eration the Eonia had declined to 1.83% on Friday, 7 Maywhen the excess liquidity became apparent. Consequently,on Monday, 10 May the ECB announced the fine-tuningoperation that was to take place on the following day. As aresult, the overnight rates, which had been at 1.60% at thestart of trading, increased immediately, taking the Eonia to1.84% on the same day. After the operation conducted on11 May, the Eonia was once again close to the minimumbid rate (2.07%).
Otherwise, the Eonia generally moved 2 to 4 basis points
above the minimum bid rate, with slight upward move-ments at the end of the month. After a temporary increaseat the end of the March-April reserve maintenance period,the Eonia again increased at the end of the June-Julyperiod, reaching 2.12% on 4 June when the market expect-ed a liquidity shortage at the end of the period. This was,however, an incorrect assessment of the market. In fact,there was a slight liquidity surplus. The Eonia subsequentlydeclined again temporarily to 1.72% by 8 June. By contrast,owing to a slight liquidity shortfall the Eonia went up for ashort time to 2.53% by the end of the maintenance periodon 6 July. For all that, the Eonia then swiftly increasedagain to a level close to the minimum bid rate.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods
2004
Item7 April
to11 May12 Mayto8 June9 Juneto6J u l y
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances by
1 Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) – 11.1 – 6.1 – 6.6
2 Change in general govern-
ment deposits with the
Eurosystem (increase: –) + 5.5 – 6.2 – 12.8
3 Change in net foreign
reserves
2+ 9.3 + 0.6 – 3.1
4 Other factors2,3– 6.8 + 2.2 + 3.0
Total – 3.1 – 9.5 – 19.5
II Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations – 4.7 + 11.5 + 20.7
(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations + 7.9 + 0.0 – 0.0
(c) Other operations – 0.4 + 0.4 –
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.4
Total + 2.8 + 11.6 + 21.3
III Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I + II) – 0.3 + 2.1 + 1.7
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) + 0.2 – 2.0 – 1.6
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-
tical Section of this Monthly Report .— 2Including end-
of-quarter valuation adjustments with no impact onliquidity. — 3Including monetary policy operations con-
cluded in the second stage and still outstanding in thethird stage of monetary union (outright transactions andthe issuance of debt certificates) as well as financial assetsnot connected with monetary policy.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
23Monetary developments in the euro area
The slowdown in monetary growth, which
began one year ago, continued into thesecond quarter of this year. The growth ofthe euro-area money stock M3 was, in sea-sonally adjusted terms, again slightly weakerin the period from April to June than in theprevious quarter. The three-month movingaverage of annual rates of change wentdown distinctly from 6.3% for the periodfrom January to March to 5.2% for theperiod from April to June. The seasonally ad-justed annualised three-month rate of changewas 5% at the end of June. Again in thesecond quarter, private non-banks investedthe increase in their claims on MFIs equallybetween liquid M3 components and longer-term monetary capital formation. Hence theannualised seasonally adjusted three-monthrate of change in monetary capital formation(excluding the MFIs’ capital and reserves) ishigher than the corresponding monetarygrowth for the fourth consecutive quarter. Inaddition, capital market yields, which hadrisen again in the second quarter, are likely tohave encouraged investment activity outsidethe banking sector. Despite the decline in in-vestors’ preference for liquidity, however, thepresent money stock is still far higher than ex-perience suggests is required to finance infla-tion-free economic growth. Since the possi-bility of this liquidity surplus having an impacton demand in the commodities markets can-not be ruled out entirely, monetary develop-ments must continue to be monitored care-fully. In the present circumstances, however,there is no great risk for price stability.In the quarter under review, the growthof the money stock M3 was spread overalmost all its components. However, in thesecond quarter there was a perceptibly small-er increase in cash holdings than in the pre-ceding quarters, although the pace of expan-sion, at an annualised three-month rate ofchange of 15%, was still high. By contrast,there was hardly any increase in overnight de-posits in the period from April to June, afterthey had risen strongly in the previous quar-ter. In the past three months they expandedat a seasonally adjusted annual rate ofchange of only 1
1/C252% (as opposed to 131/C252%
between January and March). Overall, themoney stock M1 climbed at an annualisedrate of just under 3
1/C252% in the second quarter
of 2004. Other short-term bank deposits (ex-cluding overnight deposits) were also in-Seasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
Reference value: 4½%Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
87
6
54
3
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Slowdown in
monetary
expansion
Components of
the money
stock

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
24creased in net terms in the quarter under re-
view. However, the increase was concen-trated on deposits redeemable at notice of upto three months. By contrast, short-term timedeposits were reduced further in the periodfrom April to June. Unlike what occurred inthe previous quarter, the marketable instru-ments included in the money stock M3 alsoincreased perceptibly in the second quarter.Money market fund shares were the main in-struments sold outside the banking sector butbank liabilities arising from repo transactionsand the sale of money market paper andshort-term bank debt securities also in-creased.
The balance sheet counterparts indicate that,
in the period under review, monetary growthwas stimulated primarily by lending to do-mestic enterprises and households. There wasa particular increase in loans to the privatesector. They expanded in the period underreview by an annualised three-month rate of8%, which was far higher than the corres-ponding monetary growth (5%) for the firsttime since the end of 2000. This developmentcontinued to be driven mainly by the livelydemand for housing loans in some euro-areacountries.
There was a also a strong increase in lending
to the euro-area public sector. In non-season-ally adjusted terms, it expanded by 343 billion
in the April-June period. However, the in-crease affected securitised lending only (by350 billion) while unsecuritised bank lending
to the euro-area public sector was reduced by37 billion. The greater expansion of central
government bank deposits had a dampening 5 billion, seasonally adjusted,
change over the period indicated
 5 billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet counterparts 1
Loans to
enterprises
and households
Public sector
borrowing2
Net externalasset
position
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counterparts
of M3
3Money stock
Jan to Mar 2004
Increase in M3
Apr to June 2004Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts
are shown in terms of whether they expand
(+) or contract (−) the money stock. —
2Bank loans to general government less
euro-area general government deposits
and holdings of securities issued by the MFI
sector. — 3Calculated as errors and omis-
sions from the remaining items of the con-
solidated balance sheet of the MFI sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank200+160+120+80+40+0 40−80−120−160−Balance sheet
counterparts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
25effect on monetary development – as did the
outflows of non-banks’ resources into thenon-euro-area countries.
However, in the second quarter the continued
strong increase in monetary capital formationprovided the main effective counterbalanceto monetary growth. Domestic MFIs wereagain able to place large volumes of bankdebt securities with a maturity of over twoyears outside the domestic banking sector.Demand for longer-term time deposits wasalso heavy.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
In contrast to figures for the euro area as a
whole, short-term deposits in the Germanbanking sector remained virtually unchangedin the period under review. However, therewas a sharp increase in longer-term invest-ment by domestic non-banks in GermanMFIs. In the second quarter institutional in-vestors, in particular, shifted large amounts ofliquid funds to longer-term time deposits. Atthe same time domestic households addedfar less to their short-term bank deposits thanin the previous quarters. The capital marketrates, which rose again in the second quarter,are likely to have favoured longer-term mon-etary capital formation and dampened thepreference for liquidity.
The decline in the preference for liquidity can
be seen most clearly from overnight deposits,which, in seasonally adjusted annualisedterms, were reduced by 3% in the past threemonths (April to June). In particular, insurancecorporations and other financial intermediar-ies reduced their holdings of overnightmoney noticeably.
Short-term time deposits with an agreed ma-
turity of up to two years have been decliningsince the end of 2001; this continued across abroad front in the quarter under review. Inaddition to households, which once againmade a distinct reduction in their short-termtime deposits, financial enterprises also per-ceptibly reduced their deposits with anagreed maturity of up to two years. By con-trast, short-term savings deposits, which aretraditionally held almost exclusively by house-holds, were expanded strongly.Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2004 2003
ItemApr to
JuneApr toJune
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs
1
Overnight + 7.4 + 30.2With agreed maturities
up to 2 years – 6.2 – 5.9over 2 years + 13.3 – 2.5
At agreed notice
up to 3 months + 0.9 + 2.8over 3 months – 2.3 – 5.4
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised + 1.7 + 6.0Securitised – 9.1 + 3.3
to domestic government
Unsecuritised – 18.7 – 9.4Securitised + 14.9 – 5.8
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .— 1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Stagnating
liquidity supply
in Germany
Overnight
deposits
reducedFurther decline
in short-term
time deposits ...
... but strong
increase in
short-term
savings deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
26Turning to the longer-term bank deposits, in
the quarter under review strong investmentwas seen only in longer-term time depositswith a maturity of over two years. This wasrelated, in particular, to portfolio shifts by in-surance enterprises. However, longer-termsavings deposits (with an agreed period ofnotice of more than three months) decreasedfurther in the quarter under review.
As in the previous quarters, loans by German
banks to their domestic non-bank customersstagnated in the period under review. Thiscontrasts to a certain extent with the distinct-ly more lively demand for loans in the rest ofthe euro area, which, however, is beingdriven by the ongoing housing boom in someeuro-area countries. Developments in Ger-many have been characterised mainly by thefact that households and enterprises reducedtheir short-term loans more extensively in theperiod from April to June, taking up longer-term credit instead. Longer-term loans ex-panded in the second quarter at an annual-ised seasonally adjusted three-month rate ofchange of just over 2
1/C252%. A small reduction
in banks’ holdings of securities issued by do-mestic private residents accompanied whatwas overall only a slight increase in the vol-ume of loans granted to private domesticnon-banks. By contrast, the demand bybanks for German government paper wasvery lively in the second quarter, after theyhad increased these investments unusuallystrongly in the period from January to March.Loans to the public sector were, however,sharply reduced in the second quarter, whichmeans that, in net terms, the domestic bank-ing sector provided the public sector in Ger-many with no additional funds in the periodunder review.
The ongoing weak credit development in
Germany is still essentially a result of lowcredit demand. This is indicated by the July re-sults of the Eurosystem’s bank lending sur-vey.
1The German institutions taking part in
the survey reported a further slight decreasein the demand for corporate loans and pri-vate housing loans and thus estimate the de-velopment of credit demand as somewhatweaker than for the euro area as a whole.However, the data on credit supply werelargely in line with the survey results for theSeasonally adjusted
 5 bn
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02250
2200
2150
2100
2050
2000
1950
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, German results of euro-
area bank lending survey, Monthly Report, June 2003,
pp 67-76. The aggregate survey results for Germany
can be found under http://www.bundesbank.de/volks-
wirtschaft/vo_veroeffentlichungen.en.php.Overall increase
in longer-term
bank deposits
Loans to the
private sector
virtually
unchangedNo noteworthychanges in
credit standards

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
27euro area as a whole.2This means that in the
second quarter of 2004 – for the first time
since the survey was launched one and a halfyears ago – the respondent banks in Germanyhave not really tightened their credit stand-ards for loans to enterprises. This was largelyunrelated to the size of the borrower or theloan maturity. The credit standards applied toloans to households for house purchase(housing loans) also remained largely un-changed, following isolated tightening in theprevious quarter. As in the previous quarters,there was also no noteworthy movement inconsumer loans. In the third quarter of 2004the respondent institutions expect the creditstandards to remain more or less unchangedfor corporate and consumer credit, while thedata on housing loans signal a tendencytowards a slight tightening (see adjacentchart).
Despite the fact that the credit standards re-
mained unchanged, the institutions partici-pating in the survey reported that they hadfurther widened their margins in the secondquarter. For loans to households, however,this applies only to riskier lending (see charton page 28). The German data on marginmovements for average loans to enterpriseswere above the euro-area average for thethird quarter in succession. At the same time,a further narrowing of margins on averageprivate housing loans and consumer creditwas recorded. The trend towards a risk-differ-entiated margin spread on loans to house-holds was thus more strongly affirmed (seechart on page 28); it was thus more markedthan in the euro area as a whole. Regardingthe other lending terms – such as the bench-marks for the required collateral – the re-spondent institutions indicated no majorchanges.
There has been little change in banks’ lending
rates. For example, for new consumer creditand for housing loans with an initial interestrate fixation for up to one year the institu- %
%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 1Consumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansLoans to enterprisesBank lending survey
Changes in credit standards *
*Difference between the sum of the per-
centages for “tightened considerably” and
“tightened somewhat” and the sum of the
percentages for “eased somewhat” and
“eased considerably”. — 1Expectations for
Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−60
50
40
3020
10
0
2002 2003 2004
2See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, August
2004, pp 15-19.Persistent trend
towards
widening
margin spreads
for loans to
households
Increase inlending rates,
especially in the
short-term
maturity
segment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
28tions charged 5.3% and 4.5% respectively.
The banks charged between 3.3% and 4.5%on short-term loans to enterprises, dependingon the size of the loan. Their interest rateswere between 3.9% and 5.2% on longer-term corporate loans, depending on theperiod of interest rate fixation. New housingloans with an interest rate fixed for morethan ten years cost 5.1% on average.As to liabilities, in some cases domestic bankspaid somewhat higher rates of interest on pri-vate non-banks’ deposits in the second quar-ter of 2004 than in the first, reflecting the de-velopment of long-term forward money mar-ket rates and interest rate movements in thecapital market. In comparison with the previ-ous quarter, the interest rates on timedeposits of households and non-financial en-terprises increased across almost the entirematurity range. The rates varied between1.9% and 4.2% depending on the maturitycategory. By contrast, of savings deposits,only deposits with an agreed period of noticeof up to three months were able to benefitfrom the slight upward movement in interestrates. On average, banks paid 2.1%; in thelonger-term maturity range rates were 2.6%.
Securities markets
Developments in the European capital mar-
kets were affected in recent months by theeconomic recovery that was gradually gainingstrength in the euro area and the changes insentiment in the US financial markets, whichhave been particularly frequent in recentmonths. As a result, from early April toaround mid-June bond yields in the ten-yearsegment increased, with fluctuations, by
1/C252
percentage point to 41/C252%. The yield rates
have since fallen back somewhat. The bondmarkets in the United States and in the euroarea benefited from the growing reticence ofinvestors to invest in shares. The situation inthe oil markets, which has escalated particu-larly of late, and the general geopolitical un-certainty were contributory factors. At the%
%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2Consumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansLoans to enterprises
Average loansRiskier loansBank lending survey
Changes in loan margins*
*Difference between the sum of the per-
centages for “tightened considerably” and
“tightened somewhat” and the sum of the
percentages for “eased somewhat” and
“eased considerably”.
Deutsche Bundesbank60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−100
80
60
40
20
2002 2003 2004Deposit rates
tended to rise
Capital market
rates in the
euro area ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
29time of going to press, ten-year government
bonds in the euro area were yielding, at justover 4%, only slightly more than in earlyApril. As previously, yield fluctuation in the USbond market was more marked, with the re-sult that the spread on US Treasuries overeuro-area bonds increased from null in earlyApril to roughly
1/C252percentage point in the
second half of June, before shrinking toaround
1/C254point.
Yields on German government bonds in-creased rather more strongly than capitalmarket rates in other European countries.Owing to portfolio shifts into the highly liquidGerman bonds following the terrorist attacksin Madrid in March, the traditional yieldspread on Federal bonds had risen by earlyApril to almost 15 basis points; it then fellback to around 10 basis points in the follow-ing months. It can probably be assumed thatthis development was connected with thedissolution of the “safe haven” positions ex-panded in March. However, the tense situ-ation in public finances may also have movedmore strongly into investors’ sights again inrecent months.
In spring, the cautious upward movement in
the European equity markets continued atfirst, given greater confidence about the sus-tainability of the economic recovery in Europeand optimistic earnings expectations. Re-emerging doubts about the further continu-ation of the global economic upswing, to-gether with growing tension in the oil marketled to a further marked fall in share prices, es-pecially in recent months. On balance, Ger-man equities lost roughly 8% of their valueNew business
% per
annum
% per
annum% per
annum
... over  5 1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year... up to  5 1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
... over  5 1 million with an initial
   rate fixation of over 5 yearsLoans to non-financial
corporations ...Loans to households
Consumer credit 1
2
Housing loans3Households’ deposits ...
... overnight... redeemable at notice
  of up to 3 months
... with an agreed maturity
  of up to 1 yearBank interest
rates in Germany
1 With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year
and up to 5 years. — 2 Decline owing to
special effect. — 3 With an initial rate
fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years.
Deutsche Bundesbank5.5
5.24.94.64.3
4.0
3.73.43.1
2.87.0
6.76.46.15.8
5.5
5.24.9
4.62.7
2.42.1
1.8
1.5
1.2
0.9
2003 2004... and in
Germany
Losses in the
equity market ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
30on the CDAX price index and European equi-
ties lost some 6% on the Dow Jones Euro-Stoxx between early April and mid-August.Equities in the telecommunication, technol-ogy and media sectors recorded even greaterlosses.
This development contrasted to a certain ex-
tent with the analysts’ optimistic earnings ex-pectations. Between April and July they wentup by 8% for the equities in the DAX and by6% for those in the Dow Jones EuroStoxx. Atthe same time, the already relatively low valu-ation level of German and European equitiesfell further. On the basis of expected year-on-year earnings, at 13.2x for the DAX and13.6x for the Dow Jones EuroStoxx, the cur-rent price-earnings ratio is again well downon historical averages.
Sales and purchases of securities
In the second quarter domestic issuers raised
3290
1/C252billion (nominal value) from sales of
debt securities in the German bond market.After deducting redemptions and changes inissuers’ holdings of their own bonds, net saleswere 348 billion. In addition, sales of foreign
bonds in the German market raised 330 bil-
lion net in the first quarter. Hence, total fundsraised through the sale of domestic and for-eign bonds and notes reached 378 billion in
the period under review, compared with 387
billion in the previous quarter and only 351
1/C252
billion in the same quarter in 2003.
In the second quarter, more than one-third of
the funds were raised through paper issuedby credit institutions, to which 328 billion net
accrued; in the same period in 2003, lessthan one-tenth of this figure was raised ( 32.7
billion) in this segment of the banks’ liability-side business. As in the previous months,other bank debt securities ( 318
1/C252billion) and
debt securities issued by special purposecredit institutions ( 317 billion) were still in de-
mand in the period under review. These alsoinclude index certificates, more of which haveDaily data
%
Per-
cent-
age
points%
Per-
cent-
age
points
Yield spreads of European
corporate bonds2
2003 2004Spread of US bond yields
over the euro-area averageYield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area
average 1
USABond yields in the
euro area and the USA
1Weighted average of the yields on ten-
year government bonds of all euro-area
countries; GDP-weighted. — 2Spread of
seven to ten-year BBB-rated European cor-porate bonds over euro-area governmentbonds with a comparable maturity. Source:
Merrill Lynch Indices.
Deutsche Bundesbank2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.50.5+
0
0.5−5.5
4.55.0
4.04.5
3.53.0
... despite opti-
mistic earnings
expectationsLarge sales
receipts in the
German bond
market
Credit institu-
tions expand
their bonded
debt

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
31been issued by banks recently (for details, see
box on page 33). Mortgage Pfandbriefe out-standing were, by contrast, unchanged and,in net terms, public Pfandbriefe were re-deemed ( 38 billion).
In the second quarter the public sector raised315 billion in the bond market, compared
with 317 billion in the same period in the pre-
vious year. Most of the funds were raised byFederal Government issues. Sales of ten-yearFederal bonds raised 39 billion net, two-year
Federal Treasury notes raised 34 billion and
five-year Federal notes (Bobls) 33
1/C252billion. By
contrast, the volume of Federal savings notesoutstanding decreased by 3
1/C252billion. More-
over, in April a bond issued by the formerBundespost was redeemed for 33 billion and
in May a bond issued by the former Treuhandagency was redeemed for 34 billion.
3State
governments added 37 billion to their
bonded debt.
The financing conditions in the capital market
continued to be favourable and initial signs ofan economic recovery resulted in enterprisesraising 35 billion net worth of resources in
the capital market in the second quarter (fol-lowing 38 billion in the corresponding quarter
in 2003). Money market paper raised roughly31 billion.
German credit institutions were again theprincipal purchasers in the German bondmarket in the second quarter. They added338 billion to their bond portfolios, as op-
posed to 33 billion in the corresponding
period in 2003. They invested almost equalamounts in domestic and foreign bonds andnotes. Public debt securities accounted formost of the domestic bonds ( 315 billion). Do-
mestic non-banks invested 327
1/C252billion (net)
in the bond market. Of domestic paper ( 316
billion), paper issued by private borrowerswas most in demand. At the same time theyDaily data
%
%Basis
points
Memo item
Implied volatility 1
of the Bund future
2003 2004Interest rate discount of Federal
bonds compared with other euro-areagovernment bonds (enlarged scale)Yield on ...
... ten-year government bonds
    outstanding of the other
    euro-area countries
... ten-year Federal
     bonds outstandingYields on Federal bonds
and other euro-area
government bonds
1Market expectation of future volatility
derived from the prices of options on Bund
futures.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
65
4
32010
05.04.5
4.03.5
3In 1995 the debts of the Treuhand agency were trans-
ferred to the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities. In
1999 responsibility was assumed by the Federal Govern-
ment.Fewer funds
raised by the
public sector
More funds
raised by enter-
prises in the
bond market
Domestic
bonds and
notes
purchased
mainly by credit
institutions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
32invested ( 3111/C252billion) in foreign debt secur-
ities, most of which, however, were denomin-
ated in euro. Foreign investors increased theirholdings of domestic debt securities by 312
1/C252
billion net, on balance adding solely paper is-sued by private borrowers to their portfolios.
Issuing activity in the German equity market
revived in the second quarter. Domestic en-terprises placed new shares to a market valueof35 billion, following only 31
1/C252billion in the
previous quarter and 351/C252billion in the
second quarter of 2003. What was involvedwas an equity injection by a big bank in Apriland a few fairly small IPOs. By contrast, only asmall volume of domestic equities were soldin the German market ( 3
1/C252billion).
Shares were purchased by domestic non-banks only. They topped up their share port-folios in the previous quarter by 323 billion,
whereas they had been net sellers in the pre-vious year. Banks, however, reduced theirholdings by 35
1/C252billion. Foreign investors re-
duced their portfolios of German equitiesmore extensively ( 312 billion).
Funds raised by the sale of mutual fundshares, at 31
1/C252billion, were down on the pre-
vious quarter ( 3121/C252billion). Investment inter-
est in domestic funds focused primarily onopen-end real estate funds ( 31 billion). Fur-
thermore, 32
1/C252billion accrued to foreign
funds. Domestic securities-based funds main-ly experienced outflows. This applies particu-larly to mutual funds open to the generalpublic.Monthly data
Lin scale
Price-earnings ratio2
DAX
Dow Jones
EuroStoxxAverage earnings per share2)
DAXDow Jones
EuroStoxxLog scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx
share price index 1
DAX share price
index  1Price movements and profit
estimates for European
and German public
limited companies
1March 2000 = 100; source:  Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2Based on year-on-year I / B / E / S
analyst estimates. Source: Thomson Finan-
cial Datastream.
Deutsche Bundesbank33
3027
24
2118
15
12130
115
100
85
70115
100
85
70
4085
60
50
45
40
35
30
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004More funds
raised in the
equity market
Shares
purchased on
balance only by
non-banks
Far fewer funds
raised by
mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
33Index certificates – a new investment instrument
Banks and securities companies have
been increasing their offerings of indexcertificates since the mid-1990s. Theirshare in the gross sales of debt securitiesby German banks has therefore increasedperceptibly in recent months. However,their share in the total amount outstand-ing of securitised bank liabilities is esti-mated at less than 5%.
The value of index certificates – also
known as participation certificates – isderived from an underlying instrument,generally key domestic and foreign shareindices. Moreover, certificates also existwhich are based on sector indices, bas-kets of indices or other financial productsas well as “exotic” varieties with complexstructures.
From a purely legal perspective, index
certificates are debt securities on whichno interim dividends are paid to the in-vestor; a single repayment is merelymade when the certificate matures. Inthe case of open-end certificates, how-ever, once a year the investor has theright to exercise an option to redeem thecertificates at the then index level in linewith his/her subscription ratio. In theBundesbank’s securities statistics, indexcertificates are recorded under “otherbank debt securities” or “debt securitiesissued by special purpose credit institu-tions”. In banking statistics, they are re-ported as part of the “debt securitiesoutstanding” and those with a corres-pondingly short maturity are allocated topaper with a maturity of up to two years(their share in the volume outstanding ofindex certificates was roughly one-fifthin the period under review).
The importance of index certificates as a
new investment instrument with a widevariety of characteristics has increased inrecent years, following the equity marketslump. The banks issuing these products,which are tailored to meet an extensiverange of investment objectives, establishthe bid/ask prices on each trading day. Atleast in the case of straightforward prod-ucts, market participants cite the mainadvantages as being relatively low trans-action costs, a comparatively high degreeof transparency and liquidity, risk diversi-fication and low minimum capital outlay.If the certificate is based on a perform-ance index, on expiry of the speculationperiod, interim investment earnings onthe underlying (eg dividends) can gener-ally also be collected free of tax in theform of capital gains.
1On the other
hand, investors must bear in mind, inter
alia, the issuer risk and the ranking of
the certificate in relation to the issuer’sother liabilities. More complex, “exotic”certificates are less transparent and li-quid; they also involve a more compli-cated pricing mechanism.
It is far simpler to issue a certificate than,
for example, to launch a mutual fund,which is subject to strict investmentguidelines and requires approval by theFederal Financial Supervision Authority(BaFin).
1This does not apply to capital guaranteed funds.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
34Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2004 2003
ItemJan to
MarApr toJuneApr toJune
Bonds and notes
Residents 56.6 65.5 19.7
Credit institutions 55.3 38.2 3.2
of which
Foreign bonds and notes 23.4 18.7 10.1
Non-banks 1.2 27.3 16.5of which
Domestic bonds and notes 4.4 16.0 2.4
Non-residents 30.4 12.6 31.9
Shares
Residents – 0.9 17.8 3.7
Credit institutions 6.7 – 5.5 5.5
of which
Domestic shares 7.4 – 6.3 0.2
Non-banks – 7.6 23.2 – 1.8of which
Domestic shares – 9.2 23.3 1.0
Non-residents 3.1 – 12.0 4.4
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 2.8 0.1 6.8
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 2.8 – 1.3 7.0of which: Share-based funds 0.6 – 1.4 2.0
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
35Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The cyclical upturn in the German economy
gathered further slight momentum in spring2004, having already been somewhat strong-er in the first few months of this year. Accord-ing to an initial estimate by the Federal Statis-tical Office, real gross domestic product(GDP) in the second quarter was 0.5% upon the preceding three-month period afteradjustment for seasonal and working-dayvariations. There was a 1.5% year-on-yearincrease in overall output in working-dayadjusted terms. The unadjusted figure was2.0%.
At the end of the first half of the year, sea-
sonally adjusted overall output was 0.9% upon the final quarter of 2003. This correspondsto an annualised growth rate of just over1
3/C254%. This means that, for the first time in
some while, there is likely to have been an in-crease in capacity utilisation. Not only havedevelopments so far confirmed the generalcyclical expectations in spring 2004, the slightupswing has also opened up the opportunityfor somewhat stronger growth.
Nevertheless, it is still not certain whether the
current pace of expansion can be maintainedin the coming months. Surveys such as thoseby the Ifo institute, for example, indicate that,even though the business climate showedsome improvement in July, there is still a cer-tain amount of caution in industry with re-gard to how both current and future develop-ments are being assessed. Moreover, up tothe end of the period under review, economicgrowth was not broadly based but was, in-Higher GDP
growth in Q2
Strong external
stimuli

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
36stead, sustained almost exclusively by the ex-
ternal economy. Sizeable export orders led toa sharp upturn in industrial output. By con-trast, even recently no significant stimuli havebeen coming from domestic demand. For ex-ample, business investment remained weakdespite the cyclical improvement. This wasmainly due to the continuing low degree ofwillingness to undertake construction work,which affected business demand for commer-cial buildings, warehouses and offices as wellas private housing construction. The declinein this sector was so large that it more thanoffset the stabilisation in expenditure on ma-chinery and equipment.
In addition, households remained rather cau-
tious in terms of consumer spending. Al-though private consumption probably in-creased somewhat in the second quarter inseasonally adjusted terms, it did not give asignificant boost to economic growth. This isalso indicated by the weak take-up of con-sumer loans, which is often connected withthe buying of higher-quality consumer dur-able goods. Furthermore, the rate of price in-crease – accelerated by government influ-ences and the higher cost of energy – hasnarrowed the real scope for expenditure.There is still a widespread lack of optimismabout the economy. As shown by the surveysof the consumer research institution,Gesellschaft f/C252r Konsumforschung (GfK),
households’ sentiment has not improved inthe last few months either.
The retail trade, in particular, reported that
there is a continuing reluctance to purchase.According to the official data on this that arecurrently available (which are, admittedly,often subject to considerable revision), salesin the April-June period did not exceed thelow level of the first few months of the yearin seasonally adjusted terms. In real terms,they were 3% down on the year. In contrastto this, after a lull at the start of the year,private registrations of new motor vehiclespicked up again somewhat in seasonally ad-justed terms at the start of spring. Even so, sofar this year, the domestic car market hasremained quite weak overall, while demandin the euro area has shown a noticeable in-crease.
Adjusted for seasonal and working-day
variations, quarterly
%DM bn  5 bn
1997 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004Lin scale
Year-on-year change880900920940960980
oLog scale
Real GDP 1Economic growth in Germany
1At 1995 prices. — oFrom 1999, in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−500
490480
470
460450
Sluggish
consumption
continues

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
37Output and labour market
Industry has given strong stimuli to growth
recently. After eliminating seasonal and work-ing-day variations, second-quarter outputrose by around 1
1/C254% compared with the first
three months of the year. The year-on-yearincrease, which was 1
1/C252% in the first quarter,
grew to just under 4%. The sharpest increasewas achieved in the capital goods sector,where the seasonally adjusted expansion ofoutput amounted to over 2
3/C254%. In year-on-
year terms, there was a 53/C254% increase. Taking
turnover as a yardstick, exports showed thesharpest increase. This was especially true ofthe motor vehicle sector. Production of ITequipment and mechanical engineeringgoods was stepped up, too. The fact thatsales of capital goods to domestic customersalso showed an above-average increase wasdue, to a considerable extent, to a high levelof sales of commercially used motor vehicles.By contrast, increases in the case of othercapital goods were at a noticeably lowerlevel. The expansion of output was also com-paratively weak in the intermediate and con-sumer goods sectors. In seasonally adjustedterms, production in those sectors in thesecond quarter was
1/C254% and1/C252%u po nt h e
quarter respectively. Once again, the em-phasis was on exports.
It is not only exports that are of crucial signifi-
cance for developments in German industry.Imported inputs have also become increasing-ly important over the past few years. Accord-ing to the calculations of the Federal Statistic-al Office, in 2000 the percentage of importedintermediate goods in output in the produc-Seasonally adjusted, monthly
Balance
Balance
Propensity to purchase
2004Households’ assessment of the
economic situation2
MonthlyCurrent situationBusiness
expectations2000 = 100
Business climate in the
industrial sector 1Sentiment in the industrial
sector and among households
1 Source: Ifo Institute. — 2  According to
Gfk data. Moving five-month averages.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−40+
20+
0
20−
40−105
100
9590
85
80110
105
100
959085
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Sharp increase
in industrial
output
Growing
importance of
imported inputs

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
38tion of machinery amounted to some 16%.
In the manufacture of road vehicles, the cor-responding figure was around 18%. An evenlarger role is played by material imports in thefield of radio, television and communicationequipment, at nearly 30%, as well as in theproduction of office equipment and com-puters, at no less than just under 45%. Thisgives an average ratio for these sectors of19
1/C252%. In the mid-1990s, the figure hadbeen as low as 133/C254%. Behind this is a
growth in imported inputs of more than 45%within five years. The rise is likely to have con-tinued up to the end of the period underreview.
Capacity utilisation in manufacturing has in-
creased noticeably due to the sharp rise inoutput. According to the Ifo surveys, in sea-sonally adjusted terms, the level of capacityutilisation in June was 0.6 percentage pointhigher than in March. This gives a year-on-year increase of 2 percentage points. Thismeans that longer-term average capacity util-isation was exceeded slightly for the first timesince summer 2001. However, utilisation wasstill 3 percentage points away from the earlierpeaks in 2000. This is also likely to be a majorreason for industrial enterprises still showinga low propensity to invest.
The long-prevailing downward trend in the
construction sector continued during the pastfew months. According to the data availableat present, seasonally adjusted constructionsector output in the second quarter wasabout 6% down on the already poor figurefor the first three months of the year. Therewas a further decline of nearly one-tenthcompared with 2003, which had alreadybrought significant performance shortfalls ofmore than 4%. The overall survey in the con-struction industry, which is scheduled for themiddle of the year, is likely to bring aboutsome positive adjustments. Nevertheless, asexperience over the past few years hasshown, these will do no more than mitigatethe decline somewhat.2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
1Lin scale
Year-on-year change
1997 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004Log scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
1Provisional until adjusted to the results of
the annual overall survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−110
90105
85100
8095
759010+
5+
0
5−105
100
95
90
85Increase in
capacity
utilisation
Further decline
in construction
output

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
39If the number of hours worked is taken as a
yardstick, all the major construction sectorswere affected by this negative development.At distinctly more than 10%, the cutback inconstruction activity compared with last yearwas somewhat larger in industrial and publicconstruction than it was in housing construc-tion. Output in the finishing trades was alsoperceptibly down on the year. Relevant statis-tical data beyond the first quarter are unavail-able so far but construction activity duringthis period was already noticeably lower thanin the same period of 2003. There is unlikelyto have been any change in this developmentin the second quarter. This, too, suggests thatthere was a further reduction in constructioninvestment in spring 2004. Compared withthe most recent peak in 1994, this now cor-responds to a fall of almost one-quarter. Adecline in level on such a scale had not beenrecorded since the early 1950s.
The situation in trade was marked in the
spring months by persistently weak domesticdemand. The consumer-related sectors atboth the retail and wholesale levels were es-pecially affected, with sales, at constantprices, remaining clearly down on the year.While, in the retail trade, suppliers of radio,television and sound reproduction equipmentsuffered fairly heavy losses, wholesalers offuels and refined petroleum products in par-ticular, felt the reluctance of the consumers,who reduced their purchases at least tempor-arily, not least owing to the high prices. Thesituation in productivity-oriented trade in ma-chinery and equipment was better, however,with undoubtedly mainly export business thatwas flourishing. The situation in the hotel andrestaurant trade has continued to stabiliseover the past few months. At least, real turn-over – which had fallen noticeably after theintroduction of euro banknotes and coins –was no longer showing such a large year-on-year fall in April and May as it had in the firstquarter, when the figure had been -2%. Thebusiness performance of hotels, motels andguest houses, in particular, has taken a posi-tive turn. This contrasted with turnover in res-taurants, which was still down on the year.The continuing improvement in industry hasalso had an impact on the commercial serviceproviders. According to the survey by theCentre for European Economic Research(ZEW), the assessment of sales and earningswas noticeably brighter in the second quarter.This applies mainly to the information andcommunication sector, which had com-plained of disappointed expectations in thefirst few months of the year. In the case ofmanagement and tax consultants, too, posi-tive views were clearly in the majority. By con-trast, the advertising industry expects nomore than a gradual recovery in its businessconditions.
There were no signs of any improvement on
the labour market up to the end of the periodunder review. Unemployment remained highand employment was still falling. The numberof persons in work – which was recently ad-justed upwards by more than 100,000 – haddeclined by the second quarter to 38.21 mil-lion. This was a good 25,000 fewer than inthe first quarter and 110,000, or 0.3%, downon the year. This means that the reductionin employment has accelerated somewhatagain following an identifiable slowdown for
Differing devel-
opments in
trade and in the
case of service
providers
Continuing
fall in
employment ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
40a time towards the end of 2003. Many jobs
have continued to be lost particularly in in-dustry and construction. In construction, thefigure on an average of the April-June periodmay have been more than 80,000 down onthe year. This is equivalent to a fall of 3
1/C252%.
In industry, the decrease may have been justover 2%, affecting nearly 180,000 persons.In the case of services, the trend in employ-ment was more favourable, but even therefew new employment opportunities havearisen compared with earlier years. In manycases, these are likely to have been part-timejobs, the number of which continued to in-crease noticeably, while fewer and fewer per-sons were in full-time work. The ratio of em-ployees in part-time jobs is now moving to-wards 30%. That means almost a doublingcompared with the early 1990s.
At the end of July, 4.36 million persons were
officially registered as unemployed. The sea-sonally adjusted figure was 4.39 million. Theseasonally adjusted unemployment rate, asdefined by the Federal Employment Agency,went up to 10.6%. The internationally stand-ardised rate was 9.9%. The fact that this wasscarcely higher than before was partly due toa greater use of labour market policy meas-ures, especially business start-up grants andbridging allowances. There was also an ex-pansion of job creation schemes followingsome temporary cutbacks.
In July, there was a slight year-on-year rise of
7,000 in the number of persons out of work.However, it should be borne in mind that,since the beginning of the year, persons tak-ing part in aptitude tests and training meas-ures have no longer been counted as beingunemployed. If such persons are excludedfrom the July 2003 figure, the increaseamounts to 83,000. Last year, too, adminis-trative measures contributed to a reduction inregistered unemployment, when labour mar-ket policy was reoriented towards active job-seeking and tighter registration requirementsfor the unemployed. As a result, on an annualaverage, between 120,000 and 150,000Quarterly
Millions
Millions
%Thou-
sands
Thou-
sands
0
1Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
JulyJulyLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
- JulyLin scale
Year-on-year
changeLog scale
Employed
(sesonally adjusted)Labour market
1From January 2004, unemployed exclud-
ing participants in aptitude tests and train-
ing measures.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8800+
400+
0
400−
800−39.0
38.6
38.2
37.8
37.4
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004... and high
unemployment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
41registered unemployed persons may have
been eliminated from the official unemploy-ment statistics in 2003. If both of these fac-tors were to be taken into account, the num-ber of persons without employment wouldcurrently be roughly 250,000 to 300,000higher.
Orders
The demand for German industrial products
showed a further increase in spring. Seasonal-ly adjusted orders received in the secondquarter were almost 2% up on the averageof the first three months of the year. In year-on-year terms, there was a 7
1/C252% increase.
This was noticeably more than in the firstquarter, in which growth of 3
1/C252% had been
achieved. A crucial part in the accelerated in-crease was played by export orders placedwith German firms. After adjustment for sea-sonal and working-day variations, 3
1/C252% more
orders were placed in the April-June periodthan in the first quarter. The figure was morethan one-tenth up on the year. A similarlystrong pace of growth was last recorded atthe start of the current decade. The sharpestincrease was recorded by consumer goodsproducers, especially manufacturers of non-durable goods. Among these, a greater vol-ume of orders was placed, in particular, forpharmaceutical products following a slightlull in orders during the first few months ofthe year. In the case of durable consumergoods, a surge in orders for electrical house-hold appliances and for optical and photo-graphic products had a positive impact. Cap-ital goods producers also recorded a cleargrowth in orders in the second quarter with aseasonally adjusted increase of 3
1/C254%. The
best performer in this area was the car indus-try, which continues to be very successfulwith its cars internationally. In addition,manufacturers of machinery and equipmentwere able to conclude contracts for sizeableorders with export customers. Even thoughthe producers of intermediate goods failed toequal the expansion of business in the otherSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
Domestic
1997 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004ForeignNew orders
Volume, 2000 = 100
TotalDemand for industrial goods
Deutsche Bundesbank105
100
95
9085115
80110
72105
75100
95
90
85105
100
95
90
85
80
Further rise
in foreign
demand in
industry ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
42sectors, they also recorded a significant in-
crease in demand at a seasonally adjusted3
1/C252%. This was true especially of the chem-
icals industry. Demand for steel productionheld up at the high level at which it had beenfor some time.
In contrast to external demand, which was
broadly based and very strong overall, domes-tic orders provided no significant stimuli overthe past few months. In seasonally adjustedterms, the intake of orders in the secondquarter was no more than
1/C252% higher than in
the first few months of the year, in whichnew orders had stagnated at the higher levelachieved in the final quarter of 2003. Owingto the temporary pick-up in demand at thattime, which followed on from earlier weakgrowth, orders in the second quarter were, atall events, around 4
1/C252% up on the year. The
best performance was put in by the produ-cers of intermediate goods, which was mainlydue to the iron and steel industry. The capitalgoods sector was only slightly behind. The carindustry and producers of machinery andequipment performed best in this sector, fol-lowed by manufacturers of structural metalproducts. Latterly, orders in the consumergoods sector almost matched last year’s levelsas the sharp decline in ordering in the firstquarter was partially made up again.
Demand for construction work remained
weak in spring, however. In April and May,the seasonally adjusted intake of constructionorders declined on average by 7
1/C254% com-
pared with the first quarter and by 8% on theyear. This means that the falling trend in de-mand, which has been under way since themost recent peak in 1994, was continuing upto the end of the period under review. Over-all, the volume of orders since then has al-most halved. The most recent deterioration inbusiness is due mainly to commercial custom-ers. Following more buoyant ordering activityfor an interim period in the first few monthsof the year, they cut back their new ordersagain perceptibly. In May, orders were downon the year by almost one-quarter. A fairlySeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
... in housing construction
1997 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004... from the public sectorConstruction orders ...
... from industrial
    enterprisesVolume, 2000 = 100
Total
construction orders
Apr/
MayDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60120
100110
90100
80110
90100
8090
70120
110
100
90
80
70
- - - - 
... but domestic
orders
languishingPoor orders
situation in the
construction
sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
43large number of vacant and unlet properties
are being reported on the office markets, forexample, with many properties being com-pleted only now owing to long planning andconstruction times. Public clients were also re-luctant to tackle new construction projects,however. At least, new orders were roughlyjust as high as they were last year. In housingconstruction, seasonally adjusted demand inApril and May remained at the low level ofthe first quarter. The orders situation deterior-ated perceptibly at the start of the year be-cause many new orders had been broughtforward to the last few months of 2003owing to the cutback in government assist-ance.
Prices
Prices in Germany continued to be affected
by the international energy and commoditymarkets as well as by administrative meas-ures. Oil prices on the world markets havebeen rising sharply for some time with heavyupward and downward fluctuations in theshort term. Brent North Sea Oil, which has alead function for the European markets, re-peatedly went over the US$40 per barrelmark during the past few weeks. In July, thecost was around US$37
1/C252on a monthly aver-
age. Compared with the average of the years2000 to 2003, this signifies an increase of noless than US$11, or more than 40%. In con-trast to similar periods of high oil prices, themain underlying cause is a rapidly increasingglobal “appetite” for energy rather than anacute or abrupt supply shortage. A positiveeconomic performance and a brisk pace ofexpansion mean that the USA and China, inparticular, have a rapidly growing demand foroil and oil products. Furthermore, high riskpremiums are being created by repeatedlyemerging fears of supply shortfalls in the caseof major oil suppliers, notably in the MiddleEast and (recently also) Russia. Added to thisare concerns about capacity reserves that areeffectively still usable and how long stockswill last.2000 = 100, monthly, log scale
1997 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004Non-ferrous metals 1Crude oil 1Total
on a euro basison a US dollar
basisCommodity prices
Source: HWWA Commodity Price Index”Euroland”. — 1On a US dollar basis.
Deutsche Bundesbank140
120
100
80
70120
100
80
60
405070140
120
100
80
60
5070
High oil and
commodity
prices ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
44The extremely dynamic growth of the Chi-
nese economy has also driven up the pricesof commodities. According to the HWWAindex, the slight calming in the case of indus-trial commodities that was apparent in Apriland May again gave way to a rise which ap-proached the peak prices of March. Thismeant that the dollar prices in July exceededthe previous year’s level by 30%. In the caseof non-ferrous metals, the figure was asmuch as 45%. From a European point ofview, the associated increase in the cost ofimported inputs was roughly one-tenth lowerowing to the euro’s appreciation against theUS dollar but was still quite large.
The international price movements can also
be clearly identified in German import prices.Import prices for commodities and semi-finished products in the middle of this yearwere around 15% higher than in the sameperiod of 2003, after having been 5% cheap-er in year-on-year terms in the first quarter.This price increase has been reflected, atmost, only partly in the case of finishedgoods. In July 2004, import prices for finishedgoods were still more than
1/C252% down on the
year. At the start of 2004, however, the year-on-year decline had been significantly largerat almost -2
1/C252%.
German industrial factory gate prices reflect-ed not only the oil price rise but also theincreased cost of other important raw mater-ials and inputs. Intermediate goods, for ex-ample, were 2.2% up on the year in July2004, compared with -0.2% at the start ofthe year. The manufacture of basic metals ledthe way with an annual rate of growth thatwas now in double figures. Capital goods,however, were scarcely more expensive at theend of the period under review than they hadbeen one year earlier. In the case of consumergoods, the price rise was mainly determinedby the increase in tobacco tax. By contrast,other products, such as clothing and con-sumer electronic equipment, became cheap-er. Marked increases in the cost of primaryproducts due to high energy and steel priceswere also one main reason for the first fairlysharp increase in construction prices in fouryears. As a result, in the second quarter thelevel of prices for residential and commerciallyused buildings showed an increase of around1% on both the quarter and the year.
The differing price trends are also reflected in
consumer prices. Despite prices falling atConsumer prices
Annual percentage change
2003 2004
I t e m Q 4Q 1Q 2J u l y
Food 1.6 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.3
Industrial goods 0.5 0.9 1.8 1.7
of which
Tobacco 8.5 4.4 12.2 12.2Pharmaceuticals andtherapeutic appliances 0.1 17.2 23.2 23.1
Energy 3.3 – 1.6 4.9 5.8of which
Refined petroleumproducts 1.4 – 6.3 7.7 9.7
Services 1.3 2.2 2.4 2.3of which
Out-patient and in-patienthealthcare services 1.2 17.0 17.0 19.0
Rents 1.0 1.1 1.0 1.0
Total 1.2 1.0 1.7 1.8
Total excluding seasonal
goods, energy, tobacco,healthcare 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.4
Memo item
HICP 1.2 1.0 1.8 2.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
... affect import
prices ...... and indus-trial producer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
45times, energy, for example, cost households
5.8% more in July than it had done in thesame month last year. Heating oil and fuelalone cost 9.7% more. Added to this was thesharp price rise in healthcare, an area inwhich physiotherapy services have latterly be-come more expensive. Overall, the price ef-fects of the health reform for householdstherefore add up to just over one-fifth. Thefact that, in July, the year-on-year rate of con-sumer price increase did not exceed 1.8% intotal was due, in particular, to no more thanminor price movements in the case of foodand industrial goods (excluding tobacco andpharmaceuticals as well as therapeutic appli-ances). In July, both food and industrialgoods were somewhat cheaper to buy than12 months earlier. Price developments in thecase of services (excluding in-patient and out-patient healthcare) and housing rents, albeitmoderate, were not so positive at year-on-year rates of 1.1% and 1.0% respectively.Despite some price surges in certain seg-ments, the general price trend in Germanyhas not shown a persistent deterioration sofar.
Consumer
prices affected
by energy and
health reform

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
46Foreign trade
and paymentsForeign trade and current account
The external environment in the second quar-
ter of 2004 was marked by the strong expan-sion of world trade. The USA and Asia onceagain provided particularly dynamic impulsesfor foreign trade but the economic recoveryin European countries also made further pro-gress. The German economy contributed tothe brisk demand on foreign markets to anotable extent and, in doing so, again dem-onstrated its international competitiveness. Inthis way, orders received from abroad grewby 4% in seasonally adjusted terms in thesecond quarter of the year compared withthe first and industry’s continuing favourableassessment of export expectations suggeststhat this development has also continued inthe summer months.
Exports again showed particularly buoyant
growth in the second quarter of 2004. Ger-man exports increased in value and in season-ally adjusted terms by 4% compared with thefirst quarter. This means that they were in linewith the very good result of the previousthree-month period (+4.5%). The increase inexports was not much smaller in real termseither, ie after deducting the simultaneousrise in export prices (+
1/C252% in seasonally ad-
justed terms).
According to the statistical information so far
available on the regional structure of foreigntrade in the second quarter (up to and includ-ing May), the marked growth in the Germaneconomy’s export business was spread broad-ly across the various countries and groups ofcountries. Only in foreign trade with JapanExternal
environment
Exports of
goods
Breakdown
of exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
47and Russia was there a decline in exports on
an average of April and May. Owing to thecomparatively small volume of German ex-ports to these countries, coincidences mayalso have played a part, with the result thatno significant conclusions should be drawnfrom them.
Germany’s export business with China re-
mained very favourable. The highest growthduring the period under review was achievedhere with an increase in turnover of 14
1/C252%.
The growing importance of this market forthe German economy is also becoming clearin that its share of total German exports hasnow risen to 3
1/C252% compared with approxi-
mately 2% in 2002. Yet the increase in ex-ports to other centres of growth was also dis-proportionately sharp. This is true of exportsto the USA, for example, which went up by10% in the spring months. There was also amarked increase in trade with the developingand OPEC countries during the period underreview. In all, German exports to non-euro-area countries rose on an average of Apriland May by 6
1/C252% compared with the first
quarter. The appreciation of the euro in thelast two years, which may also be interpretedas a correction of the previous weakness ofthe euro, does not therefore seem to havedecisively affected the German economy’s ex-port business. By contrast, at 4
1/C252%, the in-
crease in exports to the euro-area countriesduring the period under review was not quiteso dynamic. Owing to their important role interms of total German exports, these exportshave also significantly influenced the overallresult.The rise in exports to EU countries that arenot part of the euro area was somewhatsharper (+5%). German export turnover thusincreased by 6% in the United Kingdom,Sweden and Denmark altogether. By con- 5 bn
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
MonthlyLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 2000 = 100
MonthlyMonthly 1Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−120
115
110
105
100
95
90190
180
170
160
150
140
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
48trast, exports to the ten new member states1,
which have a market share of 81/C252%, went up
by only 3%. While large increases in exports
to Poland (+111/C252%) and the Czech Republic
(+71/C252%) were achieved, a decline in turnover
was recorded in exports to Hungary (-31/C252%),
for example.
Almost all industries were able to benefit
from the considerable increase in exports, inparticular, the manufacturers of capital goods(+5
1/C252%), which traditionally account for a
large share of German exports (around 45%).Accordingly, foreign demand for machineryand metal products has continued to increasenoticeably following the steep rise in the lastquarter. In addition, exports of motor ve-hicles, which amount to almost one fifth ofGerman exports, recovered. The motor indus-try’s export turnover rose considerably com-pared with the previous quarter (+7
1/C252%),
making up for the considerable decline (-4%)during the winter months. By contrast, therewas a below-average increase in exports ofGerman intermediate and consumer goods(+3
1/C252% in each case).
German imports increased in value and inseasonally adjusted terms by 2
1/C252% in the
second quarter compared with the first. How-ever, this was largely a result of price develop-ments. The rise in (seasonally adjusted) pricesof imported goods amounted to 1
1/C252% com-
pared with the previous quarter, with the re-sult that the increase in real imports of goodswas correspondingly smaller. This price risewas mainly caused by the higher raw materialand energy prices. Not least in view of theconsiderable increase in import prices for en-ergy sources (+11
1/C252% on an average of April
and May), the correspondent nominal im-ports dropped by 1
1/C252%. This was likewise vis-
ible in the noticeable decline in imports fromthe OPEC countries. In contrast to the twoprevious quarters, imports of intermediategoods did not increase very sharply either(+1
1/C252%). On the other hand, imports of cap-
ital goods rose particularly steeply (+8%).That could suggest a certain revival of domes-tic investment demand; in view of the inter-national division of production processes,however, this should also be seen in connec-tion with the large number of exports, in par-Trend in foreign trade by region and
by category of goods
Average of April and May 2004 compared
with the average of January to March 2004%; seasonally adjusted
ItemEx-
portsIm-ports
Total + 5.7 + 3.4
Selected country/group of countries
Euro-area countries + 4.5 + 0.0
Other EU countries + 4.8 + 0.3United States + 9.9 + 23.0Japan – 10.7 + 5.1China + 14.4 + 19.2Russia – 1.2 + 16.2OPEC countries + 6.7 – 20.5Developing countries excludingOPEC + 6.2 + 9.8
Categories of goods
Selected main categories
Intermediate goods + 3.5 + 1.4
Capital goods + 5.3 + 8.1Consumer goods + 3.3 + 2.4Energy sources . – 1.7
Selected categories
Chemicals + 2.7 – 0.7Machinery + 5.5 – 0.2Motor vehicles and motor vehicleparts + 7.5 + 5.7Information technology + 0.0 + 10.1Metals and metal products + 5.3 + 1.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
1The recording of trade with the ten new member states
that joined the EU on 1 May 2004 has been moved from
extra to intra trade statistics. By doing so, the foreign
trade data may initially be subject to greater uncertainty.
Trade with the ten new accesssion countries has already
been included in EU trade since the beginning of the
year.Imports of
goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
49ticular, of machinery. Domestic demand for
imports of communication and informationtechnology goods was also very buoyant(+10%). By contrast, imports of consumergoods went up only moderately (+2
1/C252%).
The rise in demand for imports focused onsuppliers outside the euro area. The importvalue from the other euro-area countries re-mained unchanged, however. In real terms,there was even a minor fall in imports fromthe euro area owing to the slight rise in theprices of imported goods. In terms of value,German demand for products from theUnited Kingdom, Sweden and Denmark alsodeclined (–
1/C252% overall). By contrast, imports
from the new EU member states, which nowmake up 11% of all German imports, in-creased slightly over the period under review(+1%). Meanwhile, imports from the USA(+23%) and South-East Asia (+16%) roseparticularly sharply. This can presumably beviewed in connection with the high demandfor imports of information and communica-tion technology products in Germany. Therewas also a steep increase in imports fromRussia (+16%).
The strong demand for imports in some sec-
tors has not achieved the same high level ofgrowth as for exports, however, with the re-sult that, at 343
1/C252billion in the second quar-
ter of 2004, net exports were 341/C252billion up
on the first quarter of the year in seasonallyadjusted terms. In addition to the increasedtrade surplus, the invisible current transac-tions balance also improved, particularlyowing to a somewhat lower deficit on ser-vices. Furthermore, this mirrors the slightlyMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2003 2004
I t e m Q 2Q 1Q 2
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 162.6 177.2 185.4
Imports (cif) 132.1 136.0 142.4
Balance + 30.4 + 41.1 + 43.0
2 Services (balance) – 8.3 – 8.9 – 8.1
3 Factor income (balance) – 3.6 – 3.9 + 1.04 Current transfers (balance) – 7.9 – 5.6 – 7.1
Balance on current account
2 + 8.7 + 21.3 + 26.7
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 31.2 + 39.2 + 43.5
2 Services – 8.7 – 9.0 – 8.33 Factor income – 5.7 – 1.1 – 1.04 Current transfers – 7.6 – 7.1 – 6.7
Current account
2 + 7.6 + 20.4 + 25.5
II Balance of capital transfers 3 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2
III Balance of financial account 4 – 25.4 – 14.4 – 71.3
IV Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values
(increase: –) 5 + 1.5 + 0.2 – 0.3
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 15.0 – 7.5 + 44.8
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 50. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankCurrent
account

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
50declining deficit on current transfers. There
was little change in net expenditure on cross-border factor income compared with the pre-vious quarter. Altogether, this resulted in aseasonally adjusted current account surplusof325
1/C252billion, which was 35 billion up on
the previous quarter.
Financial transactions
The continuing strong growth in the world
economy, which was partly accompanied byincipient inflation concerns in the USA, wasalso reflected in the international financialmarkets. Thus, yields of longer-term paper in-creased globally at the beginning of thesecond quarter whereby the interest rate risein the USA, whose economy continues to ex-pand more quickly than that of the euro areaand Germany, was considerably sharper thanin Germany. In addition, the US central bankraised its key interest rates for the first time inover four years against the background ofstrong economic development and risingprices. At the same time as the interest ratedifferential between European and US long-term bonds and notes grew, the euro ex-change rate initially went down. However,with the announcement of continuing highUS trade deficits and the prevailing assess-ment that the US central bank is likely to raiseinterest rates only gradually, the euro againmade up some ground on the dollar. In thisarea of conflict between good economic dataon the one hand, and rising interest rates onthe other, share indices in the major financialcentres closed almost unchanged in thesecond quarter after marked fluctuations. ToFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2003 2004
I t e m Q 2Q 1Q 2
1 Direct investment + 19.2 – 21.9 – 9.0
German investment
abroad + 15.3 + 10.2 – 3.3Foreign investmentin Germany + 3.9 – 32.1 – 5.7
2 Portfolio investment + 10.2 + 8.1 – 32.2
German investment
abroad – 25.8 – 26.0 – 31.8
Shares – 1.3 + 1.2 + 1.0Investment fundcertificates – 0.3 – 7.1 – 2.6Bonds and notes – 20.5 – 26.1 – 25.8Money market paper – 3.8 + 6.0 – 4.3
Foreign investment
in Germany + 36.0 + 34.1 – 0.4
Shares + 4.3 + 2.8 – 12.0Investment fundcertificates – 0.1 + 0.8 – 1.0Bonds and notes + 30.8 + 42.9 + 15.1Money market paper + 1.1 – 12.5 – 2.5
3 Financial derivatives
1 – 2.5 – 1.3 + 2.3
4 Credit transactions – 51.6 + 1.6 – 31.6
Monetary financial
institutions 2 – 67.0 + 21.3 – 67.2
Long-term – 8.1 – 5.3 + 4.1Short-term – 58.9 + 26.6 – 71.3
Enterprises andindividuals – 6.4 – 9.6 + 1.7
Long-term + 0.6 + 2.4 – 0.1Short-term – 7.1 – 12.0 + 1.9
General government + 1.2 – 3.0 + 2.6
Long-term – 0.1 – 1.9 + 1.4Short-term + 1.3 – 1.1 + 1.2
Bundesbank + 20.6 – 7.0 + 31.3
5 Other investment – 0.6 – 1.0 – 0.7
6 Balance of all
statistically recorded
capital flows – 25.4 – 14.4 – 71.3
Memo itemChange in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
3 + 1.5 + 0.2 – 0.3
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding the Bundesbank. —
3Excluding allocation of SDRs and changes due to
value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankTrends in
financial
transactions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
51some extent, the above-mentioned develop-
ments are also evident from German financialtransactions with non-residents. All in all,there were outflows of funds from Germanythrough direct and portfolio investment be-tween April and June. According to currentstatistics for the euro area, this has also beenthe case for the euro area as a whole.
In German portfolio transactions with non-
residents, in which new underlying economicconditions are generally reflected very quickly,there were substantial net outflows of capitalamounting to 332 billion in the second quar-
ter of 2004 compared with net inflows offunds during the previous three-month period(38 billion).
The main reason for this turnaround in port-folio investment was the reorientation of for-eign investors, who sold a total of 3
1/C252billion
of German securities. In the first threemonths of 2004, they had increased theirportfolios of German investment by 334 bil-
lion. In particular, there was less demand forbonds and notes, which non-residents ac-quired for just 315 billion, after having invest-
ed343 billion in such paper in the previous
quarter.
It is possible that the change in the inter-
national security situation contributed to-wards this development. Whereas concernsover international terrorism persuaded for-eign investors to park larger sums in the“safe haven” of German government debt inthe first three months of 2004, the fact thatthe assessment of geopolitical risks is nowsomewhat calmer overall led to a counter-movement in investor behaviour to a certainextent. In any case, only public bonds, whichare particularly in demand at uncertain times,were affected by the foreigners’ withdrawal(3-4
1/C252billion compared with 3+19 billion). At
the same time, private bonds continued toarouse interest, although the amount of newinvestment recorded in this respect wassomewhat lower ( 319
1/C252billion compared
with 324 billion).
Another argument in favour of the view thatprecautionary considerations played a lessprominent role during the period under re-view is the fact that the interest rate advan-tage of Bunds compared with paper fromother euro-area countries, which had in-creased significantly following the terrorist at-tacks in Madrid, has recently been eroded –Capital exports: −
 5 bn
 5 bn
of which
Public bonds
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2German paperForeign portfolio investment
in Germany
Deutsche Bundesbank30+
20+
10+
0
10−40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
2003 2004Portfolio
investment
Foreign
investment in
German
securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
52and this despite rising yields overall. However,
non-resident investors also moved from buy-ing to selling shares of German firms ( 312 bil-
lion compared with purchases of 33 billion in
the previous quarter). It is possible that thesesales are linked to the shifts in institutional in-vestors’ specimen portfolios, some of whomrestructured their positions into Germanpaper. However, the restructuring does notseem to have exerted any particular influenceon the DAX’s price movements as the shareindices of important markets moved largely inthe same direction in the period under re-view. At the end of June 2004, they wereclose to the level at which they began thequarter. Furthermore, non-resident investorssold part of their holdings of German moneymarket paper, as in the two previous three-month periods.
German investors continued to show keen
interest in foreign investment opportunities(332 billion net compared with 326billion).
Despite prices falling overall, foreign bondsand notes once again appealed to them ( 326
billion), mostly euro-denominated sovereigndebt from other euro-area countries ( 324 bil-
lion). This means that, all in all, 345
1/C252billion
has already flowed into these instruments inthe first half of 2004. This is more than in thewhole of 2003 ( 331
1/C252billion) and only slightly
less than in 2002 ( 348 billion). The underlying
sentiment regarding foreign equities, whichhas been decidedly cautious for some time,may also play a role in addition to the some-what higher return compared to Federal gov-ernment benchmark bonds and, as men-tioned above, the repatriation of “safehaven” investments they had previously setup. In any case, German financial marketplayers also withdrew from the global stockmarkets to a certain extent in the secondquarter ( 31 billion) after having already sold a
small proportion of their foreign holdings ofparticipatory securities in the previous quar-ter. New German investment in foreign in-vestment certificates also declined ( 32
1/C252bil-
lion compared with 37 billion in the previous
quarter). German investors added moneymarket paper, ie debt securities with a re-sidual maturity of up to one year, to theirportfolios for 34
1/C252billion after having with-
drawn 36 billion from this instrument in the
previous quarter.
As in the case of portfolio investment, there
were also net capital outflows through directinvestment from April to June, which, at 39
billion, were considerably lower than in theprevious quarter ( 322 billion). Both the activ-
ities of foreigners in Germany and investmentby Germans abroad contributed towardsthese net capital exports. Weak direct invest-ment in both directions of financial flowsstood in contrast to the relatively strongglobal economy to a certain extent during theperiod under review. However, a completelynormal delayed reaction of direct investmentto the changed economic environment canpossibly be expected.
Foreign investors continued to withdraw net
capital from April to June of this year follow-ing the two preceding three-month periodshaving been characterised by net capital ex-ports by foreign investors in Germany. How-ever, at 35
1/C252billion, the extent of this was
much lower than previously. Compared toGerman invest-
ment in foreign
securitiesDirect
investment
Foreign direct
investment in
Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
53this, net holdings of direct investment funds
in the euro area as a whole hardly changed,according to the statistical data currentlyavailable. Just over half of the outflows offunds from Germany can be traced back toforeigners repatriating their investment cap-ital by 33 billion after having added to it in
the previous quarter ( 35 billion). Outflows of
funds totalling 31
1/C252billion were also recorded
in the granting of shareholder loans from for-eign enterprises to their German subsidiaries.However, these were noticeably lower thanthe previous quarter’s capital exports of 330
billion. One single transaction within the tele-communications sector shaped developmentin equity capital in June.
German firms slightly extended their invest-
ment abroad from April to June ( 33
1/C252billion)
after having withdrawn funds from abroad inthe final quarter of 2003 and the first quarterof 2004 ( 311
1/C252billion). The main reason for
this was that they added 321/C252billion to their
equity capital abroad. There was a minor in-flow of capital in the case of loans within af-filiated enterprises ( 31 billion). It appears that
holding companies in the Netherlands wereinvolved in these transactions to a major ex-tent.
Whereas net capital exports were recorded in
portfolio investment and direct investment,net inflows of funds amounting to 34
1/C252bil-
lion resulted from the non-banks’ non-securi-tised credit transactions. Transactions madeby German enterprises and individuals, whichamounted to 31
1/C252billion net, accounted forthe smaller part of this figure. They mostly re-duced their deposits with foreign banks. Thefinancial operations of public authorities like-wise resulted in inflows of funds amountingto32
1/C252billion.
In addition to the capital flows arisingthrough portfolio investment and direct in-vestment, net outflows of funds totalling 336
billion also resulted from the activities of themonetary financial institutions (including theBundesbank). It was exclusively the oper-ations of the monetary financial institutions(excluding the Bundesbank) which led to cap-ital exports through short-term credit transac-tions. By contrast, overall, funds accrued tothe banking system through long-term trans-actions and those made by the Bundesbankthat are classified as credit transactions ( 34
billion and 331
1/C252billion respectively). The
latter can primarily be traced back to a reduc-tion in the claims on partner central bankswithin the Eurosystem previously accruedas part of the large-value payment systemTARGET.
The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank,
which are shown separately from credit trans-actions in the balance of payments, remainedalmost unchanged at transaction values. Val-ued at market prices at the end of the quarterunder review, however, the foreign reservesfell by 33 billion to 377 billion. The main rea-
son for this was the decline in the marketvalue of gold whereas the slight depreciationof the US dollar against the euro had onlyminor effects.German foreign
direct
investment
Credit trans-
actions of
non-banksCredit trans-
actions of the
banking system
Foreign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
54Public financesBudgetary development of central,
state and local government
In the second quarter of 2004 general gov-
ernment1recorded a deficit of 38 billion,
which was more unfavourable than in thesame period of last year ( 36 billion). This was
mainly attributable to the fact that a largeBundesbank profit had been distributed inthe second quarter of 2003, whereas thisyear the profit was far smaller and had beenbooked in the first quarter. Overall revenuetherefore declined even though tax revenuegrew considerably. Expenditure, which fluctu-ates sharply in the course of the year, de-creased by just under 1%.
The general government budget deficit has
doubled in the last three years from around335 billion in 2000 to almost 370 billion in
2003. Another rise is expected this year. Al-though expenditure is not likely to significant-ly exceed last year’s level, thanks to a strin-gent spending policy at all levels and favour-able interest rates, revenue will probably fallfurther. Tax revenue is likely to increase onlymarginally owing to the extensive tax cutsand the persistent weak growth of the taxbase. Non-tax revenue is set to decline notice-ably, primarily because of the very small Bun-desbank profit. On the whole, as in the pre-ceding years, new borrowing is likely to sig-nificantly overshoot the estimates in thebudget plans.
1Excluding local government, the results for which are
not yet known.Underlying
trends

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
55In the second quarter, the tax revenue of gen-
eral government2was just over 2% higher
than in the corresponding period of last year,after the first-quarter figure had fallen slightlyshort of the corresponding level in 2003.However, this increased inflow of revenuedoes not necessarily imply a persistent up-ward trend in tax receipts because the pictureis distorted by several special factors. The rev-enue trend was affected positively by the re-covery of corporate profits and negatively bythe continued weak domestic demand.
Among the direct taxes, corporation tax re-
corded a very favourable result. It raised 34
1/C252
billion, which was just over 33 billion more
than in the second quarter of 2003. Thissharp improvement was, however, largely at-tributable to the fact that high tax refundshad reduced revenue last year. In addition,current tax prepayments from enterpriseswent up steeply; this was due to improvedprofitability and to the moratorium for claim-ing accrued corporation tax credits. The out-come of assessed income tax revenue like-wise improved noticeably (+17
1/C252%). This was
primarily attributable to higher tax receiptsfor earlier years as well as declining paymentsfor grants to homebuyers and investmentgrants. The trend in income tax prepaymentsseems to have been curbed only partly by thecut in income tax rates this year. The lowertax rates affected wage tax to a much greaterextent, reducing the revenue from this tax byalmost 7% in the second quarter. Of the in-vestment income taxes, non-assessed taxeson earnings yielded 9% more than in thesame period last year as a result of higherdividend payments, whereas revenue fromtax on interest income went down by 16%,not least owing to a further decline in theaverage interest rate.
Among the indirect taxes, revenue from turn-
over tax again increased only moderately(+1%), mainly because of the ongoing slug-gishness of private consumption. Revenuefrom mineral oil tax – the most important ex-cise tax – decreased by just over 1%. This waspartly because energy consumption con-tinued to be dampened by high oil prices.The level of receipts from tobacco tax waseven more unfavourable; despite the rise inthe tax rate which came into force on1 March, this tax yielded almost 6% less thanYear-on-year change
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf Q1 Q2Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes, which are not yet
known for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−
4−
5−
2002 2003 2004
2Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known.Tax revenue in
the second
quarter ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
56in 2003 (adjusted for changes in booking
techniques). This reflected the fact that,owing to the tax increase, the domestic con-sumption of tobacco products appears tohave gone down or been replaced increasing-ly by illegal imports.
In the first half of the year, tax revenue (ex-
cluding receipts from local government taxes)grew by a little more than 1%. At first glanceit appears to have developed somewhat morefavourably than was expected for 2004 as awhole according to the official tax estimatefrom May. However, the bulk of this increasewas related to changes in booking tech-niques.
3Furthermore, the lowering of the in-
come tax rate had only a partial downwardeffect on revenue during this period. Againstthis background, the outcome of the first sixmonths is on the whole broadly in line withcurrent expectations. Risks exist with regardto several major individual taxes comparedwith the May estimate. This relates, for ex-ample, to assessed income tax if the receiptsfrom the tax amnesty do not increase sharplyin the second half of the year.
4In addition,
contrary to previous assumptions, tobaccotax will yield considerably less than in 2003 asa result of the strong consumer reactions tothe tax increase. However, there is a chancethat corporation tax will recover more sharplythan was expected in May. On balance, there-fore, actual revenue deviations from thespring forecast are likely to be fairly minimalthis year.
In the second quarter central government re-
corded a deficit of 36 billion, which was 3
1/C252
billion more than in the same period last year.Revenue went down by 4
1/C252%. Although tax
revenue grew sharply by 3%, non-tax rev-enue declined steeply – as already mentioned –owing to the sheer drop in the BundesbankTrends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
1st half
Type of tax 2003 2004Annualpercent-agechange
Wage tax 62.3 59.1 – 5.1
Assessed income tax – 2.9 – 2.8 .Corporation tax 3.7 6.7 + 81.7Turnover tax 67.0 67.9 + 1.4
of which Q2
Wage tax 31.7 29.6 – 6.7
Assessed income tax 2.6 3.1 + 17.6
Corporation tax 1.2 4.5 .Turnover tax 33.3 33.7 + 1.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
3Until the end of 2003, in the case of Federal Govern-
ment excise taxes, partial amounts outstanding at the
end of the month were frequently not recorded as
revenue until the subsequent month, whereas since the
beginning of this year they have been booked in the
month in which they are due. This adjustment means
that the growth of overall tax revenue in the first half of
the year was overstated by nearly3/C254percentage point.
4In the first half of the year the tax amnesty yielded
barely more than 30.2 billion. In the May estimate for the
whole of 2004 an amount of 311/C252billion was anticipated,
and this figure was already 331/C252billion lower than the
original government expectations. However, revenueflows are likely to be concentrated largely on the second
half of the year, not least as a result of the considerable
amount of time required for the retrospective income
declarations (for obtaining the necessary invoices and the
required consultations with tax advisers)....and in 2004
as a wholeFederal budgetin the second
quarter...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
57profit.5Expenditure, which fluctuates sharply
in the course of the year, decreased by 31/C252%
following an increase of 2% in the first quar-
ter. This decline was attributable to the factthat there were no more transfers to theflood disaster fund and that transfers to en-terprises (particularly the Post Office pensionfunds) as well as interest payments werelower than in the second quarter of 2003.
For 2004 as a whole, as things now stand,
central government’s deficit is likely to exceedthe level of 2003 ( 339 billion), whereas the
budget envisages a volume of 329
1/C252billion.
The main reason for this is declining revenue.On the one hand, tax revenue of central gov-ernment will contract by 1
1/C252%, according to
the tax estimate in May. On the other hand,non-tax revenue will presumably contract –primarily as a result of the negligible Bundes-bank profit – even if the scheduled sizeableproceeds from privatisations and the sale ofclaims ( 37 billion) are actually realised. The
expenditure level could remain virtually un-altered after recording noticeable growth inboth 2002 and 2003. This is due for the mostpart to the cessation of transfers to the flooddisaster fund. Owing to central government’shigher borrowing requirement, a supplemen-tary budget is likely in the second part of theyear.
The Federal Government’s draft budget for
2005 envisages only a marginal rise in ex-penditure of
1/C252% compared with the spend-
ing total budgeted for 2004. Net governmentborrowing is anticipated to reach 322 billion,
which is somewhat lower than investment ex-penditure. The constitutional ceiling for netborrowing could, however, only be compliedwith through a planned recourse to sizeableproceeds from asset disposals ( 315 billion);
this raises fundamental questions with regardto the interpretation of this credit limit.
6
Thus, on the one hand, the purchase of assetsis seen as investment expenditure, which jus-tifies debt financing. On the other hand, thesale of an asset does not entail a correspond-ing need to redeem debt; the associated pro-ceeds are being used instead to comply withthe borrowing ceiling. 5 bn
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2The Federal Government’s
balance of revenue
and expenditure
Deutsche Bundesbank9+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−
9−
12−
15−
18−
21−
24−
27−
30−
2003 2004
5The Bundesbank profit is allocated to the Federal
budget up to an amount of 33.5 billion. Any amount ex-
ceeding that sum accrues to the Redemption Fund for In-
herited Liabilities to repay debt. Whereas in 2003 the
profit distribution had amounted to 351/C252billion and had
been posted in April, the amount transferred in (March)2004 was only around 3
1/C254billion.
6See Deutsche Bundesbank, Development of public sec-
tor investment, and its financing, Monthly Report, April
1999, p 37 ff, particularly pp 42-43....and in 2004as a whole
Federal budget
in 2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
58Nevertheless, according to the 2005 draft
budget, there will be a marked improvementin the budget situation compared with theexpected outcome for this year even if theproceeds from asset disposals are disregard-ed. On the whole, however, the draft budgetis subject to risks. On the revenue side, be-sides the uncertainty about the impact of thevarious changes in tax legislation (includingmeasures to combat illicit work and tax eva-sion) and the development of the macroeco-nomic tax base, these risks are likely to de-pend not least on the realisation of non-taxrevenue, which includes sizeable proceedsfrom motorway tolls. On the expenditureside, the details of an across-the-board cut inspending still need to be spelled out. More-over, additional burdens for central govern-ment vis-/C224-vis the draft budget will arise fromthe – now concrete – provisions for the amal-gamation of unemployment assistance andsocial assistance.
When it adopted the draft budget, the Fed-
eral Government reaffirmed its intention tolower the general government deficit ratio tounder 3% in 2005 and announced that itwould take additional measures if necessary.As things stand today, there is indeed a riskthat this deficit ceiling will be overshot onceagain. Since the sale of financial assets doesnot lower the Maastricht deficit, the centralgovernment deficit (as defined in the Treaty)will develop far more unfavourably next yearthan as recorded in the budget accounts. Ac-cording to an agreement reached by the Fi-nancial Planning Council – the decisions ofwhich are assigned great importance also inthe context of the German stability pro-grammes – central government (including thesocial security funds) may utilise no morethan 45% of the 3% ceiling, a threshold thatwill be considerably overstepped at least thisyear and is likely to require further consolida-tion efforts if it is to be kept to next year.
The Federal Government’s new medium-term
financial plan until 2008 (see the adjacenttable) indicates that net borrowing is to belowered only slightly, even though it is basedon a fairly positive macroeconomic scenario.This reflects not least a significant decline inthe sizeable proceeds expected from assetdisposals in 2005. Projected net borrowingfor 2007 was raised by 311 billion to 321 bil-
lion compared with the previous financialplan. No substantial progress towards a bal-anced budget is envisaged for 2008 ( 319
1/C252The Federal Government’s financial
planning over the medium term
5billion
ItemAc-
tual2003Target2004Draft2005 2006 2007 2008
Expenditure 256.7 257.3 258.3 253.6 257.1 260.0
of which
Investment 25.7 24.6 22.8 22.3 22.2 20.8
Revenue 217.5 227.7 236.0 231.7 235.7 240.3of which
Taxes 191.9 197.7 194.5 202.6 210.3 216.8
Privatisationproceeds 5.2 7.1 15.5 3.3 0.1 0.1
Deficit 39.2 29.6
1 22.3 22.0 21.5 19.8
Seigniorage 0.6 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
Net borrowing 38.6 29.3 22.0 21.7 21.2 19.5Memo item
Change in
expenditurein % 3.0 + 0.2 + 0.4 – 1.8 + 1.4 + 1.1
1Most recent assessment of the Federal Ministry of Finance:
around 540 billion.
Deutsche BundesbankConsolidation
requirement
with regard to
the 3% ceiling
Federal Govern-
ment’s
medium-term
financial plan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
59billion) either. The main reason for the higher
level of new borrowing vis-/C224-vis the previousfinancial plan is the markedly poorer revenueoutlook anticipated in the recent medium-term tax estimate. Average expendituregrowth is expected to be merely
1/C254% be-
tween 2006 and 2008.
In the second quarter the special funds re-
corded a surplus of just under 32 billion,
which was considerably smaller than in thesecond quarter of 2003 ( 35 billion). This was
primarily due to the fact that, contrary to lastyear, the Redemption Fund for Inherited Li-abilities received none of the Bundesbank’sprofit distribution (2003: 32 billion). Further-
more, the flood disaster fund recorded a mar-ginal deficit after revenue had exceeded ex-penditure by 31 billion in 2003. Following a
large surplus of 310 billion in 2003, overall
the special funds may close more or less inbalance this year.
State government succeeded in lowering its
deficit in the second quarter by 31
1/C252billion
compared with the same period of last yearto not quite 34 billion, thus continuing the
improvement observed at the beginning ofthe year. Overall revenue grew favourably byjust over 2
1/C252% on the back of the sharp in-
crease in tax revenue of 6%. This compara-tively strong rise is primarily related to stategovernment’s higher share in turnover taxrevenue this year as well as to a sharp in-crease in its own taxes. By contrast, expend-iture remained almost unchanged.
For 2004 as a whole a deficit of 324
1/C252billion
is envisaged for state government; this wouldbe a considerable reduction compared with
last year’s record high of almost 332 billion.
Savings on expenditure as a result of longerworking hours, cuts in civil servants’ remuner-ation and reduced transfers are making anongoing contribution to consolidation. How-ever, next year state government will be bur-dened by the further income tax cuts and thereallocation of turnover tax shares to centralgovernment. Consequently, a number ofstate governments are also likely to find ithard to stay below the constitutionally de-fined ceiling for new borrowing. Some stateseven announced that they would struggle toachieve this in subsequent years, too.
Local government was able to reduce its def-
icit in the first quarter of 2004 (latest availabledata) by almost 3
1/C252billion to just over 34 bil-
lion. The main reason for this was the sharprise in tax revenue (+7
3/C254%). It was primarily
local business tax that rose unexpectedlysharply – although the amounts raised varyconsiderably from one state to the next.Overall revenue expanded much more slowly(2
3/C254%) owing to the virtually unchanged level
of non-tax revenue. Expenditure grew moder-ately (+
3/C254%). Although a marked increase in
social benefits again caused additional bur-dens, personnel expenditure declined, notleast because last year’s base figure had in-cluded one-off payments related to collectivewage agreements. Fixed investment was re-duced by one-tenth, although some statesare still having to overcome the consequencesof the 2002 floods. This evidently reflects thetight statutory credit limit for the municipalbudgets. After cash advances (which strictlyspeaking should only be used to bridge liquid-Special funds
State
governmentLocalgovernment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
60ity shortfalls during the year but in actual fact
are frequently used to finance expendituresstretching over several years) had alreadymade up one-sixth of local government debtby the end of last year, many municipalitiesare apparently finding it difficult to obtain theauthorisation (which is principally linked tofund-raising ability) needed to take up regularloans for investment purposes.
The lowering of local business tax transfers
agreed at the end of 2003 should provide justover 32 billion of relief to local government
this year. However, not least the emergingsharp growth in social benefits and the in-come tax cuts are likely to absorb a large partof this amount, which means that a signifi-cant decline in the local government deficitscan no longer be expected in 2004. In 2005,local government should receive additionalrelief of 32
1/C252billion from the amalgamation
of unemployment assistance and social assist-ance. According to the Federal Government’splans, the bulk of this sum is to be used to ex-pand day-care provisions for young children.This is, however, offset by the considerableneed for fiscal consolidation.
The indebtedness of central, state and local
government rose by 38
1/C252billion in the second
quarter. Following a sharp increase of 335 bil-
lion in the first quarter, central government li-abilities went up by merely 31
1/C252billion. A
351/C252billion decrease in money market loans
was accompanied by a 37 billion net increase
in capital market debt. The net borrowing re-quirement of state government amounted to36
1/C252billion. The special funds redeemed li-
abilities on balance, whereas local govern-ment debt is likely to have continued its mod-erate upward trend.
Social security funds
In the second quarter of 2004 the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance scheme re-corded a deficit of just over 31 billion, which
was somewhat higher than in the sameperiod last year. Nonetheless, this was a no-ticeable improvement on the first quarter,when a deficit of just under 33 billion had
been recorded. This owed something to thefact that since April pensioners have had topay the full contribution to the long-termcare insurance scheme themselves. This wasthe main reason why overall expenditure roseonly half as much (by just over
1/C252%) as the ex-Net borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2002 + 54.5 + 67.6 – 11.9 + 57.4
2003
p + 80.3 + 73.4 – 1.8 + 35.8
of which
Q1 + 35.3 + 32.6 + 2.7 + 19.5
Q2 + 13.2 + 11.8 + 0.5 + 16.3Q3 + 20.0 + 9.4 + 5.0 – 6.5Q4
p + 11.7 + 19.5 – 9.9 + 6.5
2004
Q1p + 45.0 + 34.4 + 3.9 + 4.7
Q2pe + 8.6 + 14.7 – 9.3 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market loans.
Deutsche BundesbankIndebtedness
Statutory
pension
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
61penditure for pension benefits. However, rev-
enue increased even more slowly by justunder
1/C252%. Revenue from compulsory contri-
butions declined somewhat as a result of theweak evolution of employment and paylevels. Grants from the Federal budget, whichthis year are no longer being topped up by afurther stage of the ecology tax, increased byalmost 1%.
The lowering of the required minimum fluctu-
ation reserve from 0.5 to 0.2 month’s ex-penditure signalled that from the outset adeficit was expected for 2004 and was de-signed to avoid the need to raise the contri-bution rate. The resultant risk of liquidityshortages in autumn this year will, however,be significantly reduced by the agreed sale ofthe GAGFAH housing company – the netsales price of which is 32.1 billion, ie 30.5 bil-
lion higher than its book value. The continuedweak revenue base will be partly offset bycost-curbing effects in the second half of theyear. For example, no pension increase wasmade on 1 July 2004, the saving effect ofabolishing the statutory pension insurancescheme’s contribution to the long-term careinsurance scheme will continue, and the in-crease in the number of current pension re-cipients is likely to remain below 1% – alsobecause the widely introduced deductions inbenefit levels will deter early retirement.
The deficit of the Federal Employment
Agency reached almost 32 billion in the
second quarter, which was just under 3
1/C252bil-
lion lower than in the same period last year.Although revenue fell by 2% year on year, ex-penditure decreased by the much steepermargin of 5%. Revenue from contributionswas
1/C252% down on the second quarter of
2003. The sharper decline in overall revenuewas attributable to a reduction in incomefrom the insolvency compensation levy,which was, however, offset on the expend-iture side by decreases in insolvency benefit.
Compared with 2003, 2
1/C252% less was spent
on unemployment benefit even though the
number of unemployed persons7increased
by just under 11/C252%. The increasing number of
long-term unemployed and the associatedloss of entitlement to unemployment benefitare reducing the corresponding expenditureQuarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
Expenditure
RevenueFinances of the wage
and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−60
58
56
54
52
2002 2003 2004
7Including participants in aptitude tests and training
measures, who are no longer counted as unemployed as
from the beginning of 2004.Federal Employ-
ment Agency

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
62requirement.8Spending on active labour mar-
ket policy measures decreased by 91/C252%a s
the retrenchment efforts were continued.
Cuts in the area of job creation measureswere again particularly large (-29%). Al-though growing payments for the new instru-ments personnel service agencies (PSAs) andself-employed start-ups (“Me plcs”) mean-while account for almost 7
1/C252% of the total
resources available for vocational promotionalschemes (including job creation measures),this is outweighed on balance by the declinein expenditure on the “traditional” active la-bour market policy measures.
Savings in the field of active labour market
policy are likely to continue during the re-mainder of the year. Similarly, the growingnumber of unemployed persons exhaustingthe maximum period of entitlement to un-employment benefit will continue to dampenthe related expenditure, although this will beoffset by a rise in spending on unemploymentassistance which is financed out of the Fed-eral budget. The supplementary grant to theFederal Employment Office of 35.2 billion en-
visaged for the current year may neverthelessbe exceeded somewhat owing to the persist-ently weak revenue trend. Looking ahead tothe far-reaching reforms due next year, it islikely that the Federal Employment Agencywill be only marginally relieved by the intro-duction of “unemployment benefit II” (theamalgamation of unemployment assistanceand social assistance paid to persons able towork). Although the measures to re-integratethe recipients of unemployment benefit II intothe labour market will be financed by centralgovernment in future, this will be offset by acompensatory amount which the Federal Em-Quarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn 5 bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefit and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−
3−8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.016
15
14
13
12
11
2002 2003 2004
8Under a grandfathering clause, the shortening of the
maximum period of entitlement to unemployment bene-
fit to 12 months (or 18 months for persons over 55) ap-
plies only to persons who become unemployed as of
2006.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
63ployment Office will have to pay to central
government.9
The financial development of the statutoryhealth insurance scheme was positively influ-enced in the first quarter (latest availabledata) by the recent health system reform (Actmodernising the statutory health insurancescheme). It recorded a surplus of 31 billion
compared with a deficit of 3
1/C252billion in the
same period last year. Revenue from contribu-tions
10went up by 2%, primarily because the
full contribution now has to be paid on com-pany pensions instead of the previous half-contribution. An overall rise in revenue of1
1/C252% was accompanied by a fall in expend-
iture of 31/C252%. Expenditure items which
registered a particularly sharp drop includedpharmaceuticals, travel expenses and deathbenefit – which has now been completelyabolished. This was facilitated both by signifi-cantly higher patients’ co-payments and bythe direct restriction of benefits. By contrast,expenditure on dentures went up sharply.This was presumably triggered by uncertain-ties regarding the outsourcing of insurancecoverage for dentures next year as patientssought treatment ahead of the change.
The improvement in the financial outcome in
the first quarter is, however, overstated by a“stampede” effect at the end of 2003 in an-ticipation of the pending health reform. Thecurbing of expenditure resulting from pa-tients’ co-payments is also likely to becomeless significant during the remainder of theyear as chronically ill patients, in particular,reach the defined co-payment ceiling. On theother hand, the new Federal grant to covernon-insurance-related benefits, totalling 31
billion, was not drawn on in the first quarter.Overall, a surplus is expected for this year;and it is certainly needed in order to redeemat least one-quarter of the (gross) debt of38.3 billion which had accumulated by the
end of 2003 and also to create financial lee-way for lowering contribution rates. At thebeginning of May, the average contributionrate amounted to 14.2%. Although it cannotbe ruled out that it may fall to below 14% bythe end of the year, it is unlikely to fall belowthis threshold on an annual average .
General government budget trends
The general government deficit ratio (as de-
fined in the national accounts) was 3.9% in2003, thus exceeding the 3% ceiling for thesecond year in succession. As things standtoday, no major changes are expected thisyear. On the one hand, the expenditure ratiowill probably fall considerably. This is likely tobe partly attributable to the health reform,the currently muted growth in spending onpensioners, the decline in the number of staffin the public sector in conjunction with mod-erate pay adjustments, the generally stringentspending policy at all levels of governmentand the ongoing favourable interest ratelevel. On the other hand, the ratio of revenue
9The compensatory amount, which is to be paid on a
quarterly basis, is calculated according to the average ex-
penditure in respect of recipients of unemployment bene-
fit II who changed over from the old to the new benefit
in the previous quarter. This is intended to encourage the
Federal Employment Agency to intensify its job place-
ment efforts.
10Including contributions for low paid part-time jobs
(“mini jobs”) booked under the risk structure compensa-tion scheme.Statutory
health
insurance
scheme
Deficit ratio stillwell above the
3% ceiling in
2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
64The Stability and Growth Pact following the European Court of Justice’s judgement
of 13 July 2004
The objective of the Stability and Growth Pact is
to attain and safeguard sound public finances ineconomic and monetary union. Sound public fi-nances not only promote growth and employ-ment, they are also a sine qua non for the ability
of the European System of Central Banks to en-sure price stability at low interest rates.
To achieve this objective, the member states of
the European Union need to ensure that the Sta-bility and Growth Pact is rigorously implement-ed and, if they have not already done so, achievestructurally balanced budgets as quickly as pos-sible. They should take advantage of the emer-ging economic recovery to undertake the neces-sary fiscal consolidation measures.
Hence in Germany, too, the various tiers of gov-
ernment (central, state and local government)are faced with the task of achieving a balancedgeneral government budget in the mediumterm through structural consolidation measures.Another key requirement for this would be therigorous implementation of a national stabilitypact.
It is becoming apparent that Germany will make
virtually no progress towards structural consoli-dation this year. In 2004, for the third year in suc-cession, the deficit ratio will exceed the 3% ceil-ing specified under Community law. It is there-fore all the more urgent to sufficiently curtailthe general government deficit ratio in 2005 sothat it falls below the 3% ceiling. As things standnow, this is an achievable target. Should itemerge that the current budget plans will notsuffice to achieve this aim, additional consolida-tion measures would be necessary. The FederalGovernment also announced this when it pre-sented the draft budget for 2005.
The requirements imposed on the member
states by the Stability and Growth Pact have notlost any of their urgency in the wake of theEuropean Court of Justice’s judgement of 13 July2004. The upshot of that judgement in responseto the case filed by the European Commissionagainst the Council of the European Union inconnection with the excessive deficit proceduresagainst France and Germany is that the excessivedeficit procedures against those countries arebeing held in abeyance and correspond to thestate of the Council’s recommendations pursu-ant to Article 104 (7) of the EC Treaty from Janu-ary and June 2003.
1
It follows that the excessive deficit proceduresshould now be continued in line with the ruleslaid down by the Stability and Growth Pact. Re-newed recommendations pursuant to Article104 (7) of the EC Treaty would, by contrast, con-tradict the Pact’s intention of effectively combat-ing excessive budget deficits.
The demands to be issued to Germany and
France in the further course of the excessive def-icit procedures could be oriented to the Commis-sion’s recommendations from autumn last year.In any case they should contain the demand tocomply with the 3% deficit ceiling in 2005. Theeconomic situation has developed since thenlargely as forecast. Given the macroeconomic re-covery, a further extension of the deadline forcorrecting the excessive deficits beyond the endof 2005 is therefore likewise unwarranted oneconomic policy grounds.
The European Court’s judgement has also reani-
mated the public debate about a possible re-form of the Stability and Growth Pact. However,the Pact essentially satisfies the requirements re-garding appropriate fiscal policy rules for eco-nomic and monetary union. It is not the Pact’sform that is causing problems but its implemen-tation. The current fiscal policy difficulties ofsome member states are due not least to the factthat that these countries failed to sufficiently re-duce their budget deficits in the past when themacroeconomic setting was more favourable.
1If the Council decides that an excessive deficit exists, it
simultaneously makes recommendations pursuant to Art-
icle 104 (7) to the member state concerned with a view tocorrecting the excessive deficit within a given period. If themember state fails to put these recommendations intopractice, the Council is called upon to initiate the furthersteps envisaged in the Pact.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
65to GDP will also decrease noticeably. This par-
ticularly reflects the sizeable income tax cutsmade at the beginning of the year. Further-more, despite the rise in macroeconomicgrowth, the assessment base for taxes andsocial security contributions is developingrelatively weakly. Non-tax revenue will fall asa result of the sharp decline in the Bundes-bank profit and the proceeds lost on accountof the delayed introduction of a motorwaytoll system for heavy goods vehicles.
Whereas in the past few years the general
government deficits have risen considerablyin the context of an unfavourable macroeco-nomic setting coupled with extensive cuts intaxes and social security contributions, it isnow high time to achieve a comprehensiveconsolidation of public finances – especiallysince the macroeconomic outlook has mean-while improved. This requirement stems notleast from the commitments which wereentered into within the framework of Euro-pean monetary union and which were ex-pressly recognised by representatives of alllevels of government (for details, see the boxon page 64).The deficits are indeed expected to decreasein 2005. Although the taxes and social secur-ity ratio will fall further, particularly as a resultof the last stage of the income tax reform,non-tax revenue may increase substantiallyowing to the introduction of the motorwaytoll announced for the beginning of 2005.The crucial requirement is to strictly curb ex-penditure at all levels of government so as tofacilitate a marked lowering of the expend-iture ratio. This may be aided by the structuralreforms adopted in connection with labourmarket-related expenditure, even if thesehave an impact only after a time lag. In add-ition, it is to be expected that expenditure onpensions will continue to develop weakly andthat an overall stringent spending policy willbe pursued. The continuously favourableinterest rate level should also help to ease thepressure on public finances. All in all, how-ever, there is a danger, judging from thepresent perspective, that these efforts will notbe sufficient to achieve compliance with the3% ceiling next year. Should that appear like-ly, additional consolidation measures wouldhave to be taken in good time.
Comprehensive
need for con-
solidation in
2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
66

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and resident
individuals, housing loans, sectorsof economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of resident individuals and
domestic non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public
authorities at banks (MFIs) inGermany, by creditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the euro area 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004

VIII Public finances in Germany
1 General government budgetary
position 52*
2 Budgetary position of central,
state and local government 52*
3 Government fiscal position as
defined in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of central, state and
local government 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*
6 Specific taxes levied by central,
state and local government 54*
7 General government debt 55*8 Change in general government
debt 57*
9 Loans raised by general govern-
ment against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Central government debt 58*11 Central government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets
of the wage and salary earners’pension insurance fund 59*
13 Revenue and expenditure of the
Federal Employment Agency 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 60*
2 Output in the production sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 67*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the euro-area memberstates, the Deutsche Mark value ofthe ECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2002          Dec 9.8 6.6 6.9 7.1 4.0 4.7 4.9 3.09 2.94 4.4
2003          Jan 9.2 6.6 7.3 7.4 4.2 4.8 4.6 2.79 2.83 4.2
         Feb 10.3 7.5 8.1 7.9 4.4 4.9 4.7 2.76 2.69 4.0         Mar 11.6 8.1 8.2 8.3 4.1 4.8 4.4 2.75 2.53 4.1
         Apr 11.1 8.1 8.7 8.5 4.7 5.1 4.7 2.56 2.53 4.2
         May 11.3 8.6 8.7 8.6 5.0 5.2 4.5 2.56 2.40 3.9         June 11.3 8.4 8.4 8.6 4.8 5.1 5.1 2.21 2.15 3.7
         July 11.3 8.6 8.7 8.5 5.4 5.5 5.2 2.08 2.13 4.0
         Aug 11.7 8.7 8.3 8.2 5.5 5.6 5.3 2.10 2.14 4.2         Sep 11.1 8.2 7.6 8.0 5.5 5.4 5.4 2.02 2.15 4.2
         Oct 11.6 8.1 8.0 7.7 5.7 5.4 5.8 2.01 2.14 4.3
         Nov 10.5 7.6 7.4 7.5 6.2 6.0 6.1 1.97 2.16 4.4         Dec 10.6 7.6 7.1 7.0 5.9 5.8 5.9 2.06 2.15 4.4
2004          Jan 11.5 7.5 6.6 6.6 5.8 5.8 6.0 2.02 2.09 4.2
         Feb 10.7 6.8 6.1 6.3 5.7 5.7 6.1 2.03 2.07 4.2         Mar 11.4 6.7 6.1 5.9 6.0 5.8 6.7 2.01 2.03 4.0
         Apr 10.9 6.2 5.5 5.5 6.0 5.9 7.2 2.08 2.05 4.2
         May 9.3 5.5 4.8 5.2 5.9 5.9 7.3 2.02 2.09 4.4         June 9.6 5.7 5.4 ... 6.5 6.2 7.2 2.03 2.11 4.4
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.07 2.12 4.3
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.5, p 44*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-termliabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from 2001, Euro12. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period
€
 million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2002          Dec + 5,553 + 9,332 − 14,200 + 1,149 − 8,445 − 5,852 − 1,052 1.0183 93.3 96.3
2003          Jan − 3,992 + 1,556 − 3,954 + 8,601 − 6,993 − 7,111 + 1,549 1.0622 95.5 98.8
         Feb + 2,645 + 8,483 − 21,238 + 2,318 − 7,098 − 21,798 + 5,340 1.0773 96.8 100.2         Mar + 4,271 + 6,782 + 10,897 + 2,037 + 15,221 − 11,353 + 4,992 1.0807 97.6 100.8
         Apr − 7,378 + 6,607 + 17,450 − 11,561 + 24,770 + 3,031 + 1,210 1.0848 98.3 101.3
         May − 1,623 + 7,443 − 23,004 + 642 + 11,068 − 35,072 + 358 1.1582 102.2 105.4         June + 2,083 + 10,107 − 26,419 + 13,612 + 24,804 − 65,588 + 754 1.1663 102.4 106.0
         July + 2,834 + 15,457 + 323 − 4,031 − 36,091 + 38,614 + 1,831 1.1372 101.1 104.9
         Aug + 3,033 + 10,501 + 5,943 − 5,564 − 38,761 + 50,017 + 251 1.1139 99.9 103.8         Sep + 5,645 + 10,865 − 6,902 − 9,529 + 11,173 − 8,490 − 57 1.1222 99.5 103.3
         Oct + 7,993 + 13,391 − 111 − 9,209 + 35,686 − 27,339 + 750 1.1692 101.0 104.8
         Nov + 3,251 + 8,654 + 13,242 + 3,867 + 4,029 − 172 + 5,518 1.1702 100.9 105.0         Dec + 6,094 + 8,635 − 16,689 − 4,308 − 33,290 + 13,587 + 7,321 1.2286 103.7 108.0
2004          Jan − 3,082 + 5,231 − 19,707 − 10,596 − 3,439 − 2,676 − 2,997 1.2613 104.7 109.2
         Feb + 5,221 + 9,437 + 16,680 + 7,834 + 17,369 − 17,174 + 8,650 1.2646 104.4 108.8         Mar + 11,146 + 13,398 − 11,006 − 26,100 − 2,493 + 13,850 + 3,737 1.2262 102.8 107.0
         Apr + 338 + 10,660 − 8,492 − 2,922 − 3,038 + 155 − 2,687 1.1985 100.9 105.0
         May + 3,151 + 11,148 − 8,495 − 730 − 27,154 + 18,725 + 664 1.2007 102.0 106.1         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2138 101.8 106.0
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2266 102.4 106.9
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables X.12 and 13, pp 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis a narrow group of countries. — 4  Based
on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period BelgiumGerm any Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area 8 
Real gross domestic product 1 
2001 0.6 0.8 1.1 2.1 4.0 6.0 1.8 1.3 1.2 0.8 1.8 2.8 1.6
2002 0.7 0.1 2.3 1.2 3.9 6.1 0.4 1.7 0.2 1.4 0.5 2.0 0.92003 1.1 − 0.1 1.9 0.5 4.3 3.7 0.3 2.1 − 0.7 0.7 − 1.2 2.4 0.5
2003          Q1 1.3 0.4 2.3 1.4 4.7 3.6 0.8 − 0.2 0.9 − 1.4 2.3 1.0
         Q2 0.9 − 0.7 1.4 − 0.5 3.8 5.3 0.1 − 1.4 0.5 − 2.2 2.2 − 0.1         Q3 1.0 − 0.3 2.1 0.2 4.3 0.5 0.2 − 1.4 0.7 − 0.9 2.3 0.3         Q4 1.2 0.2 1.7 1.1 4.3 5.1 0.0 − 0.5 0.6 − 0.4 2.8 0.7
2004          Q1 3.0 1.5 2.7 2.2 4.0 6.1 0.9 0.9 0.7 0.1 2.9 1.8
         Q2 2.6 2.0 ... ... 3.9 ... ... 1.0 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 1,2 
2001 − 0.3 0.2 0.0 1.1 1.0 10.1 − 1.2 3.2 0.5 2.8 3.1 − 1.5 0.42002 1.3 − 1.0 2.1 − 1.4 1.7 7.8 − 1.3 0.4 − 1.0 0.9 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.52003 0.8 0.4 0.8 − 0.3 1.5 6.3 − 0.5 2.6 − 2.1 1.8 − 0.1 1.4 0.4
2003          Q1 1.6 1.5 2.3 0.0 0.7 2.4 − 0.2 4.5 0.6 3.6 0.6 1.6 1.0
         Q2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.9 2.1 2.2 − 1.7 − 1.3 − 4.8 0.6 − 2.8 1.7 − 0.8         Q3 0.4 − 1.0 1.6 − 0.6 2.2 5.4 − 0.2 4.7 − 3.6 1.9 1.1 1.0 − 0.3         Q4 1.5 1.5 0.7 1.3 0.7 15.2 0.3 2.9 − 0.9 1.4 1.0 1.1 1.5
2004          Q1 1.8 1.5 − 0.5 0.5 2.6 4.4 0.0 ... 0.9 3.0 − 2.9 1.3 1.0
         Q2 ...
7p 3.4 4.5 2.7 0.5 ... 1.0 ... ... ... − 1.8 2.5 ...
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2001 82.3 84.4 85.7 87.4 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.52002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 77.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.42003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.8 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 79.0 78.9 81.1
2003          Q2 78.6 81.8 82.8 84.9 77.1 75.1 75.6 85.9 81.9 80.4 77.6 78.2 80.9
         Q3 77.9 81.0 80.7 84.8 76.8 77.1 76.1 84.8 81.0 79.4 76.4 79.5 80.7         Q4 79.0 82.9 82.0 84.4 76.1 73.6 76.1 83.9 81.4 80.3 84.3 79.3 81.4
2004          Q1 79.4 82.8 82.8
4 81.4 77.5 74.4 76.8 83.5 82.1 80.0 80.6 77.0 4 80.6
         Q2 79.6 82.6 83.4 81.8 74.6 77.7 75.9 85.6 82.8 80.4 79.3 79.7 80.7
         Q3 81.5 83.4 84.7 82.6 76.3 75.3 76.6 87.4 83.1 82.3 81.4 79.8 81.4
Unemployment rate 5 
2001 6.7 7.8 9.1 8.4 10.4 3.9 9.4 2.1 2.5 3.6 4.1 10.6 8.02002 7.3 8.7 9.1 8.9 10.0 4.3 9.0 2.8 2.7 4.2 5.0 11.3 8.42003 8.1 9.6 9.0 9.4 9.3 4.6 8.6 3.7 3.8 4.1 6.3 11.3 8.9
2004          Jan 8.4 9.6 9.0 9.6 4.5 8.5 3.9 4.5 4.2 6.2 11.1 8.9
         Feb 8.5 9.6 9.0 9.5 4.5 ... 4.0 4.6 4.2 6.2 11.1 8.9         Mar 8.5 9.7 9.0 9.5 4.5 ... 4.1 4.7 4.2 6.4 11.1 8.9
         Apr 8.5 9.8 8.9 9.5 4.5 ... 4.2 4.9 4.2 6.5 11.1 9.0
         May 8.6 9.8 8.9 9.5 4.5 ... 4.2 4.8 4.2 6.5 11.0 9.0         June 8.6 9.8 8.8 9.5 4.5 ... 4.2 ... 4.2 6.5 11.0 9.0
         July ... 9.9 ... ... 4.5 ... ... ... 4.2 ... 11.0 ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2001 2.4 1.9 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.3
2002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.32003 1.5 1.0 1.3 2.2 3.4 4.0 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.1 2.1
2004          Jan 1.4 1.2 0.8 2.2 3.1 2.3 2.2 2.3 1.5 1.2 2.2 2.3 1.9
         Feb 1.2 0.8 0.4 1.9 2.6 2.2 2.4 2.4 1.3 1.5 2.1 2.2 1.6         Mar 1.0 1.1 − 0.4 1.9 2.9 1.8 2.3 2.0 1.2 1.5 2.2 2.2 1.7
         Apr 1.7 1.7 − 0.4 2.4 3.1 1.7 2.3 2.7 1.5 1.5 2.4 2.7 2.0
         May 2.4 2.1 − 0.1 2.8 3.1 2.1 2.3 3.4 1.7 2.1 2.4 3.4 2.5         June 2.0 1.9 − 0.1
p 2.7 3.0 2.5 2.4 3.8 1.5 p 2.3 3.7 3.5 p 2.4
         July 2.1 2.0 ... ... 3.1 ... 2.2 3.8 p 1.2 ... ... 3.3 e 2.4
General government financial balance 6 
2001 0.5 − 2.8 5.2 − 1.5 − 1.4 1.1 − 2.6 6.3 0.0 0.2 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 1.62002 0.1 − 3.5 4.3 − 3.2 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 2.3 2.7 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 2.7 0.0 − 2.32003 0.3 − 3.9 2.3 − 4.1 − 3.2 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 1.3 − 2.8 0.3 − 2.7
General government debt 6 
2001 108.1 59.4 43.9 56.8 106.9 36.1 110.6 5.5 52.9 67.1 55.6 57.5 69.42002 105.8 60.8 42.6 58.6 104.7 32.3 108.0 5.7 52.6 66.6 58.1 54.6 69.22003 100.5 64.2 45.3 63.7 103.0 32.0 106.2 4.9 54.8 65.0 59.4 50.8 70.6
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central adjusted. — 6  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — including proceeds fromsales of UMTS licences. — 7  Adjusted in advance by
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece and Portugal is calculated the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
fromseasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; ad- Quarterly Production Survey for the second quarter (industry in Germany:
justed for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally on average,  -2.6%). — 8  Including Greece (Harmonised Index of Consumer
adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and October. — 4  France Prices, general government financial balance and general government debt
and euro area fromfirst quarter 2004 not seasonally adjusted. — from  2001 only). 
5  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€
 billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2002          Nov 37.3 22.2 5.5 15.1 6.1 34.9 84.4 49.5 18.9 3.7 − 0.5 13.4 2.3
         Dec 51.6 57.3 14.8 − 5.7 − 14.1 21.0 − 33.7 − 54.7 23.9 16.5 − 0.1 − 2.2 9.6
2003          Jan 53.4 30.4 5.4 23.0 21.8 8.6 19.2 10.6 15.3 − 0.8 − 2.1 6.7 11.4
         Feb 51.1 35.5 4.3 15.6 17.9 10.3 66.7 56.5 11.7 7.0 − 1.2 9.9 − 4.1         Mar 45.0 37.8 6.4 7.2 6.6 13.2 5.6 − 7.6 13.8 7.3 − 1.6 14.0 − 5.9
         Apr 86.7 71.2 27.3 15.5 20.9 − 2.5 41.6 44.1 6.8 − 2.9 − 2.6 10.6 1.7
         May 69.4 42.8 14.3 26.6 30.7 41.9 42.9 1.1 17.9 6.6 − 1.3 19.4 − 6.7         June 12.3 25.4 − 7.1 − 13.1 − 13.8 58.1 39.5 − 18.6 17.1 2.9 − 1.6 8.8 7.0
         July 36.9 14.9 − 4.4 22.0 14.0 − 37.9 − 31.2 6.6 32.1 5.3 − 2.1 19.0 9.8
         Aug 1.3 11.6 4.9 − 10.3 − 3.9 − 31.6 − 70.8 − 39.2 16.7 7.7 − 1.6 3.9 6.7         Sep 58.0 32.3 1.2 25.8 24.0 19.1 30.9 11.8 26.8 0.5 − 0.6 19.6 7.3
         Oct 51.0 33.5 4.2 17.5 17.8 9.9 50.6 40.7 27.7 4.9 0.1 20.8 2.0
         Nov 91.3 68.0 14.8 23.3 13.7 18.1 44.2 26.1 28.7 7.9 0.2 16.5 4.2         Dec 22.8 45.0 4.9 − 22.2 − 32.2 − 11.8 − 11.5 0.3 20.5 16.6 1.1 0.4 2.3
2004          Jan 43.3 28.1 5.2 15.1 17.5 23.9 110.8 86.9 17.4 1.7 − 1.1 16.8 − 3.4
         Feb 45.2 32.1 6.5 13.0 21.6 7.4 23.0 15.6 16.7 7.6 − 0.3 9.4 2.8         Mar 77.9 47.2 16.3 30.7 14.4 6.2 76.4 70.3 38.5 7.1 − 0.2 31.5 7.9
         Apr 89.8 85.0 26.6 4.8 11.6 8.2 70.5 62.3 25.6 10.4 − 1.1 16.4 2.2
         May 68.5 43.8 1.3 24.7 30.7 − 21.2 − 11.4 9.8 24.5 5.5 − 0.9 19.9 − 2.0         June 65.6 52.3 − 4.8 13.3 7.4 19.0 − 16.9 − 35.9 14.2 10.0 − 0.4 4.5 8.8
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2002          Nov 9.4 4.6 4.3 4.8 3.5 19.2 32.0 12.8 5.8 4.1 − 0.6 0.4 1.9
         Dec 11.4 23.0 12.1 − 11.6 − 8.5 1.9 − 40.8 − 42.7 − 9.5 3.1 0.2 − 15.2 2.4
2003          Jan 18.3 1.8 3.1 16.4 10.8 − 3.0 9.4 12.4 4.1 − 1.6 − 2.0 3.9 3.9
         Feb 0.7 7.9 − 1.3 − 7.2 0.5 10.3 20.2 9.9 4.4 6.3 − 1.2 0.8 − 1.5         Mar 4.6 2.7 − 1.2 1.9 5.1 18.7 25.2 6.5 1.7 1.9 − 1.6 − 1.1 2.6
         Apr 4.9 6.6 5.9 − 1.7 − 2.6 4.5 14.7 10.1 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 2.5 0.5 1.5
         May 1.9 4.0 3.0 − 2.1 2.4 27.6 22.6 − 5.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.5 4.8 − 4.4         June − 18.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 17.1 − 10.0 38.5 24.6 − 13.9 4.8 0.1 − 1.4 3.7 2.4
         July 0.6 − 8.4 − 0.5 9.0 − 1.6 − 24.6 − 18.6 6.0 8.7 4.9 − 2.1 4.9 1.0
         Aug − 13.6 2.7 0.9 − 16.3 − 11.0 16.7 − 20.6 − 37.3 5.7 3.2 − 1.5 2.2 1.8         Sep 17.7 12.8 − 3.6 4.9 10.8 − 1.8 10.5 12.3 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 9.1 − 4.8
         Oct − 1.8 − 9.3 − 3.4 7.5 4.5 6.4 − 0.2 − 6.6 3.1 0.3 0.1 2.6 0.2
         Nov 24.5 15.5 5.5 8.9 2.4 7.9 12.4 4.6 3.3 0.2 0.2 3.0 − 0.1         Dec − 10.1 0.0 1.1 − 10.2 − 7.8 11.4 12.4 1.1 − 0.2 1.5 1.0 − 2.9 0.2
2004          Jan − 0.6 − 6.8 1.4 6.2 6.1 23.0 34.9 11.9 2.6 − 0.2 − 1.1 6.5 − 2.7
         Feb 16.6 2.9 − 3.6 13.7 22.4 − 23.5 − 2.7 20.8 − 5.8 0.6 − 0.4 0.5 − 6.5         Mar 28.7 10.4 9.6 18.3 5.8 − 2.0 10.3 12.3 9.4 0.0 − 0.2 9.4 0.2
         Apr 10.8 16.4 13.3 − 5.6 1.1 14.8 22.0 7.2 13.0 4.5 − 1.2 6.2 3.4
         May − 10.4 − 10.6 − 8.3 0.1 6.0 11.3 − 4.9 − 16.2 5.0 4.3 − 0.9 4.9 − 3.3         June − 9.2 − 12.4 − 12.7 3.2 8.5 18.8 − 8.6 − 27.4 7.9 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 6.0
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
EurosystemDeposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 4.3 − 15.2 − 72.8 65.1 60.0 7.5 52.6 − 7.3 12.4 − 4.4 14.7 − 2.7 2002          Nov 
− 11.0 − 28.9 − 88.5 101.9 77.6 19.8 57.8 − 7.6 31.9 − 2.8 − 6.6 − 4.0          Dec 
15.2 23.2 − 8.3 − 32.8 − 61.0 − 7.4 − 53.6 2.5 25.7 14.6 19.4 7.1 2003          Jan 
18.6 − 8.3 − 39.4 27.1 10.4 7.2 3.2 2.4 14.3 0.4 12.1 − 0.3          Feb 
− 1.1 6.5 − 38.9 54.3 47.0 7.9 39.0 − 5.8 13.2 − 9.2 4.3 − 10.5          Mar 
− 16.5 5.2 − 88.6 50.1 31.1 9.1 22.0 10.8 8.2 6.4 11.8 20.3          Apr 
10.4 25.3 − 57.7 65.3 37.5 7.4 30.0 19.1 8.8 1.3 8.8 − 17.6          May
30.2 18.3 − 4.8 29.7 55.3 7.3 48.0 − 38.9 13.3 − 16.7 − 0.8 − 7.4          June
− 24.6 − 14.3 − 5.9 − 4.5 − 18.9 11.1 − 30.0 3.1 11.3 5.2 10.2 − 5.0          July− 10.0 − 32.3 − − 4.7 − 2.7 − 13.8 1.2 − 15.0 3.9 7.2 − 2.9 2.2 − 1.3          Aug 
20.9 25.1 − 4.3 16.5 45.8 2.1 43.6 − 29.6 0.3 − 4.5 − 8.9 1.2          Sep 
− 18.0 3.0 − 48.3 20.0 4.4 6.4 − 2.0 10.5 5.1 13.2 5.7 9.5          Oct 
14.6 18.5 − 47.6 52.2 49.3 7.9 41.3 − 4.1 7.1 − 1.0 − 4.3 0.8          Nov 
− 26.8 − 46.5 − 63.9 96.1 67.2 18.8 48.5 0.3 28.7 − 16.0 − 2.6 − 13.7          Dec 
20.5 38.6 − − 9.3 − 45.0 − 26.8 − 8.8 − 18.0 − 21.2 17.5 6.9 9.2 5.1 2004          Jan 
18.9 − 9.1 − 25.9 − 8.2 1.7 4.3 − 2.7 − 5.9 6.7 14.0 7.5 2.0          Feb 
− 9.2 29.2 − 25.5 29.1 40.7 6.1 34.5 − 12.2 5.2 − 10.7 5.0 − 2.4          Mar 
− 4.7 22.4 − 54.8 25.9 24.4 9.8 14.6 0.5 8.3 7.2 8.9 5.4          Apr 
15.5 − 16.2 − 23.6 26.8 17.8 7.3 10.6 11.1 6.0 − 3.6 − 2.0 − 5.6          May
29.2 12.2 − 29.1 29.0 47.1 6.3 40.7 − 25.8 12.1 − 4.0 − 4.5 4.1          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V  )10 
of which Components of the money stock
Debt securities
Deposits with
Intra- with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claimagreed at agreed m arket of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 0.6 − 3.6 1.5 2.5 27.0 31.8 − 5.6 3.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 0.8 2002          Nov 
0.0 4.7 1.5 4.3 18.5 1.4 6.8 12.8 − 3.1 − 1.0 0.9          Dec 
− 0.8 15.1 0.5 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 9.3 − 4.7 4.1 5.3 2.5 − 1.1 2003          Jan 
1.4 − 14.2 2.2 1.7 19.5 5.6 − 0.7 3.0 2.3 1.3 8.1          Feb 
− 1.7 22.8 1.5 2.5 0.4 7.1 − 5.2 1.7 0.4 0.5 − 4.0          Mar 
− 1.1 4.4 0.9 2.8 8.7 8.2 − 2.0 1.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.4          Apr 
2.2 14.8 2.4 1.3 15.3 6.8 7.4 0.7 1.0 0.4 − 1.0          May
0.4 13.3 0.6 2.8 1.9 16.4 − 11.8 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 1.6          June
− 2.8 − 15.7 1.1 3.4 − 14.2 − 12.5 − 1.3 2.0 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.2          July
0.6 − 4.5 2.5 − 0.1 1.2 1.7 2.9 2.7 1.5 − 0.4 − 7.2          Aug 0.3 11.8 1.3 0.9 1.5 10.8 − 13.8 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 0.5          Sep 
− 0.7 − 3.6 1.2 1.3 5.9 3.3 − 3.5 0.9 5.6 − 0.7 0.2          Oct 
0.1 3.3 1.0 2.4 25.5 22.8 − 0.3 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 4.1          Nov 0.2 4.2 0.2 4.5 − 3.0 − 10.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.9 0.2 1.2          Dec 
0.0 22.5 3.5 − 5.0 − 2.7 8.3 − 14.1 1.3 2.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 2004          Jan 
1.3 − 1.8 1.1 0.9 − 0.6 5.7 − 5.2 1.2 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0          Feb 
0.6 12.2 1.2 2.3 4.4 1.2 − 0.1 0.1 0.8 − 0.5 3.0          Mar 
− 0.6 12.7 1.9 2.7 0.5 5.8 − 5.0 0.9 − 1.0 0.1 − 0.3          Apr 
1.0 − 10.7 1.0 2.3 5.5 − 2.7 8.7 0.2 − 0.3 0.3 − 0.8          May2.4 10.4 0.6 2.3 − 11.1 3.3 − 9.8 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 3.2          June
euro-area MFIs. — 9Up to end-2002, including national banknotes and German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the
coins still in circulation. — 10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
2002          May 13,711.5 9,645.0 7,573.6 6,659.7 345.0 568.9 2,071.5 829.2 1,242.3 2,845.8 1,220.8
         June 13,642.1 9,667.1 7,597.7 6,691.1 342.7 563.9 2,069.4 830.1 1,239.3 2,731.2 1,243.8
         July 13,678.9 9,652.9 7,586.1 6,692.6 344.4 549.1 2,066.8 828.5 1,238.3 2,755.6 1,270.3
         Aug 13,649.1 9,645.5 7,591.1 6,692.3 339.7 559.1 2,054.4 818.0 1,236.4 2,745.1 1,258.5         Sep 13,822.3 9,700.5 7,625.2 6,726.8 349.4 549.1 2,075.3 820.8 1,254.5 2,813.5 1,308.3
         Oct 13,863.8 9,726.3 7,657.4 6,742.7 353.1 561.6 2,068.8 820.4 1,248.5 2,862.9 1,274.6
         Nov 14,010.9 9,761.7 7,678.1 6,754.5 356.7 566.9 2,083.6 829.2 1,254.4 2,936.6 1,312.6         Dec 13,931.2 9,779.1 7,720.9 6,781.2 367.0 572.7 2,058.2 837.2 1,221.0 2,839.6 1,312.4
2003          Jan 13,975.4 9,853.5 7,748.2 6,804.6 374.9 568.7 2,105.3 829.2 1,276.1 2,851.7 1,270.3
         Feb 14,114.0 9,905.5 7,777.8 6,831.3 381.2 565.3 2,127.7 828.6 1,299.1 2,908.7 1,299.9         Mar 14,123.6 9,942.0 7,807.8 6,854.6 386.7 566.5 2,134.2 829.1 1,305.1 2,893.6 1,288.0
         Apr 14,227.9 10,027.6 7,880.6 6,891.0 404.1 585.5 2,147.0 823.5 1,323.5 2,905.7 1,294.7
         May 14,301.6 10,088.6 7,911.5 6,907.1 407.0 597.5 2,177.1 819.1 1,358.1 2,878.2 1,334.8         June 14,380.6 10,102.6 7,942.3 6,942.5 406.1 593.7 2,160.3 818.0 1,342.4 2,958.5 1,319.4
         July 14,371.2 10,159.5 7,982.4 6,962.3 403.6 616.4 2,177.1 826.1 1,351.1 2,943.7 1,268.1
         Aug 14,361.1 10,167.8 8,001.5 6,975.1 407.1 619.3 2,166.3 820.0 1,346.3 2,930.5 1,262.8         Sep 14,407.2 10,213.8 8,023.4 6,995.9 412.6 614.8 2,190.5 821.4 1,369.0 2,889.0 1,304.4
         Oct 14,492.9 10,260.8 8,057.7 7,024.7 420.3 612.7 2,203.2 821.1 1,382.1 2,951.9 1,280.1
         Nov 14,607.2 10,349.3 8,118.6 7,071.2 424.9 622.5 2,230.8 830.5 1,400.2 2,954.8 1,303.1         Dec 14,553.6 10,361.7 8,152.6 7,102.1 426.9 623.6 2,209.1 841.7 1,367.4 2,885.0 1,306.9
2004          Jan 14,766.3 10,411.7 8,177.0 7,117.7 426.4 632.9 2,234.8 839.4 1,395.3 3,016.2 1,338.4
         Feb 14,861.2 10,455.7 8,205.2 7,139.2 431.9 634.0 2,250.5 830.8 1,419.7 3,033.2 1,372.3         Mar 15,063.7 10,535.3 8,254.9 7,172.4 433.1 649.4 2,280.5 845.9 1,434.5 3,151.1 1,377.3
         Apr 15,227.4 10,625.4 8,339.9 7,230.2 437.6 672.1 2,285.5 840.2 1,445.3 3,229.3 1,372.7
         May 15,251.5 10,685.2 8,377.4 7,269.0 441.7 666.6 2,307.8 834.3 1,473.5 3,196.6 1,369.8         June 15,331.0 10,753.2 8,427.5 7,323.7 446.4 657.4 2,325.7 840.7 1,485.1 3,184.9 1,392.9
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
2002          May 4,341.9 3,327.7 2,606.9 2,294.6 69.2 243.2 720.8 485.6 235.2 827.5 186.7         June 4,291.6 3,309.3 2,596.0 2,294.8 69.7 231.6 713.3 480.4 232.8 800.0 182.3
         July 4,303.6 3,317.5 2,589.5 2,291.3 69.8 228.4 728.0 489.0 239.0 801.2 184.9
         Aug 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.2 181.5         Sep 4,355.6 3,327.5 2,605.3 2,301.6 66.5 237.3 722.2 477.0 245.2 841.9 186.1
         Oct 4,370.5 3,332.3 2,611.3 2,299.8 69.8 241.7 721.0 480.4 240.6 850.3 188.0
         Nov 4,413.9 3,341.1 2,615.3 2,299.5 69.6 246.2 725.8 481.7 244.1 879.3 193.5         Dec 4,359.5 3,344.6 2,630.8 2,304.4 66.6 259.8 713.8 478.4 235.4 823.8 191.1
2003          Jan 4,360.7 3,353.2 2,623.2 2,298.5 66.1 258.7 730.0 484.0 246.1 823.2 184.3
         Feb 4,383.3 3,351.8 2,627.3 2,303.8 66.5 257.0 724.6 477.9 246.6 841.2 190.2         Mar 4,395.2 3,351.2 2,624.8 2,302.6 67.2 255.0 726.4 474.6 251.7 861.1 182.9
         Apr 4,400.8 3,353.3 2,629.0 2,300.8 67.3 260.9 724.3 475.4 248.9 867.3 180.3
         May 4,401.1 3,351.6 2,629.9 2,298.8 67.9 263.2 721.7 470.7 251.1 871.8 177.7         June 4,411.5 3,334.6 2,629.8 2,301.7 67.0 261.1 704.8 463.7 241.2 906.3 170.6
         July 4,391.1 3,334.6 2,620.8 2,293.4 64.4 263.0 713.9 474.3 239.6 891.4 165.1
         Aug 4,373.2 3,322.7 2,624.8 2,296.4 64.5 263.9 697.9 469.1 228.8 886.0 164.4         Sep 4,384.6 3,337.1 2,634.6 2,309.9 64.2 260.5 702.5 463.0 239.4 877.7 169.8
         Oct 4,387.2 3,333.3 2,624.5 2,303.4 66.5 254.6 708.8 466.1 242.7 882.7 171.3
         Nov 4,409.5 3,355.4 2,637.9 2,311.5 66.9 259.5 717.5 472.5 245.0 884.0 170.2         Dec 4,392.5 3,337.7 2,630.9 2,303.9 69.0 258.0 706.7 469.9 236.8 880.9 173.9
2004          Jan 4,416.6 3,334.2 2,621.1 2,291.7 68.4 260.9 713.2 470.2 242.9 921.4 161.0
         Feb 4,424.0 3,346.3 2,619.5 2,295.4 67.9 256.2 726.7 461.6 265.2 916.1 161.5         Mar 4,479.7 3,374.8 2,629.5 2,295.8 66.6 267.0 745.3 474.2 271.1 939.4 165.5
         Apr 4,514.1 3,385.7 2,646.0 2,299.2 65.4 281.5 739.6 467.5 272.2 962.8 165.7
         May 4,495.6 3,374.2 2,634.5 2,296.1 66.2 272.3 739.7 461.6 278.0 952.1 169.3         June 4,477.7 3,364.5 2,621.6 2,295.8 66.5 259.2 742.9 456.3 286.6 944.6 168.6
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to end-2002, also including nati onal
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central banknotes and coins still in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*).
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). From2002, the Germ an contribution
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills includes the volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the
and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4From
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
273.8 5,713.5 5,366.7 5,409.7 1,856.8 961.3 81.5 1,153.0 1,250.6 106.4 2002          May
285.7 5,749.3 5,407.9 5,438.3 1,900.8 938.5 81.5 1,155.0 1,256.3 106.2          June
296.6 5,725.7 5,384.9 5,422.5 1,872.6 948.2 82.6 1,154.1 1,258.9 106.2          July
301.1 5,688.0 5,358.6 5,396.2 1,840.9 959.7 83.3 1,142.5 1,263.4 106.4          Aug 306.7 5,730.1 5,399.2 5,434.7 1,894.9 941.0 82.9 1,143.6 1,265.5 106.8          Sep 
313.9 5,745.4 5,410.6 5,446.2 1,875.8 964.2 82.8 1,144.9 1,272.8 105.8          Oct 
321.4 5,799.5 5,467.0 5,504.7 1,927.1 956.8 82.4 1,148.4 1,284.7 105.3          Nov 341.2 5,879.5 5,566.7 5,592.2 1,980.7 947.8 81.2 1,163.9 1,313.4 105.2          Dec 
312.1 5,869.8 5,536.5 5,569.2 1,956.3 953.1 76.7 1,168.2 1,311.7 103.1 2003          Jan 
319.3 5,913.0 5,560.3 5,586.5 1,956.1 952.7 75.4 1,175.6 1,324.8 101.9          Feb 
327.2 5,963.6 5,610.2 5,639.9 1,995.3 948.2 75.9 1,182.7 1,337.5 100.4          Mar 
336.3 5,979.6 5,640.1 5,671.4 2,012.8 961.3 74.1 1,179.6 1,345.8 97.7          Apr 
343.8 6,041.4 5,695.7 5,715.4 2,035.9 972.4 73.0 1,185.2 1,352.6 96.4          May351.0 6,100.7 5,715.9 5,744.9 2,083.6 940.3 72.4 1,188.1 1,365.6 94.8          June
361.5 6,093.4 5,739.1 5,770.3 2,090.1 944.5 72.1 1,194.5 1,376.3 92.8          July
362.7 6,089.4 5,741.1 5,779.3 2,078.5 951.1 72.2 1,203.9 1,382.4 91.2          Aug 364.8 6,117.9 5,754.9 5,789.2 2,117.6 922.4 73.0 1,203.3 1,382.3 90.6          Sep 
371.2 6,118.4 5,769.3 5,806.7 2,112.8 934.7 73.9 1,208.4 1,386.3 90.6          Oct 
379.2 6,179.9 5,818.4 5,851.8 2,151.0 927.4 75.5 1,215.5 1,391.5 90.8          Nov 397.9 6,239.4 5,916.6 5,936.2 2,191.1 921.6 74.9 1,232.2 1,424.6 91.8          Dec 
389.1 6,244.5 5,888.2 5,923.5 2,177.9 904.2 75.1 1,235.3 1,440.3 90.8 2004          Jan 
393.5 6,263.6 5,889.9 5,924.9 2,171.9 899.2 74.6 1,242.6 1,446.1 90.5          Feb 
399.6 6,290.5 5,918.9 5,966.4 2,210.5 891.9 73.2 1,250.4 1,450.2 90.3          Mar 
409.4 6,322.1 5,946.1 5,997.8 2,225.2 893.8 71.7 1,261.1 1,456.8 89.2          Apr 
416.6 6,366.7 5,978.1 6,023.0 2,235.6 900.2 71.3 1,266.0 1,461.7 88.3          May423.0 6,435.7 6,022.2 6,062.2 2,277.8 875.6 71.7 1,276.3 1,472.9 88.0          June
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
76.5 2,107.7 2,023.6 1,987.3 519.1 234.2 17.1 654.1 457.9 104.8 2002          May
79.8 2,119.3 2,035.6 1,997.1 530.9 234.4 17.3 653.0 457.0 104.6          June
83.4 2,112.5 2,030.5 1,993.2 525.8 235.8 17.6 653.9 455.5 104.6          July
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8          Aug 85.9 2,105.7 2,023.7 1,987.6 536.6 233.0 17.5 639.6 456.5 104.3          Sep 
87.4 2,115.1 2,035.2 2,003.0 538.0 243.7 17.5 641.5 458.8 103.5          Oct 
89.9 2,147.3 2,066.9 2,035.6 569.5 237.6 17.9 645.7 462.0 102.9          Nov 94.2 2,170.7 2,092.1 2,054.2 567.8 242.4 18.2 648.0 474.8 103.1          Dec 
84.9 2,159.7 2,082.0 2,048.3 561.2 238.7 18.6 649.7 478.9 101.2 2003          Jan 
86.6 2,173.9 2,094.9 2,058.5 564.8 237.3 18.5 656.1 481.8 100.0          Feb 
89.0 2,175.8 2,098.2 2,063.3 572.0 232.8 18.6 657.9 483.5 98.4          Mar 
91.9 2,176.7 2,100.4 2,068.2 580.4 233.5 18.1 655.8 484.6 95.8          Apr 
93.2 2,189.4 2,112.0 2,073.9 585.9 236.9 17.8 653.8 485.3 94.3          May96.0 2,194.7 2,115.7 2,076.1 600.0 225.8 17.6 653.4 486.3 92.9          June
99.4 2,183.0 2,107.8 2,071.3 591.1 225.3 17.3 658.5 488.3 90.8          July
99.3 2,193.4 2,117.6 2,082.5 593.2 228.9 17.5 662.7 491.0 89.3          Aug 
100.2 2,188.3 2,112.7 2,079.6 603.5 217.2 17.5 661.0 491.8 88.5          Sep 
101.5 2,188.7 2,113.6 2,083.5 606.9 216.1 17.8 661.3 492.8 88.6          Oct 
103.9 2,211.8 2,137.8 2,105.1 628.8 214.6 18.3 661.2 493.4 88.9          Nov 108.5 2,215.1 2,143.0 2,105.2 616.1 216.3 18.5 662.1 502.3 89.9          Dec 
103.5 2,209.9 2,137.7 2,102.7 626.1 202.7 18.5 662.9 503.6 88.8 2004          Jan 
104.4 2,213.0 2,140.9 2,103.8 630.1 198.8 18.3 663.3 504.7 88.5          Feb 
106.7 2,215.1 2,142.0 2,106.6 631.3 200.7 18.0 663.6 504.8 88.2          Mar 
109.3 2,219.4 2,145.3 2,112.5 637.8 196.2 17.5 668.3 505.6 87.1          Apr 
111.6 2,229.8 2,154.8 2,118.4 634.1 202.7 16.9 672.6 505.8 86.2          May113.8 2,229.2 2,151.6 2,114.1 636.3 193.0 16.6 676.9 505.5 85.8          June
Bundesbank in accordance with the accounting regim e chosen by the calculated by adding to this total the item“Intra-Eurosystemliability/claim
Eurosystem(see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability item s“). — 5Excluding
volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can be central governments’ deposits. — 6 In Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
2002          May 149.0 154.8 68.8 55.2 1.4 26.6 2.4 0.4 234.8 230.7 442.6 1,804.6 1,481.5
         June 155.0 156.0 71.6 53.3 1.5 26.7 2.4 0.4 229.6 225.9 439.1 1,788.0 1,476.9
         July 151.9 151.3 69.3 51.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 228.8 224.9 450.1 1,795.6 1,478.8
         Aug 141.0 150.8 67.8 52.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 236.5 231.9 463.4 1,813.6 1,496.0         Sep 146.3 149.1 70.7 48.4 1.3 25.9 2.4 0.4 238.3 234.4 460.9 1,812.1 1,494.1
         Oct 151.8 147.4 72.2 45.3 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 235.6 232.1 463.1 1,822.4 1,492.8
         Nov 147.5 147.4 71.9 45.6 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 229.6 225.8 477.6 1,829.6 1,494.1         Dec 136.4 150.9 75.6 45.1 1.4 25.6 2.8 0.4 226.9 224.4 470.5 1,817.0 1,490.3
2003          Jan 154.7 145.9 71.0 45.9 1.2 24.8 2.6 0.4 232.8 229.6 534.9 1,793.5 1,481.7
         Feb 175.8 150.6 72.2 49.9 1.0 24.4 2.7 0.4 233.3 229.7 547.2 1,802.1 1,485.6         Mar 176.2 147.5 71.8 47.1 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 224.0 220.8 550.8 1,803.1 1,485.7
         Apr 159.7 148.4 75.0 45.2 1.0 24.2 2.8 0.3 230.5 227.0 563.0 1,833.9 1,516.8
         May 170.1 155.9 76.9 50.8 0.9 24.1 2.8 0.3 231.7 228.2 571.1 1,819.2 1,514.8         June 200.3 155.5 80.1 46.8 0.9 24.6 2.8 0.3 215.0 212.1 571.0 1,829.0 1,514.1
         July 173.0 150.1 75.2 46.4 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 219.9 216.4 585.6 1,844.7 1,515.7
         Aug 163.0 147.0 73.4 45.7 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.3 217.1 214.2 587.8 1,858.1 1,512.7         Sep 183.9 144.9 74.8 42.0 1.0 23.9 2.8 0.3 211.5 207.9 576.9 1,860.2 1,518.5
         Oct 165.8 145.9 78.1 39.9 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.4 224.7 221.1 582.3 1,893.8 1,539.0
         Nov 180.4 147.7 80.0 39.6 0.9 24.0 2.9 0.3 224.7 220.9 584.7 1,902.5 1,552.4         Dec 153.6 149.6 79.7 41.5 0.9 24.3 2.9 0.4 208.7 206.4 581.8 1,873.2 1,534.2
2004          Jan 174.1 146.9 78.4 41.2 0.9 23.2 2.9 0.3 214.6 211.9 591.6 1,899.7 1,548.2
         Feb 193.0 145.7 76.7 41.3 0.9 23.5 3.0 0.4 228.6 225.3 599.2 1,910.1 1,558.2         Mar 183.8 140.3 73.5 39.1 0.9 23.3 3.1 0.4 217.9 214.3 602.2 1,948.2 1,576.2
         Apr 179.6 144.7 77.7 39.2 1.0 23.1 3.2 0.4 225.5 222.5 611.4 1,972.7 1,586.3
         May 195.1 148.5 78.3 42.5 1.0 23.1 3.3 0.4 221.9 218.5 609.5 1,982.9 1,589.0         June 224.3 149.3 81.1 40.6 1.0 22.8 3.3 0.4 217.9 214.4 609.0 1,992.2 1,597.2
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
2002          May 48.2 72.3 12.4 34.2 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 4.7 4.7 31.7 814.1 712.6         June 48.7 73.5 13.8 34.1 1.1 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.1 4.1 31.2 808.9 712.2
         July 47.6 71.7 13.9 32.3 1.0 22.5 1.5 0.4 3.1 3.1 31.4 817.3 715.7
         Aug 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 32.9 840.1 733.6         Sep 49.9 68.2 13.1 30.0 0.9 22.2 1.6 0.4 10.7 10.7 33.5 841.1 733.7
         Oct 48.3 63.7 12.8 26.0 0.9 22.0 1.6 0.4 9.6 9.6 34.0 844.6 730.7
         Nov 47.7 64.1 13.1 26.2 0.9 21.9 1.6 0.4 6.4 6.4 33.9 844.9 728.7         Dec 47.7 68.7 15.7 27.7 1.0 22.2 1.6 0.4 3.3 3.3 32.9 826.4 716.6
2003          Jan 46.9 64.5 12.7 26.9 1.0 21.8 1.7 0.4 8.6 8.6 35.5 817.6 702.1
         Feb 48.3 67.2 14.8 28.0 0.7 21.7 1.7 0.4 10.9 10.9 36.7 825.8 710.3         Mar 46.6 65.9 14.5 27.1 0.7 21.6 1.6 0.3 11.2 11.2 37.3 819.4 701.0
         Apr 45.5 63.1 14.1 24.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 11.3 11.3 37.2 818.7 699.8
         May 47.7 67.8 14.8 28.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 12.3 12.3 37.7 814.0 698.7         June 48.1 70.5 17.4 28.4 0.7 22.1 1.6 0.3 10.8 10.8 37.2 819.6 699.7
         July 45.3 66.3 14.0 27.9 0.6 21.9 1.6 0.3 10.9 10.9 36.8 822.7 696.4
         Aug 46.0 65.0 14.0 27.1 0.6 21.2 1.7 0.3 12.4 12.4 36.4 821.8 688.4         Sep 46.3 62.5 13.9 24.7 0.7 21.2 1.7 0.3 15.6 15.6 36.3 825.6 689.8
         Oct 45.5 59.7 13.8 22.1 0.6 21.2 1.6 0.4 21.1 21.1 35.7 829.7 692.4
         Nov 45.7 61.0 14.4 22.6 0.6 21.4 1.6 0.3 20.0 20.0 35.2 833.2 698.6         Dec 45.9 64.0 15.8 23.9 0.6 21.6 1.6 0.4 14.1 14.1 35.3 826.4 693.3
2004          Jan 46.0 61.3 14.4 23.6 0.6 20.7 1.7 0.3 16.6 16.6 34.9 836.4 695.5
         Feb 47.3 62.0 15.2 23.3 0.6 20.9 1.7 0.4 17.5 17.5 34.7 833.7 695.2         Mar 47.9 60.6 15.4 21.7 0.6 20.7 1.8 0.4 18.2 18.2 34.2 851.5 698.5
         Apr 47.3 59.7 14.9 21.4 0.6 20.6 1.8 0.4 17.3 17.3 34.2 858.7 698.9
         May 48.3 63.1 15.7 24.1 0.6 20.5 1.8 0.4 17.0 17.0 34.6 861.5 701.5         June 50.7 64.4 17.3 24.0 0.6 20.3 1.8 0.4 16.1 16.1 34.4 859.1 697.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building with money market fund shares. — 5Excluding liabilities arising from
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central securities issued. — 6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 7The
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates should on
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with or M3. — 8From2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution, the difference
January 2002 Monthly Report , they were published in this table together
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claimMonetary m ents1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post,
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reseves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
... ... 1,659.7 2,755.0 1,008.8 − 7.3 1,485.2 − 2,290.3 4,727.7 5,549.1 3,955.7 176.2 2002          May
... ... 1,654.6 2,620.0 985.8 10.7 1,533.6 − 2,349.7 4,767.8 5,569.3 3,929.4 176.5          June
... ... 1,669.1 2,648.3 993.4 − 2.9 1,542.7 − 2,328.0 4,757.9 5,562.3 3,950.5 174.9          July
... ... 1,685.7 2,616.3 1,004.3 − 0.2 1,525.4 − 2,301.2 4,749.7 5,576.1 3,967.0 177.7          Aug ... ... 1,679.0 2,674.3 1,015.9 − 5.0 1,588.0 − 2,364.1 4,791.4 5,622.0 3,973.4 178.3          Sep 
... ... 1,687.5 2,697.5 1,014.0 3.3 1,568.2 − 2,354.8 4,810.4 5,642.8 3,979.4 180.3          Oct 
... ... 1,695.4 2,737.3 1,016.2 − 3.4 1,601.5 − 2,414.5 4,875.0 5,713.3 3,994.4 181.8          Nov ... ... 1,686.9 2,627.0 1,006.4 10.8 1,550.9 − 2,499.4 4,981.0 5,806.0 3,990.8 192.4          Dec 
... ... 1,682.7 2,662.6 1,016.9 10.0 1,541.9 − 2,440.8 4,923.8 5,800.7 3,997.7 192.8 2003          Jan 
... ... 1,692.1 2,714.3 1,010.3 13.5 1,560.5 − 2,451.2 4,950.8 5,840.4 4,005.7 197.4          Feb 
... ... 1,702.0 2,694.1 999.6 14.1 1,546.1 − 2,497.5 5,003.5 5,877.7 4,011.2 199.3          Mar 
... ... 1,708.4 2,715.1 997.0 − 20.9 1,592.6 − 2,527.2 5,050.6 5,967.9 4,008.9 198.1          Apr 
... ... 1,710.6 2,653.5 993.6 − 4.3 1,649.9 − 2,561.5 5,108.7 6,016.5 4,013.8 200.4          May... ... 1,728.5 2,672.2 997.6 16.3 1,625.9 − 2,605.4 5,129.3 6,012.3 4,037.6 186.6          June
... ... 1,750.2 2,682.1 999.8 5.2 1,577.2 − 2,584.8 5,123.5 6,019.8 4,065.7 154.4          July
... ... 1,765.3 2,680.5 1,014.3 − 3.6 1,553.2 − 2,573.2 5,125.2 6,019.7 4,102.1 156.2          Aug ... ... 1,765.8 2,639.7 1,016.6 5.4 1,612.6 − 2,615.6 5,136.1 6,015.8 4,103.7 156.3          Sep 
... ... 1,790.5 2,690.4 1,014.1 9.3 1,587.3 − 2,620.4 5,157.1 6,065.0 4,130.3 157.3          Oct 
... ... 1,800.1 2,685.3 1,014.3 4.6 1,631.3 − 2,667.8 5,205.3 6,115.7 4,146.5 158.1          Nov ... ... 1,784.5 2,637.2 1,010.8 6.5 1,597.6 − 2,729.5 5,298.1 6,176.3 4,145.0 162.9          Dec 
... ... 1,807.2 2,750.5 1,004.8 2.3 1,669.2 − 2,703.1 3,590.9 6,168.9 4,162.6 161.8 2004          Jan 
... ... 1,816.5 2,766.4 1,008.0 6.1 1,685.7 − 2,703.5 3,582.4 6,193.4 4,182.5 166.4          Feb 
... ... 1,857.8 2,857.2 1,025.9 9.3 1,713.0 − 2,745.7 3,612.8 6,220.1 4,248.4 168.2          Mar 
... ... 1,877.3 2,937.3 1,021.8 2.2 1,725.0 − 2,770.9 3,639.3 6,276.2 4,273.4 166.4          Apr 
... ... 1,892.5 2,932.1 1,016.1 4.4 1,701.2 − 2,787.8 3,664.2 6,297.0 4,287.2 166.0          May... ... 1,897.9 2,899.1 1,027.2 − 5.5 1,732.2 − 2,835.5 3,693.3 6,329.9 4,313.6 163.2          June
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
28.9 39.4 745.9 730.3 269.8 − 8.2 391.6 15.7 531.4 1,277.5 1,382.2 1,797.8 − 2002          May
26.8 38.1 743.9 687.5 265.5 − 24.8 399.9 16.7 544.6 1,290.0 1,390.4 1,790.1 −          June
26.0 38.7 752.7 705.5 267.7 − 39.0 405.0 18.8 539.7 1,283.4 1,382.7 1,801.9 −          July
28.4 37.5 774.2 698.7 272.4 − 50.5 410.3 22.0 534.5 1,282.0 1,385.1 1,814.5 −          Aug 28.4 36.8 775.9 713.1 274.4 − 48.6 425.8 24.1 549.6 1,289.2 1,397.9 1,816.9 −          Sep 
32.2 37.1 775.2 706.5 272.8 − 42.1 430.1 26.2 550.8 1,299.3 1,411.9 1,815.4 −          Oct 
32.1 38.1 774.7 716.9 274.2 − 47.5 437.8 27.6 582.6 1,328.8 1,438.8 1,819.8 −          Nov 32.1 39.0 755.3 661.0 277.7 − 56.9 444.3 29.1 583.5 1,349.2 1,456.6 1,806.8 −          Dec 
26.9 37.4 753.4 670.1 283.0 − 50.3 436.6 29.6 574.0 1,339.7 1,448.0 1,809.5 − 2003          Jan 
34.6 37.7 753.4 679.1 279.5 − 63.2 440.5 31.9 579.5 1,347.5 1,467.5 1,811.1 −          Feb 
31.9 36.5 751.0 682.6 280.3 − 48.9 437.6 33.3 586.5 1,350.9 1,467.7 1,809.6 −          Mar 
33.5 36.3 748.9 686.4 281.1 − 55.5 444.9 34.2 594.5 1,357.8 1,476.1 1,803.5 −          Apr 
32.2 34.1 747.7 666.8 277.5 − 43.6 447.0 36.6 600.7 1,371.8 1,488.0 1,795.1 −          May33.0 31.6 754.9 661.1 279.0 − 42.6 451.8 37.3 617.5 1,377.9 1,490.5 1,802.6 −          June
30.6 31.7 760.4 668.9 280.4 − 63.1 451.5 38.4 605.0 1,366.0 1,476.0 1,812.5 −          July
25.7 29.5 766.7 640.5 285.5 − 67.4 450.4 40.8 607.2 1,374.0 1,477.8 1,825.8 −          Aug 26.4 29.3 770.0 639.8 279.8 − 60.1 459.3 42.2 617.3 1,370.9 1,478.4 1,820.9 −          Sep 
25.7 30.1 773.9 638.2 279.6 − 63.5 457.6 43.4 620.7 1,371.7 1,484.4 1,825.0 −          Oct 
28.6 31.5 773.1 635.5 279.6 − 70.8 465.2 44.4 643.2 1,394.3 1,509.6 1,824.4 −          Nov 30.0 31.3 765.1 625.5 279.6 − 67.8 464.3 44.6 631.9 1,395.2 1,505.9 1,818.7 −          Dec 
31.2 29.8 775.4 642.8 276.3 − 47.1 446.8 48.1 640.5 1,391.1 1,503.6 1,824.6 − 2004          Jan 
26.7 31.3 775.8 663.0 270.2 − 60.8 452.6 49.2 645.3 1,392.7 1,502.8 1,819.0 −          Feb 
29.6 31.4 790.6 680.7 273.8 − 54.5 460.7 50.4 646.8 1,394.2 1,507.6 1,837.3 −          Mar 
29.8 31.1 797.7 690.9 274.2 − 52.8 472.2 52.3 652.7 1,395.8 1,508.3 1,848.3 −          Apr 
27.6 32.3 801.5 671.6 270.6 − 61.3 471.9 53.3 649.8 1,401.8 1,513.4 1,851.8 −          May29.5 29.7 799.9 642.4 276.7 − 54.5 474.3 53.9 653.6 1,395.1 1,504.7 1,860.0 −          June
between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central govern-
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen ments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetaryby the Eurosystem(see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table liabilities with such m aturities. — 12M2 plus repo transactions, money
III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding central governments’ deposits), market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities up to 2
and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments’ years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main termMarginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2002          Jan 385.2 118.5 60.0 0.4 3.7 0.6 − 344.3 38.3 54.2 130.4 475.2
         Feb 386.0 127.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 306.2 49.6 85.2 132.6 438.8         Mar 386.7 114.6 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 283.3 54.2 91.8 132.1 415.6
         Apr 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6         June 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         July 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8
         Sep 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
         Oct 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
         Nov 372.1 147.5 45.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 334.0 42.8 58.6 129.3 463.4
         Dec 371.5 168.1 45.0 1.1 2.0 0.2 − 350.7 51.7 55.5 129.5 480.5
2003          Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3         June 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         July 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
         Aug 315.8 213.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 391.6 51.5 − 1.6 132.8 524.6         Sep 315.0 214.0 45.0 0.1 − 0.6 − 391.7 54.4 − 4.4 132.0 524.2
         Oct 321.3 208.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 395.5 48.3 − 1.1 131.9 527.5
         Nov 321.8 205.8 45.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 399.4 43.4 − 2.2 131.8 531.4
         Dec 320.1 235.5 45.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 416.1 57.0 − 4.5 132.6 548.7
2004          Jan 309.2 232.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 427.6 37.0 − 11.2 133.6 561.4
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 303.3 219.4 56.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 418.0 48.6 − 21.1 134.1 552.3
         Apr 301.4 217.9 67.1 0.4 − 0.4 − 425.3 51.5 − 25.7 135.3 561.0
         May 310.7 213.2 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 436.4 46.0 − 18.9 135.0 571.5         June 311.3 224.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.5 − 442.5 52.2 − 21.1 137.1 580.1
         July 308.2 245.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 449.1 65.0 − 24.1 138.8 588.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Jan 89.9 63.3 41.1 0.3 1.4 0.3 − 91.7 0.1 64.9 39.0 131.0
         Feb 89.9 63.3 42.4 0.1 − 0.0 − 78.5 0.1 78.6 38.6 117.2         Mar 90.0 58.5 40.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 79.7 0.1 71.2 38.3 118.1
         Apr 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8
         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0
         June 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         July 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2
         Sep 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
         Oct 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
         Nov 84.3 73.2 31.6 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.6 0.1 56.5 37.9 132.6         Dec 84.4 91.1 33.8 0.9 0.7 0.2 − 99.3 0.1 73.5 37.8 137.3
2003          Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7         June 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         July 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
         Aug 73.7 111.0 29.6 0.2 − 0.1 − 109.6 0.1 66.5 38.2 147.9
         Sep 73.9 114.0 29.1 0.1 − 0.4 − 109.8 0.1 69.2 37.7 147.9
         Oct 75.7 106.5 29.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 110.8 0.1 63.4 37.5 148.4
         Nov 76.1 102.3 30.8 0.0 − 0.2 − 111.5 0.1 60.0 37.5 149.1
         Dec 76.1 118.3 30.9 0.3 − 0.1 − 115.9 0.1 72.2 37.4 153.4
2004          Jan 73.1 119.5 32.3 0.2 − 0.1 − 116.2 0.1 70.9 37.9 154.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 72.4 109.7 41.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 113.5 0.1 72.0 37.9 151.5
         Apr 72.9 97.9 48.7 0.2 − 0.3 − 115.8 0.1 65.7 37.8 153.9
         May 75.4 100.7 51.8 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 119.3 0.1 70.9 37.7 157.0         June 75.6 115.6 49.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.2 0.1 80.9 38.3 159.9
         July 74.6 127.9 49.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 122.7 0.1 91.1 38.5 161.1
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
of the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the chageover to the circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofnew operational framework for the monetary policy, there was no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main termMarginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 1.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.7 − 0.2 − + 46.3 − 5.2 − 55.1 + 3.0 + 49.0 2002          Jan 
+ 0.8 + 8.8
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.7 − 0.5 − − 38.1 + 11.3 + 31.0 + 2.2 − 36.4          Feb 
+ 0.7 − 12.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − − 22.9 + 4.6 + 6.6 − 0.5 − 23.2          Mar 
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7          Apr 
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 − 1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 − 2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          June
− 27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 − − 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 − 30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          July
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 − 9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug 
+ 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep 
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2          Oct 
+ 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 4.8 − 2.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 5.8          Nov 
− 0.6 + 20.6 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 − + 16.7 + 8.9 − 3.1 + 0.2 + 17.1          Dec 
− 10.6 + 8.2
+ 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan 
− 4.5 − 7.7
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − − 13.2 + 6.5 − 5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb 
− 3.9 + 10.9
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 − 7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar 
− 15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 − 20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr 
− 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 − 5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 − 2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          June
− 10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 − 10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          July
− 4.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 8.9 − 0.9 − 4.5 + 0.6 + 9.4          Aug − 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 6.3 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.4 − + 3.8 − 6.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.3          Oct 
+ 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 3.9 − 4.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.9          Nov 
− 1.7 + 29.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − + 16.7 + 13.6 − 2.3 + 0.8 + 17.3          Dec 
− 10.9 − 2.9
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − + 11.5 − 20.0 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 12.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 5.9 − 13.2 + 11.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 9.6 + 11.6 − 9.9 + 0.5 − 9.1          Mar 
− 1.9 − 1.5 + 10.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 7.3 + 2.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.7          Apr 
+ 9.3 − 4.7 + 7.9 − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 5.5 + 6.8 − 0.3 + 10.5          May+ 0.6 + 11.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − 0.4 + 6.1 + 6.2 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 8.6          June
− 3.1 + 20.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 12.8 − 3.0 + 1.7 + 8.0          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 − 0.2 − − 4.8 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 1.1 − 3.9 2002          Jan 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.3 − − 13.2 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 0.4 − 13.8          Feb 
+ 0.1 − 4.9 − 1.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.2 − 0.0 − 7.4 − 0.3 + 0.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7          Apr 
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 − 8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May
− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          June
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 − − 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          July
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 − 10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug 
− 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep 
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2          Oct 
+ 0.4 + 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.0          Nov + 0.1 + 17.8 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − + 4.7
+ 0.0 + 17.1 − 0.2 + 4.6          Dec 
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.0 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan 
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − − 2.8 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb + 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar 
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2
+ 0.0 − 3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr 
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May
− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          June
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          July
− 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 2.5 + 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.1 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.8 − 7.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 − − 0.2 − + 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.2 + 0.6          Oct 
+ 0.4 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.7          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 16.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.1 − + 4.4 + 0.0 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 4.2          Dec 
− 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 0.8 − 9.8 + 9.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 2.6          Mar + 0.5 − 11.8 + 7.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 2.4 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 2.5 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 3.1          May+ 0.2 + 14.9 − 2.4 + 0.1 − + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 2.9          June
− 1.0 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 1.3          July
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sumof liquidity-providing factors and the sumof liquidity-absorbing
euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sumof the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2003 Nov                28 833.3 130.4 194.8 31.9 162.8 14.2 5.5 5.5 −
         Dec                  5 858.3 130.4 194.5 31.9 162.6 15.8 5.3 5.3 −
                              12 847.0 130.3 192.7 31.9 160.8 16.3 5.5 5.5 −
                              19 848.7 130.2 189.9 30.3 159.6 17.8 5.9 5.9 −
                              24 835.2 130.2 189.5 30.4 159.1 18.0 6.0 6.0 −
2004 Jan                  2 3 838.3 130.3 3 176.8 3 29.1 3 147.7 17.4 6.3 6.3 −
                                9 812.0 130.3 176.4 29.1 147.3 18.4 6.5 6.5 −
                              16 812.6 130.3 178.0 29.1 148.9 17.6 7.5 7.5 −
                              23 823.3 130.3 176.3 29.0 147.3 18.1 7.7 7.7 −
                              30 824.4 130.3 178.3 29.0 149.3 17.1 7.6 7.6 −
         Feb                  6 817.0 130.3 177.5 29.0 148.5 17.6 7.3 7.3 −
                              13 813.2 130.3 173.8 29.0 144.8 17.3 7.1 7.1 −
                              20 816.9 130.3 171.2 28.9 142.3 17.6 7.3 7.3 −
                              27 824.0 130.3 168.6 28.9 139.6 18.0 7.3 7.3 −
         Mar                  5 826.8 130.3 168.1 28.9 139.2 17.5 7.2 7.2 −
                              12 819.7 130.3 167.0 27.6 139.4 17.3 7.4 7.4 −
                              19 822.8 130.3 166.6 27.6 138.9 17.2 7.2 7.2 −
                              26 830.3 130.3 167.0 28.5 138.6 16.6 7.2 7.2 −
2004 Apr                  2 3 847.1 3 136.5 3 171.6 3 29.3 3 142.3 3 17.8 8.5 8.5 −
                                8 848.1 136.5 171.4 29.3 142.2 16.8 8.3 8.3 −
                              16 835.3 136.5 171.2 29.3 141.9 17.0 8.0 8.0 −
                              23 842.7 136.5 171.7 29.7 142.0 17.5 7.4 7.4 −
                              30 853.5 136.5 173.6 29.7 143.9 17.7 7.4 7.4 −
         May                 7 846.2 136.5 175.0 29.7 145.3 17.4 7.1 7.1 −
                              14 842.0 136.2 174.2 29.8 144.4 17.3 7.4 7.4 −
                              21 860.0 136.2 174.4 29.6 144.9 17.2 7.4 7.4 −
                              28 867.3 136.2 173.0 29.6 143.4 16.7 7.4 7.4 −
         June                 4 870.1 136.2 173.3 29.5 143.8 16.2 7.7 7.7 −
                              11 869.1 136.1 174.7 29.5 145.2 16.0 7.2 7.2 −
                              18 867.8 136.1 174.8 29.2 145.5 16.0 7.0 7.0 −
                              25 895.8 136.1 173.9 28.6 145.4 16.5 7.1 7.1 −
         July                 2 3 882.4 3 127.4 3 174.1 28.4 3 145.7 16.6 6.9 6.9 −
                                9 881.0 127.4 175.6 28.4 147.2 16.4 6.7 6.7 −
                              16 868.8 127.4 173.7 28.2 145.6 16.9 7.0 7.0 −
                              23 887.6 127.4 174.8 28.1 146.7 17.0 7.7 7.7 −
                              30 883.7 127.4 172.1 28.0 144.1 17.3 7.9 7.9 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Sep 3 221.9 3 36.2 3 52.7 8.8 3 44.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 226.4 36.2 52.1 8.6 43.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 229.9 36.2 53.0 8.6 44.4 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 240.0 36.2 3 48.8 8.3 3 40.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2003          Jan 233.9 36.2 48.9 8.2 40.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 236.2 36.2 49.2 8.2 41.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 239.2 3 34.1 3 48.4 8.3 3 40.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 230.5 34.1 47.0 8.2 38.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 258.1 34.1 47.8 8.3 39.6 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 258.2 3 33.4 3 45.0 8.3 3 36.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 246.9 33.4 44.8 8.3 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 248.9 33.4 45.5 8.3 37.1 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 257.5 3 36.5 3 44.7 8.5 3 36.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 257.6 36.5 45.0 8.5 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 254.4 36.5 44.5 8.5 36.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 267.7 36.5 3 40.1 7.6 3 32.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2004          Jan 258.1 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 258.2 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 256.2 3 38.3 3 41.5 7.6 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 268.0 38.3 42.1 7.9 34.2 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 276.6 38.3 41.5 7.8 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 290.3 3 35.8 3 41.2 7.4 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 295.9 35.8 40.4 7.4 33.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-termFine-tuning Structural Marginal related denom i- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
270.3 225.3 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.8 53.6 43.8 120.1 2003 Nov                28
292.4 247.3 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.5 54.3 43.8 121.5          Dec                  5
282.0 237.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.5 53.9 43.8 122.1                               12
284.0 239.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.7 54.1 43.7 122.5                               19
276.0 231.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.7 54.1 42.9 117.8                               24
298.0 253.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.8 61.3 42.7 3 104.6 2004 Jan                  2
270.4 225.0 45.0 − − 0.4 0.0 1.0 62.0 42.7 104.2                                 9
269.0 224.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.2 62.2 42.7 104.1                               16
279.6 229.0 45.0 − − 5.6 0.0 0.9 63.1 42.7 104.6                               23
279.0 224.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 63.6 42.7 104.7                               30
270.0 215.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 65.3 42.6 105.3          Feb                  6
268.0 213.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.5 66.0 42.6 106.5                               13
275.0 220.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.4 66.1 42.6 105.4                               20
283.9 218.7 65.0 − − 0.2 0.0 1.3 66.5 42.6 105.4                               27
285.9 220.7 65.0 − − 0.2 0.0 1.2 68.0 42.6 106.0          Mar                  5
277.7 212.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.2 1.2 68.9 42.6 107.3                               12
281.5 216.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.3 69.0 42.6 107.1                               19
289.5 224.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.2 68.9 42.6 106.9                               26
293.0 218.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 3 68.5 42.6 3 107.5 2004 Apr                  2
293.5 218.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 69.9 42.6 108.1                                 8
280.5 205.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 70.0 42.6 108.4                               16
286.0 211.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.9 71.2 42.5 108.9                               23
295.1 220.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 71.0 42.5 108.7                               30
286.1 211.0 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 1.1 71.8 42.6 108.6          May                  7
282.0 207.0 75.0 − − 0.0 − 0.6 72.5 42.6 109.3                               14
298.6 223.5 75.0 − − 0.1 − 0.7 73.6 42.6 109.4                               21
308.2 232.5 75.0 − − 0.6 0.0 0.9 72.8 42.6 109.6                               28
311.1 236.0 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 0.7 72.9 42.6 109.4          June                  4
308.6 233.5 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 0.9 73.6 42.6 109.4                               11
307.0 232.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 73.8 42.6 109.6                               18
335.2 260.0 75.0 − − 0.2 0.0 0.8 73.7 42.6 109.9                               25
331.0 256.0 75.0 − − 0.0 − 0.7 3 73.4 42.1 3 110.2          July                  2
328.0 253.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.5 73.8 42.1 110.5                                 9
317.5 242.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.8 73.2 42.1 110.2                               16
334.5 259.5 75.0 − − − 0.0 0.9 72.9 42.1 110.5                               23
333.0 258.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.9 67.5 42.1 115.5                               30
 Deutsche Bundesbank
104.2 72.4 31.7 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0 2002          Sep 
103.9 72.4 31.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.4          Oct 
111.1 77.0 34.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Nov 125.5 87.1 36.1 − − 2.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec 
124.3 87.5 36.6 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.8 2003          Jan 
126.3 91.6 34.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Feb 
130.9 98.4 32.1 − − 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.1          Mar 
125.0 92.5 32.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Apr 
151.8 118.7 32.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          May155.0 122.5 32.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          June
144.0 115.1 28.8 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.9          July
145.2 116.0 29.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Aug 151.4 121.5 29.7 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4
3 20.1          Sep 
133.0 101.9 31.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 38.4          Oct 145.4 115.0 30.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 23.3          Nov 162.3 129.9 32.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Dec 
157.4 117.4 40.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0 2004          Jan 
157.6 109.9 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 
141.7 94.1 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 30.1          Mar 
153.7 104.3 49.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.1          Apr 
173.2 123.7 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          May189.4 139.9 49.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          June
196.0 145.1 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  2,3 liabilities
 Eurosystem 5
 
2003 Nov                28 833.3 405.2 125.0 124.9 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 1.1 70.3 64.2 6.1
         Dec                  5 858.3 416.2 137.4 137.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 70.7 64.8 5.9
                              12 847.0 419.7 129.5 129.5 0.0 − − − 0.3 1.1 64.8 59.1 5.7
                              19 848.7 429.5 129.8 129.7 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 55.2 49.4 5.7
                              24 835.2 439.2 113.5 113.5 0.0 − − − 0.3 1.1 48.1 42.2 5.8
2004 Jan                  2 6 838.3 434.3 152.9 152.8 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 35.6 29.8 5.8
                                9 812.0 425.2 133.7 133.6 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 38.8 32.9 5.9
                              16 812.6 419.2 135.1 135.1 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 42.9 37.0 5.9
                              23 823.3 415.1 134.7 134.3 0.4 − − − 0.3 1.1 57.4 51.7 5.8
                              30 824.4 415.6 132.1 132.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 60.1 54.0 6.1
         Feb                  6 817.0 418.8 133.2 133.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 48.6 42.5 6.1
                              13 813.2 418.5 135.4 135.3 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 44.8 38.7 6.2
                              20 816.9 417.5 131.0 131.0 0.0 − − − 0.3 1.1 56.7 50.4 6.3
                              27 824.0 418.9 128.9 128.8 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 67.4 61.1 6.2
         Mar                  5 826.8 423.7 137.7 137.6 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 56.6 50.8 5.9
                              12 819.7 424.1 135.2 135.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 51.8 46.1 5.7
                              19 822.8 423.8 133.2 133.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 57.4 51.8 5.6
                              26 830.3 423.8 131.9 131.8 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 66.7 61.1 5.5
2004 Apr                  2 6 847.1 431.0 140.2 140.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 54.9 48.9 5.9
                                8 848.1 441.4 135.1 135.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 51.6 45.6 6.0
                              16 835.3 435.8 135.2 135.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 44.3 38.3 6.0
                              23 842.7 432.0 131.1 131.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 59.0 53.4 5.7
                              30 853.5 435.4 133.6 133.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 62.1 56.3 5.8
         May                 7 846.2 439.8 136.8 136.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 46.1 40.2 5.8
                              14 842.0 440.1 136.7 136.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 43.3 37.5 5.8
                              21 860.0 441.1 137.4 137.3 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 58.3 52.3 6.0
                              28 867.3 443.7 138.7 136.0 2.8 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 64.0 58.2 5.8
         June                 4 870.1 447.4 139.3 139.1 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 63.6 57.5 6.1
                              11 869.1 448.4 141.1 141.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 59.0 53.0 6.0
                              18 867.8 447.6 140.4 140.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 57.7 51.5 6.2
                              25 895.8 448.1 136.8 136.7 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 88.0 82.4 5.6
         July                 2 6 882.4 454.5 140.8 140.3 0.5 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 73.1 67.2 5.9
                                9 881.0 458.2 137.6 137.5 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 70.7 65.0 5.7
                              16 868.8 459.2 140.1 140.1 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 56.1 50.4 5.6
                              23 887.6 458.7 136.8 136.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 78.2 72.5 5.6
                              30 883.7 463.1 131.3 131.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 77.1 71.2 5.9
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Sep 6 221.9 92.0 41.0 41.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.0 0.5
         Oct 226.4 94.2 41.3 41.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Nov 229.9 95.7 41.0 40.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.8 0.1 0.7         Dec 
6 240.0 104.5 44.8 44.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
2003          Jan 233.9 94.5 40.9 40.8 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Feb 236.2 96.1 38.1 38.1 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.5         Mar 
6 239.2 98.1 48.1 48.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Apr 230.5 101.8 36.4 36.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         May 258.1 103.2 36.3 36.2 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         June
6 258.2 105.2 38.8 38.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 246.9 108.5 39.6 39.5 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Aug 248.9 108.6 41.0 41.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 
6 257.5 109.2 41.7 41.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 257.6 110.8 42.0 42.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         Nov 254.4 112.7 36.4 36.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5         Dec 
6 267.7 121.4 44.6 44.5 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.6 0.1 0.5
2004          Jan 258.1 112.4 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Feb 258.2 113.3 36.8 36.7 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Mar 
6 256.2 115.0 31.0 31.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.4 0.4
         Apr 268.0 117.7 38.3 38.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         May 276.6 120.8 43.4 43.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         June
6 290.3 122.3 36.6 36.6 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 295.9 126.0 39.3 39.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2From2002, euro
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial banknotes and up to end-2002, banknotes still in circulation issued by the
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states national central banks of the Eurosystem (see also footnote 4). —(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and 3According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euroter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem 
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
3 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  4 
Eurosystem 5
 
9.7 0.7 12.3 12.3 − 6.0 66.7 − 71.2 65.0 2003 Nov                28
9.7 0.7 13.6 13.6 − 6.0 66.5 − 71.2 65.0          Dec                  5
9.5 0.7 12.4 12.4 − 6.0 67.0 − 71.2 65.0                               12
9.5 0.6 12.7 12.7 − 6.0 68.0 − 71.2 65.0                               19
10.3 0.6 12.6 12.6 − 6.0 67.3 − 71.2 65.0                               24
10.1 0.5 6 12.3 6 12.3 − 5.8 6 54.4 − 6 69.1 6 62.1 2004 Jan                  2
9.5 0.5 12.5 12.5 − 5.8 53.6 − 69.1 62.0                                 9
9.6 0.4 13.4 13.4 − 5.8 53.8 − 69.1 62.0                               16
10.8 0.4 12.6 12.6 − 5.8 54.0 − 69.1 62.0                               23
9.6 0.4 13.5 13.5 − 5.8 54.8 − 69.1 62.0                               30
9.5 0.4 15.0 15.0 − 5.8 53.2 − 69.1 62.0          Feb                  6
9.5 0.4 12.3 12.3 − 5.8 53.4 − 69.1 62.5                               13
9.3 0.4 10.6 10.6 − 5.8 52.5 − 69.1 62.8                               20
9.3 0.4 8.7 8.7 − 5.8 52.1 − 69.1 62.1                               27
10.0 0.5 8.9 8.9 − 5.8 51.0 − 69.1 62.1          Mar                  5
9.1 0.5 9.7 9.7 − 5.8 51.0 − 69.1 62.1                               12
9.0 0.4 9.3 9.3 − 5.8 51.5 − 69.1 62.1                               19
9.0 0.4 9.3 9.3 − 5.8 51.5 − 69.1 61.6                               26
8.6 0.3 9.6 9.6 − 5.9 6 55.2 − 6 80.6 59.5 2004 Apr                  2
8.6 0.3 9.0 9.0 − 5.9 55.0 − 80.6 59.3                                 8
8.5 0.3 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 55.6 − 80.6 59.3                               16
8.4 0.3 8.8 8.8 − 5.9 56.0 − 80.6 59.3                               23
8.6 0.3 10.3 10.3 − 5.9 56.2 − 80.6 59.3                               30
8.2 0.3 11.2 11.2 − 5.9 56.6 − 80.6 59.4          May                  7
8.1 0.3 10.2 10.2 − 5.9 56.1 − 80.6 59.4                               14
8.0 0.3 10.2 10.2 − 5.9 57.3 − 80.6 59.5                               21
8.0 0.3 8.2 8.2 − 5.9 56.6 − 80.6 59.8                               28
7.8 0.3 8.2 8.2 − 5.9 55.9 − 80.6 59.8          June                  4
7.9 0.3 9.3 9.3 − 5.9 55.6 − 80.6 59.8                               11
7.8 0.3 9.9 9.9 − 5.9 56.5 − 80.6 59.8                               18
8.0 0.2 10.3 10.3 − 5.9 56.8 − 80.6 59.8                               25
9.0 0.2 11.5 11.5 − 5.9 6 56.0 − 6 70.2 59.8          July                  2
8.2 0.2 13.1 13.1 − 5.9 55.8 − 70.2 59.8                                 9
8.2 0.2 11.3 11.3 − 5.9 56.6 − 70.2 59.8                               16
8.6 0.2 11.5 11.5 − 5.9 56.6 − 70.2 59.8                               23
8.8 0.2 9.4 9.4 − 5.9 56.8 − 70.2 59.8                               30
 Deutsche Bundesbank
7.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.6 10.2 24.1 6 37.3 5.1 2002          Sep 
7.1 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 10.6 26.2 37.3 5.1          Oct 
7.1 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.6 10.5 27.6 37.3 5.1          Nov 7.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.6 11.1 29.1
6 34.2 5.0          Dec 
7.8 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.6 17.6 29.6 34.2 5.0 2003          Jan 
7.3 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 19.1 31.9 34.2 5.0          Feb 7.1 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5
6 11.7 33.3 6 30.4 5.0          Mar 
7.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 11.6 34.2 30.4 5.0          Apr 7.3 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 34.5 36.6 30.4 5.0          May7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 31.3 37.3
6 28.2 5.0          June
7.3 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 14.9 38.4 28.2 5.0          July7.4 0.0 3.5 3.5 − 1.5 12.4 40.8 28.2 5.0          Aug 7.3 0.0 3.6 3.6 − 1.5 16.2 42.2
6 30.2 5.0          Sep 
7.4 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.5 12.9 43.4 30.2 5.0          Oct 7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 12.9 44.4 30.2 5.0          Nov 7.7 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.4
6 10.5 44.6 6 29.1 5.0          Dec 
7.3 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 11.4 48.1 29.1 5.0 2004          Jan 
7.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.4 12.7 49.2 29.1 5.0          Feb 6.5 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.5 10.8 50.4
6 32.2 5.0          Mar 
6.2 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 10.9 52.3 32.2 5.0          Apr 5.8 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 11.5 53.3 32.2 5.0          May5.6 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 32.2 53.9
6 29.3 5.0          June
5.9 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.5 30.3 55.6 29.3 5.0          July
 
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of eu ro
related to euro-banknote issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem
euro banknotes in circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly claim/ liability related to banknote issue“. — 4For the Deutsche Bundes-
basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro bank- bank: from2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-notes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The note 2). — 5Source: ECB. — 6Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2002          Sep 6,341.1 13.3 2,077.4 1,745.3 1,113.3 632.1 332.0 253.8 78.3 3,323.1 3,074.8 2,490.6 2,242.3
         Oct 6,359.1 14.2 2,078.3 1,741.3 1,117.9 623.5 336.9 257.2 79.7 3,327.8 3,080.9 2,494.9 2,240.6
         Nov 6,453.5 13.2 2,130.2 1,780.8 1,150.6 630.2 349.5 267.3 82.1 3,336.6 3,088.4 2,496.7 2,238.4         Dec 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003          Jan 6,380.7 13.2 2,104.3 1,748.5 1,136.2 612.3 355.8 277.0 78.8 3,348.8 3,101.1 2,501.4 2,237.9
         Feb 6,424.9 13.2 2,124.3 1,751.7 1,142.1 611.7 370.5 289.5 81.1 3,347.4 3,097.7 2,501.7 2,239.2         Mar 6,434.8 12.9 2,121.5 1,747.2 1,135.0 614.4 371.9 288.9 83.1 3,346.7 3,100.4 2,498.0 2,238.1
         Apr 6,430.3 13.8 2,107.6 1,732.2 1,118.6 613.6 375.4 291.6 83.8 3,348.8 3,102.2 2,499.1 2,234.6
         May 6,467.7 14.0 2,144.0 1,756.9 1,143.6 613.2 387.1 303.3 83.8 3,347.2 3,101.9 2,499.2 2,232.0         June 6,472.9 13.3 2,139.0 1,748.0 1,137.1 610.9 390.9 305.4 85.5 3,330.2 3,089.9 2,502.9 2,239.7
         July 6,425.7 13.3 2,113.5 1,728.1 1,109.7 618.4 385.3 297.4 88.0 3,330.2 3,093.7 2,494.1 2,231.1
         Aug 6,395.1 13.5 2,105.5 1,720.3 1,104.5 615.8 385.2 296.8 88.3 3,318.3 3,084.7 2,495.6 2,231.4         Sep 6,403.1 13.3 2,099.4 1,712.2 1,095.3 616.9 387.2 297.5 89.7 3,332.6 3,089.6 2,504.9 2,245.2
         Oct 6,399.3 13.6 2,092.9 1,715.9 1,096.1 619.9 376.9 285.3 91.7 3,328.9 3,086.1 2,496.9 2,242.9
         Nov 6,456.1 13.1 2,126.2 1,742.4 1,117.5 624.9 383.7 292.5 91.3 3,350.9 3,103.5 2,505.0 2,246.9         Dec 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004          Jan 6,424.2 13.2 2,084.1 1,713.6 1,101.3 612.4 370.4 278.3 92.1 3,329.8 3,078.3 2,489.0 2,230.4
         Feb 6,448.7 13.2 2,100.2 1,722.7 1,101.9 620.8 377.5 282.5 94.9 3,341.8 3,081.9 2,483.5 2,230.2         Mar 6,506.7 12.7 2,106.5 1,725.6 1,098.7 626.9 380.9 282.2 98.7 3,370.4 3,102.9 2,491.9 2,228.9
         Apr 6,568.8 12.9 2,132.5 1,749.7 1,115.1 634.6 382.9 282.4 100.4 3,381.2 3,110.1 2,506.6 2,230.4
         May 6,583.5 13.8 2,163.3 1,771.6 1,127.6 644.0 391.7 289.0 102.7 3,369.7 3,101.0 2,497.0 2,229.7         June 6,551.3 13.1 2,150.3 1,746.3 1,112.7 633.6 404.0 299.5 104.4 3,360.1 3,090.4 2,483.2 2,229.3
 Changes 1
1996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 − 0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.21999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.12002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.4
2002          Oct 20.3 0.9 0.8 − 4.1 4.6 − 8.7 4.9 3.5 1.5 4.6 6.2 4.4 − 1.5
         Nov 97.2 − 1.0 52.0 39.4 32.7 6.7 12.6 10.1 2.5 9.4 7.9 2.2 − 1.8         Dec − 29.0 4.7 3.0 1.0 13.7 − 12.7 1.9 4.4 − 2.4 11.4 10.8 16.1 7.8
2003          Jan − 14.6 − 4.7 − 25.1 − 30.7 − 28.1 − 2.7 5.7 5.3 0.4 18.3 17.1 3.7 1.4
         Feb 41.3 0.0 17.0 3.2 5.9 − 2.8 13.9 12.5 1.4 0.7 − 1.3 2.4 3.4         Mar 14.1 − 0.4 − 2.9 − 4.3 − 7.1 2.8 1.4 − 0.6 2.1 4.6 7.8 1.4 3.9
         Apr 4.5 1.0 − 13.7 − 17.2 − 16.5 − 0.8 3.5 2.7 0.8 4.9 4.2 3.2 − 1.2
         May 57.3 0.2 36.6 24.8 25.1 − 0.3 11.9 11.8 0.1 1.9 2.5 2.9 − 0.0         June − 5.9 − 0.7 − 5.2 − 8.9 − 6.5 − 2.4 3.8 2.0 1.7 − 18.0 − 12.5 3.2 7.2
         July − 49.6 − 0.1 − 25.7 − 20.1 − 27.4 7.3 − 5.6 − 8.0 2.4 0.6 4.5 − 8.1 − 8.1
         Aug − 43.7 0.3 − 8.1 − 7.9 − 5.2 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 − 13.6 − 10.0 0.5 − 0.6         Sep 26.2 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 8.1 − 9.2 1.2 2.1 0.7 1.4 17.7 7.4 11.8 16.2
         Oct − 5.0 0.3 − 6.5 4.1 0.8 3.3 − 10.6 − 12.6 2.0 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 1.7
         Nov 67.6 − 0.5 33.6 26.6 21.4 5.1 7.1 7.2 − 0.1 24.5 19.2 9.8 5.6         Dec − 8.6 4.2 − 14.4 − 10.3 − 0.7 − 9.6 − 4.1 − 4.7 0.7 − 10.1 − 13.7 − 1.4 0.3
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 4.1 − 26.5 − 18.1 − 15.5 − 2.6 − 8.5 − 9.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 4.6 − 6.6
         Feb 26.4 0.0 17.3 9.0 0.4 8.6 8.3 4.2 4.1 16.6 8.0 − 1.1 2.5         Mar 47.2 − 0.5 6.2 2.8 − 3.2 6.0 3.4 − 0.3 3.7 28.7 21.7 9.0 − 0.9
         Apr 57.9 0.1 26.1 24.1 16.4 7.7 1.9 0.2 1.7 10.8 7.1 14.6 1.4
         May 19.5 1.0 30.7 21.9 12.5 9.3 8.9 6.5 2.3 − 10.4 − 8.2 − 8.8 0.1         June − 33.2 − 0.7 − 12.9 − 25.2 − 14.9 − 10.3 12.2 10.6 1.7 − 9.2 − 10.1 − 13.2 0.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to fromthe flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.7 645.6 166.4 2003
248.3 584.2 445.3 138.9 248.3 114.7 59.3 133.6 27.2 106.3 752.3 597.5 174.9 2002          Sep 
254.2 586.0 448.3 137.7 246.9 116.4 59.1 130.5 27.6 102.9 762.2 608.7 176.7          Oct 
258.2 591.7 449.2 142.5 248.2 118.6 61.0 129.6 28.0 101.6 791.0 634.2 182.4          Nov 265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9          Dec 
263.4 599.8 453.0 146.7 247.6 121.8 60.5 125.8 26.5 99.3 738.3 591.8 176.2 2003          Jan 
262.4 596.0 447.3 148.7 249.7 125.6 64.6 124.1 26.2 97.9 757.7 612.1 182.2          Feb 
259.9 602.4 444.0 158.4 246.3 126.8 64.5 119.5 26.2 93.3 778.6 630.9 175.1          Mar 
264.5 603.1 445.8 157.4 246.6 129.9 66.2 116.7 25.2 91.5 787.6 641.1 172.5          Apr 
267.2 602.7 439.8 162.9 245.3 130.7 66.7 114.6 26.5 88.2 792.4 644.3 170.2          May263.2 587.0 434.6 152.4 240.2 126.9 61.9 113.4 24.6 88.7 827.6 668.9 162.8          June
263.0 599.6 444.9 154.7 236.5 126.7 62.3 109.8 24.9 84.9 811.5 651.6 157.3          July
264.1 589.1 440.6 148.5 233.6 129.2 65.0 104.4 24.1 80.3 801.2 642.0 156.6          Aug 259.8 584.6 435.2 149.4 243.1 129.7 64.7 113.4 23.4 90.0 795.8 642.4 161.9          Sep 
254.0 589.2 436.6 152.6 242.8 127.6 60.6 115.2 25.1 90.1 800.6 643.9 163.3          Oct 
258.1 598.5 442.5 156.0 247.4 132.9 64.7 114.5 25.6 89.0 803.7 648.2 162.2          Nov 256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.7 645.6 166.4          Dec 
258.6 589.2 440.2 149.0 251.5 132.0 61.2 119.5 25.6 93.9 843.7 683.0 153.4 2004          Jan 
253.3 598.3 432.1 166.2 260.0 136.0 65.2 124.0 25.0 99.0 839.5 680.6 154.0          Feb 
263.0 611.0 444.9 166.2 267.4 137.6 67.0 129.8 24.9 104.9 859.1 697.2 158.0          Mar 
276.2 603.5 437.2 166.3 271.1 139.4 68.8 131.7 25.8 105.9 884.1 722.1 158.1          Apr 
267.2 604.1 431.4 172.7 268.7 137.6 66.3 131.1 25.8 105.3 875.0 707.5 161.6          May253.9 607.2 426.2 181.0 269.7 138.4 66.5 131.3 25.7 105.6 867.0 695.6 160.8          June
Changes 1
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 199630.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 − 2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 199830.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 113.4 98.5 − 38.7 2003
5.9 1.8 3.1 − 1.2 − 1.6 1.4 − 0.2 − 3.0 0.4 − 3.4 12.2 11.8 1.7 2002          Oct 
4.0 5.7 0.9 4.8 1.4 2.3 2.0 − 0.9 0.4 − 1.3 31.1 27.5 5.7          Nov 8.3 − 5.3 − 0.8 − 4.6 0.6 6.9 3.1 − 6.3 − 2.3 − 4.0 − 39.1 − 32.8 − 8.4          Dec 
2.3 13.4 4.6 8.8 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.7 3.0 1.1 2.0 9.4 10.1 − 12.5 2003          Jan 
− 1.0 − 3.7 − 5.7 2.0 2.0 5.5 5.8 − 3.5 − 2.0 − 1.4 19.9 20.7 3.6          Feb 
− 2.5 6.4 − 3.3 9.7 − 3.2 1.3 0.0 − 4.5 0.1 − 4.5 24.4 21.8 − 11.6          Mar 
4.4 1.0 1.8 − 0.9 0.7 3.4 1.9 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.7 16.1 16.3 − 3.8          Apr 2.9 − 0.4 − 5.9 5.5 − 0.6 1.1 1.0 − 1.7 1.5 − 3.1 21.8 18.8 − 3.2          May
− 4.0 − 15.7 − 5.2 − 10.5 − 5.6 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.9 0.5 25.4 16.1 − 7.5          June
0.0 12.6 10.3 2.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 0.3 − 3.6 0.3 − 3.9 − 18.6 − 19.0 − 5.9          July1.1 − 10.5 − 4.3 − 6.2 − 3.6 2.2 2.4 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 4.8 − 21.0 − 19.0 − 1.2          Aug 
− 4.3 − 4.4 − 5.4 0.9 10.3 1.0 0.3 9.3 − 0.5 9.9 10.2 14.5 4.4          Sep 
− 5.6 5.3 1.4 3.9 0.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 2.2 1.6 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 3.5          Oct 
4.1 9.4 6.0 3.4 5.3 5.7 4.3 − 0.4 0.6 − 1.0 13.0 12.4 − 3.0          Nov 
− 1.7 − 12.4 − 2.9 − 9.5 3.6 1.4 − 1.4 2.2 0.5 1.7 13.4 9.4 − 1.7          Dec 
2.1 3.6 0.6 3.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 2.7 − 0.4 3.1 34.7 32.1 − 18.8 2004          Jan 
− 3.7 9.1 − 8.0 17.2 8.6 4.0 4.0 4.6 − 0.6 5.2 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 4.8          Feb 
9.8 12.7 12.7 − 0.0 7.0 1.4 1.6 5.6 − 0.1 5.8 10.7 8.6 2.1          Mar 
13.2 − 7.5 − 7.6 0.1 3.6 1.8 1.7 1.9 0.9 1.0 21.3 21.2 − 0.4          Apr 
− 8.9 0.6 − 5.9 6.5 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 2.4 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.4 − 10.4 2.6          May
− 13.4 3.1 − 5.2 8.3 0.9 0.8 0.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.2 − 8.9 − 14.1 − 1.5          June
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2002          Sep 6,341.1 1,400.2 1,172.1 228.1 2,105.1 1,967.6 540.3 869.1 272.6 558.3 454.7 87.5 8.8
         Oct 6,359.1 1,419.4 1,177.2 242.2 2,114.5 1,979.6 542.0 877.8 279.0 559.7 456.9 86.6 8.2
         Nov 6,453.5 1,460.0 1,214.3 245.7 2,146.5 2,008.8 571.8 874.6 273.2 562.4 460.2 90.1 10.0         Dec 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003          Jan 6,380.7 1,457.2 1,213.2 244.0 2,160.0 2,024.7 564.4 882.9 275.8 577.4 477.0 88.5 9.1
         Feb 6,424.9 1,466.4 1,224.6 241.9 2,173.4 2,036.7 571.1 886.4 272.1 579.2 479.9 88.5 8.0         Mar 6,434.8 1,471.5 1,218.2 253.2 2,175.3 2,040.7 578.3 883.1 266.2 579.3 481.6 88.0 7.7
         Apr 6,430.3 1,455.5 1,200.9 254.6 2,176.2 2,044.3 585.8 880.6 264.8 577.9 482.7 86.5 8.2
         May 6,467.7 1,508.5 1,253.9 254.6 2,188.9 2,053.8 591.4 885.3 270.9 577.1 483.4 87.4 8.8         June 6,472.9 1,509.2 1,252.8 256.4 2,194.2 2,059.3 608.2 874.5 260.2 576.7 484.4 86.7 9.0
         July 6,425.7 1,457.9 1,207.6 250.3 2,182.5 2,051.4 595.2 879.5 259.0 576.8 486.5 85.7 9.3
         Aug 6,395.1 1,450.5 1,198.0 252.5 2,193.0 2,061.5 597.8 885.7 261.3 578.0 489.3 85.5 8.9         Sep 6,403.1 1,451.2 1,188.3 262.9 2,187.8 2,057.4 607.3 871.8 248.1 578.3 490.2 84.2 9.6
         Oct 6,399.3 1,439.5 1,179.5 260.0 2,188.2 2,057.3 609.5 868.5 243.9 579.4 491.2 85.4 10.7
         Nov 6,456.1 1,463.6 1,214.6 249.0 2,211.2 2,082.4 632.7 869.4 244.7 580.3 491.9 83.1 9.9         Dec 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004          Jan 6,424.2 1,461.1 1,212.6 248.5 2,209.5 2,082.6 630.5 861.5 233.5 590.6 502.1 80.9 9.5
         Feb 6,448.7 1,454.4 1,215.7 238.7 2,212.3 2,085.6 633.8 860.3 230.1 591.5 503.3 79.5 10.8         Mar 6,506.7 1,459.9 1,203.6 256.3 2,214.3 2,088.7 632.9 864.4 230.9 591.4 503.5 77.8 13.1
         Apr 6,568.8 1,482.1 1,227.2 254.9 2,219.0 2,097.2 641.7 864.4 225.6 591.2 504.3 74.5 10.6
         May 6,583.5 1,496.5 1,251.2 245.4 2,229.4 2,105.3 640.0 874.8 232.1 590.6 504.6 75.8 9.4         June 6,551.3 1,501.5 1,256.7 244.8 2,228.7 2,101.4 640.7 870.7 224.0 590.0 504.3 76.7 12.4
 Changes 1
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 − 41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.01997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 − 3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 − 0.31998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2002          Oct 20.3 19.4 5.2 14.2 9.6 12.2 1.8 9.0 6.4 1.4 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.6
         Nov 97.2 41.3 37.4 3.9 32.3 29.4 29.8 − 3.2 − 5.8 2.7 3.3 3.5 1.8         Dec − 29.0 22.0 23.3 − 1.2 24.6 26.7 3.4 10.5 6.3 12.8 12.6 − 2.2 − 1.9
2003          Jan − 14.6 − 19.2 − 22.2 3.0 − 14.2 − 13.7 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.2 2.1 4.1 0.3 0.9
         Feb 41.3 9.1 11.4 − 2.3 14.3 11.9 6.7 3.4 − 3.7 1.8 3.0 1.0 − 1.1         Mar 14.1 5.9 − 5.9 11.9 2.2 4.1 7.4 − 3.3 − 5.9 0.1 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3
         Apr 4.5 − 14.0 − 16.5 2.5 1.6 3.9 7.7 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 1.4 1.1 − 1.2 0.5
         May 57.3 54.5 52.0 2.5 13.9 10.2 6.1 4.9 6.3 − 0.8 0.7 1.5 0.7         June − 5.9 − 1.2 − 1.7 0.6 4.6 5.1 16.4 − 10.9 − 10.8 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.0
         July − 49.6 − 52.1 − 45.6 − 6.4 − 11.8 − 7.9 − 13.0 5.1 − 1.1 0.1 2.1 − 1.1 0.5
         Aug − 43.7 − 10.0 − 10.5 0.5 9.7 9.6 2.3 6.1 2.3 1.3 2.8 − 0.5 − 0.5         Sep 26.2 4.5 − 8.4 12.9 − 4.0 − 3.5 10.0 − 13.7 − 13.1 0.2 0.9 − 0.8 0.8
         Oct − 5.0 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 0.3 − 0.1 2.2 − 3.4 − 4.2 1.1 1.0 1.1 1.1
         Nov 67.6 26.1 35.8 − 9.7 23.6 25.4 23.5 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7         Dec − 8.6 10.4 15.9 − 5.5 4.4 5.1 − 10.2 5.3 3.4 10.0 8.9 − 1.0 − 0.5
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 11.1 − 17.2 6.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 8.2 − 13.1 − 14.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 0.2
         Feb 26.4 − 6.3 3.3 − 9.6 3.0 3.1 4.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 0.9 1.2 − 1.4 1.3         Mar 47.2 4.0 − 12.6 16.6 1.6 2.8 − 1.1 4.0 0.7 − 0.1 0.1 − 1.8 2.3
         Apr 57.9 21.3 23.2 − 1.9 4.7 8.7 8.6 0.3 − 5.1 − 0.2 0.9 − 3.5 − 2.6
         May 19.5 15.3 24.2 − 8.9 10.7 8.3 − 1.5 10.4 6.6 − 0.6 0.3 1.4 − 1.2         June − 33.2 4.8 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 4.0 0.3 − 3.7 − 7.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.8 3.0
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated footnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less
fromthe flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which fromMoney of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  
7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
74.2 8.8 4.5 3.4 49.9 46.7 10.7 37.5 1,490.2 67.4 647.7 344.3 305.5 2002          Sep 
73.9 9.1 4.5 3.4 48.3 46.8 9.6 38.1 1,485.9 65.2 642.5 343.2 306.0          Oct 
75.6 9.4 4.5 3.4 47.6 46.3 6.4 37.9 1,496.8 68.8 653.5 342.5 309.8          Nov 74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8          Dec 
74.8 10.4 4.7 3.6 46.9 45.2 7.6 38.5 1,461.1 138.9 602.9 350.5 305.9 2003          Jan 
75.9 12.3 4.6 3.6 48.2 45.1 10.9 39.6 1,468.4 145.7 606.7 354.1 305.4          Feb 
75.7 13.0 4.6 3.6 46.6 45.2 11.2 40.2 1,467.9 143.5 612.1 353.1 303.6          Mar 
73.8 12.3 4.5 3.5 45.5 44.9 11.3 39.6 1,468.6 142.6 620.2 351.6 307.2          Apr 
74.1 13.3 4.4 3.5 47.7 44.4 12.3 39.4 1,463.3 133.3 599.0 351.0 305.4          May73.4 12.2 4.4 3.5 48.1 44.6 10.8 38.7 1,470.0 128.7 594.8 348.2 307.0          June
72.1 12.1 4.3 3.4 45.3 43.8 10.9 38.4 1,482.8 133.0 603.6 348.1 301.6          July
72.4 12.8 4.2 3.4 45.9 43.8 12.4 38.1 1,480.0 122.1 579.2 344.0 298.0          Aug 70.5 12.0 4.1 3.3 46.2 43.4 15.6 38.0 1,485.5 124.4 579.7 341.0 304.3          Sep 
70.6 12.7 4.0 3.3 45.5 43.0 21.1 37.6 1,494.1 126.2 574.2 344.6 299.9          Oct 
69.3 11.4 4.0 3.2 45.7 43.6 20.0 37.1 1,502.7 131.5 574.6 343.0 304.0          Nov 68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8          Dec 
67.5 11.9 3.8 3.1 45.9 45.2 16.6 36.4 1,493.9 128.6 585.4 336.8 284.5 2004          Jan 
64.9 10.9 3.8 3.1 47.3 45.8 17.5 36.2 1,503.7 127.3 604.4 332.2 288.0          Feb 
60.9 10.1 3.7 3.1 47.8 46.2 18.2 35.8 1,532.3 134.7 623.1 330.1 292.8          Mar 
60.2 10.2 3.7 3.1 47.2 46.2 17.3 35.7 1,549.0 135.3 632.3 333.7 299.7          Apr 
62.7 12.3 3.7 3.0 48.3 45.8 17.0 36.1 1,559.8 132.3 612.5 336.4 295.8          May60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 50.7 47.1 16.1 36.0 1,554.2 123.6 582.1 337.5 295.2          June
Changes 1
23.3 − 2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 − − 5.1 196.3 − 15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 199625.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 − 6.2 − 6.2 − − 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 199724.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.0 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003
− 0.3 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 0.1 − 1.0 0.6 − 3.8 0.6 − 4.6 − 1.0 1.3 2002          Oct 
1.8 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.2 − 0.2 11.9 10.7 13.2 − 0.5 2.5          Nov 
− 0.6 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 1.2 − 24.8 − 6.6 − 42.1 1.3 − 6.0          Dec 
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 5.3 1.8 4.8 2.9 11.3 3.2 − 7.7 2003          Jan 
2.1 3.0 − 0.0 0.0 1.4 − 0.1 2.3 1.1 8.1 6.8 4.4 3.7 − 1.7          Feb 
− 0.0 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6 0.1 0.4 0.5 0.8 − 2.4 8.2 − 0.7 − 3.2          Mar 
− 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.5 3.5 − 0.8 13.7 − 0.9 1.2          Apr 
0.9 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.5 1.0 − 0.2 3.4 − 6.9 − 8.2 0.7 − 7.8          May
− 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.4 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 3.1 − 4.5 − 11.4 − 3.6 4.7          June
− 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.8 0.2 − 0.4 12.1 4.3 7.0 − 0.2 − 4.6          July
0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.0 1.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 − 10.9 − 32.4 − 4.9 − 0.2          Aug 
− 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.4 3.2 − 0.1 11.6 2.4 12.3 − 1.9 0.7          Sep 
0.1 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 5.6 − 0.5 7.8 1.8 − 10.3 3.4 − 1.1          Oct 
− 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 12.3 5.3 6.8 − 1.0 1.3          Nov 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 0.6 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 10.6 − 0.1 3.2 − 1.8 − 7.9          Dec 
− 1.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.9 2.5 − 0.3 4.2 − 2.7 12.7 − 3.9 − 13.9 2004          Jan 
− 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.6 0.9 − 0.2 10.0 − 1.3 19.6 − 4.6 4.1          Feb 
− 4.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.8 − 0.5 23.2 7.5 14.0 − 2.5 6.7          Mar 
− 0.8 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 15.5 0.3 6.4 3.4 7.7          Apr 
2.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.3 12.2 − 2.8 − 16.7 2.6 − 4.6          May
− 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 8.2 − 11.0 − 31.0 3.5 − 0.5          June
than four years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
collected separately from1999 only; up to Decem ber 1998, included in the paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2004          Jan 2,224 6,463.9 52.7 2,421.6 1,749.6 662.1 3,580.3 457.9 2,561.5 4.1 546.7 149.8 259.5
         Feb 2,222 6,488.0 50.9 2,435.5 1,749.8 675.7 3,593.5 459.2 2,559.8 3.9 560.1 148.5 259.6         Mar 2,219 6,542.8 43.9 2,459.8 1,762.0 687.8 3,633.3 481.1 2,559.0 3.7 580.5 147.0 258.9
         Apr 2,216 6,604.4 52.3 2,498.9 1,791.0 697.0 3,648.7 476.7 2,563.8 3.7 594.5 145.9 258.4
         May 2,213 6,618.6 55.2 2,529.2 1,806.8 712.7 3,626.7 452.4 2,566.7 3.7 594.1 146.5 260.9         June 2,200 6,587.5 50.5 2,507.2 1,792.0 705.3 3,622.4 449.1 2,566.6 3.5 590.4 145.6 261.8
Commercial banks 5
2004          May 255 1,886.4 18.7 722.3 577.4 142.2 970.2 246.7 541.8 1.9 175.0 78.9 96.4         June 255 1,843.3 16.7 684.7 546.0 136.2 965.3 244.1 543.0 1.8 168.4 78.3 98.2
   Big banks 6
2004          May 4 1,089.5 10.3 426.0 363.8 60.4 519.7 153.6 266.7 1.3 95.5 68.3 65.2         June 4 1,052.6 7.9 389.9 335.7 52.8 518.9 151.9 266.2 1.2 93.2 67.9 68.1
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2004          May 168 696.9 7.7 245.2 166.7 78.0 405.7 73.1 259.2 0.6 71.1 10.5 27.8         June 168 702.4 8.0 248.6 167.8 80.4 408.4 75.0 260.3 0.6 71.1 10.3 27.0
   Branches of foreign banks
2004          May 83 100.0 0.7 51.1 46.9 3.8 44.7 20.1 16.0 0.0 8.4 0.1 3.4         June 83 88.2 0.8 46.2 42.5 3.0 38.0 17.2 16.4 0.0 4.0 0.1 3.1
Landesbanken
2004          May 13 1,390.5 4.1 711.8 564.7 144.8 590.9 64.1 410.7 0.3 112.7 32.1 51.6         June 13 1,394.8 3.7 719.8 575.2 142.0 588.6 61.1 411.5 0.3 112.8 31.7 51.0
Savings banks
2004          May 487 984.3 18.2 228.0 72.3 155.0 701.7 70.6 537.6 0.9 92.4 14.7 21.8         June 486 983.3 16.7 227.6 71.1 155.8 702.7 71.8 537.4 0.9 92.4 14.7 21.6
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2004          May 2 192.0 0.2 131.2 88.1 42.6 41.7 10.0 19.8 0.1 11.6 11.6 7.2         June 2 191.5 0.3 130.0 86.6 42.9 42.3 10.7 20.7 0.1 10.7 11.5 7.4
Credit cooperatives
2004          May 1,390 566.0 12.1 146.9 59.2 85.8 384.2 43.4 298.9 0.5 41.1 5.9 16.9         June 1,378 567.5 11.7 146.5 58.5 86.1 386.6 44.6 299.7 0.5 41.5 5.9 16.8
Mortgage banks
2004          May 25 872.4 1.3 231.3 144.5 85.4 620.0 10.3 493.4 − 116.2 0.8 18.9         June 25 872.6 1.1 233.1 145.6 86.0 619.4 9.9 489.8 − 119.6 0.9 18.2
Building and loan associations
2004          May 27 175.3 0.1 42.7 30.8 11.8 122.2 1.5 108.2 . 12.4 0.4 9.9         June 27 176.0 0.0 42.8 31.1 11.7 121.9 1.5 107.9 . 12.4 0.4 10.8
Special purpose banks
2004          May 14 551.8 0.6 315.2 269.8 45.2 195.7 5.8 156.2 − 32.7 2.1 38.2         June 14 558.4 0.4 322.7 277.9 44.6 195.7 5.5 156.7 − 32.6 2.1 37.6
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2004          May 127 405.4 3.3 176.8 123.6 52.6 210.4 39.9 123.0 0.2 47.0 1.2 13.7         June 127 400.1 3.6 176.7 123.3 52.6 205.6 36.5 123.9 0.2 44.6 1.2 13.0
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2004          May 44 305.4 2.7 125.7 76.7 48.9 165.6 19.8 107.1 0.1 38.6 1.1 10.3         June 44 311.8 2.8 130.6 80.7 49.7 167.6 19.3 107.5 0.1 40.6 1.1 9.9
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,820.1 280.7 1,539.3 2,453.1 677.1 316.5 751.5 65.8 600.6 510.0 107.4 1,537.1 291.3 362.3 2004          Jan 
1,818.6 256.7 1,561.8 2,470.4 691.2 319.9 750.7 83.4 601.4 511.2 107.1 1,548.5 285.0 365.5          Feb 
1,844.5 276.3 1,568.0 2,472.0 697.2 320.2 746.6 83.6 601.3 511.3 106.8 1,576.3 283.6 366.4          Mar 
1,873.9 270.9 1,602.9 2,477.8 701.0 319.4 750.3 84.4 601.0 512.2 106.0 1,593.8 286.2 372.7          Apr 
1,868.9 248.3 1,620.4 2,487.6 705.5 322.3 753.7 76.9 600.4 512.4 105.7 1,606.1 287.2 368.7          May1,861.1 258.6 1,602.4 2,468.5 704.0 302.5 756.9 68.0 599.7 512.1 105.4 1,601.3 287.6 369.0          June
Commercial banks 5
737.0 150.7 586.1 715.1 328.9 153.6 123.4 65.4 100.0 89.9 9.2 212.5 93.1 128.7 2004          May
720.4 153.0 567.3 699.3 327.8 139.0 123.2 57.0 100.1 90.2 9.2 209.5 92.2 121.8          June
Big banks 6
451.7 111.7 339.9 359.2 153.6 107.8 70.3 61.6 27.2 25.4 0.4 148.6 53.8 76.2 2004          May
434.5 109.0 325.5 346.6 151.1 96.2 70.1 52.6 28.6 26.7 0.6 146.3 53.1 72.2          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
209.6 29.8 179.7 340.0 166.7 40.7 51.1 3.7 72.8 64.5 8.7 63.9 37.0 46.4 2004          May
219.9 32.1 187.6 336.8 165.5 39.9 51.2 4.5 71.5 63.5 8.6 63.3 36.7 45.7          June
Branches of foreign banks
75.7 9.2 66.5 15.9 8.7 5.2 2.0 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.3 6.1 2004          May
66.0 11.9 54.1 16.0 11.2 2.8 1.9 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 3.9          June
Landesbanken
462.3 56.1 406.1 327.2 46.5 43.5 221.1 8.2 15.4 14.5 0.7 481.2 60.1 59.8 2004          May
463.9 60.4 403.5 327.7 47.8 40.0 223.9 8.5 15.3 14.4 0.7 479.0 60.4 63.9          June
Savings banks
216.3 5.2 211.0 633.0 195.6 52.8 10.9 − 303.5 251.8 70.2 44.0 46.6 44.4 2004          May
216.2 5.1 211.1 629.6 194.2 51.6 10.9 − 302.9 251.4 70.0 44.3 47.2 46.0          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
110.9 27.2 83.7 31.1 7.5 6.8 16.4 3.1 − − 0.3 28.3 10.0 11.7 2004          May
114.7 28.6 86.0 28.9 6.2 6.2 16.3 2.2 − − 0.3 28.4 10.1 9.4          June
Credit cooperatives
75.5 1.4 74.1 405.2 122.0 52.8 24.3 − 181.1 155.9 24.9 32.3 30.7 22.3 2004          May
77.0 2.7 74.3 404.4 122.5 51.8 24.2 − 181.1 155.8 24.8 32.5 31.0 22.5          June
Mortgage banks
129.6 4.0 125.7 146.1 1.5 5.3 139.0 0.2 − − 0.2 553.1 21.2 22.5 2004          May
132.9 4.5 128.4 147.7 1.4 5.6 140.4 0.2 − − 0.2 546.6 21.1 24.4          June
Building and loan associations
30.1 1.9 28.1 112.7 0.3 0.8 111.0 − 0.4 0.4 0.2 7.2 7.3 18.0 2004          May
29.7 2.0 27.7 113.0 0.4 0.8 111.2 − 0.4 0.4 0.2 7.0 7.4 19.0          June
Special purpose banks
107.3 1.9 105.5 117.3 3.2 6.6 107.5 − − − − 247.7 18.1 61.4 2004          May
106.2 2.2 104.0 117.9 3.8 7.5 106.6 − − − − 254.0 18.2 62.0          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
142.1 19.6 122.5 127.1 79.0 14.4 23.6 0.2 7.0 6.8 3.2 99.3 13.0 23.9 2004          May
139.6 23.7 115.9 127.5 81.7 11.8 23.8 0.2 7.0 6.8 3.2 98.5 13.0 21.6          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
66.4 10.4 56.0 111.2 70.3 9.2 21.5 0.2 7.0 6.8 3.1 99.3 10.6 17.8 2004          May
73.5 11.8 61.7 111.5 70.5 9.0 21.9 0.2 6.9 6.8 3.2 98.5 10.6 17.7          June
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Commercial included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Mortgage banks”. 
bank AG. — 7Sumof the banks m ajority-owned by foreign banks and
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2003          Jan 12.9 42.3 1,661.6 1,086.8 0.0 9.7 565.1 2.6 3,005.1 2,686.9 3.9 4.0 307.4
         Feb 12.9 39.0 1,667.6 1,095.5 0.0 9.7 562.3 2.5 3,001.9 2,682.6 3.8 3.6 308.9         Mar 12.6 47.5 1,655.8 1,081.1 0.0 10.0 564.7 2.5 3,005.5 2,677.5 3.8 4.8 316.4
         Apr 13.5 37.7 1,648.8 1,074.6 0.0 9.9 564.3 2.5 3,007.6 2,676.4 3.8 5.0 319.4
         May 13.7 38.3 1,674.3 1,099.7 0.0 9.2 565.3 2.5 3,003.6 2,667.8 3.9 4.5 324.5         June 12.9 40.9 1,665.5 1,090.9 0.0 9.9 564.7 2.5 2,992.4 2,670.2 3.9 3.9 311.4
         July 12.9 40.5 1,645.6 1,063.8 0.0 10.9 571.0 2.4 2,996.0 2,671.8 4.0 3.4 314.7
         Aug 13.2 42.5 1,636.2 1,056.4 0.0 9.3 570.5 2.4 2,986.9 2,667.9 4.0 3.4 309.6         Sep 12.9 42.1 1,627.9 1,047.0 0.0 9.7 571.2 2.4 2,995.7 2,676.3 3.9 2.1 311.4
         Oct 13.3 44.3 1,630.0 1,046.2 0.0 9.7 574.1 2.4 2,992.9 2,675.4 3.9 3.1 308.4
         Nov 12.8 38.2 1,663.1 1,073.8 0.0 10.5 578.8 2.3 3,012.2 2,685.5 3.7 3.4 317.5         Dec 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004          Jan 12.9 39.5 1,632.9 1,055.9 0.0 8.4 568.5 2.3 2,992.0 2,667.0 3.5 2.6 316.8
         Feb 12.9 37.6 1,645.1 1,058.5 0.0 8.5 578.0 2.3 2,994.8 2,658.8 3.4 2.5 328.1         Mar 12.4 31.1 1,656.6 1,062.0 0.0 8.1 586.4 2.4 3,015.7 2,670.4 3.2 2.1 338.0
         Apr 12.6 39.4 1,673.5 1,070.7 0.0 8.6 594.1 2.4 3,022.9 2,664.3 3.2 3.0 350.5
         May 13.5 41.4 1,693.0 1,081.2 0.0 7.7 604.1 2.4 3,013.6 2,657.8 3.2 2.9 347.8         June 12.8 37.3 1,671.8 1,070.0 0.0 7.7 594.0 2.3 3,003.5 2,652.5 3.0 3.6 342.6
Changes *
1995 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 2.91996 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 − 2.0 + 4.7 + 10.61997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 − 1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 36.51998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.11999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2003          Jan − 4.6 − 3.2 − 29.7 − 25.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 7.9 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 5.5
         Feb + 0.0 − 3.3 + 6.0 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.5         Mar − 0.4 + 8.5 − 11.8 − 14.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 3.7 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 7.4
         Apr + 0.9 − 9.8 − 7.0 − 6.5 − − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 3.1
         May + 0.2 + 0.6 + 25.5 + 25.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 8.7 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.3         June − 0.7 + 2.6 − 8.8 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 11.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 13.1
         July − 0.0 − 0.4 − 20.1 − 27.2 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.4
         Aug + 0.2 + 2.0 − 9.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.1         Sep − 0.2 − 0.3 − 7.8 − 9.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 8.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 2.6
         Oct + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.5 − 6.1 + 33.1 + 27.6 − + 1.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 + 19.3 + 10.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 9.1         Dec + 4.2 + 8.5 − 19.3 − 9.8 − − 1.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 16.1 − 8.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 7.4
2004          Jan − 4.1 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 8.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 7.2
         Feb + 0.1 − 1.9 + 12.0 + 2.4 − + 0.1 + 9.5 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 8.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 11.3         Mar − 0.5 − 6.5 + 11.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.4 + 0.1 + 20.9 + 11.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 9.9
         Apr + 0.1 + 8.3 + 16.9 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 7.7 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.6
         May + 0.9 + 2.0 + 19.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7         June − 0.7 − 4.1 − 21.3 − 11.2 − − 0.1 − 10.0 − 0.0 − 10.1 − 5.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 5.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). — 5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). — 6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. — 7From1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). — 8Up to December
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising fromthe exchange of equalisation claim s
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). — 4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt securities arising fromthe
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. — 11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection fromthe banks’ portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month *
 
68.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
3.0 54.7 118.4 1,214.6 134.8 1,079.7 0.2 25.5 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 577.4 103.5 42.1 2003          Jan 
3.0 54.8 118.0 1,224.7 134.5 1,090.1 0.2 25.6 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 579.2 103.7 41.9          Feb 
3.0 54.8 116.1 1,218.0 144.0 1,073.9 0.2 25.5 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 579.3 103.0 42.1          Mar 
3.0 54.6 116.7 1,203.4 137.4 1,065.9 0.1 25.5 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 577.9 102.4 41.8          Apr 
3.0 54.5 119.6 1,254.2 146.4 1,107.7 0.1 25.5 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 577.1 101.9 41.7          May3.0 54.4 118.1 1,252.5 150.5 1,101.8 0.1 25.4 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 576.7 101.3 41.8          June
2.0 54.2 119.1 1,207.7 123.6 1,084.0 0.1 25.3 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 576.8 100.9 41.7          July
2.0 54.6 118.8 1,198.2 120.9 1,077.2 0.1 25.7 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 578.0 100.4 41.7          Aug 2.0 54.4 115.1 1,188.2 116.0 1,072.0 0.1 25.5 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 578.3 99.9 41.5          Sep 
2.0 53.9 115.0 1,179.6 122.1 1,057.4 0.1 25.3 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 579.4 100.0 40.7          Oct 
2.0 54.1 113.3 1,214.5 135.3 1,079.1 0.1 25.5 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 580.3 100.1 40.7          Nov 2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5          Dec 
2.0 57.2 108.9 1,213.2 142.0 1,071.1 0.1 28.3 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 590.6 100.3 40.3 2004          Jan 
2.0 56.6 108.8 1,215.7 134.0 1,081.6 0.1 28.2 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 591.5 100.1 40.5          Feb 
2.0 54.9 107.2 1,204.3 140.0 1,064.2 0.1 27.8 2,145.8 635.3 819.2 591.4 99.8 39.3          Mar 
2.0 54.4 106.6 1,227.8 143.2 1,084.5 0.1 27.7 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 591.2 99.2 39.0          Apr 
2.0 54.3 107.1 1,252.0 134.2 1,117.7 0.1 27.6 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 590.6 98.9 39.0          May2.0 54.9 106.7 1,257.3 129.2 1,128.0 0.1 28.4 2,158.3 643.4 826.2 590.0 98.7 38.8          June
Changes *
− 1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 − 14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996− 5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
− 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 29.4 + 7.2 − 36.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 + 2.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 2003          Jan 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 17.8 − 0.3 + 18.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 6.7 + 9.5 − 16.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1          Mar 
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 14.6 − 6.6 − 8.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 3.0 + 50.8 + 8.9 + 41.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1          May
− 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.7 + 4.2 − 5.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1          June− 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 44.9 − 27.0 − 18.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.5 − 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.1          Aug + 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 8.7 − 3.5 − 5.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 8.6 + 6.1 − 14.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3          Oct 
− + 0.2 − 1.7 + 34.9 + 13.2 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 2.7 − 4.1 + 15.1 − 18.6 + 33.6 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 10.0 + 0.1 − 0.2          Dec − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 16.3 + 25.3 − 41.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Jan 
− − 0.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 − 8.0 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.4 + 6.0 − 17.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2          Mar − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 23.2 + 3.2 + 20.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 24.2 − 9.0 + 33.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          May
− + 0.6 − 0.4 + 5.3 − 5.0 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2          June
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. — 17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. — 13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising fromm onetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). — 20Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer
one month. — 16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Mediumm arket Memo Mediumm arket
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total termtermbanks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total termtermnon-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2003          Jan 0.3 695.1 620.5 471.3 149.1 0.9 73.8 2.6 559.9 333.2 91.5 241.6 10.8 215.9
         Feb 0.3 713.7 637.5 488.8 148.6 1.3 74.9 2.6 576.6 352.7 109.9 242.8 10.2 213.8         Mar 0.3 733.3 654.1 504.0 150.1 1.0 78.3 2.6 574.8 354.5 113.1 241.3 8.5 211.8
         Apr 0.3 738.6 657.2 505.9 151.2 1.7 79.8 2.6 583.3 364.8 125.1 239.7 7.4 211.1
         May 0.3 760.1 676.4 524.6 151.8 1.3 82.4 2.5 578.6 362.3 126.8 235.6 6.8 209.4         June 0.4 794.3 707.2 553.1 154.1 1.3 85.8 2.6 578.1 351.6 115.2 236.4 7.0 219.5
         July 0.3 779.1 689.4 533.9 155.5 1.4 88.3 2.6 567.4 345.3 106.5 238.8 6.8 215.3
         Aug 0.3 771.9 682.3 522.9 159.4 1.3 88.3 2.6 561.3 344.3 101.3 243.0 7.4 209.5         Sep 0.4 769.8 680.3 520.2 160.1 1.3 88.2 2.3 569.4 346.6 110.3 236.3 7.2 215.6
         Oct 0.4 757.0 664.9 502.0 162.9 0.9 91.2 1.6 576.6 348.6 106.0 242.6 8.0 219.9
         Nov 0.3 764.6 672.3 512.8 159.5 1.3 91.1 1.6 583.8 357.5 118.0 239.6 6.4 219.8         Dec 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004          Jan 0.3 788.7 693.8 531.9 161.9 1.2 93.6 1.6 588.4 353.0 118.0 235.0 5.5 229.8
         Feb 0.3 790.5 691.5 530.7 160.8 1.3 97.7 1.6 598.7 360.7 126.1 234.6 6.0 232.0         Mar 0.3 803.2 700.1 538.5 161.6 1.7 101.4 1.7 617.6 370.2 133.9 236.4 4.8 242.5
         Apr 0.3 825.5 720.4 557.5 162.9 2.2 102.8 1.7 625.8 376.7 137.2 239.5 5.0 244.0
         May 0.3 836.2 725.7 570.5 155.2 1.9 108.7 1.7 613.1 361.8 123.6 238.2 5.0 246.3         June 0.4 835.4 722.1 566.9 155.2 2.1 111.2 1.7 618.9 363.8 124.6 239.1 7.3 247.8
Changes *
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.11996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.41997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 − 0.1 + 10.4 − 1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.91998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.01999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2003          Jan − 0.1 + 9.2 + 9.6 + 6.6 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 6.8 + 4.9 − 0.0 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 0.2
         Feb + 0.0 + 18.9 + 17.3 + 17.5 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 16.8 + 19.6 + 18.3 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 2.2         Mar + 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 16.3 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 3.5 + 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.5
         Apr + 0.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 12.8 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.2
         May + 0.0 + 30.1 + 28.0 + 24.9 + 3.2 − 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 5.6 + 6.0 + 3.8 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0         June + 0.1 + 29.4 + 26.3 + 25.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 6.2 − 14.9 − 12.6 − 2.3 + 0.1 + 8.6
         July − 0.1 − 16.5 − 19.1 − 20.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 12.3 − 7.5 − 9.0 + 1.5 − 0.3 − 4.6
         Aug + 0.0 − 13.2 − 12.8 − 15.3 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 13.0 − 6.1 − 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 7.3         Sep + 0.0 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 19.1 + 10.6 + 10.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 8.5
         Oct − 0.0 − 14.4 − 17.0 − 18.8 + 1.8 − 0.4 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 4.2
         Nov − 0.0 + 12.5 + 12.1 + 14.3 − 2.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 13.3 + 12.9 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.0         Dec − 0.0 + 11.7 + 9.9 + 7.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 6.0 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.8
2004          Jan + 0.0 + 16.3 + 14.8 + 14.0 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 5.3 + 6.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 2.9
         Feb − 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 11.1 + 8.0 + 8.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.5         Mar + 0.0 + 6.1 + 2.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 15.6 + 7.4 + 7.0 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 9.4
         Apr − + 20.3 + 18.4 + 17.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 5.6 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.3
         May + 0.0 + 13.0 + 7.5 + 14.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 + 5.8 − 0.0 − 9.7 − 12.7 − 13.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.0         June + 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 termloans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 termloans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
17.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
15.4 42.7 623.1 112.6 510.5 406.1 104.4 1.0 324.7 35.7 289.1 95.4 193.7 4.4 2003          Jan 
15.4 42.4 616.4 117.7 498.7 392.8 105.9 1.0 330.8 33.2 297.6 107.5 190.1 4.3          Feb 
15.4 43.3 621.7 131.7 490.0 384.4 105.6 1.0 339.8 43.3 296.5 109.2 187.3 4.2          Mar 
15.1 43.2 634.6 141.6 493.0 387.9 105.1 1.0 333.3 39.3 294.0 110.3 183.7 4.0          Apr 
14.7 41.7 620.9 128.0 492.9 386.0 106.9 1.0 332.0 43.6 288.4 109.8 178.7 3.8          May15.1 42.2 622.8 143.1 479.7 372.8 106.9 1.0 324.6 43.8 280.8 99.8 180.9 3.9          June
15.2 43.1 617.2 123.6 493.7 384.1 109.6 0.9 328.0 40.3 287.7 108.5 179.2 3.9          July
15.3 43.1 601.1 108.0 493.1 386.3 106.8 0.3 324.7 39.5 285.2 103.5 181.7 4.7          Aug 15.0 43.7 607.5 144.2 463.3 361.2 102.1 0.3 326.6 40.0 286.6 109.5 177.1 6.8          Sep 
11.7 43.0 597.1 129.1 468.0 360.1 107.9 0.3 332.0 38.2 293.8 116.4 177.5 3.4          Oct 
11.7 41.3 583.1 113.9 469.2 361.3 107.9 0.3 333.5 38.8 294.7 121.6 173.1 3.3          Nov 11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6          Dec 
11.7 40.9 606.8 138.7 468.2 359.1 109.0 0.5 315.6 44.8 270.8 99.6 171.2 3.7 2004          Jan 
12.0 39.7 602.9 122.7 480.2 368.1 112.1 0.5 328.7 55.9 272.8 104.6 168.2 3.4          Feb 
9.5 39.8 640.2 136.3 503.8 389.4 114.4 0.5 326.2 61.8 264.4 103.0 161.4 0.9          Mar 9.6 39.3 646.0 127.7 518.3 403.7 114.6 0.5 323.8 56.9 266.8 106.6 160.2 0.9          Apr 
9.6 39.4 616.9 114.2 502.7 389.0 113.8 0.5 325.2 62.9 262.4 102.3 160.0 0.9          May9.6 38.9 603.7 129.4 474.4 360.2 114.2 0.5 310.2 60.6 249.6 90.0 159.7 0.9          June
Changes *
− 0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 − 1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 − 0.9 1995− 2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 − 1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 − 2.0 1996+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
− 0.2 − 1.7 + 14.4 + 11.7 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 2.5 + 6.6 + 9.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 2003          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 0.3 − 6.7 + 5.4 − 12.0 − 13.5 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 9.2 + 12.2 − 3.1 − 0.1          Feb 
− 0.1 + 1.0 + 7.4 + 14.3 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 1.9 − 0.1          Mar 
− 0.3 + 0.1 + 17.1 + 10.6 + 6.5 + 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 1.8 − 1.9 − 0.3          Apr 
− 0.4 − 0.7 − 4.3 − 11.8 + 7.5 + 4.2 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.2          May+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 14.1 − 17.1 − 16.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 10.9 + 0.0 − 10.9 − 10.6 − 0.3 + 0.2          June
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 6.9 − 19.8 + 12.8 + 10.4 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 3.6 + 6.4 + 8.5 − 2.1 − 0.0          July
+ 0.2 − 0.5 − 22.3 − 16.7 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 1.1 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.2 + 0.1          Aug − 0.3 + 1.2 + 16.1 + 37.6 − 21.5 − 18.4 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 7.8 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 7.5 − 0.8 + 2.1          Sep 
+ 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.8 − 15.4 + 3.6 − 1.5 + 5.1 − + 1.4 − 1.8 + 3.2 + 6.7 − 3.6 + 0.0          Oct 
− 0.0 − 1.3 − 9.2 − 14.2 + 5.1 + 4.0 + 1.0 − + 4.9 + 0.9 + 4.0 + 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.1          Nov − 0.1 + 0.6 + 14.9 − 17.7 + 32.6 + 31.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 − 21.2 − 6.2 − 15.0 − 17.7 + 2.7 + 0.3          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 12.9 + 43.2 − 30.2 − 30.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 5.8 + 12.5 − 6.7 − 3.5 − 3.2 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 15.9 + 12.7 + 9.4 + 3.2 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 11.1 + 2.2 + 5.1 − 2.9 − 0.3          Feb 
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.7 + 13.1 + 17.6 + 19.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 5.8 − 7.3 − 2.2 − 5.1 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 − 0.6 + 3.8 − 9.1 + 12.8 + 13.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 5.1 + 1.3 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 26.7 − 13.1 − 13.6 − 13.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 − 3.3 − 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0          May+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 13.5 + 15.2 − 28.7 − 29.1 + 0.3 − − 15.1 − 2.3 − 12.8 − 12.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          June
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). — 5Up capital supplied to branches abroad. — 8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 9Up to December 1998,
registered debt securities. — 6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). — 7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2003          Jan 3,005.1 2,690.8 371.1 329.7 328.5 1.2 41.4 38.6 2.8 2,634.0 2,076.5
         Feb 3,001.9 2,686.4 364.4 329.3 328.1 1.2 35.1 32.7 2.4 2,637.4 2,077.5         Mar 3,005.5 2,681.3 369.2 332.5 330.4 2.2 36.7 34.0 2.7 2,636.3 2,071.6
         Apr 3,007.6 2,680.2 366.3 326.5 324.2 2.2 39.8 37.0 2.8 2,641.3 2,079.0
         May 3,003.6 2,671.7 356.2 321.4 319.1 2.3 34.7 32.6 2.2 2,647.4 2,080.5         June 2,992.4 2,674.1 359.6 328.9 326.9 2.0 30.7 28.8 1.9 2,632.8 2,077.4
         July 2,996.0 2,675.8 357.5 315.5 314.2 1.3 42.0 39.8 2.2 2,638.6 2,081.8
         Aug 2,986.9 2,671.9 346.7 308.2 306.8 1.4 38.5 36.5 2.0 2,640.2 2,090.5         Sep 2,995.7 2,680.2 356.7 323.8 322.9 0.9 32.9 31.7 1.2 2,639.0 2,088.3
         Oct 2,992.9 2,679.3 353.7 317.2 316.1 1.0 36.6 34.5 2.1 2,639.1 2,087.7
         Nov 3,012.2 2,689.2 360.7 317.5 316.6 0.9 43.2 40.6 2.6 2,651.5 2,097.0         Dec 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004          Jan 2,992.0 2,670.5 346.6 305.7 304.4 1.3 41.0 39.6 1.4 2,645.3 2,097.7
         Feb 2,994.8 2,662.2 339.5 306.0 304.8 1.1 33.6 32.2 1.3 2,655.2 2,091.2         Mar 3,015.7 2,673.6 353.0 306.8 305.9 0.8 46.3 45.0 1.3 2,662.7 2,098.5
         Apr 3,022.9 2,667.5 346.1 304.0 303.3 0.7 42.2 39.9 2.3 2,676.8 2,116.1
         May 3,013.6 2,661.0 335.4 297.1 296.2 0.9 38.3 36.3 2.0 2,678.2 2,113.0         June 3,003.5 2,655.4 331.5 294.9 294.2 0.7 36.7 33.8 2.9 2,672.0 2,102.1
Changes *
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 276.9 + 185.11996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 282.5 + 219.91998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.31999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2003          Jan + 7.9 + 1.7 + 5.7 − 2.2 − 2.4 + 0.2 + 7.9 + 7.5 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 3.6
         Feb − 3.3 − 4.4 − 6.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 6.3 − 5.9 − 0.4 + 3.5 + 1.0         Mar + 3.7 − 5.1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 5.9
         Apr + 2.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 − 6.0 − 6.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.2
         May − 3.8 − 8.5 − 10.1 − 5.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 0.6 + 6.3 + 1.8         June − 11.1 + 2.5 + 3.4 + 7.5 + 7.8 − 0.3 − 4.1 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 14.6 − 3.1
         July + 3.8 + 1.7 − 1.9 − 13.2 − 12.7 − 0.5 + 11.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 5.7 + 4.3
         Aug − 9.1 − 4.0 − 10.7 − 7.3 − 7.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 8.7         Sep + 9.6 + 8.3 + 10.0 + 15.6 + 16.1 − 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 2.2
         Oct − 2.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.6
         Nov + 19.3 + 9.9 + 6.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 12.4 + 9.3         Dec − 16.1 − 8.6 − 5.4 − 2.4 − 3.2 + 0.8 − 3.0 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 10.7 − 0.9
2004          Jan − 3.7 − 10.1 − 8.6 − 9.4 − 9.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.0 + 1.7
         Feb + 2.8 − 8.3 − 7.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 − 6.5         Mar + 20.9 + 11.4 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 12.7 + 12.8 − 0.1 + 7.1 + 7.1
         Apr + 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.0 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 + 0.9 + 14.3 + 17.6
         May − 9.4 − 6.5 − 10.4 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 3.4         June − 10.1 − 5.6 − 3.7 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 + 0.9 − 6.4 − 11.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection fromthe banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5FromDecem ber 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,6 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
2,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,909.4 194.8 1,714.6 167.1 47.0 557.4 414.2 30.0 384.2 140.3 3.0 7.7 2003          Jan 
1,911.1 194.0 1,717.1 166.5 47.1 559.9 414.4 31.5 382.9 142.5 3.0 7.7          Feb 
1,907.1 193.1 1,714.0 164.5 47.2 564.6 409.8 29.9 379.8 151.9 3.0 7.6          Mar 
1,910.3 193.3 1,717.0 168.6 47.0 562.4 408.6 30.9 377.6 150.8 3.0 7.5          Apr 
1,912.9 193.2 1,719.7 167.6 47.0 566.9 407.1 31.5 375.5 156.9 3.0 7.5          May1,912.8 193.5 1,719.3 164.6 47.0 555.4 405.7 31.5 374.2 146.8 3.0 7.4          June
1,916.9 193.9 1,723.0 164.9 46.9 556.8 404.9 31.3 373.6 149.8 2.0 7.3          July
1,924.6 195.5 1,729.1 165.9 47.3 549.7 403.9 32.9 371.1 143.7 2.0 7.2          Aug 1,922.2 195.0 1,727.2 166.1 47.2 550.6 403.3 33.7 369.6 145.3 2.0 7.2          Sep 
1,926.8 195.7 1,731.1 160.9 46.8 551.4 402.0 32.5 369.4 147.5 2.0 7.2          Oct 
1,930.3 195.9 1,734.3 166.7 47.0 554.5 401.7 33.1 368.6 150.8 2.0 7.1          Nov 1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0          Dec 
1,926.0 195.0 1,731.0 171.7 50.1 547.6 400.5 33.9 366.5 145.1 2.0 7.1 2004          Jan 
1,925.4 194.3 1,731.1 165.8 49.6 564.1 399.8 34.8 365.0 162.3 2.0 7.0          Feb 
1,922.9 193.9 1,729.1 175.6 47.9 564.1 399.7 35.4 364.4 162.4 2.0 7.0          Mar 
1,927.1 194.7 1,732.5 189.0 47.4 560.7 397.2 34.9 362.3 161.5 2.0 7.0          Apr 
1,933.6 197.1 1,736.4 179.5 47.4 565.1 394.9 34.6 360.3 168.3 2.0 6.9          May1,935.2 198.2 1,737.0 166.9 48.1 569.9 392.3 34.4 357.9 175.7 2.0 6.8          June
Changes *
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 − 18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
− 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 0.2 + 5.8 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.3 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 2003          Jan 
+ 1.7 − 0.7 + 2.4 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0          Feb 
− 4.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 − 4.6 − 1.5 − 3.1 + 9.4 + 0.0 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 3.2 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 4.0 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 2.6 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 6.1 − − 0.0          May− 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          June
+ 4.1 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.1          July
+ 7.8 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 1.5 − 2.5 − 6.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          Aug − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.5 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 4.5 + 0.7 + 3.8 − 5.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 3.3 − − 0.0          Nov − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 9.7 − 0.7 + 1.5 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.1          Dec 
− 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
− 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 0.5 + 16.4 − 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 17.1 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.7 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 9.8 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 13.4 − 0.5 − 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.1 + 2.5 + 3.7 − 9.5 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 6.8 − − 0.0          May+ 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 12.6 + 0.8 + 4.8 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 7.4 − − 0.2          June
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. — 6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. — 9From
1999, breakdown of securities by m ediumand long-termlending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). — 10Excluding
possible. — 7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from1999, m ore than one year up to footnote 11). — 11Including debt securities arising fromthe exchange of
and including five years. — 8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2001 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2003          June 2,240.1 1,011.4 1,070.5 782.5 288.0 1,267.1 338.0 157.8 37.0 62.9 156.9 32.5 52.2 48.7
         Sep 2,245.6 1,106.2 1,077.5 845.7 231.8 1,262.1 338.1 154.4 36.2 61.7 153.3 32.9 53.6 53.9         Dec 2,241.6 1,124.5 1,083.3 867.1 216.2 1,252.2 335.1 151.0 37.2 59.0 152.3 32.1 54.4 54.4
2004          Mar 2,229.2 1,124.8 1,075.2 861.7 213.5 1,242.1 329.3 149.3 37.7 58.4 148.6 31.9 56.3 57.5
         June 2,229.7 1,125.6 1,081.5 865.7 215.9 1,235.2 329.0 145.9 37.8 57.5 147.0 32.3 57.6 53.8
 Short-term lending
2001 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.22002 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2003          June 327.3 − 14.4 − 14.4 278.8 9.3 51.1 4.5 15.9 56.5 4.7 7.9 22.3
         Sep 323.3 − 14.0 − 14.0 274.7 8.7 48.7 4.0 15.1 54.6 4.7 7.8 26.3         Dec 313.9 − 14.1 − 14.1 266.7 8.9 46.6 4.2 13.2 55.9 3.9 8.0 25.8
2004          Mar 306.3 − 13.2 − 13.2 261.4 8.0 47.0 4.0 13.5 53.8 4.1 8.6 27.6
         June 294.6 − 12.4 − 12.4 250.0 7.4 44.8 4.1 13.1 52.8 4.4 6.9 24.0
 Medium-term lending
2001 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.72002 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2003          June 193.5 − 37.4 − 37.4 121.0 11.9 17.6 2.5 6.0 12.7 3.4 9.9 6.4
         Sep 195.0 − 38.0 − 38.0 121.4 12.0 17.6 2.2 6.1 12.6 3.4 10.5 6.4         Dec 195.0 − 38.2 − 38.2 121.2 12.0 17.5 2.3 6.0 11.9 3.4 10.9 6.5
2004          Mar 193.9 − 37.2 − 37.2 121.0 11.5 17.2 3.0 5.8 11.6 3.3 11.3 6.9
         June 198.2 − 38.7 − 38.7 124.0 12.2 17.4 3.0 5.9 11.8 3.3 11.6 7.2
 Long-term lending
2001 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.12002 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2003          June 1,719.3 1,011.4 1,018.7 782.5 236.2 867.2 316.7 89.1 30.0 41.0 87.6 24.4 34.4 20.1
         Sep 1,727.2 1,106.2 1,025.5 845.7 179.8 866.1 317.4 88.1 30.0 40.6 86.1 24.7 35.2 21.2         Dec 1,732.8 1,124.5 1,031.0 867.1 164.0 864.3 314.2 86.9 30.6 39.9 84.5 24.7 35.5 22.1
2004          Mar 1,729.0 1,124.8 1,024.8 861.7 163.0 859.7 309.8 85.0 30.6 39.1 83.3 24.5 36.4 23.0
         June 1,737.0 1,125.6 1,030.4 865.7 164.8 861.2 309.4 83.6 30.8 38.5 82.4 24.6 39.1 22.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2003          Q2 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 5.8 + 2.7 + 3.1 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.0 − 1.6         Q3 + 5.4 + 4.5 + 7.9 + 5.8 + 2.1 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 1.1 − 3.4 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 5.1         Q4 − 4.0 + 1.7 + 5.0 + 4.5 + 0.5 − 9.9 − 2.6 − 3.4 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.5
2004          Q1 − 12.4 − 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.9
         Q2 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 5.2 + 2.0 + 3.2 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 3.6
 Short-term lending
2003          Q2 − 3.4 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 − 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.0         Q3 − 4.0 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.9         Q4 − 9.5 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.9 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6
2004          Q1 − 7.3 − − 0.9 − − 0.9 − 5.1 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.0
         Q2 − 11.3 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 − 10.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.5
 Medium-term lending
2003          Q2 + 0.4 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1         Q3 + 1.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1         Q4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
2004          Q1 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0
         Q2 + 4.2 − + 1.5 − + 1.5 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
 Long-term lending
2003          Q2 + 5.3 + 0.7 + 4.6 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3         Q3 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 7.8 + 5.8 + 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.1         Q4 + 5.5 + 1.7 + 4.7 + 4.5 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 2.7 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0
2004          Q1 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 4.1 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
         Q2 + 7.6 + 1.8 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 2.6 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are 1Excluding loans on a trust basis. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001
729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5 2002
719.1 163.2 48.5 206.8 444.5 71.9 958.8 729.1 229.8 114.2 22.7 14.2 3.5 2003          June
716.1 162.3 48.6 205.7 441.8 70.2 969.6 735.9 233.7 116.1 23.2 13.8 3.5          Sep 
711.9 160.7 44.0 207.2 437.0 67.7 975.6 744.7 230.9 118.6 21.6 13.7 3.5          Dec 
702.5 158.7 43.6 206.2 429.5 66.5 973.4 742.6 230.9 119.1 20.1 13.7 3.3 2004          Mar 
703.2 165.6 45.3 200.7 428.4 66.2 981.2 749.2 232.0 120.9 20.1 13.3 3.3          June
Short-term lending
130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001
123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0 2002
115.9 18.7 17.9 33.6 51.8 15.0 46.8 5.0 41.7 2.3 22.7 1.7 0.0 2003          June
113.5 17.9 18.3 32.1 50.6 14.4 47.2 5.2 42.0 2.3 23.2 1.4 0.0          Sep 
109.1 17.9 14.6 31.2 49.4 12.9 45.9 5.1 40.8 2.4 21.6 1.2 0.0          Dec 
102.7 17.2 14.2 29.4 47.2 13.0 43.5 5.2 38.4 2.2 20.1 1.4 0.0 2004          Mar 
99.9 17.2 14.9 27.4 46.5 12.7 43.5 5.0 38.5 2.3 20.1 1.1 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1 2002
62.5 6.1 6.3 17.6 31.0 4.7 72.0 25.4 46.6 36.4 − 0.5 0.1 2003          June
62.5 5.9 6.0 17.7 30.8 4.6 73.1 26.0 47.2 37.3 − 0.5 0.1          Sep 
62.7 5.7 5.6 18.0 30.4 4.5 73.2 26.2 47.0 37.1 − 0.6 0.1          Dec 
61.9 5.5 5.8 18.1 29.6 4.2 72.3 25.6 46.7 37.3 − 0.6 0.1 2004          Mar 
63.7 6.8 6.4 17.5 30.0 4.1 73.7 26.5 47.2 38.1 − 0.5 0.1          June
Long-term lending
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4 2002
540.7 138.4 24.3 155.6 361.8 52.2 840.1 698.6 141.5 75.5 − 12.0 3.4 2003          June
540.1 138.4 24.2 155.9 360.4 51.2 849.2 704.7 144.5 76.5 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
540.0 137.1 23.8 158.0 357.2 50.4 856.5 713.4 143.1 79.1 − 11.9 3.4          Dec 
537.9 136.0 23.6 158.6 352.7 49.3 857.6 711.8 145.8 79.6 − 11.7 3.2 2004          Mar 
539.6 141.5 24.0 155.8 352.0 49.3 864.1 717.8 146.3 80.6 − 11.7 3.2          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.2 − 1.0 + 8.4 + 6.9 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 2003          Q2
− 3.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 10.8 + 8.8 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0          Q3
− 4.2 − 0.5 − 4.6 + 0.4 − 4.8 − 1.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 8.8 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 6.6 − 1.2 − 3.1 + 0.6 − 3.7 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Q1
+ 0.5 + 2.4 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 7.4 + 5.8 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
− 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 2003          Q2
− 2.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Q3
− 4.4 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 2004          Q1
− 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
− 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q2
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
+ 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2004          Q1
+ 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.8 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 7.1 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2003          Q2
− 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 9.2 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 7.3 + 7.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − 0.2 2004          Q1
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
the maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer   
goods. — 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and   
housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.  
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.52003 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.3
2003          July 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 246.4 582.6 8.0 574.6 576.8 100.9 41.7 29.8 7.1
         Aug 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 248.0 586.5 8.0 578.5 578.0 100.4 41.7 30.1 6.1         Sep 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 240.3 585.1 7.9 577.2 578.3 99.9 41.5 30.1 11.6
         Oct 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 238.7 585.7 8.0 577.7 579.4 100.0 40.7 30.4 14.5
         Nov 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 237.5 586.5 8.3 578.2 580.3 100.1 40.7 30.5 12.7         Dec 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.3
2004          Jan 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 225.0 589.3 8.3 581.0 590.6 100.3 40.3 30.7 9.8
         Feb 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 223.4 591.4 8.3 583.1 591.5 100.1 40.5 30.8 10.4         Mar 2,145.8 635.3 819.2 225.3 594.0 8.6 585.4 591.4 99.8 39.3 31.2 10.9
         Apr 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 220.8 598.8 8.5 590.3 591.2 99.2 39.0 31.3 10.6
         May 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 227.9 602.3 8.4 593.9 590.6 98.9 39.0 31.3 11.4         June 2,158.3 643.4 826.2 220.4 605.8 8.2 597.5 590.0 98.7 38.8 31.4 9.9
Changes *
2002 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 − 10.2 + 14.3 − 1.5 + 15.8 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 1.62003 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 − 20.3 + 15.6 − 0.5 + 16.1 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 + 2.0 + 7.8
2003          July − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.7 + 5.8 − 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.6 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0         Sep + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 − 7.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 − 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Nov + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.8         Dec + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 10.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 − 12.9 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7         Mar + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Apr + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 4.4 + 4.8 − 0.1 + 4.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 + 7.1 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 3.5 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 7.1 + 3.5 − 0.2 + 3.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.5
Domestic government End of year or month *
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −2003 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −
2003          July 109.0 14.5 90.9 31.5 59.4 0.5 58.9 1.9 1.7 36.2 1.1 −
         Aug 107.7 14.7 89.2 30.8 58.4 0.5 57.9 2.0 1.7 36.1 1.1 −         Sep 105.0 15.4 85.9 28.7 57.2 0.5 56.7 2.0 1.7 36.0 1.1 −
         Oct 101.6 15.2 82.7 25.7 57.0 0.5 56.5 2.0 1.7 35.8 1.1 −
         Nov 104.1 15.8 84.6 27.0 57.7 0.5 57.2 2.0 1.7 35.8 1.1 −         Dec 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −
2004          Jan 106.3 16.1 86.6 29.8 56.8 0.5 56.3 2.0 1.7 34.8 1.2 −
         Feb 107.4 16.6 87.2 30.0 57.1 0.5 56.7 2.1 1.6 34.8 1.2 −         Mar 106.4 17.6 85.0 28.6 56.4 0.9 55.6 2.2 1.6 33.5 1.0 −
         Apr 105.8 17.3 84.7 28.6 56.2 0.9 55.3 2.2 1.6 33.3 1.1 −
         May 108.9 18.5 86.6 30.6 56.0 0.9 55.0 2.2 1.6 33.2 1.0 −         June 111.4 20.0 87.5 32.1 55.4 0.9 54.5 2.2 1.6 33.1 1.1 −
Changes *
2002 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 8.7 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 −2003 − 4.8 + 1.2 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 −
2003          July − 5.4 − 3.7 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −         Sep − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Oct − 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Nov + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 − + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Dec + 4.0 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.0 −
2004          Jan − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −         Mar − 1.0 + 1.0 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.1 −
         Apr − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         May + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −         June + 2.6 + 1.6 + 1.0 + 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.52003 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
2003          July 1,993.3 581.2 738.1 214.9 523.2 7.5 515.7 574.8 99.2 5.5 28.7 7.1
         Aug 2,003.8 583.8 745.3 217.2 528.1 7.5 520.6 576.0 98.7 5.5 28.9 6.1         Sep 2,007.3 593.4 739.5 211.6 527.9 7.4 520.5 576.2 98.1 5.5 29.0 11.6
         Oct 2,013.1 595.7 741.8 213.0 528.7 7.5 521.2 577.4 98.3 5.0 29.2 14.5
         Nov 2,034.5 618.3 739.4 210.6 528.8 7.8 521.0 578.3 98.4 4.9 29.4 12.7         Dec 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
2004          Jan 2,031.1 616.1 727.7 195.2 532.6 7.8 524.7 588.6 98.7 5.6 29.6 9.8
         Feb 2,034.3 618.8 727.6 193.4 534.3 7.8 526.4 589.4 98.5 5.7 29.6 10.4         Mar 2,039.3 617.7 734.2 196.7 537.6 7.7 529.8 589.2 98.2 5.8 30.1 10.9
         Apr 2,048.2 626.8 734.9 192.3 542.7 7.6 535.0 589.0 97.5 5.8 30.2 10.6
         May 2,053.5 624.2 743.6 197.3 546.3 7.5 538.8 588.3 97.3 5.8 30.2 11.4         June 2,046.8 623.4 738.7 188.3 550.4 7.4 543.0 587.7 97.1 5.7 30.4 9.9
Changes *
2002 + 60.3 + 47.9 + 12.8 − 3.6 + 16.4 − 1.2 + 17.5 + 1.0 − 1.4 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 1.62003 + 58.7 + 47.2 + 1.0 − 18.7 + 19.7 − 0.1 + 19.8 + 15.1 − 4.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 7.8
2003          July − 1.7 − 9.6 + 8.2 + 1.8 + 6.5 − 0.0 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 9.6 + 2.6 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.0         Sep + 3.5 + 9.6 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 5.9 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Nov + 21.2 + 22.6 − 2.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.8         Dec − 2.3 − 12.1 − 0.3 − 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 10.0 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 1.1 + 9.9 − 11.4 − 13.6 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 3.2 + 3.6 − 1.0 − 2.7 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7         Mar + 5.0 − 1.1 + 6.6 + 3.3 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5
         Apr + 9.1 + 9.0 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 5.0 − 0.1 + 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 5.3 − 2.6 + 8.7 + 5.0 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 6.7 − 1.2 − 4.6 − 8.7 + 4.1 − 0.1 + 4.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.12002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.52003 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.3
2003          July 711.2 192.4 491.5 99.5 392.1 1.5 390.6 4.8 22.5 5.3 17.2 7.1
         Aug 716.9 189.6 500.0 103.2 396.8 1.5 395.2 4.8 22.4 5.3 17.4 6.1         Sep 723.7 200.7 495.9 99.7 396.2 1.5 394.7 4.8 22.3 5.3 17.4 11.6
         Oct 727.9 201.0 500.0 103.2 396.8 1.5 395.3 4.8 22.1 4.7 17.4 14.5
         Nov 733.5 206.0 500.7 102.8 397.9 1.7 396.2 4.7 22.0 4.7 17.4 12.7         Dec 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.3
2004          Jan 726.6 211.6 488.2 90.4 397.9 1.8 396.1 4.9 21.9 5.3 17.4 9.8
         Feb 723.7 207.6 489.3 90.0 399.3 1.8 397.5 5.1 21.7 5.4 17.4 10.4         Mar 730.9 207.4 496.5 94.6 401.9 1.9 400.0 5.1 21.8 5.5 17.8 10.9
         Apr 740.0 213.5 499.5 92.7 406.8 2.0 404.9 5.2 21.8 5.5 17.8 10.6
         May 741.6 205.6 509.0 98.2 410.8 1.9 408.9 5.3 21.8 5.5 17.8 11.4         June 737.6 204.6 506.2 91.6 414.5 1.9 412.7 5.1 21.7 5.5 18.0 9.9
Changes *
2002 + 31.1 + 13.4 + 18.3 + 7.4 + 10.9 − 1.3 + 12.2 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 1.6 − 1.62003 + 29.6 + 11.2 + 17.9 + 2.9 + 15.0 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 7.8
2003          July + 0.8 − 9.5 + 10.1 + 3.5 + 6.6 + 0.1 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 4.8 − 2.8 + 7.6 + 3.7 + 3.9 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0         Sep + 6.8 + 11.1 − 4.1 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 4.3 + 0.3 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.9
         Nov + 5.4 + 5.0 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.8         Dec − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 4.2 + 5.8 − 9.9 − 11.7 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Feb − 2.9 − 3.1 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.7         Mar + 7.1 − 0.2 + 7.2 + 4.6 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Apr + 9.5 + 6.1 + 3.0 − 1.9 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 1.6 − 7.9 + 9.4 + 5.5 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 4.1 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 6.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
liabilities arising fromregistered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.2
2002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.62003 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.4
2004          Jan 1,304.6 404.5 392.1 68.6 265.8 57.7 12.5 239.5 221.5 29.1 174.3 18.0
         Feb 1,310.6 411.2 398.3 69.3 269.9 59.1 12.9 238.3 220.6 28.8 173.7 18.1         Mar 1,308.5 410.3 397.0 67.5 270.8 58.6 13.3 237.8 219.8 28.2 173.7 17.9
         Apr 1,308.1 413.3 400.2 69.4 272.9 58.0 13.0 235.4 218.0 27.5 172.8 17.6
         May 1,311.9 418.6 405.9 69.4 278.2 58.4 12.7 234.7 216.8 26.7 172.6 17.5         June 1,309.3 418.8 405.2 68.0 279.2 58.0 13.5 232.5 214.8 26.2 171.6 17.0
Changes *
2002 + 29.2 + 34.5 + 33.1 + 5.6 + 22.4 + 5.1 + 1.5 − 5.5 − 4.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 2.12003 + 29.2 + 36.0 + 35.3 + 5.6 + 23.7 + 6.0 + 0.6 − 16.9 − 16.2 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 4.2
2004          Jan + 3.2 + 4.1 + 4.0 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Feb + 6.0 + 6.7 + 6.2 + 0.6 + 4.1 + 1.5 + 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1         Mar − 2.1 − 0.9 − 1.4 − 1.7 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Apr − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.3 + 1.9 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.3
         May + 3.7 + 5.4 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.1         June − 2.6 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising fromregistered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.2
2002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.62003 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 21.9
2004          Jan 106.3 45.2 1.8 6.3 37.1 0.0 12.6 19.6 3.7 2.7 13.2 0.1 21.9
         Feb 107.4 45.8 1.6 6.8 37.3 0.0 12.7 19.6 3.3 3.1 13.2 0.1 21.8         Mar 106.4 46.2 2.5 7.0 36.7 0.0 12.4 19.6 3.6 2.9 13.0 0.1 20.9
         Apr 105.8 46.2 2.5 7.2 36.5 0.0 12.6 19.6 3.5 3.0 13.0 0.1 20.4
         May 108.9 45.8 2.7 6.6 36.4 0.0 12.6 18.4 2.5 2.7 13.1 0.0 20.3         June 111.4 47.1 2.8 8.2 36.0 0.0 12.6 21.2 4.8 3.4 12.9 0.1 20.2
Changes *
2002 − 8.6 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.62003 − 4.8 − 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.7
2004          Jan − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb + 1.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0         Mar − 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.0
         Apr − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5
         May + 3.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1         June + 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche TelekomAG, and of publicly-owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 − 2001
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 − 200218.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 − 2003
18.1 104.8 134.7 6.1 128.6 583.7 574.4 9.2 76.8 0.2 12.1 − 2004          Jan 
17.8 103.4 134.9 6.0 129.0 584.3 575.0 9.4 76.7 0.2 12.2 −          Feb 
18.0 102.1 135.7 5.9 129.8 584.1 574.7 9.4 76.3 0.2 12.4 −          Mar 
17.4 99.6 135.8 5.6 130.2 583.8 574.3 9.5 75.7 0.2 12.4 −          Apr 
17.8 99.1 135.5 5.6 129.9 583.1 573.6 9.5 75.5 0.2 12.4 −          May17.7 96.6 135.8 5.5 130.4 582.6 573.2 9.5 75.4 0.2 12.4 −          June
Changes *
− 1.3 − 10.9 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2002− 0.7 − 21.6 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 14.7 + 14.4 + 0.3 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2003
− 0.8 − 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2004          Jan 
− 0.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          Feb 
+ 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 −          Mar 
− 0.6 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          May− 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
 
   
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
27.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 2001
27.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 200224.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0 2003
22.2 8.2 9.2 2.0 2.8 0.2 19.3 2.4 11.7 4.5 0.8 0.0 2004          Jan 
23.8 9.2 9.8 2.0 2.9 0.2 18.2 2.5 10.2 4.7 0.8 0.0          Feb 
23.0 8.5 9.6 2.0 2.9 0.2 17.6 3.0 9.1 4.7 0.9 0.0          Mar 
22.8 8.8 9.1 2.0 2.9 0.2 17.2 2.5 9.3 4.6 0.9 0.0          Apr 
24.8 10.2 9.7 2.0 2.9 0.2 19.9 3.0 11.5 4.5 0.9 0.0          May23.8 9.4 9.6 2.0 2.9 0.3 19.3 3.0 10.9 4.5 0.9 0.0          June
Changes *
+ 0.0 + 1.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 2002− 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 2003
− 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2004          Jan 
+ 1.6 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Feb 
− 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.6 + 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 2.0 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          May− 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0          June
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, ”German Unity” Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.82002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.92003 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 16.0 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.0
2004          Feb 601.4 591.5 503.3 381.4 88.1 76.1 10.0 7.9 0.4 107.1 100.1 84.4 7.0
         Mar 601.3 591.4 503.5 382.2 88.0 76.3 9.9 7.8 0.3 106.8 99.8 84.5 7.0
         Apr 601.0 591.2 504.4 383.5 86.8 75.0 9.9 7.8 0.3 106.0 99.2 84.7 6.9
         May 600.4 590.6 504.6 384.3 86.0 74.2 9.8 7.8 0.3 105.7 98.9 84.8 6.8         June 599.7 590.0 504.3 385.2 85.6 73.8 9.7 7.8 0.3 105.4 98.7 84.9 6.8
Changes *
2002 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 11.0 + 16.4 − 10.2 − 8.7 − 1.1 − 0.7 . − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.12003 + 14.2 + 15.1 + 28.0 + 23.8 − 12.9 − 12.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 . − 4.6 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.1
2004          Feb + 0.8 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0
         Mar − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Apr − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1
         May − 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1         June − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate ofprovisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.42002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.32003 1,490.1 353.4 20.8 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.2
2004          Feb 1,508.0 357.0 22.1 184.2 33.1 64.3 108.3 1,335.4 2.2 0.5 0.5 1.2 40.5 3.2
         Mar 1,535.3 370.8 22.1 198.6 36.9 68.3 110.9 1,356.0 2.5 0.8 0.5 1.3 41.0 3.3
         Apr 1,553.0 376.8 21.5 206.5 36.5 69.6 111.2 1,372.2 2.3 0.4 0.5 1.4 40.9 3.3
         May 1,565.4 383.4 20.1 208.0 36.5 67.6 111.8 1,386.1 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.4 40.7 3.3         June 1,560.4 374.6 20.8 210.6 40.0 71.3 100.3 1,388.8 2.4 0.5 0.4 1.5 41.0 3.3
Changes *
2002 + 9.1 + 6.3 − 4.5 + 12.1 + 16.2 + 14.2 + 4.6 − 9.7 + 4.8 + 4.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.12003 + 19.6 + 7.0 + 4.7 + 13.2 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 14.9 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.3
2004          Feb + 10.8 + 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 4.2 − 5.4 + 5.6 + 10.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0
         Mar + 24.8 + 13.7 + 0.0 + 11.8 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 2.6 + 18.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1
         Apr + 17.7 + 6.1 − 0.6 + 7.9 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 16.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0
         May + 12.4 + 6.6 − 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 2.0 + 0.5 + 13.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0         June − 5.1 − 8.8 + 0.7 + 2.5 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 11.5 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. — 3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. — 4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. — 5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. — 6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interimand savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2003 27 172.9 30.1 0.1 10.6 37.3 63.6 8.6 11.3 0.4 29.3 106.8 4.0 7.1 7.2 105.5
2004          Apr 27 175.3 30.9 0.1 11.9 36.5 64.4 8.8 12.4 0.4 30.1 108.5 4.1 7.3 7.3 8.2
         May 27 175.3 30.7 0.1 11.9 36.1 64.8 8.8 12.5 0.4 29.6 108.7 4.0 7.2 7.3 7.0         Jun 27 176.0 31.0 0.1 11.8 36.0 64.5 9.0 12.5 0.4 29.3 108.8 4.2 7.0 7.4 7.6
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Apr 16 126.5 24.2 0.0 6.2 23.4 46.7 8.0 8.5 0.3 22.0 73.7 4.0 7.3 4.7 5.3         May 16 126.5 24.1 0.0 6.2 23.1 47.0 8.0 8.5 0.3 21.8 73.8 3.9 7.2 4.7 4.4         Jun 16 127.4 24.7 0.0 5.9 23.0 46.6 8.2 8.4 0.3 21.5 74.0 4.0 7.0 4.7 4.9
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Apr 11 48.8 6.8 0.1 5.7 13.1 17.8 0.8 3.9 0.1 8.1 34.8 0.2 − 2.6 2.9         May 11 48.8 6.7 0.1 5.7 13.0 17.8 0.8 4.0 0.1 7.9 34.9 0.2 − 2.6 2.6         Jun 11 48.6 6.3 0.1 5.9 13.0 17.9 0.8 4.0 0.1 7.7 34.8 0.2 − 2.6 2.7
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interiminterim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2003 27.0 2.9 5.7 48.2 29.7 43.7 17.9 4.0 8.2 3.2 17.5 12.2 8.0 14.8 11.9 0.6
2004          Apr 2.5 0.0 0.5 4.7 3.3 4.0 1.8 0.5 0.9 0.5 1.3 12.0 8.2 1.1 0.1
         May 2.0 0.0 0.4 3.6 2.2 3.2 1.4 0.3 0.6 0.2 1.2 11.8 8.1 1.1 0.1         Jun 2.1 0.0 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.7 1.5 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.5 12.0 8.0 1.1 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Apr 1.6 0.0 0.3 3.4 2.3 3.0 1.3 0.4 0.6 0.4 1.1 7.3 4.1 0.8 0.0         May 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.5 1.3 2.3 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.0 7.2 4.0 0.7 0.0         Jun 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.5 2.6 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.2 7.3 4.0 0.8 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Apr 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.4 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.7 4.1 0.4 0.0         May 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.2 4.6 4.1 0.3 0.0         Jun 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.7 4.1 0.4 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sumcontracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interimand bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.92002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.02003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2003          Aug 54 202 1,415.0 627.2 551.3 177.8 373.5 75.8 717.8 504.8 19.5 15.8 485.3 213.0 70.0
         Sep 54 201 1,380.3 634.8 560.8 171.2 389.6 74.0 685.3 484.2 19.1 16.3 465.0 201.2 60.1
         Oct 55 200 1,368.7 621.8 540.7 168.3 372.5 81.1 680.1 476.0 20.0 16.5 456.0 204.1 66.8
         Nov 55 201 1,356.0 618.6 539.3 173.7 365.6 79.2 670.9 471.2 18.3 15.7 452.8 199.7 66.6         Dec 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2004          Jan 55 202 1,390.3 647.7 566.3 191.5 374.8 81.3 673.5 472.8 19.2 16.9 453.6 200.8 69.1
         Feb 55 203 1,413.6 666.3 587.2 190.0 397.2 79.1 679.6 482.5 19.3 17.1 463.1 197.1 67.8         Mar 55 203 1,466.2 689.6 607.6 198.5 409.1 82.0 708.6 506.9 19.0 16.9 487.9 201.7 67.9
         Apr 55 205 1,493.1 713.2 631.2 207.6 423.6 82.0 711.1 509.6 18.8 16.6 490.8 201.5 68.8
         May 55 206 1,435.9 672.9 591.4 199.1 392.3 81.5 691.9 506.0 18.1 16.0 487.9 185.9 71.2
Changes *
2002 − 8 − 11 −139.1 −133.4 −139.9 − 15.4 −124.5 + 6.5 − 3.6 − 9.2 − 1.9 − 2.2 − 7.3 + 5.7 − 2.22003 − 5 − 3 − 6.8 − 45.3 − 17.4 − 12.7 − 4.7 − 27.9 + 22.5 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.7 + 24.9 + 15.9
2003          Aug − 1 − − 37.1 − 30.3 − 24.8 − 14.6 − 10.2 − 5.5 + 3.5 + 4.6 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 4.3 − 1.1 − 10.2
         Sep − − 1 − 9.1 + 15.8 + 17.0 − 6.6 + 23.5 − 1.2 − 18.0 − 9.8 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 9.4 − 8.2 − 6.9
         Oct + 1 − 1 − 13.6 − 13.7 − 20.8 − 3.0 − 17.8 + 7.1 − 6.4 − 8.9 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 9.8 + 2.5 + 6.5
         Nov − + 1 + 10.8 + 4.9 + 6.0 + 5.5 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 3.8 + 4.6 − 1.7 − 0.8 + 6.3 − 0.8 + 2.1         Dec − + 1 − 28.0 − 8.3 − 6.2 + 11.9 − 18.0 − 2.2 − 19.6 − 19.5 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 20.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
2004          Jan − − + 80.6 + 42.7 + 38.0 + 6.0 + 32.1 + 4.7 + 31.7 + 28.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 28.0 + 3.7 + 6.2
         Feb − + 1 + 24.8 + 19.5 + 21.7 − 1.6 + 23.2 − 2.2 + 6.7 + 9.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 9.5 − 3.0 − 1.3         Mar − − + 36.7 + 16.7 + 14.4 + 8.5 + 5.9 + 2.4 + 20.1 + 18.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 18.6 + 1.8 − 0.2
         Apr − + 2 + 19.9 + 21.1 + 21.4 + 9.1 + 12.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.7
         May − + 1 − 44.9 − 36.0 − 35.8 − 8.5 − 27.3 − 0.1 − 13.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 13.7 + 4.0
    
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.02002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.42003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2003          Aug 47 194 666.8 313.5 246.2 126.4 119.8 67.3 284.9 219.6 41.8 38.7 177.8 65.3 68.4
         Sep 47 190 661.6 311.9 248.2 131.2 117.1 63.6 274.6 209.8 40.3 37.4 169.5 64.8 75.1
         Oct 46 187 652.0 308.5 244.4 128.1 116.3 64.1 272.2 206.3 39.3 36.9 167.0 65.9 71.4
         Nov 46 182 649.9 308.4 244.9 128.7 116.3 63.5 270.2 204.5 39.8 37.0 164.7 65.7 71.3         Dec 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2004          Jan 46 177 618.1 295.8 233.1 115.2 117.9 62.7 263.3 199.1 41.6 37.9 157.5 64.2 59.0
         Feb 46 179 621.3 297.2 235.7 114.8 120.9 61.5 260.4 196.5 38.8 37.1 157.7 63.9 63.7         Mar 46 176 650.7 300.5 238.8 111.7 127.1 61.7 270.0 204.6 41.6 38.0 163.0 65.4 80.3
         Apr 46 176 663.2 298.4 236.6 111.1 125.5 61.8 274.8 207.7 40.9 37.8 166.8 67.1 90.1
         May 46 175 629.3 280.2 218.7 106.5 112.1 61.5 275.1 206.6 39.5 37.9 167.1 68.5 74.0
Changes *
2002 + 1 + 0 − 78.3 + 6.7 + 13.3 + 20.0 − 6.7 − 6.6 − 70.0 − 42.0 − 5.2 − 4.8 − 36.8 − 28.1 − 15.0
2003 − 1 − 21 − 32.8 − 14.0 − 10.7 + 1.6 − 12.3 − 3.3 − 11.9 − 14.2 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 9.0 + 2.3 − 6.9
2003          Aug − − 1 − 6.0 − 12.0 − 10.3 − 1.1 − 9.2 − 1.6 + 4.8 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.1
         Sep − − 4 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 4.2 + 4.8 − 0.6 − 2.4 − 6.9 − 6.5 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 5.0 − 0.4 + 7.1
         Oct − 1 − 3 − 10.2 − 3.8 − 4.1 − 3.1 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.6 − 3.6 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.6 + 1.0 − 3.8
         Nov − − 5 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.3         Dec − − 3 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 3.7 − 1.4 + 5.1 − 1.6 + 9.5 + 11.9 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 10.3 − 2.4 − 8.9
2004          Jan − − 2 − 30.7 − 13.1 − 14.4 − 12.1 − 2.3 + 1.4 − 14.9 − 15.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 15.9 + 0.9 − 2.8
         Feb − + 2 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 2.6 − 0.4 + 3.0 − 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 4.7         Mar − − 3 + 26.7 + 1.8 + 2.1 − 3.1 + 5.2 − 0.3 + 8.5 + 7.1 + 2.8 + 0.8 + 4.3 + 1.5 + 16.4
         Apr − − + 10.8 − 3.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.1 + 3.9 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 1.7 + 10.0
         May − − 1 − 32.6 − 17.5 − 17.3 − 4.6 − 12.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 16.0
*FromMarch 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been elim inated fromthe flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarde da s
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-termm arket Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 2001
1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 20021,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 2003
1,165.2 787.6 292.0 495.6 377.6 73.2 68.1 63.1 5.1 4.8 304.4 159.5 24.8 65.6 2003          Aug 
1,143.7 749.9 274.6 475.3 393.8 73.5 68.1 63.3 5.4 5.1 320.3 149.7 24.7 62.2          Sep 1,136.7 739.5 265.4 474.1 397.2 76.4 70.9 66.7 5.5 5.2 320.9 149.0 24.8 58.2          Oct 
1,124.7 738.8 261.6 477.2 385.9 69.5 64.0 60.6 5.5 5.2 316.4 149.4 26.6 55.3          Nov 1,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4          Dec 
1,155.0 765.6 281.4 484.3 389.4 74.0 68.0 64.8 6.0 5.7 315.4 149.9 28.9 56.4 2004          Jan 
1,186.4 790.4 267.1 523.2 396.1 72.4 66.3 62.6 6.1 5.7 323.7 144.6 28.9 53.7          Feb 
1,227.8 808.2 273.9 534.3 419.5 71.8 65.6 62.4 6.1 5.7 347.8 155.4 28.1 55.0          Mar 
1,249.4 822.6 275.2 547.4 426.8 69.1 62.9 58.7 6.3 5.9 357.7 157.4 28.1 58.2          Apr 
1,193.8 776.0 268.5 507.5 417.9 65.0 58.3 54.4 6.7 6.3 352.9 155.3 27.9 59.0          May
Changes *
− 53.4 − 31.7 + 56.0 − 87.7 − 21.7 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 26.9 −104.8 + 1.8 + 17.2 2002+ 34.4 + 12.6 + 17.0 − 4.4 + 21.8 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 18.1 − 72.6 + 4.6 + 26.8 2003
− 25.5 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 1.3 − 26.1 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 7.1 2003          Aug 
− 3.9 − 27.7 − 17.4 − 10.3 + 23.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 23.5 − 9.7 − 0.1 + 4.7          Sep − 8.3 − 11.4 − 9.2 − 2.1 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 4.6          Oct 
+ 4.4 + 8.8 − 3.7 + 12.5 − 4.4 − 6.9 − 6.9 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 4.1          Nov − 23.4 + 2.8 + 5.5 − 2.7 − 26.2 − 3.3 − 3.5 − 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 22.9 − 10.0 + 3.9 + 1.4          Dec 
+ 66.6 + 31.0 + 14.2 + 16.8 + 35.5 + 7.8 + 7.4 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 27.8 + 10.5 − 1.5 + 5.1 2004          Jan 
+ 31.9 + 25.5 − 14.2 + 39.7 + 6.4 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.0 − 5.3 − 0.0 − 1.7          Feb 
+ 29.7 + 10.0 + 6.8 + 3.2 + 19.6 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 20.3 + 10.8 − 0.8 − 2.9          Mar 
+ 14.8 + 10.7 + 1.3 + 9.5 + 4.1 − 2.7 − 2.8 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 3.0          Apr 
− 47.3 − 41.3 − 6.7 − 34.6 − 6.0 − 4.2 − 4.6 − 4.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 4.7          May
    
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003
477.4 292.2 96.5 195.7 185.2 28.2 23.6 23.3 4.5 4.5 157.1 75.3 43.0 71.1 2003          Aug 
478.5 292.6 95.8 196.9 185.9 29.8 25.6 25.3 4.2 4.2 156.0 69.3 40.8 73.1          Sep 469.3 288.2 92.9 195.3 181.1 29.6 25.4 23.5 4.3 4.2 151.5 71.0 40.1 71.6          Oct 
469.7 291.3 94.9 196.5 178.3 31.0 26.8 24.4 4.2 4.2 147.3 71.9 39.2 69.1          Nov 467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4          Dec 
444.3 263.0 86.3 176.7 181.3 30.0 26.0 25.7 4.0 3.9 151.3 67.9 38.3 67.6 2004          Jan 
447.4 263.5 86.0 177.4 183.9 30.1 26.1 25.7 4.0 3.9 153.8 68.3 39.0 66.7          Feb 
470.2 273.7 88.0 185.7 196.5 32.6 28.7 28.3 3.9 3.8 163.9 71.1 39.2 70.2          Mar 
480.6 297.0 75.6 221.4 183.6 30.0 26.2 25.8 3.9 3.8 153.6 70.7 39.4 72.4          Apr 
451.1 271.9 75.7 196.3 179.2 28.5 24.7 24.2 3.8 3.7 150.7 70.6 39.2 68.5          May
Changes *
− 47.1 − 37.4 + 20.3 − 57.8 − 9.7 − 9.4 − 10.0 − 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 21.4 − 4.4 − 5.4 2002− 13.8 − 10.3 + 0.3 − 10.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 6.3 − 10.3 − 1.6 − 7.2 2003
− 3.8 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 0.3 − 6.6 − 3.1 − 3.3 − 3.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 3.5 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 2003          Aug 
+ 7.5 + 4.7 − 0.7 + 5.4 + 2.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 2.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.2 − 6.0 − 2.2 + 2.8          Sep − 9.7 − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.9 − 5.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.8 + 1.7 − 0.6 − 1.6          Oct 
+ 4.0 + 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.4 − 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.8          Nov + 4.0 − 4.4 + 4.9 − 9.3 + 8.4 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 9.5 − 3.7 + 2.1 + 0.3          Dec 
− 26.1 − 21.4 − 13.5 − 7.9 − 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 1.4 2004          Jan 
+ 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.6          Feb 
+ 20.8 + 9.0 + 1.9 + 7.1 + 11.9 + 2.6 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.3 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.9          Mar 
+ 8.8 + 22.5 − 12.4 + 34.9 − 13.7 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 2.2          Apr 
− 28.0 − 24.1 + 0.1 − 24.2 − 3.9 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 4.1          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money marketsecurities. — 3Including own debt securities. — 4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable fromliabilities liabilities Applicable fromRatio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( €  billion)
 
2003          Dec 6,664.2 133.3 0.5 132.8 133.6 0.9 0.0
2004          Jan 6,696.7 133.9 0.5 133.4 134.1 0.7 0.0
         Feb  8 −−−−−−−
         Mar 6,756.2 135.1 0.5 134.6 135.3 0.7 0.0
         Apr 6,747.2 134.9 0.5 134.4 135.0 0.6 0.0
         May 6,847.2 136.9 0.5 136.4 137.1 0.7 0.0         June 6,925.3 138.5 0.5 138.0 138.8 0.8 0.0
         July  
p ... ... ... 138.5 ... ... ...
         Aug ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( €  million)
2003          Dec 1,884,373 37,687 217 37,470 37,852 382 0
2004          Jan 1,891,545 37,831 217 37,614 37,860 246 4
         Feb  8 −−−−−−−
         Mar 1,885,245 37,705 217 37,488 37,784 296 3
         Apr 1,883,341 37,667 216 37,451 37,681 230 0
         May 1,911,592 38,232 216 38,016 38,331 315 1         June 1,913,668 38,273 216 38,058 38,465 407 4
         July  
p 1,914,337 38,287 214 38,073 ... ... ...
         Aug  p 1,890,408 37,808 213 37,595 ... ... ...
1Up to December 2003, the Eurosystem’s reserve maintenance periods application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve
began on the 24th day of each month and ended on the 23rd day of the ratio of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying
following month (with the first reserve maintenance period lasting from 1 the reserve ratios to the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of
January 1999 until 23 February 1999). From March 2004, the reserve the European Central Bank on the application of minimum reserves. —
maintenance period will start on the settlement day of the main refinancing 5Average credit balances of the credit institutions at the national central
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of banks. — 6Average credit balances less required reserves after deduction of
the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary policy stance is the lump-sum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the
scheduled. For the transitional period, provision has been made for a lump-sum allowance. — 8Owing to changes in the operational framework
extended reserve maintenance period lasting from 24 January until 9 March for the monetary policy, no reserve maintenance period began in February2004. — 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the 2004. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
fromfacility 1 facility fromfacility 1 facility fromAct  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
         Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.71
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          to
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
 
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement
€
 million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2004 June               30 315,078 256,000 − 2.00 2.01 2.02 7
         July                 7 315,956 253,000 − 2.00 2.00 2.01 7
         July               14 328,840 242,500 − 2.00 2.01 2.01 7
         July               21 322,945 259,500 − 2.00 2.01 2.01 7
         July               28 321,937 258,000 − 2.00 2.01 2.02 7
         Aug                  4 342,842 255,000 − 2.00 2.01 2.02 7
         Aug                11 336,449 247,500 − 2.00 2.01 2.02 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2004 Apr                29 54,243 25,000 − − 2.01 2.03 91
         May               27 45,594 25,000 − − 2.04 2.05 91
         July                 1 37,698 25,000 − − 2.06 2.08 91
         July               29 40,354 25,000 − − 2.07 2.08 91
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 Euribor  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds Eonia  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2004          Jan 2.02 1.80 − 2.09 2.07 2.04 − 2.12 2.02 2.06 2.08 2.09 2.12 2.15 2.22
         Feb 2.03 2.00 − 2.08 2.05 2.02 − 2.09 2.03 2.06 2.06 2.07 2.09 2.11 2.16         Mar 2.01 1.80 − 2.08 2.01 1.92 − 2.06 2.01 2.05 2.04 2.03 2.02 2.02 2.06
         Apr 2.07 2.00 − 2.80 2.03 1.92 − 2.07 2.08 2.05 2.05 2.05 2.06 2.11 2.16
         May 2.02 1.55 − 2.30 2.07 2.04 − 2.09 2.02 2.05 2.06 2.09 2.14 2.21 2.30         June 2.03 1.70 − 2.20 2.09 2.05 − 2.12 2.03 2.07 2.08 2.11 2.19 2.29 2.40
         July 2.06 2.02 − 2.45 2.10 2.08 − 2.12 2.07 2.07 2.08 2.12 2.19 2.26 2.36
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2003          Oct 1.97 3.47 2.12 4.33 5.00 4.92 5.20 8.13 7.13 5.84 4.56 4.12 4.71
         Nov 1.98 3.44 2.13 4.43 4.97 4.90 5.17 7.98 7.09 5.82 4.52 4.18 4.67         Dec 1.97 3.54 2.14 4.25 5.09 4.88 5.14 8.04 7.05 6.00 4.56 4.23 4.67
2004          Jan 1.94 3.36 2.09 4.27 5.05 4.89 5.11 8.15 7.02 5.92 4.58 4.07 4.56
         Feb 1.93 3.42 2.09 4.22 5.01 4.91 5.11 8.13 7.16 5.95 4.62 4.06 4.58         Mar 1.92 3.32 2.08 4.17 4.98 4.82 5.03 8.05 7.17 5.89 4.56 3.96 4.61
         Apr 1.90 3.35 2.09 4.16 4.90 4.75 5.01 8.03 7.08 5.85 4.51 3.91 4.59
         May 1.89 3.28 2.07 4.15 4.89 4.73 4.99 7.99 7.04 5.82 4.50 3.87 4.55         June 1.89 3.27 2.09 4.11 4.87 4.69 4.97 7.93 6.99 5.80 4.48 3.90 4.53
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2003          Oct 0.69 1.89 2.16 2.51 2.05 2.73 0.88 1.98 2.23 3.89
         Nov 0.70 1.87 2.24 2.61 2.01 2.70 0.87 1.97 2.36 2.70         Dec 0.69 1.89 2.40 2.41 2.02 2.68 0.86 2.00 2.42 3.35
2004          Jan 0.69 1.91 2.37 2.74 2.03 2.65 0.93 1.99 2.07 3.12
         Feb 0.69 1.88 2.16 2.45 2.02 2.63 0.86 1.98 2.21 3.59         Mar 0.70 1.92 2.15 2.34 2.00 2.59 0.86 1.96 2.11 3.35
         Apr 0.70 1.92 2.14 2.44 2.02 2.57 0.85 1.97 2.00 3.50
         May 0.70 1.85 2.16 2.41 2.00 2.55 0.86 1.96 2.06 3.75         June 0.70 1.88 2.23 2.39 2.00 2.55 0.87 1.99 2.27 3.79
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2003          Oct 9.71 7.91 7.20 6.74 8.07 4.40 3.62 4.02 4.87 4.78 4.05 5.09 5.21
         Nov 9.64 7.84 7.57 6.59 7.93 4.42 3.59 4.09 4.92 4.84 4.15 5.25 5.17         Dec 9.69 7.71 7.66 6.43 7.63 4.45 3.63 4.17 5.02 4.95 3.85 5.00 5.08
2004          Jan 9.87 8.32 7.62 7.04 8.49 4.48 3.63 4.28 5.02 4.92 4.06 5.12 5.16
         Feb 9.81 8.16 7.43 6.91 8.44 4.34 3.55 4.21 4.97 4.84 4.10 5.07 5.05         Mar 9.71 8.01 7.34 6.80 8.28 4.28 3.47 4.12 4.86 4.78 3.94 5.06 4.97
         Apr 9.73 7.82 7.31 6.60 8.22 4.27 3.43 4.03 4.78 4.68 3.87 4.89 4.92
         May 9.68 7.92 7.30 6.69 8.17 4.20 3.40 4.03 4.75 4.61 4.11 4.81 4.94         June 9.56 7.98 7.18 6.70 8.30 4.20 3.42 4.11 4.81 4.69 3.93 4.94 5.01
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to 
€
1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over 
€
1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2003          Oct 5.46 4.14 4.76 4.83 3.08 3.26 4.33
         Nov 5.41 4.10 4.94 4.71 3.02 3.30 4.23         Dec 5.58 4.04 4.84 4.81 3.12 3.41 4.32
2004          Jan 5.67 4.06 4.86 4.81 3.01 3.37 4.29
         Feb 5.63 4.02 4.94 4.78 2.97 3.19 4.30         Mar 5.56 3.94 4.79 4.77 2.91 3.25 4.41
         Apr 5.51 3.87 4.71 4.64 2.96 3.28 4.41
         May 5.46 3.98 4.58 4.57 2.95 3.30 4.24         June 5.46 3.96 4.76 4.71 3.02 3.25 4.08
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          June 2.15 139,931 3.27 187,960 2.13 76,477 5.09 28,180
         July 2.06 137,602 3.25 187,705 2.07 77,253 5.06 28,346
         Aug 2.04 135,705 3.24 187,639 2.05 80,491 5.03 28,452         Sep 2.00 133,458 3.23 187,511 2.04 77,051 5.04 29,069
         Oct 1.99 131,553 3.22 187,892 2.02 80,075 5.02 29,052
         Nov 1.98 129,649 3.16 186,957 2.02 80,795 4.99 29,633         Dec 2.00 128,564 3.16 190,465 2.05 74,309 4.98 29,363
2004          Jan 1.97 126,519 3.14 191,301 2.00 65,515 4.97 29,816
         Feb 1.94 124,617 3.13 191,935 1.99 72,633 4.96 29,775         Mar 1.94 122,662 3.11 192,728 1.98 71,568 4.96 29,211
         Apr 1.92 119,413 3.07 192,985 1.97 71,450 4.93 29,591
         May 1.90 118,543 3.05 192,822 1.98 73,261 4.93 29,523         June 1.89 115,574 3.03 193,431 1.98 71,355 4.88 29,421
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
2003          June 5.72 7,870 5.27 32,349 5.91 874,476 9.19 91,794 6.55 70,545 6.40 330,208
         July 5.53 7,737 5.20 32,621 5.88 876,065 9.01 89,466 6.49 71,055 6.36 332,013
         Aug 5.54 7,963 5.15 32,709 5.87 877,688 8.91 87,862 6.40 71,011 6.34 333,305         Sep 5.48 8,022 5.11 32,871 5.85 879,014 8.94 90,945 6.38 70,957 6.34 333,058
         Oct 5.50 7,772 5.07 33,146 5.83 882,447 8.89 89,093 6.36 70,809 6.32 332,152
         Nov 5.44 7,751 5.04 33,167 5.82 884,545 8.74 84,602 6.33 70,975 6.30 331,730         Dec 5.55 7,756 5.01 33,052 5.79 886,159 8.90 88,558 6.35 70,446 6.28 329,925
2004          Jan 5.43 7,641 4.97 32,907 5.78 885,875 8.87 84,977 6.32 69,872 6.27 328,719
         Feb 5.38 7,521 4.96 32,809 5.77 884,820 8.77 83,635 6.29 69,585 6.26 328,977         Mar 5.32 7,690 4.90 32,180 5.75 880,980 8.74 84,319 6.27 69,587 6.25 331,220
         Apr 5.29 7,401 4.87 32,148 5.74 881,832 8.81 82,911 6.19 70,268 6.22 331,533
         May 5.27 7,501 4.84 32,268 5.73 882,795 8.74 81,301 6.15 70,586 6.21 331,611         June 5.23 7,640 4.83 33,007 5.71 886,293 8.87 83,200 6.14 70,479 6.21 331,010
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          June 5.05 200,061 4.68 87,487 5.45 487,707
         July 4.92 192,725 4.58 87,735 5.42 487,473
         Aug 4.89 188,935 4.54 88,871 5.40 489,036         Sep 4.88 193,086 4.51 88,151 5.39 486,570
         Oct 4.83 188,707 4.48 88,246 5.37 487,573
         Nov 4.75 190,666 4.48 88,462 5.36 489,132         Dec 4.84 187,742 4.46 87,966 5.33 488,777
2004          Jan 4.82 181,660 4.40 88,474 5.30 487,166
         Feb 4.78 181,186 4.37 87,879 5.29 488,299         Mar 4.76 183,464 4.34 87,519 5.27 487,244
         Apr 4.75 179,606 4.32 87,478 5.25 489,214
         May 4.77 174,716 4.28 89,876 5.23 491,825         June 4.82 176,787 4.32 90,155 5.22 488,822
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by the end of the month. — 1The effective interest rates may always be
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments onhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and deposits and loans but not any other related charges which may occur fornon-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarante es and
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. —
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a home improvements; including loans granted by building and loansample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics 4Consumer credits are loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting System/ consum ption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these statistics,
Banking statistics / EWU-Zinsstatistik). This information is currently available other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business , debt
in German only. — oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at consolidation, education etc. — 6 Including overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
2003          June 1.16 389,213 2.13 31,655 2.69 767 2.82 3,585 2.16 486,111 3.05 92,548
         July 1.06 389,222 1.98 29,175 2.54 665 2.63 1,689 2.11 488,133 2.97 90,491
         Aug 1.05 394,794 2.07 25,650 2.59 627 2.68 1,378 2.08 490,805 2.92 88,948         Sep 1.06 393,137 1.88 28,352 2.46 679 2.73 1,891 2.04 491,693 2.88 88,197
         Oct 1.07 394,958 1.94 28,477 2.47 986 2.93 3,332 2.20 492,668 2.76 88,289
         Nov 1.06 412,862 1.89 24,839 2.52 1,065 3.04 3,325 2.15 493,279 2.73 88,529         Dec 1.08 400,936 1.89 29,428 2.84 1,512 2.91 2,519 2.17 502,167 2.72 89,528
2004          Jan 1.10 405,052 1.92 30,791 2.78 1,542 3.15 3,852 2.18 503,431 2.68 88,506
         Feb 1.10 411,617 1.95 23,387 2.41 1,056 2.86 2,340 2.12 504,560 2.66 88,115         Mar 1.12 410,717 2.03 28,021 2.31 840 2.66 2,357 2.10 504,583 2.62 87,863
         Apr 1.13 412,968 2.01 32,020 2.30 1,243 2.76 2,061 2.13 505,420 2.60 86,706
         May 1.13 418,859 1.88 30,506 2.33 1,097 2.74 2,404 2.10 505,649 2.58 85,838         June 1.13 419,073 1.88 25,692 2.46 838 2.71 1,725 2.13 505,366 2.57 85,480
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          June 1.25 121,685 2.05 41,507 2.29 322 3.30 887
         July 1.16 120,786 2.03 61,029 2.02 109 4.23 424
         Aug 1.16 118,994 2.00 40,582 2.52 187 3.68 2,473         Sep 1.15 124,565 1.94 34,584 2.61 210 3.92 1,179
         Oct 1.15 127,129 1.93 40,008 2.41 156 4.02 4,523
         Nov 1.07 129,086 1.95 35,693 2.56 256 3.26 1,160         Dec 1.05 138,713 1.96 36,247 2.76 360 4.09 1,075
2004          Jan 1.16 136,443 1.92 35,633 2.43 174 3.90 823
         Feb 1.11 128,210 1.95 38,596 2.18 197 4.26 697         Mar 1.11 130,095 1.92 34,914 2.28 201 3.82 1,274
         Apr 1.10 134,285 1.90 30,589 1.85 222 3.93 1,075
         May 1.10 131,703 1.92 32,753 2.44 115 4.24 1,535         June 1.10 134,255 1.92 31,971 2.59 163 4.22 1,273
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
2003          June 7.76 5.48 2,443 6.64 4,936 8.87 3,773 3.80 10,157 5.00 1,603 4.93 2,973
         July 7.83 5.58 1,913 6.59 5,969 8.75 4,405 3.76 9,268 4.94 1,802 5.06 2,654
         Aug 7.73 5.57 1,388 6.36 4,844 8.66 3,658 3.84 7,060 4.96 1,461 5.03 2,316         Sep 7.65 5.41 1,785 6.33 5,374 8.36 4,575 3.69 9,281 4.94 1,693 5.24 2,684
         Oct 7.52 5.26 2,631 6.33 5,096 8.42 4,398 3.73 11,515 5.00 3,368 5.26 2,543
         Nov 7.47 5.24 1,532 6.27 5,631 8.32 3,851 3.93 7,820 5.14 1,440 5.21 2,004         Dec 6.90 5.02 1,541 5.80 5,234 7.81 3,701 3.57 12,315 4.93 2,578 5.13 3,978
2004          Jan 8.01 5.30 1,427 6.62 4,233 9.00 3,746 3.85 8,611 5.08 1,992 5.27 1,998
         Feb 7.98 4.98 1,308 6.50 4,963 9.08 3,539 3.85 5,613 5.04 1,588 5.07 2,112         Mar 7.83 5.28 1,553 6.29 5,806 8.88 4,494 3.69 8,974 5.11 2,037 5.00 3,549
         Apr 7.56 5.05 1,664 6.08 6,345 8.86 4,074 3.50 9,264 4.92 1,658 5.00 2,903
         May 7.77 5.21 1,147 6.21 5,257 8.94 3,147 3.94 5,901 4.85 1,552 5.10 1,725         June 7.87 5.34 1,402 6.21 5,371 9.11 3,794 3.48 8,704 5.00 2,816 5.07 3,278
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volumeweighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa
€
 million % pa % pa
€
 milion % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          June 10.65 64,982 4.82 5.00 2,253 4.37 2,685 4.80 5,062 4.85 3,149
         July 10.44 63,287 4.69 4.58 2,805 4.16 3,589 4.70 6,864 4.85 3,973
         Aug 10.38 63,305 4.79 4.73 1,695 4.25 2,701 4.81 5,441 4.91 3,600         Sep 10.47 64,592 4.90 4.63 2,033 4.52 3,166 4.96 6,143 5.03 3,584
         Oct 10.41 63,212 4.90 4.44 2,463 4.48 3,292 5.00 6,201 5.08 3,200
         Nov 10.27 59,790 5.00 4.68 1,866 4.62 2,903 5.07 5,368 5.12 3,108         Dec 10.48 62,675 5.06 4.63 2,878 4.75 3,710 5.14 7,473 5.19 3,380
2004          Jan 10.40 59,768 5.02 4.57 2,827 4.65 3,280 5.15 5,978 5.19 3,201
         Feb 10.40 57,555 4.95 4.56 1,999 4.61 2,457 5.06 4,262 5.03 2,628         Mar 10.38 57,884 4.85 4.43 2,504 4.48 3,240 4.99 5,417 4.98 2,983
         Apr 10.36 56,755 4.76 4.26 2,706 4.32 3,127 4.91 5,106 4.95 2,964
         May 10.35 55,144 4.80 4.49 2,079 4.37 2,736 4.91 4,497 4.94 2,865         June 10.37 58,601 4.83 4.49 2,314 4.32 3,479 4.96 5,292 5.09 2,934
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to 
€
1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          June 6.60 93,175 4.49 7,813 4.94 1,008 5.11 1,483
         July 6.51 88,185 4.39 7,881 4.88 1,575 4.90 1,620
         Aug 6.54 86,025 4.36 5,782 4.91 1,626 4.93 1,714         Sep 6.40 88,489 4.52 7,119 5.00 1,205 5.02 1,671
         Oct 6.47 85,930 4.51 7,345 4.99 1,471 5.08 1,868
         Nov 6.36 88,429 4.47 7,001 5.20 1,146 4.95 1,215         Dec 6.44 87,201 4.55 6,976 5.05 1,613 5.14 1,850
2004          Jan 6.33 84,562 4.52 6,495 5.13 1,152 5.20 1,579
         Feb 6.26 86,480 4.58 6,151 5.12 1,510 5.04 1,068         Mar 6.22 87,095 4.44 7,140 5.00 1,262 5.20 1,385
         Apr 6.11 84,844 4.43 6,733 4.89 1,419 5.04 1,211
         May 6.27 81,810 4.52 6,616 5.00 987 4.93 1,186         June 6.24 84,815 4.54 7,185 4.98 1,264 5.19 1,509
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over 
€
1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          June 3.25 38,751 3.89 3,627 4.26 6,164
         July 3.32 33,140 3.91 2,885 4.27 6,336
         Aug 3.36 27,749 3.84 2,478 4.50 4,873         Sep 3.24 34,013 3.84 3,239 4.72 4,921
         Oct 3.25 34,631 4.06 3,284 4.63 5,125
         Nov 3.16 35,610 3.90 3,669 4.73 4,434         Dec 3.32 41,204 3.87 5,084 4.78 7,639
2004          Jan 3.25 32,666 4.33 4,274 4.99 4,169
         Feb 3.24 26,802 3.60 2,681 4.58 3,317         Mar 3.20 35,662 3.85 3,509 4.85 5,627
         Apr 3.25 30,662 3.79 3,034 4.57 5,536
         May 3.26 26,670 3.93 3,403 4.79 4,593         June 3.26 32,704 3.93 3,754 4.63 5,444
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,866
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,8871993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,9151994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,1091997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€
 million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,398 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,572 117,119 35,848 81,271 − 63,1082002 178,057 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 54,021 83,314 13,536 69,778 − 94,7432003 170,154 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 35,699 101,553 35,748 65,805 − 68,601
2004          Apr 31,066 21,240 14,682 2,775 3,784 9,826 12,376 11,085 1,291 − 18,690
         May 29,126 21,890 13,759 261 7,870 7,236 21,483 18,498 2,985 − 7,643         June 17,882 4,835 − 675 2,211 3,299 13,047 31,636 8,588 23,048 − − 13,754
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,0551993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
€
 million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,005 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 81,546 17,575 63,971 − 3,371 − 14,714 11,343 84,9182002 39,700 9,232 30,470 19,058 − 23,236 42,294 20,6422003 17,382 16,838 544 − 7,885 7,056 − 14,941 25,268
2004          Apr − 355 3,395 − 3,750 23,315 13,448 9,867 − 23,670
         May 4,639 327 4,312 10,291 − 4,072 14,363 − 5,652         June 1,487 1,306 181 − 15,817 − 14,831 − 986 17,304
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8At issue prices. — 9Net purchases or
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt transaction values. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998,
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and excluding syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also specially marked. 
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, €  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
issued by spe- by German-
Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed cialised credit
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,8321992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,2821993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€
 million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004          Mar 96,493 68,074 3,242 14,355 14,577 35,899 1,697 26,723 −         Apr 73,207 56,797 2,134 8,277 14,799 31,587 716 15,694 7,524
         May 79,506 54,816 3,510 8,013 7,458 35,836 2,315 22,375 3,400         June 78,494 54,369 3,268 6,264 14,324 30,513 3,566 20,560 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,9391993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€
 million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004          Mar 41,699 29,606 1,409 8,423 5,132 14,642 1,545 10,548 −         Apr 26,256 23,412 1,055 3,566 6,604 12,186 335 2,509 2,500
         May 43,733 27,078 2,717 5,780 2,931 15,650 2,150 14,505 400         June 25,868 20,131 2,363 3,101 3,566 11,101 535 5,202 −
Net sales  6 
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,1141993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,7011994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€
 million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2004          Mar 23,340 21,597 970 1,518 7,719 11,390 − 259 2,002 − 5,681         Apr 20,667 15,758 − 308 − 1,341 7,277 10,129 644 4,265 5,011
         May 29,454 18,525 1,007 1,518 3,122 12,878 1,563 9,367 2,245         June 2,805 − 1,098 − 549 − 7,676 7,126 1 2,123 1,780 − 1,454
*For definitions, see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to Monthly Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Report 2, Capital market statistics. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public specialised Other bank Corporate Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,760
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€
 million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004          Apr 2,697,179 1,658,369 160,546 598,479 290,278 609,065 54,039 984,771 184,246
         May 2,726,633 1,676,893 161,553 599,998 293,400 621,942 55,602 994,138 186,491         June 2,729,438 1,675,796 161,005 592,321 300,527 621,943 57,725 995,918 185,037
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-June 2004 
964,179 644,161 49,927 234,904 91,206 268,123 16,777 303,238 52,300    less than 2
643,286 435,920 52,280 179,058 85,155 119,427 14,859 192,507 56,777 2 to less than 4
434,215 269,050 34,605 90,105 52,592 91,748 5,851 159,314 49,887 4 to less than 6
264,952 135,045 18,234 54,073 22,645 40,094 11,351 118,556 9,532 6 to less than 8
203,713 87,338 5,756 21,860 18,191 41,532 4,220 112,155 7,728 8 to less than 10
76,416 59,187 169 7,329 9,535 42,154 1,035 16,193 4,921 10 to less than 15
26,196 11,600 35 1,209 6,466 3,890 452 14,145 2,076 15 to less than 20
116,481 33,494 − 3,782 14,736 14,974 3,179 79,808 1,816 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, €  million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal formliquidation under review  2 
DM million
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386 .
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .1994
o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .19963 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
€
 million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004          Apr 162,381 816 745 378 1 37 − 110 27 − 262 866,566
         May 162,365 − 16 76 47 3 104 − 162 201 − 285 841,734         June 163,175 810 420 180 0 17 − 34 294 − 67 873,884
oFrom January 1994, including the shares of east German companies market segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). — 1Including shares are traded on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the
on the Official Market, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock Deutsche Börse AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM 1,902 million. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German Germanmore than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.98
1992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004          Apr 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.6 4.3 3.8 4.1 117.92 97.51 254.33 3,985.21
         May 3.9 3.9 3.9 4.3 3.8 4.4 4.0 4.3 117.30 96.88 249.22 3,921.41         June 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.3 3.9 4.5 4.0 4.3 116.96 96.84 256.55 4,052.73
         July 3.9 3.9 3.9 4.2 3.8 4.4 3.9 4.2 117.54 97.33 246.85 3,895.61
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
Sales of mutual fund shares Purchases
Domestic mutual funds (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loan associations  1 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total shares Total shares dents  4 
Period
DM million
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 − 3,102 − − 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 41993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,0011994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,3181997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€
 million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,000
2001 97,032 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,221 96,082 10,251 2,703 85,831 17,518 9512002 66,478 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 6,996 67,150 2,100 3,007 65,050 3,989 − 6732003 48,195 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 4,252 49,726 − 2,658 734 52,384 3,518 − 1,530
2004          Apr 3,148 1,489 282 − 76 − 77 409 1,207 1,659 3,346 407 − 66 2,939 1,725 − 198
         May − 1,871 − 2,218 − 663 − 83 − 742 89 − 1,555 347 − 1,633 229 152 − 1,862 195 − 238         June 190 − 432 − 886 − 200 − 1,048 365 453 622 735 − 397 153 1,132 469 − 545
1Book values. — 2Residual. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign end-1988 recorded under shares). — The figures for the most recent date
fund shares by residents; transaction values. — 4Net purchases or net sales are provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
(−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
operat- Fixed Compen-
of ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex- sation
which pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend- of em-
Period Total Taxes Total  3 ployees iture grants Interest tion aid  4 Balance venue  5 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 − 12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 − 14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.11997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 − 94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 − 91.71998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 − 56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 − 53.41999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 − 26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 − 23.4
2000  
p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  6,p 555.8 446.2 599.9 169.9 69.8 213.8 66.6 40.1 39.2 − 44.1 445.0 449.1 − 4.1 923.5 971.7 − 48.2
2002  pe 550.9 441.7 608.0 173.3 69.5 225.9 66.1 38.7 33.5 − 57.1 457.9 466.4 − 8.5 924.1 989.7 − 65.6
2003  pe 546.6 442.2 615.2 174.0 68.8 236.4 65.7 36.3 32.5 − 68.6 466.8 473.3 − 6.5 924.5 999.6 − 75.1
2002          Q1 118.3 98.6 150.2 39.9 15.3 57.9 24.0 6.5 6.0 − 31.8 111.3 112.8 − 1.5 206.4 239.8 − 33.4
         Q2 137.8 105.1 141.8 40.4 15.6 58.5 11.9 7.8 6.7 − 4.0 113.0 115.6 − 2.6 228.9 235.6 − 6.6         Q3 135.3 109.4 148.7 41.4 16.5 54.7 19.2 9.7 7.8 − 13.4 113.1 116.6 − 3.5 228.0 244.9 − 16.9         Q4 157.2 129.0 165.6 49.9 21.5 55.2 10.7 13.6 13.1 − 8.5 119.3 120.0 − 0.7 257.5 266.6 − 9.2
2003          Q1 117.2 96.3 154.5 40.9 15.6 61.8 23.6 5.6 6.5 − 37.3 116.3 116.8 − 0.5 207.7 245.5 − 37.8
         Q2 135.8 108.9 143.8 40.9 15.5 61.3 10.8 7.5 7.5 − 8.0 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 228.2 239.1 − 10.9         Q3 131.2 109.6 155.8 42.4 16.6 58.5 21.6 9.2 7.4 − 24.6 115.1 117.8 − 2.7 225.0 252.3 − 27.4         Q4  
p 160.7 127.4 159.8 48.1 20.5 55.2 9.5 12.9 13.7 + 0.9 119.0 120.4 − 1.5 261.1 261.7 − 0.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data fromthe Federal Statistical the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly f igures
Office. — *The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed for some insurance sectors are estimated. — 3Including discrepancies in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the clearing transactions between central, state and local government. —
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — 4Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the interests. — 5Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly Federal Labour Office. — 6Owing to modifications of the system of
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between other operatin g
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, expenditure and current grants. see footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. — 2The annual figures differ fromthe sumof
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  p 240.6 261.3 184.6 207.1 50.5 52.5 119.0 123.2 24.7 25.2
2002  pe 238.9 271.6 183.5 207.4 47.8 53.2 119.9 124.5 25.1 25.3
2003  pe 239.6 278.8 182.3 208.7 48.3 53.5 117.1 125.0 24.7 25.5
2002          Q1 47.4 68.9 42.4 49.4 10.2 12.0 24.7 29.1 5.2 5.4
         Q2 56.3 62.6 43.3 48.8 11.1 11.9 28.8 29.1 5.9 5.8         Q3 62.7 70.6 45.3 49.3 11.8 12.9 29.1 30.5 6.1 6.2         Q4 72.5 69.5 52.0 59.5 14.5 16.1 37.0 35.4 7.8 7.7
2003          Q1 46.6 71.9 42.2 51.1 9.7 12.6 25.2 29.4 5.3 5.6
         Q2 59.1 64.6 44.4 50.2 12.0 12.0 26.7 29.1 5.6 5.8         Q3 57.6 74.5 45.3 50.5 12.2 13.1 29.3 30.6 6.1 6.3         Q4  
p 76.3 67.8 49.9 56.5 14.1 15.6 35.6 35.3 7.6 7.6
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data fromthe Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. — *See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. — 1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. — 4Including proceeds fromthe sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Item 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  1 2001 2002 2003  pe 
Revenue 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.2 965.5 951.0 954.0 963.0
of which
Taxes 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3 486.0 490.5Social contributions 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.4 378.1 383.6 389.0 395.5
Expenditure 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 972.6 989.5 1,009.9 1,028.4 1,045.1of which
Intermediate consumption 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.2 78.0 81.1 84.5 84.7Compensation of employees 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.7 165.5 167.7 168.2Interest 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.9 68.4 67.7 65.2 66.2Social benefits  
2 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 532.7 548.7 572.9 588.3
Gross capital formation 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 35.9 34.3 31.1
Net lending/net borrowing − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.4 − 24.0 − 58.9 − 74.3 − 82.1
as a percentage of GDP − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.5 − 3.9
Memo itemDebt as defined in theMaastricht Treaty 2,143.9 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.8 1,283.5 1,365.9
as a percentage of GDP 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.5 60.8 64.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office record such
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include proceeds (
€
50.85 billion) under "net increase in non-produced assets", with
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus (
€
22.8 billion
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. — 1Adjusted for proceeds fromthe sale or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. — 2 Including social benefits in kind. 
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 581993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 7141997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 1171998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 122002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 512003 442,243 390,437 214,002 155,510 . 20,925 51,671 4,751 + 127
2004          Q1 . 84,148 42,010 36,033 . 6,105 . . .
         Q2 . 97,988 53,116 40,298 . 4,574 . . .
2004          Feb . 28,668 15,320 11,418 . 1,929 . . .
         Mar . 26,916 14,813 10,640 . 1,463 . . .
         Apr . 29,375 16,227 12,095 . 1,053 . . .
         May . 29,974 16,246 11,964 . 1,764 . . .         June . 38,640 20,644 16,239 . 1,757 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Including receipts fromthe 1988. — 4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  — 2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. — 5Difference between the local government’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
remitted to state government. — 3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,1702002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,8462003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,409
2004          Q1 88,802 32,644 29,518 − 5,808 2,177 6,756 34,243 25,919 8,324 133 15,570 5,522 691 4,654
         Q2 103,712 41,892 29,560 3,054 4,481 4,797 33,673 25,023 8,650 1,317 20,979 5,097 755 5,723
2004          Feb 30,219 8,531 9,560 − 1,554 − 1,437 1,962 12,994 10,262 2,731 154 6,729 1,572 240 1,551
         Mar 27,954 9,347 8,892 − 3,642 3,475 621 9,715 6,726 2,990 5 6,795 1,848 245 1,039
         Apr 30,961 10,717 9,700 − 955 545 1,427 10,775 7,588 3,187 927 6,616 1,663 262 1,586
         May 31,566 10,305 9,859 − 1,225 46 1,626 12,109 9,289 2,821 384 6,989 1,528 251 1,592         June 41,186 20,870 10,002 5,234 3,891 1,744 10,788 8,146 2,642 5 7,374 1,906 242 2,546
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table the statutory pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing
VIII.4, does not include the receipts fromthe Equalisation of Burdens levies, to local governm ent; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to ce ntral
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% was
central and state government), the real property taxes and other local allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; sincegovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2From2002 49.6% has been allocated to central governm ent and 50.4% to state
1980, the revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax has been government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedallocated to central, state and local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15, central government share. — 6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
and revenue from corporation tax and investment income tax has been and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beenallocated to central and state government in the ratio of 50:50. — 3Fromaffected by the financing of the debt service of the Germ an Unity Fund. —
1996, after deducting child benefit. — 4FromFebruary 1993, including 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
revenue from the withholding tax on interest income, in which local government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. — 8For the breakdown, see
government has a share of 12%. — 5In 1998, 3.64% and from1999, 5.63% Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
was allocated to central government to finance the supplementary grant to
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness tax  2 taxes taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 6962003 43,188 14,094 2,204 8,870 6,531 11,722 7,336 230 3,373 786 6,989 24,146 9,658 671
2004          Q1 4,612 2,376 439 3,834 1,473 2,836 2,091 34 1,197 178 2,021 . . .
         Q2 10,599 3,484 502 1,627 1,861 2,905 2,076 13 1,245 201 1,563 . . .
2004          Feb 1,474 1,070 230 2,777 449 729 567 9 207 60 729 . . .
         Mar 3,296 1,098 161 603 506 1,131 765 9 342 54 678 . . .
         Apr 3,320 1,326 161 524 508 777 717 4 315 62 566 . . .
         May 3,828 1,136 169 604 464 789 652 2 329 69 475 . . .         June 3,452 1,022 172 499 890 1,339 707 6 601 70 522 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. — 2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied fromm id-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
General government
1998 2,280,154 . 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999 1,199,975 . 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 1052000 1,211,439 . 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 . 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 1082002 1,277,630 . 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 29 7,845 97
2003          Mar 1,311,922 . 30,630 220,438 143,172 15,434 469,566 402,082 135 22,528 − 1 7,845 95
         June 1,326,312 . 31,165 232,373 150,627 14,284 462,639 401,696 135 25,460 − 4 7,845 92         Sep 1,346,412 . 33,424 237,449 146,729 13,754 469,120 406,758 317 32,071 − 6 6,706 91         Dec 
p 1,358,121 . 36,022 246,414 153,616 12,810 471,129 396,832 341 34,163 − 1 6,711 86
Central government 7,8 
1998 957,983 . 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 . 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 1042000 715,819 . 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 . 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 . 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003          Mar 745,400 . 30,085 80,348 132,987 15,434 435,146 42,281 − 1,183 − 1 7,845 94
         June 749,920 . 30,416 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 − 4 7,845 91         Sep 766,213 . 32,892 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 − 6 6,706 90         Dec 767,697 . 35,235 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2004          Mar 802,690 . 36,463 88,901 150,050 11,245 450,711 49,888 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
         June 803,991 . 35,630 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88
State government (western)
1998 525,380 . 520 83,390 . . . 430,709 43 10,716 . − 21999 274,208 . 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 12000 282,431 . − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 12001 305,788 . 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 12002 328,390 . 250 97,556 . . . 217,333 5 13,246 . . 1
2003          Mar 339,986 . 300 109,109 . . . 213,990 7 16,579 . . 1
         June 345,390 . 322 116,274 . . . 209,820 8 18,966 . . 1         Sep 348,006 . 322 118,815 . . . 208,313 3 20,552 . . 1         Dec 
p 355,661 . 472 125,356 . . . 207,880 4 21,949 . . 1
2004          Mar p 363,202 . 222 136,105 . . . 200,367 3 26,504 . . 1
State government (eastern)
1998 98,192 . 445 27,228 . . . 70,289 − 230 . . .1999 53,200 . 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .2000 55,712 . 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .2001 58,771 . 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .2002 63,782 . 338 23,838 . . . 37,739 − 1,867 . . .
2003          Mar 64,965 . 245 26,134 . . . 36,351 − 2,235 . . .
         June 66,910 . 427 28,418 . . . 36,204 − 1,861 . . .         Sep 66,595 . 211 28,260 . . . 36,214 − 1,911 . . .         Dec 
p 68,076 . 315 28,833 . . . 37,022 − 1,906 . . .
2004          Mar p 69,661 . 524 30,752 . . . 35,314 − 3,070 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont’d)
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Local government (western) 9 
1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .
1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .2002 84,097 . . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .
2003          Mar 85,100 . . 153 . . 578 82,369 20 1,980 . . .
         June 88,000 . . 153 . . 578 85,269 20 1,980 . . .         Sep 89,250 . . 153 . . 578 86,519 20 1,980 . . .         Dec 
p 90,906 . . 77 . . 603 87,868 19 2,339 . . .
Local government (eastern) 9 
1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .2002 16,745 . . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .
2003          Mar 16,680 . . − . . 284 16,256 100 40 . . .
         June 16,750 . . − . . 284 16,326 100 40 . . .         Sep 16,850 . . − . . 284 16,426 100 40 . . .         Dec 
p 16,951 . . − . . 131 16,601 87 132 . . .
German Unity Fund/Indemnification Fund 7 
1998 79,413 . − − − . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .2000 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .2001 39,923 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .2002 39,810 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,685 3,146 − 26 . . .
2003          Mar 40,422 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,420 2,175 − − . . .
         June 39,942 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,443 1,672 − − . . .         Sep 40,099 . . 4,694 10,134 . 24,005 1,266 − − . . .         Dec 39,568 . . 4,610 10,134 . 24,032 793 − − . . .
2004          Mar 40,010 . . 4,610 9,634 . 24,177 1,589 − − . . .
         June 39,500 . . 4,538 9,634 . 24,183 1,144 − − . . .
ERP Special Fund 7 
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . . . − . 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .2000 18,386 . . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .2001 19,161 . . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .2002 19,400 . . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .
2003          Mar 19,369 . . . 51 . 10,138 8,660 8 512 . . .
         June 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .         Sep 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .         Dec 19,261 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,522 8 512 . . .
2004          Mar 18,576 . . . 51 . 10,169 7,960 8 389 . . .
         June 18,525 . . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,8 
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt Processing Fund/Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,8 
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 − 20 79,899 151999          June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 − 9 40,902 4
Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal 7,8 
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 − − . . .
1999          June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 − − . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data fromthe Federal Statistical 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Predominantly Treasury London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
discount paper (Bubills). — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
securities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
paper. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes. Including loans raised government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
abroad. Other loans fromnon-banks, including loans fromsupplem entary ratios. — 8Since 1 July 1999 central government has assumed joint
public pension funds and liabilities arising from the investment assistance responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabi lities,
levy. — 5Old liabilities arising fromhousing construction and liabilities the Federal Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the
arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and Use of Coal. From July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded
fromhousing construction in connection with the return of the troops of under central governm ent. — 9Data other than year-end figures have been
the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to their home country. — estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. 
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2002 2003
2002 2003  p Total 1st hf Q3 Q4 Total  p 1st hf Q3 Q4  p 
Item
€
 million
Borrowers
Central government  2 725,405 767,697 + 24,328 + 15,709 + 10,110 − 1,491 + 42,292 + 24,515 + 16,293 + 1,484
German Unity Fund 39,441 39,099 − 197 + 64 + 319 − 580 − 342 + 85 + 131 − 558
ERP Special Fund 19,400 19,261 + 239 + 147 + 19 + 73 − 139 − 1 − − 138Indemnification Fund 369 469 + 84 + 40 + 19 + 25 + 100 + 47 + 26 + 27
State government (western) 328,390 355,661 + 22,603 + 8,660 + 6,170 + 7,774 + 27,271 + 17,000 + 2,616 + 7,655
State government (eastern) 63,782 68,076 + 5,011 + 1,385 + 1,377 + 2,249 + 4,294 + 3,128 − 315 + 1,481Local government (western)  
3 84,097 90,906 + 2,630 + 1,275 + 900 + 455 + 7,439 + 3,742 + 1,154 + 2,543
Local government (eastern)  3 16,745 16,951 − 242 − 211 − 30 − 1 + 249 + 17 + 111 + 121
Total 1,277,630 1,358,121 + 54,455 + 27,068 + 18,883 + 8,504 + 81,164 + 48,533 + 20,015 + 12,616
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 30,815 36,022 + 7,779 − 785 + 9,188 − 625 + 5,207 + 350 + 2,258 + 2,598 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 203,951 246,414 + 52,551 + 25,595 + 16,056 + 10,900 + 42,463 + 28,422 + 5,075 + 8,965
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 137,669 153,616 + 7,623 + 3,244 + 2,213 + 2,167 + 15,947 + 12,958 − 3,898 + 6,887
Federal savings notes 17,898 12,810 − 8,497 − 5,759 − 884 − 1,854 − 5,088 − 3,614 − 530 − 944Bonds  
5 456,300 471,129 + 8,152 + 15,758 − 1,446 − 6,159 + 14,829 + 6,339 + 6,481 + 2,009
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 404,046 396,832 − 17,640 − 13,578 − 6,305 + 2,243 − 6,541 − 2,499 + 4,977 − 9,019
Loans from social security funds 137 341 − 37 + 64 − 12 − 90 + 204 − 1 + 181 + 24Other loans  
6 18,803 34,122 + 5,733 + 2,571 + 1,212 + 1,950 + 15,319 + 6,616 + 6,611 + 2,092
Old debt  7 126 85 − 67 − 42 − 0 − 25 − 41 − 39 − 3 + 0
Equalisation claims 7,845 6,711 − 1,142 − − 1,139 − 3 − 1,134 + 0 − 1,139 + 5Investment assistance levy 41 41 − 0 − 0 + 0 + 0 − 0 + 0 − 0 + 0
Total 1,277,630 1,358,121 + 54,455 + 27,068 + 18,883 + 8,504 + 81,164 + 48,533 + 20,015 + 12,616
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 − − −−−−−−
Credit institutions 532,700 525,300 − 746 − 1,529 + 689 + 94 − 6,727 + 4,951 + 2,215 − 13,893
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 137 341 − 37 + 65 − 12 − 90 + 204 − 1 + 181 + 24
Other  8 228,353 280,240 + 1,438 + 3,131 − 894 − 799 + 51,887 + 7,783 + 24,119 + 19,985
Foreign creditors  pe 512,000 547,800 + 53,800 + 25,400 + 19,100 + 9,300 + 35,800 + 35,800 − 6,500 + 6,500
Total 1,277,630 1,358,121 + 54,455 + 27,068 + 18,883 + 8,504 + 81,164 + 48,533 + 20,015 + 12,616
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data fromthe Federal Statistical own securities. — 6Including loans raised abroad. — 7Old liabilities arising
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Net borrowing differs fromhousing construction and liabilities arising fromthe housing
from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer of construction of the former GDR’s armed forces and from housing
debts. — 2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt inassociations. — 4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. — 8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 5Excluding issuers’ holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 − − −2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 − − −2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 − − −2002 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 − − −
2003 Mar 396,685 33,202 1,585 9,180 264,827 87,892 − − −
June 396,008 33,375 1,329 9,180 263,083 89,041 − − −
Sep 398,318 38,309 793 9,180 260,264 89,773 − − −Dec 
p 399,304 38,410 793 9,042 260,046 91,013 − − −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data fromthe Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. — 1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. — 2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Schätze)  2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2003          July 760,392 30,842 1,207 87,689 141,157 13,804 426,319 51,688 − 2,102 − 7 6,706 91
         Aug 764,368 31,420 1,206 88,295 135,298 13,754 433,479 53,227 − 2,102 − 7 6,706 93         Sep 766,213 32,892 1,229 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 − 6 6,706 90
         Oct 769,146 33,239 1,218 90,274 142,861 12,761 439,993 35,959 186 7,076 2 6,706 89
         Nov 769,493 34,180 1,215 90,637 143,575 12,792 436,109 38,142 186 7,076 2 6,706 87         Dec 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2004          Jan 786,023 35,941 1,229 92,560 143,816 11,830 448,242 39,290 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 86
         Feb 789,107 35,197 1,208 92,768 144,190 11,212 453,213 38,183 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 86         Mar 802,690 36,463 1,178 88,901 150,050 11,245 450,711 49,888 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
         Apr 798,786 35,616 1,128 95,468 150,031 10,786 449,577 41,875 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 88
         May 804,270 36,639 1,096 95,913 152,810 10,575 452,391 40,513 223 8,456 − 46 6,708 88         June 803,991 35,630 1,105 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88
         July
p 819,148 35,722 1,087 97,641 153,393 10,389 460,289 46,719 223 9,144 − 45 5,586 88
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern
cash bills. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. — Germany to their home country. — 8Commutation and compensation debt
3Including loans raised abroad. — 4Including money market loans. — and old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency. — 9Since 1 July 1999
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government central government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
employees. — 6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and
levy. — 7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. From July 1999, the
former GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection aforementioned special funds are included under central government.  
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,3041998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 9402001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,4952002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 − 10,155 + 2,221 + 222003 + 227,078 + 42,292 + 62,535 + 13,636 + 42,327 + 15,947 + 109,500 + 8,874 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,218
2003          Jan-July + 145,616 + 34,987 + 38,947 + 3,760 + 27,572 + 13,674 + 60,777 + 5,626 + 7,275 + 2,061 + 11,046 + 196
2004          Jan-July  
p + 149,444 + 51,450 + 37,348 + 24,095 + 18,791 + 9,963 + 76,993 + 8,168 + 4,568 − 1,354 + 11,745 + 9,645
2003          July + 31,062 + 10,472 + 11,352 − 1,847 + 693 + 715 + 10,241 + 4,801 + 4,153 + 3,321 + 4,623 − 124         Aug + 15,812 + 3,976 + 7,161 + 7,161 + 657 − 5,859 + 6,329 + 1,134 + 1,440 + 1,315 + 225 + 328         Sep + 23,605 + 1,845 + 6,694 + 606 + 1,246 + 1,246 + 13,693 − 1,297 + 977 + 298 + 995 − 73
         Oct + 11,968 + 2,933 + 8,442 + 5,908 + 6,317 + 6,317 + 10,100 + 4,102 + 296 − 214 − 13,187 − 188
         Nov + 17,180 + 347 + 1,205 − 3,883 + 6,680 + 715 + 6,311 + 1,335 + 394 − 408 + 2,590 − 189         Dec + 12,897 − 1,796 + 85 + 85 − 145 − 145 + 12,290 − 2,026 + 1,099 + 723 − 432 + 7,144
2004          Jan + 26,811 + 18,326 + 12,047 + 12,048 + 385 + 385 + 11,926 + 4,748 + 533 − 776 + 1,920 − 321
         Feb + 17,553 + 3,084 + 4,971 + 4,971 + 7,849 + 375 + 5,535 − 1,156 + 760 + 456 − 1,563 − 1,186         Mar + 36,156 + 13,583 + 1,580 − 2,502 + 5,860 + 5,860 + 15,425 − 2,567 + 673 + 217 + 12,619 + 6,423
         Apr + 3,991 − 3,904 − 1,135 − 1,135 − 19 − 19 + 11,797 + 5,262 + 855 − 507 − 7,507 − 5,683
         May + 17,688 + 5,484 + 6,903 + 2,815 + 4,133 + 2,779 + 7,549 + 1,257 + 448 − 17 − 1,345 + 3,254         June + 17,741 − 279 + 1,087 + 1,087 + 146 + 146 + 13,163 − 4,717 + 187 + 44 + 3,157 + 87
         July
p + 29,504 + 15,157 + 11,893 + 6,811 + 437 + 437 + 11,599 + 5,341 + 1,111 − 771 + 4,464 + 7,072
1After deduction of repurchases. — 2Federal Treasury notes (Schätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance fund
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
fromPen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Germany
1993 290,393 232,408 52,671 298,065 252,920 15,898 − 7,672 39,786 29,957 8,499 1,100 229 6,297
1994 322,335 256,662 61,891 324,323 273,880 17,751 − 1,988 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,8901995 338,185 270,294 64,387 348,115 294,034 20,285 − 9,930 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,8001996  
8 353,672 282,616 68,388 362,667 305,780 21,660 − 8,995 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 374,853 297,402 74,961 372,955 316,511 23,280 + 1,898 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 389,101 297,827 88,755 385,707 327,823 24,393 + 3,394 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,5731999 208,173 152,206 54,628 203,295 172,919 12,950 + 4,878 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,9042000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003  p 228,853 156,497 71,043 231,176 196,417 15,238 − 2,323 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,892
2002          Q2 54,621 37,404 16,780 55,560 47,012 3,508 − 939 10,663 7,490 1,366 1,696 111 4,954
         Q3 55,043 37,938 16,614 57,105 48,276 3,704 − 2,062 8,911 5,919 1,182 1,689 121 4,947         Q4 58,392 41,409 16,585 57,549 48,441 3,898 + 843 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003          Q1 55,374 37,289 17,761 57,255 48,883 3,727 − 1,881 8,686 5,649 1,230 1,685 122 4,874
         Q2 56,442 38,349 17,749 57,396 48,763 3,735 − 954 7,698 4,906 980 1,686 126 4,867         Q3 57,241 39,085 17,830 58,256 49,409 3,858 − 1,015 6,348 3,822 727 1,683 116 4,855         Q4 59,796 41,772 17,703 58,269 49,363 3,916 + 1,527 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,892
2004          Q1 55,431 37,289 17,846 58,350 49,858 3,873 − 2,919 6,196 3,693 695 1,681 127 4,866
         Q2 56,665 38,446 17,873 57,794 49,437 3,416 − 1,129 3,750 1,914 28 1,682 126 4,892
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of deducted frompension paym ents. — 4From1995, including long-termcare
German Pension Insurance Funds. — 1The annual figures do not tally with insurance for pensioners. — 5Largely corresponds to fluctuation reserves.
the sumof the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From1993, End of year or quarter. From1992, figures for the whole of Germ any. —
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security funds;
and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government including participating interests. — 8Excluding income arising from the
cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance revaluation of participating interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Employment Agency
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
Promo- loans
Unemployment support  3,4 Job promotion  4,5 tion of fromwinter central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction Balance ment
Germany
1993 85,109 79,895 1,829 109,536 48,005 34,149 13,856 36,891 15,895 20,996 1,919 − 24,426 24,419
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 − 10,205 10,1421995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 − 6,892 6,8871996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 − 13,763 13,7561997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 − 9,574 9,5741998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 − 7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 − 3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 8672001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 − 1,931 1,9312002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 − 5,623 5,6232003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 272 − 6,215 6,215
2002          Q1 11,502 11,188 51 13,093 6,587 4,608 1,979 4,665 2,523 2,142 139 − 1,591 3,720
         Q2 12,200 11,459 433 14,141 7,098 5,005 2,093 5,230 2,903 2,327 97 − 1,941 2,200         Q3 12,710 11,808 528 13,905 6,708 4,839 1,869 5,182 2,849 2,334 7 − 1,195 854         Q4 14,473 12,951 1,077 15,369 7,218 5,299 1,919 5,933 3,293 2,640 2 − 896 − 1,151
2003          Q1 11,617 11,281 48 14,408 7,647 5,422 2,225 4,785 2,576 2,209 180 − 2,790 5,151
         Q2 12,272 11,487 536 14,667 7,975 5,708 2,267 4,721 2,623 2,098 84 − 2,395 2,408         Q3 12,828 11,797 619 13,645 7,251 5,313 1,938 4,453 2,462 1,991 7 − 817 514         Q4 13,917 12,773 878 14,131 6,863 5,086 1,777 5,196 2,903 2,293 1 − 214 − 1,858
2004          Q1 11,524 11,261 47 14,448 8,200 6,001 2,199 4,389 2,491 1,898 144 − 2,924 5,244
         Q2 12,042 11,419 394 13,949 7,782 5,673 2,109 4,268 2,510 1,758 67 − 1,907 1,946
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government recipients of wage substitutes are paid in January instead of in
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- December. — 5Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up,
solvency compensation to employees. — 3Unemployment benefit, rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service
short-time working benefit. — 4Including contributions to the statutory Agencies (PSAs), compensation top-up payments and business start-up
health insurance funds and statutory pension insurance sheme. From 2003, grants. 
the January contributions to the statutory pension insurance scheme for
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
  1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2000   2001   2002   2003   2000   2001   2002   2003
Annual Percentage
Item
€
 billion percentage change of total
At  1995  prices
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 430.5 447.3 444.3 443.8 445.1 3.9 − 0.7 − 0.1 0.3 22.7 22.4 22.3 22.4Construction 105.1 102.1 95.8 90.1 86.1 − 2.9 − 6.1 − 5.9 − 4.5 5.2 4.8 4.5 4.3Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 334.5 353.5 367.6 371.3 374.2 5.7 4.0 1.0 0.8 17.9 18.5 18.7 18.8
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 546.6 570.9 589.7 595.9 599.3 4.4 3.3 1.1 0.6 29.0 29.7 29.9 30.1
Public and private services  3 382.1 388.4 389.6 394.8 395.1 1.6 0.3 1.3 0.1 19.7 19.6 19.8 19.9
All economic sectors 1,823.5 1,886.7 1,911.5 1,919.9 1,923.7 3.5 1.3 0.4 0.2 95.8 96.2 96.5 96.8Memo item: Enterprise sector 1,596.1 1,658.5 1,684.3 1,693.4 1,698.5 3.9 1.6 0.5 0.3 84.2 84.8 85.1 85.5
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 1,730.5 1,786.4 1,806.6 1,815.2 1,817.2 3.2 1.1 0.5 0.1 90.7 91.0 91.2 91.4
Gross domestic product 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,986.2 1,989.7 1,987.7 2.9 0.8 0.2 − 0.1 100 100 100 100
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,099.1 1,120.6 1,136.9 1,125.3 1,124.5 2.0 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.1 56.9 57.2 56.6 56.6
Government consumption 374.3 378.0 382.0 388.4 391.7 1.0 1.0 1.7 0.9 19.2 19.2 19.5 19.7Machinery and equipment 160.3 176.5 167.8 152.5 151.2 10.1 − 4.9 − 9.1 − 0.8 9.0 8.4 7.7 7.6Premises 248.7 242.1 230.5 217.1 209.8 − 2.6 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 3.4 12.3 11.6 10.9 10.6Other investment  
6 23.4 25.5 27.0 27.4 27.9 9.0 5.6 1.6 1.8 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4
Changes in inventories  7 − 5.7 − 8.1 − 24.7 − 22.0 − 9.9 . . . . − 0.4 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.5
Domestic use 1,900.2 1,934.7 1,919.4 1,888.6 1,895.2 1.8 − 0.8 − 1.6 0.4 98.2 96.6 94.9 95.3
Net exports 14.6 34.8 66.8 101.1 92.5 . . . . 1.8 3.4 5.1 4.7
Exports 581.8 661.5 698.8 722.6 735.4 13.7 5.6 3.4 1.8 33.6 35.2 36.3 37.0Imports 567.2 626.7 632.0 621.5 642.9 10.5 0.9 − 1.7 3.4 31.8 31.8 31.2 32.3
Gross domestic product 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,986.2 1,989.7 1,987.7 2.9 0.8 0.2 − 0.1 100 100 100 100
At  current  prices
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,156.0 1,196.2 1,232.7 1,236.5 1,247.7 3.5 3.0 0.3 0.9 58.9 59.4 58.6 58.6
Government consumption 378.2 385.6 394.1 404.4 410.9 2.0 2.2 2.6 1.6 19.0 19.0 19.2 19.3
Machinery and equipment 159.6 176.7 167.4 151.9 146.9 10.7 − 5.3 − 9.3 − 3.2 8.7 8.1 7.2 6.9Premises 245.2 240.2 228.9 215.5 207.9 − 2.1 − 4.7 − 5.9 − 3.5 11.8 11.0 10.2 9.8Other investment  
6 21.6 23.2 24.4 24.6 24.7 7.3 5.0 1.0 0.3 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2
Changes in inventories  7 2.1 0.7 − 15.0 − 13.2 1.9 . . . . 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.1
Domestic use 1,962.6 2,022.5 2,032.5 2,019.7 2,040.0 3.1 0.5 − 0.6 1.0 99.6 98.0 95.7 95.8Net exports 16.0 7.5 41.2 90.7 89.2 . . . . 0.4 2.0 4.3 4.2
Exports 586.4 686.1 731.5 757.6 765.5 17.0 6.6 3.6 1.0 33.8 35.3 35.9 36.0
Imports 570.4 678.6 690.2 667.0 676.3 19.0 1.7 − 3.4 1.4 33.4 33.3 31.6 31.8
Gross domestic product 1,978.6 2,030.0 2,073.7 2,110.4 2,129.2 2.6 2.2 1.8 0.9 100 100 100 100
IV Prices (1995 = 100)
Private consumption 105.2 106.7 108.4 109.9 111.0 1.5 1.6 1.3 1.0 . . . .Gross domestic product 103.3 103.1 104.4 106.1 107.1 − 0.3 1.3 1.6 1.0 . . . .Terms of trade 100.2 95.8 95.8 97.7 99.0 − 4.4 0.1 1.9 1.3 . . . .
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,057.8 1,099.1 1,121.3 1,130.5 1,132.7 3.9 2.0 0.8 0.2 72.9 72.7 71.9 72.0Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 410.4 409.3 420.9 441.1 439.9 − 0.3 2.8 4.8 − 0.3 27.1 27.3 28.1 28.0
National income 1,468.2 1,508.4 1,542.2 1,571.5 1,572.6 2.7 2.2 1.9 0.1 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 1,965.1 2,020.3 2,065.6 2,108.8 2,118.2 2.8 2.2 2.1 0.4 . . . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2004. — 1Includ- ing taxes on products (offset against subsidies on products). — 5Including
ing communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangible fixed asset forma-
ties, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home services. — tion (inter alia, computer software and entertainment, literary or artistic
4Gross value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but exclud- originals) and cultivated assets. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-total tion  
2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
1999 95.3 103.7 100.2 94.0 94.5 91.1 96.2 98.5 97.2 92.4 93.3 89.8
2000 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.8 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9
2001 99.5 92.4 97.3 100.4 99.4 102.3 100.4 98.8 98.0 101.1 102.1 104.02002 98.3 89.0 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.42003 98.4 85.1 99.8 99.5 99.5 102.0 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.6
 
2002          Oct 104.0 101.9 101.9 104.5 104.9 104.1 100.5 105.2 103.9 107.2 99.2 111.4         Nov 105.8 96.2 103.1 107.0 104.3 110.9 103.5 105.8 102.1 105.3 105.7 119.9         Dec 92.6 63.4 106.6 93.7 84.5 105.4 83.4 92.8 88.3 81.5 118.6 90.6
2003          Jan 90.3 51.8 110.3 91.7 93.9 89.9 82.0 92.9 102.6 101.0 80.7 101.9
         Feb 92.4 51.5 104.1 94.9 94.2 98.3 87.1 91.7 98.3 100.1 91.4 110.9         Mar 104.6 83.8 109.0 106.0 105.9 110.0 97.1 100.6 112.0 110.4 103.5 121.4
         Apr 98.4 92.1 100.3 98.7 100.4 99.4 85.7 96.7 105.6 102.9 93.2 108.9
         May 96.0 91.2 95.3 96.5 98.9 97.3 79.8 93.9 102.5 101.3 91.8 106.9         June 100.0 98.6 91.6 101.0 102.5 103.4 83.5 97.4 103.4 97.7 102.0 106.8
         July 100.4 102.3 90.5 101.3 102.5 103.1 85.8 98.6 105.1 101.7 98.9 108.7
         Aug 90.0 89.8 90.4 90.0 93.1 86.6 67.2 95.4 98.8 88.2 85.6 80.0         Sep 102.3 100.9 92.2 103.5 103.3 106.6 97.2 99.1 97.6 101.6 104.4 110.8
         Oct 105.1 99.3 102.2 106.0 106.9 106.3 97.9 105.2 104.0 107.3 98.1 112.3
         Nov 106.4 93.1 104.6 107.8 105.3 113.9 100.1 103.2 101.4 103.2 105.9 125.1         Dec 95.0 67.0 107.0 96.2 87.1 108.8 82.9 94.2 92.6 83.0 117.9 97.5
2004          Jan  
r 92.0 49.3 115.8 93.3 96.4 90.7 83.4 94.0 101.4 104.5 82.6 98.8
         Feb  r 94.1 56.7 105.8 96.3 98.4 97.0 86.4 92.4 101.0 103.0 87.7 111.7
         Mar  r 7 104.8 7 74.0 109.7 107.2 107.6 111.8 95.9 99.8 107.0 111.7 106.1 123.2
         Apr  x 7 100.2 7 83.2 102.6 101.5 103.4 103.5 88.5 96.6 105.9 103.8 97.8 114.9
         May  x 7 99.3 7 84.1 97.5 100.9 102.5 103.8 86.5 95.1 101.1 104.9 98.0 115.8
         June  x 7 102.3 7 90.1 90.1 104.7 105.5 110.0 87.3 96.4 101.3 109.0 105.6 120.6
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.9 + 3.5 − 3.6 − 2.2 + 3.22000 + 4.8 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 9.7 + 3.7 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 8.1 + 7.1 + 11.2
2001 − 0.4 − 7.6 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 2.4 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 4.12002 − 1.2 − 3.7 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.32003 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 5.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 + 2.1
 
2002          Oct + 0.2 − 7.1 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 3.9 + 3.2 − 1.5 + 1.3         Nov + 2.8 − 3.0 − 0.9 + 3.8 + 4.1 + 4.9 − 3.0 + 2.5 + 6.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 + 11.4         Dec + 0.1 − 12.2 − 3.4 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.9 − 8.4 + 0.3 + 8.3 + 6.4 − 1.5 + 5.2
2003          Jan + 0.9 − 9.9 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 2.3 − 8.5 − 0.9 + 3.8 + 3.3 − 3.5 + 6.7
         Feb + 0.4 − 23.0 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 4.7 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 2.1 + 10.0         Mar + 0.8 − 6.6 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 2.0 − 6.7 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.8 − 1.3 + 5.1
         Apr + 0.3 − 4.5 + 3.5 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 4.8 + 1.2 + 3.0 − 1.5 − 4.0 + 2.9
         May + 0.4 − 3.8 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 4.4 − 1.9
+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 5.8
         June − 2.0 − 1.6 + 5.3 − 2.8 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 8.9 − 6.6 − 7.7
         July + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.2 + 6.7
         Aug − 2.6 − 4.5 + 1.2 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 3.8 − 9.2 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 7.3 + 0.4 − 12.8         Sep − 2.3 − 3.4
+ 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 6.4 − 3.0 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.0 − 3.2
         Oct + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.9 + 2.1 − 2.6
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.8
         Nov + 0.6 − 3.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 2.7 − 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.2 + 4.3         Dec + 2.6 + 5.7 + 0.4 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 7.6
2004          Jan  
r + 1.9 − 4.8 + 5.0 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 1.2 − 1.2 + 3.5 + 2.4 − 3.0
         Feb  r + 1.8 + 10.1 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 4.5 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 4.0 + 0.7
         Mar  r 7 + 0.2 7 − 11.7 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 4.5 + 1.2 + 2.5 + 1.5
         Apr  x 7 + 1.8 7 − 9.7 + 2.3 + 2.8 + 3.0 + 4.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 4.9 + 5.5
         May  x 7 + 3.4 7 − 7.8 + 2.3 + 4.6 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 1.3 − 1.4 + 3.6 + 6.8 + 8.3
         June  x 7 + 2.3 7 − 8.6 − 1.6 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 6.4 + 4.6 − 1.0 − 2.0 + 11.6 + 3.5 + 12.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — oUsing the quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities related to prin-
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The ting. — 7Provisional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Build- survey in the construction sector. — xProvisional; adjusted in advance by
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
3Electricity, gas, steamand hot water supply, and, in particular, m ining of Quarterly Production Survey for the second quarter (industry: on
coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleumand natural gas and m anu- average -2.6%). facture of refined petroleumproducts. — 4Including mining and
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which of which
 
Industry,
total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
Germany  
  
2000 99.9 + 13.8 99.9 + 8.2 100.0 + 21.8 100.0 + 14.3 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 4.2
2001 98.3 − 1.6 97.6 − 2.3 99.1 − 0.9 95.9 − 4.1 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.52002 98.3
+ 0.0 94.6 − 3.1 102.8 + 3.7 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 99.0 − 2.4
2003 99.0 + 0.7 94.7 + 0.1 104.4 + 1.6 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.1 95.4 − 3.6
 
2003          June 100.7 − 0.4 95.1 − 1.1 107.7 + 0.6 98.5 − 1.5 105.2 + 2.0 89.2 − 7.2
         July 97.6 − 0.2 94.9 − 0.9 100.9 + 0.6 98.1 + 0.6 98.0 − 0.8 93.8 − 0.6
         Aug 89.9 − 2.0 87.3 − 3.5 93.2
+ 0.0 89.5 + 0.0 89.5 − 3.1 92.9 − 3.2
         Sep 102.9 + 1.1 98.4 + 0.1 108.5 + 2.2 100.9 + 0.7 104.4 + 2.6 102.8 − 4.3
         Oct 102.7 + 2.4 99.1 + 1.5 107.2 + 3.4 102.5 + 2.8 102.9 + 2.4 102.8 + 0.9
         Nov 102.5 + 0.9 99.2 + 1.8 106.6 − 0.2 102.1 + 2.7 104.4 + 0.8 95.6 − 4.6         Dec 98.0 + 6.8 89.7 + 1.5 108.5 + 12.9 91.1 + 5.3 106.4 + 9.0 86.9 + 1.5
2004          Jan 99.8 + 1.2 93.7 + 1.2 107.4 + 1.1 101.9 + 3.3 99.8 + 0.6 93.0 − 3.5
         Feb 101.2 + 2.4 95.9 + 0.4 107.8 + 4.8 102.2 + 5.6 101.2 + 1.5 98.3 − 3.7         Mar 111.1 + 5.2 105.2 + 5.2 118.6 + 5.4 110.8 + 5.3 113.1 + 6.7 103.7 − 1.1
         Apr 104.1 + 7.1 98.0 + 5.4 111.8 + 9.1 106.3 + 9.1 105.2 + 6.8 92.8 + 1.6
         May 103.9 + 11.6 95.1 + 4.5 115.0 + 20.2 105.0 + 12.4 107.1 + 13.3 88.3 + 2.3         June  
p 105.4 + 4.7 98.3 + 3.4 114.3 + 6.1 107.2 + 8.8 108.1 + 2.8 89.0 − 0.2
Western Germany  
  
2000 100.0 + 13.6 99.9 + 7.8 100.0 + 21.4 99.9 + 13.5 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 3.52001 97.8 − 2.2 97.2 − 2.7 98.6 − 1.4 95.1 − 4.8 99.2 − 0.8 101.1 + 1.22002 97.3 − 0.5 93.7 − 3.6 101.6 + 3.0 95.1
+ 0.0 98.9 − 0.3 98.3 − 2.8
2003 97.6 + 0.3 93.2 − 0.5 102.9 + 1.3 95.7 + 0.6 99.9 + 1.0 94.3 − 4.1
 
2003          June 99.7 − 0.6 93.2 − 2.0 107.6 + 1.1 96.4 − 2.6 105.2 + 2.5 88.2 − 7.2
         July 96.5 − 1.0 93.7 − 1.7 99.8 − 0.4 95.9 − 0.3 97.8 − 1.6 93.1 − 1.2
         Aug 88.6 − 1.8 85.6 − 4.0 92.2 + 0.9 86.7 − 1.1 89.2 − 2.0 91.8 − 3.7         Sep 101.3 + 0.2 96.3 − 1.1 107.4 + 1.8 98.6 − 0.2 103.4 + 2.0 101.8 − 4.9
         Oct 101.1 + 1.7 97.1 + 0.6 106.0 + 3.1 100.1 + 1.9 101.9 + 2.0 101.5 + 0.4
         Nov 100.4 + 0.1 97.4 + 1.0 103.9 − 1.0 100.0 + 1.7 102.2 + 0.1 94.0 − 5.3         Dec 96.0 + 6.1 88.0 + 1.3 105.5 + 11.4 89.7 + 4.9 103.4 + 7.9 85.3 + 0.7
2004          Jan 98.1 + 0.5 92.4 + 0.7 105.0 + 0.4 99.9 + 4.1 98.4 − 1.0 91.9 − 3.8
         Feb 99.8 + 1.9 94.2 − 0.6 106.5 + 4.7 100.2 + 5.1 100.1 + 1.0 97.4 − 4.2         Mar 109.6 + 5.2 103.6 + 4.9 116.9 + 5.6 108.3 + 4.7 112.4 + 7.1 102.6 − 1.3
         Apr 102.8 + 7.2 96.3 + 5.1 110.7 + 9.5 103.9 + 9.1 104.9 + 7.2 91.3 + 1.4
         May 102.3 + 11.3 93.0 + 3.9 113.4 + 19.6 102.2 + 11.8 106.2 + 13.0 86.6 + 1.9         June  
p 103.4 + 3.7 96.3 + 3.3 112.0 + 4.1 104.5 + 8.4 106.6 + 1.3 87.5 − 0.8
Eastern Germany  
  
2000 100.0 + 18.2 100.0 + 13.9 99.9 + 29.7 99.9 + 20.8 100.0 + 16.3 100.0 + 15.12001 104.9 + 4.9 102.4 + 2.4 110.9 + 11.0 106.0 + 6.1 103.4 + 3.4 106.1 + 6.12002 111.0 + 5.8 104.0 + 1.6 127.8 + 15.2 111.6 + 5.3 110.7 + 7.1 109.4 + 3.12003 117.9 + 6.2 110.8 + 6.5 135.1 + 5.7 122.8 + 10.0 114.1 + 3.1 112.7 + 3.0
 
2003          June 114.0 + 1.8 115.6 + 7.4 110.0 − 10.4 123.4 + 9.5 105.8 − 4.9 106.5 − 4.8
         July 112.2 + 11.1 107.4 + 6.5 123.6 + 21.8 123.9 + 10.2 101.3 + 12.9 106.0 + 7.9
         Aug 108.4 − 3.6 105.6 + 1.3 115.0 − 13.1 121.3 + 8.6 94.4 − 17.6 109.8 + 2.1         Sep 124.3 + 11.2 121.0 + 12.2 132.1 + 8.7 128.3 + 10.6 121.1 + 13.5 119.9 + 4.4
         Oct 124.8 + 9.7 121.0 + 10.1 134.0 + 8.9 131.0 + 12.8 118.7 + 6.9 123.3 + 7.5
         Nov 132.3 + 11.3 118.6 + 10.0 165.3 + 13.6 127.5 + 13.2 139.9 + 10.7 121.7 + 5.3         Dec 127.3 + 14.6 108.3 + 3.2 173.1 + 37.4 106.9 + 7.8 152.5 + 20.4 112.6 + 13.9
2004          Jan 122.6 + 8.9 107.8 + 6.4 158.4 + 13.3 125.9 − 3.2 122.4 + 29.3 110.1 − 0.1
         Feb 120.7 + 8.7 114.3 + 10.4 136.0 + 5.3 125.4 + 10.1 117.7 + 8.0 112.6 + 5.4         Mar 131.8 + 6.1 122.4 + 8.5 154.4 + 1.7 139.4 + 9.9 126.2 + 2.7 121.8 + 2.5
         Apr 121.9 + 6.0 116.0 + 7.7 136.0 + 2.6 135.1 + 9.7 109.4 + 1.9 116.0 + 4.8
         May 127.4 + 16.8 117.7 + 10.2 150.6 + 31.3 136.8 + 16.5 120.4 + 19.1 114.7 + 8.0         June  
p 133.1 + 16.8 120.2 + 4.0 164.2 + 49.3 138.7 + 12.4 132.4 + 25.1 112.0 + 5.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleumproducts; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2000 99.9 − 8.6 100.0 99.9 100.0 99.9 − 7.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 − 13.4 100.0 99.9 100.0
2001 94.5 − 5.4 82.8 96.9 99.0 97.4 − 2.5 87.6 99.9 100.7 85.2 − 14.8 68.3 86.4 94.22002 88.7 − 6.1 72.8 91.5 95.6 90.9 − 6.7 79.6 93.1 95.6 81.7 − 4.1 51.9 85.8 95.72003 79.2 − 10.7 67.5 78.5 87.4 80.8 − 11.1 74.5 78.3 87.8 74.2 − 9.2 46.1 79.2 86.2
   
2003          May 82.7 − 10.3 66.6 83.1 92.4 81.6 − 12.6 70.7 79.7 90.8 86.2 − 2.7 54.0 95.1 96.9         June 94.4 − 11.3 75.7 91.8 109.0 95.9 − 11.6 83.7 92.1 108.2 89.7 − 9.8 51.4 91.1 111.2
         July 90.6 − 3.4 71.2 86.6 107.3 91.1 − 5.5 79.1 85.7 105.1 89.0 + 4.2 46.9 89.9 113.5
         Aug 81.1 − 8.3 67.7 76.1 95.2 81.7 − 6.2 73.8 74.7 94.9 79.2 − 14.3 49.0 81.0 95.7         Sep 91.2 − 10.5 76.3 88.8 103.1 91.2 − 11.8 84.9 85.3 102.3 90.9 − 6.4 50.2 101.3 105.4
         Oct 80.1 − 5.2 70.6 75.8 90.8 83.4 − 3.0 79.8 76.4 93.9 69.6 − 13.0 42.6 73.7 81.9
         Nov 69.2 − 7.5 62.0 73.6 68.7 71.0 − 3.8 69.5 74.0 68.5 63.1 − 19.0 39.1 71.7 69.3         Dec 69.3 − 12.6 66.7 68.4 71.9 71.1 − 14.4 73.9 68.4 72.5 63.4 − 5.8 44.9 68.3 69.8
2004          Jan 53.2 − 6.2 41.5 65.7 46.6 55.3 − 5.5 47.8 67.6 45.4 46.6 − 9.0 22.1 58.6 49.7
         Feb 66.2 + 2.8 58.3 75.3 60.8 67.3 − 0.3 64.7 79.2 54.9 62.6 + 15.3 38.8 61.8 77.7         Mar 81.9 − 7.7 70.7 72.7 99.2 83.4 − 9.1 81.0 70.8 99.8 77.0 − 2.5 39.2 79.3 97.4
         Apr 77.1 − 6.4 62.8 72.4 91.2 78.7 − 7.3 71.6 73.3 89.5 71.9 − 3.5 36.1 69.4 95.9
         May 75.8 − 8.3 66.7 65.2 93.4 77.0 − 5.6 73.8 64.2 94.1 71.9 − 16.6 44.9 68.3 91.5
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclusive engineering”. — oBundesbank calculation. — 1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site post office. 
preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
  
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  By enterprises’ main product range of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical Clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco  2 products  2 leather goods  2 ing materials  2 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100
1996 97.0 + 0.3 − 0.6 97.0 + 0.0 81.8 + 4.2 103.2 − 0.8 96.4 − 1.1 96.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 90.7 + 5.3
1997 95.9 − 1.1 − 1.7 95.7 − 1.3 83.4 + 2.0 101.4 − 1.7 95.2 − 1.2 95.8 − 0.2 − 0.7 94.0 + 3.6
1998 96.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 97.1 + 1.5 88.2 + 5.8 100.3 − 1.1 98.2 + 3.2 97.5 + 1.8 + 1.5 99.2 + 5.51999 97.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 98.0 + 0.9 94.7 + 7.4 100.2 − 0.1 97.6 − 0.6 98.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 102.9 + 3.7
2000 100.0 + 2.4 + 1.2 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 5.6 100.0 − 0.2 100.0 + 2.5 100.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 100.0 − 2.8
2001 101.8 + 1.8 . 104.7 + 4.7 107.3 + 7.3 99.5 − 0.5 96.5 − 3.5 101.9 + 1.9 . 102.4 + 2.42002 100.2 − 1.6 − 2.2 107.4 + 2.6 111.1 + 3.5 94.7 − 4.8 88.9 − 7.9 101.1 − 0.8 − 1.5 105.3 + 2.82003 99.7 − 0.5 − 0.5 109.4 + 1.9 113.9 + 2.5 89.8 − 5.2 87.7 − 1.3 101.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 107.4 + 2.0
 
2003          June 92.7 − 0.9 − 0.9 105.3 + 2.0 106.9 + 0.8 82.8 − 2.9 80.1 − 1.4 96.8 − 0.3 − 0.6 111.6 + 0.8
         July 99.0 − 0.9 − 1.0 110.8 + 3.5 118.1 + 2.9 87.7 − 5.5 85.7 − 2.9 103.6 + 0.6 + 0.2 120.7 + 5.0
         Aug 91.9 − 5.3 − 5.4 107.3 − 0.3 104.0 − 4.9 74.9 − 13.5 79.1 − 6.7 93.0 − 4.1 − 4.5 96.6 − 0.2         Sep 98.2 + 1.3 + 1.1 105.3 + 4.3 111.0 + 3.4 96.4 − 3.8 85.2 − 0.5 99.8 + 2.5 + 2.1 106.6 + 6.7
         Oct 105.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 113.5 + 3.6 117.5 + 2.3 107.2 − 2.7 94.0 − 0.5 107.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 114.1 + 2.1
         Nov 101.8 − 4.3 − 4.9 109.5 − 2.6 112.9 − 0.4 88.3 − 10.2 93.0 − 4.7 102.2 − 3.5 − 4.4 105.2 − 0.9         Dec 122.0 + 1.8 + 1.4 128.3 + 2.9 146.4 + 15.5 110.4 − 6.8 103.4 − 0.9 116.8 + 1.6 + 1.0 99.4 + 0.8
2004          Jan 91.6 − 2.1 − 2.1 102.5 + 1.0 101.3 − 8.9 76.7 − 5.5 79.6 + 1.0 89.8 − 2.8 − 3.1 83.8 − 6.2
         Feb 85.3 − 3.1 − 2.3 97.4 − 0.6 99.9 − 4.8 66.0 − 2.2 77.1 − 0.1 86.3 − 3.3 − 3.1 90.5 − 4.4         Mar 101.4 + 1.9 + 2.5 110.7 + 2.1 115.6 + 6.1 88.4 − 2.9 95.2 + 1.6 104.8 + 1.7 + 1.7 118.2 + 1.7
         Apr 101.5 − 1.6 − 1.6 114.1 + 0.4 112.7 − 0.4 98.0 + 1.4 91.4 − 0.7 104.5 − 1.5 − 2.0 115.8 − 1.5
         May 94.9 − 5.7 − 6.1 106.7 − 3.7 107.6 − 3.5 86.7 − 7.7 86.0 − 4.7 98.0 − 5.7 − 6.5 109.1 − 6.1         June  
e 93.9 + 1.3 + 1.0 106.1 + 0.8 111.1 + 3.9 82.4 − 0.5 82.9 + 3.5 97.6 + 0.8 + 0.2 ... ...
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding value-added tax; figures tive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor vehicle parts and
from2003 provisional, partly revised and, judging by past experience, sub- accessories.— 4Up to (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices; from2001, at
ject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent months. — 1Excluding 2000 prices. 
sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of automo-
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2,r Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed  2 
Persons
Mining employed Persons
and under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- vocationaling Con- time motion further Unem-
Annual change Annual sector  
2 Annual ploy- Vacan- schemes  2,5 training  2 workers  2 struction  4 
percen- change, ment cies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- rate  2,6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands in % sands  2 
Germany  
  
2001 38,923 + 0.4 + 172 34,834 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 352 3,853 − 37 9.4 507
2002 38,698 − 0.6 − 225 34,577 − 0.7 6,217 7 883 207 192 340 4,061 + 209 9.8 452
2003 38,316 − 1.0 − 382 34,106 − 1.4 8 6,136 817 195 140 260 4,377 + 315 10.5 355
2003          July 38,349 − 0.9 − 360 6,136 834 196 131 227 4,353 + 305 10.4 367         Aug 38,383 − 0.9 − 355 34,219 − 1.3 6,145 836 150 131 222 4,316 + 296 10.4 356         Sep 38,589 − 0.8 − 317 6,146 835 169 133 233 4,208 + 265 10.1 330
         Oct 38,715 − 0.7 − 254 6,114 824 163 138 242 4,151 + 220 10.0 297
         Nov 38,690 − 0.5 − 199 34,381 − 0.9 6,096 814 162 140 245 4,184 + 157 10.0 275         Dec 38,517 − 0.4 − 164 6,060 790 149 135 235 4,315 + 89 10.4 258
2004          Jan 37,714 − 0.4 − 147 6,035 737 164 123 217
9 4,597 9 +3 7 9 11.0 277
         Feb 37,713 − 0.3 − 131 33,482 − 0.7 6,019 711 186 117 203 4,641 + 15 11.1 309
         Mar 37,892 − 0.3 − 105 6,018 10 728 197 109 200 4,547 + 30 10.9 324
         Apr 38,097 − 0.3 − 101 6,013 10 745 177 102 199 4,443 + 32 10.7 324
         May o 38,183 o − 0.3 o − 100 ... ... 6,004 10 748 171 103 p 196 4,293 + 43 11 10.3 319
         June ... ... ... ... ... 162 109 p 185 4,233 + 62 10.2 305
         July ... ... ... ... ... 138 116 p 164 4,360 + 83 10.5 297
Western Germany 12  
  
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 94 53 202 2,321 − 60 7.2 4362002 . . . . . 5,593
7 654 162 42 198 2,498 + 178 7.7 378
2003 . . . . . 8 5,503 607 160 30 161 2,753 + 255 8.4 292
2003          July . . . . . 5,502 616 162 29 143 2,735 + 253 8.3 300         Aug . . . . . 5,507 617 119 28 140 2,724 + 246 8.3 287         Sep . . . . . 5,507 617 139 27 149 2,653 + 213 8.1 261
         Oct . . . . . 5,476 609 136 27 157 2,637 + 187 8.0 237
         Nov . . . . . 5,459 603 135 26 159 2,665 + 144 8.1 222         Dec . . . . . 5,427 587 122 25 152 2,750 + 102 8.4 212
2004          Jan . . . . . 5,401 553 135 22 139
9 2,927 9 +7 1 9 8.9 234
         Feb . . . . . 5,386 535 151 21 131 2,945 + 49 8.9 263
         Mar . . . . . 5,384 10 548 159 21 129 2,871 + 52 8.7 275
         Apr . . . . . 5,377 10 559 143 21 130 2,805 + 50 8.5 274
         May . . . . . 5,368 10 560 139 22 p 129 2,710 + 58 11 8.2 265
         June . . . . . ... ... 133 23 p 122 2,669 + 65 8.1 253
         July . . . . . ... ... 112 25 p 109 2,760 + 79 8.4 247
Eastern Germany 13  
  
2001 . . . . . 626 262 29 190 150 1,532 + 23 17.3 712002 . . . . . 624
7 229 45 150 142 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2003 . . . . . 8 632 210 35 110 99 1,624 + 61 18.5 63
2003          July . . . . . 634 218 34 102 84 1,618 + 53 18.5 67         Aug . . . . . 638 219 31 104 82 1,592 + 50 18.2 69         Sep . . . . . 639 218 30 106 83 1,554 + 52 17.8 69
         Oct . . . . . 638 215 27 112 85 1,514 + 34 17.3 60
         Nov . . . . . 637 211 27 113 86 1,519 + 13 17.4 53         Dec . . . . . 633 203 27 110 83 1,565 − 14 17.9 46
2004          Jan . . . . . 634 183 29 101 78
9 1,670 9 −3 3 9 19.1 43
         Feb . . . . . 633 175 35 96 72 1,696 − 33 19.4 46
         Mar . . . . . 633 10 181 37 89 70 1,676 − 22 19.2 49
         Apr . . . . . 637 10 186 34 81 69 1,639 − 18 18.8 51
         May . . . . . 637 10 188 32 81 p 67 1,583 − 15 11 18.3 54
         June . . . . . ... ... 29 85 p 62 1,565 − 3 18.1 53
         July . . . . . ... ... 26 91 p 55 1,600 + 4 18.5 50
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Monthly included for the first time. — 8The figures from2003 onwards are positively
figures: end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; short- affected by the fact that firms which are required to report and which have
time workers: mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: averages. — been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are inclu-1Work-place concept.— 2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundesbank; de- ded for the first time. — 9FromJanuary 2004, unem ployed persons
viations fromthe official figures are due to rounding. — 3Including active excluding all those participating in occupational aptitude testing and
proprietors. — 4The figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site training schemes. — 10Provisional up to adjustment to the figures of the
preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil annual overall survey. — 11FromMay 2004, calculated on the basis of new
engineering”. — 5Employees involved in job creation schemes and struc- labour force figures. — 12Excluding western Berlin; for the mining,
tural adjustment measures (SAM). — 6Relative to the total civilian labour manufacturing and construction sectors, including persons employed in
force. — 7The figures fromMarch 2002 onwards are positively affected by western Berlin. — 13 Including western Berlin; for the mining,
the fact that construction firms which are required to report and which manufacturing and construction sectors, excluding persons employed inhave been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are western Berlin. — o First preliminary estimate. 
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index
Indices of Index of world market
of which foreign trade prices prices  of raw materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1999 98.6 100.6 100.3 87.7 99.0 98.8 99.3 2 97.0 89.9 97.0 90.8 57.6 83.1
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 95.4 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.5 101.2 100.3 103.0 100.8 101.0 100.6 91.4 91.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 105.0 102.6 100.2 102.4 94.6 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.12003 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 104.1 94.8 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.9
 
2002          Oct 103.3 104.1 100.9 107.6 104.8 102.9 102.5 94.3 100.8 98.3 90.5 92.1         Nov 103.0 103.6 101.0 105.1 104.5 103.0 100.2 102.2 94.8 100.7 97.3 80.5 90.8         Dec 104.0 104.0 100.9 105.6 107.9 103.0 102.4 94.4 100.7 97.9 87.2 89.6
2003          Jan 104.0 105.3 101.4 110.7 105.1 103.2 103.8 94.8 100.9 98.2 92.2 88.3
         Feb 104.5 105.9 101.6 113.0 105.9 103.4 100.3 104.2 96.4 101.0 98.5 97.3 89.7         Mar 104.6 106.3 101.6 113.8 105.6 103.5 104.4 94.8 101.0 98.0 89.5 88.3
         Apr 104.3 106.6 101.4 110.2 105.8 103.7 104.2 94.6 100.9 96.5 76.0 87.8
         May 104.1 106.8 101.4 108.2 105.6 103.7 100.3 103.9 93.9 100.5 95.2 72.5 83.5         June 104.4 107.1 101.3 108.8 106.1 103.8 103.9 95.4 100.3 95.1 77.0 81.3
         July 104.6 106.3 101.1 109.2 107.4 103.8 104.1 92.4 100.3 95.2 81.5 82.7
         Aug 104.6 105.1 101.0 110.4 107.7 103.9 100.3 104.1 94.0 100.4 95.8 86.4 85.2         Sep 104.5 105.6 101.4 109.7 106.7 103.9 104.2 97.4 100.5 95.7 78.7 87.5
         Oct 104.5 105.7 101.4 110.0 106.4 103.9 104.2 96.2 100.4 95.5 81.0 88.7
         Nov 104.3 105.5 101.4 109.5 105.8 104.1 100.3 104.2 97.6 100.4 95.5 81.7 91.0         Dec 105.1 105.7 101.4 109.4 109.0 104.1 104.2 96.1 100.2 95.1 80.7 89.4
2004          Jan 105.2 106.9 102.1 110.5 107.2 104.4 104.0 96.6 100.2 95.2 82.6 92.8
         Feb 105.4 106.4 101.9 110.2 108.3 104.5 100.5 104.1 97.8 100.3 95.3 82.2 96.2         Mar 105.7 106.1 103.1 111.4 108.0 104.6 104.7 98.2 100.8 96.4 91.2 103.5
         Apr 106.0 106.3 103.3 113.1 108.1 104.7 105.1
p 96.8 101.1 96.9 94.9 105.1
         May 106.2 106.6 103.1 116.1 108.1 104.7 101.4 105.6 96.0 101.3 97.6 104.5 101.1
         June 106.2 106.7 103.1 114.2 108.6 104.8 105.5 p ... 101.1 97.0 100.8 99.1
         July 106.5 106.0 102.8 115.5 109.9 104.8 ... ... ... ... 104.7 97.6
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 2 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 37.1 − 6.2
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 2 + 3.1 + 6.1 + 3.1 + 10.1 + 73.6 + 20.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.12002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.92003 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.6
 
2002          Oct + 1.3 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 14.7 + 10.2         Nov + 1.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 5.7 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 12.1 + 3.9         Dec + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.6 − 5.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 23.2 + 2.9
2003          Jan + 1.1 − 3.1
+ 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 3.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 25.1 − 1.1
         Feb + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 8.5 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 26.0 − 2.1
         Mar + 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 7.4 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.9 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 6.4
         Apr + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 19.5 − 6.2
         May + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 20.7 − 8.0         June + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 3.1 − 8.7 − 9.6
         July + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 7.5
         Aug + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.1
+ 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 5.2
         Sep + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 15.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 10.5 − 3.7
         Nov + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 4.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.2         Dec + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 7.5 − 0.2
2004          Jan + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 10.4 + 5.1
         Feb + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 15.5 + 7.2         Mar + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.5 − 2.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.9 + 17.2
         Apr + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.9
p + 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 24.9 + 19.7
         May + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 7.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 p + 2.2 + 0.8 + 2.5 + 44.1 + 21.1
         June + 1.7 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 5.0 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.5 ... + 0.8 + 2.0 + 30.9 + 21.9
         July + 1.8 − 0.3 + 1.7 + 5.8 + 2.3 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... + 28.5 + 18.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- index of raw material prices for the euro area based on the euro. — 6Coal
stitute. — 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation and crude oil. — 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw
based on data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Previously: materials. 
Overall construction price level. — 4Excluding value-added tax. — 5HWWA
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999 €  billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM / 
€
change DM / 
€
change DM / 
€
change DM / 
€
change DM / 
€
change DM / 
€
change %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 − 1.8 12.31994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 − 0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 − 2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 − 0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 − 0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 − 1.0 10.81997 1,591.3 − 0.2 1,015.9 − 1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 − 0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 − 1.9 10.41998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.31999 855.4 3.0 549.2 3.4 327.5 3.1 876.7 3.3 1,281.1 3.4 125.1 − 1.9 9.8
2000 884.6 3.4 571.7 4.1 338.1 3.2 909.8 3.8 1,325.5 3.5 129.3 3.3 9.8
2001 903.7 2.2 592.4 3.6 347.5 2.8 939.8 3.3 1,373.7 3.6 141.0 9.1 10.32002 910.4 0.7 593.5 0.2 365.0 5.1 958.5 2.0 1,382.8 0.7 146.3 3.8 10.62003 909.4 − 0.1 588.3 − 0.9 375.2 2.8 963.4 0.5 1,398.8 1.2 151.1 3.3 10.8
2002          Q2 218.6 0.7 140.0 0.1 90.0 4.5 230.0 1.8 342.7 0.2 34.2 2.1 10.0
         Q3 227.3 1.1 152.4 0.5 91.5 5.8 243.9 2.5 340.5 0.8 30.8 4.6 9.0         Q4 254.1 0.2 163.6 − 0.3 92.5 5.3 256.1 1.7 356.0 0.9 34.1 5.7 9.6
2003          Q1 211.0 0.3 136.6 − 0.6 94.5 3.8 231.2 1.1 351.7 2.4 50.5 6.8 14.4
         Q2 218.5 − 0.1 138.5 − 1.1 93.1 3.5 231.6 0.7 347.0 1.2 35.4 3.7 10.2         Q3 227.1 − 0.1 151.2 − 0.8 93.7 2.4 244.9 0.4 342.8 0.7 31.8 3.3 9.3         Q4 252.8 − 0.5 162.0 − 1.0 93.9 1.5 255.8 − 0.1 357.2 0.4 33.3 − 2.2 9.3
2004          Q1 211.3 0.1 136.8 0.1 95.6 1.1 232.3 0.5 356.2 1.3 51.1 1.1 14.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2004. — *House- plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
holds including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Residence surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — 3Social cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state and fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 6In-
local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), private cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (workplace concept)  2 (workplace concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change change 1995 = 100
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.1 1.9 105.8 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.1 2.9 108.7 2.7 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.3 2.0 110.8 2.0 105.9 1.6 113.2 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.5 2.0 113.0 2.0 107.9 1.9 115.2 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.22002 116.6 2.7 116.1 2.7 109.5 1.5 118.9 3.2 117.3 3.2 116.0 2.02003 118.9 2.0 118.5 2.1 110.9 1.3 122.0 2.6 120.3 2.5 . .
2002          Q3 120.5 2.7 119.9 2.8 109.3 1.9 128.2 3.7 126.4 3.7 112.9 3.4
         Q4 132.0 2.8 131.4 2.8 121.9 1.5 132.0 3.4 130.2 3.4 125.4 2.3
2003          Q1 109.3 2.9 108.9 3.0 104.0 2.0 109.7 3.2 108.2 3.1 . .
         Q2 110.1 2.2 109.7 2.3 106.7 1.5 112.0 2.6 110.5 2.6 . .         Q3 122.9 2.0 122.4 2.1 110.5 1.2 131.1 2.3 129.3 2.3 . .         Q4 133.6 1.2 133.1 1.3 122.3 0.4 135.1 2.3 133.2 2.3 . .
2004          Q1 111.2 1.7 111.0 1.9 104.9 0.8 113.2 3.2 111.7 3.3 . .
         Q2 111.6 1.4 111.5 1.6 . . 113.5 1.3 112.0 1.4 . .
2003          Dec 110.8 1.6 110.4 1.7 . . 112.3 2.4 110.7 2.4 . .
2004          Jan 110.9 1.9 110.7 2.1 . . 112.3 2.3 110.8 2.4 . .
         Feb 110.9 1.9 110.7 2.1 . . 112.4 2.4 110.9 2.5 . .         Mar 111.8 1.4 111.6 1.6 . . 115.0 4.9 113.5 4.9 . .
         Apr 111.4 1.1 111.2 1.3 . . 113.1 0.8 111.6 0.8 . .
         May 111.9 1.8 111.8 2.0 . . 114.2 2.2 112.7 2.3 . .         June 111.6 1.4 111.5 1.6 . . 113.3 1.0 111.8 1.1 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. — 2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2004. — 3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steamand hot water using the old and new classifications of the econom ic sectors. 
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
X External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2003 2004
Item2001  1 2002 2003 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May
Current account − 16,684 + 54,455 + 24,856 + 11,512 + 17,338 + 13,285 + 11,146 + 338 + 3,151A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) incl supplementary items 1,033,862 1,063,218 1,036,195 257,064 271,362 265,149 99,047 94,118 92,403
Imports (fob) incl supplementary items 960,211 929,666 927,716 220,241 240,683 237,083 85,649 83,458 81,254
Balance + 73,651 + 133,551 + 108,481 + 36,823 + 30,680 + 28,066 + 13,398 + 10,660 + 11,148
2 Services
Receipts 321,672 329,844 325,956 86,508 84,373 75,027 26,980 25,973 28,517
Expenditure 322,038 316,728 310,311 82,811 80,060 77,615 27,165 25,434 25,131
Balance − 369 + 13,114 + 15,645 + 3,697 + 4,313 − 2,587 − 185 + 539 + 3,386
3 Income − 38,582 − 44,110 − 43,418 − 9,415 − 4,954 − 5,232 + 1,902 − 6,696 − 5,626
4 Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 78,798 85,305 80,753 15,064 19,375 31,698 7,461 4,699 4,959
Transfer payments to non-residents 130,182 133,400 136,606 34,656 32,076 38,661 11,431 8,864 10,717
Balance − 51,387 − 48,097 − 55,851 − 19,592 − 12,700 − 6,964 − 3,970 − 4,165 − 5,758
Capital account + 6,574 + 10,977 + 13,434 + 2,764 + 7,373 + 2,940 + 543 + 669 + 2,314B
Financial account (net capital exports: −) − 34,165 − 65,808 − 50,462 − 636 − 3,558 − 14,033 − 11,006 − 8,492 − 8,495C
1 Direct investment − 112,440 − 4,718 − 13,125 − 19,124 − 9,650 − 28,862 − 26,100 − 2,922 − 730
By resident units abroad − 316,489 − 151,328 − 118,595 − 32,191 − 27,248 − 25,860 − 9,702 − 7,853 − 1,066By non-resident units in the euro area + 204,055 + 146,610 + 105,471 + 13,068 + 17,598 − 3,002 − 16,398 + 4,931 + 335
2 Portfolio investment + 67,948 + 114,633 + 17,608 − 59,089 + 10,500 + 5,196 − 4,904 − 3,012 − 25,839
By resident units abroad − 281,866 − 175,759 − 283,802 − 63,314 − 64,325 − 89,883 − 25,430 − 29,834 − 18,638
Equity − 101,583 − 40,365 − 67,741 − 19,386 − 26,302 − 31,309 − 10,823 − 2,503 − 4,618
Bonds and notes − 155,875 − 89,592 − 172,769 − 37,162 − 25,429 − 46,358 − 24,350 − 8,740 − 16,410
Money market instruments − 24,411 − 45,803 − 43,291 − 6,765 − 12,594 − 12,216 + 9,743 − 18,592 + 2,390
By non-resident units in the euro area + 349,814 + 290,394 + 301,412 + 4,225 + 74,827 + 95,080 + 20,527 + 26,822 − 7,201
Equity + 232,553 + 88,853 + 103,619 + 25,103 + 45,746 + 19,925 + 713 − 12,856 − 390
Bonds and notes + 113,135 + 133,670 + 191,829 − 7,771 + 34,639 + 53,431 + 8,963 + 27,151 + 11,534
Money market instruments + 4,129 + 67,869 + 5,965 − 13,107 − 5,559 + 21,725 + 10,851 + 12,526 − 18,344
3 Financial derivatives − 856 − 10,785 − 13,090 − 4,590 − 4,075 + 6,241 + 2,411 − 26 − 1,315
4 Other investment − 6,632 − 162,664 − 71,674 + 80,141 − 13,924 − 6,000 + 13,850 + 155 + 18,725
Eurosystem+ 5,032 + 18,185 + 11,236 + 6,144 − 1,350 − 1,888 + 468 + 1,148 − 1
General government + 2,545 − 8,160 − 4,974 + 5,045 − 1,862 − 6,638 − 2,038 − 1,204 + 693
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 3,256 − 138,175 − 18,946 + 80,564 − 17,625 − 30 − 5,736 + 2,151 + 27,126
Long-term− 24,190 + 19,536 + 1,293 + 3,840 + 1,574 − 17,319 − 9,079 − 10,392 + 4,462Short-term+ 27,446 − 157,704 − 20,240 + 76,724 − 19,199 + 17,289 + 3,343 + 12,543 + 22,664
Other sectors  
2 − 17,462 − 34,518 − 58,988 − 11,612 + 6,916 + 2,553 + 21,155 − 1,940 − 9,093
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 17,815 − 2,277 + 29,817 + 2,025 + 13,589 + 9,390 + 3,737 − 2,687 + 664
Errors and omissions + 44,278 + 372 + 12,172 − 13,639 − 21,153 − 2,192 − 683 + 7,486 + 3,030D
*Source: European Central Bank. — 1FromJanuary 2001, including   
Greece. — 2 Enterprises and households.  
67*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
X External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item Capital trans-
fers and Change in
the Bundes- acquisition/disposal of Change in bank’s net
Supple- non- the foreign external
Balance mentary produced reserves at Balance of assets aton current External trade Factor Current Financial transaction transaction non-financial unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4,5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1,2,3 transactions
DM million
1990  o + 73,021 + 105,382 − 3,833 − 26,118 + 32,859 − 35,269 − 4,975 − 89,497 − 11,611 + 33,062 − 10,976
1991 − 36,298 + 21,899 − 2,804 − 30,724 + 33,144 − 57,812 − 4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 18,643 − 319
1992 − 30,013 + 33,656 − 1,426 − 44,983 + 33,962 − 51,222 − 1,963 + 69,792 − 52,888 + 15,072 − 68,7451993 − 23,062 + 60,304 − 3,038 − 52,549 + 27,373 − 55,151 − 1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 − 19,260 + 35,7661994 − 46,749 + 71,762 − 1,104 − 62,803 + 4,852 − 59,455 − 2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 − 11,332 − 12,242
1995 − 38,642 + 85,303 − 4,722 − 63,985 + 178 − 55,416 − 3,845 + 63,647 − 10,355 − 10,805 − 17,754
1996 − 20,643 + 98,538 − 5,264 − 64,743 + 1,815 − 50,989 − 3,283 + 23,607 + 1,882 − 1,564 + 1,6101997 − 14,916 + 116,467 − 7,360 − 68,696 − 2,588 − 52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 8,193 + 8,4681998 − 20,677 + 126,970 − 5,934 − 75,072 − 13,337 − 53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 − 7,128 − 6,295 − 8,231
1999 − 43,915 + 127,542 − 13,656 − 90,099 − 18,775 − 48,927 − 301 − 44,849 + 24,517 + 64,548 − 72,364
2000 − 54,471 + 115,645 − 13,505 − 95,967 − 5,166 − 55,478 + 13,345 + 55,434 + 11,429 − 25,737 + 94,3292001 + 3,421 + 186,771 − 10,499 − 98,323 − 20,889 − 53,639 − 756 − 51,306 + 11,797 + 36,844 + 63,911
€
 million
1999 − 22,454 + 65,211 − 6,982 − 46,067 − 9,599 − 25,016 − 154 − 22,931 + 12,535 + 33,003 − 36,9992000 − 27,851 + 59,128 − 6,905 − 49,067 − 2,641 − 28,366 + 6,823 + 28,343 + 5,844 − 13,159 + 48,2302001 + 1,749 + 95,495 − 5,368 − 50,272 − 10,680 − 27,425 − 387 − 26,233 + 6,032 + 18,838 + 32,6772002 + 45,670 + 132,788 − 5,968 − 36,422 − 16,844 − 27,883 − 212 − 70,724 + 2,065 + 23,201 − 33,2922003 + 48,062 + 132,215 − 7,335 − 35,537 − 12,515 − 28,767 + 316 − 55,015 + 445 + 6,192 + 2,658
2001          Q3 − 2,466 + 25,547 − 1,768 − 16,479 − 3,518 − 6,250 − 446 − 2,722 − 2,165 + 7,798 − 13,360
         Q4 + 8,737 + 25,303 − 703 − 7,447 − 1,050 − 7,365 − 479 − 46,370 + 2,085 + 36,027 + 36,688
2002          Q1 + 9,445 + 33,328 − 1,028 − 10,633 − 6,722 − 5,500 + 160 + 5,740 − 1,352 − 13,993 − 18,496
         Q2 + 10,420 + 31,721 − 1,383 − 8,605 − 2,682 − 8,631 − 75 − 9,488 + 2,432 − 3,289 + 1,694         Q3 + 9,507 + 35,543 − 1,552 − 12,652 − 5,563 − 6,269 + 62 − 17,554 + 87 + 7,899 − 17,588         Q4 + 16,299 + 32,195 − 2,005 − 4,532 − 1,877 − 7,483 − 359 − 49,422 + 898 + 32,584 + 1,099
2003          Q1 + 9,124 + 29,949 − 2,049 − 8,307 − 4,690 − 5,779 − 30 − 13,099 − 1,495 + 5,500 + 3,444
         Q2 + 8,698 + 30,436 − 1,860 − 8,340 − 3,649 − 7,890 + 149 − 25,399 + 1,505 + 15,047 + 22,123         Q3 + 11,377 + 39,533 − 1,582 − 13,275 − 4,479 − 8,820 + 208 + 3,279 − 751 − 14,113 − 15,902         Q4 + 18,863 + 32,297 − 1,844 − 5,615 + 303 − 6,278 − 12 − 19,796 + 1,186 − 241 − 7,008
2004          Q1 + 21,277 + 41,150 − 1,483 − 8,878 − 3,942 − 5,571 + 430 − 14,387 + 205 − 7,526 − 6,821
         Q2  
p + 26,666 + 43,021 − 2,200 − 8,087 + 999 − 7,067 + 209 − 71,294 − 339 + 44,758 + 30,993
2002          Jan + 361 + 10,526 − 508 − 3,825 − 6,449 + 616 + 477 + 9,907 − 1,747 − 8,998 − 17,916         Feb + 2,642 + 10,558 − 323 − 2,995 − 1,228 − 3,370 − 155 − 5,211 + 67 + 2,656 + 1,535         Mar + 6,441 + 12,245 − 198 − 3,814 + 955 − 2,746 − 162 + 1,044 + 328 − 7,651 − 2,116
         Apr + 2,949 + 10,015 − 910 − 2,509 − 620 − 3,027 − 148 + 330 + 1,657 − 4,788 − 9,839
         May + 3,584 + 10,408 − 565 − 3,230 − 557 − 2,472 + 47 + 492 + 1,379 − 5,501 + 3,826         June + 3,887 + 11,299 + 92 − 2,866 − 1,506 − 3,132 + 26 − 10,310 − 603 + 7,000 + 7,707
         July + 1,110 + 13,224 − 770 − 3,705 − 5,416 − 2,224 − 203 − 11,194 − 548 + 10,836 − 15,567
         Aug + 2,031 + 10,477 − 312 − 5,856 − 921 − 1,359 + 86 − 4,630 + 886 + 1,627 − 5,579         Sep + 6,367 + 11,842 − 471 − 3,092 + 773 − 2,686 + 179 − 1,730 − 252 − 4,564 + 3,559
         Oct + 3,087 + 11,529 − 364 − 3,826 − 966 − 3,287 − 82 − 21,706 + 570 + 18,132 − 5,279
         Nov + 8,450 + 12,283 − 632 − 1,346 + 446 − 2,301 − 137 − 5,800 − 842 − 1,670 + 4,265         Dec + 4,762 + 8,383 − 1,009 + 640 − 1,357 − 1,895 − 139 − 21,916 + 1,171 + 16,122 + 2,112
2003          Jan − 1,449 + 9,184 − 1,024 − 3,327 − 5,184 − 1,098 + 461 − 3,299 − 97 + 4,384 + 6,799
         Feb + 4,067 + 10,880 − 635 − 2,974 − 522 − 2,682 − 504 − 22,519 − 320 + 19,276 + 677         Mar + 6,507 + 9,886 − 390 − 2,006 + 1,016 − 2,000 + 13 + 12,719 − 1,078 − 18,160 − 4,032
         Apr + 3,320 + 9,425 − 752 − 2,310 − 339 − 2,704 − 126 − 3,365 + 1,449 − 1,278 + 1,477
         May + 3,186 + 10,416 − 549 − 2,775 − 1,379 − 2,527 + 156 − 7,420 − 854 + 4,932 + 22,684         June + 2,191 + 10,595 − 559 − 3,255 − 1,931 − 2,659 + 119 − 14,614 + 910 + 11,393 − 2,037
         July + 1,677 + 14,374 − 695 − 3,648 − 5,401 − 2,953 + 62 + 3,144 + 225 − 5,109 − 16,353
         Aug + 1,792 + 10,609 − 356 − 5,401 − 74 − 2,987 + 224 − 7,334 − 717 + 6,036 − 3,057         Sep + 7,908 + 14,550 − 531 − 4,227 + 997 − 2,880 − 78 + 7,469 − 259 − 15,040 + 3,508
         Oct + 6,595 + 11,061 − 510 − 3,786 + 1,704 − 1,874 − 27 − 4,471 − 255 − 1,842 − 21,689
         Nov + 5,254 + 10,607 − 591 − 1,543 − 320 − 2,899 + 49 − 4,277 + 521 − 1,547 + 14,870         Dec + 7,015 + 10,629 − 742 − 286 − 1,081 − 1,505 − 35 − 11,048 + 921 + 3,148 − 190
2004          Jan + 1,642 + 12,487 − 640 − 4,140 − 5,528 − 537 + 53 − 1,592 − 206 + 103 + 5,619
         Feb + 6,338 + 12,111 − 369 − 2,318 − 471 − 2,615 − 130 + 4,471 − 26 − 10,652 + 556         Mar + 13,297 + 16,552 − 473 − 2,420 + 2,057 − 2,419 + 507 − 17,265 + 437 + 3,024 − 12,996
         Apr + 9,739 + 14,278 − 524 − 3,105 + 835 − 1,745 + 82 − 37,457 − 628 + 28,264 + 315
         May + 8,762 + 14,084 − 889 − 1,839 − 99 − 2,495 − 29 − 12,412 + 607 + 3,073 + 9,981         June  
p + 8,165 + 14,659 − 787 − 3,143 + 263 − 2,827 + 156 − 21,425 − 318 + 13,421 + 20,697
oFrom July 1990, including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. —
1Fromthe beginning of 1993, figures subject to significant uncertainty 4Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
owing to changes in the method of data collection for foreign trade. — goods returned. — 5See footnote 3. — 6Excluding the expenditure on
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, freight and insurance included in the cif import figure. — 7Capital
exports fob. — 3FromJanuary 1993, including additional estim ates for exports: −. — 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are
68*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
X External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2004
Country / group of countries  2001  2002  2003 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun  p 
All countries  1 Exports 638,268 651,320 664,185 55,664 56,590 64,931 61,738 60,683 62,966
Imports 542,774 518,532 531,970 43,177 44,479 48,379 47,460 46,599 48,307Balance + 95,495 + 132,788 + 132,215 + 12,487 + 12,111 + 16,552 + 14,278 + 14,084 + 14,659
I Exports 461,512 470,873 490,496 40,911 42,215 48,432 45,539 45,102 ...European countries
Imports 384,901 372,955 385,358 31,045 32,705 35,389 34,036 33,358 ...Balance + 76,611 + 97,918 + 105,139 + 9,866 + 9,510 + 13,044 + 11,503 + 11,744 ...
Exports 401,887 408,286 426,298 35,514 36,851 41,916 39,269 38,850 ... 1 EU member states (25)
Imports 325,968 314,981 325,614 26,335 27,671 30,360 28,583 28,400 ...
Balance + 75,919 + 93,304 + 100,684 + 9,179 + 9,180 + 11,556 + 10,686 + 10,450 ...
Memo item
Exports 351,611 354,813 369,763 30,859 31,986 36,119 33,666 33,483 ...  EU member states (15)
Imports 277,034 262,849 268,295 21,595 22,649 24,712 22,807 24,075 ...Balance + 74,577 + 91,964 + 101,468 + 9,265 + 9,337 + 11,407 + 10,859 + 9,409 ...
Euro-area Exports 275,384 276,270 288,458 24,267 24,766 28,316 26,348 26,306 ...countries Imports 221,680 211,642 217,853 17,696 18,527 19,998 18,778 19,743 ...
Balance + 53,704 + 64,628 + 70,605 + 6,571 + 6,239 + 8,317 + 7,570 + 6,563 ...
of which
Austria Exports 33,486 33,863 35,637 2,871 3,022 3,368 3,220 3,117 ...
Imports 20,664 21,047 21,026 1,612 1,861 2,178 2,197 1,962 ...Balance + 12,822 + 12,816 + 14,611 + 1,259 + 1,161 + 1,191 + 1,022 + 1,154 ...
Belgium and Exports 35,187 34,108 38,412 3,201 3,265 4,089 3,687 3,654 ...Luxembourg Imports 28,521 26,505 27,710 2,208 2,268 2,699 2,440 2,469 ...
Balance + 6,666 + 7,603 + 10,702 + 994 + 997 + 1,390 + 1,247 + 1,186 ...
France Exports 69,601 68,721 69,413 5,665 5,899 6,775 6,367 6,179 ...
Imports 49,743 48,200 48,832 3,838 4,094 4,512 4,203 4,749 ...Balance + 19,858 + 20,521 + 20,581 + 1,827 + 1,805 + 2,263 + 2,164 + 1,430 ...
Italy Exports 47,119 47,335 48,597 4,275 4,248 4,759 4,309 4,394 ...
Imports 35,280 33,482 33,670 2,545 2,797 3,041 2,798 2,936 ...Balance + 11,839 + 13,853 + 14,927 + 1,730 + 1,451 + 1,719 + 1,511 + 1,459 ...
Netherlands Exports 40,011 40,463 41,711 3,468 3,525 3,875 3,511 3,660 ...
Imports 43,233 40,751 44,404 3,733 3,703 3,915 3,621 3,735 ...Balance − 3,222 − 288 − 2,694 − 265 − 178 − 40 − 109 − 75 ...
Spain Exports 27,841 29,436 32,314 2,873 2,857 3,185 3,156 3,287 ...
Imports 15,226 15,532 16,421 1,358 1,467 1,441 1,365 1,487 ...Balance + 12,615 + 13,903 + 15,893 + 1,515 + 1,390 + 1,744 + 1,791 + 1,800 ...
Other EU member Exports 126,503 132,016 137,840 11,247 12,085 13,600 12,921 12,544 ...states Imports 104,288 103,339 107,761 8,639 9,143 10,361 9,805 8,658 ...
Balance + 22,215 + 28,677 + 30,079 + 2,609 + 2,942 + 3,239 + 3,116 + 3,887 ...
of which
United Exports 52,764 53,761 55,580 4,546 5,126 5,457 5,033 4,949 ...KingdomIm ports 37,259 33,075 31,961 2,485 2,465 2,904 2,597 2,762 ...
Balance + 15,505 + 20,685 + 23,619 + 2,061 + 2,661 + 2,553 + 2,436 + 2,187 ...
Exports 59,624 62,588 64,198 5,397 5,365 6,516 6,271 6,251 ... 2 Other European
Imports 58,933 57,974 59,744 4,710 5,035 5,029 5,454 4,958 ... countries
Balance + 692 + 4,614 + 4,454 + 687 + 330 + 1,487 + 817 + 1,294 ...
II Exports 175,203 178,818 172,236 14,647 14,255 16,394 16,097 15,498 ...Non-European
Imports 157,199 144,950 145,910 12,074 11,718 12,930 13,365 13,198 ... countries
Balance + 18,003 + 33,869 + 26,326 + 2,573 + 2,537 + 3,464 + 2,732 + 2,300 ...
Exports 12,042 11,797 12,079 948 962 1,072 1,247 1,026 ... 1 Africa
Imports 11,356 10,248 9,846 725 729 925 707 691 ...
Balance + 686 + 1,549 + 2,233 + 224 + 233 + 148 + 540 + 335 ...
Exports 89,801 89,081 79,617 6,527 6,509 7,326 7,451 6,849 ... 2 America
Imports 59,575 52,822 51,322 4,007 3,729 4,395 4,702 4,736 ...
Balance + 30,226 + 36,259 + 28,295 + 2,520 + 2,780 + 2,931 + 2,749 + 2,113 ...
of which
Exports 67,824 68,263 61,669 4,915 5,081 5,624 5,692 5,305 ... United States
Imports 45,982 40,376 39,046 3,019 2,799 3,161 3,669 3,697 ...Balance + 21,842 + 27,887 + 22,624 + 1,896 + 2,282 + 2,464 + 2,023 + 1,608 ...
Exports 68,936 72,915 75,539 6,743 6,368 7,532 6,968 7,202 ... 3 Asia
Imports 84,220 79,892 82,991 7,170 7,112 7,404 7,818 7,641 ...
Balance − 15,285 − 6,977 − 7,453 − 427 − 743 + 128 − 849 − 439 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 14,130 15,045 15,503 1,357 1,206 1,519 1,271 1,490 ...
Imports 5,434 4,696 4,460 300 301 344 295 411 ...Balance + 8,696 + 10,349 + 11,043 + 1,057 + 905 + 1,175 + 975 + 1,080 ...
Japan Exports 13,103 12,576 11,838 1,062 1,062 1,203 952 902 ...
Imports 22,910 19,896 19,139 1,605 1,655 1,892 1,889 1,757 ...Balance − 9,807 − 7,320 − 7,301 − 544 − 593 − 690 − 937 − 855 ...
Exports 12,118 14,571 18,201 1,682 1,522 1,838 2,004 1,891 ... People‘s Republic
of China  
2 Imports 19,942 21,338 25,024 2,259 2,219 2,180 2,424 2,382 ... of China  2 
Balance − 7,824 − 6,768 − 6,823 − 577 − 697 − 342 − 420 − 491 ...
Exports 4,424 5,026 5,001 429 415 464 431 421 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,048 1,988 1,751 173 148 207 139 130 ... polar regions
Balance + 2,375 + 3,038 + 3,250 + 256 + 267 + 257 + 292 + 290 ...
Memo item
Exports 24,735 25,282 24,557 2,177 2,086 2,418 2,219 2,347 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 28,351 26,660 26,581 2,334 2,177 2,256 2,409 2,379 ... South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 3,616 − 1,377 − 2,023 − 157 − 91 + 162 − 190 − 32 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by regi on. —
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 
69*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
X External sector
 
4 Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1999 − 46,067 − 35,468 + 2,882 + 1,005 − 1,896 + 1,997 − 14,588 − 2,245 − 403 − 756 − 8,843
2000 − 49,067 − 37,249 + 3,386 + 1,668 − 3,012 + 2,221 − 16,081 − 2,757 − 753 − 512 − 2,129
2001 − 50,272 − 37,955 + 4,151 + 1,079 − 2,455 + 3,488 − 18,581 − 2,538 − 619 − 257 − 10,4242002 − 36,422 − 35,445 + 2,750 + 1,380 − 1,461 + 5,237 − 8,883 − 2,035 + 403 − 144 − 16,7002003 − 35,537 − 36,869 + 1,825 + 1,529 − 882 + 5,050 − 6,190 − 1,863 + 1,419 − 86 − 12,428
2002          Q4 − 4,532 − 6,677 + 1,072 + 425 + 100 + 1,253 − 704 − 465 + 250 + 24 − 1,901
2003          Q1 − 8,307 − 6,921 + 168 + 449 − 293 + 1,273 − 2,983 − 574 + 473 + 216 − 4,906
         Q2 − 8,340 − 9,127 + 695 + 355 − 193 + 1,203 − 1,272 − 485 + 177 − 85 − 3,565         Q3 − 13,275 − 13,994 + 453 + 339 − 369 + 1,316 − 1,020 − 410 + 439 − 240 − 4,239         Q4 − 5,615 − 6,827 + 509 + 386 − 26 + 1,257 − 915 − 393 + 330 + 22 + 281
2004          Q1 − 8,878 − 7,018 + 517 + 351 − 188 + 1,317 − 3,858 − 342 + 214 + 210 − 4,152
         Q2 − 8,087 − 8,965 + 1,385 + 249 − 344 + 1,438 − 1,849 − 309 − 23 − 58 + 1,056
2003          Aug − 5,401 − 6,275 + 242 + 140 − 58 + 404 + 146 − 138 + 114 − 86 + 12
         Sep − 4,227 − 4,490 + 103 + 48 − 170 + 444 − 162 − 103 + 97 − 84 + 1,081
         Oct − 3,786 − 3,904 + 37 + 85 − 37 + 380 − 347 − 133 + 100 − 0 + 1,704
         Nov − 1,543 − 1,778 + 183 + 176 + 2 + 383 − 509 − 99 + 92 − 8 − 312         Dec − 286 − 1,144 + 289 + 125 + 9 + 494 − 58 − 161 + 139 + 30 − 1,111
2004          Jan − 4,140 − 2,378 + 32 + 103 − 0 + 437 − 2,333 − 143 + 31 + 67 − 5,595
         Feb − 2,318 − 1,907 + 134 + 112 + 7 + 426 − 1,091 − 93 + 114 + 64 − 534         Mar − 2,420 − 2,733 + 351 + 136 − 195 + 455 − 434 − 105 + 68 + 80 + 1,977
         Apr − 3,105 − 2,689 + 578 + 66 − 125 + 470 − 1,405 − 83 − 58 − 20 + 855
         May − 1,839 − 2,557 + 256 + 121 − 24 + 453 − 88 − 107 + 61 − 25 − 74         June − 3,143 − 3,719 + 551 + 62 − 195 + 515 − 357 − 119 − 27 − 12 + 275
1FromJanuary 2002, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts fromforeign m ilitary agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million €  million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Remittances Other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1999 − 25,016 − 17,348 − 15,428 − 13,846 − 1,920 − 7,667 − 3,429 − 4,239 − 154 − 1,351 + 1,197
2000 − 28,366 − 19,094 − 17,100 − 15,398 − 1,995 − 9,271 − 3,458 − 5,814 − 1,599 − 1,189 − 410
2001 − 27,425 − 16,927 − 14,257 − 12,587 − 2,670 − 10,499 − 3,520 − 6,978 − 387 − 1,361 + 9742002 − 27,883 − 16,207 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 3,162 − 11,676 − 3,470 − 8,206 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,2042003 − 28,767 − 18,793 − 15,397 − 13,732 − 3,396 − 9,974 − 3,332 − 6,642 + 316 − 1,235 + 1,551
2002          Q4 − 7,483 − 4,477 − 3,232 − 2,998 − 1,245 − 3,006 − 868 − 2,139 − 359 − 565 + 207
2003          Q1 − 5,779 − 3,317 − 2,297 − 1,628 − 1,020 − 2,463 − 833 − 1,629 − 30 − 253 + 223
         Q2 − 7,890 − 5,403 − 5,375 − 4,790 − 28 − 2,487 − 833 − 1,654 + 149 − 276 + 425         Q3 − 8,820 − 6,017 − 4,896 − 4,650 − 1,121 − 2,803 − 833 − 1,970 + 208 − 249 + 457         Q4 − 6,278 − 4,057 − 2,829 − 2,665 − 1,227 − 2,222 − 833 − 1,389 − 12 − 457 + 445
2004          Q1 − 5,571 − 3,337 − 2,466 − 1,822 − 871 − 2,233 − 795 − 1,438 + 430 − 254 + 684
         Q2 − 7,067 − 4,387 − 4,472 − 4,187 + 85 − 2,680 − 795 − 1,885 + 209 − 239 + 448
2003          Aug − 2,987 − 2,061 − 1,579 − 1,556 − 482 − 926 − 278 − 648 + 224 − 73 + 297
         Sep − 2,880 − 1,864 − 1,662 − 1,603 − 202 − 1,016 − 278 − 738 − 78 − 91 + 13
         Oct − 1,874 − 1,071 − 631 − 514 − 441 − 803 − 278 − 525 − 27 − 87 + 60
         Nov − 2,899 − 2,161 − 1,684 − 1,674 − 477 − 739 − 278 − 461 + 49 − 229 + 278         Dec − 1,505 − 824 − 515 − 477 − 310 − 681 − 278 − 403 − 35 − 141 + 107
2004          Jan − 537 + 278 + 501 + 863 − 223 − 815 − 265 − 550 + 53 − 84 + 137
         Feb − 2,615 − 1,912 − 1,547 − 1,388 − 366 − 702 − 265 − 437 − 130 − 95 − 36         Mar − 2,419 − 1,703 − 1,420 − 1,296 − 282 − 716 − 265 − 451 + 507 − 75 + 582
         Apr − 1,745 − 851 − 941 − 859 + 90 − 894 − 265 − 629 + 82 − 71 + 153
         May − 2,495 − 1,475 − 1,538 − 1,422 + 63 − 1,020 − 265 − 755 − 29 − 91 + 62         June − 2,827 − 2,061 − 1,993 − 1,906 − 68 − 766 − 265 − 501 + 156 − 77 + 233
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
X External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2003 2004
Item2001 2002 2003 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Apr May June
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 270,632 − 249,672 − 174,719 + 7,919 − 18,278 − 77,020 − 11,102 − 27,859 + 9,811 + 6,946
1 Direct investment  1 − 41,185 − 9,161 − 2,268 − 3,041 + 1,085 + 10,210 − 3,299 − 859 − 415 − 2,025
Equity capital − 70,254 − 38,266 − 13,052 − 2,297 − 2,324 + 21,155 − 2,398 − 387 − 1,183 − 829
Reinvested earnings  2 + 17,892 + 16,224 + 1,380 + 345 + 345 + 325 + 325 + 108 + 108 + 108
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors + 16,260 + 20,639 + 18,881 + 939 + 6,329 − 9,760 + 1,213 − 29 + 1,309 − 68Other capital − 5,083 − 7,759 − 9,477 − 2,029 − 3,265 − 1,511 − 2,439 − 552 − 650 − 1,237
2 Portfolio investment − 124,375 − 65,848 − 32,323 − 1,554 − 10,668 − 25,990 − 31,784 − 7,378 − 10,966 − 13,440
Equity
3 − 10,581 − 4,832 + 7,628 − 734 − 5,969 + 1,230 + 953 + 4,106 − 3,383 + 229
Mutual fund shares  4 − 20,222 − 6,995 − 4,253 − 240 − 467 − 7,059 − 2,628 − 1,659 − 347 − 622
Bonds and notes  5 − 95,067 − 49,056 − 37,811 − 860 − 6,645 − 26,144 − 25,849 − 8,948 − 6,633 − 10,268
Money market instruments + 1,495 − 4,965 + 2,112 + 280 + 2,412 + 5,983 − 4,259 − 878 − 603 − 2,779
3 Financial derivatives  6 + 6,829 − 863 − 493 − 384 − 36 − 1,255 + 2,289 + 776 + 922 + 591
4 Credit transactions − 110,515 − 172,208 − 137,045 + 13,575 − 7,988 − 58,969 + 22,506 − 20,106 + 20,334 + 22,278
MFIs  7,8 − 130,648 − 132,536 − 122,307 + 29,417 − 10,941 − 36,597 − 14,365 − 23,504 + 5,540 + 3,599
Long-term− 47,636 − 33,790 − 32,556 − 8,176 − 4,882 + 3,570 + 5,597 − 1,883 + 6,776 + 704
Short-term− 83,012 − 98,746 − 89,750 + 37,593 − 6,059 − 40,167 − 19,962 − 21,621 − 1,236 + 2,895
Enterprises and households − 19,861 − 10,830 − 16,234 − 113 + 9,965 − 17,505 + 4,911 + 3,316 + 3,812 − 2,217
Long-term− 2,502 − 1,187 − 2,729 − 565 − 888 − 669 − 429 − 248 − 38 − 143
Short-term  7 − 17,360 − 9,643 − 13,505 + 452 + 10,853 − 16,836 + 5,340 + 3,564 + 3,850 − 2,074
General government + 15,980 + 7,168 + 1,265 − 160 + 1,021 + 1,158 + 64 − 780 + 511 + 333
Long-term+ 257 + 218 + 692 + 274 + 115 + 305 + 7 + 36 − 23 − 6Short-term  
7 + 15,723 + 6,950 + 572 − 434 + 906 + 853 + 57 − 815 + 534 + 339
Bundesbank + 24,015 − 36,010 + 230 − 15,569 − 8,033 − 6,025 + 31,896 + 862 + 10,471 + 20,563
5 Other investment  9 − 1,385 − 1,592 − 2,590 − 677 − 670 − 1,016 − 814 − 292 − 65 − 457
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 244,399 + 178,948 + 119,704 − 4,640 − 1,518 + 62,633 − 60,191 − 9,598 − 22,223 − 28,370
1 Direct investment  1 + 23,622 + 38,269 + 11,400 + 5,829 − 12,994 − 32,076 − 5,733 − 3,069 − 37 − 2,627
Equity capital + 29,702 + 29,311 + 27,956 + 3,906 + 11,409 + 5,014 − 3,022 − 55 + 1,692 − 4,659Reinvested earnings  
2 − 20,520 − 13,008 − 5,484 − 1,371 − 1,371 − 6,898 − 1,298 − 433 − 433 − 433
Credit transactions of
foreign direct investors + 14,584 + 22,162 − 10,886 + 3,266 − 22,980 − 30,246 − 1,394 − 2,583 − 1,286 + 2,474Other capital − 143 − 197 − 186 + 27 − 52 + 54 − 19 + 2 − 11 − 10
2 Portfolio investment + 150,870 + 109,783 + 91,276 − 4,798 + 31,075 + 34,063 − 429 − 5,172 + 1,744 + 3,000
Equity  
3 + 86,812 + 15,712 + 24,204 + 2,989 + 20,306 + 2,793 − 12,027 − 23,664 − 5,661 + 17,298
Mutual fund shares + 951 − 673 − 1,530 − 802 + 278 + 835 − 981 − 198 − 238 − 545
Bonds and notes  5 + 80,299 + 83,473 + 69,243 + 6,343 + 14,389 + 42,914 + 15,077 + 20,106 + 8,682 − 13,711
Money market instruments − 17,191 + 11,271 − 642 − 13,328 − 3,897 − 12,479 − 2,498 − 1,416 − 1,039 − 43
3 Credit transactions + 69,859 + 30,814 + 17,005 − 5,676 − 19,580 + 60,603 − 54,104 − 1,424 − 23,937 − 28,743
MFIs  7,8 + 54,341 + 28,453 + 12,160 − 9,428 − 19,300 + 57,886 − 52,845 − 106 − 23,432 − 29,308
Long-term+ 4,425 + 18,379 − 4,512 − 7,407 + 6,012 − 8,845 − 1,543 − 1,977 + 497 − 63
Short-term+ 49,916 + 10,075 + 16,672 − 2,021 − 25,312 + 66,730 − 51,302 + 1,871 − 23,929 − 29,245
Enterprises and households + 12,008 + 3,332 − 820 + 1,032 + 1,068 + 7,908 − 3,198 − 2,604 − 162 − 433
Long-term+ 11,743 + 5,250 − 1,901 + 1,345 + 57 + 3,078 + 289 − 282 − 183 + 753
Short-term  7 + 265 − 1,918 + 1,081 − 314 + 1,011 + 4,830 − 3,487 − 2,322 + 21 − 1,186
General government + 879 − 1,625 + 3,682 + 2,302 − 1,186 − 4,188 + 2,504 + 1,205 + 754 + 546
Long-term− 217 − 125 + 4,861 − 158 + 1,178 − 2,208 + 1,409 + 1,216 + 812 − 619Short-term  
7 + 1,096 − 1,500 − 1,179 + 2,460 − 2,365 − 1,980 + 1,095 − 11 − 58 + 1,165
Bundesbank + 2,631 + 653 + 1,983 + 418 − 161 − 1,002 − 564 + 80 − 1,097 + 452
4 Other investment + 47 + 83 + 24 + 6 − 19 + 43 + 74 + 67 + 7 + 0
III Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) − 26,233 − 70,724 − 55,015 + 3,279 − 19,796 − 14,387 − 71,294 − 37,457 − 12,412 − 21,425
1From1996, new definition for direct investm ent. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including accumulated statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9In particular, subscriptions of the Federal
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- Government to international organisations. 
71*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
X External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising fromexternalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,4531993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residents Net externalFund and claims on Claims in other position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2003          Feb 95,491 83,685 35,721 8,008 39,956 312 11,001 493 9,669 85,822
         Mar 98,240 82,530 34,100 8,348 40,083 312 14,908 490 10,599 87,641
         Apr 93,702 79,453 33,442 8,123 37,888 312 13,496 441 9,126 84,575
         May 70,456 78,904 34,252 7,871 36,781 312 − 9,216 455 9,818 60,638         June 73,550 78,425 33,435 8,292 36,698 312 − 5,663 476 10,537 63,014
         July 90,714 79,218 34,759 8,289 36,170 312 10,710 474 10,375 80,339
         Aug 98,605 84,197 37,546 8,583 38,068 312 13,592 504 11,060 87,545         Sep 91,894 81,206 36,491 8,492 36,223 312 9,902 474 10,879 81,016
         Oct 113,947 81,401 36,595 8,539 36,267 312 31,794 440 11,319 102,628
         Nov 97,130 79,624 36,705 8,374 34,545 312 16,742 452 10,518 86,612         Dec 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004          Jan 89,895 76,992 35,834 7,726 33,432 312 12,135 456 10,522 79,374
         Feb 87,987 76,089 34,930 7,736 33,423 312 11,140 446 10,078 77,910         Mar 104,464 79,717 38,266 7,610 33,841 312 23,981 454 9,545 94,920
         Apr 102,021 78,143 35,849 7,880 34,414 312 23,134 432 9,694 92,327
         May 89,877 76,473 35,705 7,685 33,083 312 12,641 451 8,537 81,340         June 69,837 76,996 35,793 7,390 33,813 312 − 7,951 480 9,003 60,834
         July 70,865 76,076 35,721 7,395 32,960 312 − 6,009 486 8,545 62,320
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Deutsche Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. Fro m
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
72*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
X External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with fromCredit Advance fromfromCredit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,280
2001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003 357,399 86,627 270,772 154,953 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2004          Jan 376,102 97,551 278,551 165,784 112,767 105,352 7,415 541,955 59,085 482,870 397,897 84,973 56,451 28,522
         Feb 373,952 100,262 273,690 158,957 114,733 106,933 7,800 525,880 61,515 464,365 379,646 84,719 55,887 28,832         Mar 383,299 101,332 281,967 162,540 119,427 112,036 7,391 523,358 58,687 464,671 373,242 91,429 60,912 30,517
         Apr 378,176 98,826 279,350 161,096 118,254 110,603 7,651 516,565 57,255 459,310 371,128 88,182 57,028 31,154
         May 375,102 94,057 281,045 161,579 119,466 111,809 7,657 518,986 56,858 462,128 372,372 89,756 57,967 31,789         June 383,333 96,394 286,939 163,660 123,279 115,754 7,525 525,509 54,845 470,664 379,253 91,411 60,242 31,169
Industrial countries 2
 
2000 262,284 42,488 219,796 132,570 87,226 81,391 5,835 407,513 50,184 357,329 294,569 62,760 51,078 11,6822001 298,904 61,403 237,501 151,047 86,454 79,453 7,001 466,206 57,861 408,345 340,344 68,001 54,364 13,6372002  
4 278,074 62,861 215,213 133,509 81,704 75,996 5,708 493,155 55,770 437,385 372,464 64,921 50,731 14,190
2003 305,754 85,390 220,364 140,280 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,220
2004          Jan 325,420 95,751 229,669 151,374 78,295 73,297 4,998 498,964 57,528 441,436 381,658 59,778 44,871 14,907
         Feb 323,349 98,758 224,591 144,333 80,258 74,980 5,278 480,772 59,120 421,652 362,647 59,005 44,087 14,918         Mar 331,633 99,757 231,876 147,990 83,886 78,987 4,899 476,713 56,284 420,429 355,947 64,482 48,285 16,197
         Apr 326,684 97,406 229,278 146,701 82,577 77,612 4,965 470,049 54,973 415,076 353,847 61,229 44,745 16,484
         May 333,646 92,672 240,974 151,041 89,933 84,613 5,320 480,255 54,711 425,544 358,690 66,854 48,839 18,015         June 341,730 95,129 246,601 153,095 93,506 88,252 5,254 487,219 52,718 434,501 365,438 69,063 51,545 17,518
EU countries 2
 
2000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,5362001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003 225,973 81,430 144,543 89,392 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,642
2004          Jan 244,609 91,604 153,005 98,532 54,473 50,661 3,812 412,101 53,753 358,348 319,307 39,041 28,893 10,148
         Feb 244,375 92,678 151,697 95,345 56,352 52,249 4,103 392,919 53,931 338,988 300,405 38,583 28,560 10,023         Mar 251,007 93,160 157,847 99,577 58,270 54,521 3,749 384,501 50,947 333,554 290,940 42,614 31,286 11,328
         Apr 247,132 90,875 156,257 99,192 57,065 53,335 3,730 378,851 49,982 328,869 289,006 39,863 28,413 11,450
         May 255,423 86,130 169,293 103,970 65,323 61,205 4,118 391,604 49,732 341,872 295,897 45,975 33,084 12,891         June 259,865 88,680 171,185 103,659 67,526 63,401 4,125 396,192 47,760 348,432 301,273 47,159 34,708 12,451
of which:  Euro-area member states 1
 
2000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,404
2004          Jan 157,917 49,422 108,495 66,475 42,020 39,057 2,963 341,329 33,550 307,779 278,884 28,895 21,184 7,711
         Feb 156,892 51,807 105,085 61,008 44,077 40,823 3,254 313,682 34,891 278,791 250,138 28,653 20,953 7,700         Mar 162,182 52,802 109,380 64,168 45,212 42,367 2,845 321,381 33,888 287,493 255,488 32,005 23,105 8,900
         Apr 158,519 50,134 108,385 63,943 44,442 41,615 2,827 316,676 32,987 283,689 253,466 30,223 21,163 9,060
         May 157,317 47,971 109,346 64,396 44,950 42,112 2,838 321,627 32,318 289,309 258,190 31,119 21,768 9,351         June 160,788 49,919 110,869 64,454 46,415 43,462 2,953 327,205 31,976 295,229 263,503 31,726 22,679 9,047
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2000 58,590 974 57,616 20,182 37,434 35,580 1,854 38,547 2,479 36,068 14,455 21,613 12,015 9,5982001 59,216 1,031 58,185 20,892 37,293 35,404 1,889 39,060 2,271 36,789 14,217 22,572 11,624 10,9482002  
4 53,597 956 52,641 15,404 37,237 35,410 1,827 40,268 1,926 38,342 15,386 22,956 11,891 11,065
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,249
2004          Jan 50,682 1,800 48,882 14,410 34,472 32,055 2,417 42,991 1,557 41,434 16,239 25,195 11,580 13,615
         Feb 50,603 1,504 49,099 14,624 34,475 31,953 2,522 45,108 2,395 42,713 16,999 25,714 11,800 13,914         Mar 51,666 1,575 50,091 14,550 35,541 33,049 2,492 46,645 2,403 44,242 17,295 26,947 12,627 14,320
         Apr 51,492 1,420 50,072 14,395 35,677 32,991 2,686 46,516 2,282 44,234 17,281 26,953 12,283 14,670
         May 41,456 1,385 40,071 10,538 29,533 27,196 2,337 38,731 2,147 36,584 13,682 22,902 9,128 13,774         June 41,603 1,265 40,338 10,565 29,773 27,502 2,271 38,290 2,127 36,163 13,815 22,348 8,697 13,651
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in January 2001, including Greece. — 2FromMay 2004, including the new
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in member states: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia ,
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia. — 3All
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. — 4Change in the
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X.7. — 1From reporting population owing to an increase in the exemption limit. 
73*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
X External sector
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 9.1611 0.62883 7.5086 1.4670 1.4838 1.7376 2.03662003 1.1312 130.97 7.4307 9.1242 0.69199 8.0033 1.5212 1.5817 1.7379 1.9438
2002          Nov 1.0014 121.65 7.4280 9.0818 0.63709 7.3190 1.4673 1.5735 1.7847 2.0155
         Dec 1.0183 124.20 7.4264 9.0961 0.64218 7.2948 1.4679 1.5872 1.8076 1.9947
2003          Jan 1.0622 126.12 7.4324 9.1733 0.65711 7.3328 1.4621 1.6364 1.8218 1.9648
         Feb 1.0773 128.60 7.4317 9.1455 0.66977 7.5439 1.4674 1.6299 1.8112 1.9457         Mar 1.0807 128.16 7.4274 9.2265 0.68255 7.8450 1.4695 1.5943 1.7950 1.9497
         Apr 1.0848 130.12 7.4255 9.1541 0.68902 7.8317 1.4964 1.5851 1.7813 1.9700
         May 1.1582 135.83 7.4246 9.1559 0.71322 7.8715 1.5155 1.6016 1.7866 2.0083         June 1.1663 138.05 7.4250 9.1182 0.70224 8.1619 1.5411 1.5798 1.7552 2.0069
         July 1.1372 134.99 7.4332 9.1856 0.70045 8.2893 1.5476 1.5694 1.7184 1.9386
         Aug 1.1139 132.38 7.4322 9.2378 0.69919 8.2558 1.5400 1.5570 1.7114 1.9137         Sep 1.1222 128.94 7.4273 9.0682 0.69693 8.1952 1.5474 1.5330 1.6967 1.9227
         Oct 1.1692 128.12 7.4301 9.0105 0.69763 8.2274 1.5485 1.5489 1.6867 1.9446
         Nov 1.1702 127.84 7.4370 8.9939 0.69278 8.1969 1.5590 1.5361 1.6337 1.8608         Dec 1.2286 132.43 7.4419 9.0228 0.70196 8.2421 1.5544 1.6131 1.6626 1.8982
2004          Jan 1.2613 134.13 7.4481 9.1368 0.69215 8.5925 1.5657 1.6346 1.6374 1.8751
         Feb 1.2646 134.78 7.4511 9.1763 0.67690 8.7752 1.5734 1.6817 1.6260 1.8262         Mar 1.2262 133.13 7.4493 9.2346 0.67124 8.5407 1.5670 1.6314 1.6370 1.8566
         Apr 1.1985 129.08 7.4436 9.1653 0.66533 8.2976 1.5547 1.6068 1.6142 1.8727
         May 1.2007 134.48 7.4405 9.1277 0.67157 8.2074 1.5400 1.6541 1.7033 1.9484         June 1.2138 132.86 7.4342 9.1430 0.66428 8.2856 1.5192 1.6492 1.7483 1.9301
         July 1.2266 134.08 7.4355 9.1962 0.66576 8.4751 1.5270 1.6220 1.7135 1.8961
*Calculated fromdaily quotations. — 1Exchange rates fromAustralia and central banks at 14.15. For additional euro reference exchange rates of the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. — 2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics.
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the euro-area member states, the Deutsche Mark value of
the ECU * and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.05076
1992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated fromdaily quotations. — 1As per data fromthe European exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). — 3Applicable from1 January
Commission. — 2Up to 1998, reciprocal values of the exchange rates for the 1999. — 4Applicable from1 January 2001. — 5Deutsche Mark conversion
Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from1999, euro reference rate. 
74*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
X External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
Indicators of the German economy’s currencies against the currencies of 19 industrial
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3,4 countries  3,5,6 
Narrow group  1 Broad group  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  7 
Real Real
based  on based  on based  on the
consumer consumer Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  8 based on consumer prices
1995 108.0 108.5 93.1 107.5 109.6 110.4 110.2 86.1 84.0 106.4 105.4 115.6
1996 108.1 108.7 95.4 105.7 106.1 106.8 105.2 90.9 85.9 108.8 104.2 100.61997 99.1 99.4 90.3 96.4 100.6 101.4 99.0 98.8 99.8 109.7 97.9 95.91998 101.5 101.3 96.5 99.0 100.9 101.1 100.1 103.4 103.3 103.5 99.9 89.71999 95.6 95.6 96.5 95.7 97.8 98.0 97.6 100.8 102.3 102.2 98.3 105.1
2000 85.4 86.0 88.0 85.9 91.8 92.6 91.1 105.4 105.2 103.6 96.8 117.9
2001 87.0 88.3 90.8 87.5 91.9 93.0 91.4 112.0 103.6 100.5 100.5 106.72002 89.7 92.2 95.4 91.4 93.1 94.0 92.5 110.7 104.2 98.7 104.9 100.82003 99.9 103.5 106.8 101.8
p 96.7 97.7 97.2 97.7 99.2 108.0 105.3 99.9
1999          Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0         Q2 96.1 95.8 96.4 95.8 98.5 98.3 97.8 102.8 102.8 103.5 98.6 99.0         Q3 94.5 94.6 95.5 94.6 97.0 97.8 97.2 101.4 102.3 102.3 97.7 106.2         Q4 92.0 92.2 94.1 92.6 95.5 95.9 95.5 99.1 104.1 102.8 96.7 115.2
2000          Q1 88.8 89.3 91.0 89.2 93.6 94.8 93.5 101.5 106.4 104.9 95.1 114.9
         Q2 85.7 86.0 88.2 86.1 92.0 92.5 91.3 104.3 105.4 103.7 96.5 118.4         Q3 84.5 85.1 87.1 84.9 91.3 92.1 90.4 106.2 103.9 104.1 97.2 119.2         Q4 82.7 83.6 85.7 83.3 90.1 91.0 89.2 109.4 105.0 101.6 98.2 119.2
2001          Jan 88.9 89.8 91.5 88.7 . 94.0 92.3 107.7 102.4 102.7 100.0 108.3
         Feb 88.0 89.0 90.8 88.0 92.7 93.9 92.2 108.8 102.0 101.6 99.2 109.9         Mar 88.1 89.1 91.2 88.2 . 93.6 92.0 111.5 102.9 99.7 99.3 106.0
         Apr 87.3 88.3 90.8 87.6 . 93.1 91.5 113.0 103.7 100.0 99.4 104.9
         May 85.7 86.7 89.1 85.8 91.4 92.4 90.4 113.1 104.3 101.3 98.3 107.5         June 84.4 85.6 87.9 84.7 . 91.9 89.8 114.1 104.4 102.7 98.5 108.3
         July 85.1 86.5 88.9 85.8 . 92.7 90.8 114.3 104.9 102.5 99.5 105.8
         Aug 87.4 88.8 91.6 88.2 91.5 93.4 91.9 111.6 103.0 101.1 100.4 106.4         Sep 87.7 89.1 92.4 88.9 . 93.1 91.9 110.7 103.8 99.1 102.2 108.2
         Oct 87.8 89.4 92.6 89.0 . 92.7 91.5 111.8 103.7 99.0 103.0 106.2
         Nov 86.5 88.3 91.1 87.5 92.1 92.0 90.5 113.3 104.0 97.8 103.4 106.3         Dec 87.4 89.5 91.6 88.3 . 93.5 91.7 114.1 104.3 99.0 103.3 102.1
2002          Jan 87.3 89.9 91.4 88.1 . 93.6 91.4 116.4 104.9 97.9 103.3 98.3
         Feb 86.5 89.0 90.9 87.4 92.2 93.3 91.0 117.3 105.3 98.5 102.7 98.2         Mar 86.5 88.9 91.0 87.5 . 93.2 90.9 116.1 104.6 98.7 103.4 99.8
         Apr 87.0 89.1 91.5 87.6 . 92.7 90.4 115.3 105.2 99.0 103.8 99.4
         May 88.4 90.6 93.4 89.5 92.7 93.2 91.3 112.0 103.5 100.4 105.1 101.2         June 90.4 92.7 96.2 92.0 . 94.2 92.7 109.0 101.9 101.0 104.9 101.7
         July 91.4 94.1 98.0 93.9 . 95.2 94.4 106.0 103.5 99.4 106.0 104.3
         Aug 90.8 93.4 97.4 93.4 93.6 94.6 93.6 107.3 103.5 98.0 105.7 104.3         Sep 90.9 93.6 97.7 93.6 . 94.1 93.2 107.6 104.7 97.7 105.6 102.5
         Oct 91.4 94.1 98.3 94.0 . 94.0 93.3 108.5 105.0 97.6 105.8 99.8
         Nov 92.2 95.0 99.0 94.6 94.0 94.0 93.1 106.8 104.3 97.7 106.1 100.8         Dec 93.3 96.3 100.1 95.7 . 95.6 94.7 106.0 104.0 98.3 106.5 99.6
2003          Jan 95.5 98.8 102.7 98.2 . 96.3 95.8 103.0 102.6 98.8 107.9 100.4
         Feb 96.8 100.2 104.1 99.5 95.7 97.0 96.6 102.2 101.2 100.5 108.0 99.2         Mar 97.6 100.8 104.8 99.8 . 97.0 96.5 101.4 99.3 103.0 108.1 99.8
         Apr 98.3 101.3 105.0 99.7 . 96.9 96.3 101.4 98.7 104.1 106.4 98.6
         May 102.2 105.4 108.8 103.3 97.4 98.3 97.8 96.7 96.9 109.0 106.5 97.7         June 102.4 106.0 109.1 103.8 . 98.7 98.2 96.1 98.9 111.2 104.9 96.3
         July 101.1 104.9 107.5 102.6 . 98.8 97.9 97.8 98.5 109.5 103.9 97.3
         Aug 99.9 103.8 106.4 101.6 96.8 98.1 97.1 99.1 98.1 108.4 104.0 98.3         Sep 99.5 103.3 106.1 101.3 . 97.2 96.5 97.2 98.2 110.5 103.3 101.1
         Oct 101.0 104.8 108.0 103.0 . 97.5 97.1 93.3 98.8 113.1 103.7 103.7
         Nov 100.9 105.0 108.1 103.1
p 97.0 97.4 96.9 93.0 99.5 114.1 102.9 103.9
         Dec 103.7 108.0 111.2 106.0 . 99.3 99.3 90.6 99.5 113.3 104.3 102.9
2004          Jan 104.7 109.2 112.3 107.0 . 100.1 99.8 88.9 101.6 114.3 103.9 102.9
         Feb 104.4 108.8 112.1 106.8 p 97.6 99.8 99.7 89.3 104.1 111.3 103.3 102.4
         Mar 102.8 107.0 110.1 104.7 . 98.9 98.5 90.9 104.2 111.8 103.2 102.1
         Apr 100.9 105.0 108.2 102.7 . 98.1 97.4 91.8 104.3 111.1 103.3 104.0
         May 102.0 106.1 109.6 103.9 p 96.5 98.4 97.9 93.4 103.7 108.4 104.8 100.0
         June 101.8 106.0 109.6 103.9 . 98.2 97.8 91.9 104.9 109.6 106.1 101.6
         July 102.4 106.9 110.1 104.4 . 98.8 98.1 90.9 105.0 112.5 105.8 101.2
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of also includes the following countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazi l, China,
the currency concerned. — 1ECB calculations based on the weighted Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel,
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro or, prior to 1999, of the Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania,
exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro against the currencies Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Hong Kong, Japan, Turkey. — 3The method of calculation is consistent with the procedure used
Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdomby the ECB to com pute the effective exchange rates of the euro (seeand United States. The weights used in these calculations are based on Monthly Bulletin, November 2001, pp 51−65). — 4Decline in the figures
manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture third- implies an increase in competitiveness. — 5Euro-area countries and ECB’s
market effects. Where consumer prices were not yet available, estimates narrow group excluding Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and Southhave been used. For details of the methodology; see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, Korea. — 6Figures up to end-1998, computed by linking with the figures
August 2003, pp 67−74 and the ECB’s Occasional Paper No 2, which can be published up to October 2001. — 7Euro-area countries and ECB’s broad
downloaded fromthe ECB’s website. — 2ECB calculations. In addition to group. — 8 Annual and quarterly averages. 
the countries belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 1), this group
75*X External sector

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the External Communica-tion Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2003 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2004 Monthly Report.
September 2003
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2002
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004

– Price indicators for the housing market
– Approaches to the validation of internal rating
systems
October 2003
– Germany’s competitive position and foreign
trade within the euro area
– The economic situation of small and medium-
sized enterprises in Germany
– Development and significance of education
expenditure in Germany
November 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2003
– The monetary constitution under the Consti-
tution for Europe
December 2003
– Report on the stability of the German financial
system
– Stress testing the German banking system
January 2004
– The euro and prices two years on– Payment system oversight – a contribution to
the stability of the financial system and the effi-ciency of payment operations
– The new MFI interest rate statistics – method-
ology for collecting the German data
February 2004
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2003-04March 2004
– Public finances in crisis – the causes and the
need for action
– German balance of payments in 2003
April 2004
– Recent developments in the corporate bond
market
– Credit risk transfer instruments: their use by
German banks and aspects of financial stability
– The significance of information and communi-
cation technology
May 2004
– Effects of eastward enlargement of the EU on
the German economy
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2004
June 2004
– Monetary policy under uncertainty– Purchasing power parity theory as a concept
for evaluating price competitiveness
– Overall financial flows in 2003
July 2004
– Financial development and outlook of the
statutory health insurance scheme
– Regulation of the European securites markets– Initial experience with the new monetary policy
framework and the Bundesbank’s contribution
to liquidity management by the Eurosystem
August 2004
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2004
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20033
European economic and monetary union,February 2004
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200342 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, March 20043,5
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2002,
September 20036
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 1998 and 2000, March 20031, 6
7 Erl/C228uterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20013
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
September 2003
10 International capital links,
June 20031, 6
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2003
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20043
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.6Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2004
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Research Centre
13/2004
Consumption Smoothing Across States and Time:
International Insurance vs. Foreign Loans
14/2004
Real-Time Estimation of the Output Gag in Japanand its Usefulness for Inflation Forecasting andPolicymaking
15/2004
Welfare Implications of the Design of a CurrencyUnion in Case of Member Countries of DifferentSizes and Output Persistence
16/2004
On the decision to go public: Evidence from pri-vately-held firms
17/2004
Who do you trust while bubbles grow and blow?A comparative analysis of the explanatory power
of accounting and patent information for the mar-
ket values of German firms
18/2004
The Economic Impact of Venture Capital
19/2004
The Economic Impact of Venture Capital: Addition-
al Evidence
20/2004
Financial constraints for investors and the speed of
adaption: Are innovators special?
21/2004
How effective are automatic stabilisers? Theory
and empirical results for Germany and other OECDcountriesSeries 2
Banking and Financial Supervision
1/2003
Measuring the Discriminative Power of Rating
Systems
2/2003
Credit Risk Factor Modeling and the Basel II IRBApproach
1/2004
Forecasting Credit Portfolio Risk
2/2004
Systematic Risk in Recovery Rates – An Empirical
Analysis of US Corporate Credit Exposures
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20013
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Earlier Discussion Papers are available on the internet,
in some cases as abstracts.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

