MONTHLY REPORT
NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH
2004
Vol 56
No 1 1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1Fax +49 69 5601071Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 19 November 2004.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on theinternet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in autumn 2004 5
Overview 6
The debate about a reform of theStability and Growth Pact 9
Global and European setting 11
Monetary policy, banking business
and the capital market 21
Money market management andliquidity needs 22
Economic conditions in Germany 33
Corporate investment behaviourin the current cycle – hints of astructural break? 36
The effects of “Hartz IV” on thelabour market 41
Foreign trade and payments 47
Public finances 55
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finances in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*External sector 67*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
4Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
5The economic scene
in Germany
in autumn 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
6OverviewRecovery temporarily faltering
The economic upswing ran into difficulties
during the third quarter of 2004 after the re-covery process had gained considerable mo-mentum in the two preceding quarters. Ac-cording to initial estimates by the FederalStatistical Office, in the third quarter of 2004real GDP rose by a mere 0.1% on the preced-ing period (after adjustment for seasonal andworking-day variations) compared with risesof 0.4% in the first two quarters of this year.Despite this distinct slowdown in economicactivity, the recovery process does not appearto have halted, however. This is suggested, atleast, by the fact that the rise in private-sectorinvestment in machinery and equipment,which is to be expected in this phase of theeconomic cycle, began to take off in the thirdquarter, although whether this will be sus-tained still remains to be seen. The weakmacroeconomic growth in the third quarter isa further indication of the vulnerability of thecurrent cyclical phase, which is not yet self-sustaining. Until the second quarter of 2004,Germany’s economic recovery was largely im-ported from abroad.
Hence it was the decline in exports – of both
goods and services – which was primarily re-sponsible for the “dip in growth” in Germanyin the third quarter. Following the vigorousexpansion in the first half of the year, a cer-tain decline in export activity and global eco-nomic growth was not surprising, especiallyas the sharp rise in prices on the crude oilmarkets absorbed an increasing share of in-come in the oil-consuming countries. Thesurge in costs and the decline in purchasingEconomic
upswing
faltering ...
... mainly
because
of weaker
exports ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
7power as a result of the oil price increases, as
well as the persistently unsatisfactory employ-ment situation and general uncertainty overthe impact of the labour market reforms, de-pressed the mood among German con-sumers, causing private consumption to stag-nate further. The strained financial situationof general government undoubtedly also sub-stantially magnified households’ uncertaintyover their income prospects. For instance, itbecame apparent that not only will the 3%defict ceiling stipulated by the Stability andGrowth Pact not be complied with this year,but that central government along with manystate and local governments will also exceedthe upper borrowing limits specified underbudgetary law.
In order to avoid further damage to the cred-
ibility of fiscal policy, it is crucial that the def-icit be brought back under the 3% ceilingnext year. The Federal Government’s an-nouncement that this objective will beachieved is to be welcomed. The key role ofsound public finances for the stability of eco-nomic and monetary union means, however,that it is equally important that fiscal policybe embedded in a framework of enforceableand thus credible fiscal rules. In the late sum-mer, the European Commission, respondingto the problems which had arisen in connec-tion with the implementation of the Stabilityand Growth Pact, presented proposals to re-form it. On balance, however, the proposedreforms would further increase the scope forfiscal discretion and at the same time makethe rules more difficult to apply and lesstransparent. This would ultimately diminishthe credibility of the Pact even further (see
box on page 9).
Investment activity, like private consumption,
remained sluggish, although this was mainlydue to the low level of construction invest-ment; the adjustment process in that sectorhas evidently not yet been concluded. By con-trast, investment in machinery and equip-ment broke free from its weak underlyingtrend. This nutures hope that the cyclical up-thrust will gradually spread to the domesticeconomy as well. The essential prerequisitesfor a revival of investment are, in any case, inplace: financing conditions remain favour-able, the structural adjustments in the corpor-ate sector and the moderate pay settlementshave contributed to a brightening of earningsprospects, capacity utilisation in the industrialsector is, by and large, increasing and there isnow a substantial need for replacement in-vestment in new industrial machinery andequipment.
At the same time, however, serious structural
impediments are straining the German econ-omy. For example, on the issue of decouplinghealthcare costs from labour costs, which isalso of particular significance to enterprises,forward-looking reform efforts that hold outa real prospect of success are still necessary.The prevailing uncertainties per se are making
it harder for the economic stimuli from theexternal economy to spill over to domesticdemand and for the recovery to take abroader hold.
The reforms initiated on the labour market
and the moderate pay settlements, which in-
... and the
sluggish
domestic
economy
Need to ensure
the credibility
of fiscal policyRay of hope
provided
by rising
investment
in machinery ...
... and labour
market reforms

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
8clude measures to safeguard production and
investment locations, give hope of a radicalturnaround on the labour market. At theleast, they provide an important foundationfor improving the labour market situation,which is vital to consumer confidence. House-holds’ willingness to spend will, however, ini-tially remain subdued during the wintermonths as higher energy bills strain house-hold budgets and the agreed cutbacks in an-nual bonuses and other non-core wage com-ponents make themselves felt for many. Thus,an easing of the current spending restraintcan be expected only once the situation onthe labour market actually improves notice-ably.
Against this backdrop, much will continue to
depend for the time being on exports as amainstay of growth. Despite the recent ap-preciation of the euro, a further rise in exportactivity can be expected in the fourth quarter.This is, at any rate, the prospect signalled bythe continuing strength of the world econ-omy and the rise in foreign orders. The mod-erate evolution of costs and prices meansthat the German economy’s competitive pos-ition is at present still somewhat better thanits long-term average. Consequently, thestimuli from the world economy will alsomake themselves felt in corresponding exportactivity. Furthermore, enterprises will presum-ably be less susceptible to exchange rate fluc-tuations than in the past as their productionsites become more regionally diversified andthe importance of the single European mar-ket rises.Relevant baseline quarter = 100, log scale
Exports at constant prices 1
123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2
QuartersEnlarged scale
Terms of Trade 1Crude oil prices (Brent)
in US dollar terms
1973 Q2 to 1976 Q1
1978 Q4 to 1981 Q3
2001 Q4 to
2004 Q3Periods of sharply
rising oil prices
1Seasonally adjusted data based on the
national accounts.
Deutsche Bundesbank120
115
110
105
100
95105
100
95
90
85
80400
350
325
300
275
250
225
200
175
150
125
100110
German
economy’s
good price
competitiveness

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
9The debate about a reform of the Stability and Growth Pact
At the beginning of September 2004, the European Com-
mission presented proposals for a reform of the Stability
and Growth Pact. These were designed to address both the
problems which had arisen in the past and the increased
heterogeneity between the members states since enlarge-
ment of the European Union.
In its Communication, the Commission essentially put for-
ward the following amendments for discussion.1
– Greater emphasis on debt and the sustainability of pub-
lic finances. This could include clarifying the provision
laid down in the EC Treaty whereby debt-to-GDP ratios
above the 60% reference value are deemed to be “suffi-
ciently diminishing” and approaching the reference
value “at a satisfactory pace”.
– Greater consideration of country-specific circumstances
(particularly those concerning the size and development
of the debt-to-GDP ratio) when defining the medium-
term deficit objective of “close to balance or in surplus”.
– Consideration of country-specific economic circum-
stances and developments in the implementation of the
excessive deficit procedure. The Commission suggests
widening the definition of the exceptional circum-
stances in which countries may breach the 3% ceiling
and extending the deadlines for correcting excessive
deficits.
– The possibility for the Commission to issue early warn-
ings directly to the member state concerned in the event
of inadequate budgetary developments, ie without
seeking the approval of the Council. This – together
with suitable recommendations under the Broad Eco-
nomic Policy Guidelines – is intended to ensure sound
fiscal policy in times of economic upswing, too.
The Ecofin Council, at its meeting on 11 September, con-
sidered the Commission’s proposals to be a sound basis for
discussion. Since then, further proposals have been intro-
duced into the debate about a reform of the EU’s fiscal
rules. In particular, it has been suggested that certain ex-
penditure categories should be disregarded when assess-
ing whether the 3% criterion has been fulfilled. The cat-
egories mentioned include government expenditure which
could raise the growth potential in the member state con-
cerned (for example, spending on investment, education,
and research and development) as well as military expend-
iture and net payments to the European Union.
When assessing these proposals, emphasis must be placed
on the objective of the Stability and Growth Pact to attain
and maintain sound public finances in the euro area.2
Furthermore, the proposed changes should make it easierfor the European System of Central Banks to guarantee
price stability at low interest rates.
Viewed from this perspective, it is true that some of the
proposals are aimed at a more consistent application ofthe fiscal rules; however, in our opinion, the following
points require critical appraisal.
The Commission’s idea of departing from the current inter-
pretation of the medium-term budgetary objective,
whereby the cyclically adjusted deficit ratio should not ex-
ceed
1/C252percentage point, is problematic. It is particularly
undesirable in that it would make the rules increasingly
complicated and less transparent, thereby rendering them
less enforceable. Moreover, if the criterion is relaxed for
some countries, the risk of the deficit ratio exceeding the
3% ceiling in times of economic downturn will increase.
Any relaxation of the reference value for the deficit ratio
by expanding the exception clauses or extending the cor-
rection deadlines must be rejected. Both options would re-
duce the potential deterrent posed by the sanctions and
weaken commitment to the rules by increasing the degree
of discretion. Thus, there is a risk that, in future, deficits of
more than 3% of GDP could prove the rule rather than the
exception in some countries. The attendant debt accumu-
lation would not only contradict the fundamental object-
ives of the fiscal rules, it would also make it more difficult
to overcome future burdens caused by demographic devel-
opments.
The proposal to disregard certain expenditure categories
when assessing compliance with the reference value must
likewise be rejected. This would effectively signify the aboli-
tion of the 3% ceiling. In the longer term, this could lead to
sustainability problems which would impair the underlying
conditions for sustainable growth and a stability-oriented
monetary policy. Alongside the theoretical objections, statis-
tical problems would arise, particularly at the international
level, which would be very difficult to resolve.
The large-scale problems related to setting deficit limits for
individual expenditure categories can be clearly seen in the
inadequate national budgetary rules in Germany. Further-
more, debt financing is by no means an essential require-
ment for greater promotion of research and education. In
this context, it should be noted that there is absolutely no
conflict of objectives between structural reforms to pro-
mote growth and fiscal consolidation. No convincing eco-
nomic reasons can be found for the proposal to disregard
net payments to the EU. Payments to other member states
should be met from current revenue rather than by passing
on the financing burden to future generations through
borrowing. Proposals to relax the 3% ceiling suggest that it
would be advantageous for a member state if its govern-
ment had the greatest possible borrowing capacity.
The unsatisfactory fiscal policy developments in some mem-
ber states are not the result of the design of the fiscal rules
but rather of the inadequate way in which they are imple-
mented. The proposed reforms would hardly change this. In
fact, many of the proposals would increase the scope for dis-
cretion and thus weaken commitment to the rules. This
would make the fiscal framework more complicated and in-
transparent, rendering it even more difficult to enforce.
1See European Commission, Strengthening economic gov-
ernance and clarifying the implementation of the Stabilityand Growth Pact, Communication from the Commission to
the Council and the European Parliament of 3 Septem-ber 2004. — 2See the Statement by the Deutsche
Bundesbank on the Commission’s proposals for a reformof the Stability and Growth Pact, Do not weaken the
Stability and Growth Pact, 7 September 2004.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
10Moreover, the pressure on the world econ-
omy coming from the high oil prices is likelyto remain within manageable bounds, espe-cially as an easing of the international oil mar-kets is already evident. The retarding impactof the high and volatile oil prices on economicactivity is often overestimated by comparisonwith the situation during the oil crises of1973/75 and 1978/82. Even though US dollarcrude oil prices have recently reached historic-al highs, if the price increases for other goodsand services are taken into account, currentoil prices are (in real terms) still considerablylower than they were then. Furthermore, as aresult of changes in the economic structure,production in industrial countries has becomeless energy-intensive and consequently oilprices now have less direct impact on thebusiness cycle. The cost growth of total netenergy imports has so far been far more re-strained than during the two comparableperiods. The causes of the oil price increasesare also different. Whereas in the 1970s and1980s it was supply shortages that pushed upthe price of oil, a key factor in the currentsituation is the cyclically induced rise in thedemand for oil. Thus, the recent rise in oilprices is at least in part an endogenous mar-ket reaction to the extremely dynamic globaleconomic development this year.In the past few months external influences
have also dominated on the price front, al-though the appreciation of the euro has atleast partially cushioned the inflationary ef-fects generated by the international com-modity markets. Excluding the increases inenergy prices, there has been only a moder-ate rise in consumer prices and, what is more,this was partly due to the tax-induced in-crease in the price of tobacco and the priceeffects of the healthcare reform. Moreover, inview of the current economic environmentand the high level of unemployment, wage-policy makers did not attempt to use the lat-est pay settlements to reverse the reducedscope for expenditure brought about by thehigher energy prices. Consequently, the out-look for prices in Germany is likely to remainfavourable and consumer-friendly in 2005.
At the same time, it must be recognised that
the marked increase in upward price pres-sures across the entire euro area has had acertain impact on long-term inflation expect-ations. To prevent these expectations frombecoming entrenched, monetary policy-makers need to monitor the increased risk onthe price front with great vigilance in order tomaintain confidence in the stability of theeuro on a lasting basis under favourable mon-etary conditions.
Burden created
by oil prices
should not be
overestimatedConsumer-
friendly outlook
for prices
Monetary
policy vigilance

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
11Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
The global economy lost momentum in the
second half of the year. The main reason forthis was the sharp rise in crude oil priceswhich had occurred in several surges sincethe beginning of 2004. At the end of Octo-ber, they reached a new all-time high atUS$51
1/C252(North Sea Brent).1Although crude
oil prices have receded perceptibly in the pastfew weeks, in mid-November they still ex-ceeded by far their average of the first threequarters and were 42% higher than theirlevel one year earlier. The rise in energy priceshas led to perceptible losses in purchasingpower among households in the oil-consuming countries and has burdened firms’cost accounts. This has also had a negativeimpact on the consumer climate and on busi-ness sentiment. Although the growth-dampening effects have been counteractedto a degree by expansionary effects in the oil-producing countries owing to rising export re-ceipts, from a global perspective the retardingeffects still outweigh the benefits. Industrialraw material prices denominated in dollarslikewise hit a new all-time high in the pastfew weeks. In mid-November, they were22% up on the year.
Although third-quarter overall economic
growth in the USA was somewhat strongerthan in the second quarter, it was unable tomatch its fast pace of the winter of 2003-04.In the United Kingdom, growth, having been
1In real terms, however – ie taking consumer price in-
creases in the industrial countries into account – crude oil
prices were, as of late, still well below their level at the
end of the 1970s and the beginning of the 1980s.Slower global
growth due,
above all, to
higher oil prices
Industrial
countries ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
12extremely buoyant in the first half of the year,
slowed down after mid-year. In the thirdquarter, the euro-area economy was not ableto maintain its relatively fast-paced growth ofthe first two quarters, either. Japan’s econom-ic growth, having already slowed downnoticeably in the second quarter, virtuallyground to a halt in the third quarter. Accord-ing to initial country estimates, real GDP inthe United States, Japan, the United Kingdomand the euro area altogether rose in the third
quarter by a seasonally adjusted
1/C252% on the
period compared with well over 1% in thefirst quarter and just over
1/C252% in the second
quarter. It was up by 31/C254% on the year.
A distinction should be made with regard to
emerging economies between oil-importingcountries and oil-exporting countries. The oil-importing emerging economies, as a rule, areaffected by oil-price rises even more than in-dustrial countries because they are generallymuch more energy-intensive, ie they usemore energy to manufacture one unit of GDP ,and their energy production is heavier oncrude oil. Moreover, emerging economies’energy intensity – unlike that of industrialcountries – was still on the increase until theend of the 1990s; however, since the begin-ning of this decade, it has likewise been ex-hibiting a downward trend. In China, year-on-year aggregate output growth in the thirdquarter, at just over 9%, was not quite ashigh as in the first half of the year (+9
3/C254%).
Growth in other south and east Asian emer-ging economies – for which no current infor-mation on GDP growth is yet available, how-ever – is likely to have slowed down as well.In some of the region’s countries, such asThailand, the government has resorted toproviding subsidies to push refined petroleumprices below the market level.
Overall output in the key crude oil and indus-
trial raw material exporting countries is stillrunning at full steam. According to the IMFautumn forecast, in 2004 the Common-wealth of Independent States (CIS) willachieve its fastest growth since the boomMil-
lion kJ Energy intensity3
Industrial countries
Developing countries
1970-79 1980-89 1990-99 2000-01
1Spot market price for a barrel of Brent
North Sea oil. -  = Average for the year 2004;
partly estimated. Source: Thomson Finan-
cial. — 2Deflated using the OECD consumer
price index (base year:  1970). Source:
OECD. — 3Energy consumption (million
kilojoules) relative to real GDP (US$1,000 at
1997 prices). Source: Energy Information
Administration, Washington DC.
Deutsche Bundesbank30
25
201510
5
0US$
1970 75 80 85 90 95 00 2004Crude oil prices 1
Nominal
Real2Crude oil prices
and energy intensity
40
35
30
25201510
5
0- 
- ... and crude
oil-importing
emerging
economies
affected, ...
... whereas
countries
exporting
crude oil and
raw materials
are booming

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
13year of 2000 (+8%). In Latin America which,
on the whole, is likewise benefiting from thebooming markets for crude oil and raw ma-terials, growth will increase from 1
3/C254%i n
2003 to 41/C252%. The oil-producing countries in
the Middle East are expected to see a 51/C252%
rise in GDP .
According to the IMF forecast, global GDP
growth in 2004 (+5%) will be at its highestmark since the mid-1970s. As a long-termaverage (+3
1/C252%), the increase in output
should be described as exceptional, too. For2005, however, the IMF expects growth toweaken to 4
1/C254%. This is based on a slow-
down in industrial countries from 31/C252%t o
3% and in other parts of the world from6
1/C252% to 6%. In a historical comparison, how-
ever, these growth rates are still noteworthy.Although the projections are based on the as-sumption that the average price for the mostimportant types of crude oil will be US$37
1/C252
on an annual average for 2004 and 2005,even higher oil prices such as are currentlylooming on the horizon will not necessarilymean that next year the global upswing willbe disturbed to such an extent that this mightcall the entire upswing into question. How-ever, growth will probably slow down moreconsiderably than had been expected in thethird quarter.
2
In this connection, it should also be notedthat global output – given significant regionaldifferences in the level of growth – has in-creased at a pace that, in some cases, hasconsiderably exceeded the growth rate of po-tential output and would have led to tensionsooner or later. A certain calming of growthwas inevitable anyway following the long
period of extremely strong monetary and fis-cal policy impulses and should be viewedquite positively. In addition, a shift in overalldemand to a potential growth path, as is nowthe case in the USA and, to a degree also inChina, will contribute to a more balancedglobal development, which will most likelyalso have a calming effect on the markets forraw materials.
Despite the current oil price-related burdens,
the fundamentals for sustained strong worldeconomic growth remain intact. Corporatebalance sheets have improved considerably.Productivity and, with it, profitability haverisen significantly. Banking system stabilityhas increased and the credit quality of loanshas improved. The means of obtaining exter-nal finance continue to be regarded as veryfavourable. The signs of overheating on thereal estate markets, especially in Anglo-Saxoncountries and in Spain, seem to be waning. Inaddition, the industrial countries so far hardlyseem to have experienced any second-roundeffects as a response to higher energy prices,which means that the price climate has notfundamentally worsened.
Nevertheless, crude oil price movements re-
main the main short-term risk to the worldeconomy. The crude oil supply may possiblybe less elastic than is generally assumed atpresent. In the light of minimal spare capacityand the continuing tension in the Middle
2IMF simulations provide certain indications regarding
the extent of the growth slowdown. They show that a
permanent rise of US$5 in the price of crude oil after one
year will cause global growth to slow down by 0.3 per-
centage point.Global GDP rise
weaker in 2005
More subdued
global
economic
growth with
positive aspectsConditions for
growth remain
good
Risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
14East, the oil markets remain volatile and high-
ly prone to disruptions. The major externalimbalances, which have recently tended toresume growth – especially on account of oilprices – are a further risk factor. At all events,the US current account deficit rose in thesecond quarter of 2004 by just over 1 per-centage point from its temporary low in au-tumn 2003 to 5.7% of GDP . This contrastswith large surpluses in east Asia and an im-provement in the external balance in LatinAmerica, the CIS and the Middle East. Thisdevelopment has encouraged foreign ex-change market players to rethink their invest-ment behaviour in the past few weeks. As aresult, the US dollar sustained considerablelosses.
Seasonally adjusted consumer price inflation
in industrial countries calmed down distinctlyin the third quarter; it was 0.3% up on theperiod following a rise of 0.8% in the secondquarter. On the year, prices for consumergoods were up by an average of 2.1% in thethird quarter and were thus slightly lowerthan the second-quarter figure (2.2%). Ex-cluding Japan, where prices fell slightly onceagain, consumer prices rose by 2.5%. How-ever, in the light of the latest price surges onthe oil markets, October is likely to see a re-turn to higher inflation. According to the IMFforecast, consumer prices in the advancedeconomies will rise next year (as in 2004 al-ready) by 2.1% overall. However, if oil pricessignificantly exceed the assumed level ofUS$37
1/C252, inflation is likely to be somewhat
stronger.Despite the strains caused by the consider-
able rise in crude oil prices during the courseof 2004, according to initial calculations, realGDP in the United States grew in the thirdquarter by just under 1% on the quarter or by3
3/C254% on the year after adjustment for sea-
sonal and working-day variations. Overalleconomic capacity utilisation increased, too,with potential output growth up by 3
1/C254%
(according to IMF estimates). GDP rose bynearly 4% on the year. The result would prob-ably have been even better had it not beenfor the output losses caused by hurricanes inSeptember. The strongest second-quarterstimuli came from private consumption,which rebounded from a phase of weakergrowth in the previous quarter to rise by justover 1%. Purchases of new cars picked up es-pecially sharply. What is remarkable is thatthe rise in consumption, given only a slight in-crease in income, was very much at the ex-pense of saving, which – as a percentage ofdisposable income – hit new all-time lows, atjust under
1/C252% in the quarter and1/C254% in Sep-
tember. Commercial investment grew by2
3/C254% on the period, thereby generating one-
third of total GDP growth. Real expenditureon new residential buildings likewise in-creased distinctly. Total economic output inthe third quarter was curbed by the failure ofinventory replenishment to match previousmonths’ levels. In addition, export growth, at1
1/C254% after seasonal adjustment, was no
longer as strong as earlier. By contrast, how-ever, import growth was even more sluggish,which meant that the real foreign balance didnot deteriorate as much as in the three pre-ceding quarters.Prices in
industrial
countriesUSA

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
15On the whole, leading indicators for the USA
and reports from the Federal Reserve’s dis-tricts indicate a continuation of steady eco-nomic growth. Doubts about the sustainabil-ity of the US upswing that had arisen in thepast few months have been dispelled follow-ing the publication of exceptionally good em-ployment figures for October and the sharpupward revision for the two precedingmonths. After seasonal adjustment, around760,000 new non-farm jobs were created be-tween July and October; on average over thisperiod, just under
1/C252% more people were em-
ployed than in the second quarter and nearly1
1/C252% more than a year earlier. This positive
picture changes little if one takes into consid-eration that, in October, additional temporaryemployees were hired, particularly in con-struction, to repair the damage caused byhurricanes.
Inflation risks continue to be regarded as
moderate. This assessment is supported bythe fact that the core rate of the personalconsumption expenditure deflator (excludingenergy and food), which plays a key role inthe Fed’s price analyses, averaged 1.4% inthe third quarter, a figure that was no higherthan in the first half of 2004. The overallindex of consumer prices, however, was2.7% up on the year. This was mainly due tothe sharp rise in energy prices (+10.4%) sincethe third quarter of 2003. In October, year-on-year overall consumer price inflationsurged to 3.2% because of the latest rise incrude oil prices.
Following a rather weak second-quarter rise
of
1/C254%, seasonally adjusted overall output inJapan virtually stagnated in the third quarter.
On the year, however, it went up – owing tothe strong growth overhang from 2003 anddynamic growth in the winter months – byno less than 4%. The disappointing third-quarter developments are due entirely to thenegative contribution to growth provided byforeign trade and payments, which amount-ed to
1/C254percentage point of GDP . Real ex-
ports, having increased in the first and secondquarters by a seasonally adjusted 4
1/C252%a n d
31/C252% respectively, were up by only1/C252%o n
the period, whereas imports, at 23/C254%, rose
somewhat more sharply than in the secondquarter. In addition, government investmentonce again showed a clear downward trend.Domestic private demand, however, con-tinued to rise, growing by
1/C252% during the
period under review. The main reason for thiswas that seasonally adjusted household con-sumer demand picked up distinctly (+1%)owing not least to the onset of recovery onthe labour market. Although rising oil pricesput a strain on Japanese consumers, too, con-sumer prices in the third quarter were stillslightly lower on average than a year earlier.The Bank of Japan presumes that the defla-tionary tendencies will end in the 2005-06 fis-cal year beginning on 1 April 2005.
Initial figures show that real third-quarter
GDP in the United Kingdom was up by justunder
1/C252% from its level in the second quar-
ter (in which it had grown by nearly 1%) afterseasonal and working-day adjustment. Theyear-on-year rise amounted to 3%. Theweakening of economic activity after mid-year was concentrated on the production sec-tor (excluding construction), which saw out-
JapanUnited
Kingdom

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
16put decline by 1% on the period. By contrast,
seasonally adjusted output growth in the ser-vices sector, at
3/C254%, was almost as strong as
before. The UK labour market is still in ahealthy state; in the third quarter, the stand-ardised unemployment rate was 4
1/C252%; it had
been just under 5% a year earlier. UK prop-erty prices, which have risen extremely sharp-ly in the past few years and have increasinglybeen regarded as a risk to economic growth,have tended to decline somewhat in the pastfew months; however, in October, the HalifaxHouse Price Index was still just under one-fifth higher than a year earlier. According tothe UK Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices(HICP), consumer price inflation measuredonly 1.2% over the July-October period. Ac-cording to the traditional Retail Price Indexexcluding Mortgage Interest Payments (RPIX)– which is methodologically different fromthe HICP – prices went up by 2.1%.
In the new EU member states, economic ac-
tivity likewise lost momentum in the thirdquarter. Seasonally adjusted third-quarter in-dustrial output was down by 1
3/C254% on the ex-
ceptionally high level of the preceding period.The substantial cutbacks in output that af-fected Polish industry were a key factor. Forthe entire group of new EU countries to-gether, the year-on-year growth rate was“only” 7
3/C254%, down from as high as 121/C252%
in the first half of the year. The seasonally ad-justed unemployment rate among the newEU member states was 14% in the third quar-ter and thus
1/C254percentage point lower than a
year earlier. Youth unemployment is a particu-larly pressing problem in this group of coun-tries. As this report went to press, youthunemployment rates ranged from 10% in
Cyprus to nearly 40% in Poland.
After mid-year, consumer prices maintained
their sharp rising trend. After the eliminationof seasonal variations, on an average of theJuly-October period, they were 1.4% higherthan in the second quarter, in which they hadlikewise risen on a similar scale. The annualrate of inflation was 4.9%, compared with4.1% in the second quarter and the last all-time low of 1.5% in the second quarter of2003. The divergence in the inflation rates ofthe individual countries remained very largethroughout the reporting period, with ratesranging in October from 2.0% in Cyprus to7.2% in Latvia.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
According to the initial Flash Estimate, euro-
area growth slowed down to a seasonally ad-justed
1/C254% in the third quarter from levels of
3/C254% in the first quarter and1/C252% in the
second. GDP rose by just under 2% on theyear. Although no information on the individ-ual expenditure components is available yet,there is much to indicate that, in particular,the contribution of real exports to growth hasfallen. According to the European Commis-sion’s indicator-based short-run forecast, themacroeconomic growth rate will range be-tween 0.2% and 0.6% in the fourth quarterof 2004 and the first quarter of 2005.
After seasonal adjustment, third-quarter in-
dustrial production was only
1/C254% higher than
in the second quarter, in which growth hadNew EU
member statesWeaker GDP
growth in the
third quarter
Subdued
industrial
activity

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
17been as high as 1%. The reduced output of
durable consumer goods made a particularcontribution to the moderate result. The pro-duction of energy and non-durable consumergoods stagnated at second-quarter levels. Bycontrast, the manufacture of intermediategoods and capital goods continued to rise.The fact that capacity utilisation in manufac-turing rose only sluggishly between July andOctober is in keeping with the levelling-off ofindustrial activity in the third quarter.
3
Leading indicators for the euro area present arather mixed picture with regard to industrialactivity in the coming months. Ordering activ-ity in the euro-area order-based manufactur-ing industry was exceptionally weak in theJuly-August period. Seasonally adjusted neworders, in terms of value, were down by2
1/C252% on the quarter. In addition, the pur-
chasing manager indices for manufacturingcontinued to slump in October. However, thiscontrasts to a certain extent with the latestEU survey, which indicates a renewed im-provement in industrial confidence.
Consumer sentiment has seen no improve-
ment since the beginning of the year. The lowpropensity to purchase is also illustrated byreal retail sales, which declined once again inthe third quarter after seasonal adjustment.One reason for the persistently weak con-sumption is the loss of purchasing powercaused by the sharp rise in oil prices. Anotheris that continued difficulties on the labourmarket are putting a strain on private con-Seasonally adjusted
%
%
%
%
%
SpainItalyFranceGermanyEuro areaQuarter-on-quarter changeGrowth trends in
the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
01.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 3Owing to a break in the statistical series at the turn of
2003-04, longer comparisons, such as with the long-
term average, are uninformative.Mixed outlook
Consumer
climate and the
labour market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
18sumption. Although euro-area unemploy-
ment did not rise further in the third quarter,12.7 million people were still without employ-ment in the euro area. The unemploymentrate has stood at 8.9% since early 2003.
In the third quarter, euro-area consumer
prices rose by
1/C252% from second-quarter levels
after seasonal adjustment. This represents aslight levelling-off of the rate of price increasecompared to the second quarter, at the be-ginning of which tax increases had come intoeffect. Price movements over the past fewmonths have been influenced by the sharprise in crude oil prices. Overall, consumershad to pay just under 6
1/C252% more for energy
in the third quarter than a year earlier. By con-trast, unprocessed foods were cheaper owingto the weather, which was relatively favour-able for agriculture. The prices of processedfoods, drinks and tobacco rose by 3
1/C252%o n
the year, especially due to the hike in taxes ontobacco products in various euro-area coun-tries. The prices of services, which rose by anaverage of just over 2
1/C252%, were influenced in
Germany and the Netherlands by the in-creases in patients’ additional charges andcutbacks in benefits as part of the health sys-tem reforms. Although pharmaceuticals –which are regarded as industrial goods –were also affected in both countries, pricesfor this category of goods rose by only slightlyless than 1%.
Euro-area consumer prices in the third quar-
ter were up by 2.2% on the year. The re-newed surge in crude oil prices at the begin-ning of the fourth quarter, however, causedthe year-on-year rise in the HICP to increaseto 2.4% in October. Core inflation (excluding
energy and unprocessed food), however, re-mained unchanged at 2.0%.
Exchange rates
In the past few weeks, the exchange rate par-
ities on the international foreign exchangemarkets have begun to fluctuate more sharp-ly again following the second and thirdquarters, in which exchange rate fluctuationshad been contained within relatively narrowbands. The US dollar, in particular, fell againsta background of partly weaker business dataand the US presidential elections. By contrast,the euro gained ground against several cur-rencies.
Following a period from mid-May to the end
of September when the euro-US dollar ex-change rate had largely fluctuated betweenaround US$1.20 and US$1.24 to the euro,the euro subsequently grew stronger againstthe dollar. The persistently large US deficit inforeign trade in goods and services, as well asintermittently unfavourable labour marketdata in the USA, put pressure on the dollar.The deterioration in the US economic outlookperceived by market participants was accom-panied by a reduction in the speed at whichthey expect the US Federal Reserve to tightenmonetary policy. At times, this caused a de-cline in the yield advantage enjoyed by long-term US government bonds over similareuro-area instruments, despite increases of25 basis points in the federal funds rate inAugust, September and November.
Consumer
prices
Renewed
stronger
exchange rate
fluctuations on
foreign
exchange
markets
Development
of the euro’s
exchange rate
against the US
dollar, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
19Foreign exchange market watchers regarded
the euro’s appreciation against the US dollarin the period under review as being linked insome part to the rise in oil prices. In actualfact, in a departure from normal circum-stances, a rather close positive correlation be-tween the euro-US dollar exchange rate andthe oil price can be observed for the August-October period. The considerable US currentaccount deficit helped to make this correl-ation possible, especially since this deficittends to grow in line with rising oil pricesowing to the high consumption of oil in theUSA. As higher oil prices are causing the out-look for US economic growth to deteriorate,financing the deficit is also becoming moredifficult. However, the fragility of the correl-ation described above is shown by the coun-tervailing movements of the euro-US dollarexchange rate and oil prices in November.
At around the same time as the US presiden-
tial elections, the euro began to surge againstthe US dollar. In mid-November, the euro-USdollar exchange rate reached new all-timehighs, with reference rates surpassing theUS$1.30 mark. As this report went to press,the euro was thus trading 3
1/C252% higher than
at the turn of 2003-04.
The uneven summer trend in the euro-yen ex-
change rate carried over into the autumnmonths. Following reports of positive Japan-ese economic data, the euro initially fellsomewhat against the yen. In the second halfof September, however, news that the Japan-ese trade surplus had declined distinctly putdownward pressure on the yen. The weakergrowth of Japanese exports, in particular,raised fears in some quarters about the con-
tinuation of economic recovery in Japan. Thiscaused the euro to regain ground against theyen. In October, tension between positiveeconomic data from Japan and speculationabout renewed intervention on the part ofthe Bank of Japan caused the euro-yen ex-change rate to remain within relatively nar-row margins. As this report went to press, theDaily data, log scale
US$
£¥
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.20  1... pound sterling
£ 0.7110  1... Japanese yen
¥ 133.73  1The euro’s exchange rate
against the ...
... US dollar
$1.1789  1Exchange rate of the euro
1Debut level at the start of monetary union
on 4 January 1999. — 2As calculated by the
ECB against the currencies of 23 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank109
106
103
1000.72
0.70
0.68
0.66139
136
133
130
127
1241.30
1.27
1.24
1.21
1.18
1.15
ND J FMAMJ J ASON
2003 2004
... against
the yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
20euro was trading at ¥136,1/C252% higher than at
the end of last year.
In the autumn months, the euro rose virtually
continuously against the pound sterling. Therelative weakness of the pound is linked,above all, to the cooling of the UK economicupturn, which had been very robust for along time. In the UK, this development and adetectable slowdown in property price risesboth led to deflated expectations of interestrate increases, which reduced the attractive-ness of investing in the pound sterling. Inaddition, reports about the burgeoningbudget deficit and the gradual deteriorationin the UK balance of trade put downwardpressure on the pound sterling. Towards theend of the reporting period, the euro was val-ued at £0.70; however, despite its latestgains, the euro was still
1/C252% lower than at
the end of 2003.
In September, the number of important trad-
ing partners included in the calculations ofthe euro’s nominal effective exchange ratewas increased from 12 to 23 countries.
4The
new additions are the countries that joinedthe EU in May 2004 and China. On a weight-ed average against these 23 currencies, theeuro has appreciated by a total of around2
1/C252% since mid-August and has thus now re-
turned to its level at the end of last year.
4The new calculation method is explained in detail in
European Central Bank, Update of the overall trade
weights for the effective exchange rates of the euro and
computation of a new set of euro indicators, Monthly
Bulletin, September 2004, pp 69-72.... and against
the pound
sterlingEffective
exchange rate
of the euro

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
21Monetary policy,
banking business and
the capital marketInterest rate policy and the money
market
Over the past few months the Governing
Council of the ECB has maintained its steadymonetary policy course. The underlying as-sessment is that – despite the rise in the priceof oil, which has kept the rate of inflationabove 2% – there has so far been nomedium-term increase in price pressure. Themain refinancing operations have conse-quently still been conducted as variable ratetenders with a minimum bid rate of 2%. Theinterest rates on the marginal lending facilityand the deposit facility have also kept to theirrespective previous levels of 3% and 1%.
Apart from the short-term interest rate fluctu-
ations frequently observed at the end of thereserve maintenance periods, there were nodramatic swings in money market rates dur-ing the period under review. The overnightinterest rate (EONIA) was mostly close to themarginal lending rate, which was only a fewbasis points above the minimum bid rate.With regard to the other money market rates,in early September when market players’ ex-pectations of an interest rate increase becamestronger still, there was for a time a percep-tible increase in the rates on longer-maturityinstruments in particular. However, followingthe meeting of the Governing Council of theECB in early October, interest rate premiumson longer-maturity instruments declinedagain and in early November twelve-monthdeposits were back at their early August level,ie some 25 basis points above the overnightrate. Similarly, forward interest rates on three-month deposits hardly changed on balance inEurosystem
interest rates
unchanged
Money market
rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
22Money market management and liquidity needs
The euro-area credit institutions’ need for central bank
money arising from the autonomous factors determiningliquidity went up by 510.6 billion net during the three re-
serve maintenance periods from 7 July to 11 October 2004.The main cause of this expansion was the 516.0 billion in-
crease in banknotes in circulation; this item grew stronglyin the period under review at an annual rate of around18%. Although the pace of absolute growth slowed dis-tinctly in August owing to seasonal factors, at the end ofthe September/October reserve maintenance period thefigure for banknotes in circulation was 5469.5 billion. By
contrast, liquidity needs arising from general governmentdeposits declined by 56.8 billion net. If, in order to elimin-
ate valuation effects, the changes in net reserve assets andother factors are taken together, these two items resultedin a slight liquidity withdrawal of 51.4 billion. Excluding
the valuation effects, this was mainly due to the reductionin the net reserve assets. The required level of minimum re-serves went up by 50.7 billion and also resulted in growing
demand for central bank liquidity.
The greater need for liquidity was covered primarily by the
main refinancing operations (MROs) being topped up to511 billion. The volume of longer-term refinancing oper-
ations remained unchanged. There were no fine-tuningoperations during the period under review. Short-termfluctuations in the credit institutions’ current accountswere offset via the standing facilities.
The EONIA rate for overnight money in the interbank mar-
ket was 2.04% on 46 of 69 trading days in the period underreview and was thus again close to the marginal allotmentrates for the main refinancing operations. There were fair-ly large deviations from these rates during the final daysfollowing the allotments in the last main refinancing oper-ation of each reserve maintenance period and at the endof the month. The increase in the volatility of the EONIAthat was observed after each allotment in the final mainrefinancing operations in all three reserve maintenanceperiods reflects not least market players’ uncertainty aboutthe development of the liquidity situation at the end ofthe maintenance periods. In the period under review,money market players evidently rather tended to assumethat there would be a liquidity shortage at the end of themaintenance period. The EONIA thus rose slightly to 2.16%on 10 August despite the excess liquidity signalled by re-course to the deposit facility amounting to 54.0 billion on
that day. By contrast, on 6 August the EONIA had slippeddown to 1.93%. On that day market participants correctlyassumed that there would be sufficient liquidity at the endof the period.
The EONIA followed a comparable path in the subsequent
reserve maintenance period. Despite recourse to the depositfacility of 52.2 billion net on the final day of the August/Sep-
tember period, the EONIA rose to 2.17% on the same day.
On 11 October, the final day of the September/October re-
serve maintenance period, the EONIA soared to this year’srecord high of 2.77%. On the same day, recourse to themarginal lending facility in the euro area amounted to57.6 billion. This was due to the somewhat higher than ex-
pected autonomous factors. Six days previously, the over-night rates had begun to climb as the market anticipatedthe liquidity deficit that actually occurred. At the start ofthe new November/December reserve maintenance periodthe EONIA fell back again, as expected, to 2.05%.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods
2004
Item7J u l y
to10 Aug11 Aug
to7 Sep8 Sep
to11 Oct
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances by
1 Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) – 11.8 – 1.9 – 2.3
2 Change in general govern-
ment deposits with theEurosystem (increase: –) + 3.9 + 4.8 – 1.9
3 Change in net foreign
reserves
2–7 . 4 –1 . 4 –0 . 6
4 Other factors2,3+ 7.7 + 0.6 – 0.3
Total – 7.6 + 2.1 – 5.1
II Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations + 8.2 – 2.0 + 4.8
(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations € 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0
(c) Other operations – – –
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.2
Total + 7.8 – 1.9 + 5.2
III Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I + II) + 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.0
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) – 0.5 – 0.3 + 0.1
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of this Monthly Report .— 2Including end-
of-quarter valuation adjustments with no impact onliquidity. — 3Including monetary policy operations con-
cluded in the second stage and still outstanding in thethird stage of monetary union (outright transactions andthe issuance of debt certificates) as well as financial assetsnot connected with monetary policy.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
23the period under review. A1/C254percentage
point change in interest rates is currently notexpected until mid-2005.
Monetary developments in the euro area
The monetary slowdown which had been ap-
parent since the second half of 2003 came toa halt. Euro-area M3 increased far moredistinctly between July and September thanin the preceding quarters. Following a 5%annualised seasonally adjusted three-monthrate of change at the end of both March andJune, the money stock grew at a rate of 8%in the third quarter. The three-month movingaverage of annual growth rates went up from5.2% for the April-June period to 5.7% forthe July-September months.
The increase in the money stock was mainly
attributable to its liquid components. Be-tween July and September overnight depositsincreased at a seasonally adjusted annualisedgrowth rate of 10
1/C252%. At the end of June
that rate had still been 1%. Cash holdingsalso expanded more strongly in the thirdquarter than in the first half of 2004. All inall, the money stock M1 increased in the thirdquarter of 2004 at an annual rate of 12%.There was also a substantial topping-up ofother short-term bank deposits (excludingovernight deposits) in the period from July toSeptember. The increase was not only in de-posits redeemable at notice of up to threemonths but also in deposits with an agreedmaturity of up to two years. After what hadbeen, in part, a very extensive reduction inthe preceding quarters, the financial inter-mediaries – such as insurance companies –
were especially active in building up depositsof this kind in the July-September period.Given sliding capital market rates and range-bound equity markets, during the summermonths institutional investors appeared to beattracted to the idea of parking liquidity inshort-term time accounts remunerated atmarket rates. By contrast, there was little de-mand for the negotiable financial instrumentsincluded in the money stock M3. Althoughinvestment in money market fund shares wasbeing expanded markedly, this was offset bya decline in money market paper outstandingand short-term bank debt securities. Repur-chase operations were stagnating by the endof the period under review.Seasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
Reference value: 4½%Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
87
6
54
3
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Monetary
expansion
accelerates
Components of
the money
stock

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
24The strong boost to the money stock in the
quarter under review came mainly from thesustained strong increase in lending to thedomestic private sector, including loans inparticular. Loans increased in the third quarterby just over 7
1/C252%, ie at a similar pace as in
the second quarter (just under 8%). Giventhe ongoing shifts from short-term into long-er-term loans, demand for long-term housingloans was again particularly high. In addition,consumer credit and corporate lending werelatterly also gaining momentum.
Moreover, during the period under review a
large amount of funds accrued to the euroarea through foreign payment transactions,after the clear decline of such inflows hadslowed the pace of monetary growth in theeuro area until early summer. The net externalassets of the MFI sector, which reflects pay-ment transactions between domestic non-banks and non-euro-area residents, rose by361 billion in the third quarter. In recent
years, such inflows of funds had frequentlyoriginated from securities transactions withnon-euro-area residents. Hence, if domesticinvestors again sell more securities to non-residents than they purchase from themwhile the euro exchange rate continues torise, this alone can lead to a sustained accel-eration of monetary growth.
By contrast, lending by domestic banks to the
euro-area general government sector weak-ened perceptibly in the months under review.Between July and September it actuallydecreased in non-seasonally adjusted termsby as much as 32
1/C252billion; in the same period€ billion, seasonally adjusted,
change over the period indicated
€ billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet counterparts 1
Loans to
enterprises
and households
Public sector
borrowing2
Net external
asset
position
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counterparts
of M33Money stock
Apr to June 2004
Increase in M3
July to Sep 2004Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts are
shown in terms of whether they expand (+)
or contract (−) the money stock. — 2Bank
loans to general government less euro-area
central government deposits with MFIs and
holdings of securities issued by the MFIsector. — 3Calculated as errors and omis-
sions from the remaining items of the con-
solidated balance sheet of the MFI sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank200+160+120+80+40+0 40−80−120−160−Balance sheet
counterparts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
25in 2003 it had been expanded by 3381/C252
billion.
Monetary expansion was again curbed by the
strong growth of monetary capital formation.In addition to the further marked increase inlonger-term time deposits, domestic MFIsagain placed large volumes of bank debtsecurities with maturities of more than twoyears outside the domestic banking sector.Since capital market rates are low, longer-term bank bonds are currently enjoying greatpopularity. The yield spread over comparablegovernment bonds is likely to have been acontributory factor here.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
In the third quarter there was a clear increase
in liquidity preference in Germany, too. Afterhaving experienced no more than a verymoderate rise in the second quarter, short-term deposits of domestic enterprises andhouseholds with German banks were toppedup strongly on a broad front in the periodfrom July to September. By contrast, the in-crease in the longer-term investment activityof domestic private non-banks in domesticbanks in the months under review was welldown on the second quarter and vis-/C224-vis theeuro area. Declining yields on fixed-interestsecurities since the mid-year point and range-bound equity markets probably boosteddomestic non-banks’ demand for liquid bankdeposits.Turning to short-term bank deposits, over-
night money rose strongly in the third quarterafter having stagnated in the previous quar-ter. From July to September it expanded by11% in seasonally adjusted annualised terms.Overnight deposits from insurance corpor-ations and non-financial enterprises were adeterminative factor.
For the first time since the second quarter of
2002, deposits with agreed maturities of upto two years also increased again in the quar-ter under review. Here too, it was only thecorporate sector which topped up its port-folio of short-term time deposits. Households,however, reduced them further – albeit lessmarkedly than in the previous quarters; none-theless, they renewed their investment inshort-term savings deposits. The annualisedLending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2004 2003
ItemJuly to
SepJuly to
Sep
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 5.7 – 0.8
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years + 1.3 – 12.0over 2 years + 5.3 + 9.5
At agreed notice
up to 3 months + 1.4 + 5.8over 3 months – 0.2 – 4.2
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised + 2.8 + 7.5Securitised – 5.6 – 3.2
to domestic government
Unsecuritised – 0.4 + 0.6Securitised + 6.1 – 3.0
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .— 1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Clear increase
in liquidity
preference in
GermanyMarked
increase in
overnight
deposits
First new
increase in
short-term time
deposits ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
26three-month growth rate of investment in de-
posits redeemable at notice of three monthswas 4% at the end of September, after 6%at the end of June. The main demand wasstill for savings deposits with particularly at-tractive yields.
Longer-term bank deposits were expanded
only moderately in the quarter under reviewafter continuing to be very popular in the pre-vious quarter. In the period under review theincrease affected only time deposits with amaturity of more than two years, which, as inthe previous quarter, were again topped upby insurance corporations in particular. How-ever, there was a further slight decrease inlonger-term savings deposits (with an agreedperiod of notice of more than three months)in the quarter under review.In the quarter under review the credit business
conducted by German banks with their domes-tic non-bank customers again remained wellbelow the buoyant credit expansion in the restof the euro area. The annualised seasonally ad-justed three-month growth rate rose at theend of September to just under 1
1/C252%a f t e rt h e
previous quarter’s credit stagnation. However,this increase is due almost entirely to the pur-chase by domestic banks of securities issued bythe domestic public sector. In the quarterunder review lending to domestic enterprisesand households remained virtually unchanged,as did unsecuritised lending by German banksto general government in Germany. However,the trend towards substituting longer-termloans for short-term loans, which has been ob-servable for some time, continued.
The ongoing weak credit development in
Germany still appears to be primarily due tolow credit demand. This is indicated by theOctober results of the Eurosystem’s banklending survey.
1According to data supplied
by the German institutions participating inthe survey, net credit demand from both en-terprises and households exhibited ratherweak growth overall in the third quarter com-pared with the euro area. That is particularlytrue of long-term corporate and housingloans. As far as enterprises are concerned,the primary causes are said to be the declinein fixed capital formation while among pri-vate customers the slide in consumer confi-dence is cited. Supply-side factors, however,Seasonally adjusted
€b n
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02250
2200
2150
2100
2050
2000
1950
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, German results of euro-
area bank lending survey, Monthly Report, June 2003,
pp 67-76. The aggregate survey results for Germany
can be viewed under http://www. bundesbank.de/volks-
wirtschaft/vo_veroeffentlichungen. en. php.... and further
increase in
short-term
savings deposits
Moderate
increase in
longer-term
bank depositsCredit
expansion
still weak
Further decline
in credit
demand
despite stable
credit standards

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
27played a negligible role in the weak credit
growth in Germany. In any case, the banksdid not tighten their credit standards furtherin the past three months (see adjacent chart).The evolution of credit standards in Germanyis thus more or less in line with developmentsin the euro area.
2The respondent institutions
are again expecting broadly unchanged creditstandards for all categories of lending in thefourth quarter. With regard to demand,banks are expecting a perceptible recovery inthe field of corporate loans in the next quar-ter.
Despite virtually unchanged credit standards,
the trend towards increasing credit risk pre-mia also continued in the third quarter of2004. The margin spread was also more pro-nounced than in the euro area as a whole(see adjacent chart). According to data sup-plied by the institutions taking part in the sur-vey, there were – apart from the margins –virtually no further changes in other lendingconditions such as collateral requirements ormaturities in the third quarter of 2004.
With regard to new business, German banks
offered most lending to non-financial enter-prises at cheaper rates in the third quarter of2004. Particularly for long-term corporatelending, the banks are charging far less inter-est than in the previous quarter. For instance,depending on the credit volume, they haverecently been charging between 4.4% and5.0% on long-term corporate loans. In somecases, the rates on housing loans also de-clined noticeably in the period under review.%
%%
%%%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q41Consumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in loan margins
Loans to enterprises
Average loansRiskier loansConsumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in credit standards
Loans to enterprisesBank Lending Survey *
*Difference between the sum of the per-
centages for ”tightened considerably” and
”tightened somewhat” and the sum of the
percentages for ”eased somewhat” and
”eased considerably”. — 1Expectations for
Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−100
80
60
402040+
20+
0
20−60+
40+
20+
0
20−60
4020
0
2003 2004
2See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin,
November 2004, pp 17-21.Ongoing
tendency
towards wider
margins
Fall mainly in
corporate
lending rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
28For loans with an interest rate fixation up to
ten years, the rate was 5.0% towards theend of the period under review. By contrast,new consumer loans did not develop uni-formly between July and September: whereasbanks reduced their charges for loans with ashort interest rate fixation, they were char-ging rather more for longer-term consumercredit than in the previous quarter.
The interest rates on deposits at domestic
credit institutions remained virtually un-changed in the third quarter. Towards the endof the period – depending on the maturity –the rates on households’ time deposits werebetween 1.9% and 2.7%, while those for en-terprises were between 2.0% and 3.9%. Theinterest paid on savings deposits redeemableat notice of up to three months was 2.1%.For longer maturities the banks paid 2.5%.
Securities markets
Developments in the financial markets were
affected from the mid-year point onwards bythe marked rise in oil prices and the percep-tible appreciation of the euro vis-/C224-vis theUS dollar. While, overall, prices rose slightlyagainst a background of distinct fluctuationsin the euro-area equity markets, the interestrate level declined. For instance, the yields onten-year euro-area government bonds fellcompared to early July by more than
1/C252per-
centage point to 33/C254% at the end of the
period under review. The decrease in long-term yields on dollar-denominated bonds wassomewhat smaller. While US bond yields fluc-tuated widely, the yield spread of ten-year USNew business
% per
annum
% per
annum% per
annum
... over €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year... up to €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
... over €1 million with an initial
   rate fixation of over 5 yearsLoans to non-financial
corporations ...Loans to households
Consumer credit 1
2
Housing loans3Households’ deposits ...
... overnight... redeemable at notice
  of up to 3 months
... with an agreed maturity
  of up to 1 yearBank interest
rates in Germany
1 With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year
and up to 5 years. — 2 Decline owing to
special effect. — 3 With an initial rate
fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years.
Deutsche Bundesbank5.5
5.24.94.64.3
4.0
3.73.43.1
2.87.0
6.76.46.15.8
5.5
5.24.9
4.62.7
2.42.1
1.8
1.5
1.2
0.9
2003 2004Little change in
deposit rates
Capital markets
affected by
euro appreci-
ation and
higher oil prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
29Treasuries over comparable euro-area bonds
evened out at times, before rising to justunder
1/C252percentage point by the end of the
period under review. In connection with thedecline in yields in the euro bond markets,there was a perceptible flattening of the yieldcurve. The gap between ten-year and three-month yields in the euro area narrowed in theperiod under review from 2
1/C254%t o12/C253%.
Against a backdrop of rather subdued ex-
pectations for the global economy in generaland the euro area in particular, the decline inbond yields in the period under review wasdue primarily to a lower real interest ratecomponent. This is indicated by the move-ment in the prices of inflation-indexed bondswhich are linked to the European consumerprice index. The (real) yields on these instru-ments fell by just over
1/C252percentage point, ie
by an extent similar to nominal bond yields.After a slight increase in the second quarter,the break-even inflation rate derived from acomparison of nominal and inflation-indexedbond yields remained, on balance, virtuallyunchanged at 2
1/C253% in the period under re-
view. Market participants are apparentlytending to associate rising oil prices with therisk of an economic slowdown rather thanwith expectations of a longer-term increasein inflation rates.
The cost of raising funds in the market for
corporate bonds improved further in the thirdquarter of 2004. At the end of the periodunder review, the spreads on corporatebonds with a BBB rating (the lowest invest-ment grade rating) over government bondswith the same maturities was roughly 75basis points and therefore close to the long-
standing lows. The generally low yield level inthe capital market evidently prompted invest-ors to take larger volumes of higher-yield –but hence riskier – paper into their portfolios(in a search for yield).
Since the middle of the year prices in the
European equity markets have been affectedby the changes in investor sentiment. Follow-Daily data
%
Per-
cent-
age
points%
Per-
cent-
age
points
Yield spreads of European
corporate bonds2
2003 2004Spread of US bond yields
over the euro-area averageYield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area
average 1
USABond yields in the
euro area and the USA
1Weighted average of the yields on ten-
year government bonds of all euro-area
countries; GDP-weighted. — 2Spread of
seven to ten-year BBB-rated European cor-
porate bonds over euro-area governmentbonds with a comparable maturity. Source:
Merrill Lynch Indices.
Deutsche Bundesbank2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.50.5+
0
0.5−5.5
4.55.0
4.04.5
3.5
3.0Yield curve
flatter
Real interest
rates on the
decline
Low yield
spreads on
corporate
bonds
Fluctuating
equity rates in
Germany and
Europe

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
30ing considerable temporary price losses, a
positive view has prevailed again in the end; inkeeping with the recent decline in the price ofoil, this resulted in euro-a rea equity prices rising
by just over 4% by the time this Monthly Re-
port went to press. In Germany, the fluctuations
in equity prices as measured against the CDAXprice index were somewhat more marked still;on balance, share prices rose by 3%.
Compared with the persistently high earnings
expectations for the current and the comingyears, the valuation of equities on the Euro-pean markets still looks comparatively lowover the long term, which suggests a highrisk premium on equity investment. Measuredin terms of the forecast average year-on-yearearnings for the Dow Jones EuroStoxx priceindex,
3the October price-earnings ratio of13.1 was well below the long-term average
of 16.5.4The range of estimated earnings per
share has increased somewhat since August.It is, however, still below the average of re-cent years.
Sales and purchases of securities
Large amounts of resources were again in-
vested in the German bond market in thethird quarter. Overall, domestic issuers solddebt securities to a nominal value of 3303
1/C252
billion, as opposed to 32901/C252billion in the
previous quarter. Owing to higher redemp-tions and changes in issuers’ holdings of theirown debt securities, net sales amounted to333 billion in the period under review. In add-
ition, sales of foreign bonds in the Germanmarket raised 323 billion net. Total funds
raised from the sale of domestic and foreigndebt securities thus amounted to 356 billion
in the period under review. That was some-what less than in the previous quarter ( 378
billion) but far more than in the same periodin the previous year ( 321 billion).
At323 billion net, more than two-thirds of
the domestic funds raised again accrued tothe credit institutions. The main demand wasfor other bank debt securities ( 324 billion)
and debt securities issued by special purposecredit institutions ( 314
1/C252billion). The volume
of mortgage Pfandbriefe outstanding, how-ever, remained unchanged. On balance, pub-Weekly averages
%
Nominal yields on 10-year
euro-area government bonds 1
Real yields
on 10-year inflation-indexed
French government bonds2Nominal and real
bond yields
1Weighted average of the yields on
ten-year euro-area government bonds; GDP
weighted. — 2Calculated from the 2001
inflation-indexed French government bond
OAT€i yielding 3%; maturity date: 25 July
2012.
Deutsche Bundesbank6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.52.0
1.5
1.0
2002 2003 2004
3I/B/E/S forecasts.
4From November 1999, estimates for the Dow Jones
EuroStoxx; from 1989 to October 1999, estimates for the
DAX.Forecasts point
to low evalu-
ation level in
the equity
marketSales receipts
in the German
bond market
Credit
institutions
expanded their
bonded debt

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
31lic Pfandbriefe were redeemed (- 3151/C252bil-
lion).
The public sector accounted for 35 billion of
the funds raised in the third quarter. Most ofthis amount was raised by Federal Govern-ment issuances, reflecting an expansion of itsbonded debt across the whole maturityrange. Ten-year and thirty-year Bund issuesraised 32 billion net and 33
1/C252billion net, re-
spectively. Sales of two-year Treasury notes(Sch/C228tze) raised 32
1/C252billion and five-year Fed-
eral notes (Bobls) raised 331/C252billion. More-
over, in the period under review a bond is-sued by the Currency Conversion EqualisationFund was redeemed for 31 billion, one origin-
ally issued by the former Deutsche Bundes-post was redeemed for 32
1/C252billion and one
originally issued by the former Treuhandagency for 35 billion.
5The federal states in-
creased their bonded debt by 321/C252billion in
the third quarter.
Low interest rates led to a restructuring of
securitised liabilities in the corporate sector infavour of longer maturities. In the third quar-ter312
1/C252billion worth of corporate bonds
were sold, as opposed to just over 32 billion
in the same period in the previous year. How-ever, these figures include revenue from thesecuritisation of Federal Government claimson Russia. The volume outstanding of moneymarket paper issued by German enterprisesfell by 38 billion.Monthly data
Lin scale
Price-earnings ratio2
DAX
Dow Jones
EuroStoxxAverage expected earnings
per share2
DAXDow Jones
EuroStoxxLog scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx
share price index1
DAX share price
index1Price movements and earnings
estimates for European
and German public
limited companies
1March 2000 = 100; source:  Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2Based on I / B / E / S forecasts of
12-month forward earnings per share.
Source: Thomson Financial Datastream.
Deutsche Bundesbank33
3027
24
2118
15
12130
115
100
85
70115
100
85
70
4085
60
50
45
40
35
30
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
5In 1995 the debts of the Treuhand agency were trans-
ferred to the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities. In
1999 responsibility was assumed by the Federal Govern-
ment.Fewer funds
raised by the
public sector
Enterprises
issued bonds to
the detriment
of money
market paper

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
32The principal buyers in the bond market were
domestic credit institutions and non-resi-dents. In the third quarter banks purchased326
1/C252billion net of bonds and notes, follow-
ing338 billion in the second quarter. Particu-
larly worthy of note is the high level of for-eign investment in the German market,which saw investment purchases increasefrom 314 billion in the second quarter to
328
1/C252billion in the third. Almost two-thirds
of these purchases were of general govern-ment bonds.
Issuing activity in the German equity market
declined in the third quarter. Domestic enter-prises placed new shares with a market valueof only 31 billion. In the previous quarter, the
volume of shares outstanding had increasedby35 billion, primarily as a result of a capital
increase by a big bank. After minimal changein the second quarter, the volume of foreignequities outstanding in the German marketfell by as much as 310 billion.
On balance, German equities were purchased
solely by foreign investors in the third quarter.They added 36
1/C252billion worth of paper to
their equity portfolios, while credit institutionsreduced their holdings of domestic equitiesby33
1/C252billion and non-banks reduced theirs
by321/C252billion. At the same time, credit insti-
tutions sold 34 billion worth of foreign equi-
ties and non-banks sold 361/C252billion worth.
In the third quarter domestic investment
funds had to accommodate a larger outflowof funds (- 34 billion) than in the previous
quarter (- 31 billion). On balance, only the
specialised funds earmarked for institutionalinvestors were affected by redemptions (- 35
billion). By contrast, foreign funds sold 33 bil-
lion worth of shares and domestic fundsopen to the general public 31 billion worth.
Of the funds open to the general public,money market funds attracted the most in-vestment ( 32
1/C252billion). Open-end real estate
funds sold 31 billion worth of shares and
mixed funds sold 31/C252billion worth. By con-
trast, shares in share-based funds and bond-based funds were redeemed (- 32 billion and
-31 billion respectively), as in the previous
quarter.Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2004 2003
ItemApr to
JuneJuly to
SepJuly to
Sep
Bonds and notes
Residents 63.7 27.6 27.8
Credit institutions 38.2 26.7 4.0of which
Foreign bonds and notes 18.8 14.2 0.2
Non-banks 25.5 0.9 23.8of which
Domestic bonds and notes 14.3 – 7.7 23.4
Non-residents 14.2 28.3 – 7.0
Shares
Residents 16.9 – 16.1 1.5
Credit institutions – 5.4 – 7.3 – 1.5of which
Domestic shares – 6.2 – 3.5 0.0
Non-banks 22.3 – 8.8 3.0of which
Domestic shares 23.0 – 2.4 – 1.0
Non-residents – 11.7 6.7 3.1
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 0.1 – 4.9 4.0
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public – 1.3 1.0 2.6of which: Share-based funds – 1.4 – 1.8 0.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
Marked
increase in
purchase
of domestic
bonds by
non-residents
Lower volume
of funds raised
in the equity
marketEquities
purchased by
foreign
investors
Sales of mutual
fund shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
33Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The German economy achieved a notable
pace of growth in the first half of the yearbut made hardly any further progress in thethird quarter. According to initial calculationsby the Federal Statistical Office, the increasein real gross domestic product (GDP) in thethird quarter of 2004 amounted to 0.1%after seasonal and working-day adjustment.The year-on-year rate after adjustment forworking-day variations as well as accordingto the non-adjusted figures was 1.3%. On anaverage of the first nine months of the cur-rent year, the increase in overall outputamounts to 1.2% after working-day adjust-ment, and to 1.6% on the basis of the origin-al figures.
The current phase in the recovery process in-
dicates yet again that a self-sustaining, broad-ly based upswing has not yet occurred. In-deed, up to now the upturn has been basedalmost entirely on external demand. Thismakes the economy especially sensitive to ex-ternal changes and disruptions. As the cyclicalmovement is also taking place along quite aflat growth trend, periods when overall out-put is stagnating or temporary setbacks areby no means unusual. Resilience to exogen-ous shocks and risk factors will increase onlyif the endogenous forces of the domesticeconomy are revitalised. In the present situ-ation, however, the Germany economy didnot have much to counter the slackening ofexport activity, especially as higher oil priceswere likewise placing a strain on domesticreal incomes and the demand for domesticgoods. At all events, despite the unfavourableCyclically weak
quarterly result
but ...
... recovery
scenario
remains intact

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
34setting, private consumption held up at the
level of the second quarter and there was adistinct increase in investment in machineryand equipment, although this was accom-panied by rising imports. Much the same ap-plies to inventories, which also made a contri-bution to growth. The strains due to con-struction investment were no longer assevere at the end of the period under review,although the situation here is unlikely to havebottomed out yet.
Judging by the latest Ifo and German Indus-
trial and Trade Association (DIHK) surveys, therecovery scenario is not being fundamentallycalled into question. At present, however, it isscarcely possible to tell whether there mightbe slower cyclical progress for a time. Thetransition from the initial phase of cyclical re-covery to an upturn additionally sustained by
domestic demand is taking more time thanexpected. While demand for heating oil wasstill declining in the third quarter, rising pur-chases in the fourth quarter are likely to havetied up a lot of purchasing power. Further-more, households’ current scope for expend-iture is being restricted by cutbacks in specialannual bonuses and wage components out-side the agreed pay scales, which have beenannounced or adopted by many firms and inthe public sector.
Given very dynamic export activity in the first
half of the year, the lull in exports in the thirdquarter is not unusual. The good shape of theglobal economy, enterprises’ export expect-ations and the latest data on new exportorders suggest that external impulses will in-crease again in the final quarter of 2004,even though the recent depreciation of theUS dollar might have a slightly dampeningimpact on export growth.
What is also to be seen in a positive light is
that employers and workers have demon-strated a great deal of flexibility in the pastfew months and that agreement has beenachieved on moderate pay agreements aswell as on measures to safeguard jobs andproduction sites in Germany. Together withthe reforms that have been initiated, thismeans that important conditions are in placefor a turnaround on the labour market. Fur-thermore, developments so far in machineryand equipment do not suggest that there hasbeen a structural change in corporate invest-ment behaviour (see explanatory notes onpage 36-37). Rising investment in machinery
Adjusted for seasonal and working-day
variations, quarterly
%DM bn € bn
Lin scale
Year-on-year change9009209409609801000
oLog scale
                                    
Real GDP 1Economic growth in Germany
1At 1995 prices. — oFrom 1999, in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−510
500490
480
470460
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Slower pace of
growth possibleChances
of external
improvement
More
favourable
underlying
conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
35and equipment in the third quarter is pointing
in the same direction.
Output and labour market
The slowing of export activity has been re-
flected very obviously in the performance ofindustry. The increase in output, which be-came perceptibly stronger in the second quar-ter in the wake of buoyant demand, tailed offafter the middle of the year. The summer holi-day period played a part in this. In August,particularly, production was cut back owingto an accumulation of holidays. Taking thethird quarter as a whole, which is advisable tooffset special factors, seasonally adjusted out-put held up largely at the second-quarterlevel, which had brought an increase ofaround 1
3/C254%. The year-on-year increase
amounted to some 4%, compared with4
1/C252% in the second quarter. This indicates, as
before, a sharp improvement in industrial ac-tivity.
Taking sales as a yardstick, production for ex-
port, in particular, declined in the summermonths, whereas domestic activities weremuch less affected. Besides consumer goodsproducers, manufacturers of capital goodswere hit especially. Seasonally adjusted cap-ital goods output in the third quarter was nohigher than it had been before and the year-on-year increase fell from 6
1/C254%t o51/C252%. Not
least, the motor and mechanical engineeringindustries lost momentum compared with thehigh level of production in spring. By con-trast, producers of intermediate goods ex-panded their output again slightly. In particu-Seasonally adjusted, monthly
Balance
Balance
Propensity to purchaseHouseholds’ assessment of the
economic situation2
MonthlyCurrent situationBusiness
expectations2000 = 100
Business climate in the
industrial sector 1Sentiment in the industrial
sector and among households
1 Source: Ifo Institute. — 2  According to
Gfk data. Moving five-month averages.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−40+
20+
0
20−
40−105
100
95
90
85
80110
105
100
95
9085
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Slowing of
industrial
output

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
36Deutsche BundesbankCorporate investment behaviour in the current cycle – hints of a structural break?
Since the second half of 2003, macroeconomic activity in 
Germany has tended to show an upward trend. Preceded by inventory cycle effects, the recovery was initiated by strong stimuli exerted by foreign trade. However, one 
year after the start of the recovery, there has not yet 
been any broadening of growth. The “typical growth scenario“ in macroeconomic forecasts envisages that, on the basis of external stimuli, the domestic economy 
will strengthen, mainly as a result of a rise in corporate 
investment while private consumption will support growth with a time lag (for example, as a consequence of an improvement in the labour market situation). However, the sustained downturn in private investment 
has given rise to doubts that the current weakness in 
investment is of a purely cyclical nature. Although indus-trial investment has evidently increased signiﬁ  cantly in 
the third quarter of 2004, there could have been a struc-
tural change in investment behaviour.
The table below shows the statistical shares of expendi-
ture aggregates in the cumulative change in the year-
on-year seasonally and working-day adjusted real gross domestic product (GDP) since the respective cyclical trough. In contrast to the previous recovery periods, no 
element of ﬁ  nal domestic demand has made a positive 
contribution to economic growth since the second half 
of 2003. The latest upward movement is, for the most 
part, attributable to net exports. Not only is the increase in exports exceptional by historical standards, it should also be taken into account that there was a compara-
tively small increase in imports this time owing to sub-
dued domestic demand.
In terms of the national accounts ﬁ  gures, the current 
recovery process is so far to be regarded as atypical, 
mainly because after one year, it is still almost completely 
based on buoyant foreign trade. However, the low level 
of corporate investment cannot alone be “blamed” for 
the fact that the basis for growth has not yet broadened. Indeed, it should be pointed out that there has been lit-tle sign of an improvement in either private consump-
tion or housing construction. In particular, investment 
by enterprises in the expansion of productive capital 
remained low, especially as capacity is underutilised in 
many cases.
1 For reasons of comparability, uniformly deﬁ  ned as a one-year period 
after the cyclical trough. — 2 Seasonally and working day-adjusted 
quarterly data at 1995 prices; as of August 2004. — 3 Quotient of 
differences, whereby the year-on-year cumulative change is calculated 
from the cyclical low . — 4 Government consumption expenditure and public investment. — 5 The standard error of the estimated coefﬁ  cient 
is given in parentheses. — 6 Commercial investment comprises private 
investment in machinery and equipment and other capital as well as 
in commercially used non-residential buildings. — 7 OLS residual-based 
CUSUM tests were conducted; see W Ploberger and W Krämer (1992), Recovery phases since 1970 in a chart of national accounts
GDP 2 Share of use aggregates in the cumulative change in GDP (in %) 2, 3
Private investment Foreign balance
Recovery phases 1Cumulative
change (in5billion)Public
demand
4Private con-
sumptionNon-
housingconstruc-tionHousing
construc-tion TotalOf which
exports
1975 Q3 to 1976 Q2 13.6 6 36 20 8 2 33
1983 Q1 to 1983 Q4 9.5 7 36 29 11 – 29 171993 Q3 to 1994 Q2 10.2 15 28 – 1 43 30 952003 Q3 to 2004 Q2 7.4 – 7 – 30 – 19 – 7 142 298

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
37An econometric study of enterprises’ investment behav-
iour complements the circular ﬂ  ow analysis ﬁ  nding, 
which asks whether a structural break can be statistically proven at the current end. Using the accelerator model, 
a close relationship to the long-term trend of aggregate 
economic activity can be established for industrial invest-ment. As part of a vector error correction model on the basis of seasonally and calendar-adjusted quarterly data 
in the sample, the estimate of this connection produces 
for the period since 1970 the cointegration relation-ship
 5
it – 1,18 yt(0,17) 
where it denotes commercial investment 6 and yt GDP 
– both variables are in logarithmic form and real terms.
As the adjacent chart shows, the cyclical ﬂ  uctuations in 
industrial investment around their long-term equilib-
rium value show considerable volatility. These would be 
fully consistent with the fall in the volume of investment, 
which has already been ongoing for four years, provided 
that the level achieved in summer 2004 was roughly in 
line with the lower turning point. An econometric mod-
elling of investment behaviour taking into account the 
above long-term relationship as well as suitable regres-
sors for short-term dynamics provides a residual struc-ture which does not provide any statistically signiﬁ  cant 
evidence for a structural change at present. 
7
If the structure is presumed to remain unchanged (ie 
if such a model equation were to valid in the future), 
industrial investment would pick up in the not-too-dis-tant future as part of a continued upward economic trend and, in that way, increasingly broaden the basis for growth. Economically, the very favourable ﬁ  nancial 
conditions as well as the considerable need for replace-
ment investment support this view. In commercial and 
industrial construction, on the other hand, the fact that 
enterprises evidently have little incentive to expand their 
production capacity at present has a negative inﬂ  uence. 
All in all, according to the current data, it would be 
premature to talk of a structural change in the invest-
ment behaviour of enterprises. Nevertheless, the growth 
proﬁ le of the current recovery phase has special features 
by historical standards. Once again, the structural prob-
lems of the German economy are manifesting them-
selves in the weakness of investment. This includes the 
widespread uncertainty among households, the future 
demographic burdens as well as the fact that functional disruptions in the labour market are only gradually being reduced.
The CUSUM Test with OLS Residuals, Econometrica 60, 2: 271-285. Alter-
native critical values were used for this in order to improve the quality of the test at the current end; see A Zeileis (2004), Alternative Boun-daries for CUSUM Tests, Statistical Papers 45: 123-131. Furthermore, a new test was applied which was developed by DWK Andrews (2004), End-of-Sample Instability Tests, Econometrica 71, 6: 1661-1694. — 8 The 
long-term residuals measure the percentage deviation from the long-term equilibrium value and, in this case, result from regression of the cointegration relationship on a constant and a dummy variable model-ling the statistical break resulting from German reuniﬁ  cation.Quarterly data
%
1970 75 80 85 90 95 00 2004Long-term residuals of commercial
investment8
20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5–
10–
15–

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
38lar, output was stepped up significantly in the
chemicals and chemical products industryafter having remained unchanged over a pro-longed period.
There was no improvement in business in the
construction sector in the summer either, al-though, in seasonally adjusted terms, the de-cline in construction output clearly sloweddown in the third quarter. A gradual trendstabilisation at a low level is becoming appar-
ent. How low output has now become is alsorevealed by the fact that the figure for theperiod from July to September was again8
1/C252% down on the year. Even an upward ad-
justment of between 3 or 4 percentagepoints in the overall survey, as has been thecase over the past few years, would probablybe a long way from offsetting this shortfall.The situation was especially unfavourable inthe building industry, with all the major sub-sectors – residential, industrial and public sec-tor construction – being equally affected.Civil engineering performed somewhat bet-ter, however. With a 6
1/C252% fall in output on
the year (according to the present data), thesituation was not fundamentally differenthere either, however. This also applies to thefinishing trades. In the second quarter of2004 (more recent statistics are unavailable),hours worked were 7
1/C252% down on the same
period of 2003. The corresponding figure forsales was -5%.
The indicators available for the services sector
point to a generally more subdued per-formance recently. A large number ofconsumption-linked producers were stillbeing affected by the fact that householdsare cutting back on purchases. At least, therewas no further fall in retail sales in the thirdquarter. Nevertheless, they were still down onthe year, as was wholesale turnover in somebranches. Business in motor vehicles was es-pecially affected, whereas pharmaceuticalproducts, in particular, enjoyed buoyant de-mand in both wholesale and retail terms. Thebusiness-related branches of the wholesaletrade likewise performed relatively well. The2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
1Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
1Provisional until adjusted to the results of
the annual overall survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−105
90100
8595
8090
7510+
5+
0
5−105
100
95
90
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Sluggish
construction
activityModerate
performance
in services

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
39pace of growth slackened somewhat along
with the slowing of industrial activity.
In the hotel and restaurant industry, there
had been a gradual consolidation in the situ-ation with regard to accommodation services,resulting in a steady reduction of the declinein year-on-year turnover. This did not con-tinue in the third quarter. In the case of somecommercial service providers, too, the im-provement in the business situation, whichwas apparent in the second quarter, has fal-tered during the past few months. Accordingto the surveys of the Centre for EuropeanEconomic Research (ZEW), this applies, notleast, to suppliers of IT services and the ICTtrade. Furthermore, among both manage-ment consultants and architects, optimismabout positive developments was more sub-dued again. Technical consultancy as well asresearch and development continued to be indemand, however. In the telecoms sector andin the case of tax consultants and auditingfirms, too, there were increasing reports of apositive development in turnover. A massiverise in costs due to the international pricesurge on the oil markets caused problems forthe transport sector, in particular.
From a cyclical point of view, there has been
hardly any improvement in the labour marketsituation of late. Following a further revisionof the data by the Federal Statistical Office,there has been an increase in the number ofpersons in work since the start of 2004, withthe seasonally adjusted figure reaching 38.39million in August. This was roughly 110,000persons more than in December 2003 or105,000 more than 12 months earlier. To alarge extent, however, the upward adjust-
ment was due to the recording in the statis-tics of additional part-time low-income work-ers, who are active, not least, in households.There is a possibility that this was partly dueto the campaign against illicit working con-ducted by the Federal Government and that agreater number of household helps were re-ported. The number of self-employed personshas also been adjusted upwards, which isQuarterly
Millions
Millions
%Thou-
sands
Thou-
sands
0
1Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
OctOctLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
- OctLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Employed
(seasonally adjusted)Labour market
1From January 2004, unemployed exclud-
ing participants in aptitude testing and
training measures.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8800+
400+
0
400−
800−38.8
38.4
38.0
37.6
37.2
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Unfavourable
development
on the labour
market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
40partly related to the promotion of one-person
businesses under current labour market pol-icy. Industrial employment was continuing tofall well into the third quarter, however, albeitat decreasing rates. The figure in August wasmore than 1
1/C252% down on the year. There
was also a further decline in employment inthe construction sector and the finishingtrades, with reductions that were close tobeing in double figures. Furthermore, a year-on-year fall in employment was again report-ed by many branches of the services sector,including the wholesale and retail trade aswell as the commercial service providers sur-veyed by the ZEW.
Any sign of an identifiable cyclical improve-
ment on the labour market is also belied bythe increase in unemployment going into thefourth quarter. According to the Federal Em-ployment Agency, the seasonally adjustednumber of persons officially registered as un-employed had risen to 4.46 million by Octo-ber. This was almost 190,000 higher than thelevel in January of this year. The year-on-yearincrease was 55,000. Taking into account themethodological adjustment at the start of theyear, as a result of which persons taking partin aptitude testing and training schemes areno longer counted as being unemployed,the increase over 12 months amounted to185,000. The seasonally adjusted unemploy-ment rate, as calculated by the Federal Em-ployment Agency, was 10.7% in October.Using the standardised international method,the figure was 10.0%. In both cases, this wasaround
1/C252percentage point higher than at
the beginning of 2004.Numerous labour market policy measures
have continued to have an alleviating impact.Direct assistance for employment was grant-ed to 375,000 persons in October. This mainlytook the form of one-person businesses and,to a minor extent, personnel service agencies(PSAs). Just under 120,000 participants in jobcreation schemes were reported. The labourexchanges supported pre-retirement part-time work for roughly 80,000 persons. Ar-rangements similar to pre-retirement werebeing taken up by 395,000 older workers, forwhich they are no longer registered as un-employed. 110,000 persons were taking partin aptitude testing and training measures. Vo-cational training schemes were being attend-ed by 165,000 persons. The expected impactof the Fourth Act Promoting Modern LabourMarket Services (Hartz IV) on unemploymentin 2005 are roughly quantified in the explana-tory notes on page 41.
Orders
The slowing of export activity has been clearly
reflected in the volume of new industrialorders. Furthermore, the summer months ofJuly and August were marked by various holi-day influences. Whereas there tended to befewer (school) holidays in July than has beenusual during the past few years, which meantthat there were relatively few hold-ups ofbusiness activity, August – as the main holidaymonth – was especially affected. In the periodfrom July to September as a whole, the sea-sonally adjusted level of new orders was justas high as in the second quarter. This meantthat, for the time being, there was no con-
Rise in
unemploymentExtensive
labour market
policy measures
Weaker
demand for
industrial goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
41The effects of “Hartz IV” on the labour market
The Fourth Act Promoting Modern Labour Market
Services (“Hartz IV”) merges unemployment assist-ance with social assistance for persons able to workinto a basic national social security system for jobseekers (“unemployment benefit II”). The new actcomes into force on 1 January 2005. It is expected tohave a noticeable impact on employment and un-employment. However, only a conditional quantita-tive assessment, which is subject to great uncertainty,is possible at present.
It can be taken as read that, at the start of January,
many previous recipients of social assistance willregister as unemployed in order to claim unemploy-ment benefit II. Based on the statistics on social assist-ance recipients for 2003, the Institut f/C252r Arbeits-
markt- und Berufsforschung (IAB), the Federal Em-
ployment Agency’s labour market and employmentresearch institution, predicts that around 300,000will do so in the coming year. As the increase in un-employed persons will take place at the beginning ofthe year, the cited figures also apply to the annualaverage.
However, there will be relief as a result of the jobs
planned as part of the integration measures. Thesewill be non-profit-making and additional activities,for which an expense allowance work-related benefitbonus will be paid amounting to 51t o 52 per hour
worked in addition to unemployment benefit II. Onthe basis of the financial resources provided for thispurpose, the Federal Ministry of Economics and La-bour has estimated a potential for 600,000 jobs,200,000 to 250,000 of which are estimated to bealready available for recipients of social assistance.According to the Federal Employment Agency, afurther 45,000 job opportunities had been createdthroughout Germany by the end of October, with theresult that an additional 300,000 jobs can be ex-pected for 2005. As these will only be created grad-ually, this will result in an average of 150,000 jobs peryear provided that growth is relatively steady. Thenumber of people out of work will fall and the num-ber of people in work will rise accordingly.
A further reduction in registered unemployment is
expected among persons who are currently claimingunemployment assistance but are not entitled toclaim unemployment benefit II under the new rulesbecause they have offsettable assets or sufficientfamily income. This is estimated to affect around halfa million people. The level has been calculated byboth the IAB and the trade unions from basic infor-mation supplied by the Federal Government. Experi-ence from 2003 can be cited in order to exclude fromthis group those who are likely to take themselvesoff the unemployment register after a while. Follow-ing the reorganisation of job placement to encour-age active job-seeking and involving a tightening of
the criteria for registering as unemployed, aroundone-fifth of those unemployed who were registeredbut did not receive benefits were taken off the regis-ter at that time. This number of benefit recipients de-registering from assistance results in around 100,000deregistrations on an annual average.
Finally, it is not unrealistic to assume that more in-
tense job placement activity which the Federal Gov-ernment is aiming for will, together with stricterrules on accepting jobs that become available, willlead to a reduction in registered unemployment.However, the stated number of 100,000 persons de-registering in connection with this appears, if any-thing, to form the upper limit. Assuming that 50,000will deregister over the course of the year, there willbe a fall of 25,000 per year on average. Employmentis unlikely to increase not quite as sharply, as experi-ence shows that there will be some withdrawals intothe hidden reserve.
Combining these partial effects, it becomes apparent
that Hartz IV will arguably not have a significant im-pact on registered unemployment on average in2005. On the other hand, the number of persons inwork will rise. At the start of the year, though, thereis likely to be a sharp rise in registered unemploy-ment. This will not only gradually go back downagain but is also even likely to turn into an increasingdecline over time. Employment will continuously riseafter a slow start. If one adds the gradual improve-ment in the labour market, which is supported by thecyclical component, there could be a turnaround in2005. Admittedly, this will be less significant whenlooking at full-time workers subject to social securitycontributions or the hours worked than in purelyperson-related terms.
Deutsche BundesbankEffects of “Hartz IV” on average
unemployment in 2005
Item Change
Persons receiving social assistance but able
to work who were not previously registeredas unemployed + 300,000
Unemployment benefit II recipients with
a “one euro job” – 150,000
Previous recipients of unemployment
assistance who are not entitled tounemployment benefit II and are nolonger registered unemployed – 100,000
Intensified job intermediation – 25,000
Estimated overall effect + 25,000

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
42tinuation of the steadily rising demand for
German industrial products, which hadbegun in spring 2003, producing an increasein orders of around 7
1/C252%.
Export orders, which had been the main driv-
ing force for about a year, were especially af-fected by this. Quarterly growth, which hadaveraged 2
3/C254% in the phase of expansion,
fell to not quite 1%. Capital goods producersperformed better. Producers of machinery
and equipment, especially manufacturers ofother transport equipment, which includesaircraft, ships and boats, railways and rollingstock, achieved significant growth in orders,while manufacturer of road vehicles was no-ticeably down on the quarter. In the case ofintermediate goods, it was, above all, thechemicals industry that helped to stabiliseorders in the sector as a whole. Orders re-ceived by producers of consumer goods werea long way from matching their outstandinglevel in the second quarter. In seasonally ad-justed terms, they fell by 2
3/C254%.
In the summer months, domestic demand,
which had previously increased not even halfas much as export orders, lagged behind thesecond-quarter level. At 3%, it continued toshow a year-on-year increase. However, therise has become distinctly smaller lately. Inparticular, as in the second quarter, there wasa decline in new orders received by producersof capital goods. Not only manufacturers ofmachinery and equipment but also the IT andtelecoms sectors took in fewer orders. In boththe consumer and intermediate goods sec-tors, the volume of new orders in the thirdquarter was likewise lower than before. Aclear rise in incoming orders in the chemicalsand steel industry contrasted with sharplosses for suppliers of important products ofthe textile sector and the plastic goodsindustry.
Among the commercial service providers in-
cluded in the ZEW survey, advertising firms, inparticular, reported a positive situation withregard to orders. Technical consultancy asVolume, 2000 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
DomesticLog scale
ForeignLin scale
year-on-year changeLog scale
New orders totalDemand for industrial goods
Deutsche Bundesbank105
100
95
90100115
95110
90105
85100
80
7515+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−110
105
100
95
90
85
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Positive orders
situation in the
case of service
providers

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
43well as research and development activities
were in considerable demand. In the IT sector,it is likely that specialised firms often had tobe employed to set up programs. However, incontrast to the first half of the year, telecomsservices met with only limited interest. Manyfirms of architects also reported a substantiallack of orders.
Demand for construction work remained
weak in the summer months. In seasonallyadjusted terms, incoming construction ordersin July and August were down again on thepreceding three-month period from April toJune. Even though the decline became mark-edly slower, the year-on-year decline – at justunder one-tenth – was, in fact, sharper thanbefore. Only in public construction was thesituation marginally more favourable with thefall amounting to around 6
1/C252% on the year.
In commercial construction as well as in thecase of dwellings, however, the deteriorationover 12 months was in double figures. Takingconstruction permits as a yardstick, no im-provement in construction activity appearslikely in the immediate future either. With nomore than 15,800 dwellings on an average ofthe period from July to September, there wasa further decline of around 11
1/C252% in the
number of new dwellings approved com-pared with the second quarter. In particular,there has been a massive decline in construc-tion projects for owner-occupied houses. Inthe summer months, they were no less thanroughly 13% down on the spring quarter and17
1/C252% down on the year. There was also a
reduction in construction applications forrented and owner-occupied apartments, al-though the fall was distinctly smaller at littlemore than 8%. It should be borne in mind,
however, that the willingness to build hasbeen falling dramatically for several yearsnow.
Prices and wages
Wage developments in the economy as a
whole remained quite moderate in 2004.Volume, 2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted,
quarterly, log scale
... in housing construction... from the public sectorConstruction orders ...
... from industrial
    enterprisesTotal construction orders
July/
AugDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60120
100110
90100
80110
90100
8090
70120
110
100
90
80
7070
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004- - - - 
Weak
construction
demand
Moderate wage
developments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
44Agreed rates of pay, including all ancillary
agreements, went up 1.1% on a monthlybasis in the third quarter, compared with in-creases of 1.9% in the first quarter and 1.6%in the second quarter. The smaller increase innegotiated rates of pay in the summermonths was due, first, to the abolition of holi-day bonuses for civil servants and, second, toa base effect in the metal-working and elec-trical engineering industry, since workers inthat sector had been granted a one-off pay-ment last year as part of the “ERA structuralcomponent”. For 2004 as a whole, a 1
1/C252%
increase in agreed rates of pay appears likely.
At present, data on actual earnings in the
third quarter are available only for industryand the construction sector. These show thatwages and salaries per employee in industryduring this period were 1.1% up on the year.
In July and August, earnings in the construc-tion sector were also up 1.1%. It is very likelythat the increase in average actual earningsamong the individual services subsectors wassignificantly lower, particularly in view of thesharp expansion of part-time employment inthe form of “mini-jobs”. On an overall aver-age, the rise in actual earnings is thereforelikely to have markedly lagged behind the in-crease in negotiated rates of pay in the thirdquarter as well.
As an outcome, the corporate cost account in
the third quarter was perceptibly alleviatedfrom the wages side. Given a 1% increase inproductivity per person employed, unit labourcosts were quite clearly down on the year inthis three-month period, too. They thusformed a major counterweight to the sharprise in energy and commodity prices, especial-ly as the scope for raising prices is currentlyvery limited in the case of many enterprises.
In the past few months, external factors have
had a sharp impact on domestic prices. Brentcrude oil, to which prices in Europe aregeared, cost almost US$50 a barrel in Octo-ber. This was US$15 more than in mid-2004,a rise of more than two-thirds on the year.The depreciation of the dollar against theeuro has dampened the price rise to some ex-tent for European customers, but the increasewas still very large at just under 60%. Whenmeasured against that, the rate of price in-crease for internationally traded industrialraw materials was moderate. The year-on-year rate was, nevertheless, quite sharp atmore than one-fifth in US dollar terms andConsumer prices
Annual percentage change
2004
I t e m Q 1Q 2Q 3O c t
Food 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.6 – 1.4
Industrial goods 0.9 1.8 1.6 1.5
of which
Tobacco 4.4 12.2 12.2 12.2Pharmaceuticals andtherapeutic appliances 17.2 23.2 23.2 23.3
Energy – 1.6 4.9 6.1 9.5
of which
Refined petroleumproducts – 6.3 7.7 10.3 16.3
Services 2.2 2.4 2.3 2.3
of which
Outpatient and inpatientmedical services 17.0 17.0 18.7 18.5
Rents 1.1 1.0 1.0 1.2
Total 1.0 1.7 1.8 2.0
Total excluding seasonal
products, energy, tobacco,healthcare 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.4
Memo item
Harmonised Index 1.0 1.8 2.0 2.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
Sharp increase
in the cost of
energy and raw
materials

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
45around 15% in euro terms in October accord-
ing to the HWWA index. The prices of non-ferrous metals and iron ore and scrap wentup by more than 35% or about two-fifths.
The international surge in prices has been rec-
ognisably reflected in German import prices.Imports of crude oil in September were nearly40% up on the year and refined petroleumproducts were, in fact, over twice as expen-sive. Iron ore and non-ferrous ores werearound one-quarter up on the year, with ironand steel products costing over one-thirdmore. Although overall import prices were nomore than 2.7% higher than their level inSeptember 2003, this was due to persistentlylow prices for capital and consumer goods.At the end of the period under review, capitalgoods prices were 2.6% down on the earlierlevel. The corresponding figure for consumergoods was -1.5%. This suggests that the in-crease in the cost of energy and commoditieshas so far not led to major price adjustmentsin the case of finished goods. No more thansubdued demand together with fierce com-petition has probably made it considerablymore difficult to adjust prices.
As German exports are heavily concentrated
on finished products, price increases for ex-ported goods were comparatively small onthe whole. Even though domestic supplierswere able to charge their customers fairlyhigh prices in comparison with the relevantcompeting imports – for example, exportersof capital goods made price concessions inyear-on-year terms amounting to no morethan 0.3%, while importers reduced theirquoted prices by 2.6% over the same period– overall export prices were only 1.0% up on
the year in September, while imports became2.7% more expensive. At the end of theperiod under review, there was therefore anoticeable deterioration in the terms of tradeon the basis of external trade prices. For theyear as a whole, however, the losses are stilllikely to be limited.2000 = 100, monthly
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
(quarterly)Enlarged scale
Terms of trade2
(seasonally adjusted)Log scale
Commodity prices 1
on a euro basison a US dollar
basisCommodity prices and
terms of trade
1Source: HWWA Commodity Price Index
“Euroland”. — 2Germany; index of export
prices as a percentage of the index of im-
port prices.
Deutsche Bundesbank5+
0
5−115
110
105
100
95160
140
120
100
80
60
5070
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Rising import
prices
Deterioration
in the terms
of trade

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
46In terms of domestic industrial factory gate
prices, there were likewise major differencesin price developments at the individual stagesof production. Capital goods showed a 0.5%increase on the year in October, while non-durable consumer goods (leaving aside to-bacco on account of the tax increase inMarch) cost 0.1% less than in the samemonth in 2003. Intermediate goods, by con-trast, were 5.2% higher over 12 months. Forenergy, the overall figure was +6.4%. Takentogether, the year-on-year rate of increase forindustrial factory gate prices was 3.3% in Oc-tober, compared with +0.2% in the first quar-ter.
Price changes in the case of industrial prod-
ucts were quite small at the consumer level aswell. After excluding tobacco and healthcareproducts, there was, in fact, a year-on-yearfall of 0.7% in October. Food was also 1.4%cheaper than in 2003. This contrasted with arelatively sharp price rise in the case of ser-vices. Excluding healthcare, the year-on-yearrate of increase for services was 1.1%. In-creases in housing rents were on a similarscale. For all these components together, therate of price increase was only 0.3% on theyear. However, adding the price rises for en-ergy (+9.5%), the (to a large extent) tax-induced higher cost of tobacco (+12.2%),and the price effects of the health system re-form (+20.4%) means that there was a 2.0%
increase on the year in the cost of living. Thiswas twice as much as in the first few monthsof the year, when the year-on-year rate hadbeen +1%.
The dramatic increases in the price of com-
modities have also been pushing up the costsof construction work noticeably since thespring. This means an end to the ongoingperiod of largely constant construction pricessince autumn 2001. In August 2004, con-struction work cost 1.5% more than in thesame month of 2003.
International oil prices have been going down
since the last few days of October. By mid-November, the prices quoted for Brent NorthSea Oil had fallen to below US$45, whichwas, at all events, a reduction of more than10%. In euro terms, in fact, this was a fall ofover 15%, as the US dollar was depreciatingagainst the single currency. Even so, oil pricesare still noticeably higher than at the start ofthe year, when they had scarcely gone higherthan US$30
1/C252. In year-on-year terms, the
rates of increase are still around 45%. Eventhough this means that direct oil-price-relatedinflation is no longer being stoked up, theprice adjustments sparked off by the oil pricesurge will persist in the case of other energysources and in the enterprises’ cost structure.Rise in industrial
factory gate
prices
High overall
rate, low core
rate for
consumer
pricesConstruction
work costs
more
Slight fall in
international
oil prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
47Foreign trade and
paymentsForeign trade and current account
In the third quarter of 2004 world economic
growth lost momentum as a result of thesharp rise in oil prices. Under these circum-stances German exporters benefited mainlyfrom demand from euro-area partner coun-tries. They were assisted in this by price andcost movements which were more favourablein Germany than in the rest of the euro area.Primarily as a result of the higher foreign de-mand for intermediate and capital goods,orders received from abroad in the third quar-ter grew by a seasonally adjusted 1% overthose of the second quarter. Furthermore,industry’s export expectations as recorded bythe Ifo Institute continue to be decidedly posi-tive. Consequently, somewhat more buoyantexport sales are again emerging for Germanenterprises during the rest of 2004 even ifgrowth rates remain below the record figuresreached in the first half of the year. How Ger-man foreign trade subsequently develops willgreatly depend on how the world economycopes with the “oil price shock” and whetherthe recent re-emergence of exchange rateuncertainties will result in a substantial down-turn in German exporters’ price competitive-ness.
Following the dynamic export activity in the
first half of 2004, the seasonally adjustedvalue of exports of goods in the third quartergrew by no more than about
1/C252% compared
with the second quarter. In real terms, ie aftertaking account of the simultaneous increasein export prices (+
1/C252% seasonally adjusted),
export sales just managed to reach the levelattained in the previous quarter.External
environment
Exports
of goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
48According to the statistics on the regional
breakdown of foreign trade, which extendonly up to the end of August so far, the ro-bust growth in German exports was due sole-ly to the increased demand from the euroarea. These statistics show that German ex-ports to other euro-area countries, which –with a current 44% share of Germany’s totalexport turnover – play a major role in Germanforeign trade, increased by a seasonally ad-justed 2
1/C252% on an average of July and
August compared with the second quarter.By contrast, exports to non-euro-area coun-tries did not repeat the strong performanceof the previous quarter but, instead, fell by2
1/C252%.
The expansion in exports to other parts of the
euro area was due mainly to the rise in thesales of German goods to Austria (+5
1/C252%)
and to the Benelux countries (+4%). Theheaviest demand from countries outside theeuro area came from Denmark (+8
1/C252%) and
Japan (+101/C252%). However, these countries
were unable to offset the decline in total ex-ports to non-euro-area countries, the mainreason for the decline being the downturn ingoods exported to countries outside the EU.Even so, as exports of German products tomost non-euro-area countries on an averageof July and August were only slightly belowthe generally very high level of the previousquarter, substantial losses were recorded inonly a few countries. One such country wasChina, where the rapid growth in the sales ofGerman products during the previous twoquarters was not repeated. Instead, there wasa decline of 17
1/C252% in July-August. However,
trade with China had always been subject tofairly sharp fluctuations, partly as a resultof large orders. Exports to the United States(-3%) and the emerging markets of South-East Asia (-4%) continued to show a certainweakness. This did not fail to have an effecton the export sales of the German motor in-dustry, which did not quite regain the highlevel of the previous quarter.€b n
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
MonthlyLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 2000 = 100
MonthlyMonthly 1Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−120
115
110
105
100
95
90190
180
170
160
150
140
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Breakdown
of exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
49While the exports of capital goods and, more
especially, consumer goods declined on anaverage of July and August, the exports ofGerman enterprises were boosted by the con-tinuing increase in demand for German inter-mediate goods. Among the sources of sup-port for the upturn in sales in July and Augustwas the growth in exports enjoyed by themetal industry (+2%) and the chemical indus-try (+1
1/C252%). In addition, there was a sharp
expansion in the exports of information andcommunication technology products (+3%).In contrast to the motor industry, however,the manufacturers of mechanical engineeringproducts continued to increase their exportsales (+1%).
The seasonally adjusted value of German im-
ports again rose significantly in the third quar-ter (+4
1/C252%). According to the data for July
and August, which are already available, theincrease in the imports of goods from othereuro-area countries (+5%) was somewhatfaster than from non-euro-area countries(+3
1/C252%). However, part of the increase in the
value of imports was due to the increasedprice of imported goods (+1% in seasonallyadjusted terms in the third quarter). The high-er import prices can be attributed almostsolely to the rise in energy prices and com-modity prices. For example, the seasonally ad-justed value of Germany’s total energy im-ports again rose somewhat more sharply inJuly-August (+9
1/C252%) than in the previous
quarter. In view of the 9% rise in the importprices of energy products in July and Augustcompared with the previous quarter, how-ever, the change in terms of volume wasslight.The increase in Germany’s energy imports
that were primarily due to price changes isreflected in a substantial rise in the nominalimports from the OPEC countries. Followingthe sharp downturn in the second quarter,these imports, which are almost entirely inthe form of energy products, grew by nearlyone-quarter on average in July and Augustcompared with the previous few months. Im-ports from the United Kingdom also expand-ed strongly (+13
1/C252%) in the third quarter, not
least as a result of the higher demand forBritish chemical products and even more sofor energy sources. Although nominal im-ports from Russia declined during the periodunder review, they, too, were significantlygreater in July and August than at the end of2003 given the 18
1/C252% growth rate in the
second quarter. The main reason for the factTrend in foreign trade by region and
by category of goods
Average of July and August 2004 compared
with the average of April to June 2004%; seasonally adjusted
ItemEx-
portsIm-
ports
Total + 0.4 + 4.2Selected country/group of countries
Euro-area countries + 2.5 + 5.2
Other EU countries + 0.2 + 1.6United States – 3.0 – 7.2Japan + 10.4 + 3.0China – 17.7 + 7.1Russia + 1.6 – 6.7OPEC countries + 0.0 + 23.7Emerging markets in South-EastAsia – 4.0 + 3.0
Categories of goods
Selected main categories
Intermediate goods + 1.2 + 6.7Capital goods – 1.8 + 1.4Consumer goods – 3.3 – 1.1Energy sources . + 9.5
Selected categories
Chemicals + 1.4 + 0.4Machinery + 0.9 + 5.9Motor vehicles and motor vehicleparts – 0.6 + 6.5Information technology + 2.8 + 2.1Metals and metal products + 1.9 + 9.7
Deutsche Bundesbank
Imports
of goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
50that the value of imports from Russia has
been tending to rise is probably also attribut-able here to the substantial increase in theprices of energy and commodity imports.
Generally speaking, another reason for the
dynamic rise in imports was a certain need tocatch up in view of the very careful stockmanagement in the past and the sustainedbuoyancy of exports. Consequently, Germanimports of intermediate goods increased par-ticularly strongly (+6
1/C252%) while there was
also a sharp rise in capital goods (+11/C252%).
There were pronounced increases in the caseof imports of metals and metal products(+9
1/C252%), motor vehicles and motor vehicle
parts (+61/C252%) and machinery (+6%). Presum-
ably as a result of the large share of inter-mediate goods imports, domestic demand forproducts emanating from all parts of Asiagrew disproportionately fast. By contrast, im-ports of goods from the United States andfrom the ten new EU member states weremore sluggish than in the previous quarter.
1
In line with the low propensity to consumein Germany, domestic demand for foreignconsumer goods also continued to be sub-dued (-1%).
At336
1/C252billion, the value of net exports in
the third quarter of 2004 was 35 billion lower
in seasonally adjusted terms than it had beenin the second quarter as Germany’s importbill grew much more strongly than its exportproceeds. The deficit on current invisibleMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2003 2004
I t e m Q 3Q 2Q 3
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 166.3 185.3 180.5
Imports (cif) 127.9 142.3 143.9
Balance + 38.4 + 43.0 + 36.6
2 Services (balance) – 13.3 – 7.6 – 13.33 Factor income (balance) – 4.5 + 0.0 – 4.14 Current transfers (balance) – 8.8 – 7.1 – 8.0
Balance on current account
2 + 10.3 + 26.2 + 8.0
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 38.5 + 41.9 + 36.72 Services – 9.2 – 7.8 – 9.33 Factor income – 3.6 – 2.3 – 3.64 Current transfers – 8.0 – 6.8 – 7.2
Current account
2 + 16.5 + 23.1 + 13.8
II Balance of capital transfers 3 +0 . 2 +0 . 2 +0 . 2
III Balance of financial account 4 – 5.2 – 67.9 – 31.2
IV Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 – 0.8 – 0.3 + 1.6
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions – 4.5 + 41.8 + 21.5
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 52. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank1As in the second quarter the recording of trade with
the ten member states which acceded to the European
Union on 1 May 2004 continues to be fraught with con-
siderable uncertainty. This is due to the change in the
method of recording foreign trade on that date.Current
account

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
51transactions with non-residents increased
simultaneously with the declining trade sur-plus in the third quarter. Not only did cross-border net payments of factor income in-crease by 31
1/C252billion; the deficit on services
likewise increased discernibly during theperiod under review (+ 31
1/C252billion). Further-
more, the deficit on current transfers alsoshowed a slight rise. In the third quarter, theGerman current account therefore closedwith a seasonally adjusted surplus of 314 bil-
lion compared with one of 323 billion in the
preceding three-month period.
Financial transactions
Owing to the increase in crude oil prices, the
financial markets focused their attentionmore sharply on the associated growth risks,in particular, in the fourth quarter, with theresult that yields on longer-term bonds andnotes on both sides of the Atlantic declined inthe third quarter. Initially, the downturn inyields was particularly pronounced in theUnited States, which is more dependent onoil imports than elsewhere and whose currentaccount deficit reached a record high in thesame period. The exchange rate patterntherefore shifted in favour of the euro – des-pite the interest rate increases by the Fed. Theaforementioned influences can also be seento some extent in the figures on Germanfinancial transactions with non-residents. Ifportfolio investment and direct investmentare taken together, the outcome was aninflow of funds into Germany.In the case of portfolio investment, in which a
change in economic circumstances generallyhas a particularly rapid effect on investor be-haviour, the influx of funds amounting to 319
billion net was a return to the hitherto three-year trend towards capital imports which hadbeen interrupted in the previous quarter byunusually large net capital exports ( 330 bil-
lion).
The shift was particularly marked in the case
of non-residents’ investment in Germany.Whereas in the previous quarter foreign in-vestors had been rather cautious with respectto their portfolio investment in Germany(31
1/C252billion), they again stocked up their
portfolios quite considerably with Germanpaper between July and September ( 339 bil-
lion). The bulk of the foreign funds flowinginto Germany during the quarter under re-view was invested in domestic debt securities(334 billion compared with 315
1/C252billion in
the previous three-month period), with thefunds being almost equally divided betweenprivate and public bonds. The decision infavour of fixed-interest securities may havehad something to do with expectations of adecline in capital market yields. This assump-tion is also supported by the fact that someof the funds used to acquire German bondsactually came from the proceeds accruing toforeign investors from the sales of Germanmoney market paper ( 36 billion), ie debt
securities whose upside price potential is verylimited in times of falling interest rates owingto their short maturities of one year or less.
It was also of great importance for German
portfolio investment that foreign investors onTrends in
financial
transactionsPortfolio
investment
Foreign
investment in...
... German
bonds and
notes
... German
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
52the German share market switched from sell-
ing to buying and acquired German equitiesworth 36
1/C252billion. One possible factor con-
tributing to the more buoyant demand wasthe internationally more favourable price-earnings ratio of German shares, which in theperiod under review stood at 12 and wastherefore much more attractive than the cor-responding ratios in the United States andJapan. Another factor encouraging invest-ment in Germany, especially by non-euro-area residents, may have been the prospectof a rising euro exchange rate. After all, itwas primarily investors from outside the euroarea that were interested in dividend-bearingpaper.
At the same time, investment by German resi-
dents on world markets declined during thequarter under review ( 320 billion compared
with 331
1/C252billion in the previous quarter). Be-
tween July and September they purchasedlonger-dated bonds worth only 317
1/C252billion
compared with 3251/C252billion in the previous
quarter. Once again it was the euro-denomin-ated foreign government bonds which weremost in demand ( 316
1/C252billion). As in the case
of foreign investors, German residents mayhave chosen this form of investment partlybecause of the belief that the prices of bondsand notes still had a certain upside potential.This paper is also very popular because it usu-ally offers a slightly higher yield than thebenchmark Federal bond. When this reportwent to press, the spread between ten-yeargovernment bonds issued by other euro-areacountries and comparable Federal paper was11 basis points on average and thereforeFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2003 2004
I t e m Q 3Q 2Q 3
1 Direct investment + 2.8 – 7.5 – 8.7
German investment
abroad – 3.0 – 2.5 – 8.1Foreign investmentin Germany + 5.8 – 5.0 – 0.6
2 Portfolio investment – 6.4 – 30.0 + 19.1
German investment
abroad – 1.6 – 31.6 – 19.9
Shares – 0.7 + 0.9 + 6.1
Investment fundcertificates – 0.2 – 2.5 – 3.1Bonds and notes – 0.9 – 25.6 – 17.7Money market paper + 0.3 – 4.3 – 5.1
Foreign investment
in Germany – 4.8 + 1.5 + 39.0
Shares + 3.0 – 11.7 + 6.7
Investment fundcertificates – 0.8 – 1.0 + 4.0Bonds and notes + 6.3 + 15.4 + 34.2Money market paper – 13.3 – 1.2 – 6.0
3 Financial derivatives
1 – 0.4 + 2.2 – 2.7
4 Credit transactions – 0.6 – 31.8 – 38.3
Monetary financial
institutions 2 + 20.0 – 67.2 – 5.1
Long-term – 15.6 + 4.1 + 4.5
Short-term + 35.6 – 71.3 – 9.6
Enterprises and
individuals – 7.6 + 1.5 – 3.6
Long-term + 0.8 – 0.4 – 2.8
Short-term – 8.4 + 1.9 – 0.8
General government + 2.1 + 2.6 + 3.2
Long-term + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.5
Short-term + 2.0 + 1.2 + 1.8
Bundesbank – 15.2 + 31.3 – 32.8
5 Other investment – 0.7 – 0.7 – 0.66 Balance of all
statistically recordedcapital flows – 5.2 – 67.9 – 31.2
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
3 – 0.8 – 0.3 + 1.6
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding the Bundesbank. —
3Excluding allocation of SDRs and changes due to
value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankForeign
investment in...
... foreign
bonds and
notes

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
53slightly below the “average spread” in the
previous period (14 basis points).
As in the first two quarters of the year, Ger-
man investors sold foreign equities on bal-ance ( 36 billion compared with 31 billion in
each of the previous two three-monthperiods). Evidently, they were responding tothe price level of foreign shares, which is verymuch higher than that of German paper, andto the exchange rate risk to which they pos-sibly saw themselves exposed when investingin cross-border shares. This was offset to acertain extent by the acquisition of mutualfund certificates of foreign funds ( 33 billion),
which traditionally invest part of their incom-ing capital in foreign shares. German invest-ors also bought a net amount of money mar-ket paper issued by foreign borrowers andworth 35 billion.
In contrast to portfolio investment, direct in-
vestment resulted in net capital outflows of38
1/C252billion in the three-month period under
review. Between July and September Germanenterprises provided their branches abroadwith funds totalling 38 billion net. The main
reason for this was that German parent com-panies were paying back substantial amountsof loans which their subsidiaries abroad hadpreviously granted them, ie reverse flows. Bycontrast, they reduced the equity capitalwhich they held outside Germany.
There was little change in the investment of
foreign enterprises in Germany during theperiod under review (- 3
1/C252billion). Although
these enterprises increased their equity cap-ital in Germany by 33
1/C252billion, this was large-ly due to a capital injection in the food, drinks
and tobacco industry. At the same time, how-ever, foreign proprietors withdrew funds(34
1/C252billion net) from their subsidiaries domi-
ciled in Germany through intra-group credittransactions.
The non-securitised credit transactions of
non-banks were almost in balance in the thirdquarter (- 3
1/C252billion net). While the oper-Quarterly
€b n
€b n
US$Log scale
Euro-US dollar exchange rate
(end-of-quarter
rates)
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3Lin scale, reduced
Foreign investment in German
bonds and notes
(capital imports: +)Log scale
Dow Jones Index 1
(end-of-quarter
levels)German investment in shares abroad
(capital exports: +)Investment behaviour
and prices
12 October 1931 = 100; source: Reuters.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.30
1.25
1.20
1.1545+
30+
15+
010500
10000
9500
90009+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−
2003 2004...foreign
shares
German direct
investment
abroad
Foreign direct
investment in
Germany
Credit
transactions
of non-banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
54ations of general government resulted in net
capital imports of 33 billion, enterprises and
individuals transferred funds totalling 331/C252
billion abroad between July and September
this year. This meant that they increased theirclaims on foreign banks while reducing theircorresponding liabilities.
In the period under review the non-securi-
tised credit transactions of the banks (includ-ing the Bundesbank), which usually repre-sent, more or less, the counterpart of theother external transactions recorded in thebalance of payments, resulted in net capitalexports of 338 billion compared with 336 bil-
lion in the previous quarter. This quarterly re-sult was due mainly to the external paymentsof the Bundesbank (- 333 billion), which were
determined essentially by the increase inclaims within the large-value payment systemTARGET. There were likewise net capital ex-ports (of 35 billion) in the case of the credit
institutions between July and September.
The reserve assets of the Bundesbank, which
are shown separately from cross-border credittransactions in the balance of payments, de-clined by 31
1/C252billion at transaction values be-
tween July and September. When these werevalued at market prices, however, resultantvaluation changes led to a rise in the reserveassets of 3
1/C252billion. The increase was attrib-
utable to price rises in the case of gold.Credit
transactions
of the banking
systemReserve assets
of the
Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
55Public financesBudgetary development of central,
state and local government
In the third quarter of 2004 central and state
government recorded a deficit of 3181/C252bil-
lion; this was 341/C252billion lower than in the
third quarter of 2003.1Despite a fall in tax
revenue (-3%), overall revenue grew by 11/C252%
owing to considerable inflows from asset dis-posals. Expenditure – which is subject to attimes strong fluctuations during the year –went down by 2
1/C252%.
However, for 2004 as a whole an increase in
the deficit of central, state and local govern-ment is expected, after already reaching apeak of 370 billion last year. Whereas tax rev-
enue is likely to stagnate as a result of signifi-cant income tax cuts and the weak growth ofthe tax assessment base, non-tax revenue willdecrease due to the lower Bundesbank profit.Expenditure is likely to reach roughly thesame level as last year. Central governmentand many state and local governments willonce again, as in 2003, exceed the upperlimits for new borrowing as specified underbudgetary law. The original budget targetswill be widely missed, particularly by centralgovernment as a result of considerable taxshortfalls.
Tax revenue
2of central, state and local gov-
ernment in the third quarter was 3% below
1Third-quarter results for local government are not yet
known.
2Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known.Underlying
trends
Tax revenue
in the third
quarter ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
56the 2003 level3after increasing by 1% in the
first six months of 2004. Whereas most taxesrelated to profit and investment income con-tinued to recover, wage tax receipts and rev-enue from major excise taxes, in particular,declined significantly.
The sharp increase of 31
1/C252billion in revenue
from corporation tax was partly the result ofthe favourable profit trend but was presum-ably also due to the moratorium for claimingaccrued corporation tax credits adopted lastyear and to the limitation of the tax losscarry-forward facility. Conversely, the mora-torium also contributed to a fall in revenuefrom investment income tax on dividends.Revenue from assessed income tax increasedby 5
1/C252% despite the tax cuts which entered
into force at the beginning of the year. Be-sides the positive earnings trend, this was at-
tributable to smaller refunds in respect of em-ployees’ assessed liability, which are recordedunder assessed income tax. Additional rev-enue from the tax amnesty is still fairly small.Wage tax revenue fell sharply (-8
1/C252%), par-
ticularly as a result of the tax cuts which cameinto force at the beginning of the year butalso owing to the continued unfavourablesituation on the labour market.
Among the indirect taxes, turnover tax rev-
enue was
1/C252% below the figure for 2003.
This basically reflects the weak domestic de-mand. Receipts from the Federal Govern-ment’s special excise taxes fell much moresteeply (-6
1/C252%). Besides mineral oil tax and
electricity tax, revenue from tobacco tax, inparticular, went down. This primarily mirrorsthe lower energy consumption prompted byhigh mineral oil prices and the shrinking de-mand for taxed tobacco products, which morethan outweighed the increase in tobacco taxon 1 March this year. However, changes inbooking techniques also played a role.
4
Despite the more positive growth assump-tions, expectations for tax revenue in 2004 asa whole were revised downwards somewhatin the official estimate from November.
5Be-
sides the reduced revenue expectations inconnection with the tax amnesty, this wasYear-on-year change
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes, which are not yet
known for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−
4−
5−
2002 2003 2004
3Even after taking account of changes in booking tech-
niques for several special excise taxes of central govern-
ment, tax revenue still shows a decline of 23/C254%.
4Adjusted for this effect, the decline in these Federal
taxes amounted to 5%.
5The Federal Government is now expecting nominal
GDP growth of 23/C254% and real growth of 13/C254%, whereas
in May growth rates of 21/C254% and 11/C252% respectively were
anticipated.... and in 2004
as a whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
57mainly attributable to the fact that revenue
from wage tax, turnover tax and special ex-cise taxes will be lower because of the de-pressed tax-generating structure of the cur-rent macroeconomic situation and especiallyas a result of consumer reactions to the in-crease in the price of tobacco and mineral oilproducts. On the other hand, in contrast toprevious years, profit-related taxes (corpor-ation tax and local business tax, in particular)were revised upwards, which was largely dueto the more favourable trend in entrepreneur-ial and property income. Overall, tax revenueis expected to stagnate. Thus, revenue short-falls of 31
1/C252billion are anticipated vis-/C224-vis
the May estimate. The overall tax ratio (as de-fined in the government financial statistics),which was 20.8% in 2003, will fall again thisyear to 20.3%.
The new tax estimate puts the likely tax short-
falls next year vis-/C224-vis the May estimate a littlehigher at 31
1/C252b i l l i o n–b a s e do nc u r r e n tt a xl e -
gislation. This is also primarily due to theamended estimate of the growth structure,whereas the assumptions regarding the scaleof macroeconomic growth (real +1
3/C254%, nom-
inal +23/C254%) were hardly revised. After taking
account of the recently adopted changes in taxlegislation, tax revenue is expected to increaseby merely 1
1/C252%. The overall tax ratio will go
down again marginally to 20.1 %, primarily asa result of a further cut in income tax.
In the third quarter central government re-
corded a deficit of 313 billion, which was 34
billion less than in the same period last year.This was partly attributable to an increase inrevenue of 1%. Although tax revenue de-clined, relatively high proceeds from the sale
of financial assets were booked ( 34
1/C252billion).
Furthermore, expenditure – which fluctuatesrelatively sharply during the year – decreasedby 4
1/C252%. A significant decline in interest ex-
penditure, the discontinuation of transfers tothe flood disaster fund and also lower operat-ing expenditure all played a role. In the firstnine months of 2004, the deficit reached justover 347 billion, thus roughly matching the
level from the same period in 2003.
In 2004 as a whole the deficit will far exceed
the original target figure ( 329
1/C252billion). One
of the main reasons for this on the expend-iture side is additional labour market-relatedspending. The principal cause on the revenueside are the tax shortfalls (just over 311 billion
according to the recent tax estimate) but theTrends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
Q1 to Q3
Type of tax 2003 2004Annual
percent-agechange
Wage tax 94.4 88.4 – 6.3
Assessed income tax 0.1 0.4 .Corporation tax 4.8 9.4 + 94.0Turnover tax 101.2 101.9 + 0.7
of which Q3
Wage tax 32.1 29.4 – 8.6
Assessed income tax 3.0 3.1 + 5.6
Corporation tax 1.2 2.7 + 131.9Turnover tax 34.2 34.0 – 0.7
Deutsche Bundesbank
Tax revenue
in 2005
Central
government
in the third
quarter ...... and in 2004
as a whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
58decline in the Bundesbank profit and the
smaller-than-expected revenue from motor-way tolls are other contributory factors. In thesupplementary budget adopted by the Bun-destag, a deficit of 343
1/C252billion is now antici-
pated for 2004. In order to justify again ex-ceeding the constitutional limit for net bor-rowing, which is defined by the level of in-vestment expenditure, the Federal Govern-ment – for the third consecutive year – is in-voking the exemption clause that this is ne-cessary to avert a disruption of the overalleconomic equilibrium.
Next year, according to the Federal Govern-
ment’s draft budget, net government bor-rowing should amount to 322 billion and
thus just stay below the investment expend-iture target. The sharp decline in new bor-rowing should be achieved not least by the
realisation of privatisation proceeds amount-ing to 315
1/C252billion (following 3101/C252billion in
the draft supplementary budget for this year).However, in the meantime new financial bur-dens have emerged; according to the FederalMinistry of Finance this will amount to justover 38 billion. Thus, the recent tax estimate
suggests that tax revenue shortfalls of 33
1/C252
billion are to be expected. The Bundesbank
profit is expected to raise 311/C252billion less
than previously anticipated. On the expend-iture side, above all the adopted adjustmentsto the planned amalgamation of unemploy-ment assistance and social assistance will re-quire additional funds of 33 billion.
6In order
to close the new financial gap, the currentlyenvisaged transfers ( 35
1/C252billion) to the Post
Office pension fund – which has taken overresponsibility for Post Office employees’ pen-sions and is refinanced by contributions fromFederal Government and the successor enter-prises to the old Post Office – are to be dis-continued.
7Additional funds are to be pro-
cured by shifting privatisation proceeds fromthis year to next year ( 31
1/C252billion) and by
making an across-the-board cut in expend-iture ( 31 billion). Even if these measures yield
the full financial effects hoped for, it shouldbe borne in mind that they will for the mostpart merely engineer a postponement and€b n
€b n
Cumulative
20042003
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
2003
2004The Federal Government’s
balance of revenue and
expenditure in 2003 and 2004
Deutsche Bundesbank20−
25−
30−
35−
40−
45−
50−10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
30−
6This is necessitated by bringing forward the date of the
first payment of unemployment benefit II to previous re-
cipients of unemployment assistance to the beginning of
January 2005 and by the payments made to the munici-
palities to alleviate local government by a net amount of
321/C252billion per year in the wake of the reform.
7In order to achieve this, the ongoing contributions cur-
rently paid by the Post Office successor enterprises to the
Post Office pension fund will be sold in the capital market
and the proceeds will go to the Post Office pension fund.
This will burden central government more heavily in the
future.Outlook
for 2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
59are no substitute for a sustainable consolida-
tion process. In the aggregate, asset sales areto relieve the Federal budget by a totalamount of almost 323 billion.
The special funds recorded a deficit of just
under 3
1/C252billion in the third quarter. In the
same period last year, these budgets weremore or less balanced. Although a surplus isexpected for 2004 as a whole, this will bemuch lower than in 2003 (just over 310 bil-
lion). Following a surplus in 2003, the flooddisaster fund will record a deficit this year be-cause a large part of the accrued funds havenow been used up. The financial situation ofthe Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilitieswill also deteriorate markedly owing to thefact that no part of the Bundesbank profitwas transferred to it this year.
In the third quarter, state government
lowered its budgetary deficit compared withlast year by 31 billion to 35 billion. Despite
the increase in state government’s share ofturnover tax (limited to this year) – to com-pensate for the fact that income tax cutswere brought forward – and a continuing fa-vourable trend in state government’s tax rev-enue, its overall tax receipts went downslightly. Overall revenue stagnated. Expend-iture was reduced by
1/C252%. Relief arose, not
least, from the fact that grants to the flooddisaster fund were discontinued.
For 2004 as a whole, the budgetary plans for
state government envisage a decline in itsdeficits of 37 billion to 324
1/C252billion. Al-
though, as things stand today, the plans willnot be fully met,
8a considerable reduction isstill expected. This improvement will, how-
ever, not be maintained in 2005. Besides the“return” of the increased share of turnovertax to central government, the state govern-ment budgets will also be burdened by thefinal stage of the tax reform. The breachingof the state constitutional ceilings for newborrowing – which is foreseeable in somefederal states – appears difficult to substanti-ate by declaring that it is needed to avert adisruption of the overall economic equilib-rium in the light of the economic growth thatis becoming apparent and the fact that cen-tral government itself has not invoked this ex-emption clause. State government is requiredto make its contribution to the consolidationof public finances also with regard to the fis-cal target of reducing the general govern-ment deficit below the 3% ceiling as definedin the Maastricht Treaty.
For local government, only figures for the
second quarter of 2004 are available. Duringthis period local government recorded aclose-to-balanced budget after recording adeficit of 32
1/C252billion in the second quarter of
2003. The main reason for this was the sharpincrease in revenue (+7%). Tax revenue roseparticularly steeply (+12%); besides the first-time effects of the lowering of the share oflocal business tax to be passed on, this wasalso partly attributable to the persistently fa-vourable trend in gross revenue from localbusiness tax. In addition, key grants distrib-uted from state government by quota in-creased by 8
1/C252% on average – albeit with
major differences between the individual
8For example, the states of North Rhine-Westphalia and
Hesse have already adopted supplementary budgetsSpecial funds
State
government
Local
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
60states. Overall expenditure fell somewhat.
The marginal decline in expenditure on per-sonnel was offset by a steep rise in social se-curity spending (+6
1/C252%), which was caused,
not least, by a higher number of recipients.By contrast, spending on non-financial assetswere considerably reduced again (-8
1/C252%).
Mainly as a result of the favourable trends in
local business tax, a reduction of local gov-ernment budgetary deficits now appearsprobable for the whole of 2004 as well, fol-lowing the high level of 38
1/C252billion recorded
in 2003. However, this improvement will alsobe the result of a decline in investment innon-financial assets.
In the third quarter the indebtedness of cen-
tral, state and local government rose by 318billion. Central government was the largest
borrower, recording a rise of 310
1/C252billion.
State government expanded its indebtednessby36
1/C252billion in total. There was a prefer-
ence for borrowing via medium and long-term securities, which accounted for 317 bil-
lion. Whereas 31 billion was raised through
loans against borrowers’ notes, money mar-ket loans and cash advances from banks werereduced by 31
1/C252billion.
Social security funds
In the third quarter of 2004, the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance scheme re-corded a deficit of just under 31
1/C252billion,
which was nearly 31/C252billion higher than in
the same period in 2003. Expenditure was al-most
1/C252% down on the year, primarily be-
cause the pension insurance contribution tothe long-term care insurance scheme hasbeen paid by the pensioners themselves sinceApril 2004. Furthermore, this year there wasno annual pension adjustment on 1 July,2004, as a result of which only
1/C252% extra was
spent on pensions. By contrast, overall rev-enue declined more sharply by just under 1%.Revenue from contributions diminished byjust over 1%. Although receipts from compul-sory contributions showed hardly any de-crease, revenue from contributions on sick-ness benefit and wage substitutes for un-employed persons declined more steeply.
9Net borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2003 + 81.2 + 73.4 – 0.8 + 26.9
of which
Q1 + 35.3 + 32.6 + 2.7 + 19.4Q2 + 13.2 + 11.8 + 0.5 + 12.4Q3 + 20.0 + 9.4 + 5.0 – 0.3Q4 + 12.6 + 19.5 – 9.0 – 4.6
2004
Q1 + 45.8 + 34.6 + 4.6 + 16.9Q2 + 9.3 + 14.6 – 8.5 – 3.6Q3
pe + 18.1 + 17.2 – 0.4 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market loans.
Deutsche Bundesbank
9The 10% decline in revenue from contributions on
wage substitutes for unemployed persons was primarily
due to changes in booking techniques. In the second
quarter this item had increased by 8%.IndebtednessWage and
salary earners’
pension
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
61By the end of the year the deficit of 351/C252bil-
lion which had accumulated in the first ninemonths is expected to decline sharply. Besidesthe seasonally higher revenue from contribu-tions in the fourth quarter, proceeds from thesale of the participating interest in the GAG-FAH housing company will also boost rev-enue. The sales proceeds of 32.1 billion will
primarily help to increase the degree of liquid-ity in the fluctuation reserves – which havenow been renamed the sustainability re-serves. In future liquidity shortages will there-fore be less likely given the prescribed level ofreserves. However, as the disposed equitystake had a book value of 31.6 billion, the re-
serves are only being raised by the capitalgain of 30.5 billion. Next year there is a risk,
in view of the policy makers’ professed inten-tion to keep the current contribution rate at19.5% that a considerable deficit will occurand that at the end of the year the reserveswill consequently fall below the statutoryminimum level of 0.2 month’s expenditure.
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a
deficit of just under 3
1/C252billion in the third
quarter of 2004; this was an improvement of3
1/C252billion compared with the same period
last year. Unlike in the statutory pension insur-ance scheme, a similarly negative decline inrevenue (-2
1/C252%) was more than offset by a
much steeper fall in expenditure (-6%). Des-pite an increase in the number of unemployedpersons, nearly 3% less was spent on un-employment benefit. The ratio of recipientshas continued to go down because more andmore unemployed persons are exhausting themaximum period of entitlement to this bene-fit. Expenditure on active labour market policymeasures contracted by 12%. The fast-
growing rate of spending on “Me plcs” andpersonnel service agencies
10by no means
consumed the savings made in other areas.
In the first nine months the deficit of the Fed-
eral Employment Agency amounted to 35 bil-
lion. Since the financial outcome of the lastquarter is relatively favourable as a rule, theFederal Government grant of 35.2 billion
budgeted for the full year should barely be ex-ceeded. Despite the persistently high level ofunemployment, another reduction in the def-icit is expected next year if spending on activeQuarterly
€b n
€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
Expenditure
RevenueFinances of the wage
and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−60
58
56
54
52
2002 2003 2004
10In September expenditure on “Me plcs” and person-
nel service agencies already accounted for 91/C252% of over-
all spending on vocational promotion schemes. However,
the more stringent evaluation of the viability of proposed
business start-ups is likely to slow down the rate of in-
crease in this item of expenditure.Federal
Employment
Agency

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
62labour market policy measures is lowered
again. The 2005 Federal budget includes atransfer requirement of 34 billion. Therefore,
savings made by the Federal EmploymentAgency in respect of spending on vocationalpromotion schemes for former recipients ofunemployment assistance, responsibility forwhich has now been assumed by central gov-ernment, will be offset by additional expend-iture on the compensatory amount
11to be
transferred to central government.
The financial outcome of the statutory health
insurance scheme is currently available only forthe first half of the year. According to this asurplus of 32
1/C252billion was recorded in total. In
the same period last year the scheme ran up adeficit of 32 billion. This pronounced improve-
ment was made possible by the 2004healthcare reform, which resulted in bothhigher revenue and greater savings. Revenuewas 2
1/C252% up on the first half of 2003. The
main reasons for this were the levying of thefull (instead of half) contribution rate frompensioners (particularly on company pensions)since the beginning of the year, the first instal-ment of the new Federal grant (financed byrevenue from tobacco tax) of 3
1/C252billion,12and
the contributions from mini jobs (which aregrowing particularly rapidly). Expenditure de-creased by 4% in total. Savings on pharma-ceuticals, sickness benefit and travel costswere particularly marked. However, the declinein expenditure already began to deceleratemarginally during the year. This is firstly attrib-utable to the drop-out effect of expenditurebrought forward to the end of 2003, whichprovided for particularly low expenditure in thefirst quarter. Secondly, more and more insuredpersons are reaching the income-related upperQuarterly
€b n
€b n€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefit and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2 Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−
3−8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.016
15
14
13
12
11
2002 2003 2004
11The Federal Employment Agency pays the compensa-
tory amount for three months as a reimbursement to
central government of the average unemployment bene-
fit II paid to persons who switch from the old unemploy-
ment benefit to the new unemployment benefit II. The
lower the number of benefit recipients who receive un-
employment benefit II, the lower the compensatory
amount will be.
12In the second half of the year a further instalment of
30.5 billion is to be paid. The Federal grant increases to
32.5 billion in 2005 and then to 34.2 billion thereafter.Statutory
health
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
63payment ceiling above which they are exempt-
ed from co-payments.
If a significant surplus is expected for 2004 as
a whole, this is in part because the health in-surance institutions have so far largely re-frained from cutting contribution rates. Theywere prompted to do so not least by theirstatutory obligation to redeem at least one-quarter of their accumulated debt ( 38
1/C252bil-
lion gross) this year. It should also be borne inmind that noticeable expenditure growth, es-pecially in connection with pharmaceuticals,is expected as from next year. The trend in2005 will be additionally burdened by thefact that the decision to outsource insurancecoverage for dentures – adopted as part ofthe healthcare reform – and their financingvia non-income related flat-rate insurancepremiums has since been cancelled. Instead,the special contribution intended for mem-bers of the statutory health insurance schemeof 0.5% that was to be paid on 1 January2006 is being brought forward to 1 July 2005and raised to 0.9%. This will save employersand the statutory pension insurance scheme0.45%, but employees and pensioners willhave to pay 0.45% extra. This new arrange-ment has nullified the option associated withthe planned flat-rate denture payment oflowering the contribution rate by 0.4% andconcurrently decoupling health insurancefinancing partly from wages.
T h el o n g - t e r mc a r ei n s u r a n c es c h e m er e c o r d e d
a deficit of 3
1/C252billion in the first half of the
year; this was somewhat higher than in thesame period last year. A record deficit of almost31 billion is expected for 2004 as a whole aswell as a correspondingly sharp fall in the re-
serves. However, the long-term care insuranceinstitutions will be relieved next year by thefact that all childless persons born after 1940will have to start paying a 0.25% higher contri-bution rate when they reach the age of 23.
Outlook for the general government
sector as a whole
In 2004 Germany will once again exceed the
deficit and debt criteria stipulated in theMaastricht Treaty. The deficit ratio is likely tomatch last year’s figure (3.8%). The debt ratiowill increase again markedly after rising to64.2% in 2003. Although GDP has expandedquite perceptibly this year, the structure of thecurrent macroeconomic development is hardlyboosting government revenue, so that thecyclical situation is a contributory factor to theincrease in the general government deficit.
On the one hand, the state of public finances
in 2004 is characterised by a decrease in therevenue ratio, which could amount to 1
1/C252
percentage points. Besides the weak growthof the tax and social security contributionbases, this is also attributable to the extensiveincome tax cuts which entered into force atthe beginning of the year. Furthermore, non-tax revenue will fall as well, not least as a re-sult of the lower Bundesbank profit. On theother hand, the expenditure ratio will fall,too. This is mainly attributable to lower ex-penditure as a result of the healthcare re-form, the dampened development of pen-sions as well as savings on personnel expend-iture and investment. Government budgets
Long-term care
insurance
schemeMaastricht
ceiling will be
exceeded again
in 2004
Sharp decline
of the revenue
and
expenditure
ratios

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
64are also continuing to profit from the very
favourable financing terms, which will yieldconsiderable savings whenever maturingdebt securities are rolled over.
The general government deficit ratio is ex-
pected to decline next year. Although the rev-enue ratio is likely to fall further, it will not doso as sharply as in 2004. This is partly becausethe structure of macroeconomic growth islikely to be yield somewhat more revenue.Furthermore, the last stage of the income taxreform will not cause such large shortfalls asthe tax cuts this year. Finally, non-tax revenuemay increase again since additional revenue isnow likely to arise inter alia from the introduc-
tion of motorway tolls for heavy goods ve-hicles. The expenditure ratio is also likely to fallless steeply than it has done this year but stillmore steeply than the revenue ratio. This willprobably be due, in part, to a stringent spend-ing policy at all levels of government, whichwill be reflected in personnel expenditure inparticular. Labour market-related spendingmay produce savings in view of the adoptedreform measures, and the development ofpensions as well as interest expenditure shouldagain be relatively subdued. Overall, however,the course of economic development in 2005is subject to considerable uncertainty. Thus,among other things, the likely financial impactof the various statutory measures is very diffi-cult to gauge. The revenue from profit-relatedtaxes has likewise proved to be exceptionallyvolatile in the past few years.
Despite the expectations of a declining deficit
ratio, as things stand today there is a consid-erable risk that the 3% ceiling will be ex-
ceeded next year, too. This, along with theprocess of preparing a Federal budget in linewith the constitutional requirements, prompt-ed the Federal Government to put forward anew package of measures (see pp 58-59),which (including a zero-wage round forpublic-sector employees) should result in fi-nancial relief of 38 billion for the general gov-
ernment budget.
13It is to be welcomed that
in 2005 central government intends to vigor-ously pursue the objective of complying withthe 3% ceiling and therefore meeting itsEuropean commitments. This would in factbe the best way to strengthen the credibilityof the European Stability and Growth Pact(for more details on the current discussionconcerning the reform of the Pact, see thebox on p 9). However, it is not certain thatthe planned measures will be sufficient tocomply with the 3% ceiling. Moreover, themeasures largely comprise one-off effectswhich will result in burdens for futurebudgets. This makes it all the more importantto pursue a strict and sustainable consolida-tion course from now on with the objectiveof staying permanently below the deficit ceil-ing and ultimately achieving a structurally bal-anced budget. For the close coordination thatthis requires between central and state gov-ernment, the Financial Planning Council isavailable, as a national fiscal policy coordin-ation body, to enable additional joint consoli-dation measures to be agreed on.
13The original plan to move the public holiday on 3 Oc-
tober (“German Unity Day”) to the first Sunday in Octo-
ber, which would have yielded relief of 32 billion, has
been dropped.Decrease
in deficit ratio
expected
in 2005Efforts to
comply with
the 3% deficit
ceiling

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and resident
individuals, housing loans, sectorsof economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of resident individuals and
domestic non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public
authorities at banks (MFIs) inGermany, by creditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the euro area 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Public finances in Germany
1 General government budgetary
position 52*
2 Budgetary position of central,
state and local government 52*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004

3 Government fiscal position as
defined in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of central, state and
local government 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*
6 Specific taxes levied by central,
state and local government 54*
7 General government debt 55*8 Change in general government
debt 57*
9 Loans raised by general govern-
ment against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Central government debt 58*11 Central government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets
of the wage and salary earners’pension insurance fund 59*
13 Revenue and expenditure of the
Federal Employment Agency 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 60*
2 Output in the production sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*X External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 67*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the euro-area memberstates, the Deutsche Mark value ofthe ECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2003          Mar 11.7 8.2 8.3 8.4 4.2 4.8 4.7 2.75 2.53 4.1
         Apr 11.1 8.2 8.9 8.6 4.8 5.2 5.1 2.56 2.53 4.2
         May 11.4 8.7 8.8 8.7 5.1 5.3 4.9 2.56 2.40 3.9         June 11.3 8.5 8.6 8.7 4.8 5.1 5.3 2.21 2.15 3.7
         July 11.3 8.6 8.8 8.6 5.4 5.6 5.5 2.08 2.13 4.0
         Aug 11.7 8.7 8.4 8.3 5.5 5.6 5.6 2.10 2.14 4.2         Sep 11.1 8.3 7.6 8.0 5.5 5.5 5.7 2.02 2.15 4.2
         Oct 11.6 8.2 8.0 7.7 5.7 5.4 6.1 2.01 2.14 4.3
         Nov 10.5 7.7 7.4 7.5 6.3 6.0 6.3 1.97 2.16 4.4         Dec 10.7 7.7 7.2 7.1 5.9 5.8 6.2 2.06 2.15 4.4
2004          Jan 11.5 7.5 6.6 6.6 5.8 5.8 6.2 2.02 2.09 4.2
         Feb 10.7 6.8 6.2 6.3 5.7 5.7 6.3 2.03 2.07 4.2         Mar 11.4 6.8 6.2 6.0 5.9 5.7 7.1 2.01 2.03 4.0
         Apr 10.9 6.2 5.5 5.5 6.0 5.9 7.5 2.08 2.05 4.2
         May 9.4 5.5 4.9 5.2 5.9 5.9 7.5 2.02 2.09 4.4         June 9.5 5.6 5.3 5.2 6.4 6.1 7.7 2.03 2.11 4.4
         July 10.1 5.9 5.5 5.4 6.3 6.3 7.5 2.07 2.12 4.3
         Aug 9.2 5.7 5.6 5.7 6.1 6.0 7.6 2.04 2.11 4.1         Sep 9.7 6.3 6.0 ... 6.1 6.3 7.9 2.05 2.12 4.1
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.11 2.15 4.0
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.5, p 44*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2003          Mar + 4,271 + 6,782 + 10,897 + 2,037 + 15,221 − 11,353 + 4,992 1.0807 97.4 99.0
         Apr − 7,378 + 6,607 + 17,450 − 11,561 + 24,770 + 3,031 + 1,210 1.0848 97.9 99.5
         May − 1,623 + 7,443 − 23,004 + 642 + 11,068 − 35,072 + 358 1.1582 101.8 103.5         June + 2,083 + 10,107 − 26,419 + 13,612 + 24,804 − 65,588 + 754 1.1663 102.2 104.2
         July + 2,834 + 15,457 + 323 − 4,031 − 36,091 + 38,614 + 1,831 1.1372 101.0 102.9
         Aug + 3,033 + 10,501 + 5,943 − 5,564 − 38,761 + 50,017 + 251 1.1139 99.8 101.8         Sep + 5,645 + 10,865 − 6,902 − 9,529 + 11,173 − 8,490 − 57 1.1222 99.6 101.7
         Oct + 7,993 + 13,391 − 111 − 9,209 + 35,686 − 27,339 + 750 1.1692 101.3 103.3
         Nov + 3,251 + 8,654 + 13,242 + 3,867 + 4,029 − 172 + 5,518 1.1702 101.2 103.3         Dec + 6,094 + 8,635 − 16,689 − 4,308 − 33,290 + 13,587 + 7,321 1.2286 104.2 106.2
2004          Jan − 2,689 + 5,254 − 18,686 − 7,187 − 7,352 − 1,145 − 3,002 1.2613 105.4 107.4
         Feb + 5,376 + 9,796 + 18,216 + 9,131 + 14,588 − 14,140 + 8,637 1.2646 105.3 107.3         Mar + 10,957 + 13,580 − 11,736 − 25,539 − 3,718 + 13,798 + 3,722 1.2262 103.4 105.5
         Apr + 210 + 10,157 − 23,301 − 4,715 − 9,461 − 6,430 − 2,696 1.1985 101.6 103.7
         May + 2,429 + 10,536 + 9,544 − 717 − 1,829 + 10,987 + 1,102 1.2007 102.4 104.4         June + 6,027 + 11,989 + 2,100 − 13,813 + 31,634 − 14,432 − 1,289 1.2138 102.3 104.2
         July + 2,800 + 13,907 − 11,991 − 8,487 − 31,603 + 27,484 + 616 1.2266 102.8 104.7
         Aug + 2,109 + 5,514 + 140 + 4,434 + 1,987 − 8,648 + 2,368 1.2176 102.7 104.8         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2218 103.0 105.2
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2490 104.2 106.4
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables X.12 and 13, pp 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-23 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area
Real gross domestic product 1 
2001 0.7 0.8 1.1 2.1 4.3 6.0 1.8 1.5 1.4 0.8 1.6 2.8 1.6
2002 0.9 0.1 2.3 1.2 3.6 6.1 0.4 2.5 0.6 1.4 0.4 2.2 0.82003 1.3 − 0.1 1.9 0.5 4.5 3.7 0.3 2.9 − 0.9 0.7 − 1.2 2.5 0.5
2003          Q2 0.8 − 0.7 1.6 − 0.5 4.0 5.3 0.1 − 1.4 0.5 − 2.2 2.3 − 0.1
         Q3 1.0 − 0.3 2.4 0.2 4.6 0.5 0.1 − 1.4 0.7 − 1.0 2.3 0.3         Q4 1.6 0.2 1.7 1.0 4.5 5.1 0.0 − 0.5 0.6 − 0.2 3.0 0.7
2004          Q1 3.3 1.5 2.9 2.0 4.0 6.1 0.8 1.2 0.8 0.3 2.7 1.7
         Q2 2.8 1.9 3.2 2.7 3.9 4.1 1.4 1.3 1.9 1.5 2.5 2.2         Q3 ... 1.3 ... ... 3.8 ... ... 1.4 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 1,2 
2001 − 0.3 0.2 0.1 1.1 1.0 10.2 − 1.0 3.2 0.4 2.8 3.1 − 1.5 0.42002 1.3 − 1.0 2.1 − 1.5 1.7 7.5 − 1.6 1.7 − 0.3 0.9 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.52003 0.8 0.4 0.8 − 0.1 1.5 5.0 − 0.6 5.6 − 2.4 1.9 − 0.1 1.4 0.3
2003          Q2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.8 2.1 0.9 − 1.8 5.2 − 5.1 − 0.3 − 2.8 1.7 − 0.9
         Q3 0.5 − 1.1 1.6 − 0.3 2.2 4.2 − 0.5 6.3 − 4.0 2.2 1.1 1.0 − 0.3         Q4 1.5 1.5 0.8 1.5 0.7 14.7 0.0 5.5 − 1.2 1.9 1.0 1.1 1.4
2004          Q1 1.8 1.5 − 0.6 0.5 2.6 4.1 − 0.2 7.3 1.1 2.3 − 2.9 1.3 1.0
         Q2 2.0 4.0 4.6 3.0 0.9 3.1 1.4 7.5 3.0 6.1 − 1.8 2.5 3.0         Q3 2.1
7p 3.6 6.4 2.0 0.9 1.6 − 0.7 ... 2.6 ... − 4.1 2.3 2.4
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 77.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.42003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.8 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 79.0 78.9 81.12004 80.4 83.2 84.5 82.3 ... 75.6 76.4 85.6 82.7 81.3 80.4 79.0 81.2
2003          Q3 77.9 81.0 80.7 84.8 76.8 77.1 76.1 84.8 81.0 79.4 76.4 79.5 80.7
         Q4 79.0 82.9 82.0 84.4 76.1 73.6 76.1 83.9 81.4 80.3 84.3 79.3 81.4
2004          Q1 79.4 82.8 82.8
4 81.4 77.5 74.4 76.8 83.5 82.1 80.0 80.6 77.0 80.7
         Q2 79.6 82.6 83.4 81.8 74.6 77.7 75.9 85.6 82.8 80.4 79.3 79.7 80.7
         Q3 81.5 83.4 84.7 83.2 76.3 75.3 76.6 87.4 83.1 82.3 81.4 79.8 81.6         Q4 80.9 83.9 86.9 82.6 ... 75.0 76.4 86.0 82.7 82.4 80.2 79.3 81.7
Unemployment rate 5 
2001 6.7 7.8 9.1 8.4 10.4 3.9 9.4 2.1 2.5 3.6 4.0 10.6 8.02002 7.3 8.7 9.1 8.9 10.0 4.3 9.0 2.8 2.7 4.2 5.0 11.3 8.42003 8.0 9.6 9.0 9.4 9.3 4.6 8.6 3.7 3.8 4.3 6.3 11.3 8.9
2004          Apr 7.7 9.7 9.0 9.5 4.6 ... 4.2 4.8 4.5 6.5 11.0 8.9
         May 7.7 9.8 8.9 9.5 4.5 ... 4.2 4.7 4.5 6.5 10.9 8.9         June 7.7 9.8 8.9 9.6 4.5 ... 4.2 4.7 4.5 6.5 10.9 8.9
         July 7.7 9.8 8.7 9.5 4.5 ... 4.2 4.7 4.5 6.4 10.7 8.9
         Aug 7.7 9.9 8.6 9.6 4.5 ... 4.3 4.7 4.5 6.4 10.7 8.9         Sep 7.7 9.9 8.4 9.6 4.4 ... 4.3 ... 4.5 6.5 10.6 8.9
         Oct ... 9.9 ... ... 4.4 ... ... ... 4.5 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2001 2.4 1.9 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.3
2002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.32003 1.5 1.0 1.3 2.2 3.4 4.0 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.1 2.1
2004          Apr 1.7 1.7 − 0.4 2.4 3.1 1.7 2.3 2.7 1.5 1.5 2.4 2.7 2.0
         May 2.4 2.1 − 0.1 2.8 3.1 2.1 2.3 3.4 1.7 2.1 2.4 3.4 2.5         June 2.0 1.9 − 0.1 2.7 3.0 2.5 2.4 3.8 1.5 2.3 3.7 3.5 2.4
         July 2.1 2.0 0.2 2.6 3.1 2.5 2.2 3.8 1.2 2.1 2.9 3.3 2.3
         Aug 2.0 2.1 0.3 2.5 2.8 2.5 2.4 3.6 1.2 2.2 2.4 3.3 2.3         Sep 1.8 1.9 0.2 2.2 2.9 2.4 2.1 3.1 1.1
p 1.8 2.1 3.2 p 2.1
         Oct 2.7 2.2 0.6 p 2.3 3.3 2.5 2.1 4.1 1.5 p 2.3 2.4 3.6 p 2.4
General government financial balance 6 
2001 0.6 − 2.8 5.2 − 1.5 − 3.7 0.9 − 2.6 6.4 − 0.1 0.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 1.72002 0.1 − 3.7 4.3 − 3.2 − 3.7 − 0.2 − 2.3 2.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 2.42003 0.4 − 3.8 2.3 − 4.1 − 4.6 0.1 − 2.4 0.8 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 2.8 0.4 − 2.7
General government debt 6 
2001 108.0 59.4 43.8 56.5 114.7 35.9 110.6 5.5 52.9 66.1 55.8 57.5 69.52002 105.4 60.9 42.6 58.8 112.5 32.7 107.9 5.7 52.6 65.7 58.4 54.4 69.42003 100.0 64.2 45.6 63.7 109.9 32.1 106.2 5.3 54.1 64.5 60.3 50.7 70.7
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. — 6  As a
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition; including proceeds from
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece and Portugal is calculated sales of UMTS licences. — 7  Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; ad- Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production
justed for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally Survey for the third quarter (industry in Germany: on
adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and October. — 4  France average,  -2.3%). — Output possibly understated. 
from first quarter 2004 not seasonally adjusted. — 5  Standardised, as a
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2003          Feb 51.4 36.0 4.8 15.3 17.7 10.6 66.8 56.2 12.0 7.1 − 1.2 10.2 − 4.1
         Mar 48.8 37.7 6.1 11.1 10.4 14.1 4.2 − 9.9 13.2 7.4 − 1.6 13.3 − 5.9
         Apr 83.7 71.5 27.1 12.3 17.6 − 4.2 41.7 45.9 10.2 − 2.8 − 2.6 13.1 2.6
         May 68.6 43.2 13.9 25.3 29.3 38.5 41.9 3.4 21.5 6.7 − 1.3 22.2 − 6.1         June 11.5 24.6 − 7.3 − 13.1 − 13.8 61.6 39.0 − 22.6 15.9 2.8 − 1.6 7.4 7.3
         July 38.6 15.1 − 5.0 23.5 15.5 − 38.5 − 31.5 7.0 31.5 5.2 − 2.1 18.6 9.8
         Aug − 0.2 10.1 4.2 − 10.3 − 3.9 − 31.9 − 70.8 − 38.9 15.2 7.6 − 1.6 2.2 7.1         Sep 58.3 33.2 1.6 25.1 23.4 14.0 31.8 17.8 28.9 0.8 − 0.6 21.7 6.9
         Oct 51.1 32.6 3.4 18.5 18.7 11.5 49.9 38.4 27.3 4.9 0.1 20.5 1.8
         Nov 91.8 68.2 14.7 23.7 14.0 18.3 44.2 25.9 30.1 8.0 0.2 17.7 4.2         Dec 22.7 45.3 4.5 − 22.6 − 32.7 − 9.5 − 12.2 − 2.7 22.5 16.9 1.1 2.5 2.1
2004          Jan 42.6 27.8 5.0 14.8 17.5 22.0 110.9 88.9 17.1 1.6 − 1.1 15.9 0.6
         Feb 45.2 31.9 6.6 13.3 21.5 8.7 24.3 15.6 16.3 7.6 − 0.3 9.8 − 0.9         Mar 76.5 45.4 16.0 31.1 14.4 6.8 76.9 70.1 45.0 7.1 − 0.2 30.2 7.8
         Apr 89.9 85.1 26.6 4.8 11.7 6.3 69.2 62.9 27.3 10.3 − 1.1 15.8 2.3
         May 69.9 45.1 1.3 24.8 30.7 − 20.3 − 10.4 10.0 21.0 5.6 − 0.9 17.1 − 0.9         June 63.2 49.0 − 5.6 14.3 8.6 14.8 − 25.8 − 40.6 25.1 9.9 − 0.4 8.2 7.4
         July 27.0 25.1 − 11.6 1.9 − 4.5 − 1.1 − 7.9 − 6.7 26.3 7.4 0.1 14.8 4.1
         Aug − 15.8 − 10.4 − 7.2 − 5.3 − 0.1 29.8 45.3 15.5 21.0 6.0 − 0.0 10.0 5.0         Sep 58.1 57.2 − 5.2 0.9 7.9 32.5 24.2 − 8.3 43.9 3.3 − 0.3 36.1 4.8
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2003          Feb 0.7 7.9 − 1.3 − 7.2 0.5 10.3 20.2 9.9 4.4 6.3 − 1.2 0.8 − 1.5
         Mar 4.6 2.7 − 1.2 1.9 5.1 18.7 25.2 6.5 1.7 1.9 − 1.6 − 1.1 2.6
         Apr 4.9 6.6 5.9 − 1.7 − 2.6 4.5 14.7 10.1 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 2.5 0.5 1.5
         May 1.9 4.0 3.0 − 2.1 2.4 27.6 22.6 − 5.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.5 4.8 − 4.4         June − 18.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 17.1 − 10.0 38.5 24.6 − 13.9 4.8 0.1 − 1.4 3.7 2.4
         July 0.6 − 8.4 − 0.5 9.0 − 1.6 − 24.6 − 18.6 6.0 8.7 4.9 − 2.1 4.9 1.0
         Aug − 13.6 2.7 0.9 − 16.3 − 11.0 16.7 − 20.6 − 37.3 5.7 3.2 − 1.5 2.2 1.8         Sep 17.7 12.8 − 3.6 4.9 10.8 − 1.8 10.5 12.3 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 9.1 − 4.8
         Oct − 1.8 − 9.3 − 3.4 7.5 4.5 6.4 − 0.2 − 6.6 3.1 0.3 0.1 2.6 0.2
         Nov 24.5 15.5 5.5 8.9 2.4 7.9 12.4 4.6 3.3 0.2 0.2 3.0 − 0.1         Dec − 10.1 0.0 1.1 − 10.2 − 7.8 11.4 12.4 1.1 − 0.2 1.5 1.0 − 2.9 0.2
2004          Jan − 0.6 − 6.8 1.4 6.2 6.1 23.0 34.9 11.9 2.6 − 0.2 − 1.1 6.5 − 2.7
         Feb 16.6 2.9 − 3.6 13.7 22.4 − 23.5 − 2.7 20.8 − 5.8 0.6 − 0.4 0.5 − 6.5         Mar 28.7 10.4 9.6 18.3 5.8 − 2.0 10.3 12.3 9.4 0.0 − 0.2 9.4 0.2
         Apr 10.8 16.4 13.3 − 5.6 1.1 14.8 22.0 7.2 13.0 4.5 − 1.2 6.2 3.4
         May − 10.4 − 10.6 − 8.3 0.1 6.0 11.3 − 4.9 − 16.2 5.0 4.3 − 0.9 4.9 − 3.3         June − 9.2 − 12.4 − 12.7 3.2 8.5 21.1 − 8.6 − 29.7 7.9 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 6.0
         July 6.4 − 4.1 − 1.5 10.5 1.5 − 3.3 − 9.4 − 6.1 7.8 1.7 0.1 2.2 3.9
         Aug − 7.3 − 8.1 − 5.4 0.8 5.4 12.1 12.3 0.2 3.0 1.9 − 0.0 5.4 − 4.3         Sep 5.5 10.8 0.6 − 5.3 − 0.8 12.1 36.0 23.9 11.5 1.1 − 0.3 11.3 − 0.7
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
18.6 − 9.3 − 40.7 28.1 10.4 7.2 3.2 2.4 15.3 0.4 12.4 − 0.2 2003          Feb 
− 1.1 5.3 − 45.4 56.5 47.0 7.9 39.1 − 5.7 15.1 − 9.2 8.1 − 9.9          Mar 
− 16.5 0.8 − 85.0 49.7 31.2 9.1 22.1 11.1 7.4 6.4 10.2 18.6          Apr 
10.4 19.1 − 56.1 65.4 37.9 7.4 30.4 19.9 7.7 1.3 6.6 − 17.2          May
30.2 19.9 − 7.1 28.9 55.1 7.3 47.8 − 39.6 13.4 − 16.7 − 1.7 − 3.5          June
− 24.6 − 13.0 − 6.2 − 4.5 − 19.0 11.1 − 30.0 3.2 11.3 5.2 10.2 − 4.8          July− 10.0 − 31.3 − − 6.1 − 3.4 − 14.1 1.2 − 15.2 3.4 7.2 − 2.9 2.2 − 2.0          Aug 
20.9 23.1 − − 0.5 17.4 46.2 2.1 44.0 − 29.0 0.3 − 4.5 − 8.4 − 5.1          Sep 
− 18.0 3.1 − 50.3 19.8 4.3 6.4 − 2.1 10.4 5.1 13.2 5.7 11.6          Oct 
14.6 16.8 − 48.7 52.7 49.5 7.9 41.6 − 3.8 7.0 − 1.0 − 4.0 0.9          Nov 
− 26.8 − 49.2 − 66.7 96.8 67.4 18.8 48.6 0.7 28.7 − 16.0 − 2.8 − 11.3          Dec 
20.5 38.0 − − 11.1 − 31.0 − 26.9 − 8.8 − 18.1 − 21.6 17.5 6.9 9.0 4.1 2004          Jan 
18.9 − 7.5 − 26.1 2.4 1.7 4.3 − 2.6 − 6.1 6.7 14.0 7.5 2.2          Feb 
− 9.2 21.6 − 25.9 33.3 40.5 6.1 34.4 − 12.4 5.2 − 9.3 4.8 − 3.0          Mar 
− 4.7 21.0 − 52.7 33.1 24.4 9.8 14.6 0.4 8.3 5.8 8.4 5.4          Apr 
15.5 − 15.3 − 28.3 36.0 18.9 7.3 11.7 11.1 6.0 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 2.9          May
28.7 − 1.9 − 26.2 30.3 44.0 6.4 37.7 − 26.0 12.3 − 4.1 − 4.3 4.4          June
− 22.2 − 3.2 − 25.0 18.4 0.3 13.2 − 12.9 10.5 7.6 5.2 3.7 − 2.4          July− 8.5 14.4 − − 12.8 − 28.1 − 37.4 − 2.8 − 34.6 3.6 5.7 3.0 11.0 1.3          Aug 
11.0 4.1 − 31.5 57.5 63.3 4.7 58.6 − 7.6 1.9 − 7.2 − 12.9 − 6.0          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
1.4 − 14.2 2.2 1.7 19.5 5.6 − 0.7 3.0 2.3 1.3 8.1 2003          Feb 
− 1.7 22.8 1.5 2.5 0.4 7.1 − 5.2 1.7 0.4 0.5 − 4.0          Mar 
− 1.1 4.4 0.9 2.8 8.7 8.2 − 2.0 1.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.4          Apr 
2.2 14.8 2.4 1.3 15.3 6.8 7.4 0.7 1.0 0.4 − 1.0          May
0.4 13.3 0.6 2.8 1.9 16.4 − 11.8 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 1.6          June
− 2.8 − 15.7 1.1 3.4 − 14.2 − 12.5 − 1.3 2.0 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.2          July
0.6 − 4.5 2.5 − 0.1 1.2 1.7 2.9 2.7 1.5 − 0.4 − 7.2          Aug 0.3 11.8 1.3 0.9 1.5 10.8 − 13.8 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 0.5          Sep 
− 0.7 − 3.6 1.2 1.3 5.9 3.3 − 3.5 0.9 5.6 − 0.7 0.2          Oct 
0.1 3.3 1.0 2.4 25.5 22.8 − 0.3 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 4.1          Nov 0.2 4.2 0.2 4.5 − 3.0 − 10.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.9 0.2 1.2          Dec 
0.0 22.5 3.5 − 5.0 − 2.7 8.3 − 14.1 1.3 2.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 2004          Jan 
1.3 − 1.8 1.1 0.9 − 0.6 5.7 − 5.2 1.2 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0          Feb 
0.6 12.2 1.2 2.3 4.4 1.2 − 0.1 0.1 0.8 − 0.5 3.0          Mar 
− 0.6 12.7 1.9 2.7 0.5 5.8 − 5.0 0.9 − 1.0 0.1 − 0.3          Apr 
1.0 − 10.7 1.0 2.3 5.5 − 2.7 8.7 0.2 − 0.3 0.3 − 0.8          May2.4 10.3 0.6 2.3 − 8.7 3.3 − 9.8 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.8          June
− 1.0 0.1 1.7 3.6 − 3.9 − 8.5 3.8 0.5 0.6 3.9 − 4.2          July
2.4 − 3.2 3.0 − 0.8 2.6 1.7 0.7 0.7 − 2.5 1.3 0.8          Aug 
− 3.9 0.6 2.3 1.3 9.5 14.6 − 5.1 0.1 3.9 − 2.0 − 2.0          Sep 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Up to end-2002, including national banknotes and German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the
coins still in circulation. — 10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2002          Aug 13,649.1 9,645.6 7,591.2 6,692.3 339.7 559.1 2,054.4 818.0 1,236.4 2,745.0 1,258.5
         Sep 13,822.3 9,700.6 7,625.2 6,726.8 349.4 549.1 2,075.3 820.8 1,254.5 2,813.5 1,308.3
         Oct 13,863.8 9,726.4 7,657.5 6,742.7 353.2 561.6 2,068.8 820.4 1,248.5 2,862.8 1,274.6
         Nov 14,010.9 9,761.8 7,678.2 6,754.5 356.8 566.9 2,083.6 829.2 1,254.4 2,936.5 1,312.6         Dec 13,931.2 9,779.2 7,721.0 6,781.2 367.1 572.7 2,058.2 837.2 1,221.0 2,839.5 1,312.4
2003          Jan 13,975.4 9,853.6 7,748.3 6,804.6 375.0 568.7 2,105.3 829.2 1,276.1 2,851.5 1,270.3
         Feb 14,114.0 9,905.6 7,778.0 6,831.3 381.4 565.3 2,127.7 828.6 1,299.1 2,908.5 1,299.9         Mar 14,123.7 9,945.1 7,807.4 6,854.6 386.3 566.5 2,137.7 829.1 1,308.6 2,891.9 1,286.7
         Apr 14,227.9 10,027.8 7,880.8 6,891.0 404.3 585.5 2,147.0 823.5 1,323.5 2,905.4 1,294.7
         May 14,301.6 10,088.9 7,911.7 6,907.1 407.2 597.5 2,177.1 819.1 1,358.1 2,878.0 1,334.8         June 14,379.6 10,102.8 7,942.5 6,942.3 406.4 593.7 2,160.3 818.0 1,342.4 2,958.6 1,318.2
         July 14,372.0 10,160.5 7,983.4 6,963.1 403.9 616.4 2,177.2 826.1 1,351.1 2,943.4 1,268.1
         Aug 14,361.6 10,168.5 8,002.2 6,975.6 407.3 619.3 2,166.3 820.0 1,346.3 2,930.2 1,262.8         Sep 14,407.6 10,214.4 8,023.9 6,996.3 412.8 614.8 2,190.5 821.3 1,369.2 2,888.7 1,304.5
         Oct 14,493.3 10,261.3 8,058.2 7,025.0 420.4 612.7 2,203.2 821.1 1,382.1 2,951.8 1,280.1
         Nov 14,607.5 10,349.8 8,119.1 7,071.5 425.0 622.5 2,230.8 830.5 1,400.2 2,954.6 1,303.1         Dec 14,554.4 10,362.4 8,153.3 7,102.5 427.0 623.8 2,209.1 841.7 1,367.4 2,884.8 1,307.2
2004          Jan 14,766.5 10,411.2 8,177.1 7,117.8 426.5 632.8 2,234.1 838.7 1,395.3 3,015.4 1,339.9
         Feb 14,862.0 10,455.1 8,205.0 7,138.8 432.2 634.0 2,250.1 830.4 1,419.7 3,034.5 1,372.4         Mar 15,063.5 10,533.8 8,253.3 7,170.8 433.1 649.4 2,280.5 846.0 1,434.5 3,152.7 1,377.0
         Apr 15,226.1 10,624.1 8,338.6 7,228.9 437.6 672.1 2,285.5 840.2 1,445.3 3,229.5 1,372.5
         May 15,251.5 10,685.1 8,377.3 7,268.8 441.9 666.6 2,307.8 834.4 1,473.5 3,196.8 1,369.7         June 15,331.0 10,755.0 8,429.3 7,320.5 446.4 662.5 2,325.8 840.5 1,485.2 3,181.2 1,394.8
         July 15,351.7 10,783.9 8,455.3 7,356.5 448.4 650.4 2,328.6 846.8 1,481.8 3,183.0 1,384.8
         Aug 15,385.2 10,765.5 8,439.4 7,348.1 448.0 643.3 2,326.1 841.5 1,484.6 3,223.0 1,396.8         Sep 15,487.4 10,815.4 8,490.5 7,403.6 444.7 642.1 2,325.0 834.2 1,490.7 3,212.7 1,459.3
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2002          Aug 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.2 181.5         Sep 4,355.6 3,327.5 2,605.3 2,301.6 66.5 237.3 722.2 477.0 245.2 841.9 186.1
         Oct 4,370.5 3,332.3 2,611.3 2,299.8 69.8 241.7 721.0 480.4 240.6 850.3 188.0
         Nov 4,413.9 3,341.1 2,615.3 2,299.5 69.6 246.2 725.8 481.7 244.1 879.3 193.5         Dec 4,359.5 3,344.6 2,630.8 2,304.4 66.6 259.8 713.8 478.4 235.4 823.8 191.1
2003          Jan 4,360.7 3,353.2 2,623.2 2,298.5 66.1 258.7 730.0 484.0 246.1 823.2 184.3
         Feb 4,383.3 3,351.8 2,627.3 2,303.8 66.5 257.0 724.6 477.9 246.6 841.2 190.2         Mar 4,395.2 3,351.2 2,624.8 2,302.6 67.2 255.0 726.4 474.6 251.7 861.1 182.9
         Apr 4,400.8 3,353.3 2,629.0 2,300.8 67.3 260.9 724.3 475.4 248.9 867.3 180.3
         May 4,401.1 3,351.6 2,629.9 2,298.8 67.9 263.2 721.7 470.7 251.1 871.8 177.7         June 4,411.5 3,334.6 2,629.8 2,301.7 67.0 261.1 704.8 463.7 241.2 906.3 170.6
         July 4,391.1 3,334.6 2,620.8 2,293.4 64.4 263.0 713.9 474.3 239.6 891.4 165.1
         Aug 4,373.2 3,322.7 2,624.8 2,296.4 64.5 263.9 697.9 469.1 228.8 886.0 164.4         Sep 4,384.6 3,337.1 2,634.6 2,309.9 64.2 260.5 702.5 463.0 239.4 877.7 169.8
         Oct 4,387.2 3,333.3 2,624.5 2,303.4 66.5 254.6 708.8 466.1 242.7 882.7 171.3
         Nov 4,409.5 3,355.4 2,637.9 2,311.5 66.9 259.5 717.5 472.5 245.0 884.0 170.2         Dec 4,392.5 3,337.7 2,630.9 2,303.9 69.0 258.0 706.7 469.9 236.8 880.9 173.9
2004          Jan 4,416.6 3,334.2 2,621.1 2,291.7 68.4 260.9 713.2 470.2 242.9 921.4 161.0
         Feb 4,424.0 3,346.3 2,619.5 2,295.4 67.9 256.2 726.7 461.6 265.2 916.1 161.5         Mar 4,479.7 3,374.8 2,629.5 2,295.8 66.6 267.0 745.3 474.2 271.1 939.4 165.5
         Apr 4,514.1 3,385.7 2,646.0 2,299.2 65.4 281.5 739.6 467.5 272.2 962.8 165.7
         May 4,495.6 3,374.2 2,634.5 2,296.1 66.2 272.3 739.7 461.6 278.0 952.1 169.3         June 4,477.8 3,364.6 2,621.6 2,295.8 66.5 259.2 742.9 456.3 286.6 944.6 168.6
         July 4,479.3 3,372.7 2,619.4 2,292.9 70.7 255.8 753.4 465.2 288.2 937.4 169.1
         Aug 4,477.2 3,362.1 2,608.0 2,286.8 69.1 252.1 754.2 460.6 293.6 949.3 165.8         Sep 4,508.4 3,365.3 2,616.7 2,294.9 69.5 252.4 748.6 455.9 292.7 975.6 167.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4From
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to end-2002, also including national
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — banknotes and coins still in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*).
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). From 2002, the German contribution
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
301.1 5,688.0 5,358.6 5,396.2 1,840.9 959.7 83.3 1,142.5 1,263.4 106.4 2002          Aug 
306.7 5,730.1 5,399.2 5,434.7 1,894.9 941.0 82.9 1,143.6 1,265.5 106.8          Sep 
313.9 5,745.4 5,410.6 5,446.2 1,875.8 964.2 82.8 1,144.9 1,272.8 105.8          Oct 
321.4 5,799.5 5,467.0 5,504.7 1,927.1 956.8 82.4 1,148.4 1,284.7 105.3          Nov 341.2 5,879.5 5,566.7 5,592.2 1,980.7 947.8 81.2 1,163.9 1,313.4 105.2          Dec 
312.1 5,869.8 5,536.5 5,569.2 1,956.3 953.1 76.7 1,168.2 1,311.7 103.1 2003          Jan 
319.3 5,913.0 5,560.3 5,586.5 1,956.1 952.7 75.4 1,175.6 1,324.8 101.9          Feb 
327.2 5,963.6 5,610.2 5,639.9 1,995.3 948.2 75.9 1,182.7 1,337.5 100.4          Mar 
336.3 5,979.6 5,640.1 5,671.4 2,012.8 961.3 74.1 1,179.6 1,345.8 97.7          Apr 
343.8 6,041.4 5,695.7 5,715.4 2,035.9 972.4 73.0 1,185.2 1,352.6 96.4          May351.0 6,100.7 5,715.9 5,744.9 2,083.6 940.3 72.4 1,188.1 1,365.6 94.8          June
361.5 6,093.3 5,739.0 5,770.2 2,090.1 944.5 72.1 1,194.4 1,376.3 92.8          July
362.7 6,089.2 5,741.0 5,779.2 2,078.5 951.1 72.2 1,203.8 1,382.4 91.2          Aug 364.8 6,117.9 5,754.9 5,789.2 2,117.6 922.4 73.0 1,203.3 1,382.3 90.6          Sep 
371.2 6,118.4 5,769.3 5,806.7 2,112.8 934.7 73.9 1,208.4 1,386.3 90.6          Oct 
379.2 6,179.9 5,818.4 5,851.8 2,151.0 927.4 75.5 1,215.5 1,391.5 90.8          Nov 397.9 6,239.3 5,916.5 5,936.2 2,191.0 921.6 74.9 1,232.2 1,424.6 91.8          Dec 
389.1 6,244.5 5,891.5 5,923.5 2,177.9 904.2 75.1 1,235.3 1,440.3 90.8 2004          Jan 
393.5 6,263.6 5,893.3 5,924.9 2,171.9 899.2 74.6 1,242.6 1,446.1 90.5          Feb 
399.6 6,290.5 5,922.5 5,966.5 2,210.6 891.9 73.2 1,250.4 1,450.2 90.3          Mar 
409.4 6,322.1 5,949.8 5,997.9 2,225.2 893.8 71.7 1,261.1 1,456.8 89.2          Apr 
416.6 6,366.8 5,981.9 6,023.2 2,235.6 900.2 71.3 1,266.1 1,461.7 88.3          May423.0 6,432.9 6,023.5 6,060.0 2,275.8 875.4 71.6 1,276.2 1,473.0 88.0          June
436.2 6,417.2 6,029.9 6,068.8 2,260.3 886.6 70.8 1,283.6 1,479.5 88.0          July
433.4 6,384.4 6,002.7 6,045.6 2,224.0 891.9 69.3 1,289.4 1,483.1 88.0          Aug 438.0 6,443.1 6,052.3 6,088.0 2,274.7 881.6 67.8 1,292.6 1,483.6 87.7          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8 2002          Aug 
85.9 2,105.7 2,023.7 1,987.6 536.6 233.0 17.5 639.6 456.5 104.3          Sep 
87.4 2,115.1 2,035.2 2,003.0 538.0 243.7 17.5 641.5 458.8 103.5          Oct 
89.9 2,147.3 2,066.9 2,035.6 569.5 237.6 17.9 645.7 462.0 102.9          Nov 94.2 2,170.7 2,092.1 2,054.2 567.8 242.4 18.2 648.0 474.8 103.1          Dec 
84.9 2,159.7 2,082.0 2,048.3 561.2 238.7 18.6 649.7 478.9 101.2 2003          Jan 
86.6 2,173.9 2,094.9 2,058.5 564.8 237.3 18.5 656.1 481.8 100.0          Feb 
89.0 2,175.8 2,098.2 2,063.3 572.0 232.8 18.6 657.9 483.5 98.4          Mar 
91.9 2,176.7 2,100.4 2,068.2 580.4 233.5 18.1 655.8 484.6 95.8          Apr 
93.2 2,189.4 2,112.0 2,073.9 585.9 236.9 17.8 653.8 485.3 94.3          May96.0 2,194.7 2,115.7 2,076.1 600.0 225.8 17.6 653.4 486.3 92.9          June
99.4 2,183.0 2,107.8 2,071.3 591.1 225.3 17.3 658.5 488.3 90.8          July
99.3 2,193.4 2,117.6 2,082.5 593.2 228.9 17.5 662.7 491.0 89.3          Aug 
100.2 2,188.3 2,112.7 2,079.6 603.5 217.2 17.5 661.0 491.8 88.5          Sep 
101.5 2,188.7 2,113.6 2,083.5 606.9 216.1 17.8 661.3 492.8 88.6          Oct 
103.9 2,211.8 2,137.8 2,105.1 628.8 214.6 18.3 661.2 493.4 88.9          Nov 108.5 2,215.1 2,143.0 2,105.2 616.1 216.3 18.5 662.1 502.3 89.9          Dec 
103.5 2,209.9 2,137.7 2,102.7 626.1 202.7 18.5 662.9 503.6 88.8 2004          Jan 
104.4 2,213.0 2,140.9 2,103.8 630.1 198.8 18.3 663.3 504.7 88.5          Feb 
106.7 2,215.1 2,142.0 2,106.6 631.3 200.7 18.0 663.6 504.8 88.2          Mar 
109.3 2,219.4 2,145.3 2,112.5 637.8 196.2 17.5 668.3 505.6 87.1          Apr 
111.6 2,229.8 2,154.8 2,118.4 634.1 202.7 16.9 672.6 505.8 86.2          May113.8 2,229.2 2,151.6 2,114.1 636.3 193.0 16.6 676.9 505.5 85.8          June
117.4 2,226.0 2,149.7 2,113.7 629.2 197.9 16.2 678.5 506.0 85.9          July
116.7 2,232.2 2,153.1 2,119.1 630.6 199.7 16.0 680.3 506.6 85.8          Aug 118.0 2,238.1 2,162.0 2,126.3 644.9 191.9 15.9 681.6 506.7 85.5          Sep 
includes the volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim
Bundesbank in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). — 5Excluding
Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The central governments’ deposits. — 6 In Germany, only saving deposits. 
volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can be
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2002          Aug 141.0 150.8 67.8 52.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 236.5 231.9 463.4 1,813.6 1,496.0
         Sep 146.3 149.1 70.7 48.4 1.3 25.9 2.4 0.4 238.3 234.4 460.9 1,812.1 1,494.1
         Oct 151.8 147.4 72.2 45.3 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 235.6 232.1 463.1 1,822.4 1,492.8
         Nov 147.5 147.4 71.9 45.6 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 229.6 225.8 477.6 1,829.5 1,494.1         Dec 136.4 150.9 75.6 45.1 1.4 25.6 2.8 0.4 226.9 224.4 470.5 1,816.9 1,490.3
2003          Jan 154.7 145.9 71.0 45.9 1.2 24.8 2.6 0.4 232.8 229.6 535.0 1,793.4 1,481.6
         Feb 175.8 150.6 72.2 49.9 1.0 24.4 2.7 0.4 233.3 229.7 547.6 1,802.1 1,485.5         Mar 176.2 147.5 71.8 47.1 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 224.0 220.8 554.9 1,802.3 1,484.7
         Apr 159.7 148.4 75.0 45.2 1.0 24.2 2.8 0.3 230.5 227.0 565.5 1,832.5 1,516.2
         May 170.1 155.9 76.9 50.8 0.9 24.1 2.8 0.3 231.7 228.2 571.5 1,817.9 1,514.2         June 200.3 155.5 80.1 46.8 0.9 24.6 2.8 0.3 215.0 212.1 570.5 1,831.9 1,514.9
         July 173.0 150.1 75.2 46.4 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 219.9 216.4 585.0 1,847.9 1,516.7
         Aug 163.0 147.0 73.4 45.7 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.3 217.1 214.2 587.3 1,861.0 1,513.6         Sep 183.9 144.9 74.8 42.0 1.0 23.9 2.8 0.3 211.5 207.9 576.9 1,856.5 1,517.2
         Oct 165.8 145.9 78.1 39.9 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.4 224.7 221.1 582.3 1,892.5 1,538.6
         Nov 180.4 147.7 80.0 39.6 0.9 24.0 2.9 0.3 224.7 220.9 585.1 1,901.0 1,551.9         Dec 153.6 149.6 79.7 41.5 0.9 24.3 2.9 0.4 208.7 206.4 582.0 1,874.6 1,535.3
2004          Jan 174.1 146.9 78.4 41.2 0.9 23.2 2.9 0.3 214.6 211.9 591.6 1,900.0 1,548.9
         Feb 193.0 145.7 76.7 41.3 0.9 23.5 3.0 0.4 228.6 225.3 599.2 1,910.0 1,558.5         Mar 183.8 140.3 73.5 39.1 0.9 23.3 3.1 0.4 219.4 215.8 602.0 1,948.0 1,576.2
         Apr 179.6 144.7 77.7 39.2 1.0 23.1 3.2 0.4 225.5 222.5 610.8 1,972.5 1,586.3
         May 195.1 148.5 78.3 42.5 1.0 23.1 3.3 0.4 221.9 218.5 609.7 1,982.6 1,589.1         June 223.7 149.2 81.1 40.6 1.0 22.8 3.3 0.4 217.7 214.3 609.4 1,996.0 1,598.9
         July 201.5 146.9 77.6 41.5 1.0 22.9 3.4 0.4 223.0 219.5 613.1 2,013.3 1,607.8
         Aug 193.0 145.8 78.0 40.8 1.0 22.1 3.5 0.5 226.0 221.9 624.1 2,022.3 1,616.6         Sep 204.0 151.1 81.5 42.9 1.0 21.8 3.6 0.5 218.7 215.3 609.8 2,044.1 1,636.1
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2002          Aug 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 32.9 840.1 733.6         Sep 49.9 68.2 13.1 30.0 0.9 22.2 1.6 0.4 10.7 10.7 33.5 841.1 733.7
         Oct 48.3 63.7 12.8 26.0 0.9 22.0 1.6 0.4 9.6 9.6 34.0 844.6 730.7
         Nov 47.7 64.1 13.1 26.2 0.9 21.9 1.6 0.4 6.4 6.4 33.9 844.9 728.7         Dec 47.7 68.7 15.7 27.7 1.0 22.2 1.6 0.4 3.3 3.3 32.9 826.4 716.6
2003          Jan 46.9 64.5 12.7 26.9 1.0 21.8 1.7 0.4 8.6 8.6 35.5 817.6 702.1
         Feb 48.3 67.2 14.8 28.0 0.7 21.7 1.7 0.4 10.9 10.9 36.7 825.8 710.3         Mar 46.6 65.9 14.5 27.1 0.7 21.6 1.6 0.3 11.2 11.2 37.3 819.4 701.0
         Apr 45.5 63.1 14.1 24.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 11.3 11.3 37.2 818.7 699.8
         May 47.7 67.8 14.8 28.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 12.3 12.3 37.7 814.0 698.7         June 48.1 70.5 17.4 28.4 0.7 22.1 1.6 0.3 10.8 10.8 37.2 819.6 699.7
         July 45.3 66.3 14.0 27.9 0.6 21.9 1.6 0.3 10.9 10.9 36.8 822.7 696.4
         Aug 46.0 65.0 14.0 27.1 0.6 21.2 1.7 0.3 12.4 12.4 36.4 821.8 688.4         Sep 46.3 62.5 13.9 24.7 0.7 21.2 1.7 0.3 15.6 15.6 36.3 825.6 689.8
         Oct 45.5 59.7 13.8 22.1 0.6 21.2 1.6 0.4 21.1 21.1 35.7 829.7 692.4
         Nov 45.7 61.0 14.4 22.6 0.6 21.4 1.6 0.3 20.0 20.0 35.2 833.2 698.6         Dec 45.9 64.0 15.8 23.9 0.6 21.6 1.6 0.4 14.1 14.1 35.3 826.4 693.3
2004          Jan 46.0 61.3 14.4 23.6 0.6 20.7 1.7 0.3 16.6 16.6 34.9 836.4 695.5
         Feb 47.3 62.0 15.2 23.3 0.6 20.9 1.7 0.4 17.5 17.5 34.7 833.7 695.2         Mar 47.9 60.6 15.4 21.7 0.6 20.7 1.8 0.4 18.2 18.2 34.2 851.5 698.5
         Apr 47.3 59.7 14.9 21.4 0.6 20.6 1.8 0.4 17.3 17.3 34.2 858.7 698.9
         May 48.3 63.1 15.7 24.1 0.6 20.5 1.8 0.4 17.0 17.0 34.6 861.5 701.5         June 50.7 64.4 17.3 24.0 0.6 20.3 1.8 0.4 16.1 16.1 34.4 859.1 697.1
         July 49.7 62.6 15.6 23.7 0.6 20.4 1.9 0.4 16.8 16.8 38.2 860.1 692.4
         Aug 52.1 61.0 15.7 22.8 0.6 19.5 2.0 0.5 14.2 14.2 39.5 865.1 696.9         Sep 48.1 63.6 15.8 25.4 0.6 19.3 2.0 0.5 18.1 18.1 37.4 870.2 700.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building with money market fund shares. — 5Excluding liabilities arising from
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central securities issued. — 6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 7The
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates should on
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with or M3. — 8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution, the difference
January 2002 Monthly Report , they were published in this table together
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post,
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reseves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
... ... 1,687.1 2,616.3 1,004.3 − 0.2 1,525.4 − 2,301.5 4,750.3 5,576.7 3,967.0 177.7 2002          Aug 
... ... 1,680.8 2,674.3 1,015.9 − 5.0 1,588.0 − 2,364.4 4,792.1 5,622.7 3,973.4 178.3          Sep 
... ... 1,688.7 2,697.5 1,014.0 3.3 1,568.2 − 2,355.1 4,811.0 5,643.4 3,979.4 180.3          Oct 
... ... 1,698.5 2,737.3 1,016.2 − 3.4 1,601.5 − 2,414.6 4,875.5 5,713.8 3,994.4 181.8          Nov ... ... 1,689.3 2,627.1 1,006.4 10.8 1,550.9 − 2,499.4 4,981.4 5,806.4 3,990.8 192.4          Dec 
... ... 1,684.3 2,662.5 1,016.9 10.0 1,541.9 − 2,440.8 4,923.5 5,800.5 3,997.7 192.8 2003          Jan 
... ... 1,693.1 2,714.0 1,010.3 13.5 1,560.5 − 2,451.2 4,951.5 5,841.4 4,005.7 197.4          Feb 
... ... 1,702.5 2,691.3 999.6 13.2 1,546.6 − 2,497.5 5,006.2 5,884.9 4,009.9 199.3          Mar 
... ... 1,710.0 2,714.0 997.0 − 20.9 1,592.6 − 2,527.2 5,052.4 5,970.9 4,008.9 198.1          Apr 
... ... 1,714.2 2,654.5 993.6 − 4.3 1,649.9 − 2,561.5 5,109.4 6,016.3 4,013.8 200.4          May... ... 1,732.1 2,669.3 997.6 15.5 1,626.1 − 2,605.4 5,130.1 6,015.5 4,037.7 186.6          June
... ... 1,753.8 2,679.5 999.8 6.0 1,577.2 − 2,584.8 5,124.3 6,023.3 4,065.6 154.4          July
... ... 1,768.5 2,678.3 1,014.3 − 3.1 1,553.2 − 2,573.2 5,126.0 6,022.8 4,102.0 156.2          Aug ... ... 1,768.9 2,643.4 1,016.6 5.8 1,612.6 − 2,615.6 5,136.9 6,013.0 4,103.7 156.3          Sep 
... ... 1,792.9 2,691.7 1,014.1 9.7 1,587.3 − 2,620.4 5,157.9 6,064.5 4,130.3 157.3          Oct 
... ... 1,801.5 2,686.4 1,014.3 5.0 1,631.3 − 2,667.8 5,206.1 6,115.4 4,146.5 158.1          Nov ... ... 1,786.3 2,635.1 1,010.7 7.8 1,597.8 − 2,729.3 5,297.9 6,177.0 4,145.6 162.9          Dec 
... ... 1,809.0 2,750.5 1,008.8 17.3 1,649.7 − 2,703.1 5,271.7 6,168.9 4,167.4 161.8 2004          Jan 
... ... 1,817.7 2,766.4 1,008.0 21.8 1,670.3 − 2,703.6 5,273.5 6,193.6 4,182.7 166.4          Feb 
... ... 1,858.2 2,857.3 1,025.9 21.5 1,699.1 − 2,745.8 5,310.2 6,221.5 4,248.4 168.2          Mar 
... ... 1,877.7 2,937.9 1,021.8 16.2 1,709.7 − 2,771.0 5,344.5 6,275.6 4,273.4 166.4          Apr 
... ... 1,891.6 2,931.9 1,016.1 17.4 1,688.1 − 2,788.9 5,377.4 6,300.1 4,285.6 167.0          May... ... 1,901.0 2,894.9 1,024.2 16.4 1,716.1 − 2,833.5 5,407.9 6,330.1 4,312.5 163.2          June
... ... 1,920.6 2,898.9 1,029.3 19.9 1,700.3 − 2,834.0 5,427.4 6,356.2 4,344.9 170.5          July
... ... 1,928.5 2,904.1 1,038.4 21.2 1,729.8 − 2,796.0 5,398.3 6,342.2 4,366.9 173.4          Aug ... ... 1,955.0 2,866.3 1,039.4 13.4 1,813.6 − 2,857.3 5,451.6 6,369.2 4,396.9 177.0          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
28.4 37.5 774.2 698.7 272.4 − 50.5 410.3 22.0 534.5 1,282.0 1,385.1 1,814.5 − 2002          Aug 
28.4 36.8 775.9 713.1 274.4 − 48.6 425.8 24.1 549.6 1,289.2 1,397.9 1,816.9 −          Sep 
32.2 37.1 775.2 706.5 272.8 − 42.1 430.1 26.2 550.8 1,299.3 1,411.9 1,815.4 −          Oct 
32.1 38.1 774.7 716.9 274.2 − 47.5 437.8 27.6 582.6 1,328.8 1,438.8 1,819.8 −          Nov 32.1 39.0 755.3 661.0 277.7 − 56.9 444.3 29.1 583.5 1,349.2 1,456.6 1,806.8 −          Dec 
26.9 37.4 753.4 670.1 283.0 − 50.3 436.6 29.6 574.0 1,339.7 1,448.0 1,809.5 − 2003          Jan 
34.6 37.7 753.4 679.1 279.5 − 63.2 440.5 31.9 579.5 1,347.5 1,467.5 1,811.1 −          Feb 
31.9 36.5 751.0 682.6 280.3 − 48.9 437.6 33.3 586.5 1,350.9 1,467.7 1,809.6 −          Mar 
33.5 36.3 748.9 686.4 281.1 − 55.5 444.9 34.2 594.5 1,357.8 1,476.1 1,803.5 −          Apr 
32.2 34.1 747.7 666.8 277.5 − 43.6 447.0 36.6 600.7 1,371.8 1,488.0 1,795.1 −          May33.0 31.6 754.9 661.1 279.0 − 42.6 451.8 37.3 617.5 1,377.9 1,490.5 1,802.6 −          June
30.6 31.7 760.4 668.9 280.4 − 63.1 451.5 38.4 605.0 1,366.0 1,476.0 1,812.5 −          July
25.7 29.5 766.7 640.5 285.5 − 67.4 450.4 40.8 607.2 1,374.0 1,477.8 1,825.8 −          Aug 26.4 29.3 770.0 639.8 279.8 − 60.1 459.3 42.2 617.3 1,370.9 1,478.4 1,820.9 −          Sep 
25.7 30.1 773.9 638.2 279.6 − 63.5 457.6 43.4 620.7 1,371.7 1,484.4 1,825.0 −          Oct 
28.6 31.5 773.1 635.5 279.6 − 70.8 465.2 44.4 643.2 1,394.3 1,509.6 1,824.4 −          Nov 30.0 31.3 765.1 625.5 279.6 − 67.8 464.3 44.6 631.9 1,395.2 1,505.9 1,818.7 −          Dec 
31.2 29.8 775.4 642.8 276.3 − 47.1 446.8 48.1 640.5 1,391.1 1,503.6 1,824.6 − 2004          Jan 
26.7 31.3 775.8 663.0 270.2 − 60.8 452.6 49.2 645.3 1,392.7 1,502.8 1,819.0 −          Feb 
29.6 31.4 790.6 680.7 273.8 − 54.5 460.7 50.4 646.8 1,394.2 1,507.6 1,837.3 −          Mar 
29.8 31.1 797.7 690.9 274.2 − 52.8 472.2 52.3 652.7 1,395.8 1,508.3 1,848.3 −          Apr 
27.6 32.3 801.5 671.6 270.6 − 61.3 471.9 53.3 649.8 1,401.8 1,513.4 1,851.8 −          May29.5 29.7 799.9 642.5 276.7 − 54.5 474.3 53.9 653.5 1,395.1 1,504.7 1,860.1 −          June
27.2 27.7 805.2 638.2 280.6 − 59.0 478.3 55.6 644.8 1,391.0 1,501.0 1,871.1 −          July
29.2 26.5 809.4 636.6 278.9 − 69.5 480.2 58.6 646.4 1,394.0 1,503.4 1,874.5 −          Aug 27.5 26.1 816.6 654.1 277.5 − 80.2 493.1 60.9 660.7 1,403.1 1,512.2 1,881.0 −          Sep 
between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central govern-
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen ments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetaryby the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo transactions, money
III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding central governments’ deposits), market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities up to 2
and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments’ years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2002          Apr 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6         June 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         July 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8
         Sep 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
         Oct 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
         Nov 372.1 147.5 45.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 334.0 42.8 58.6 129.3 463.4
         Dec 371.5 168.1 45.0 1.1 2.0 0.2 − 350.7 51.7 55.5 129.5 480.5
2003          Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2
         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3
         June 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         July 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
         Aug 315.8 213.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 391.6 51.5 − 1.6 132.8 524.6         Sep 315.0 214.0 45.0 0.1 − 0.6 − 391.7 54.4 − 4.4 132.0 524.2
         Oct 321.3 208.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 395.5 48.3 − 1.1 131.9 527.5
         Nov 321.8 205.8 45.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 399.4 43.4 − 2.2 131.8 531.4
         Dec 320.1 235.5 45.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 416.1 57.0 − 4.5 132.6 548.7
2004          Jan 309.2 232.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 427.6 37.0 − 11.2 133.6 561.4
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 303.3 219.4 56.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 418.0 48.6 − 21.1 134.1 552.3
         Apr 301.4 217.9 67.1 0.4 − 0.4 − 425.3 51.5 − 25.7 135.3 561.0
         May 310.7 213.2 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 436.4 46.0 − 18.9 135.0 571.5
         June 311.3 224.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.5 − 442.5 52.2 − 21.1 137.1 580.1
         July 308.2 245.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 449.1 65.0 − 24.1 138.8 588.1
         Aug 300.8 253.6 75.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 460.9 61.1 − 31.8 139.1 600.1
         Sep 299.4 251.6 75.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 462.8 56.3 − 32.4 139.3 602.3
         Oct 298.8 256.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 465.1 58.2 − 32.1 139.3 604.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Apr 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8
         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0
         June 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         July 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2
         Sep 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
         Oct 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
         Nov 84.3 73.2 31.6 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.6 0.1 56.5 37.9 132.6
         Dec 84.4 91.1 33.8 0.9 0.7 0.2 − 99.3 0.1 73.5 37.8 137.3
2003          Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1
         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7         June 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         July 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
         Aug 73.7 111.0 29.6 0.2 − 0.1 − 109.6 0.1 66.5 38.2 147.9
         Sep 73.9 114.0 29.1 0.1 − 0.4 − 109.8 0.1 69.2 37.7 147.9
         Oct 75.7 106.5 29.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 110.8 0.1 63.4 37.5 148.4
         Nov 76.1 102.3 30.8 0.0 − 0.2 − 111.5 0.1 60.0 37.5 149.1
         Dec 76.1 118.3 30.9 0.3 − 0.1 − 115.9 0.1 72.2 37.4 153.4
2004          Jan 73.1 119.5 32.3 0.2 − 0.1 − 116.2 0.1 70.9 37.9 154.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 72.4 109.7 41.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 113.5 0.1 72.0 37.9 151.5
         Apr 72.9 97.9 48.7 0.2 − 0.3 − 115.8 0.1 65.7 37.8 153.9
         May 75.4 100.7 51.8 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 119.3 0.1 70.9 37.7 157.0
         June 75.6 115.6 49.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.2 0.1 80.9 38.3 159.9
         July 74.6 127.9 49.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 122.7 0.1 91.1 38.5 161.1
         Aug 72.1 136.9 50.3 0.0 − 0.1 − 126.2 0.1 94.7 38.3 164.6         Sep 72.2 131.7 50.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 127.5 0.1 88.8 37.9 165.4
         Oct 72.1 129.8 48.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 127.7 0.1 84.8 37.5 165.3
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
of the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7 2002          Apr 
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 − 1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May
− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 − 2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          June
− 27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 − − 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 − 30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          July
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 − 9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug 
+ 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep 
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2          Oct 
+ 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 4.8 − 2.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 5.8          Nov 
− 0.6 + 20.6 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 − + 16.7 + 8.9 − 3.1 + 0.2 + 17.1          Dec 
− 10.6 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan 
− 4.5 − 7.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − − 13.2 + 6.5 − 5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb 
− 3.9 + 10.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 − 7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar 
− 15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 − 20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr 
− 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 − 5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May
− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 − 2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          June
− 10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 − 10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          July
− 4.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 8.9 − 0.9 − 4.5 + 0.6 + 9.4          Aug − 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 6.3 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.4 − + 3.8 − 6.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.3          Oct 
+ 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 3.9 − 4.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.9          Nov 
− 1.7 + 29.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − + 16.7 + 13.6 − 2.3 + 0.8 + 17.3          Dec 
− 10.9 − 2.9+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − + 11.5 − 20.0 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 12.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 5.9 − 13.2 + 11.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 9.6 + 11.6 − 9.9 + 0.5 − 9.1          Mar 
− 1.9 − 1.5 + 10.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 7.3 + 2.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.7          Apr 
+ 9.3 − 4.7 + 7.9 − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 5.5 + 6.8 − 0.3 + 10.5          May
+ 0.6 + 11.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − 0.4 + 6.1 + 6.2 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 8.6          June
− 3.1 + 20.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 12.8 − 3.0 + 1.7 + 8.0          July
− 7.4 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 11.8 − 3.9 − 7.7 + 0.3 + 12.0          Aug 
− 1.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 − 4.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.2          Sep 
− 0.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.1          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7 2002          Apr 
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 − 8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May
− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          June
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 − − 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          July
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 − 10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug 
− 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep 
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2          Oct 
+ 0.4 + 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.0          Nov 
+ 0.1 + 17.8 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − + 4.7 + 0.0 + 17.1 − 0.2 + 4.6          Dec 
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.0 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan 
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − − 2.8 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb 
+ 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar 
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr 
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May
− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          June
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          July
− 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 2.5 + 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.1 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.8 − 7.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 − − 0.2 − + 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.2 + 0.6          Oct 
+ 0.4 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.7          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 16.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.1 − + 4.4 + 0.0 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 4.2          Dec 
− 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 0.8 − 9.8 + 9.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 2.6          Mar 
+ 0.5 − 11.8 + 7.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 2.4 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 2.5 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 3.1          May
+ 0.2 + 14.9 − 2.4 + 0.1 − + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 2.9          June
− 1.0 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 1.3          July
− 2.5 + 9.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 3.5          Aug + 0.1 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.3 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 + 0.8          Sep 
− 0.1 − 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingeuro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2004 Mar                  5 826.8 130.3 168.1 28.9 139.2 17.5 7.2 7.2 −
                              12 819.7 130.3 167.0 27.6 139.4 17.3 7.4 7.4 −
                              19 822.8 130.3 166.6 27.6 138.9 17.2 7.2 7.2 −
                              26 830.3 130.3 167.0 28.5 138.6 16.6 7.2 7.2 −
         Apr                  2 3 847.1 3 136.5 3 171.6 3 29.3 3 142.3 3 17.8 8.5 8.5 −
                                8 848.1 136.5 171.4 29.3 142.2 16.8 8.3 8.3 −
                              16 835.3 136.5 171.2 29.3 141.9 17.0 8.0 8.0 −
                              23 842.7 136.5 171.7 29.7 142.0 17.5 7.4 7.4 −
                              30 853.5 136.5 173.6 29.7 143.9 17.7 7.4 7.4 −
         May                 7 846.2 136.5 175.0 29.7 145.3 17.4 7.1 7.1 −
                              14 842.0 136.2 174.2 29.8 144.4 17.3 7.4 7.4 −
                              21 860.0 136.2 174.4 29.6 144.9 17.2 7.4 7.4 −
                              28 867.3 136.2 173.0 29.6 143.4 16.7 7.4 7.4 −
         June                 4 870.1 136.2 173.3 29.5 143.8 16.2 7.7 7.7 −
                              11 869.1 136.1 174.7 29.5 145.2 16.0 7.2 7.2 −
                              18 867.8 136.1 174.8 29.2 145.5 16.0 7.0 7.0 −
                              25 895.8 136.1 173.9 28.6 145.4 16.5 7.1 7.1 −
2004 July                 2 3 882.4 3 127.4 3 174.1 28.4 3 145.7 16.6 6.9 6.9 −
                                9 881.0 127.4 175.6 28.4 147.2 16.4 6.7 6.7 −
                              16 868.8 127.4 173.7 28.2 145.6 16.9 7.0 7.0 −
                              23 887.6 127.4 174.8 28.1 146.7 17.0 7.7 7.7 −
                              30 883.7 127.4 172.1 28.0 144.1 17.3 7.9 7.9 −
         Aug                  6 880.2 127.4 170.7 28.1 142.7 17.8 7.7 7.7 −
                              13 871.6 127.4 170.1 28.1 142.0 18.2 7.7 7.7 −
                              20 872.0 127.4 173.0 27.8 145.2 17.1 7.3 7.3 −
                              27 881.9 127.4 170.0 27.8 142.3 16.8 7.8 7.8 −
         Sep                  3 876.6 127.4 168.8 27.6 141.2 17.9 7.7 7.7 −
                              10 874.6 127.4 167.5 27.4 140.1 17.6 7.9 7.9 −
                              17 875.2 127.4 167.7 27.5 140.2 17.5 7.6 7.6 −
                              24 885.8 127.4 168.8 27.2 141.6 17.3 8.1 8.1 −
         Oct                  1 3 882.3 3 130.7 3 165.3 26.5 3 138.8 17.1 7.6 7.6 −
                                8 880.6 130.6 166.4 26.4 139.9 17.4 6.9 6.9 −
                              15 868.4 130.6 163.4 26.3 137.2 19.2 7.5 7.5 −
                              22 875.4 130.6 162.3 26.1 136.2 18.5 7.5 7.5 −
                              29 893.8 130.6 164.9 26.0 138.9 17.6 7.7 7.7 −
         Nov                  5 893.2 130.4 166.1 25.9 140.2 17.9 7.4 7.4 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Dec 3 240.0 36.2 3 48.8 8.3 3 40.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2003          Jan 233.9 36.2 48.9 8.2 40.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 236.2 36.2 49.2 8.2 41.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 239.2 3 34.1 3 48.4 8.3 3 40.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 230.5 34.1 47.0 8.2 38.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 258.1 34.1 47.8 8.3 39.6 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 258.2 3 33.4 3 45.0 8.3 3 36.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 246.9 33.4 44.8 8.3 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 248.9 33.4 45.5 8.3 37.1 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 257.5 3 36.5 3 44.7 8.5 3 36.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 257.6 36.5 45.0 8.5 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 254.4 36.5 44.5 8.5 36.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 267.7 36.5 3 40.1 7.6 3 32.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2004          Jan 258.1 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 258.2 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 256.2 3 38.3 3 41.5 7.6 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 268.0 38.3 42.1 7.9 34.2 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 276.6 38.3 41.5 7.8 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 290.3 3 35.8 3 41.2 7.4 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 295.9 35.8 40.4 7.4 33.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 284.2 35.8 39.8 7.4 32.4 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 283.6
3 36.7 3 39.1 7.0 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 293.7 36.7 38.2 7.0 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
285.9 220.7 65.0 − − 0.2 0.0 1.2 68.0 42.6 106.0 2004 Mar                  5
277.7 212.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.2 1.2 68.9 42.6 107.3                               12
281.5 216.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.3 69.0 42.6 107.1                               19
289.5 224.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.2 68.9 42.6 106.9                               26
293.0 218.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 3 68.5 42.6 3 107.5          Apr                  2
293.5 218.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 69.9 42.6 108.1                                 8
280.5 205.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 70.0 42.6 108.4                               16
286.0 211.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.9 71.2 42.5 108.9                               23
295.1 220.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 71.0 42.5 108.7                               30
286.1 211.0 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 1.1 71.8 42.6 108.6          May                  7
282.0 207.0 75.0 − − 0.0 − 0.6 72.5 42.6 109.3                               14
298.6 223.5 75.0 − − 0.1 − 0.7 73.6 42.6 109.4                               21
308.2 232.5 75.0 − − 0.6 0.0 0.9 72.8 42.6 109.6                               28
311.1 236.0 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 0.7 72.9 42.6 109.4          June                  4
308.6 233.5 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 0.9 73.6 42.6 109.4                               11
307.0 232.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 73.8 42.6 109.6                               18
335.2 260.0 75.0 − − 0.2 0.0 0.8 73.7 42.6 109.9                               25
331.0 256.0 75.0 − − 0.0 − 0.7 3 73.4 42.1 3 110.2 2004 July                  2
328.0 253.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.5 73.8 42.1 110.5                                 9
317.5 242.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.8 73.2 42.1 110.2                               16
334.5 259.5 75.0 − − − 0.0 0.9 72.9 42.1 110.5                               23
333.0 258.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.9 67.5 42.1 115.5                               30
330.0 255.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 0.8 68.0 42.1 115.7          Aug                  6
322.5 247.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 68.0 42.1 114.7                               13
321.0 246.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 1.4 67.9 42.1 114.9                               20
334.0 259.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 67.9 42.1 114.6                               27
329.0 254.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.5 67.9 42.1 114.3          Sep                  3
327.6 252.5 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 1.5 67.9 42.1 115.2                               10
328.0 253.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.6 68.0 42.1 115.4                               17
337.5 262.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.6 67.6 42.1 115.4                               24
334.0 259.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.8 67.4 42.1 3 116.3          Oct                  1
330.5 255.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.0 68.0 42.1 116.7                                 8
319.5 244.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.8 67.5 42.1 116.8                               15
328.0 253.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.8 67.6 42.1 117.1                               22
343.0 268.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 1.9 68.5 42.1 117.6                               29
339.5 264.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.2 69.5 42.1 118.1          Nov                  5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
125.5 87.1 36.1 − − 2.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8 2002          Dec 
124.3 87.5 36.6 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.8 2003          Jan 
126.3 91.6 34.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Feb 
130.9 98.4 32.1 − − 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.1          Mar 
125.0 92.5 32.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Apr 
151.8 118.7 32.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          May155.0 122.5 32.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          June
144.0 115.1 28.8 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.9          July
145.2 116.0 29.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Aug 151.4 121.5 29.7 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4
3 20.1          Sep 
133.0 101.9 31.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 38.4          Oct 145.4 115.0 30.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 23.3          Nov 162.3 129.9 32.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Dec 
157.4 117.4 40.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0 2004          Jan 
157.6 109.9 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 
141.7 94.1 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 30.1          Mar 
153.7 104.3 49.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.1          Apr 
173.2 123.7 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          May189.4 139.9 49.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          June
196.0 145.1 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
184.8 135.3 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Aug 173.6 127.4 45.6 − − 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.5          Sep 
195.1 148.1 46.9 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0          Oct 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  2,3 liabilities
 Eurosystem 5
 
2004 Mar                  5 826.8 423.7 137.7 137.6 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 56.6 50.8 5.9
                              12 819.7 424.1 135.2 135.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 51.8 46.1 5.7
                              19 822.8 423.8 133.2 133.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 57.4 51.8 5.6
                              26 830.3 423.8 131.9 131.8 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 66.7 61.1 5.5
         Apr                  2 6 847.1 431.0 140.2 140.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 54.9 48.9 5.9
                                8 848.1 441.4 135.1 135.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 51.6 45.6 6.0
                              16 835.3 435.8 135.2 135.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 44.3 38.3 6.0
                              23 842.7 432.0 131.1 131.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 59.0 53.4 5.7
                              30 853.5 435.4 133.6 133.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 62.1 56.3 5.8
         May                 7 846.2 439.8 136.8 136.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 46.1 40.2 5.8
                              14 842.0 440.1 136.7 136.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 43.3 37.5 5.8
                              21 860.0 441.1 137.4 137.3 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 58.3 52.3 6.0
                              28 867.3 443.7 138.7 136.0 2.8 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 64.0 58.2 5.8
         June                 4 870.1 447.4 139.3 139.1 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 63.6 57.5 6.1
                              11 869.1 448.4 141.1 141.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 59.0 53.0 6.0
                              18 867.8 447.6 140.4 140.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 57.7 51.5 6.2
                              25 895.8 448.1 136.8 136.7 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 88.0 82.4 5.6
2004 July                 2 6 882.4 454.5 140.8 140.3 0.5 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 73.1 67.2 5.9
                                9 881.0 458.2 137.6 137.5 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 70.7 65.0 5.7
                              16 868.8 459.2 140.1 140.1 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 56.1 50.4 5.6
                              23 887.6 458.7 136.8 136.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 78.2 72.5 5.6
                              30 883.7 463.1 131.3 131.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 77.1 71.2 5.9
         Aug                  6 880.2 467.9 140.1 140.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 59.7 53.7 6.0
                              13 871.6 466.7 138.7 138.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 55.9 49.9 5.9
                              20 872.0 462.2 140.4 140.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 56.1 50.2 5.9
                              27 881.9 460.0 137.9 137.9 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 74.0 68.4 5.6
         Sep                  3 876.6 464.3 137.7 137.6 0.1 − − − 0.1 1.1 64.1 58.3 5.8
                              10 874.6 465.3 137.4 137.4 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 62.9 57.1 5.8
                              17 875.2 463.9 138.5 138.4 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 61.6 55.7 5.9
                              24 885.8 462.6 137.2 137.2 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 73.9 68.0 5.9
         Oct                  1 6 882.3 466.8 142.5 142.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 60.9 54.9 6.0
                                8 880.6 469.9 137.5 137.3 0.2 − − − 0.1 1.1 59.8 53.7 6.1
                              15 868.4 469.1 138.8 138.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 47.6 41.7 5.9
                              22 875.4 467.3 137.8 137.8 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 58.7 52.5 6.2
                              29 893.8 471.3 122.0 122.0 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 84.3 78.1 6.3
         Nov                  5 893.2 474.0 142.5 141.3 1.2 − − − 0.1 − 62.5 56.8 5.7
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Dec 6 240.0 104.5 44.8 44.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
2003          Jan 233.9 94.5 40.9 40.8 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Feb 236.2 96.1 38.1 38.1 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.5         Mar 
6 239.2 98.1 48.1 48.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Apr 230.5 101.8 36.4 36.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         May 258.1 103.2 36.3 36.2 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         June
6 258.2 105.2 38.8 38.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 246.9 108.5 39.6 39.5 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Aug 248.9 108.6 41.0 41.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 
6 257.5 109.2 41.7 41.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 257.6 110.8 42.0 42.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         Nov 254.4 112.7 36.4 36.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5         Dec 
6 267.7 121.4 44.6 44.5 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.6 0.1 0.5
2004          Jan 258.1 112.4 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Feb 258.2 113.3 36.8 36.7 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Mar 
6 256.2 115.0 31.0 31.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.4 0.4
         Apr 268.0 117.7 38.3 38.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         May 276.6 120.8 43.4 43.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         June
6 290.3 122.3 36.6 36.6 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 295.9 126.0 39.3 39.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Aug 284.2 125.2 41.4 40.9 0.4 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 283.6 126.5 40.1 40.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 293.7 128.2 35.5 35.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2From 2002, euro
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial banknotes and up to end-2002, banknotes still in circulation issued by the
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states national central banks of the Eurosystem (see also footnote 4). —(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and 3According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euroter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
3 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  4 
Eurosystem 5
 
10.0 0.5 8.9 8.9 − 5.8 51.0 − 69.1 62.1 2004 Mar                  5
9.1 0.5 9.7 9.7 − 5.8 51.0 − 69.1 62.1                               12
9.0 0.4 9.3 9.3 − 5.8 51.5 − 69.1 62.1                               19
9.0 0.4 9.3 9.3 − 5.8 51.5 − 69.1 61.6                               26
8.6 0.3 9.6 9.6 − 5.9 6 55.2 − 6 80.6 59.5          Apr                  2
8.6 0.3 9.0 9.0 − 5.9 55.0 − 80.6 59.3                                 8
8.5 0.3 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 55.6 − 80.6 59.3                               16
8.4 0.3 8.8 8.8 − 5.9 56.0 − 80.6 59.3                               23
8.6 0.3 10.3 10.3 − 5.9 56.2 − 80.6 59.3                               30
8.2 0.3 11.2 11.2 − 5.9 56.6 − 80.6 59.4          May                  7
8.1 0.3 10.2 10.2 − 5.9 56.1 − 80.6 59.4                               14
8.0 0.3 10.2 10.2 − 5.9 57.3 − 80.6 59.5                               21
8.0 0.3 8.2 8.2 − 5.9 56.6 − 80.6 59.8                               28
7.8 0.3 8.2 8.2 − 5.9 55.9 − 80.6 59.8          June                  4
7.9 0.3 9.3 9.3 − 5.9 55.6 − 80.6 59.8                               11
7.8 0.3 9.9 9.9 − 5.9 56.5 − 80.6 59.8                               18
8.0 0.2 10.3 10.3 − 5.9 56.8 − 80.6 59.8                               25
9.0 0.2 11.5 11.5 − 5.9 6 56.0 − 6 70.2 59.8 2004 July                  2
8.2 0.2 13.1 13.1 − 5.9 55.8 − 70.2 59.8                                 9
8.2 0.2 11.3 11.3 − 5.9 56.6 − 70.2 59.8                               16
8.6 0.2 11.5 11.5 − 5.9 56.6 − 70.2 59.8                               23
8.8 0.2 9.4 9.4 − 5.9 56.8 − 70.2 59.8                               30
8.5 0.2 9.8 9.8 − 5.9 56.8 − 70.2 59.8          Aug                  6
8.7 0.2 9.9 9.9 − 5.9 54.5 − 70.2 59.8                               13
9.0 0.2 11.9 11.9 − 5.9 55.1 − 70.2 59.8                               20
9.0 0.2 8.8 8.8 − 5.9 55.0 − 70.2 59.8                               27
9.3 0.3 8.9 8.9 − 5.9 55.1 − 70.2 59.8          Sep                  3
9.1 0.3 7.4 7.4 − 5.9 55.2 − 70.2 59.8                               10
9.1 0.4 7.4 7.4 − 5.9 57.3 − 70.2 59.8                               17
9.3 0.4 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 56.9 − 70.2 59.8                               24
9.2 0.3 8.2 8.2 − 5.8 6 56.9 − 70.7 59.9          Oct                  1
9.2 0.3 9.6 9.6 − 5.8 56.8 − 70.7 59.9                                 8
9.1 0.3 8.6 8.6 − 5.8 57.3 − 70.7 59.9                               15
9.0 0.2 6.9 6.9 − 5.8 57.9 − 70.7 59.9                               22
9.4 0.3 8.8 8.8 − 5.8 60.2 − 70.7 59.9                               29
9.4 0.3 10.3 10.3 − 5.8 57.7 − 70.7 59.9          Nov                  5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
7.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.6 11.1 29.1 6 34.2 5.0 2002          Dec 
7.8 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.6 17.6 29.6 34.2 5.0 2003          Jan 
7.3 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 19.1 31.9 34.2 5.0          Feb 
7.1 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 6 11.7 33.3 6 30.4 5.0          Mar 
7.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 11.6 34.2 30.4 5.0          Apr 7.3 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 34.5 36.6 30.4 5.0          May7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 31.3 37.3
6 28.2 5.0          June
7.3 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 14.9 38.4 28.2 5.0          July7.4 0.0 3.5 3.5 − 1.5 12.4 40.8 28.2 5.0          Aug 7.3 0.0 3.6 3.6 − 1.5 16.2 42.2
6 30.2 5.0          Sep 
7.4 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.5 12.9 43.4 30.2 5.0          Oct 7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 12.9 44.4 30.2 5.0          Nov 7.7 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.4
6 10.5 44.6 6 29.1 5.0          Dec 
7.3 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 11.4 48.1 29.1 5.0 2004          Jan 
7.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.4 12.7 49.2 29.1 5.0          Feb 6.5 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.5 10.8 50.4
6 32.2 5.0          Mar 
6.2 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 10.9 52.3 32.2 5.0          Apr 5.8 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 11.5 53.3 32.2 5.0          May5.6 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 32.2 53.9
6 29.3 5.0          June
5.9 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.5 30.3 55.6 29.3 5.0          July5.8 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 15.2 58.6 29.3 5.0          Aug 5.6 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4 12.0 60.9 29.6 5.0          Sep 
5.9 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 24.1 62.3 29.6 5.0          Oct 
 
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of eu ro
related to euro-banknote issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem
euro banknotes in circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly claim/ liability related to banknote issue“. — 4For the Deutsche Bundes-
basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro bank- bank: from 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-notes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The note 2). — 5Source: ECB. — 6Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2002          Dec 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003          Jan 6,380.7 13.2 2,104.3 1,748.5 1,136.2 612.3 355.8 277.0 78.8 3,348.8 3,101.1 2,501.4 2,237.9
         Feb 6,424.9 13.2 2,124.3 1,751.7 1,142.1 611.7 370.5 289.5 81.1 3,347.4 3,097.7 2,501.7 2,239.2         Mar 6,434.8 12.9 2,121.5 1,747.2 1,135.0 614.4 371.9 288.9 83.1 3,346.7 3,100.4 2,498.0 2,238.1
         Apr 6,430.3 13.8 2,107.6 1,732.2 1,118.6 613.6 375.4 291.6 83.8 3,348.8 3,102.2 2,499.1 2,234.6
         May 6,467.7 14.0 2,144.0 1,756.9 1,143.6 613.2 387.1 303.3 83.8 3,347.2 3,101.9 2,499.2 2,232.0         June 6,472.9 13.3 2,139.0 1,748.0 1,137.1 610.9 390.9 305.4 85.5 3,330.2 3,089.9 2,502.9 2,239.7
         July 6,425.7 13.3 2,113.5 1,728.1 1,109.7 618.4 385.3 297.4 88.0 3,330.2 3,093.7 2,494.1 2,231.1
         Aug 6,395.1 13.5 2,105.5 1,720.3 1,104.5 615.8 385.2 296.8 88.3 3,318.3 3,084.7 2,495.6 2,231.4         Sep 6,403.1 13.3 2,099.4 1,712.2 1,095.3 616.9 387.2 297.5 89.7 3,332.6 3,089.6 2,504.9 2,245.2
         Oct 6,399.3 13.6 2,092.9 1,715.9 1,096.1 619.9 376.9 285.3 91.7 3,328.9 3,086.1 2,496.9 2,242.9
         Nov 6,456.1 13.1 2,126.2 1,742.4 1,117.5 624.9 383.7 292.5 91.3 3,350.9 3,103.5 2,505.0 2,246.9         Dec 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004          Jan 6,424.2 13.2 2,084.1 1,713.6 1,101.3 612.4 370.4 278.3 92.1 3,329.8 3,078.3 2,489.0 2,230.4
         Feb 6,448.7 13.2 2,100.2 1,722.7 1,101.9 620.8 377.5 282.5 94.9 3,341.8 3,081.9 2,483.5 2,230.2         Mar 6,506.7 12.7 2,106.5 1,725.6 1,098.7 626.9 380.9 282.2 98.7 3,370.4 3,102.9 2,491.9 2,228.9
         Apr 6,568.8 12.9 2,132.5 1,749.7 1,115.1 634.6 382.9 282.4 100.4 3,381.2 3,110.1 2,506.6 2,230.4
         May 6,583.5 13.8 2,163.3 1,771.6 1,127.6 644.0 391.7 289.0 102.7 3,369.7 3,101.0 2,497.0 2,229.7         June 6,551.3 13.1 2,150.2 1,746.3 1,112.7 633.6 404.0 299.5 104.4 3,360.1 3,090.4 2,483.2 2,229.4
         July 6,574.9 13.2 2,171.4 1,765.1 1,130.4 634.7 406.3 303.2 103.0 3,368.3 3,093.3 2,477.1 2,225.1
         Aug 6,567.5 13.2 2,167.2 1,759.6 1,126.4 633.2 407.6 301.7 105.9 3,357.7 3,086.1 2,470.3 2,221.8         Sep 6,598.4 13.2 2,165.4 1,759.8 1,123.8 636.0 405.6 295.9 109.6 3,360.9 3,090.8 2,477.9 2,229.6
 Changes 1
1996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 − 0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.21999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.12002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.4
2003          Jan − 14.6 − 4.7 − 25.1 − 30.7 − 28.1 − 2.7 5.7 5.3 0.4 18.3 17.1 3.7 1.4
         Feb 41.3 0.0 17.0 3.2 5.9 − 2.8 13.9 12.5 1.4 0.7 − 1.3 2.4 3.4         Mar 14.1 − 0.4 − 2.9 − 4.3 − 7.1 2.8 1.4 − 0.6 2.1 4.6 7.8 1.4 3.9
         Apr 4.5 1.0 − 13.7 − 17.2 − 16.5 − 0.8 3.5 2.7 0.8 4.9 4.2 3.2 − 1.2
         May 57.3 0.2 36.6 24.8 25.1 − 0.3 11.9 11.8 0.1 1.9 2.5 2.9 − 0.0         June − 5.9 − 0.7 − 5.2 − 8.9 − 6.5 − 2.4 3.8 2.0 1.7 − 18.0 − 12.5 3.2 7.2
         July − 49.6 − 0.1 − 25.7 − 20.1 − 27.4 7.3 − 5.6 − 8.0 2.4 0.6 4.5 − 8.1 − 8.1
         Aug − 43.7 0.3 − 8.1 − 7.9 − 5.2 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 − 13.6 − 10.0 0.5 − 0.6         Sep 26.2 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 8.1 − 9.2 1.2 2.1 0.7 1.4 17.7 7.4 11.8 16.2
         Oct − 5.0 0.3 − 6.5 4.1 0.8 3.3 − 10.6 − 12.6 2.0 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 1.7
         Nov 67.6 − 0.5 33.6 26.6 21.4 5.1 7.1 7.2 − 0.1 24.5 19.2 9.8 5.6         Dec − 8.6 4.2 − 14.4 − 10.3 − 0.7 − 9.6 − 4.1 − 4.7 0.7 − 10.1 − 13.7 − 1.4 0.3
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 4.1 − 26.5 − 18.1 − 15.5 − 2.6 − 8.5 − 9.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 4.6 − 6.6
         Feb 26.4 0.0 17.3 9.0 0.4 8.6 8.3 4.2 4.1 16.6 8.0 − 1.1 2.5         Mar 47.2 − 0.5 6.2 2.8 − 3.2 6.0 3.4 − 0.3 3.7 28.7 21.7 9.0 − 0.9
         Apr 57.9 0.1 26.1 24.1 16.4 7.7 1.9 0.2 1.7 10.8 7.1 14.6 1.4
         May 19.5 1.0 30.7 21.9 12.5 9.3 8.9 6.5 2.3 − 10.4 − 8.2 − 8.8 0.1         June − 33.2 − 0.7 − 13.0 − 25.2 − 14.9 − 10.4 12.2 10.6 1.7 − 9.2 − 10.1 − 13.2 0.2
         July 21.8 0.1 23.4 18.8 17.7 1.2 4.6 3.7 0.9 6.4 3.3 − 5.6 − 3.8
         Aug − 5.3 − 0.1 − 7.0 − 5.5 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 4.3 2.9 − 7.3 − 6.8 − 6.4 − 2.9         Sep 40.7 0.0 − 1.6 0.3 − 2.6 2.9 − 1.9 − 5.8 3.8 5.5 6.4 9.3 9.5
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.7 645.6 166.4 2003
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002          Dec 
263.4 599.8 453.0 146.7 247.6 121.8 60.5 125.8 26.5 99.3 738.3 591.8 176.2 2003          Jan 
262.4 596.0 447.3 148.7 249.7 125.6 64.6 124.1 26.2 97.9 757.7 612.1 182.2          Feb 
259.9 602.4 444.0 158.4 246.3 126.8 64.5 119.5 26.2 93.3 778.6 630.9 175.1          Mar 
264.5 603.1 445.8 157.4 246.6 129.9 66.2 116.7 25.2 91.5 787.6 641.1 172.5          Apr 
267.2 602.7 439.8 162.9 245.3 130.7 66.7 114.6 26.5 88.2 792.4 644.3 170.2          May263.2 587.0 434.6 152.4 240.2 126.9 61.9 113.4 24.6 88.7 827.6 668.9 162.8          June
263.0 599.6 444.9 154.7 236.5 126.7 62.3 109.8 24.9 84.9 811.5 651.6 157.3          July
264.1 589.1 440.6 148.5 233.6 129.2 65.0 104.4 24.1 80.3 801.2 642.0 156.6          Aug 259.8 584.6 435.2 149.4 243.1 129.7 64.7 113.4 23.4 90.0 795.8 642.4 161.9          Sep 
254.0 589.2 436.6 152.6 242.8 127.6 60.6 115.2 25.1 90.1 800.6 643.9 163.3          Oct 
258.1 598.5 442.5 156.0 247.4 132.9 64.7 114.5 25.6 89.0 803.7 648.2 162.2          Nov 256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.7 645.6 166.4          Dec 
258.6 589.2 440.2 149.0 251.5 132.0 61.2 119.5 25.6 93.9 843.7 683.0 153.4 2004          Jan 
253.3 598.3 432.1 166.2 260.0 136.0 65.2 124.0 25.0 99.0 839.5 680.6 154.0          Feb 
263.0 611.0 444.9 166.2 267.4 137.6 67.0 129.8 24.9 104.9 859.1 697.2 158.0          Mar 
276.2 603.5 437.2 166.3 271.1 139.4 68.8 131.7 25.8 105.9 884.1 722.1 158.1          Apr 
267.2 604.1 431.4 172.7 268.7 137.6 66.3 131.1 25.8 105.3 875.0 707.5 161.6          May253.9 607.2 426.2 181.0 269.7 138.4 66.5 131.3 25.7 105.6 867.0 695.6 160.8          June
252.0 616.2 434.4 181.8 275.0 142.3 67.7 132.8 26.4 106.4 860.7 687.7 161.3          July
248.4 615.8 429.9 186.0 271.6 137.7 65.0 133.9 26.2 107.6 871.6 696.5 157.9          Aug 248.3 612.9 425.8 187.1 270.1 138.8 65.3 131.3 25.7 105.6 899.4 725.5 159.6          Sep 
Changes 1
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 199630.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 − 2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 199830.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 113.4 98.5 − 38.7 2003
2.3 13.4 4.6 8.8 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.7 3.0 1.1 2.0 9.4 10.1 − 12.5 2003          Jan 
− 1.0 − 3.7 − 5.7 2.0 2.0 5.5 5.8 − 3.5 − 2.0 − 1.4 19.9 20.7 3.6          Feb − 2.5 6.4 − 3.3 9.7 − 3.2 1.3 0.0 − 4.5 0.1 − 4.5 24.4 21.8 − 11.6          Mar 
4.4 1.0 1.8 − 0.9 0.7 3.4 1.9 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.7 16.1 16.3 − 3.8          Apr 2.9 − 0.4 − 5.9 5.5 − 0.6 1.1 1.0 − 1.7 1.5 − 3.1 21.8 18.8 − 3.2          May
− 4.0 − 15.7 − 5.2 − 10.5 − 5.6 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.9 0.5 25.4 16.1 − 7.5          June
0.0 12.6 10.3 2.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 0.3 − 3.6 0.3 − 3.9 − 18.6 − 19.0 − 5.9          July1.1 − 10.5 − 4.3 − 6.2 − 3.6 2.2 2.4 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 4.8 − 21.0 − 19.0 − 1.2          Aug 
− 4.3 − 4.4 − 5.4 0.9 10.3 1.0 0.3 9.3 − 0.5 9.9 10.2 14.5 4.4          Sep 
− 5.6 5.3 1.4 3.9 0.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 2.2 1.6 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 3.5          Oct 
4.1 9.4 6.0 3.4 5.3 5.7 4.3 − 0.4 0.6 − 1.0 13.0 12.4 − 3.0          Nov 
− 1.7 − 12.4 − 2.9 − 9.5 3.6 1.4 − 1.4 2.2 0.5 1.7 13.4 9.4 − 1.7          Dec 
2.1 3.6 0.6 3.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 2.7 − 0.4 3.1 34.7 32.1 − 18.8 2004          Jan 
− 3.7 9.1 − 8.0 17.2 8.6 4.0 4.0 4.6 − 0.6 5.2 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 4.8          Feb 
9.8 12.7 12.7 − 0.0 7.0 1.4 1.6 5.6 − 0.1 5.8 10.7 8.6 2.1          Mar 
13.2 − 7.5 − 7.6 0.1 3.6 1.8 1.7 1.9 0.9 1.0 21.3 21.2 − 0.4          Apr 
− 8.9 0.6 − 5.9 6.5 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 2.4 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.4 − 10.4 2.6          May
− 13.4 3.1 − 5.2 8.3 0.9 0.8 0.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.2 − 8.9 − 14.1 − 1.5          June
− 1.8 9.0 8.2 0.8 3.1 1.5 1.2 1.5 0.8 0.8 − 8.2 − 9.8 0.1          July
− 3.6 − 0.3 − 4.5 4.2 − 0.6 − 1.7 0.2 1.1 − 0.1 1.2 12.6 10.6 − 3.6          Aug − 0.2 − 2.9 − 4.1 1.1 − 0.9 1.5 0.7 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 35.9 36.2 0.9          Sep 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 End of year or month
 
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2002          Dec 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003          Jan 6,380.7 1,457.2 1,213.2 244.0 2,160.0 2,024.7 564.4 882.9 275.8 577.4 477.0 88.5 9.1
         Feb 6,424.9 1,466.4 1,224.6 241.9 2,173.4 2,036.7 571.1 886.4 272.1 579.2 479.9 88.5 8.0         Mar 6,434.8 1,471.5 1,218.2 253.2 2,175.3 2,040.7 578.3 883.1 266.2 579.3 481.6 88.0 7.7
         Apr 6,430.3 1,455.5 1,200.9 254.6 2,176.2 2,044.3 585.8 880.6 264.8 577.9 482.7 86.5 8.2
         May 6,467.7 1,508.5 1,253.9 254.6 2,188.9 2,053.8 591.4 885.3 270.9 577.1 483.4 87.4 8.8         June 6,472.9 1,509.2 1,252.8 256.4 2,194.2 2,059.3 608.2 874.5 260.2 576.7 484.4 86.7 9.0
         July 6,425.7 1,457.9 1,207.6 250.3 2,182.5 2,051.4 595.2 879.5 259.0 576.8 486.5 85.7 9.3
         Aug 6,395.1 1,450.5 1,198.0 252.5 2,193.0 2,061.5 597.8 885.7 261.3 578.0 489.3 85.5 8.9         Sep 6,403.1 1,451.2 1,188.3 262.9 2,187.8 2,057.4 607.3 871.8 248.1 578.3 490.2 84.2 9.6
         Oct 6,399.3 1,439.5 1,179.5 260.0 2,188.2 2,057.3 609.5 868.5 243.9 579.4 491.2 85.4 10.7
         Nov 6,456.1 1,463.6 1,214.6 249.0 2,211.2 2,082.4 632.7 869.4 244.7 580.3 491.9 83.1 9.9         Dec 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004          Jan 6,424.2 1,461.1 1,212.6 248.5 2,209.5 2,082.6 630.5 861.5 233.5 590.6 502.1 80.9 9.5
         Feb 6,448.7 1,454.4 1,215.7 238.7 2,212.3 2,085.6 633.8 860.3 230.1 591.5 503.3 79.5 10.8         Mar 6,506.7 1,459.9 1,203.6 256.3 2,214.3 2,088.7 632.9 864.4 230.9 591.4 503.5 77.8 13.1
         Apr 6,568.8 1,482.1 1,227.2 254.9 2,219.0 2,097.2 641.7 864.4 225.6 591.2 504.3 74.5 10.6
         May 6,583.5 1,496.5 1,251.2 245.4 2,229.4 2,105.3 640.0 874.8 232.1 590.6 504.6 75.8 9.4         June 6,551.3 1,501.5 1,256.7 244.8 2,228.7 2,101.4 640.7 870.7 224.0 590.0 504.3 76.7 12.4
         July 6,574.9 1,524.1 1,274.6 249.6 2,225.5 2,103.0 634.7 877.7 228.7 590.6 504.9 72.9 9.7
         Aug 6,567.5 1,510.2 1,259.4 250.8 2,231.7 2,105.7 636.2 878.2 228.9 591.3 505.6 74.0 9.8         Sep 6,598.4 1,495.3 1,242.0 253.3 2,237.6 2,113.5 645.8 876.6 225.6 591.2 505.7 76.0 14.4
 Changes 1
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 − 41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.01997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 − 3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 − 0.31998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2003          Jan − 14.6 − 19.2 − 22.2 3.0 − 14.2 − 13.7 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.2 2.1 4.1 0.3 0.9
         Feb 41.3 9.1 11.4 − 2.3 14.3 11.9 6.7 3.4 − 3.7 1.8 3.0 1.0 − 1.1         Mar 14.1 5.9 − 5.9 11.9 2.2 4.1 7.4 − 3.3 − 5.9 0.1 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3
         Apr 4.5 − 14.0 − 16.5 2.5 1.6 3.9 7.7 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 1.4 1.1 − 1.2 0.5
         May 57.3 54.5 52.0 2.5 13.9 10.2 6.1 4.9 6.3 − 0.8 0.7 1.5 0.7         June − 5.9 − 1.2 − 1.7 0.6 4.6 5.1 16.4 − 10.9 − 10.8 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.0
         July − 49.6 − 52.1 − 45.6 − 6.4 − 11.8 − 7.9 − 13.0 5.1 − 1.1 0.1 2.1 − 1.1 0.5
         Aug − 43.7 − 10.0 − 10.5 0.5 9.7 9.6 2.3 6.1 2.3 1.3 2.8 − 0.5 − 0.5         Sep 26.2 4.5 − 8.4 12.9 − 4.0 − 3.5 10.0 − 13.7 − 13.1 0.2 0.9 − 0.8 0.8
         Oct − 5.0 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 0.3 − 0.1 2.2 − 3.4 − 4.2 1.1 1.0 1.1 1.1
         Nov 67.6 26.1 35.8 − 9.7 23.6 25.4 23.5 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7         Dec − 8.6 10.4 15.9 − 5.5 4.4 5.1 − 10.2 5.3 3.4 10.0 8.9 − 1.0 − 0.5
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 11.1 − 17.2 6.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 8.2 − 13.1 − 14.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 0.2
         Feb 26.4 − 6.3 3.3 − 9.6 3.0 3.1 4.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 0.9 1.2 − 1.4 1.3         Mar 47.2 4.0 − 12.6 16.6 1.6 2.8 − 1.1 4.0 0.7 − 0.1 0.1 − 1.8 2.3
         Apr 57.9 21.3 23.2 − 1.9 4.7 8.7 8.6 0.3 − 5.1 − 0.2 0.9 − 3.5 − 2.6
         May 19.5 15.3 24.2 − 8.9 10.7 8.3 − 1.5 10.4 6.6 − 0.6 0.3 1.4 − 1.2         June − 33.2 4.7 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 4.0 0.3 − 3.7 − 7.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.8 3.0
         July 21.8 22.3 17.8 4.6 − 3.3 1.5 − 5.8 6.6 4.3 0.7 0.5 − 3.9 − 2.8
         Aug − 5.3 − 13.5 − 14.9 1.5 7.3 3.7 1.6 1.5 0.2 0.7 0.7 1.2 0.1         Sep 40.7 − 13.0 − 16.7 3.7 6.5 8.3 9.9 − 1.5 − 3.2 − 0.1 0.1 2.2 4.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  
7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002          Dec 
74.8 10.4 4.7 3.6 46.9 45.2 7.6 38.5 1,461.1 138.9 602.9 350.5 305.9 2003          Jan 
75.9 12.3 4.6 3.6 48.2 45.1 10.9 39.6 1,468.4 145.7 606.7 354.1 305.4          Feb 
75.7 13.0 4.6 3.6 46.6 45.2 11.2 40.2 1,467.9 143.5 612.1 353.1 303.6          Mar 
73.8 12.3 4.5 3.5 45.5 44.9 11.3 39.6 1,468.6 142.6 620.2 351.6 307.2          Apr 
74.1 13.3 4.4 3.5 47.7 44.4 12.3 39.4 1,463.3 133.3 599.0 351.0 305.4          May73.4 12.2 4.4 3.5 48.1 44.6 10.8 38.7 1,470.0 128.7 594.8 348.2 307.0          June
72.1 12.1 4.3 3.4 45.3 43.8 10.9 38.4 1,482.8 133.0 603.6 348.1 301.6          July
72.4 12.8 4.2 3.4 45.9 43.8 12.4 38.1 1,480.0 122.1 579.2 344.0 298.0          Aug 70.5 12.0 4.1 3.3 46.2 43.4 15.6 38.0 1,485.5 124.4 579.7 341.0 304.3          Sep 
70.6 12.7 4.0 3.3 45.5 43.0 21.1 37.6 1,494.1 126.2 574.2 344.6 299.9          Oct 
69.3 11.4 4.0 3.2 45.7 43.6 20.0 37.1 1,502.7 131.5 574.6 343.0 304.0          Nov 68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8          Dec 
67.5 11.9 3.8 3.1 45.9 45.2 16.6 36.4 1,493.9 128.6 585.4 336.8 284.5 2004          Jan 
64.9 10.9 3.8 3.1 47.3 45.8 17.5 36.2 1,503.7 127.3 604.4 332.2 288.0          Feb 
60.9 10.1 3.7 3.1 47.8 46.2 18.2 35.8 1,532.3 134.7 623.1 330.1 292.8          Mar 
60.2 10.2 3.7 3.1 47.2 46.2 17.3 35.7 1,549.0 135.3 632.3 333.7 299.7          Apr 
62.7 12.3 3.7 3.0 48.3 45.8 17.0 36.1 1,559.8 132.3 612.5 336.4 295.8          May60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 50.7 47.1 16.1 36.0 1,554.2 123.6 582.1 337.5 295.2          June
59.6 9.7 3.6 3.0 49.7 47.2 16.8 39.9 1,558.7 120.0 576.6 339.4 293.9          July
60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 52.1 47.6 14.2 41.1 1,562.9 120.7 577.2 336.9 293.3          Aug 58.0 8.2 3.5 2.9 48.1 46.0 18.1 39.0 1,575.7 119.7 595.6 334.8 302.3          Sep 
Changes 1
23.3 − 2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 − − 5.1 196.3 − 15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 199625.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 − 6.2 − 6.2 − − 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 199724.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.0 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 5.3 1.8 4.8 2.9 11.3 3.2 − 7.7 2003          Jan 
2.1 3.0 − 0.0 0.0 1.4 − 0.1 2.3 1.1 8.1 6.8 4.4 3.7 − 1.7          Feb 
− 0.0 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6 0.1 0.4 0.5 0.8 − 2.4 8.2 − 0.7 − 3.2          Mar 
− 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.5 3.5 − 0.8 13.7 − 0.9 1.2          Apr 
0.9 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.5 1.0 − 0.2 3.4 − 6.9 − 8.2 0.7 − 7.8          May
− 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.4 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 3.1 − 4.5 − 11.4 − 3.6 4.7          June
− 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.8 0.2 − 0.4 12.1 4.3 7.0 − 0.2 − 4.6          July
0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.0 1.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 − 10.9 − 32.4 − 4.9 − 0.2          Aug 
− 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.4 3.2 − 0.1 11.6 2.4 12.3 − 1.9 0.7          Sep 
0.1 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 5.6 − 0.5 7.8 1.8 − 10.3 3.4 − 1.1          Oct 
− 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 12.3 5.3 6.8 − 1.0 1.3          Nov 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 0.6 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 10.6 − 0.1 3.2 − 1.8 − 7.9          Dec 
− 1.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.9 2.5 − 0.3 4.2 − 2.7 12.7 − 3.9 − 13.9 2004          Jan 
− 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.6 0.9 − 0.2 10.0 − 1.3 19.6 − 4.6 4.1          Feb 
− 4.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.8 − 0.5 23.2 7.5 14.0 − 2.5 6.7          Mar 
− 0.8 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 15.5 0.3 6.4 3.4 7.7          Apr 
2.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.3 12.2 − 2.8 − 16.7 2.6 − 4.6          May
− 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.9 − 8.6 − 31.0 1.1 − 0.5          June
− 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 0.0 0.6 3.9 3.6 − 3.6 − 7.0 1.8 − 0.1          July
1.1 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 0.4 − 2.5 1.2 5.4 0.7 2.1 − 3.3 − 2.0          Aug 
− 2.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.6 3.9 − 2.1 17.2 − 0.9 24.1 − 1.5 5.4          Sep 
footnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than four with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data collected the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published together with money
separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the deposits market fund shares. 
with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt securities
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2004          Apr 2,216 6,604.4 52.3 2,498.9 1,791.0 697.0 3,648.7 476.7 2,563.8 3.7 594.5 145.9 258.4
         May 2,213 6,618.6 55.2 2,529.2 1,806.8 712.7 3,626.7 452.4 2,566.7 3.7 594.1 146.5 260.9         June 2,200 6,587.5 50.5 2,507.2 1,792.0 705.3 3,622.4 449.1 2,566.6 3.5 590.4 145.6 261.8
         July 2,184 6,608.2 53.1 2,516.2 1,799.5 708.0 3,633.5 453.0 2,568.9 3.6 590.5 142.7 262.7
         Aug 2,178 6,599.5 54.8 2,507.3 1,790.0 708.0 3,636.8 450.0 2,570.3 3.5 593.9 141.4 259.2         Sep 2,166 6,633.9 54.6 2,535.0 1,808.9 716.0 3,641.1 459.6 2,567.7 3.5 594.8 141.4 261.8
Commercial banks 5
2004          Aug 252 1,846.0 20.2 677.7 544.3 130.9 978.1 248.0 544.8 1.9 171.8 75.6 94.4         Sep 252 1,865.0 16.9 688.9 553.3 132.9 988.5 259.0 547.4 1.9 169.2 75.0 95.7
   Big banks 6
2004          Aug 4 1,061.4 11.1 387.5 333.1 53.4 532.9 159.6 263.8 1.2 98.3 66.0 63.8         Sep 4 1,083.0 7.8 402.0 343.3 57.4 542.5 169.0 265.8 1.2 97.0 65.6 65.2
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2004          Aug 164 696.5 8.6 242.3 167.9 73.3 408.6 71.6 264.3 0.6 70.6 9.5 27.4         Sep 164 690.6 8.5 236.4 164.2 71.3 408.8 72.4 264.4 0.6 69.9 9.4 27.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2004          Aug 84 88.1 0.5 47.8 43.2 4.2 36.6 16.8 16.7 0.0 2.9 0.1 3.1         Sep 84 91.5 0.7 50.4 45.8 4.2 37.2 17.6 17.2 0.0 2.3 0.1 3.1
Landesbanken
2004          Aug 13 1,398.9 3.6 723.2 571.4 149.7 589.3 63.0 412.0 0.3 111.6 30.4 52.5         Sep 13 1,389.7 6.5 733.2 577.5 152.7 568.4 58.3 396.8 0.2 110.4 30.1 51.6
Savings banks
2004          Aug 481 982.8 17.8 227.6 72.8 154.4 701.3 69.3 539.8 0.9 91.2 14.7 21.4         Sep 481 983.4 17.3 226.2 71.0 154.7 702.9 71.0 539.5 0.8 91.4 15.4 21.6
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2004          Aug 2 198.1 0.2 137.0 94.7 41.9 42.5 10.3 20.3 0.1 11.8 11.4 6.9         Sep 2 195.2 0.7 134.4 90.9 43.2 41.8 9.8 19.9 0.1 12.0 11.4 6.9
Credit cooperatives
2004          Aug 1,364 567.1 11.8 145.5 59.6 84.2 386.9 42.6 302.3 0.5 41.3 6.0 16.8         Sep 1,351 567.1 11.5 145.1 59.0 84.5 387.6 43.2 302.5 0.5 41.2 6.0 16.9
Mortgage banks
2004          Aug 25 868.9 0.9 227.8 137.2 89.0 621.1 11.0 486.3 − 121.0 0.8 18.3         Sep 25 873.7 1.1 232.6 141.5 89.7 621.2 11.7 484.3 − 125.1 0.8 18.0
Building and loan associations
2004          Aug 27 177.3 0.0 42.7 30.7 11.8 122.0 1.5 106.9 . 12.5 0.4 12.1         Sep 27 180.0 0.1 44.5 32.5 11.8 121.4 1.5 106.1 . 12.8 0.4 13.5
Special purpose banks
2004          Aug 14 560.4 0.3 325.7 279.4 46.1 195.5 4.4 158.0 − 32.5 2.1 36.8         Sep 15 579.8 0.6 330.2 283.4 46.6 209.2 5.0 171.2 − 32.7 2.2 37.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2004          Aug 126 399.8 3.1 174.2 122.0 51.6 209.0 36.9 125.7 0.2 46.0 0.8 12.8         Sep 126 409.5 3.4 181.3 129.1 51.7 211.5 38.2 126.6 0.2 46.4 0.8 12.6
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2004          Aug 42 311.7 2.6 126.3 78.7 47.4 172.5 20.1 109.1 0.2 43.1 0.7 9.6         Sep 42 318.0 2.7 130.9 83.3 47.5 174.3 20.6 109.4 0.2 44.1 0.7 9.5
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,873.9 270.9 1,602.9 2,477.8 701.0 319.4 750.3 84.4 601.0 512.2 106.0 1,593.8 286.2 372.7 2004          Apr 
1,868.9 248.3 1,620.4 2,487.6 705.5 322.3 753.7 76.9 600.4 512.4 105.7 1,606.1 287.2 368.7          May
1,861.1 258.6 1,602.4 2,468.5 704.0 302.5 756.9 68.0 599.7 512.1 105.4 1,601.3 287.6 369.0          June
1,873.9 249.5 1,624.2 2,470.3 691.7 314.6 758.3 72.1 600.3 512.6 105.3 1,607.5 287.9 368.7          July
1,854.6 229.2 1,625.3 2,480.0 696.3 319.3 758.0 76.3 601.0 513.4 105.5 1,610.2 286.7 368.0          Aug 1,853.0 253.1 1,599.8 2,495.0 714.3 312.8 761.7 81.6 600.8 513.5 105.3 1,622.6 285.4 377.9          Sep 
Commercial banks 5
711.3 131.0 580.1 711.8 320.8 155.7 123.1 66.4 102.9 93.4 9.3 210.7 89.7 122.6 2004          Aug 
712.4 145.2 567.1 727.0 333.6 153.0 127.9 72.2 103.2 93.7 9.3 210.5 89.3 125.8          Sep 
Big banks 6
436.9 89.6 347.2 355.7 143.9 109.3 70.3 60.8 31.6 29.8 0.5 146.5 50.6 71.8 2004          Aug 
439.9 99.0 340.8 373.2 157.3 108.3 75.0 70.5 32.0 30.3 0.5 146.4 49.8 73.7          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
207.9 31.5 176.3 340.7 166.4 43.4 50.9 5.6 71.3 63.6 8.7 64.2 36.7 47.0 2004          Aug 
203.5 34.0 169.4 337.8 165.2 41.7 51.0 1.7 71.1 63.5 8.8 64.1 37.0 48.1          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
66.6 9.9 56.6 15.3 10.4 3.0 1.9 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 3.8 2004          Aug 
69.1 12.2 56.9 16.0 11.1 3.0 1.9 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 3.9          Sep 
Landesbanken
464.8 55.6 409.2 324.7 45.1 38.9 224.5 7.0 15.3 14.4 0.8 489.4 60.6 59.5 2004          Aug 
461.5 62.6 398.9 319.1 48.9 38.7 215.4 6.2 15.2 14.3 0.8 489.9 59.1 60.1          Sep 
Savings banks
213.8 5.7 208.1 630.4 196.2 51.1 11.1 − 302.0 250.4 70.0 44.2 47.5 46.9 2004          Aug 
214.2 5.9 208.3 628.1 194.6 50.8 11.3 − 301.6 250.3 69.9 44.4 47.5 49.2          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
118.7 28.1 90.5 29.2 5.9 7.0 16.0 2.9 − − 0.3 29.7 10.1 10.4 2004          Aug 
116.2 28.3 87.9 29.7 6.8 7.1 15.4 3.2 − − 0.3 29.9 10.1 9.4          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
75.8 1.3 74.5 404.5 122.9 52.3 24.2 − 180.4 154.8 24.7 32.5 31.2 23.1 2004          Aug 
74.7 1.7 73.0 404.6 123.6 51.7 24.3 − 180.5 154.8 24.5 32.4 31.2 24.2          Sep 
Mortgage banks
135.5 4.3 131.2 148.5 1.1 5.4 141.8 − − − 0.2 537.5 22.1 25.3 2004          Aug 
137.0 6.0 131.0 149.3 1.6 4.9 142.6 − − − 0.2 541.6 22.2 23.6          Sep 
Building and loan associations
29.3 1.3 28.0 113.2 0.3 0.8 111.4 − 0.4 0.4 0.2 7.0 7.4 20.4 2004          Aug 
29.9 1.6 28.2 113.5 0.3 0.9 111.7 − 0.4 0.4 0.2 6.9 7.4 22.3          Sep 
Special purpose banks
105.4 1.8 103.6 117.8 3.9 8.0 105.8 − − − − 259.2 18.2 59.8 2004          Aug 
107.2 1.7 105.4 123.7 4.8 5.8 113.1 − − − − 266.8 18.7 63.4          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
136.9 22.5 114.3 129.4 80.7 14.1 24.7 0.2 6.9 6.7 3.1 98.2 13.0 22.2 2004          Aug 
142.5 25.2 117.3 131.4 82.7 13.4 25.3 0.1 6.8 6.7 3.1 101.3 13.1 21.2          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
70.4 12.6 57.7 114.1 70.2 11.1 22.8 0.2 6.9 6.7 3.1 98.2 10.6 18.4 2004          Aug 
73.5 13.0 60.4 115.4 71.6 10.5 23.4 0.1 6.8 6.6 3.1 101.3 10.6 17.3          Sep 
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Commercial included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Mortgage banks”. 
bank AG. — 7Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2003          Apr 13.5 37.7 1,648.8 1,074.6 0.0 9.9 564.3 2.5 3,007.6 2,676.4 3.8 5.0 319.4
         May 13.7 38.3 1,674.3 1,099.7 0.0 9.2 565.3 2.5 3,003.6 2,667.8 3.9 4.5 324.5         June 12.9 40.9 1,665.5 1,090.9 0.0 9.9 564.7 2.5 2,992.4 2,670.2 3.9 3.9 311.4
         July 12.9 40.5 1,645.6 1,063.8 0.0 10.9 571.0 2.4 2,996.0 2,671.8 4.0 3.4 314.7
         Aug 13.2 42.5 1,636.2 1,056.4 0.0 9.3 570.5 2.4 2,986.9 2,667.9 4.0 3.4 309.6         Sep 12.9 42.1 1,627.9 1,047.0 0.0 9.7 571.2 2.4 2,995.7 2,676.3 3.9 2.1 311.4
         Oct 13.3 44.3 1,630.0 1,046.2 0.0 9.7 574.1 2.4 2,992.9 2,675.4 3.9 3.1 308.4
         Nov 12.8 38.2 1,663.1 1,073.8 0.0 10.5 578.8 2.3 3,012.2 2,685.5 3.7 3.4 317.5         Dec 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004          Jan 12.9 39.5 1,632.9 1,055.9 0.0 8.4 568.5 2.3 2,992.0 2,667.0 3.5 2.6 316.8
         Feb 12.9 37.6 1,645.1 1,058.5 0.0 8.5 578.0 2.3 2,994.8 2,658.8 3.4 2.5 328.1         Mar 12.4 31.1 1,656.6 1,062.0 0.0 8.1 586.4 2.4 3,015.7 2,670.4 3.2 2.1 338.0
         Apr 12.6 39.4 1,673.5 1,070.7 0.0 8.6 594.1 2.4 3,022.9 2,664.3 3.2 3.0 350.5
         May 13.5 41.4 1,693.0 1,081.2 0.0 7.7 604.1 2.4 3,013.6 2,657.8 3.2 2.9 347.8         June 12.8 37.3 1,671.7 1,070.0 0.0 7.7 594.0 2.3 3,003.5 2,652.5 3.0 3.6 342.6
         July 12.8 39.9 1,687.1 1,082.3 0.0 6.9 597.9 2.3 3,007.5 2,656.4 3.0 6.8 340.2
         Aug 12.8 41.6 1,679.0 1,075.6 0.0 7.4 596.0 2.3 3,001.8 2,648.6 3.0 5.9 343.3         Sep 12.9 41.4 1,680.7 1,073.4 0.0 7.9 599.4 2.1 3,005.8 2,652.3 2.9 3.9 345.7
Changes *
1995 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 2.91996 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 − 2.0 + 4.7 + 10.61997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 − 1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 36.51998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.11999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2003          Apr + 0.9 − 9.8 − 7.0 − 6.5 − − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 3.1
         May + 0.2 + 0.6 + 25.5 + 25.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 8.7 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.3         June − 0.7 + 2.6 − 8.8 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 11.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 13.1
         July − 0.0 − 0.4 − 20.1 − 27.2 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.4
         Aug + 0.2 + 2.0 − 9.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.1         Sep − 0.2 − 0.3 − 7.8 − 9.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 8.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 2.6
         Oct + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.5 − 6.1 + 33.1 + 27.6 − + 1.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 + 19.3 + 10.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 9.1         Dec + 4.2 + 8.5 − 19.3 − 9.8 − − 1.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 16.1 − 8.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 7.4
2004          Jan − 4.1 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 8.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 7.2
         Feb + 0.1 − 1.9 + 12.0 + 2.4 − + 0.1 + 9.5 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 8.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 11.3         Mar − 0.5 − 6.5 + 11.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.4 + 0.1 + 20.9 + 11.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 9.9
         Apr + 0.1 + 8.3 + 16.9 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 7.7 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.6
         May + 0.9 + 2.0 + 19.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7         June − 0.7 − 4.1 − 21.3 − 11.2 − − 0.1 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 10.1 − 5.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 5.2
         July + 0.1 + 2.5 + 15.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 3.9 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 2.3
         Aug − 0.0 + 1.7 − 8.1 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 3.1         Sep + 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 2.2 − + 0.6 + 3.4 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). — 5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). — 6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. — 7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). — 8Up to December
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). — 4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. — 11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month *
 
68.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
3.0 54.6 116.7 1,203.4 137.4 1,065.9 0.1 25.5 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 577.9 102.4 41.8 2003          Apr 
3.0 54.5 119.6 1,254.2 146.4 1,107.7 0.1 25.5 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 577.1 101.9 41.7          May
3.0 54.4 118.1 1,252.5 150.5 1,101.8 0.1 25.4 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 576.7 101.3 41.8          June
2.0 54.2 119.1 1,207.7 123.6 1,084.0 0.1 25.3 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 576.8 100.9 41.7          July
2.0 54.6 118.8 1,198.2 120.9 1,077.2 0.1 25.7 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 578.0 100.4 41.7          Aug 2.0 54.4 115.1 1,188.2 116.0 1,072.0 0.1 25.5 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 578.3 99.9 41.5          Sep 
2.0 53.9 115.0 1,179.6 122.1 1,057.4 0.1 25.3 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 579.4 100.0 40.7          Oct 
2.0 54.1 113.3 1,214.5 135.3 1,079.1 0.1 25.5 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 580.3 100.1 40.7          Nov 2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5          Dec 
2.0 57.2 108.9 1,213.2 142.0 1,071.1 0.1 28.3 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 590.6 100.3 40.3 2004          Jan 
2.0 56.6 108.8 1,215.7 134.0 1,081.6 0.1 28.2 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 591.5 100.1 40.5          Feb 
2.0 54.9 107.2 1,204.3 140.0 1,064.2 0.1 27.8 2,145.8 635.3 819.2 591.4 99.8 39.3          Mar 
2.0 54.4 106.6 1,227.8 143.2 1,084.5 0.1 27.7 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 591.2 99.2 39.0          Apr 
2.0 54.3 107.1 1,252.0 134.2 1,117.7 0.1 27.6 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 590.6 98.9 39.0          May2.0 54.9 106.7 1,257.3 129.2 1,128.0 0.1 28.4 2,158.3 643.5 826.2 590.0 98.7 38.8          June
1.0 55.9 103.5 1,275.2 125.7 1,149.4 0.1 29.5 2,160.4 637.6 833.6 590.6 98.6 38.7          July
1.0 55.8 102.2 1,260.2 122.4 1,137.7 0.1 29.4 2,161.3 639.1 832.2 591.3 98.7 38.6          Aug 1.0 57.0 102.6 1,243.1 124.4 1,118.6 0.1 30.7 2,169.7 649.5 830.4 591.2 98.6 38.5          Sep 
Changes *
− 1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 − 14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996− 5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 14.6 − 6.6 − 8.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.2 2003          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 3.0 + 50.8 + 8.9 + 41.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1          May
− 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.7 + 4.2 − 5.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1          June
− 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 44.9 − 27.0 − 18.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.5 − 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.1          Aug + 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 8.7 − 3.5 − 5.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 8.6 + 6.1 − 14.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3          Oct 
− + 0.2 − 1.7 + 34.9 + 13.2 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 2.7 − 4.1 + 15.1 − 18.6 + 33.6 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 10.0 + 0.1 − 0.2          Dec − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 16.3 + 25.3 − 41.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Jan 
− − 0.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 − 8.0 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.4 + 6.0 − 17.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2          Mar − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 23.2 + 3.2 + 20.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 24.2 − 9.0 + 33.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          May
− + 0.6 − 0.4 + 5.3 − 5.0 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2          June
− 0.9 + 1.1 − 3.1 + 17.9 − 3.4 + 21.4 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 5.5 + 7.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1          July+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 3.4 − 11.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1          Aug 
− + 1.2 + 0.4 − 17.1 + 2.0 − 19.1 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 8.3 + 10.4 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. — 17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. — 13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). — 20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer
one month. — 16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2003          Apr 0.3 738.6 657.2 505.9 151.2 1.7 79.8 2.6 583.3 364.8 125.1 239.7 7.4 211.1
         May 0.3 760.1 676.4 524.6 151.8 1.3 82.4 2.5 578.6 362.3 126.8 235.6 6.8 209.4         June 0.4 794.3 707.2 553.1 154.1 1.3 85.8 2.6 578.1 351.6 115.2 236.4 7.0 219.5
         July 0.3 779.1 689.4 533.9 155.5 1.4 88.3 2.6 567.4 345.3 106.5 238.8 6.8 215.3
         Aug 0.3 771.9 682.3 522.9 159.4 1.3 88.3 2.6 561.3 344.3 101.3 243.0 7.4 209.5         Sep 0.4 769.8 680.3 520.2 160.1 1.3 88.2 2.3 569.4 346.6 110.3 236.3 7.2 215.6
         Oct 0.4 757.0 664.9 502.0 162.9 0.9 91.2 1.6 576.6 348.6 106.0 242.6 8.0 219.9
         Nov 0.3 764.6 672.3 512.8 159.5 1.3 91.1 1.6 583.8 357.5 118.0 239.6 6.4 219.8         Dec 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004          Jan 0.3 788.7 693.8 531.9 161.9 1.2 93.6 1.6 588.4 353.0 118.0 235.0 5.5 229.8
         Feb 0.3 790.5 691.5 530.7 160.8 1.3 97.7 1.6 598.7 360.7 126.1 234.6 6.0 232.0         Mar 0.3 803.2 700.1 538.5 161.6 1.7 101.4 1.7 617.6 370.2 133.9 236.4 4.8 242.5
         Apr 0.3 825.5 720.4 557.5 162.9 2.2 102.8 1.7 625.8 376.7 137.2 239.5 5.0 244.0
         May 0.3 836.2 725.7 570.5 155.2 1.9 108.7 1.7 613.1 361.8 123.6 238.2 5.0 246.3         June 0.4 835.5 722.1 566.9 155.2 2.1 111.3 1.7 618.9 363.8 124.6 239.1 7.3 247.8
         July 0.4 829.1 717.3 557.4 159.9 1.7 110.1 1.6 626.0 366.1 127.6 238.5 9.7 250.2
         Aug 0.4 828.3 714.6 557.9 156.7 1.8 112.0 1.6 635.0 372.4 134.6 237.7 12.1 250.5         Sep 0.3 854.3 735.7 578.0 157.7 2.0 116.6 1.7 635.3 375.5 141.8 233.6 10.6 249.2
Changes *
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.11996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.41997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 − 0.1 + 10.4 − 1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.91998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.01999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2003          Apr + 0.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 12.8 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.2
         May + 0.0 + 30.1 + 28.0 + 24.9 + 3.2 − 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 5.6 + 6.0 + 3.8 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0         June + 0.1 + 29.4 + 26.3 + 25.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 6.2 − 14.9 − 12.6 − 2.3 + 0.1 + 8.6
         July − 0.1 − 16.5 − 19.1 − 20.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 12.3 − 7.5 − 9.0 + 1.5 − 0.3 − 4.6
         Aug + 0.0 − 13.2 − 12.8 − 15.3 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 13.0 − 6.1 − 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 7.3         Sep + 0.0 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 19.1 + 10.6 + 10.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 8.5
         Oct − 0.0 − 14.4 − 17.0 − 18.8 + 1.8 − 0.4 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 4.2
         Nov − 0.0 + 12.5 + 12.1 + 14.3 − 2.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 13.3 + 12.9 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.0         Dec − 0.0 + 11.7 + 9.9 + 7.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 6.0 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.8
2004          Jan + 0.0 + 16.3 + 14.8 + 14.0 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 5.3 + 6.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 2.9
         Feb − 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 11.1 + 8.0 + 8.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.5         Mar + 0.0 + 6.1 + 2.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 15.6 + 7.4 + 7.0 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 9.4
         Apr − + 20.3 + 18.4 + 17.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 5.6 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.3
         May + 0.0 + 13.0 + 7.5 + 14.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 + 5.8 − 0.0 − 9.7 − 12.7 − 13.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.0         June + 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.7
         July + 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.9 − 10.2 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.8 − 1.6 + 2.4 + 0.1
         Aug − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.5 − 1.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.5         Sep − 0.0 + 30.2 + 25.1 + 23.0 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 5.0 + 6.6 + 8.2 − 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
17.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
15.1 43.2 634.6 141.6 493.0 387.9 105.1 1.0 333.3 39.3 294.0 110.3 183.7 4.0 2003          Apr 
14.7 41.7 620.9 128.0 492.9 386.0 106.9 1.0 332.0 43.6 288.4 109.8 178.7 3.8          May
15.1 42.2 622.8 143.1 479.7 372.8 106.9 1.0 324.6 43.8 280.8 99.8 180.9 3.9          June
15.2 43.1 617.2 123.6 493.7 384.1 109.6 0.9 328.0 40.3 287.7 108.5 179.2 3.9          July
15.3 43.1 601.1 108.0 493.1 386.3 106.8 0.3 324.7 39.5 285.2 103.5 181.7 4.7          Aug 15.0 43.7 607.5 144.2 463.3 361.2 102.1 0.3 326.6 40.0 286.6 109.5 177.1 6.8          Sep 
11.7 43.0 597.1 129.1 468.0 360.1 107.9 0.3 332.0 38.2 293.8 116.4 177.5 3.4          Oct 
11.7 41.3 583.1 113.9 469.2 361.3 107.9 0.3 333.5 38.8 294.7 121.6 173.1 3.3          Nov 11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6          Dec 
11.7 40.9 606.8 138.7 468.2 359.1 109.0 0.5 315.6 44.8 270.8 99.6 171.2 3.7 2004          Jan 
12.0 39.7 602.9 122.7 480.2 368.1 112.1 0.5 328.7 55.9 272.8 104.6 168.2 3.4          Feb 
9.5 39.8 640.2 136.3 503.8 389.4 114.4 0.5 326.2 61.8 264.4 103.0 161.4 0.9          Mar 
9.6 39.3 646.0 127.7 518.3 403.7 114.6 0.5 323.8 56.9 266.8 106.6 160.2 0.9          Apr 
9.6 39.4 616.9 114.2 502.7 389.0 113.8 0.5 325.2 62.9 262.4 102.3 160.0 0.9          May9.6 38.9 603.8 129.4 474.4 360.2 114.2 0.5 310.2 60.6 249.6 90.0 159.7 0.9          June
9.7 39.2 598.6 123.8 474.8 359.8 115.1 0.5 309.9 54.1 255.8 96.6 159.1 0.9          July
9.7 39.3 594.3 106.8 487.5 371.5 116.0 0.5 318.7 57.2 261.5 102.7 158.8 0.9          Aug 9.7 38.8 609.9 128.7 481.2 366.3 115.0 0.5 325.3 64.8 260.5 98.6 161.9 0.8          Sep 
Changes *
− 0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 − 1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 − 0.9 1995− 2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 − 1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 − 2.0 1996+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
− 0.3 + 0.1 + 17.1 + 10.6 + 6.5 + 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 1.8 − 1.9 − 0.3 2003          Apr 
− 0.4 − 0.7 − 4.3 − 11.8 + 7.5 + 4.2 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.2          May
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 14.1 − 17.1 − 16.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 10.9 + 0.0 − 10.9 − 10.6 − 0.3 + 0.2          June
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 6.9 − 19.8 + 12.8 + 10.4 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 3.6 + 6.4 + 8.5 − 2.1 − 0.0          July
+ 0.2 − 0.5 − 22.3 − 16.7 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 1.1 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.2 + 0.1          Aug − 0.3 + 1.2 + 16.1 + 37.6 − 21.5 − 18.4 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 7.8 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 7.5 − 0.8 + 2.1          Sep 
+ 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.8 − 15.4 + 3.6 − 1.5 + 5.1 − + 1.4 − 1.8 + 3.2 + 6.7 − 3.6 + 0.0          Oct 
− 0.0 − 1.3 − 9.2 − 14.2 + 5.1 + 4.0 + 1.0 − + 4.9 + 0.9 + 4.0 + 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.1          Nov − 0.1 + 0.6 + 14.9 − 17.7 + 32.6 + 31.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 − 21.2 − 6.2 − 15.0 − 17.7 + 2.7 + 0.3          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 12.9 + 43.2 − 30.2 − 30.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 5.8 + 12.5 − 6.7 − 3.5 − 3.2 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 15.9 + 12.7 + 9.4 + 3.2 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 11.1 + 2.2 + 5.1 − 2.9 − 0.3          Feb 
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.7 + 13.1 + 17.6 + 19.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 5.8 − 7.3 − 2.2 − 5.1 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 − 0.6 + 3.8 − 9.1 + 12.8 + 13.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 5.1 + 1.3 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 26.7 − 13.1 − 13.6 − 13.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 − 3.3 − 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0          May+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 13.5 + 15.2 − 28.7 − 29.1 + 0.3 − − 15.1 − 2.3 − 12.8 − 12.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          June
+ 0.1 + 0.1 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 6.6 + 5.4 + 6.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 16.9 + 13.5 + 12.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 3.1 + 6.4 + 6.2 + 0.2 − 0.0          Aug + 0.0 − 0.2 + 19.5 + 22.5 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 7.9 + 1.4 − 3.3 + 4.7 − 0.1          Sep 
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). — 5Up capital supplied to branches abroad. — 8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 9Up to December 1998,
registered debt securities. — 6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). — 7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2003          Apr 3,007.6 2,680.2 366.3 326.5 324.2 2.2 39.8 37.0 2.8 2,641.3 2,079.0
         May 3,003.6 2,671.7 356.2 321.4 319.1 2.3 34.7 32.6 2.2 2,647.4 2,080.5         June 2,992.4 2,674.1 359.6 328.9 326.9 2.0 30.7 28.8 1.9 2,632.8 2,077.4
         July 2,996.0 2,675.8 357.5 315.5 314.2 1.3 42.0 39.8 2.2 2,638.6 2,081.8
         Aug 2,986.9 2,671.9 346.7 308.2 306.8 1.4 38.5 36.5 2.0 2,640.2 2,090.5         Sep 2,995.7 2,680.2 356.7 323.8 322.9 0.9 32.9 31.7 1.2 2,639.0 2,088.3
         Oct 2,992.9 2,679.3 353.7 317.2 316.1 1.0 36.6 34.5 2.1 2,639.1 2,087.7
         Nov 3,012.2 2,689.2 360.7 317.5 316.6 0.9 43.2 40.6 2.6 2,651.5 2,097.0         Dec 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004          Jan 2,992.0 2,670.5 346.6 305.7 304.4 1.3 41.0 39.6 1.4 2,645.3 2,097.7
         Feb 2,994.8 2,662.2 339.5 306.0 304.8 1.1 33.6 32.2 1.3 2,655.2 2,091.2         Mar 3,015.7 2,673.6 353.0 306.8 305.9 0.8 46.3 45.0 1.3 2,662.7 2,098.5
         Apr 3,022.9 2,667.5 346.1 304.0 303.3 0.7 42.2 39.9 2.3 2,676.8 2,116.1
         May 3,013.6 2,661.0 335.4 297.1 296.2 0.9 38.3 36.3 2.0 2,678.2 2,113.0         June 3,003.5 2,655.4 331.5 294.9 294.2 0.7 36.7 33.8 2.9 2,672.0 2,102.1
         July 3,007.5 2,659.4 335.7 287.6 287.0 0.6 48.2 42.0 6.2 2,671.7 2,104.4
         Aug 3,001.8 2,651.6 324.8 281.2 280.5 0.6 43.6 38.4 5.2 2,677.0 2,105.5         Sep 3,005.8 2,655.2 325.1 287.2 286.7 0.5 37.9 34.5 3.4 2,680.8 2,106.6
Changes *
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 276.9 + 185.11996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 282.5 + 219.91998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.31999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2003          Apr + 2.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 − 6.0 − 6.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.2
         May − 3.8 − 8.5 − 10.1 − 5.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 0.6 + 6.3 + 1.8         June − 11.1 + 2.5 + 3.4 + 7.5 + 7.8 − 0.3 − 4.1 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 14.6 − 3.1
         July + 3.8 + 1.7 − 1.9 − 13.2 − 12.7 − 0.5 + 11.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 5.7 + 4.3
         Aug − 9.1 − 4.0 − 10.7 − 7.3 − 7.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 8.7         Sep + 9.6 + 8.3 + 10.0 + 15.6 + 16.1 − 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 2.2
         Oct − 2.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.6
         Nov + 19.3 + 9.9 + 6.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 12.4 + 9.3         Dec − 16.1 − 8.6 − 5.4 − 2.4 − 3.2 + 0.8 − 3.0 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 10.7 − 0.9
2004          Jan − 3.7 − 10.1 − 8.6 − 9.4 − 9.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.0 + 1.7
         Feb + 2.8 − 8.3 − 7.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 − 6.5         Mar + 20.9 + 11.4 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 12.7 + 12.8 − 0.1 + 7.1 + 7.1
         Apr + 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.0 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 + 0.9 + 14.3 + 17.6
         May − 9.4 − 6.5 − 10.4 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 3.4         June − 10.1 − 5.6 − 3.7 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 + 0.9 − 6.4 − 11.2
         July + 4.0 + 4.0 + 4.2 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 11.5 + 8.2 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 2.3
         Aug − 5.7 − 7.9 − 10.9 − 6.4 − 6.5 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 3.6 − 0.9 + 5.3 + 1.1         Sep + 4.1 + 3.7 + 2.2 + 6.0 + 6.2 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,6 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
2,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,910.3 193.3 1,717.0 168.6 47.0 562.4 408.6 30.9 377.6 150.8 3.0 7.5 2003          Apr 
1,912.9 193.2 1,719.7 167.6 47.0 566.9 407.1 31.5 375.5 156.9 3.0 7.5          May
1,912.8 193.5 1,719.3 164.6 47.0 555.4 405.7 31.5 374.2 146.8 3.0 7.4          June
1,916.9 193.9 1,723.0 164.9 46.9 556.8 404.9 31.3 373.6 149.8 2.0 7.3          July
1,924.6 195.5 1,729.1 165.9 47.3 549.7 403.9 32.9 371.1 143.7 2.0 7.2          Aug 1,922.2 195.0 1,727.2 166.1 47.2 550.6 403.3 33.7 369.6 145.3 2.0 7.2          Sep 
1,926.8 195.7 1,731.1 160.9 46.8 551.4 402.0 32.5 369.4 147.5 2.0 7.2          Oct 
1,930.3 195.9 1,734.3 166.7 47.0 554.5 401.7 33.1 368.6 150.8 2.0 7.1          Nov 1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0          Dec 
1,926.0 195.0 1,731.0 171.7 50.1 547.6 400.5 33.9 366.5 145.1 2.0 7.1 2004          Jan 
1,925.4 194.3 1,731.1 165.8 49.6 564.1 399.8 34.8 365.0 162.3 2.0 7.0          Feb 
1,922.9 193.9 1,729.1 175.6 47.9 564.1 399.7 35.4 364.4 162.4 2.0 7.0          Mar 
1,927.1 194.7 1,732.5 189.0 47.4 560.7 397.2 34.9 362.3 161.5 2.0 7.0          Apr 
1,933.6 197.1 1,736.4 179.5 47.4 565.1 394.9 34.6 360.3 168.3 2.0 6.9          May1,935.2 198.2 1,737.0 166.9 48.1 569.9 392.3 34.4 357.9 175.7 2.0 6.8          June
1,938.2 199.0 1,739.2 166.2 49.2 567.3 392.3 34.1 358.2 174.0 1.0 6.7          July
1,941.3 200.2 1,741.1 164.2 49.1 571.5 391.3 33.9 357.4 179.1 1.0 6.7          Aug 1,942.9 199.2 1,743.7 163.7 50.3 574.2 391.2 34.5 356.7 182.0 1.0 6.7          Sep 
Changes *
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 − 18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 3.2 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 4.0 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 2003          Apr 
+ 2.6 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 6.1 − − 0.0          May
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          June
+ 4.1 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.1          July
+ 7.8 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 1.5 − 2.5 − 6.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          Aug − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.5 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 4.5 + 0.7 + 3.8 − 5.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 3.3 − − 0.0          Nov − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 9.7 − 0.7 + 1.5 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.1          Dec 
− 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
− 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 0.5 + 16.4 − 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 17.1 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.7 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 9.8 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 13.4 − 0.5 − 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.1 + 2.5 + 3.7 − 9.5 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 6.8 − − 0.0          May+ 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 12.6 + 0.8 + 4.8 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 7.4 − − 0.2          June
+ 3.0 + 0.8 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.0          July
+ 3.1 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 5.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Aug + 1.6 − 0.9 + 2.6 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0          Sep 
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. — 6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. — 9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). — 10Excluding
possible. — 7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). — 11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. — 8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2001 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2003          Sep 2,245.6 1,106.2 1,077.5 845.7 231.8 1,262.1 338.1 154.4 36.2 61.7 153.3 32.9 53.6 53.9
         Dec 2,241.6 1,124.5 1,083.3 867.1 216.2 1,252.2 335.1 151.0 37.2 59.0 152.3 32.1 54.4 54.4
2004          Mar 2,229.2 1,124.8 1,075.2 861.7 213.5 1,242.1 329.3 149.3 37.7 58.4 148.6 31.9 56.3 57.5
         June 2,229.7 1,125.6 1,081.5 865.7 215.9 1,235.2 329.0 145.9 37.8 57.5 147.0 32.3 57.6 53.8         Sep 2,229.9 1,129.0 1,087.8 869.9 217.9 1,226.6 326.8 142.3 37.7 56.2 144.6 32.7 56.6 56.1
 Short-term lending
2001 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.22002 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2003          Sep 323.3 − 14.0 − 14.0 274.7 8.7 48.7 4.0 15.1 54.6 4.7 7.8 26.3
         Dec 313.9 − 14.1 − 14.1 266.7 8.9 46.6 4.2 13.2 55.9 3.9 8.0 25.8
2004          Mar 306.3 − 13.2 − 13.2 261.4 8.0 47.0 4.0 13.5 53.8 4.1 8.6 27.6
         June 294.6 − 12.4 − 12.4 250.0 7.4 44.8 4.1 13.1 52.8 4.4 6.9 24.0         Sep 287.0 − 12.0 − 12.0 241.9 7.0 43.0 3.8 12.6 52.1 4.4 6.5 23.3
 Medium-term lending
2001 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.72002 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2003          Sep 195.0 − 38.0 − 38.0 121.4 12.0 17.6 2.2 6.1 12.6 3.4 10.5 6.4
         Dec 195.0 − 38.2 − 38.2 121.2 12.0 17.5 2.3 6.0 11.9 3.4 10.9 6.5
2004          Mar 193.9 − 37.2 − 37.2 121.0 11.5 17.2 3.0 5.8 11.6 3.3 11.3 6.9
         June 198.2 − 38.7 − 38.7 124.0 12.2 17.4 3.0 5.9 11.8 3.3 11.6 7.2         Sep 199.2 − 39.2 − 39.2 124.2 12.2 17.6 2.7 5.8 11.7 3.3 11.8 7.2
 Long-term lending
2001 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.12002 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2003          Sep 1,727.2 1,106.2 1,025.5 845.7 179.8 866.1 317.4 88.1 30.0 40.6 86.1 24.7 35.2 21.2
         Dec 1,732.8 1,124.5 1,031.0 867.1 164.0 864.3 314.2 86.9 30.6 39.9 84.5 24.7 35.5 22.1
2004          Mar 1,729.0 1,124.8 1,024.8 861.7 163.0 859.7 309.8 85.0 30.6 39.1 83.3 24.5 36.4 23.0
         June 1,737.0 1,125.6 1,030.4 865.7 164.8 861.2 309.4 83.6 30.8 38.5 82.4 24.6 39.1 22.6         Sep 1,743.7 1,129.0 1,036.5 869.9 166.7 860.5 307.6 81.6 31.2 37.8 80.8 24.9 38.3 25.7
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2003          Q3 + 5.4 + 4.5 + 7.9 + 5.8 + 2.1 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 1.1 − 3.4 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 5.1         Q4 − 4.0 + 1.7 + 5.0 + 4.5 + 0.5 − 9.9 − 2.6 − 3.4 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.5
2004          Q1 − 12.4 − 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.9
         Q2 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 5.2 + 2.0 + 3.2 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 3.6         Q3 + 0.2 + 4.5 + 6.1 + 5.2 + 1.0 − 8.6 − 2.3 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.9
 Short-term lending
2003          Q3 − 4.0 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.9         Q4 − 9.5 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.9 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6
2004          Q1 − 7.3 − − 0.9 − − 0.9 − 5.1 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.0
         Q2 − 11.3 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 − 10.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.5         Q3 − 7.5 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 8.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.8
 Medium-term lending
2003          Q3 + 1.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1         Q4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
2004          Q1 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0
         Q2 + 4.2 − + 1.5 − + 1.5 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0         Q3 + 0.7 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1
 Long-term lending
2003          Q3 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 7.8 + 5.8 + 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.1         Q4 + 5.5 + 1.7 + 4.7 + 4.5 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 2.7 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0
2004          Q1 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 4.1 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
         Q2 + 7.6 + 1.8 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 2.6 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1         Q3 + 7.1 + 4.5 + 6.0 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 2.8
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are 1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001
729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5 2002
716.1 162.3 48.6 205.7 441.8 70.2 969.6 735.9 233.7 116.1 23.2 13.8 3.5 2003          Sep 
711.9 160.7 44.0 207.2 437.0 67.7 975.6 744.7 230.9 118.6 21.6 13.7 3.5          Dec 
702.5 158.7 43.6 206.2 429.5 66.5 973.4 742.6 230.9 119.1 20.1 13.7 3.3 2004          Mar 
703.2 165.6 45.3 200.7 428.4 66.2 981.2 749.2 232.0 120.9 20.1 13.3 3.3          June
700.4 166.5 43.9 203.0 426.8 64.6 989.9 757.8 232.1 122.5 20.4 13.4 3.2          Sep 
Short-term lending
130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0 2002
113.5 17.9 18.3 32.1 50.6 14.4 47.2 5.2 42.0 2.3 23.2 1.4 0.0 2003          Sep 
109.1 17.9 14.6 31.2 49.4 12.9 45.9 5.1 40.8 2.4 21.6 1.2 0.0          Dec 
102.7 17.2 14.2 29.4 47.2 13.0 43.5 5.2 38.4 2.2 20.1 1.4 0.0 2004          Mar 
99.9 17.2 14.9 27.4 46.5 12.7 43.5 5.0 38.5 2.3 20.1 1.1 0.0          June
96.2 16.8 12.3 27.5 45.8 12.4 43.7 5.0 38.7 2.3 20.4 1.4 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 200163.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1 2002
62.5 5.9 6.0 17.7 30.8 4.6 73.1 26.0 47.2 37.3 − 0.5 0.1 2003          Sep 
62.7 5.7 5.6 18.0 30.4 4.5 73.2 26.2 47.0 37.1 − 0.6 0.1          Dec 
61.9 5.5 5.8 18.1 29.6 4.2 72.3 25.6 46.7 37.3 − 0.6 0.1 2004          Mar 
63.7 6.8 6.4 17.5 30.0 4.1 73.7 26.5 47.2 38.1 − 0.5 0.1          June
63.9 6.7 6.7 17.7 30.0 4.0 74.5 26.9 47.6 38.3 − 0.5 0.1          Sep 
Long-term lending
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4 2002
540.1 138.4 24.2 155.9 360.4 51.2 849.2 704.7 144.5 76.5 − 11.9 3.4 2003          Sep 
540.0 137.1 23.8 158.0 357.2 50.4 856.5 713.4 143.1 79.1 − 11.9 3.4          Dec 
537.9 136.0 23.6 158.6 352.7 49.3 857.6 711.8 145.8 79.6 − 11.7 3.2 2004          Mar 
539.6 141.5 24.0 155.8 352.0 49.3 864.1 717.8 146.3 80.6 − 11.7 3.2          June
540.3 143.0 24.9 157.8 351.1 48.2 871.7 725.8 145.8 82.0 − 11.5 3.1          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 3.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 10.8 + 8.8 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 2003          Q3
− 4.2 − 0.5 − 4.6 + 0.4 − 4.8 − 1.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 8.8 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 6.6 − 1.2 − 3.1 + 0.6 − 3.7 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Q1
+ 0.5 + 2.4 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 7.4 + 5.8 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          Q2
− 2.8 + 1.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 − 1.8 − 1.6 + 8.7 + 8.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1          Q3
Short-term lending
− 2.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 2003          Q3
− 4.4 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 2004          Q1
− 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0          Q2
− 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2003          Q3
+ 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2004          Q1
+ 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.8 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
− 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 9.2 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2003          Q3
− 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 7.3 + 7.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − 0.2 2004          Q1
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
+ 0.7 + 2.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 7.8 + 8.1 − 0.3 + 1.5 − − 0.2 − 0.1          Q3
the maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer   
goods. — 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and   
housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.  
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.52003 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.3
2003          Oct 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 238.7 585.7 8.0 577.7 579.4 100.0 40.7 30.4 14.5
         Nov 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 237.5 586.5 8.3 578.2 580.3 100.1 40.7 30.5 12.7         Dec 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.3
2004          Jan 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 225.0 589.3 8.3 581.0 590.6 100.3 40.3 30.7 9.8
         Feb 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 223.4 591.4 8.3 583.1 591.5 100.1 40.5 30.8 10.4         Mar 2,145.8 635.3 819.2 225.3 594.0 8.6 585.4 591.4 99.8 39.3 31.2 10.9
         Apr 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 220.8 598.8 8.5 590.3 591.2 99.2 39.0 31.3 10.6
         May 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 227.9 602.3 8.4 593.9 590.6 98.9 39.0 31.3 11.4         June 2,158.3 643.5 826.2 220.4 605.8 8.2 597.5 590.0 98.7 38.8 31.4 9.9
         July 2,160.4 637.6 833.6 225.8 607.7 8.2 599.5 590.6 98.6 38.7 31.5 10.3
         Aug 2,161.3 639.1 832.2 224.5 607.7 8.0 599.7 591.3 98.7 38.6 31.9 8.2         Sep 2,169.7 649.5 830.4 222.1 608.3 8.0 600.3 591.2 98.6 38.5 32.0 10.2
Changes *
2002 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 − 10.2 + 14.3 − 1.5 + 15.8 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 1.62003 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 − 20.3 + 15.6 − 0.5 + 16.1 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 + 2.0 + 7.8
2003          Oct + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 − 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Nov + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.8         Dec + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 10.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 − 12.9 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7         Mar + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Apr + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 4.4 + 4.8 − 0.1 + 4.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 + 7.1 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 3.5 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 7.1 + 3.5 − 0.2 + 3.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.5
         July + 2.1 − 5.5 + 7.0 + 5.1 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Aug + 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.2         Sep + 8.3 + 10.4 − 1.8 − 2.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1
Domestic government End of year or month *
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −2003 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −
2003          Oct 101.6 15.2 82.7 25.7 57.0 0.5 56.5 2.0 1.7 35.8 1.1 −
         Nov 104.1 15.8 84.6 27.0 57.7 0.5 57.2 2.0 1.7 35.8 1.1 −         Dec 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −
2004          Jan 106.3 16.1 86.6 29.8 56.8 0.5 56.3 2.0 1.7 34.8 1.2 −
         Feb 107.4 16.6 87.2 30.0 57.1 0.5 56.7 2.1 1.6 34.8 1.2 −         Mar 106.4 17.6 85.0 28.6 56.4 0.9 55.6 2.2 1.6 33.5 1.0 −
         Apr 105.8 17.3 84.7 28.6 56.2 0.9 55.3 2.2 1.6 33.3 1.1 −
         May 108.9 18.5 86.6 30.6 56.0 0.9 55.0 2.2 1.6 33.2 1.0 −         June 111.4 20.0 87.5 32.1 55.4 0.9 54.5 2.2 1.6 33.1 1.1 −
         July 109.5 18.5 87.0 31.5 55.5 0.9 54.6 2.4 1.6 33.0 1.0 −
         Aug 108.6 18.7 85.8 31.2 54.7 0.9 53.8 2.4 1.6 33.0 1.0 −         Sep 109.5 19.6 85.8 32.5 53.4 0.9 52.5 2.5 1.6 33.0 1.1 −
Changes *
2002 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 8.7 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 −2003 − 4.8 + 1.2 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 −
2003          Oct − 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Nov + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 − + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Dec + 4.0 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.0 −
2004          Jan − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −         Mar − 1.0 + 1.0 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.1 −
         Apr − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         May + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −         June + 2.6 + 1.6 + 1.0 + 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         July − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −         Sep + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.52003 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
2003          Oct 2,013.1 595.7 741.8 213.0 528.7 7.5 521.2 577.4 98.3 5.0 29.2 14.5
         Nov 2,034.5 618.3 739.4 210.6 528.8 7.8 521.0 578.3 98.4 4.9 29.4 12.7         Dec 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
2004          Jan 2,031.1 616.1 727.7 195.2 532.6 7.8 524.7 588.6 98.7 5.6 29.6 9.8
         Feb 2,034.3 618.8 727.6 193.4 534.3 7.8 526.4 589.4 98.5 5.7 29.6 10.4         Mar 2,039.3 617.7 734.2 196.7 537.6 7.7 529.8 589.2 98.2 5.8 30.1 10.9
         Apr 2,048.2 626.8 734.9 192.3 542.7 7.6 535.0 589.0 97.5 5.8 30.2 10.6
         May 2,053.5 624.2 743.6 197.3 546.3 7.5 538.8 588.3 97.3 5.8 30.2 11.4         June 2,046.8 623.4 738.7 188.3 550.4 7.4 543.0 587.7 97.1 5.7 30.4 9.9
         July 2,050.9 619.0 746.6 194.3 552.2 7.3 545.0 588.3 97.0 5.7 30.5 10.3
         Aug 2,052.8 620.4 746.4 193.4 553.0 7.1 545.9 588.9 97.2 5.6 30.9 8.2         Sep 2,060.2 629.9 744.6 189.6 555.0 7.1 547.9 588.7 97.0 5.5 30.9 10.2
Changes *
2002 + 60.3 + 47.9 + 12.8 − 3.6 + 16.4 − 1.2 + 17.5 + 1.0 − 1.4 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 1.62003 + 58.7 + 47.2 + 1.0 − 18.7 + 19.7 − 0.1 + 19.8 + 15.1 − 4.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 7.8
2003          Oct + 5.9 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Nov + 21.2 + 22.6 − 2.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.8         Dec − 2.3 − 12.1 − 0.3 − 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 10.0 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 1.1 + 9.9 − 11.4 − 13.6 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 3.2 + 3.6 − 1.0 − 2.7 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7         Mar + 5.0 − 1.1 + 6.6 + 3.3 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5
         Apr + 9.1 + 9.0 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 5.0 − 0.1 + 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 5.3 − 2.6 + 8.7 + 5.0 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 6.7 − 1.2 − 4.6 − 8.6 + 4.1 − 0.1 + 4.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
         July + 4.1 − 4.0 + 7.5 + 5.7 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Aug + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.2         Sep + 7.1 + 9.5 − 2.1 − 3.7 + 1.6 − + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.12002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.52003 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.3
2003          Oct 727.9 201.0 500.0 103.2 396.8 1.5 395.3 4.8 22.1 4.7 17.4 14.5
         Nov 733.5 206.0 500.7 102.8 397.9 1.7 396.2 4.7 22.0 4.7 17.4 12.7         Dec 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.3
2004          Jan 726.6 211.6 488.2 90.4 397.9 1.8 396.1 4.9 21.9 5.3 17.4 9.8
         Feb 723.7 207.6 489.3 90.0 399.3 1.8 397.5 5.1 21.7 5.4 17.4 10.4         Mar 730.9 207.4 496.5 94.6 401.9 1.9 400.0 5.1 21.8 5.5 17.8 10.9
         Apr 740.0 213.5 499.5 92.7 406.8 2.0 404.9 5.2 21.8 5.5 17.8 10.6
         May 741.6 205.6 509.0 98.2 410.8 1.9 408.9 5.3 21.8 5.5 17.8 11.4         June 737.6 204.6 506.2 91.6 414.5 1.9 412.7 5.1 21.7 5.5 18.0 9.9
         July 742.9 200.6 515.4 99.0 416.4 1.9 414.5 5.2 21.8 5.4 18.0 10.3
         Aug 746.1 203.8 515.3 98.7 416.6 1.8 414.8 5.2 21.8 5.3 18.1 8.2         Sep 753.0 212.1 513.9 95.7 418.2 1.9 416.4 5.2 21.8 5.3 18.1 10.2
Changes *
2002 + 31.1 + 13.4 + 18.3 + 7.4 + 10.9 − 1.3 + 12.2 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 1.6 − 1.62003 + 29.6 + 11.2 + 17.9 + 2.9 + 15.0 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 7.8
2003          Oct + 4.3 + 0.3 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.9
         Nov + 5.4 + 5.0 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.8         Dec − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 4.2 + 5.8 − 9.9 − 11.7 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Feb − 2.9 − 3.1 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.7         Mar + 7.1 − 0.2 + 7.2 + 4.6 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Apr + 9.5 + 6.1 + 3.0 − 1.9 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 1.6 − 7.9 + 9.4 + 5.5 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 4.1 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 6.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
         July + 5.3 − 4.1 + 9.2 + 7.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5
         Aug + 3.4 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.2         Sep + 6.6 + 8.3 − 1.8 − 3.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.2
2002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.62003 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.4
2004          Apr 1,308.1 413.3 400.2 69.4 272.9 58.0 13.0 235.4 218.0 27.5 172.8 17.6
         May 1,311.9 418.6 405.9 69.4 278.2 58.4 12.7 234.7 216.8 26.7 172.6 17.5         June 1,309.3 418.8 405.2 68.0 279.2 58.0 13.5 232.5 214.8 26.2 171.6 17.0
         July 1,308.0 418.5 405.5 70.1 277.9 57.5 13.0 231.2 214.1 26.2 171.4 16.6
         Aug 1,306.7 416.6 403.5 70.6 275.5 57.4 13.1 231.0 214.1 26.3 171.3 16.5         Sep 1,307.2 417.9 404.3 69.3 277.5 57.5 13.5 230.7 213.9 26.4 171.1 16.4
Changes *
2002 + 29.2 + 34.5 + 33.1 + 5.6 + 22.4 + 5.1 + 1.5 − 5.5 − 4.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 2.12003 + 29.2 + 36.0 + 35.3 + 5.6 + 23.7 + 6.0 + 0.6 − 16.9 − 16.2 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 4.2
2004          Apr − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.3 + 1.9 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.3
         May + 3.7 + 5.4 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.1         June − 2.6 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.5
         July − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.4
         Aug − 1.5 − 1.9 − 2.0 + 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0         Sep + 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 2.0 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.2
2002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.62003 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 21.9
2004          Apr 105.8 46.2 2.5 7.2 36.5 0.0 12.6 19.6 3.5 3.0 13.0 0.1 20.4
         May 108.9 45.8 2.7 6.6 36.4 0.0 12.6 18.4 2.5 2.7 13.1 0.0 20.3         June 111.4 47.1 2.8 8.2 36.0 0.0 12.6 21.2 4.8 3.4 12.9 0.1 20.2
         July 109.5 47.2 3.0 8.1 36.0 0.0 12.5 19.4 3.2 3.4 12.7 0.1 20.2
         Aug 108.6 47.6 3.0 8.5 36.1 0.0 12.5 16.8 2.5 2.5 11.8 0.1 20.1         Sep 109.5 46.0 3.8 7.1 35.0 0.0 12.6 19.3 3.3 4.2 11.7 0.1 20.1
Changes *
2002 − 8.6 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.62003 − 4.8 − 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.7
2004          Apr − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5
         May + 3.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1         June + 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         July − 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0         Sep + 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.1 − + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 1.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 − 2001
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 − 200218.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 − 2003
17.4 99.6 135.8 5.6 130.2 583.8 574.3 9.5 75.7 0.2 12.4 − 2004          Apr 
17.8 99.1 135.5 5.6 129.9 583.1 573.6 9.5 75.5 0.2 12.4 −          May
17.7 96.7 135.8 5.5 130.4 582.6 573.1 9.5 75.4 0.2 12.4 −          June
17.0 95.3 135.9 5.4 130.5 583.1 573.6 9.5 75.2 0.3 12.5 −          July
16.9 94.6 136.4 5.3 131.1 583.7 574.1 9.6 75.4 0.3 12.8 −          Aug 16.8 93.9 136.8 5.3 131.5 583.5 573.8 9.6 75.2 0.3 12.8 −          Sep 
Changes *
− 1.3 − 10.9 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2002− 0.7 − 21.6 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 14.7 + 14.4 + 0.3 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2003
− 0.6 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2004          Apr 
+ 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          May
− 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
− 0.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          July
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 −          Aug − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Sep 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
 
   
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
27.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 2001
27.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 200224.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0 2003
22.8 8.8 9.1 2.0 2.9 0.2 17.2 2.5 9.3 4.6 0.9 0.0 2004          Apr 
24.8 10.2 9.7 2.0 2.9 0.2 19.9 3.0 11.5 4.5 0.9 0.0          May
23.8 9.4 9.6 2.0 2.9 0.3 19.3 3.0 10.9 4.5 0.9 0.0          June
23.9 9.6 9.3 2.0 3.0 0.2 19.1 2.8 10.6 4.8 0.9 0.0          July
25.5 10.2 10.3 2.0 3.0 0.3 18.6 3.0 9.9 4.8 0.9 0.0          Aug 24.5 9.4 10.0 2.1 3.0 0.3 19.7 3.0 11.2 4.6 1.0 0.0          Sep 
Changes *
+ 0.0 + 1.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 2002− 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 2003
− 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 2004          Apr 
+ 2.0 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          May
− 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0          June
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 −          July
+ 1.6 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Aug − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          Sep 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.8
2002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.92003 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 16.0 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.0
2004          May 600.4 590.6 504.6 384.3 86.0 74.2 9.8 7.8 0.3 105.7 98.9 84.8 6.8
         June 599.7 590.0 504.3 385.1 85.6 73.8 9.7 7.8 0.3 105.4 98.7 84.9 6.8
         July 600.3 590.6 504.9 387.4 85.7 74.0 9.7 7.8 0.3 105.3 98.6 85.1 6.7
         Aug 601.0 591.3 505.6 388.1 85.7 74.0 9.7 7.8 0.3 105.5 98.7 85.4 6.7         Sep 600.8 591.2 505.7 389.0 85.4 73.9 9.7 7.8 0.3 105.3 98.6 85.3 6.7
Changes *
2002 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 11.0 + 16.4 − 10.2 − 8.7 − 1.1 − 0.7 . − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.12003 + 14.2 + 15.1 + 28.0 + 23.8 − 12.9 − 12.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 . − 4.6 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.1
2004          May − 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1
         June − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0
         July + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1
         Aug + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0         Sep − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.4
2002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.32003 1,490.1 353.4 20.8 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.2
2004          May 1,565.4 383.4 20.1 208.0 36.5 67.6 111.8 1,386.1 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.4 40.7 3.3
         June 1,560.4 374.6 20.8 210.6 40.0 71.3 100.3 1,388.8 2.4 0.5 0.4 1.5 41.0 3.3
         July 1,566.5 377.8 22.1 218.5 37.5 69.4 100.3 1,396.9 2.3 0.4 0.4 1.5 41.0 3.3
         Aug 1,568.8 382.2 21.3 218.5 42.4 69.9 99.0 1,400.0 2.5 0.6 0.4 1.5 41.4 3.5         Sep 1,580.8 384.9 21.1 219.3 41.3 68.8 98.6 1,413.4 2.5 0.6 0.4 1.5 41.8 3.6
Changes *
2002 + 9.1 + 6.3 − 4.5 + 12.1 + 16.2 + 14.2 + 4.6 − 9.7 + 4.8 + 4.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.12003 + 19.6 + 7.0 + 4.7 + 13.2 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 14.9 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.3
2004          May + 12.4 + 6.6 − 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 2.0 + 0.5 + 13.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
         June − 5.1 − 8.8 + 0.7 + 2.5 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 11.5 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
         July + 6.2 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 7.9 − 2.5 − 2.0 + 0.0 + 8.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
         Aug + 2.2 + 4.4 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 1.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.2         Sep + 12.1 + 2.7 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 13.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. — 3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. — 4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. — 5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. — 6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2003 27 172.9 30.1 0.1 10.6 37.3 63.6 8.6 11.3 0.4 29.3 106.8 4.0 7.1 7.2 105.5
2004          July 27 177.0 31.2 0.1 12.0 35.9 63.3 9.1 13.0 0.4 28.8 108.7 4.2 7.0 7.4 7.0
         Aug 27 177.3 30.7 0.1 12.0 35.6 63.7 9.2 13.6 0.4 28.9 108.9 4.2 7.0 7.4 6.7         Sep 27 180.0 32.5 0.1 12.0 35.4 62.9 9.2 13.8 0.4 29.5 109.2 4.3 6.9 7.4 7.2
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          July 16 128.6 25.1 0.0 6.0 22.9 45.4 8.3 9.0 0.3 21.4 73.9 4.0 7.0 4.7 4.4         Aug 16 129.0 24.5 0.0 6.1 22.7 45.8 8.4 9.6 0.3 21.6 74.1 4.0 7.0 4.7 4.2         Sep 16 131.5 26.1 0.0 6.2 22.6 45.1 8.5 9.8 0.3 22.1 74.3 4.1 6.9 4.8 4.6
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          July 11 48.4 6.0 0.1 6.0 13.0 17.8 0.8 4.0 0.1 7.5 34.8 0.2 − 2.6 2.5         Aug 11 48.3 6.1 0.0 5.9 12.9 17.9 0.8 4.0 0.1 7.3 34.9 0.2 − 2.6 2.5         Sep 11 48.5 6.4 0.0 5.8 12.9 17.9 0.8 4.0 0.1 7.3 34.9 0.2 − 2.6 2.6
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2003 27.0 2.9 5.7 48.2 29.7 43.7 17.9 4.0 8.2 3.2 17.5 12.2 8.0 14.8 11.9 0.6
2004          July 2.0 0.0 0.5 4.0 2.8 4.1 1.7 0.5 0.9 0.4 1.5 11.6 8.0 1.0 0.1
         Aug 1.9 0.0 0.4 2.9 2.0 3.0 1.2 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.3 11.2 7.9 1.0 0.0         Sep 2.0 0.1 0.4 3.1 2.1 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.3 10.9 7.8 1.1 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          July 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.8 3.0 1.2 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.2 7.0 3.9 0.7 0.0         Aug 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.0 1.2 2.2 0.8 0.2 0.3 0.1 1.0 6.7 3.9 0.7 0.0         Sep 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.1 1.3 2.3 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.0 6.5 3.8 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          July 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.6 4.0 0.3 0.0         Aug 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.5 4.0 0.3 0.0         Sep 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.0 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.9
2002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.02003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2003          Nov 55 201 1,356.0 618.6 539.3 173.7 365.6 79.2 670.9 471.2 18.3 15.7 452.8 199.7 66.6
         Dec 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2004          Jan 55 202 1,390.3 647.7 566.3 191.5 374.8 81.3 673.5 472.8 19.2 16.9 453.6 200.8 69.1
         Feb 55 203 1,413.6 666.3 587.2 190.0 397.2 79.1 679.6 482.5 19.3 17.1 463.1 197.1 67.8         Mar 55 203 1,466.2 689.6 607.6 198.5 409.1 82.0 708.6 506.9 19.0 16.9 487.9 201.7 67.9
         Apr 55 205 1,493.1 713.2 631.2 207.6 423.6 82.0 711.1 509.6 18.8 16.6 490.8 201.5 68.8
         May 55 206 1,435.9 672.9 591.4 199.1 392.3 81.5 691.9 506.0 18.1 16.0 487.9 185.9 71.2         June 55 205 1,435.5 670.2 588.8 190.3 398.5 81.5 681.9 486.5 18.3 16.7 468.1 195.4 83.3
         July 54 204 1,447.9 675.6 589.2 177.6 411.6 86.4 686.8 500.5 17.1 15.7 483.4 186.3 85.6
         Aug 54 206 1,451.9 676.3 588.8 174.4 414.3 87.6 686.5 492.2 17.6 16.3 474.7 194.3 89.1
Changes *
2002 − 8 − 11 −139.1 −133.4 −139.9 − 15.4 −124.5 + 6.5 − 3.6 − 9.2 − 1.9 − 2.2 − 7.3 + 5.7 − 2.22003 − 5 − 3 − 6.8 − 45.3 − 17.4 − 12.7 − 4.7 − 27.9 + 22.5 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.7 + 24.9 + 15.9
2003          Nov − + 1 + 10.8 + 4.9 + 6.0 + 5.5 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 3.8 + 4.6 − 1.7 − 0.8 + 6.3 − 0.8 + 2.1
         Dec − + 1 − 28.0 − 8.3 − 6.2 + 11.9 − 18.0 − 2.2 − 19.6 − 19.5 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 20.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
2004          Jan − − + 80.6 + 42.7 + 38.0 + 6.0 + 32.1 + 4.7 + 31.7 + 28.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 28.0 + 3.7 + 6.2
         Feb − + 1 + 24.8 + 19.5 + 21.7 − 1.6 + 23.2 − 2.2 + 6.7 + 9.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 9.5 − 3.0 − 1.3         Mar − − + 36.7 + 16.7 + 14.4 + 8.5 + 5.9 + 2.4 + 20.1 + 18.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 18.6 + 1.8 − 0.2
         Apr − + 2 + 19.9 + 21.1 + 21.4 + 9.1 + 12.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.7
         May − + 1 − 44.9 − 36.0 − 35.8 − 8.5 − 27.4 − 0.1 − 13.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 13.7 + 4.0         June − − 1 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 3.2 − 8.8 + 5.6 − 0.1 − 10.7 − 19.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 20.1 + 9.2 + 12.0
         July − 1 − 1 + 5.9 + 3.3 − 1.4 − 12.7 + 11.2 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 11.2 − 1.3 − 1.0 + 12.4 − 9.8 + 1.3
         Aug − + 2 + 9.3 + 2.8 + 1.4 − 3.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 5.7 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 6.2 + 8.4 + 3.8
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.0
2002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.42003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2003          Nov 46 182 649.9 308.4 244.9 128.7 116.3 63.5 270.2 204.5 39.8 37.0 164.7 65.7 71.3
         Dec 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2004          Jan 46 177 618.1 295.8 233.1 115.2 117.9 62.7 263.3 199.1 41.6 37.9 157.5 64.2 59.0
         Feb 46 179 621.3 297.2 235.7 114.8 120.9 61.5 260.4 196.5 38.8 37.1 157.7 63.9 63.7         Mar 46 176 650.7 300.5 238.8 111.7 127.1 61.7 270.0 204.6 41.6 38.0 163.0 65.4 80.3
         Apr 46 176 663.2 298.4 236.6 111.1 125.5 61.8 274.8 207.7 40.9 37.8 166.8 67.1 90.1
         May 46 175 629.3 280.2 218.7 106.5 112.1 61.5 275.1 206.6 39.5 37.9 167.1 68.5 74.0         June 45 173 628.6 283.0 220.9 110.7 110.2 62.1 278.9 210.0 40.3 37.3 169.7 68.9 66.7
         July 45 173 636.3 292.3 229.6 116.4 113.2 62.7 279.0 209.7 39.6 36.7 170.1 69.2 65.0
         Aug 45 173 627.9 289.0 224.3 115.2 109.1 64.7 278.1 208.5 38.1 36.2 170.3 69.6 60.8
Changes *
2002 + 1 + 0 − 78.3 + 6.7 + 13.3 + 20.0 − 6.7 − 6.6 − 70.0 − 42.0 − 5.2 − 4.8 − 36.8 − 28.1 − 15.0
2003 − 1 − 21 − 32.8 − 14.0 − 10.7 + 1.6 − 12.3 − 3.3 − 11.9 − 14.2 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 9.0 + 2.3 − 6.9
2003          Nov − − 5 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.3
         Dec − − 3 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 3.7 − 1.4 + 5.1 − 1.6 + 9.5 + 11.9 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 10.3 − 2.4 − 8.9
2004          Jan − − 2 − 30.7 − 13.1 − 14.4 − 12.1 − 2.3 + 1.4 − 14.9 − 15.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 15.9 + 0.9 − 2.8
         Feb − + 2 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 2.6 − 0.4 + 3.0 − 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 4.7         Mar − − 3 + 26.7 + 1.8 + 2.1 − 3.1 + 5.2 − 0.3 + 8.5 + 7.1 + 2.8 + 0.8 + 4.3 + 1.5 + 16.4
         Apr − − + 10.8 − 3.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.1 + 3.9 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 1.7 + 10.0
         May − − 1 − 32.5 − 17.3 − 17.3 − 4.6 − 12.8 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 16.2         June − 1 − 2 − 0.9 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 4.2 − 2.0 + 0.5 + 3.7 + 3.3 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 2.5 + 0.4 − 7.2
         July − − + 6.9 + 8.9 + 8.5 + 5.7 + 2.8 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.7
         Aug − − − 7.6 − 2.8 − 5.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 + 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 4.2
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarde da s
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 2001
1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 20021,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 2003
1,124.7 738.8 261.6 477.2 385.9 69.5 64.0 60.6 5.5 5.2 316.4 149.4 26.6 55.3 2003          Nov 
1,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4          Dec 
1,155.0 765.6 281.4 484.3 389.4 74.0 68.0 64.8 6.0 5.7 315.4 149.9 28.9 56.4 2004          Jan 
1,186.4 790.4 267.1 523.2 396.1 72.4 66.3 62.6 6.1 5.7 323.7 144.6 28.9 53.7          Feb 
1,227.8 808.2 273.9 534.3 419.5 71.8 65.6 62.4 6.1 5.7 347.8 155.4 28.1 55.0          Mar 
1,249.4 822.6 275.2 547.4 426.8 69.1 62.9 58.7 6.3 5.9 357.7 157.4 28.1 58.2          Apr 
1,193.8 776.0 268.5 507.5 417.9 65.0 58.3 54.4 6.7 6.3 352.9 155.3 27.8 59.0          May1,187.6 775.6 267.1 508.5 412.0 65.9 59.2 55.8 6.7 6.4 346.1 160.2 28.0 59.7          June
1,199.1 774.5 261.5 513.0 424.6 69.2 62.0 58.9 7.1 6.8 355.4 161.9 28.0 58.9          July
1,209.8 785.8 266.7 519.0 424.1 70.0 62.8 59.7 7.2 6.8 354.1 153.6 27.0 61.5          Aug 
Changes *
− 53.4 − 31.7 + 56.0 − 87.7 − 21.7 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 26.9 −104.8 + 1.8 + 17.2 2002+ 34.4 + 12.6 + 17.0 − 4.4 + 21.8 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 18.1 − 72.6 + 4.6 + 26.8 2003
+ 4.4 + 8.8 − 3.7 + 12.5 − 4.4 − 6.9 − 6.9 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 4.1 2003          Nov 
− 23.4 + 2.8 + 5.5 − 2.7 − 26.2 − 3.3 − 3.5 − 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 22.9 − 10.0 + 3.9 + 1.4          Dec 
+ 66.6 + 31.0 + 14.2 + 16.8 + 35.5 + 7.8 + 7.4 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 27.8 + 10.5 − 1.5 + 5.1 2004          Jan 
+ 31.9 + 25.5 − 14.2 + 39.7 + 6.4 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.0 − 5.3 − 0.0 − 1.7          Feb 
+ 29.7 + 10.0 + 6.8 + 3.2 + 19.6 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 20.3 + 10.8 − 0.8 − 2.9          Mar 
+ 14.8 + 10.7 + 1.3 + 9.5 + 4.1 − 2.7 − 2.8 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 3.0          Apr 
− 47.3 − 41.3 − 6.7 − 34.6 − 6.0 − 4.1 − 4.6 − 4.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 4.7          May− 7.2 − 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 6.0 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 7.0 + 4.9 + 0.2 + 0.0          June
+ 6.4 − 3.9 − 5.7 + 1.8 + 10.2 + 3.2 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 7.0 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 2.2          July
+ 15.0 + 13.5 + 5.3 + 8.2 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 8.3 − 1.0 + 3.5          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001
503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003
469.7 291.3 94.9 196.5 178.3 31.0 26.8 24.4 4.2 4.2 147.3 71.9 39.2 69.1 2003          Nov 
467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4          Dec 
444.3 263.0 86.3 176.7 181.3 30.0 26.0 25.7 4.0 3.9 151.3 67.9 38.3 67.6 2004          Jan 
447.4 263.5 86.0 177.4 183.9 30.1 26.1 25.7 4.0 3.9 153.8 68.3 39.0 66.7          Feb 
470.2 273.7 88.0 185.7 196.5 32.6 28.7 28.3 3.9 3.8 163.9 71.1 39.2 70.2          Mar 
480.6 297.0 75.6 221.4 183.6 30.0 26.2 25.8 3.9 3.8 153.6 70.7 39.4 72.4          Apr 
451.1 271.9 75.7 196.3 179.2 28.5 24.7 24.2 3.8 3.7 150.7 70.6 39.2 68.5          May449.2 273.7 81.0 192.6 175.5 29.4 25.6 25.1 3.8 3.7 146.1 70.3 39.5 69.6          June
457.0 279.0 83.1 195.9 178.0 30.0 26.1 25.3 3.9 3.9 148.0 71.4 39.9 68.0          July
447.8 273.3 80.9 192.3 174.5 28.5 24.2 23.3 4.3 4.2 146.0 72.0 39.7 68.4          Aug 
Changes *
− 47.1 − 37.4 + 20.3 − 57.8 − 9.7 − 9.4 − 10.0 − 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 21.4 − 4.4 − 5.4 2002− 13.8 − 10.3 + 0.3 − 10.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 6.3 − 10.3 − 1.6 − 7.2 2003
+ 4.0 + 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.4 − 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.8 2003          Nov 
+ 4.0 − 4.4 + 4.9 − 9.3 + 8.4 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 9.5 − 3.7 + 2.1 + 0.3          Dec 
− 26.1 − 21.4 − 13.5 − 7.9 − 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 1.4 2004          Jan 
+ 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.6          Feb 
+ 20.8 + 9.0 + 1.9 + 7.1 + 11.9 + 2.6 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.3 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.9          Mar 
+ 8.8 + 22.5 − 12.4 + 34.9 − 13.7 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 2.2          Apr 
− 28.0 − 24.1 + 0.1 − 24.2 − 3.9 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 4.0          May− 2.1 + 1.6 + 5.4 − 3.8 − 3.7 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 1.1          June
+ 7.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 + 2.9 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 1.6          July
− 8.3 − 5.2 − 2.2 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.4          Aug 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market
securities. — 3Including own debt securities. — 4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2004          Mar 6,756.2 135.1 0.5 134.6 135.3 0.7 0.0
         Apr 6,747.2 134.9 0.5 134.4 135.0 0.6 0.0
         May 6,847.2 136.9 0.5 136.4 137.1 0.7 0.0         June 6,925.3 138.5 0.5 138.0 138.8 0.8 0.0
         July 6,949.1 139.0 0.5 138.5 139.1 0.6 0.0
         Aug 6,963.2 139.3 0.5 138.7 139.3 0.6 0.0         Sep 6,960.0 139.2 0.5 138.7 139.3 0.6 0.0
         Oct  
p,8 6,916.7 138.3 0.5 137.8 138.4 0.6 ...
         Nov  p ... ... ... 137.9 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2004          Mar 1,885,245 37,705 217 37,488 37,784 296 3
         Apr 1,883,341 37,667 216 37,451 37,681 230 0
         May 1,911,592 38,232 216 38,016 38,331 315 1         June 1,913,668 38,273 216 38,058 38,465 407 4
         July 1,914,325 38,287 214 38,073 38,336 263 1
         Aug 1,890,399 37,808 213 37,595 37,860 265 1         Sep 1,875,073 37,501 212 37,290 37,543 253 1
         Oct  
p 1,870,662 37,413 211 37,203 37,503 300 3
         Nov  p 1,877,711 37,554 210 37,345 ... ... ...
1Up to December 2003, the Eurosystem’s reserve maintenance periods application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve
began on the 24th day of each month and ended on the 23rd day of the ratio of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying
following month (with the first reserve maintenance period lasting from 1 the reserve ratios to the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of
January 1999 until 23 February 1999). From March 2004, the reserve the European Central Bank on the application of minimum reserves. —
maintenance period will start on the settlement day of the main refinancing 5Average credit balances of the credit institutions at the national central
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of banks. — 6Average credit balances less required reserves after deduction of
the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary policy stance is the lump-sum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the
scheduled. For the transitional period, provision has been made for a lump-sum allowance. — 8The total number of deficiencies was not
extended reserve maintenance period lasting from 24 January until 9 March available when this report went to press. 2004. — 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
         Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.71
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          to
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
 
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2004 Oct                  5 325,420 255,500 − 2.00 2.02 2.03 7
         Oct                12 338,406 244,500 − 2.00 2.02 2.03 8
         Oct                20 380,224 253,000 − 2.00 2.03 2.03 5
         Oct                25 355,097 268,000 − 2.00 2.03 2.04 9
         Nov                  3 381,182 264,500 − 2.00 2.04 2.04 6
         Nov                  9 358,101 258,000 − 2.00 2.04 2.04 8
         Nov                17 384,039 262,500 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2004 July               29 40,354 25,000 − − 2.07 2.08 91
         Aug                26 37,957 25,000 − − 2.06 2.08 91
         Sep                30 37,414 25,000 − − 2.06 2.08 84
         Oct                28 46,646 25,000 − − 2.10 2.11 91
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2004          Apr 2.07 2.00 − 2.80 2.03 1.92 − 2.07 2.08 2.05 2.05 2.05 2.06 2.11 2.16
         May 2.02 1.55 − 2.30 2.07 2.04 − 2.09 2.02 2.05 2.06 2.09 2.14 2.21 2.30         June 2.03 1.70 − 2.20 2.09 2.05 − 2.12 2.03 2.07 2.08 2.11 2.19 2.29 2.40
         July 2.06 2.02 − 2.45 2.10 2.08 − 2.12 2.07 2.07 2.08 2.12 2.19 2.26 2.36
         Aug 2.04 1.85 − 2.12 2.09 2.07 − 2.11 2.04 2.07 2.08 2.11 2.17 2.22 2.30         Sep 2.05 1.95 − 2.50 2.10 2.07 − 2.15 2.05 2.07 2.08 2.12 2.20 2.28 2.38
         Oct 2.11 2.03 − 2.95 2.13 2.11 − 2.15 2.11 2.08 2.09 2.15 2.19 2.25 2.32
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2004          Jan 1.94 3.36 2.09 4.28 5.05 4.89 5.11 8.15 7.02 5.92 4.58 4.07 4.56
         Feb 1.93 3.42 2.09 4.22 5.01 4.91 5.11 8.13 7.16 5.95 4.62 4.06 4.58         Mar 1.92 3.32 2.08 4.17 4.98 4.82 5.03 8.05 7.17 5.89 4.56 3.96 4.61
         Apr 1.90 3.35 2.09 4.17 4.90 4.75 5.01 8.03 7.08 5.85 4.51 3.91 4.59
         May 1.89 3.28 2.07 4.15 4.89 4.72 4.99 7.99 7.04 5.82 4.50 3.87 4.55         June 1.88 3.27 2.09 4.11 4.87 4.69 4.97 7.93 6.99 5.80 4.47 3.89 4.53
         July 1.89 3.25 2.10 4.10 4.91 4.63 4.94 7.93 6.98 5.76 4.48 3.88 4.50
         Aug 1.89 3.22 2.13 4.02 4.88 4.58 4.91 7.93 6.95 5.77 4.45 3.84 4.48         Sep 1.89 3.22 2.13 3.97 4.82 4.58 4.90 8.06 7.14 5.85 4.46 3.99 4.52
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2004          Jan 0.69 1.90 2.38 2.74 2.03 2.65 0.93 1.99 2.08 3.10
         Feb 0.69 1.89 2.16 2.45 2.02 2.63 0.86 1.98 2.22 3.60         Mar 0.70 1.91 2.13 2.31 2.00 2.59 0.86 1.96 2.16 3.35
         Apr 0.70 1.96 2.13 2.41 2.02 2.57 0.85 1.97 2.04 3.46
         May 0.70 1.86 2.15 2.43 2.00 2.55 0.86 1.96 2.06 3.74         June 0.70 1.87 2.21 2.42 2.00 2.55 0.87 1.99 2.27 3.76
         July 0.70 1.90 2.21 2.54 1.99 2.55 0.86 1.99 2.59 4.00
         Aug 0.71 1.91 2.18 2.67 2.00 2.53 0.87 1.98 2.36 3.99         Sep 0.72 1.90 2.20 2.48 2.00 2.52 0.90 2.00 2.31 3.68
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2004          Jan 9.87 8.35 7.63 7.22 8.56 4.47 3.61 4.30 5.02 4.85 4.08 5.10 5.18
         Feb 9.81 8.20 7.45 7.06 8.49 4.31 3.54 4.22 4.96 4.86 4.13 5.07 5.04         Mar 9.72 8.05 7.38 6.90 8.37 4.28 3.47 4.14 4.87 4.71 3.96 5.06 4.96
         Apr 9.73 7.86 7.35 6.65 8.30 4.24 3.42 4.06 4.77 4.69 3.89 4.97 4.95
         May 9.68 7.96 7.33 6.77 8.27 4.17 3.40 4.05 4.75 4.61 4.14 4.87 4.94         June 9.55 7.96 7.12 6.74 8.42 4.17 3.42 4.12 4.81 4.69 3.93 4.97 5.01
         July 9.57 8.07 7.18 6.86 8.52 4.20 3.47 4.16 4.81 4.69 4.04 4.94 5.01
         Aug 9.62 8.26 7.67 6.89 8.58 4.29 3.50 4.19 4.86 4.65 3.91 5.07 5.02         Sep 9.61 8.18 7.45 6.96 8.45 4.23 3.49 4.07 4.76 4.66 3.90 4.98 5.00
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2004          Jan 5.67 4.01 4.88 4.87 3.02 3.39 4.29
         Feb 5.63 4.00 4.93 4.78 3.00 3.19 4.30         Mar 5.56 3.95 4.81 4.73 2.95 3.27 4.37
         Apr 5.51 3.88 4.75 4.69 3.00 3.28 4.21
         May 5.46 4.00 4.62 4.59 3.00 3.30 4.21         June 5.46 3.97 4.81 4.71 2.99 3.26 4.08
         July 5.36 4.02 4.85 4.65 3.02 3.28 4.27
         Aug 5.37 4.06 4.89 4.73 2.99 3.12 4.30         Sep 5.37 4.00 4.85 4.68 2.99 3.37 4.45
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Sep 2.00 133,458 3.23 187,511 2.04 77,051 5.04 29,069
         Oct 1.99 131,553 3.22 187,892 2.02 80,075 5.02 29,052
         Nov 1.98 129,649 3.16 186,957 2.02 80,795 4.99 29,633         Dec 2.00 128,564 3.16 190,465 2.05 74,309 4.98 29,363
2004          Jan 1.97 126,519 3.14 191,301 2.00 65,515 4.97 29,816
         Feb 1.94 124,617 3.13 191,935 1.99 72,633 4.96 29,775         Mar 1.94 122,662 3.11 192,728 1.98 71,568 4.96 29,211
         Apr 1.92 119,413 3.07 192,985 1.97 71,450 4.93 29,591
         May 1.90 118,543 3.05 192,822 1.98 73,261 4.93 29,523         June 1.89 115,574 3.03 193,431 1.98 71,355 4.88 29,376
         July 1.91 113,816 3.03 193,684 1.99 72,644 4.86 29,709
         Aug 1.91 112,858 3.03 194,631 2.00 70,573 4.82 29,760         Sep 1.90 111,879 2.97 194,980 2.00 69,114 4.80 29,936
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2003          Sep 5.48 8,022 5.11 32,871 5.85 879,014 8.94 90,945 6.38 70,957 6.34 333,058
         Oct 5.50 7,772 5.07 33,146 5.83 882,447 8.89 89,093 6.36 70,809 6.32 332,152
         Nov 5.44 7,751 5.04 33,167 5.82 884,545 8.74 84,602 6.33 70,975 6.30 331,730         Dec 5.55 7,756 5.01 33,052 5.79 886,159 8.90 88,558 6.35 70,446 6.28 329,925
2004          Jan 5.43 7,641 4.97 32,907 5.78 885,875 8.87 84,977 6.32 69,872 6.27 328,719
         Feb 5.38 7,521 4.96 32,809 5.77 884,820 8.77 83,635 6.29 69,585 6.26 328,977         Mar 5.32 7,690 4.90 32,180 5.75 880,980 8.74 84,319 6.27 69,587 6.25 331,220
         Apr 5.29 7,401 4.87 32,148 5.74 881,832 8.81 82,911 6.19 70,268 6.22 331,533
         May 5.27 7,501 4.84 32,268 5.73 882,795 8.74 81,301 6.15 70,586 6.21 331,611         June 5.23 7,635 4.83 33,008 5.71 886,304 8.88 83,204 6.14 70,479 6.21 331,013
         July 5.24 7,577 4.77 33,072 5.69 888,736 8.80 81,277 6.10 71,134 6.21 331,665
         Aug 5.24 7,478 4.75 33,203 5.68 890,887 8.77 80,999 6.07 71,478 6.20 331,010         Sep 5.27 7,596 4.72 33,362 5.67 894,787 8.83 83,016 6.04 70,958 6.20 329,458
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Sep 4.88 193,086 4.51 88,151 5.39 486,570
         Oct 4.83 188,707 4.48 88,246 5.37 487,573
         Nov 4.75 190,666 4.48 88,462 5.36 489,132         Dec 4.84 187,742 4.46 87,966 5.33 488,777
2004          Jan 4.82 181,660 4.40 88,474 5.30 487,166
         Feb 4.78 181,186 4.37 87,879 5.29 488,299         Mar 4.76 183,464 4.34 87,519 5.27 487,244
         Apr 4.75 179,606 4.32 87,478 5.25 489,214
         May 4.77 174,716 4.28 89,876 5.23 491,825         June 4.79 176,791 4.32 90,154 5.22 488,805
         July 4.72 171,094 4.26 90,072 5.21 487,135
         Aug 4.68 170,136 4.21 90,723 5.19 487,903         Sep 4.76 171,077 4.25 89,980 5.25 485,472
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by the end of the month. — 1The effective interest rates may always be
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments onhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and deposits and loans but not any other related charges which may occur fornon-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarante es and
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. —
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a home improvements; including loans granted by building and loansample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics 4Consumer credits are loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting System / consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these statistics,
Banking statistics / EWU-Zinsstatistik). This information is currently available other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business , debt
in German only. — oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at consolidation, education etc. — 6 Including overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2003          Sep 1.06 393,137 1.88 28,352 2.46 679 2.73 1,891 2.04 491,693 2.88 88,197
         Oct 1.07 394,958 1.94 28,477 2.47 986 2.93 3,332 2.20 492,668 2.76 88,289
         Nov 1.06 412,862 1.89 24,839 2.52 1,065 3.04 3,325 2.15 493,279 2.73 88,529         Dec 1.08 400,936 1.89 29,428 2.84 1,512 2.91 2,519 2.17 502,167 2.72 89,528
2004          Jan 1.10 405,052 1.92 30,791 2.78 1,542 3.15 3,852 2.18 503,431 2.68 88,506
         Feb 1.10 411,617 1.95 23,387 2.41 1,056 2.86 2,340 2.12 504,560 2.66 88,115         Mar 1.12 410,717 2.03 28,021 2.31 840 2.66 2,357 2.10 504,583 2.62 87,863
         Apr 1.13 412,968 2.01 32,020 2.30 1,243 2.76 2,061 2.13 505,420 2.60 86,706
         May 1.13 418,859 1.88 30,506 2.33 1,097 2.74 2,404 2.10 505,649 2.58 85,838         June 1.13 419,073 1.88 25,696 2.46 838 2.71 1,725 2.13 505,366 2.57 85,480
         July 1.14 418,729 1.90 25,693 2.43 1,071 2.86 2,113 2.10 505,800 2.57 85,562
         Aug 1.16 416,996 1.96 24,546 2.50 701 3.12 2,459 2.11 506,415 2.56 85,491         Sep 1.17 418,190 1.89 23,979 2.50 913 2.78 2,724 2.13 506,492 2.55 85,177
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Sep 1.15 124,565 1.94 34,584 2.61 210 3.92 1,179
         Oct 1.15 127,129 1.93 40,008 2.41 156 4.02 4,523
         Nov 1.07 129,086 1.95 35,693 2.56 256 3.26 1,160         Dec 1.05 138,713 1.96 36,247 2.76 360 4.09 1,075
2004          Jan 1.16 136,443 1.92 35,633 2.43 174 3.90 823
         Feb 1.11 128,210 1.95 38,596 2.18 197 4.26 697         Mar 1.11 130,095 1.92 34,914 2.28 201 3.82 1,274
         Apr 1.10 134,285 1.90 30,589 1.85 222 3.93 1,075
         May 1.10 131,703 1.92 32,753 2.44 115 4.24 1,535         June 1.09 134,255 1.92 31,971 2.59 163 4.22 1,273
         July 1.08 131,254 1.95 32,273 3.10 334 4.25 2,601
         Aug 1.08 135,739 1.94 30,356 2.56 102 4.29 1,823         Sep 1.11 138,151 1.96 32,535 2.51 274 3.94 2,033
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2003          Sep 7.65 5.41 1,785 6.33 5,374 8.36 4,575 3.69 9,281 4.94 1,693 5.24 2,684
         Oct 7.52 5.26 2,631 6.33 5,096 8.42 4,398 3.73 11,515 5.00 3,368 5.26 2,543
         Nov 7.47 5.24 1,532 6.27 5,631 8.32 3,851 3.93 7,820 5.14 1,440 5.21 2,004         Dec 6.90 5.02 1,541 5.80 5,234 7.81 3,701 3.57 12,315 4.93 2,578 5.13 3,978
2004          Jan 8.01 5.30 1,427 6.62 4,233 9.00 3,746 3.85 8,611 5.08 1,992 5.27 1,998
         Feb 7.98 4.98 1,308 6.50 4,963 9.08 3,539 3.85 5,613 5.04 1,588 5.07 2,112         Mar 7.83 5.28 1,553 6.29 5,806 8.88 4,494 3.69 8,974 5.11 2,037 5.00 3,549
         Apr 7.56 5.05 1,664 6.08 6,345 8.86 4,074 3.50 9,264 4.92 1,658 5.00 2,903
         May 7.77 5.21 1,147 6.21 5,257 8.94 3,147 3.94 5,901 4.85 1,552 5.10 1,725         June 7.87 5.34 1,402 6.21 5,371 9.11 3,794 3.48 8,704 5.00 2,816 5.07 3,278
         July 8.02 5.25 1,492 6.34 5,020 9.27 3,792 3.64 9,119 4.90 1,908 5.15 2,018
         Aug 8.13 5.42 1,090 6.44 5,187 9.16 3,038 3.52 8,837 5.07 1,379 5.17 1,365         Sep 8.03 5.09 1,365 6.41 4,878 9.19 3,058 3.42 9,097 4.88 1,474 5.07 2,577
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volumeweighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Sep 10.47 64,592 4.90 4.63 2,033 4.52 3,166 4.96 6,143 5.03 3,584
         Oct 10.41 63,212 4.90 4.44 2,463 4.48 3,292 5.00 6,201 5.08 3,200
         Nov 10.27 59,790 5.00 4.68 1,866 4.62 2,903 5.07 5,368 5.12 3,108         Dec 10.48 62,675 5.06 4.63 2,878 4.75 3,710 5.14 7,473 5.19 3,380
2004          Jan 10.40 59,768 5.02 4.57 2,827 4.65 3,280 5.15 5,978 5.19 3,201
         Feb 10.40 57,555 4.95 4.56 1,999 4.61 2,457 5.06 4,262 5.03 2,628         Mar 10.38 57,884 4.85 4.43 2,504 4.48 3,240 4.99 5,417 4.98 2,983
         Apr 10.36 56,755 4.76 4.26 2,706 4.32 3,127 4.91 5,106 4.95 2,964
         May 10.35 55,144 4.80 4.49 2,079 4.37 2,736 4.91 4,497 4.94 2,865         June 10.38 56,024 4.83 4.49 2,314 4.32 3,479 4.96 5,292 5.09 2,934
         July 10.35 54,012 4.84 4.26 3,233 4.51 3,279 4.92 5,963 5.11 2,873
         Aug 10.33 53,601 4.88 4.37 2,071 4.59 2,291 5.04 3,844 4.99 2,648         Sep 10.33 55,219 4.75 4.44 2,058 4.29 2,825 4.84 4,833 4.96 2,652
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Sep 6.40 88,489 4.52 7,119 5.00 1,205 5.02 1,671
         Oct 6.47 85,930 4.51 7,345 4.99 1,471 5.08 1,868
         Nov 6.36 88,429 4.47 7,001 5.20 1,146 4.95 1,215         Dec 6.44 87,201 4.55 6,976 5.05 1,613 5.14 1,850
2004          Jan 6.33 84,562 4.52 6,495 5.13 1,152 5.20 1,579
         Feb 6.26 86,480 4.58 6,151 5.12 1,510 5.04 1,068         Mar 6.22 87,095 4.44 7,140 5.00 1,262 5.20 1,385
         Apr 6.11 84,844 4.43 6,733 4.89 1,419 5.04 1,211
         May 6.27 81,810 4.52 6,616 5.00 987 4.93 1,186         June 6.23 84,291 4.54 7,185 4.98 1,268 5.19 1,509
         July 6.21 80,484 4.62 7,193 5.01 1,360 5.05 1,171
         Aug 6.25 77,547 4.42 6,177 5.08 1,030 5.00 1,098         Sep 6.25 81,222 4.51 7,522 4.92 1,207 4.97 1,216
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Sep 3.24 34,013 3.84 3,239 4.72 4,921
         Oct 3.25 34,631 4.06 3,284 4.63 5,125
         Nov 3.16 35,610 3.90 3,669 4.73 4,434         Dec 3.32 41,204 3.87 5,084 4.78 7,639
2004          Jan 3.25 32,666 4.33 4,274 4.99 4,169
         Feb 3.24 26,802 3.60 2,681 4.58 3,317         Mar 3.20 35,662 3.85 3,509 4.85 5,627
         Apr 3.25 30,662 3.79 3,034 4.57 5,536
         May 3.26 26,670 3.93 3,403 4.79 4,593         June 3.26 32,704 3.93 3,754 4.63 5,444
         July 3.27 35,348 3.91 4,012 4.89 4,475
         Aug 3.26 28,221 3.60 3,766 4.70 3,971         Sep 3.31 31,752 3.65 4,204 4.41 5,135
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,866
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,8871993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,9151994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,1091997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,398 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,572 117,119 35,848 81,271 − 63,1082002 178,057 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 54,021 83,314 13,536 69,778 − 94,7432003 170,154 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 35,699 101,553 35,748 65,805 − 68,601
2004          July 33,915 20,006 6,888 8,716 4,402 13,909 19,724 11,754 7,970 − 14,191
         Aug 15,479 12,729 4,042 − 467 9,154 2,750 696 4,861 − 4,165 − 14,783         Sep 6,469 296 12,297 − 3,683 − 8,317 6,173 7,189 10,046 − 2,857 − − 720
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,0551993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,005 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 81,546 17,575 63,971 − 3,371 − 14,714 11,343 84,9182002 39,700 9,232 30,470 19,058 − 23,236 42,294 20,6422003 17,382 16,838 544 − 7,885 7,056 − 14,941 25,268
2004          July − 1,844 244 − 2,088 − 5,487 − 4,221 − 1,266 3,643
         Aug − 2,920 312 − 3,232 − 2,953 − 316 − 2,637 33         Sep − 4,547 310 − 4,857 − 7,614 − 2,727 − 4,887 3,067
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8At issue prices. — 9Net purchases or
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt transaction values. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998,
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and excluding syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also specially marked. 
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,832
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,2821993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004          June 78,494 54,369 3,268 6,264 14,324 30,513 3,566 20,560 −         July 92,541 55,773 3,399 2,630 14,833 34,912 10,710 26,058 −
         Aug 66,334 43,087 609 3,195 10,518 28,765 1,223 22,024 −         Sep 86,455 63,386 2,763 7,582 19,445 33,596 1,373 21,696 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,9391993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004          June 25,868 20,131 2,363 3,101 3,566 11,101 535 5,202 −         July 41,977 22,990 2,893 1,222 2,377 16,498 5,401 13,586 −
         Aug 31,235 15,418 175 1,712 3,024 10,508 537 15,279 −         Sep 33,868 27,170 2,408 5,614 6,070 13,078 1,218 5,480 −
Net sales  6 
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,1141993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,7011994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2004          June 2,805 − 1,098 − 549 − 7,676 7,126 1 2,123 1,780 − 1,454         July 28,213 6,802 554 − 8,127 3,148 11,227 10,577 10,834 − 4,085
         Aug 13,585 4,516 − 1,063 − 5,232 2,934 7,877 868 8,201 − 2,176         Sep 3,981 11,478 − 258 − 1,821 7,796 5,761 1,129 − 8,626 − 2,261
*For definitions, see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to Monthly Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Report 2, Capital market statistics. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,760
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004          July 2,757,651 1,682,598 161,559 584,195 303,675 633,170 68,302 1,006,752 180,952
         Aug 2,771,236 1,687,114 160,496 578,963 306,609 641,046 69,170 1,014,952 178,776         Sep 2,775,217 1,698,592 160,237 577,142 314,405 646,807 70,299 1,006,326 176,515
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-September 2004 
966,432 647,529 53,306 232,895 98,915 262,412 20,460 298,443 54,215    less than 2
658,921 441,138 50,801 175,227 92,718 122,391 16,929 200,854 58,793 2 to less than 4
460,738 283,192 31,859 100,098 53,945 97,290 9,825 167,720 39,768 4 to less than 6
250,486 117,258 17,178 36,773 22,896 40,410 10,250 122,978 7,356 6 to less than 8
204,758 90,667 6,892 20,468 16,399 46,909 4,816 109,275 7,570 8 to less than 10
87,039 73,315 166 7,087 6,492 59,570 4,378 9,345 4,921 10 to less than 15
23,965 10,610 35 898 6,681 2,996 452 12,903 2,076 15 to less than 20
122,880 34,883 − 3,694 16,359 14,829 3,189 84,808 1,816 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386 .
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .1994
o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .19963 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004          July 163,742 567 143 199 2 92 287 108 − 264 831,751
         Aug 163,743 1 257 51 4 21 7 − 24 − 312 812,941         Sep 164,711 968 165 529 2 25 300 12 − 64 833,812
oFrom January 1994, including the shares of east German companies market segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM7,771 million). — 1Including shares are traded on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the
on the Official Market, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock Deutsche Börse AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German Germanmore than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.98
1992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004          July 3.9 3.9 3.9 4.2 3.8 4.4 3.9 4.2 117.54 97.33 246.85 3,895.61
         Aug 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.6 4.3 3.7 4.0 118.53 98.30 239.67 3,785.21         Sep 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.5 4.0 118.72 98.34 246.50 3,892.90
         Oct 3.6 3.6 3.6 3.9 3.4 4.1 4.3 3.8 119.44 98.89 250.29 3,960.25
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
Sales of mutual fund shares Purchases
Domestic mutual funds (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loan associations  1 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total shares Total shares dents  4 
Period
DM million
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 − 3,102 − − 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 41993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,0011994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,3181997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,000
2001 97,032 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,221 96,082 10,251 2,703 85,831 17,518 9512002 66,478 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 6,996 67,150 2,100 3,007 65,050 3,989 − 6732003 48,195 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 4,252 49,726 − 2,658 734 52,384 3,518 − 1,530
2004          July 1,609 1,493 3,550 3,834 − 970 677 − 2,056 116 − 2,070 − 1,217 − 630 − 853 746 3,679
         Aug 1,081 − 311 138 1,159 − 1,223 189 − 449 1,392 225 931 981 − 706 411 856         Sep − 3,485 − 5,087 − 2,687 − 2,616 − 67 − 9 − 2,400 1,602 − 2,988 424 637 − 3,412 965 − 497
1Book values. — 2Residual. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign end-1988 recorded under shares). — The figures for the most recent date
fund shares by residents; transaction values. — 4Net purchases or net sales are provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
(−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
operat- Fixed Compen-
of ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex- sation
which pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend- of em-
Period Total Taxes Total  3 ployees iture grants Interest tion aid  4 Balance venue  5 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 − 12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 − 14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.11997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 − 94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 − 91.71998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 − 56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 − 53.41999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 − 26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 − 23.4
2000  
p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  6,p 555.8 446.2 599.9 169.9 69.8 213.8 66.6 40.1 39.2 − 44.1 445.0 449.1 − 4.1 923.5 971.7 − 48.2
2002  pe 550.9 441.7 608.0 173.3 69.5 225.9 66.1 38.7 33.5 − 57.1 457.9 466.4 − 8.5 924.1 989.7 − 65.6
2003  pe 546.6 442.2 615.2 174.0 68.8 236.4 65.7 36.3 32.5 − 68.6 466.8 473.3 − 6.5 924.5 999.6 − 75.1
2003          Q1 117.2 96.3 154.5 40.9 15.6 61.8 23.6 5.6 6.5 − 37.3 116.3 116.8 − 0.5 207.7 245.5 − 37.8
         Q2 135.8 108.9 143.8 40.9 15.5 61.3 10.8 7.5 7.5 − 8.0 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 228.2 239.1 − 10.9         Q3 131.2 109.6 155.8 42.4 16.6 58.5 21.6 9.2 7.4 − 24.6 115.1 117.8 − 2.7 225.0 252.3 − 27.4         Q4  
p 160.7 127.4 159.8 48.1 20.5 55.2 9.5 12.9 13.7 + 0.9 119.0 120.4 − 1.5 261.1 261.7 − 0.6
2004          Q1  p 116.1 97.0 157.9 41.7 15.4 62.8 25.3 5.4 6.3 − 41.8 116.4 116.8 − 0.4 206.1 248.3 − 42.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly f igures
Office. — *The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed for some insurance sectors are estimated. — 3Including discrepancies in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the clearing transactions between central, state and local government. —
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — 4Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the interests. — 5Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly Federal Labour Office. — 6Owing to modifications of the system of
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between other operatin g
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, expenditure and current grants. see footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. — 2The annual figures differ from the sum of
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  p 240.6 261.3 184.6 207.1 50.5 52.5 119.0 123.2 24.7 25.2
2002  pe 238.9 271.6 183.5 207.4 47.8 53.2 119.9 124.5 25.1 25.3
2003  pe 239.6 278.8 182.3 208.7 48.3 53.5 117.1 125.0 24.7 25.5
2003          Q1 46.6 71.9 42.2 51.1 9.7 12.6 25.2 29.4 5.3 5.6
         Q2 59.1 64.6 44.4 50.2 12.0 12.0 26.7 29.1 5.6 5.8         Q3 57.6 74.5 45.3 50.5 12.2 13.1 29.3 30.6 6.1 6.3         Q4  
p 76.3 67.8 49.9 56.5 14.1 15.6 35.6 35.3 7.6 7.6
2004          Q1  p 44.8 73.4 42.4 51.5 11.1 12.8 25.8 29.7 5.4 5.5
         Q2  p 56.4 62.3 46.5 51.2 11.3 11.5 28.8 29.0 5.7 5.8
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. — *See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. — 1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. — 4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Item 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  1 2001 2002 2003  pe 
Revenue 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.2 965.8 951.2 954.2 961.4
of which
Taxes 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3 486.0 489.9Social contributions 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.4 378.4 383.6 389.3 394.8
Expenditure 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 972.6 989.7 1,009.8 1,031.7 1,042.7of which
Intermediate consumption 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.2 78.0 81.0 84.5 83.9Compensation of employees 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.9 165.7 168.0 167.9Interest 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.9 68.4 67.7 66.0 66.7Social benefits  
2 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 532.7 549.2 573.1 587.1
Gross capital formation 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 36.8 35.9 31.9
Net lending/net borrowing − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.4 − 23.9 − 58.6 − 77.5 − 81.3
as a percentage of GDP − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.7 − 3.8
Memo itemDebt as defined in theMaastricht Treaty 2,143.9 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.8 1,283.6 1,366.6
as a percentage of GDP 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.4 60.9 64.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office record such
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include proceeds (
€50.85 billion) under "net increase in non-produced assets", with
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus ( €22.8 billion
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. — 1Adjusted for proceeds from the sale or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. — 2 Including social benefits in kind. 
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 581993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 7141997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 1171998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 122002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 512003 442,235 390,437 214,002 155,510 . 20,925 51,671 4,751 + 127
2004          Q2  
p 112,600 97,988 53,116 40,298 . 4,574 14,046 ... + 566
         Q3 . 93,319 49,623 38,309 . 5,387 . . .2004          May . 29,974 16,246 11,964 . 1,764 . . .
         June . 38,640 20,644 16,239 . 1,757 . . .
         July . 28,561 14,927 11,858 . 1,776 . . .
         Aug . 28,209 15,270 11,152 . 1,787 . . .         Sep . 36,550 19,426 15,300 . 1,824 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Including receipts from the 1988. — 4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  — 2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. — 5Difference between the local government’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
remitted to state government. — 3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,1702002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,8462003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,409
2004          Q2 103,712 41,892 29,560 3,054 4,481 4,797 33,673 25,023 8,650 1,317 20,979 5,097 755 5,723
         Q3 99,038 38,285 29,362 3,148 2,737 3,038 33,972 26,513 7,459 1,431 19,889 4,660 801 5,719
2004          May 31,566 10,305 9,859 − 1,225 46 1,626 12,109 9,289 2,821 384 6,989 1,528 251 1,592
         June 41,186 20,870 10,002 5,234 3,891 1,744 10,788 8,146 2,642 5 7,374 1,906 242 2,546
         July 30,246 10,426 10,844 − 1,430 − 350 1,362 10,750 8,329 2,421 943 6,265 1,602 261 1,686
         Aug 29,797 8,720 9,721 − 1,116 − 982 1,098 11,891 9,246 2,645 486 6,887 1,542 272 1,588         Sep 38,995 19,139 8,796 5,695 4,070 579 11,332 8,938 2,394 2 6,737 1,516 269 2,445
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table the statutory pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, to local government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to ce ntral
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% was
central and state government), the real property taxes and other local allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; sincegovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2From 2002 49.6% has been allocated to central government and 50.4% to state
1980, the revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax has been government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedallocated to central, state and local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15, central government share. — 6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
and revenue from corporation tax and investment income tax has been and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beenallocated to central and state government in the ratio of 50:50. — 3From affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —
1996, after deducting child benefit. — 4From February 1993, including 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
revenue from the withholding tax on interest income, in which local government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. — 8For the breakdown, see
government has a share of 12%. — 5In 1998, 3.64% and from 1999, 5.63% Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
was allocated to central government to finance the supplementary grant to
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness tax  2 taxes taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 6962003 43,188 14,094 2,204 8,870 6,531 11,722 7,336 230 3,373 786 6,989 24,146 9,658 671
2004          Q2  
p 10,599 3,484 502 1,627 1,861 2,905 2,076 13 1,245 201 1,563 7,347 2,689 169
         Q3 9,959 3,478 474 1,743 1,548 2,686 1,883 24 933 224 1,596 . . .2004          May 3,828 1,136 169 604 464 789 652 2 329 69 475 . . .
         June 3,452 1,022 172 499 890 1,339 707 6 601 70 522 . . .
         July 3,195 1,130 180 420 584 756 692 9 293 76 533 . . .
         Aug 3,376 1,185 166 919 557 684 591 7 328 73 543 . . .         Sep 3,388 1,163 128 404 407 1,247 600 8 312 75 520 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. — 2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
General government
1998 2,280,154 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999 1,199,975 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 1052000 1,211,439 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 1082002 1,277,630 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 29 7,845 97
2003          June 1,326,312 31,165 232,373 150,627 14,284 462,639 401,696 135 25,460 − 4 7,845 92
         Sep 1,346,412 33,424 237,449 146,729 13,754 469,120 406,758 317 32,071 − 6 6,706 91         Dec 1,358,121 36,022 246,414 153,616 12,810 471,129 396,832 341 34,163 − 1 6,711 86
2004          Mar 1,403,438 37,209 260,445 159,735 11,245 485,920 400,897 345 40,890 − 45 6,711 88
         June 1,411,658 37,307 269,972 162,642 10,590 488,668 391,296 345 44,084 − 45 6,711 88
Central government 7,8 
1998 957,983 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 1861999 714,069 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 1042000 715,819 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003          June 749,920 30,416 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 − 4 7,845 91
         Sep 766,213 32,892 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 − 6 6,706 90         Dec 767,697 35,235 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2004          Mar 802,690 36,463 88,901 150,050 11,245 450,711 49,888 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
         June 803,991 35,630 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88         Sep 814,356 35,866 95,200 157,026 10,568 459,482 39,864 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86
State government (western)
1998 525,380 520 83,390 . . . 430,709 43 10,716 . − 21999 274,208 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 12000 282,431 − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 12001 305,788 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 12002 328,390 250 97,556 . . . 217,333 5 13,246 . . 1
2003          June 345,390 322 116,274 . . . 209,820 8 18,966 . . 1
         Sep 348,006 322 118,815 . . . 208,313 3 20,552 . . 1         Dec 355,661 472 125,356 . . . 207,880 4 21,949 . . 1
2004          Mar 363,202 222 136,105 . . . 200,366 4 26,504 . . 1
         June 368,240 900 141,270 . . . 197,032 4 29,033 . . 1
State government (eastern)
1998 98,192 445 27,228 . . . 70,289 − 230 . . .1999 53,200 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .2000 55,712 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .2001 58,771 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .2002 63,782 338 23,838 . . . 37,739 − 1,867 . . .
2003          June 66,910 427 28,418 . . . 36,204 − 1,861 . . .
         Sep 66,595 211 28,260 . . . 36,214 − 1,911 . . .         Dec 68,076 315 28,833 . . . 37,022 − 1,906 . . .
2004          Mar 69,661 524 30,752 . . . 35,314 − 3,070 . . .
         June 71,252 777 31,897 . . . 35,530 − 3,048 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont’d)
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Local government (western) 9 
1998 158,960 . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .
1999 81,511 . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .2002 84,097 . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .
2003          June 88,000 . 153 . . 578 85,269 20 1,980 . . .
         Sep 89,250 . 153 . . 578 86,519 20 1,980 . . .         Dec 90,906 . 77 . . 603 87,868 19 2,339 . . .
2004          Mar 92,400 . 77 . . 732 89,231 20 2,340 . . .
         June 93,250 . 77 . . 707 90,106 20 2,340 . . .
Local government (eastern) 9 
1998 39,873 . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .
1999 20,726 . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .2002 16,745 . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .
2003          June 16,750 . − . . 284 16,326 100 40 . . .
         Sep 16,850 . − . . 284 16,426 100 40 . . .         Dec 16,951 . − . . 131 16,601 87 132 . . .
2004          Mar 16,900 . − . . 131 16,549 90 130 . . .
         June 16,900 . − . . 131 16,549 90 130 . . .
German Unity Fund/Indemnification Fund 7 
1998 79,413 − − − . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .2000 40,629 − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .2001 39,923 − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .2002 39,810 − 3,820 10,134 . 22,685 3,146 − 26 . . .
2003          June 39,942 . 4,694 10,134 . 23,443 1,672 − − . . .
         Sep 40,099 . 4,694 10,134 . 24,005 1,266 − − . . .         Dec 39,568 . 4,610 10,134 . 24,032 793 − − . . .
2004          Mar 40,010 . 4,610 9,634 . 24,177 1,589 − − . . .
         June 39,500 . 4,538 9,634 . 24,183 1,144 − − . . .         Sep 39,608 . 4,538 9,634 . 24,185 1,251 − − . . .
ERP Special Fund 7 
1998 34,159 .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . . − . 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000 18,386 . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .2001 19,161 . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .2002 19,400 . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .
2003          June 19,399 . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .
         Sep 19,399 . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .         Dec 19,261 . . 51 . 10,169 8,522 8 512 . . .
2004          Mar 18,576 . . 51 . 10,169 7,960 8 389 . . .
         June 18,525 . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .         Sep 18,525 . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,8 
1998 77,246 . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt Processing Fund/Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,8 
1998 304,978 − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 − 20 79,899 151999          June 151,097 − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 − 9 40,902 4
Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal 7,8 
1998 3,971 .... 3 0 0 3,671 − − . . .
1999          June 2,302 .... 1 5 3 2,148 − − . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Predominantly Treasury London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
discount paper (Bubills). — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
securities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
paper. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes. Including loans raised government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from supplementary ratios. — 8Since 1 July 1999 central government has assumed joint
public pension funds and liabilities arising from the investment assistance responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabi lities,
levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabilities the Federal Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the
arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and Use of Coal. From July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded
from housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of under central government. — 9Data other than year-end figures have been
the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to their home country. — estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. 
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2003 2004
2003 June 2004 Total Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 1st hf Q1 Q2
Item € million
Borrowers
Central government  2 767,697 803,991 + 42,292 + 19,995 + 4,520 + 16,293 + 1,484 + 36,294 + 34,993 + 1,301
German Unity Fund 39,099 39,103 − 342 + 588 − 503 + 131 − 558 + 4 + 520 − 516
ERP Special Fund 19,261 18,525 − 139 − 31 + 30 − − 138 − 736 − 685 − 51Indemnification Fund 469 396 + 100 + 25 + 23 + 26 + 27 − 73 − 79 + 6
State government (western) 355,661 368,240 + 27,271 + 11,596 + 5,404 + 2,616 + 7,655 + 12,579 + 7,541 + 5,038
State government (eastern) 68,076 71,252 + 4,294 + 1,183 + 1,945 − 315 + 1,481 + 3,176 + 1,585 + 1,592Local government (western)  
3 90,906 93,250 + 7,439 + 2,003 + 1,739 + 1,154 + 2,543 + 3,075 + 1,961 + 1,114
Local government (eastern)  3 16,951 16,900 + 249 − 46 + 63 + 111 + 121 − 26 − 30 + 4
Total 1,358,121 1,411,658 + 81,164 + 35,311 + 13,221 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 54,293 + 45,805 + 8,487
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 36,022 37,307 + 5,207 − 185 + 535 + 2,258 + 2,598 + 1,286 + 1,187 + 99 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 246,414 269,972 + 42,463 + 16,486 + 11,936 + 5,075 + 8,965 + 23,558 + 14,031 + 9,528
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 153,616 162,642 + 15,947 + 5,504 + 7,455 − 3,898 + 6,887 + 9,026 + 6,119 + 2,907
Federal savings notes 12,810 10,590 − 5,088 − 2,464 − 1,150 − 530 − 944 − 2,220 − 1,565 − 656Bonds  
5 471,129 488,668 + 14,829 + 13,266 − 6,927 + 6,481 + 2,008 + 17,540 + 14,792 + 2,748
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 396,832 391,296 − 6,541 − 945 − 1,554 + 4,977 − 9,019 − 4,780 + 4,553 − 9,333
Loans from social security funds 341 345 + 204 − 2 + 1 + 181 + 24 + 4 + 4 −Other loans  
6 34,122 44,043 + 15,319 + 3,684 + 2,932 + 6,611 + 2,092 + 9,921 + 6,727 + 3,194
Old debt  7 85 43 − 41 − 33 − 6 − 3 + 0 − 42 − 42 + 0
Equalisation claims 6,711 6,711 − 1,134 − + 0 − 1,139 + 5 + 0 + 0 + 0Investment assistance levy 41 41 − 0 + 0 − 0 − 0 + 0 − − −
Total 1,358,121 1,411,658 + 81,164 + 35,311 + 13,221 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 54,293 + 45,805 + 8,487
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 − − −−−−−−
Credit institutions 524,800 553,900 − 7,127 + 13,319 − 8,968 + 2,215 − 13,693 + 29,856 + 26,088 + 3,768
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 341 345 + 204 − 2 + 1 + 181 + 24 + 4 + 4 −
Other  8 289,840 300,973 + 61,187 + 2,594 + 9,788 + 17,919 + 30,885 + 11,133 + 2,813 + 8,319
Foreign creditors  pe 538,700 552,000 + 26,900 + 19,400 + 12,400 − 300 − 4,600 + 13,300 + 16,900 − 3,600
Total 1,358,121 1,411,658 + 81,164 + 35,311 + 13,221 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 54,293 + 45,805 + 8,487
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. — 6Including loans raised abroad. — 7Old liabilities arising
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Net borrowing differs from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer of construction of the former GDR’s armed forces and from housing
debts. — 2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt inassociations. — 4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. — 8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 5Excluding issuers’ holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 − − −2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 − − −2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 − − −2002 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 − − −
2003 June 396,008 33,375 1,329 9,180 263,083 89,041 − − −
Sep 398,318 38,309 793 9,180 260,264 89,773 − − −
Dec 399,304 38,410 793 9,042 260,046 91,013 − − −
2004 Mar 396,842 38,307 793 8,357 258,808 90,578 − − −
June 397,237 37,827 690 8,305 259,854 90,560 − − −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. — 1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. — 2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Schätze)  2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2003          Oct 769,146 33,239 1,218 90,274 142,861 12,761 439,993 35,959 186 7,076 2 6,706 89
         Nov 769,493 34,180 1,215 90,637 143,575 12,792 436,109 38,142 186 7,076 2 6,706 87         Dec 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2004          Jan 786,023 35,941 1,229 92,560 143,816 11,830 448,242 39,290 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 86
         Feb 789,107 35,197 1,208 92,768 144,190 11,212 453,213 38,183 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 86         Mar 802,690 36,463 1,178 88,901 150,050 11,245 450,711 49,888 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
         Apr 798,786 35,616 1,128 95,468 150,031 10,786 449,577 41,875 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 88
         May 804,270 36,639 1,096 95,913 152,810 10,575 452,391 40,513 223 8,456 − 46 6,708 88         June 803,991 35,630 1,105 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88
         July 821,291 35,744 1,111 97,599 153,362 10,439 461,338 47,829 223 9,144 − 45 5,572 88
         Aug 824,560 35,362 1,104 98,350 155,852 10,558 468,445 41,013 223 9,144 − 45 5,572 87         Sep 814,356 35,866 1,091 95,200 157,026 10,568 459,482 39,864 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86
         Oct 
p 826,728 35,336 1,077 102,828 161,761 10,493 460,069 39,892 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 85
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern
cash bills. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. — Germany to their home country. — 8Commutation and compensation debt
3Including loans raised abroad. — 4Including money market loans. — and old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency. — 9Since 1 July 1999
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government central government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
employees. — 6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and
levy. — 7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. From July 1999, the
former GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection aforementioned special funds are included under central government.  
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,3041998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 9402001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,4952002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 − 10,155 + 2,221 + 222003 + 227,078 + 42,292 + 62,535 + 13,636 + 42,327 + 15,947 + 109,500 + 8,874 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,218
2003          Jan-Oct + 197,001 + 43,740 + 61,245 + 17,434 + 35,791 + 15,377 + 90,899 + 9,564 + 9,987 + 3,459 − 922 + 263
2004          Jan-Oct  
p + 203,623 + 59,030 + 47,291 + 23,875 + 32,132 + 18,330 + 112,511 + 13,074 + 6,182 − 580 + 5,507 + 9,030
2003          Oct + 11,968 + 2,933 + 8,442 + 5,908 + 6,317 + 6,317 + 10,100 + 4,102 + 296 − 214 − 13,187 − 188         Nov + 17,180 + 347 + 1,205 − 3,883 + 6,680 + 715 + 6,311 + 1,335 + 394 − 408 + 2,590 − 189         Dec + 12,897 − 1,796 + 85 + 85 − 145 − 145 + 12,290 − 2,026 + 1,099 + 723 − 432 + 7,144
2004          Jan + 26,811 + 18,326 + 12,047 + 12,048 + 385 + 385 + 11,926 + 4,748 + 533 − 776 + 1,920 − 321
         Feb + 17,553 + 3,084 + 4,971 + 4,971 + 7,849 + 375 + 5,535 − 1,156 + 760 + 456 − 1,563 − 1,186         Mar + 36,156 + 13,583 + 1,580 − 2,502 + 5,860 + 5,860 + 15,425 − 2,567 + 673 + 217 + 12,619 + 6,423
         Apr + 3,991 − 3,904 − 1,135 − 1,135 − 19 − 19 + 11,797 + 5,262 + 855 − 507 − 7,507 − 5,683
         May + 17,688 + 5,484 + 6,903 + 2,815 + 4,133 + 2,779 + 7,549 + 1,257 + 448 − 17 − 1,345 + 3,254         June + 17,741 − 279 + 1,087 + 1,087 + 146 + 146 + 13,163 − 4,717 + 187 + 44 + 3,157 + 87
         July + 30,551 + 17,300 + 12,942 + 7,859 + 405 + 405 + 11,629 + 5,371 + 1,111 + 340 + 4,464 + 7,072
         Aug + 14,595 + 3,269 + 7,108 + 7,108 + 7,463 + 2,490 + 6,575 + 489 + 335 + 70 − 6,886 + 2,285         Sep + 18,757 − 10,204 + 1,200 − 8,964 + 1,175 + 1,175 + 15,619 − 2,637 + 977 + 428 − 213 − 11,104
         Oct 
p + 19,780 + 12,372 + 587 + 587 + 4,735 + 4,735 + 13,295 + 7,024 + 303 − 834 + 861 + 8,203
1After deduction of repurchases. — 2Federal Treasury notes (Schätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance fund
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Germany
1993 290,393 232,408 52,671 298,065 252,920 15,898 − 7,672 39,786 29,957 8,499 1,100 229 6,297
1994 322,335 256,662 61,891 324,323 273,880 17,751 − 1,988 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,8901995 338,185 270,294 64,387 348,115 294,034 20,285 − 9,930 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,8001996  
8 353,672 282,616 68,388 362,667 305,780 21,660 − 8,995 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 374,853 297,402 74,961 372,955 316,511 23,280 + 1,898 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 389,101 297,827 88,755 385,707 327,823 24,393 + 3,394 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,5731999 208,173 152,206 54,628 203,295 172,919 12,950 + 4,878 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,9042000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,8782003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2003          Q1 55,374 37,289 17,761 57,255 48,883 3,727 − 1,881 8,686 5,649 1,230 1,685 122 4,874
         Q2 56,442 38,349 17,749 57,396 48,763 3,735 − 954 7,698 4,906 980 1,686 126 4,867         Q3 57,241 39,085 17,830 58,256 49,409 3,858 − 1,015 6,348 3,822 727 1,683 116 4,855         Q4 59,796 41,772 17,703 58,269 49,363 3,916 + 1,527 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004          Q1 55,431 37,289 17,846 58,350 49,858 3,873 − 2,919 5,879 3,375 696 1,681 127 4,862
         Q2 56,665 38,446 17,873 57,794 49,437 3,416 − 1,129 3,752 1,914 28 1,682 128 4,877         Q3 56,766 38,664 17,779 58,107 49,719 3,456 − 1,341 2,561 731 22 1,681 127 4,889
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of deducted from pension payments. — 4From 1995, including long-term care
German Pension Insurance Funds. — 1The annual figures do not tally with insurance for pensioners. — 5Largely corresponds to fluctuation reserves.
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993, End of year or quarter. From 1992, figures for the whole of Germany. —
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security funds;
and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government including participating interests. — 8Excluding income arising from the
cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance revaluation of participating interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Employment Agency
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
Promo- loans
Unemployment support  3,4 Job promotion  4,5 tion of fromwinter central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction Balance ment
Germany
1993 85,109 79,895 1,829 109,536 48,005 34,149 13,856 36,891 15,895 20,996 1,919 − 24,426 24,419
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 − 10,205 10,1421995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 − 6,892 6,8871996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 − 13,763 13,7561997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 − 9,574 9,5741998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 − 7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 − 3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 8672001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 − 1,931 1,9312002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 − 5,623 5,6232003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 272 − 6,215 6,215
2003          Q1 11,617 11,281 48 14,408 7,647 5,422 2,225 4,785 2,576 2,209 180 − 2,790 5,151
         Q2 12,272 11,487 536 14,667 7,975 5,708 2,267 4,721 2,623 2,098 84 − 2,395 2,408         Q3 12,828 11,797 619 13,645 7,251 5,313 1,938 4,453 2,462 1,991 7 − 817 514         Q4 13,917 12,773 878 14,131 6,863 5,086 1,777 5,196 2,903 2,293 1 − 214 − 1,858
2004          Q1 11,524 11,261 47 14,448 8,200 6,001 2,199 4,389 2,491 1,898 144 − 2,924 5,244
         Q2 12,042 11,419 394 13,949 7,782 5,673 2,109 4,268 2,510 1,758 67 − 1,907 1,946         Q3 12,516 11,709 481 12,818 7,044 5,189 1,855 3,919 2,309 1,610 4 − 303 166
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government recipients of wage substitutes are paid in January instead of in
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- December. — 5Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up,
solvency compensation to employees. — 3Unemployment benefit, rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service
short-time working benefit. — 4Including contributions to the statutory Agencies (PSAs), compensation top-up payments and business start-up
health insurance funds and statutory pension insurance sheme. From 2003, grants. 
the January contributions to the statutory pension insurance scheme for
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
1st half 1st half
  2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2001   2002   2003   2004   2000   2001   2002   2003
Annual Percentage
Item € billion percentage change of total
At  1995  prices
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 450.5 444.6 443.0 445.0 227.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 0.5 4.6 22.9 22.4 22.3 22.4Construction 102.6 96.9 92.3 88.2 41.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 4.4 − 0.3 5.2 4.9 4.6 4.4Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 345.9 359.4 364.5 367.8 183.4 3.9 1.4 0.9 2.5 17.6 18.1 18.3 18.5
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 572.9 594.6 595.2 598.5 299.1 3.8 0.1 0.5 1.3 29.1 29.9 29.9 30.1
Public and private services  3 390.1 390.8 397.1 395.4 197.6 0.2 1.6 − 0.4 0.2 19.8 19.7 20.0 19.9
All economic sectors 1,886.5 1,910.9 1,916.2 1,918.9 960.9 1.3 0.3 0.1 2.0 95.8 96.2 96.4 96.7Memo item: Enterprise sector 1,657.7 1,683.0 1,688.5 1,693.3 848.6 1.5 0.3 0.3 2.4 84.2 84.7 85.0 85.3
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 1,786.2 1,805.9 1,811.3 1,812.7 907.2 1.1 0.3 0.1 2.1 90.7 90.9 91.1 91.3
Gross domestic product 1,969.5 1,986.0 1,987.6 1,985.2 993.2 0.8 0.1 − 0.1 1.8 100 100 100 100
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,121.2 1,140.7 1,132.5 1,132.5 555.2 1.7 − 0.7 0.0 − 0.4 56.9 57.4 57.0 57.0
Government consumption 378.6 382.4 389.8 390.2 192.0 1.0 1.9 0.1 0.1 19.2 19.3 19.6 19.7Machinery and equipment 176.5 167.8 153.4 151.2 70.6 − 4.9 − 8.6 − 1.4 − 1.2 9.0 8.4 7.7 7.6Premises 242.1 230.5 217.2 210.1 98.6 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 3.2 − 0.8 12.3 11.6 10.9 10.6Other investment  
6 25.5 26.9 27.3 27.8 13.8 5.5 1.4 1.7 2.2 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4
Changes in inventories  7 − 7.7 − 26.9 − 35.5 − 18.1 2.2 . . . . − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.9
Domestic use 1,936.3 1,921.6 1,884.5 1,893.7 932.5 − 0.8 − 1.9 0.5 − 0.2 98.3 96.8 94.8 95.4Net exports 33.2 64.5 103.1 91.5 60.8 . . . . 1.7 3.2 5.2 4.6
Exports 660.4 698.1 726.6 740.0 397.7 5.7 4.1 1.8 10.1 33.5 35.2 36.6 37.3Imports 627.3 633.7 623.5 648.5 337.0 1.0 − 1.6 4.0 5.6 31.8 31.9 31.4 32.7
Gross domestic product 1,969.5 1,986.0 1,987.6 1,985.2 993.2 0.8 0.1 − 0.1 1.8 100 100 100 100
At  current  prices
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,196.8 1,237.2 1,242.2 1,255.3 623.7 3.4 0.4 1.1 1.2 59.0 59.7 58.9 59.0
Government consumption 385.8 394.2 405.4 408.5 193.9 2.2 2.8 0.8 − 0.3 19.0 19.0 19.2 19.2Machinery and equipment 176.7 167.4 151.9 146.9 68.5 − 5.3 − 9.3 − 3.2 − 2.2 8.7 8.1 7.2 6.9Premises 240.2 228.9 215.4 208.3 98.7 − 4.7 − 5.9 − 3.3 − 0.0 11.8 11.0 10.2 9.8Other investment  
6 23.2 24.3 24.5 24.5 12.0 5.0 0.6 0.2 0.3 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2
Changes in inventories  7 − 0.6 − 19.3 − 26.9 − 7.6 10.5 . . . . − 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.4
Domestic use 2,022.0 2,032.8 2,012.5 2,036.0 1,007.3 0.5 − 1.0 1.2 0.7 99.6 98.0 95.5 95.7Net exports 8.0 41.2 94.8 92.2 63.4 . . . . 0.4 2.0 4.5 4.3
Exports 685.3 730.7 761.6 769.3 412.7 6.6 4.2 1.0 9.2 33.8 35.2 36.1 36.1Imports 677.3 689.5 666.8 677.1 349.2 1.8 − 3.3 1.5 3.5 33.4 33.2 31.6 31.8
Gross domestic product 2,030.0 2,074.0 2,107.3 2,128.2 1,070.7 2.2 1.6 1.0 2.9 100 100 100 100
IV Prices (1995 = 100)
Private consumption 106.7 108.5 109.7 110.8 112.3 1.6 1.1 1.0 1.6 . . . .Gross domestic product 103.1 104.4 106.0 107.2 107.8 1.3 1.5 1.1 1.1 . . . .Terms of trade 96.1 96.2 98.0 99.6 100.1 0.1 1.9 1.6 1.2 . . . .
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,099.1 1,120.8 1,129.4 1,132.2 537.2 2.0 0.8 0.2 − 0.1 72.8 72.9 72.8 72.1Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 410.4 417.6 422.4 437.1 252.2 1.7 1.2 3.5 14.8 27.2 27.1 27.2 27.9
National income 1,509.5 1,538.4 1,551.9 1,569.3 789.4 1.9 0.9 1.1 4.2 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,021.2 2,062.9 2,088.1 2,114.2 1,064.0 2.1 1.2 1.2 3.3 . . . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2004. — 1In- cluding taxes on products (offset against subsidies on products). — 5Includ-
cluding communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate ing non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangible fixed asset for-
activities, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home servi- mation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment, literary or artistic
ces. — 4Gross value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but ex- originals) and cultivated assets. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-total tion  
2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
1999 95.3 103.7 100.2 94.0 94.5 91.1 96.2 98.5 97.2 92.4 93.3 89.8
2000 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9
2001 99.5 92.4 97.3 100.4 99.4 102.3 100.4 98.8 98.0 101.1 102.1 104.02002 98.3 89.0 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.42003 98.4 85.1 99.8 99.5 99.5 102.0 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.6
 
2003          Jan 90.3 51.8 110.3 91.7 93.9 89.9 82.0 92.9 102.6 101.0 80.8 101.9         Feb 92.4 51.5 104.1 94.9 94.2 98.3 87.1 91.7 98.3 100.1 91.4 110.9         Mar 104.6 83.8 109.0 106.0 105.9 110.0 97.1 100.6 112.0 110.4 103.5 121.4
         Apr 98.4 92.1 100.3 98.7 100.4 99.4 85.7 96.7 105.6 102.9 93.3 108.9
         May 96.0 91.2 95.3 96.5 98.9 97.3 79.8 93.9 102.5 101.3 91.9 106.9         June 100.0 98.6 91.6 101.0 102.5 103.4 83.5 97.4 103.4 97.7 101.9 106.8
         July 100.4 102.3 90.5 101.3 102.5 103.1 85.8 98.6 105.1 101.7 98.9 108.7
         Aug 90.0 89.8 90.4 90.0 93.1 86.6 67.2 95.4 98.8 88.2 85.5 80.0         Sep 102.3 100.9 92.2 103.5 103.3 106.6 97.2 99.1 97.6 101.6 104.4 110.8
         Oct 105.1 99.3 102.2 106.0 106.9 106.3 97.9 105.2 104.0 107.3 98.2 112.3
         Nov 106.4 93.1 104.6 107.8 105.3 113.9 100.1 103.2 101.4 103.2 105.9 125.1         Dec 95.0 67.0 107.0 96.2 87.1 108.8 82.9 94.2 92.6 83.0 117.8 97.5
2004          Jan 92.0 49.3 115.8 93.3 96.4 90.7 83.4 94.0 101.4 104.5 82.5 98.8
         Feb 94.1 56.7 105.8 96.3 98.4 97.0 86.4 92.4 101.0 103.0 87.7 111.7         Mar 
7 104.8 7 74.0 109.7 107.2 107.6 111.8 96.0 99.8 107.0 111.7 106.2 123.2
         Apr 7 100.5 7 83.2 102.3 101.9 104.2 103.8 88.1 96.3 106.8 104.0 98.2 115.1
         May 7 99.6 7 84.1 97.2 101.3 103.3 104.1 86.2 94.8 101.8 105.2 98.3 116.0
         June 7 103.2 7 90.2 90.6 105.8 107.0 111.0 87.0 97.2 102.8 111.2 106.2 121.2
         July  + 7 102.6 7 92.6 91.9 104.7 106.7 107.5 86.9 99.1 106.2 106.5 103.9 113.0
         Aug  + 7 93.1 7 82.8 90.0 94.4 98.3 92.7 67.9 95.8 104.1 93.8 88.2 91.3
         Sep  + 7 104.8 7 92.7 91.5 107.4 107.8 112.3 91.5 100.7 106.3 106.2 108.6 120.7
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.9 + 3.5 − 3.6 − 2.3 + 3.2
2000 + 4.8 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 9.7 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 8.1 + 7.1 + 11.2
2001 − 0.4 − 7.6 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 2.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 4.12002 − 1.2 − 3.7 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.32003 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 5.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 + 2.1
 
2003          Jan + 0.9 − 9.9 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 2.3 − 8.5 − 0.9 + 3.8 + 3.3 − 3.3 + 6.7         Feb + 0.4 − 23.0 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 4.7 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 2.1 + 10.0         Mar + 0.8 − 6.6 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 2.0 − 6.6 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.8 − 1.2 + 5.1
         Apr + 0.3 − 4.5 + 3.5 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 4.9 + 1.2 + 3.0 − 1.5 − 3.9 + 2.9
         May + 0.4 − 3.8 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 4.4 − 1.9
+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 5.8
         June − 2.0 − 1.6 + 5.3 − 2.8 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 8.9 − 6.7 − 7.7
         July + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.3 + 6.7
         Aug − 2.6 − 4.5 + 1.2 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 3.8 − 9.2 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 7.3 + 0.4 − 12.8         Sep − 2.3 − 3.4
+ 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 6.4 − 3.0 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.0 − 3.2
         Oct + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.9 + 2.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.8
         Nov + 0.6 − 3.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 2.7 − 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.2 + 4.3         Dec + 2.6 + 5.7 + 0.4 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 3.2 − 0.5 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 7.6
2004          Jan + 1.9 − 4.8 + 5.0 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 1.2 − 1.2 + 3.5 + 2.1 − 3.0
         Feb + 1.8 + 10.1 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 4.5 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 4.0 + 0.7         Mar 
7 + 0.2 7 − 11.7 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 4.5 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 1.5
         Apr 7 + 2.1 7 − 9.7 + 2.0 + 3.2 + 3.8 + 4.4 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 5.3 + 5.7
         May 7 + 3.8 7 − 7.8 + 2.0 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 7.0 + 8.0 + 1.0 − 0.7 + 3.8 + 7.0 + 8.5
         June 7 + 3.2 7 − 8.5 − 1.1 + 4.8 + 4.4 + 7.4 + 4.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 13.8 + 4.2 + 13.5
         July  + 7 + 2.2 7 − 9.5 + 1.5 + 3.4 + 4.1 + 4.3 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 4.7 + 5.1 + 4.0
         Aug  + 7 + 3.4 7 − 7.8 − 0.4 + 4.9 + 5.6 + 7.0 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 5.4 + 6.3 + 3.2 + 14.1
         Sep  + 7 + 2.4 7 − 8.1 − 0.8 + 3.8 + 4.4 + 5.3 − 5.9 + 1.6 + 8.9 + 4.5 + 4.0 + 8.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — oUsing the quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities related to prin-
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The ting. — 7Provisional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Build- survey in the construction sector. — +Provisional; adjusted in advance by
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in particular, mining of Quarterly Production Survey for the third quarter (industry: on
coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas and manu- average -2.3%). facture of refined petroleum products. — 4Including mining and
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which of which
 
Industry,
total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
Germany  
  
2000 99.9 + 13.8 99.9 + 8.2 100.0 + 21.8 100.0 + 14.2 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 4.2
2001 98.3 − 1.6 97.6 − 2.3 99.1 − 0.9 95.9 − 4.1 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.52002 98.3
+ 0.0 94.6 − 3.1 102.8 + 3.7 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 99.0 − 2.4
2003 99.0 + 0.7 94.7 + 0.1 104.4 + 1.6 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.1 95.4 − 3.6
 
2003          Sep 102.9 + 1.1 98.4 + 0.1 108.5 + 2.2 100.9 + 0.7 104.4 + 2.6 102.8 − 4.3
         Oct 102.7 + 2.4 99.1 + 1.5 107.2 + 3.4 102.5 + 2.8 102.9 + 2.4 102.8 + 0.9
         Nov 102.5 + 0.9 99.2 + 1.8 106.6 − 0.2 102.1 + 2.7 104.4 + 0.8 95.6 − 4.6         Dec 98.0 + 6.8 89.7 + 1.5 108.5 + 12.9 91.1 + 5.3 106.4 + 9.0 86.9 + 1.5
2004          Jan 99.8 + 1.2 93.7 + 1.2 107.4 + 1.1 101.9 + 3.3 99.8 + 0.6 93.0 − 3.5
         Feb 101.2 + 2.4 95.9 + 0.4 107.8 + 4.8 102.2 + 5.6 101.2 + 1.5 98.4 − 3.6         Mar 111.1 + 5.2 105.2 + 5.2 118.6 + 5.4 110.8 + 5.3 113.1 + 6.7 103.7 − 1.1
         Apr 104.1 + 7.1 98.0 + 5.4 111.8 + 9.1 106.3 + 9.1 105.2 + 6.8 92.8 + 1.6
         May 104.0 + 11.7 95.1 + 4.5 115.1 + 20.3 105.0 + 12.4 107.1 + 13.3 88.3 + 2.3         June 105.6 + 4.9 98.4 + 3.5 114.6 + 6.4 107.3 + 8.9 108.3 + 2.8 89.3 + 0.1
         July 105.4 + 8.0 99.5 + 4.8 112.8 + 11.8 107.0 + 9.1 106.6 + 8.8 95.2 + 1.4
         Aug 96.0 + 6.8 92.4 + 5.8 100.4 + 7.7 98.9 + 10.5 94.5 + 5.6 91.7 − 1.3         Sep  
p 107.4 + 4.4 99.5 + 1.1 117.3 + 8.1 107.3 + 6.3 109.0 + 4.4 101.0 − 1.8
Western Germany  
  
2000 100.0 + 13.6 99.9 + 7.8 100.0 + 21.4 99.9 + 13.5 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 3.52001 97.8 − 2.2 97.2 − 2.7 98.6 − 1.4 95.1 − 4.8 99.2 − 0.8 101.2 + 1.32002 97.3 − 0.5 93.7 − 3.6 101.6 + 3.0 95.1
+ 0.0 98.9 − 0.3 98.3 − 2.9
2003 97.6 + 0.3 93.2 − 0.5 102.9 + 1.3 95.7 + 0.6 99.9 + 1.0 94.3 − 4.1
 
2003          Sep 101.3 + 0.2 96.3 − 1.1 107.4 + 1.8 98.6 − 0.2 103.4 + 2.0 101.8 − 4.9
         Oct 101.1 + 1.7 97.1 + 0.6 106.0 + 3.1 100.1 + 1.9 101.9 + 2.0 101.5 + 0.4
         Nov 100.4 + 0.1 97.4 + 1.0 103.9 − 1.0 100.0 + 1.7 102.2 + 0.1 94.0 − 5.3         Dec 96.0 + 6.1 88.0 + 1.3 105.5 + 11.4 89.7 + 4.9 103.4 + 7.9 85.3 + 0.7
2004          Jan 98.1 + 0.5 92.4 + 0.7 105.0 + 0.4 99.9 + 4.1 98.4 − 1.0 91.9 − 3.8
         Feb 99.8 + 1.9 94.2 − 0.6 106.5 + 4.7 100.2 + 5.1 100.1 + 1.0 97.5 − 4.1         Mar 109.6 + 5.2 103.6 + 4.9 116.9 + 5.6 108.3 + 4.7 112.4 + 7.1 102.6 − 1.3
         Apr 102.8 + 7.2 96.3 + 5.1 110.7 + 9.5 103.9 + 9.1 104.9 + 7.2 91.3 + 1.4
         May 102.3 + 11.3 93.0 + 3.9 113.4 + 19.6 102.2 + 11.8 106.2 + 13.0 86.6 + 1.9         June 103.6 + 3.9 96.3 + 3.3 112.3 + 4.4 104.5 + 8.4 106.8 + 1.5 87.8 − 0.5
         July 104.1 + 7.9 97.9 + 4.5 111.5 + 11.7 104.3 + 8.8 106.4 + 8.8 94.0 + 1.0
         Aug 94.5 + 6.7 90.4 + 5.6 99.4 + 7.8 96.0 + 10.7 94.2 + 5.6 90.3 − 1.6         Sep  
p 105.7 + 4.3 97.2 + 0.9 115.9 + 7.9 104.6 + 6.1 108.0 + 4.4 99.5 − 2.3
Eastern Germany  
  
2000 99.9 + 18.1 100.0 + 13.9 99.9 + 29.7 99.9 + 20.7 100.0 + 16.3 100.0 + 15.12001 104.9 + 5.0 102.4 + 2.4 110.9 + 11.0 106.0 + 6.1 103.4 + 3.4 106.1 + 6.12002 111.0 + 5.8 104.0 + 1.6 127.8 + 15.2 111.7 + 5.4 110.7 + 7.1 109.4 + 3.12003 117.9 + 6.2 110.8 + 6.5 135.1 + 5.7 122.8 + 9.9 114.1 + 3.1 112.7 + 3.0
 
2003          Sep 124.3 + 11.2 121.1 + 12.3 132.1 + 8.7 128.4 + 10.8 121.0 + 13.3 119.9 + 4.4
         Oct 124.9 + 9.8 121.1 + 10.2 133.9 + 8.9 131.0 + 12.7 118.6 + 6.9 123.3 + 7.5
         Nov 132.2 + 11.2 118.4 + 9.8 165.5 + 13.7 127.3 + 13.1 140.1 + 10.8 121.5 + 5.1         Dec 127.3 + 14.6 108.3 + 3.3 173.2 + 37.4 106.9 + 7.9 152.6 + 20.3 112.5 + 13.9
2004          Jan 122.6 + 8.9 107.8 + 6.4 158.4 + 13.3 125.8 − 3.3 122.4 + 29.3 110.0 − 0.2
         Feb 120.7 + 8.7 114.3 + 10.4 136.0 + 5.3 125.4 + 10.1 117.7 + 8.0 112.6 + 5.4         Mar 131.9 + 6.2 122.6 + 8.7 154.2 + 1.6 139.7 + 10.3 126.0 + 2.5 121.9 + 2.7
         Apr 121.9 + 5.9 116.0 + 7.6 136.0 + 2.6 135.1 + 9.6 109.4 + 1.9 116.0 + 4.8
         May 127.3 + 16.7 117.6 + 10.1 150.7 + 31.4 136.6 + 16.4 120.6 + 19.3 114.6 + 7.9         June 133.6 + 17.3 120.7 + 4.5 164.5 + 49.4 139.4 + 13.1 132.0 + 24.6 114.2 + 7.3
         July 123.9 + 10.4 117.1 + 8.9 140.2 + 13.4 138.5 + 11.7 110.6 + 9.2 115.7 + 9.0
         Aug 116.2 + 7.3 113.7 + 7.8 122.2 + 6.2 132.7 + 9.6 99.2 + 5.0 114.3 + 4.2         Sep  
p 131.0 + 5.4 124.2 + 2.6 147.3 + 11.5 138.8 + 8.1 124.2 + 2.6 125.2 + 4.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2000 99.9 − 8.6 100.0 99.9 100.0 99.9 − 7.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 − 13.4 100.0 99.9 100.0
2001 94.5 − 5.4 82.9 96.9 99.0 97.4 − 2.5 87.6 99.9 100.7 85.2 − 14.8 68.3 86.4 94.22002 88.7 − 6.1 72.8 91.5 95.7 90.9 − 6.7 79.6 93.1 95.6 81.7 − 4.1 51.9 85.8 95.72003 79.2 − 10.7 67.5 78.4 87.4 80.8 − 11.1 74.5 78.3 87.8 74.2 − 9.2 46.0 79.2 86.2
   
2003          Aug 81.1 − 8.2 67.6 76.0 95.2 81.7 − 6.2 73.8 74.7 94.9 79.2 − 14.2 48.7 80.9 95.9         Sep 91.2 − 10.5 76.4 88.8 103.1 91.2 − 11.8 84.9 85.3 102.3 91.0 − 6.4 50.3 101.4 105.3
         Oct 80.1 − 5.2 70.6 75.8 90.8 83.4 − 3.0 79.8 76.4 93.9 69.6 − 13.0 42.7 73.7 81.8
         Nov 69.1 − 7.5 61.9 73.5 68.8 71.0 − 3.8 69.5 74.0 68.5 63.1 − 18.8 38.8 71.6 69.4         Dec 69.3 − 12.6 66.7 68.4 71.9 71.1 − 14.4 73.9 68.4 72.5 63.4 − 5.8 44.9 68.3 69.8
2004          Jan 53.2 − 6.2 41.4 65.7 46.6 55.3 − 5.5 47.8 67.6 45.4 46.7 − 8.8 22.0 58.8 49.8
         Feb 66.2 + 2.8 58.3 75.3 60.8 67.3 − 0.3 64.7 79.2 54.9 62.6 + 15.3 38.7 61.8 77.7         Mar 81.8 − 7.8 70.8 72.6 99.1 83.4 − 9.1 81.0 70.8 99.8 76.8 − 2.8 39.5 79.1 96.9
         Apr 77.1 − 6.5 62.8 72.4 91.2 78.7 − 7.3 71.6 73.3 89.5 71.9 − 3.5 36.1 69.4 95.9
         May 75.8 − 8.3 66.6 65.2 93.5 77.0 − 5.6 73.8 64.3 94.1 71.9 − 16.6 44.7 68.4 91.8         June 89.5 − 5.2 72.9 82.5 107.8 92.0 − 4.1 82.3 83.7 107.8 81.8 − 8.7 44.2 78.4 107.7
         July 78.9 − 12.9 63.4 71.9 96.5 80.8 − 11.3 70.8 71.9 97.8 72.9 − 18.1 41.0 72.1 92.8
         Aug 77.6 − 4.3 60.7 74.2 91.9 78.0 − 4.5 68.6 73.5 89.3 76.1 − 3.9 36.4 76.6 99.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oBundesbank calculation. — 1Including the
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications railways and post office. 
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there-
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  By enterprises’ main product range of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco  2 products  2 leather goods  2 ing materials  2 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100
1996 96.8 − 0.2 − 1.1 96.7 − 0.5 81.6 + 3.6 103.0 − 1.2 96.2 − 1.4 95.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 91.0 + 5.7
1997 96.1 − 0.7 − 1.3 96.0 − 0.7 83.4 + 2.2 101.4 − 1.6 95.4 − 0.8 96.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 94.4 + 3.71998 97.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 97.3 + 1.4 88.1 + 5.6 100.2 − 1.2 98.3 + 3.0 97.6 + 1.7 + 1.4 98.9 + 4.81999 97.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 97.8 + 0.5 94.4 + 7.2 99.9 − 0.3 97.3 − 1.0 98.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 102.2 + 3.3
2000 100.0 + 2.6 + 1.4 99.8 + 2.0 100.1 + 6.0 99.9
+ 0.0 99.9 + 2.7 100.0 + 1.7 + 0.4 100.0 − 2.2
2001 101.9 + 1.9 . 104.7 + 4.9 107.4 + 7.3 99.5 − 0.4 96.6 − 3.3 102.0 + 2.0 . 102.9 + 2.9
2002 100.3 − 1.6 − 2.2 107.5 + 2.7 111.2 + 3.5 94.5 − 5.0 89.0 − 7.9 101.3 − 0.7 − 1.4 105.9 + 2.92003 99.8 − 0.5 − 0.4 109.8 + 2.1 113.9 + 2.4 89.3 − 5.5 88.1 − 1.0 101.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 107.8 + 1.8
 
2003          Sep 97.5 − 1.9 − 1.9 105.2 + 1.3 109.7 + 0.1 94.9 − 6.3 84.5 − 3.5 98.8 − 0.9 − 1.1 104.5 + 3.1
         Oct 104.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 112.1 + 2.9 115.6 + 2.4 105.3 − 2.8 93.2 − 0.1 105.5 + 0.3 − 0.3 111.9 + 2.1
         Nov 104.3 − 0.7 − 1.2 112.3 + 1.7 116.3 + 2.9 89.5 − 8.0 95.8 − 1.1 104.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 108.4 + 0.3         Dec 122.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 130.1 + 1.9 144.2 + 12.0 109.9 − 7.0 104.4 − 1.2 117.0 − 0.6 − 1.4 100.1 − 2.8
2004          Jan 90.0 − 2.0 − 1.9 100.6 + 1.7 100.8 − 7.9 74.0 − 6.6 78.8 + 1.4 88.8 − 2.1 − 2.3 85.5 − 2.8
         Feb 85.6 − 3.5 − 2.6 97.4 − 1.4 100.1 − 5.2 67.6 − 1.6 77.0 − 0.8 86.5 − 3.6 − 3.2 90.9 − 3.5         Mar 100.4 − 2.0 − 1.5 111.3 − 1.8 112.6 + 1.2 87.5 − 6.9 92.8 − 2.3 102.8 − 3.1 − 3.3 112.8 − 6.4
         Apr 99.7 − 1.9 − 1.9 110.6 − 0.5 112.2 + 0.2 94.9 + 3.2 91.2 − 0.9 102.9 − 1.8 − 2.3 114.8 − 1.7
         May 95.7 − 2.8 − 3.4 108.4
+ 0.0 107.9 − 2.1 85.1 − 6.7 86.4 − 2.4 99.1 − 2.9 − 4.0 111.9 − 3.0
         June 93.6 − 2.6 − 3.0 105.7 − 2.8 110.5 + 0.1 81.0 − 4.7 83.1 + 0.0 97.0 − 3.3 − 3.9 109.7 − 5.3
         July 96.0 − 1.5 − 2.0 108.5 − 1.0 116.1 + 0.2 85.9 − 0.1 83.6 − 0.9 99.3 − 2.3 − 3.0 112.0 − 4.3         Aug 93.0 − 0.3 − 0.9 105.6 − 2.6 109.3 + 2.5 78.2 + 3.0 81.3 + 0.6 93.4 − 1.6 − 2.3 94.6 − 6.0         Sep 95.6 − 1.9 − 2.4 101.7 − 3.3 111.0 + 1.2 92.3 − 2.7 84.8 + 0.4 96.2 − 2.6 − 3.3 98.7 − 5.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding ding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of auto-
value-added tax; figures from 2003 provisional, partly revised and, judging motive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor vehicle parts and
by past experience, subject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent accessories.— 4Up to (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices; from 2001, at
months. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Exclu- 2000 prices. 
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed  2 
Persons
Mining employed Persons
and under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- vocationaling Con- time motion further Unem-
Annual change Annual sector  
2 Annual ploy- Vacan- schemes  2,5 training  2 workers  2 struction  4 
percen- change, ment cies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- rate  2,6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands in % sands  2 
Germany  
  
2001 38,923 + 0.4 + 172 34,843 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 352 3,853 − 37 9.4 507
2002 38,698 − 0.6 − 225 34,598 − 0.7 6,217 7 883 207 192 340 4,061 + 209 9.8 452
2003 38,316 − 1.0 − 382 34,146 − 1.3 8 6,136 817 195 140 260 4,377 + 315 10.5 355
2003          Oct 38,715 − 0.7 − 254 6,114 824 163 138 242 4,151 + 220 10.0 297         Nov 38,690 − 0.5 − 199 34,421 − 0.9 6,096 814 162 140 245 4,184 + 157 10.0 275         Dec 38,517 − 0.4 − 164 6,060 790 149 135 235 4,315 + 89 10.4 258
2004          Jan 37,755 − 0.3 − 106 6,035 737 164 123 217
9 4,597 9 +3 7 9 11.0 277
         Feb 37,760 − 0.2 − 84 33,519 − 0.7 6,019 711 186 117 203 4,641 + 15 11.1 309
         Mar 37,984 − 0.0 − 13 6,018 10 728 197 109 200 4,547 + 30 10.9 324
         Apr 38,258 + 0.2 + 60 6,013 10 745 177 102 199 4,443 + 32 10.7 324
         May 38,356 + 0.2 + 73 33,888 − 0.7 6,004 10 748 171 103 197 4,293 + 43 11 10.3 319
         June 38,425 + 0.2 + 62 6,006 10 752 162 109 185 4,233 + 62 10.2 305
         July 38,426 + 0.2 + 77 6,018 10 752 138 116 165 4,360 + 83 10.5 297
         Aug o 38,490 o + 0.3 o + 107 ... ... 6,042 10 754 107 119 p 158 4,347 + 110 10.5 287
         Sep ... ... ... 6,052 ... 115 122 p 166 4,257 + 160 10.3 r 269
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... 125 120 p 166 4,207 + 187 10.1 245
Western Germany 12  
  
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 94 53 202 2,321 − 60 7.2 4362002 . . . . . 5,593
7 654 162 42 198 2,498 + 178 7.7 378
2003 . . . . . 8 5,503 607 160 30 161 2,753 + 255 8.4 292
2003          Oct . . . . . 5,476 609 136 27 157 2,637 + 187 8.0 237         Nov . . . . . 5,459 603 135 26 159 2,665 + 144 8.1 222         Dec . . . . . 5,427 587 122 25 152 2,750 + 102 8.4 212
2004          Jan . . . . . 5,401 553 135 22 139
9 2,927 9 +7 1 9 8.9 234
         Feb . . . . . 5,386 535 151 21 131 2,945 + 49 8.9 263
         Mar . . . . . 5,384 10 548 159 21 129 2,871 + 52 8.7 275
         Apr . . . . . 5,377 10 559 143 21 130 2,805 + 50 8.5 274
         May . . . . . 5,368 10 560 139 22 130 2,710 + 58 11 8.2 265
         June . . . . . 5,368 10 562 133 23 123 2,669 + 65 8.1 253
         July . . . . . 5,378 10 561 112 25 110 2,760 + 79 8.4 247
         Aug . . . . . 5,397 10 562 84 25 p 105 2,764 + 92 8.4 239
         Sep . . . . . 5,405 ... 92 27 p 111 2,700 + 119 8.2 r 222
         Oct . . . . . ... ... 102 26 p 111 2,692 + 140 8.2 204
Eastern Germany 13  
  
2001 . . . . . 626 262 29 190 150 1,532 + 23 17.3 712002 . . . . . 624
7 229 45 150 142 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2003 . . . . . 8 632 210 35 110 99 1,624 + 61 18.5 63
2003          Oct . . . . . 638 215 27 112 85 1,514 + 34 17.3 60         Nov . . . . . 637 211 27 113 86 1,519 + 13 17.4 53         Dec . . . . . 633 203 27 110 83 1,565 − 14 17.9 46
2004          Jan . . . . . 634 183 29 101 78
9 1,670 9 −3 3 9 19.1 43
         Feb . . . . . 633 175 35 96 72 1,696 − 33 19.4 46
         Mar . . . . . 633 10 181 37 89 70 1,676 − 22 19.2 49
         Apr . . . . . 637 10 186 34 81 69 1,639 − 18 18.8 51
         May . . . . . 637 10 188 32 81 67 1,583 − 15 11 18.3 54
         June . . . . . 638 10 190 29 85 62 1,565 − 3 18.1 53
         July . . . . . 641 10 191 26 91 55 1,600 + 4 18.5 50
         Aug . . . . . 645 10 192 24 94 p 54 1,582 + 18 18.3 48
         Sep . . . . . 647 ... 23 96 p 55 1,557 + 41 18.0 r 47
         Oct . . . . . ... ... 23 94 p 55 1,514 + 47 17.5 42
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Monthly included for the first time. — 8The figures from 2003 onwards are positively
figures: end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; short- affected by the fact that firms which are required to report and which have
time workers: mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: averages. — been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are inclu-1Work-place concept.— 2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundesbank; de- ded for the first time. — 9From January 2004, unemployed persons
viations from the official figures are due to rounding. — 3Including active excluding all those participating in occupational aptitude testing and
proprietors. — 4The figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site training schemes. — 10Provisional up to adjustment to the figures of the
preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil annual overall survey. — 11From May 2004, calculated on the basis of new
engineering”. — 5Employees involved in job creation schemes and struc- labour force figures. — 12Excluding western Berlin; for the mining,
tural adjustment measures (SAM). — 6Relative to the total civilian labour manufacturing and construction sectors, including persons employed in
force. — 7The figures from March 2002 onwards are positively affected by western Berlin. — 13 Including western Berlin; for the mining,
the fact that construction firms which are required to report and which manufacturing and construction sectors, excluding persons employed inhave been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are western Berlin. — o First preliminary estimate. 
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index
Indices of Index of world market
of which foreign trade prices prices  of raw materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1999 98.6 100.6 100.3 87.7 99.0 98.8 99.3 2 97.0 89.9 97.0 90.8 57.6 83.1
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 95.4 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.4 101.2 100.3 103.0 100.8 101.0 100.6 91.4 91.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 104.9 102.6 100.2 102.4 94.6 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.12003 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 104.1 94.8 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.9
 
2003          Jan 104.0 105.3 101.4 110.7 105.1 103.2 103.8 94.8 100.9 98.2 92.2 88.3
         Feb 104.5 105.9 101.6 113.0 105.7 103.4 100.3 104.2 96.4 101.0 98.5 97.3 89.7         Mar 104.6 106.3 101.6 113.8 105.6 103.5 104.4 94.8 101.0 98.0 89.5 88.3
         Apr 104.3 106.6 101.4 110.2 105.8 103.7 104.2 94.6 100.9 96.5 76.0 87.8
         May 104.1 106.8 101.4 108.2 105.6 103.7 100.3 103.9 93.9 100.5 95.2 72.5 83.5         June 104.4 107.1 101.3 108.8 106.1 103.8 103.9 95.4 100.3 95.1 77.0 81.3
         July 104.6 106.3 101.1 109.2 107.4 103.8 104.1 92.4 100.3 95.2 81.5 82.7
         Aug 104.6 105.1 101.0 110.4 107.7 103.9 100.3 104.1 94.0 100.4 95.8 86.4 85.2         Sep 104.5 105.6 101.4 109.7 106.7 103.9 104.2 97.4 100.5 95.7 78.7 87.5
         Oct 104.5 105.7 101.4 110.0 106.4 103.9 104.2 96.2 100.4 95.5 81.0 88.7
         Nov 104.3 105.5 101.4 109.5 105.8 104.1 100.3 104.2 97.6 100.4 95.5 81.7 91.0         Dec 105.1 105.7 101.4 109.4 109.0 104.1 104.2 96.1 100.2 95.1 80.7 89.4
2004          Jan 105.2 106.9 102.1 110.5 107.2 104.4 104.0 96.6 100.2 95.2 82.6 92.8
         Feb 105.4 106.4 101.9 110.2 108.3 104.5 100.5 104.1 97.8 100.3 95.3 82.2 96.2         Mar 105.7 106.1 103.1 111.4 108.0 104.6 104.7 98.2 100.8 96.4 91.2 103.5
         Apr 106.0 106.3 103.3 113.1 108.1 104.7 105.1 96.8 101.1 96.9 94.9 105.1
         May 106.2 106.6 103.1 116.1 108.1 104.7 101.4 105.6 96.0 101.3 97.6 104.5 101.1         June 106.2 106.7 103.1 114.2 108.6 104.8 105.5 97.6 101.1 97.0 100.8 99.1
         July 106.5 106.0 102.8 115.5 109.9 104.8 106.1 97.0 101.2 97.3 104.7 97.6
         Aug 106.7 104.9 102.8 117.3 110.3 105.0 101.8 106.4
p 94.5 101.5 98.2 114.3 94.6
         Sep 106.4 104.3 102.9 116.6 109.2 105.0 106.6 ... 101.5 98.3 112.7 93.5
         Oct 106.6 104.2 102.9 120.4 108.9 105.1 107.6 ... ... ... 123.0 92.0
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 2 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 37.1 − 6.2
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 2 + 3.1 + 6.1 + 3.1 + 10.1 + 73.6 + 20.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.1
2002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.92003 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.6
 
2003          Jan + 1.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 3.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 25.1 − 1.1
         Feb + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 8.5 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 26.0 − 2.1         Mar + 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 7.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.9 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 6.4
         Apr + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 19.5 − 6.2
         May + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 20.7 − 8.0         June + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 3.1 − 8.7 − 9.6
         July + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 7.5
         Aug + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.1
+ 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 5.2
         Sep + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 15.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 10.5 − 3.7
         Nov + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 4.2 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.2         Dec + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 7.5 − 0.2
2004          Jan + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 10.4 + 5.1
         Feb + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 15.5 + 7.2         Mar + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.5 − 2.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.9 + 17.2
         Apr + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 24.9 + 19.7
         May + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 7.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 2.5 + 44.1 + 21.1         June + 1.7 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 5.0 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.5 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 2.0 + 30.9 + 21.9
         July + 1.8 − 0.3 + 1.7 + 5.8 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 5.0 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 28.5 + 18.0
         Aug + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.2
p + 0.5 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 32.3 + 11.0
         Sep + 1.8 − 1.2 + 1.5 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 2.3 ... + 1.0 + 2.7 + 43.2 + 6.9
         Oct + 2.0 − 1.4 + 1.5 + 9.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 3.3 ... ... ... + 51.9 + 3.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- index of raw material prices for the euro area based on the euro. — 6Coal
stitute. — 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation and crude oil. — 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw
based on data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Previously: materials. 
Overall construction price level. — 4Excluding value-added tax. — 5HWWA
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999 € billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM / 
€ change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 − 1.8 12.31994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 − 0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 − 2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 − 0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 − 0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 − 1.0 10.81997 1,591.3 − 0.2 1,015.9 − 1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 − 0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 − 1.9 10.41998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.31999 855.4 3.0 549.2 3.4 327.5 3.1 876.7 3.3 1,281.1 3.4 125.1 − 1.9 9.8
2000 884.7 3.4 571.8 4.1 336.8 2.8 908.6 3.6 1,325.8 3.5 129.0 3.1 9.7
2001 904.2 2.2 592.9 3.7 348.1 3.3 941.0 3.6 1,377.6 3.9 140.4 8.8 10.22002 911.2 0.8 595.3 0.4 364.4 4.7 959.7 2.0 1,388.5 0.8 146.3 4.2 10.52003 909.8 − 0.2 590.5 − 0.8 373.9 2.6 964.4 0.5 1,406.4 1.3 151.1 3.3 10.7
2002          Q3 227.5 1.1 152.7 0.6 91.6 5.6 244.3 2.5 342.2 1.0 30.7 4.9 9.0
         Q4 254.3 0.3 164.4 0.1 91.5 4.1 255.8 1.5 357.9 1.2 34.1 6.4 9.5
2003          Q1 211.2 0.3 137.0 − 0.6 94.1 3.1 231.1 0.9 352.4 2.1 50.1 5.6 14.2
         Q2 218.7 − 0.1 138.9 − 1.0 92.7 2.8 231.6 0.5 349.4 1.8 35.3 3.8 10.1         Q3 227.2 − 0.1 151.6 − 0.7 93.1 1.7 244.7 0.2 346.0 1.1 32.0 4.3 9.3         Q4 252.7 − 0.6 163.0 − 0.8 94.0 2.8 257.0 0.5 358.6 0.2 33.7 − 1.1 9.4
2004          Q1 211.5 0.2 138.8 1.3 95.7 1.8 234.5 1.5 356.6 1.2 50.9 1.5 14.3
         Q2 218.5 − 0.1 141.1 1.6 93.4 0.7 234.4 1.2 354.8 1.5 36.9 4.4 10.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2004. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (workplace concept)  2 (workplace concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change change 1995 = 100
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.0 1.9 105.8 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.1 2.9 108.7 2.8 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.3 2.0 110.8 2.0 105.9 1.6 113.2 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.5 2.0 113.0 2.0 107.9 1.9 115.2 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.22002 116.6 2.7 116.0 2.7 109.5 1.5 118.9 3.2 117.3 3.2 116.0 2.02003 118.9 2.0 118.5 2.1 110.8 1.1 122.0 2.6 120.3 2.5 . .
2002          Q4 132.0 2.8 131.4 2.8 121.8 1.5 132.0 3.4 130.2 3.4 125.4 2.3
2003          Q1 109.2 2.8 108.8 2.9 104.0 1.9 109.7 3.2 108.2 3.1 . .
         Q2 110.0 2.2 109.7 2.3 106.7 1.5 112.0 2.6 110.5 2.6 . .         Q3 122.8 2.0 122.4 2.1 110.4 1.1 131.1 2.3 129.3 2.3 . .         Q4 133.5 1.1 133.0 1.2 122.1 0.2 135.1 2.3 133.2 2.3 . .
2004          Q1 111.1 1.7 110.9 1.9 104.9 0.9 113.2 3.2 111.7 3.3 . .
         Q2 111.7 1.5 111.4 1.6 107.3 0.6 113.5 1.3 112.0 1.4 . .         Q3 124.0 0.9 123.8 1.1 . . 131.9 0.6 130.2 0.7 . .
2004          Mar 111.7 1.4 111.5 1.6 . . 115.0 4.8 113.5 4.9 . .
         Apr 111.3 1.1 111.1 1.3 . . 113.1 0.8 111.6 0.8 . .
         May 112.0 1.8 111.7 2.0 . . 114.2 2.2 112.7 2.3 . .         June 111.7 1.4 111.5 1.6 . . 113.3 1.0 111.8 1.1 . .
         July 148.0 0.5 147.7 0.7 . . 169.2 1.1 166.9 1.2 . .
         Aug 112.0 1.5 111.8 1.7 . . 113.3 1.1 111.8 1.2 . .         Sep 112.0 0.9 111.8 1.1 . . 113.3 − 0.6 111.8 − 0.5 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. — 2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2004. — 3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
X External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2003 2004  r
Item 2001  1 2002 2003 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug
Current account − 16,684 + 54,455 + 24,856 + 17,338 + 13,644 + 8,666 + 6,027 + 2,800 + 2,109A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) incl supplementary items 1,033,862 1,063,218 1,036,195 271,362 265,894 284,303 99,258 98,394 85,888
Imports (fob) incl supplementary items 960,211 929,666 927,716 240,683 237,265 251,621 87,269 84,486 80,374
Balance + 73,651 + 133,551 + 108,481 + 30,680 + 28,630 + 32,682 + 11,989 + 13,907 + 5,514
2 Services
Receipts 321,672 329,844 325,956 84,373 76,002 87,700 30,897 30,697 29,201
Expenditure 322,038 316,728 310,311 80,060 75,938 78,926 27,446 28,907 28,486
Balance − 369 + 13,114 + 15,645 + 4,313 + 64 + 8,774 + 3,451 + 1,790 + 715
3 Income − 38,582 − 44,110 − 43,418 − 4,954 − 8,047 − 16,357 − 2,859 − 6,572 + 1,128
4 Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 78,798 85,305 80,753 19,375 31,678 15,431 5,575 4,965 5,646
Transfer payments to non-residents 130,182 133,400 136,606 32,076 38,680 31,864 12,129 11,291 10,893
Balance − 51,387 − 48,097 − 55,851 − 12,700 − 7,003 − 16,433 − 6,554 − 6,325 − 5,247
Capital account + 6,574 + 10,977 + 13,434 + 7,373 + 3,588 + 4,076 + 963 + 1,144 + 1,588B
Financial account (net capital exports: −) − 34,165 − 65,808 − 50,462 − 3,558 − 12,206 − 11,657 + 2,100 − 11,991 + 140C
1 Direct investment − 112,440 − 4,718 − 13,125 − 9,650 − 23,595 − 19,245 − 13,813 − 8,487 + 4,434
By resident units abroad − 316,489 − 151,328 − 118,595 − 27,248 − 27,802 − 32,617 − 12,128 − 11,716 + 8,791By non-resident units in the euro area + 204,055 + 146,610 + 105,471 + 17,598 + 4,208 + 13,373 − 1,684 + 3,229 − 4,357
2 Portfolio investment + 67,948 + 114,633 + 17,608 + 10,500 − 3,058 + 20,944 + 31,689 − 30,742 + 5,129
By resident units abroad − 281,866 − 175,759 − 283,802 − 64,325 − 92,351 − 52,661 − 13,598 − 33,724 − 31,492
Equity − 101,583 − 40,365 − 67,741 − 26,302 − 30,821 − 16,155 − 16,412 − 3,041 − 11,061
Bonds and notes − 155,875 − 89,592 − 172,769 − 25,429 − 46,949 − 31,479 − 6,021 − 12,390 − 14,286
Money market instruments − 24,411 − 45,803 − 43,291 − 12,594 − 14,581 − 5,025 + 8,836 − 18,292 − 6,146
By non-resident units in the euro area + 349,814 + 290,394 + 301,412 + 74,827 + 89,293 + 73,605 + 45,287 + 2,982 + 36,621
Equity + 232,553 + 88,853 + 103,619 + 45,746 + 24,485 − 5,901 + 13,431 + 8,688 + 15,136
Bonds and notes + 113,135 + 133,670 + 191,829 + 34,639 + 42,122 + 81,135 + 29,433 − 1,470 + 14,785
Money market instruments + 4,129 + 67,869 + 5,965 − 5,559 + 22,687 − 1,629 + 2,423 − 4,236 + 6,700
3 Financial derivatives − 856 − 10,785 − 13,090 − 4,075 + 6,576 − 600 − 55 − 861 − 3,142
4 Other investment − 6,632 − 162,664 − 71,674 − 13,924 − 1,487 − 9,875 − 14,432 + 27,484 − 8,648
Eurosystem + 5,032 + 18,185 + 11,236 − 1,350 − 1,888 + 2,494 + 1,742 + 1,487 − 182
General government + 2,545 − 8,160 − 4,974 − 1,862 − 6,975 − 1,005 − 117 − 873 − 172
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 3,256 − 138,175 − 18,946 − 17,625 + 2,411 + 15,745 − 15,092 + 35,062 − 13,190
Long-term − 24,190 + 19,536 + 1,293 + 1,574 − 10,039 + 4,320 + 3,034 + 309 − 1,841Short-term + 27,446 − 157,704 − 20,240 − 19,199 + 12,450 + 11,425 − 18,126 + 34,753 − 11,349
Other sectors  
2 − 17,462 − 34,518 − 58,988 + 6,916 + 4,966 − 27,107 − 965 − 8,192 + 4,895
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 17,815 − 2,277 + 29,817 + 13,589 + 9,357 − 2,883 − 1,289 + 616 + 2,368
Errors and omissions + 44,278 + 372 + 12,172 − 21,153 − 5,027 − 1,084 − 9,090 + 8,047 − 3,838D
*Source: European Central Bank. — 1From January 2001, including   
Greece. — 2 Enterprises and households.  
67*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
X External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item Capital trans-
fers and Change in
the Bundes- acquisition/disposal of Change in bank’s net
Supple- non- the foreign external
Balance mentary produced reserves at Balance of assets aton current External trade Factor Current Financial transaction transaction non-financial unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4,5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1,2,3 transactions
DM million
1990  o + 73,021 + 105,382 − 3,833 − 26,118 + 32,859 − 35,269 − 4,975 − 89,497 − 11,611 + 33,062 − 10,976
1991 − 36,298 + 21,899 − 2,804 − 30,724 + 33,144 − 57,812 − 4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 18,643 − 319
1992 − 30,013 + 33,656 − 1,426 − 44,983 + 33,962 − 51,222 − 1,963 + 69,792 − 52,888 + 15,072 − 68,7451993 − 23,062 + 60,304 − 3,038 − 52,549 + 27,373 − 55,151 − 1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 − 19,260 + 35,7661994 − 46,749 + 71,762 − 1,104 − 62,803 + 4,852 − 59,455 − 2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 − 11,332 − 12,242
1995 − 38,642 + 85,303 − 4,722 − 63,985 + 178 − 55,416 − 3,845 + 63,647 − 10,355 − 10,805 − 17,754
1996 − 20,643 + 98,538 − 5,264 − 64,743 + 1,815 − 50,989 − 3,283 + 23,607 + 1,882 − 1,564 + 1,6101997 − 14,916 + 116,467 − 7,360 − 68,696 − 2,588 − 52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 8,193 + 8,4681998 − 20,677 + 126,970 − 5,934 − 75,072 − 13,337 − 53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 − 7,128 − 6,295 − 8,231
1999 − 43,915 + 127,542 − 13,656 − 90,099 − 18,775 − 48,927 − 301 − 44,849 + 24,517 + 64,548 − 72,364
2000 − 54,471 + 115,645 − 13,505 − 95,967 − 5,166 − 55,478 + 13,345 + 55,434 + 11,429 − 25,737 + 94,3292001 + 3,421 + 186,771 − 10,499 − 98,323 − 20,889 − 53,639 − 756 − 51,306 + 11,797 + 36,844 + 63,911
€ million
1999 − 22,454 + 65,211 − 6,982 − 46,067 − 9,599 − 25,016 − 154 − 22,931 + 12,535 + 33,003 − 36,9992000 − 27,851 + 59,128 − 6,905 − 49,067 − 2,641 − 28,366 + 6,823 + 28,343 + 5,844 − 13,159 + 48,2302001 + 1,749 + 95,495 − 5,368 − 50,272 − 10,680 − 27,425 − 387 − 26,233 + 6,032 + 18,838 + 32,6772002 + 45,670 + 132,788 − 5,968 − 36,422 − 16,844 − 27,883 − 212 − 70,724 + 2,065 + 23,201 − 33,2922003  
r + 45,767 + 129,921 − 7,335 − 35,537 − 12,515 − 28,767 + 316 − 69,725 + 445 + 23,197 + 2,658
2001          Q4 + 8,737 + 25,303 − 703 − 7,447 − 1,050 − 7,365 − 479 − 46,370 + 2,085 + 36,027 + 36,688
2002          Q1 + 9,445 + 33,328 − 1,028 − 10,633 − 6,722 − 5,500 + 160 + 5,740 − 1,352 − 13,993 − 18,496
         Q2 + 10,420 + 31,721 − 1,383 − 8,605 − 2,682 − 8,631 − 75 − 9,488 + 2,432 − 3,289 + 1,694         Q3 + 9,507 + 35,543 − 1,552 − 12,652 − 5,563 − 6,269 + 62 − 17,554 + 87 + 7,899 − 17,588         Q4 + 16,299 + 32,195 − 2,005 − 4,532 − 1,877 − 7,483 − 359 − 49,422 + 898 + 32,584 + 1,099
2003          Q1  
r + 9,010 + 29,835 − 2,049 − 8,307 − 4,690 − 5,779 − 30 − 12,511 − 1,495 + 5,027 + 3,444
         Q2  r + 8,103 + 29,841 − 1,860 − 8,340 − 3,649 − 7,890 + 149 − 26,220 + 1,505 + 16,463 + 22,123
         Q3  r + 10,274 + 38,430 − 1,582 − 13,275 − 4,479 − 8,820 + 208 − 5,229 − 751 − 4,502 − 15,902
         Q4  r + 18,381 + 31,815 − 1,844 − 5,615 + 303 − 6,278 − 12 − 25,764 + 1,186 + 6,210 − 7,008
2004          Q1 + 21,277 + 41,150 − 1,483 − 8,878 − 3,942 − 5,571 + 430 − 14,387 + 205 − 7,526 − 6,821
         Q2 + 26,209 + 43,042 − 2,223 − 7,566 + 46 − 7,090 + 206 − 67,869 − 339 + 41,793 + 30,993         Q3  
p + 7,991 + 36,632 − 3,250 − 13,312 − 4,066 − 8,013 + 192 − 31,210 + 1,568 + 21,459 − 31,266
2002          Apr + 2,949 + 10,015 − 910 − 2,509 − 620 − 3,027 − 148 + 330 + 1,657 − 4,788 − 9,839
         May + 3,584 + 10,408 − 565 − 3,230 − 557 − 2,472 + 47 + 492 + 1,379 − 5,501 + 3,826         June + 3,887 + 11,299 + 92 − 2,866 − 1,506 − 3,132 + 26 − 10,310 − 603 + 7,000 + 7,707
         July + 1,110 + 13,224 − 770 − 3,705 − 5,416 − 2,224 − 203 − 11,194 − 548 + 10,836 − 15,567
         Aug + 2,031 + 10,477 − 312 − 5,856 − 921 − 1,359 + 86 − 4,630 + 886 + 1,627 − 5,579         Sep + 6,367 + 11,842 − 471 − 3,092 + 773 − 2,686 + 179 − 1,730 − 252 − 4,564 + 3,559
         Oct + 3,087 + 11,529 − 364 − 3,826 − 966 − 3,287 − 82 − 21,706 + 570 + 18,132 − 5,279
         Nov + 8,450 + 12,283 − 632 − 1,346 + 446 − 2,301 − 137 − 5,800 − 842 − 1,670 + 4,265         Dec + 4,762 + 8,383 − 1,009 + 640 − 1,357 − 1,895 − 139 − 21,916 + 1,171 + 16,122 + 2,112
2003          Jan  
r − 1,364 + 9,269 − 1,024 − 3,327 − 5,184 − 1,098 + 461 − 3,103 − 97 + 4,102 + 6,799
         Feb  r + 3,854 + 10,667 − 635 − 2,974 − 522 − 2,682 − 504 − 22,323 − 320 + 19,293 + 677
         Mar  r + 6,519 + 9,898 − 390 − 2,006 + 1,016 − 2,000 + 13 + 12,915 − 1,078 − 18,369 − 4,032
         Apr  r + 3,006 + 9,111 − 752 − 2,310 − 339 − 2,704 − 126 − 3,639 + 1,449 − 690 + 1,477
         May  r + 3,170 + 10,400 − 549 − 2,775 − 1,379 − 2,527 + 156 − 7,694 − 854 + 5,221 + 22,684
         June  r + 1,927 + 10,330 − 559 − 3,255 − 1,931 − 2,659 + 119 − 14,887 + 910 + 11,931 − 2,037
         July  r + 1,147 + 13,844 − 695 − 3,648 − 5,401 − 2,953 + 62 + 308 + 225 − 1,743 − 16,353
         Aug  r + 1,353 + 10,170 − 356 − 5,401 − 74 − 2,987 + 224 − 10,171 − 717 + 9,311 − 3,057
         Sep  r + 7,775 + 14,416 − 531 − 4,227 + 997 − 2,880 − 78 + 4,633 − 259 − 12,071 + 3,508
         Oct  r + 6,529 + 10,996 − 510 − 3,786 + 1,704 − 1,874 − 27 − 6,460 − 255 + 213 − 21,689
         Nov  r + 4,881 + 10,235 − 591 − 1,543 − 320 − 2,899 + 49 − 6,266 + 521 + 815 + 14,870
         Dec  r + 6,970 + 10,584 − 742 − 286 − 1,081 − 1,505 − 35 − 13,038 + 921 + 5,182 − 190
2004          Jan + 1,642 + 12,487 − 640 − 4,140 − 5,528 − 537 + 53 − 1,592 − 206 + 103 + 5,619
         Feb + 6,338 + 12,111 − 369 − 2,318 − 471 − 2,615 − 130 + 4,471 − 26 − 10,652 + 556         Mar + 13,297 + 16,552 − 473 − 2,420 + 2,057 − 2,419 + 507 − 17,265 + 437 + 3,024 − 12,996
         Apr + 9,739 + 14,278 − 524 − 3,105 + 835 − 1,745 + 82 − 37,457 − 628 + 28,264 + 315
         May + 8,762 + 14,084 − 889 − 1,839 − 99 − 2,495 − 29 − 12,412 + 607 + 3,073 + 9,981         June + 7,709 + 14,681 − 810 − 2,622 − 689 − 2,850 + 153 − 18,000 − 318 + 10,457 + 20,697
         July + 1,656 + 13,570 − 1,236 − 3,454 − 4,107 − 3,117 + 169 − 2,652 + 847 − 20 − 1,588
         Aug + 1,219 + 11,036 − 1,065 − 5,781 − 679 − 2,292 + 80 − 5,867 + 517 + 4,051 − 15,748         Sep  
p + 5,116 + 12,027 − 950 − 4,077 + 720 − 2,604 − 56 − 22,691 + 204 + 17,428 − 13,931
oFrom July 1990, including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. —
1From the beginning of 1993, figures subject to significant uncertainty 4Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
owing to changes in the method of data collection for foreign trade. — goods returned. — 5See footnote 3. — 6Excluding the expenditure on
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, freight and insurance included in the cif import figure. — 7Capital
exports fob. — 3From January 1993, including additional estimates for exports: −. — 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are
68*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
X External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2004
Country / group of countries  2001  2002  2003 r Jan / Aug May Jun Jul Aug Sep  p 
All countries  1 Exports 638,268 651,320 664,455 481,146 60,683 62,903 62,471 56,166 61,862
Imports 542,774 518,532 534,534 372,349 46,599 48,223 48,901 45,130 49,835Balance + 95,495 + 132,788 + 129,921 + 108,798 + 14,084 + 14,681 + 13,570 + 11,036 + 12,027
I Exports 461,512 470,873 490,672 355,252 45,102 46,672 45,345 41,037 ...European countries
Imports 384,901 372,955 384,939 267,608 33,358 34,426 35,043 31,606 ...Balance + 76,611 + 97,918 + 105,733 + 87,645 + 11,744 + 12,246 + 10,302 + 9,431 ...
Exports 401,887 408,286 426,342 306,478 38,850 39,980 38,748 35,351 ... 1 EU member states (25)
Imports 325,968 314,981 324,043 226,032 28,400 28,731 29,450 26,503 ...
Balance + 75,919 + 93,304 + 102,299 + 80,446 + 10,450 + 11,249 + 9,297 + 8,848 ...
Memo item
Exports 351,611 354,813 369,776 265,814 33,483 35,047 34,095 30,559 ...  EU member states (15)
Imports 277,034 262,849 266,404 187,815 24,075 24,840 24,737 22,400 ...Balance + 74,577 + 91,964 + 103,372 + 77,999 + 9,409 + 10,206 + 9,358 + 8,159 ...
Euro-area Exports 275,384 276,270 288,668 207,822 26,306 27,596 26,514 23,710 ...countries Imports 221,680 211,642 215,705 153,167 19,743 20,211 20,225 17,989 ...
Balance + 53,704 + 64,628 + 72,963 + 54,656 + 6,563 + 7,385 + 6,289 + 5,722 ...
of which
Austria Exports 33,486 33,863 35,857 25,360 3,117 3,229 3,345 3,189 ...
Imports 20,664 21,047 21,453 15,875 1,962 1,931 2,149 1,984 ...Balance + 12,822 + 12,816 + 14,404 + 9,485 + 1,154 + 1,298 + 1,195 + 1,205 ...
Belgium and Exports 35,187 34,108 38,413 28,820 3,654 3,914 3,463 3,547 ...Luxembourg Imports 28,521 26,505 26,132 19,840 2,469 2,685 2,474 2,597 ...
Balance + 6,666 + 7,603 + 12,282 + 8,979 + 1,186 + 1,229 + 988 + 950 ...
France Exports 69,601 68,721 69,025 49,316 6,179 6,619 6,293 5,519 ...
Imports 49,743 48,200 48,545 34,439 4,749 4,763 4,606 3,675 ...Balance + 19,858 + 20,521 + 20,480 + 14,876 + 1,430 + 1,857 + 1,687 + 1,844 ...
Italy Exports 47,119 47,335 48,414 34,500 4,394 4,621 4,570 3,323 ...
Imports 35,280 33,482 34,259 22,892 2,936 3,077 3,122 2,576 ...Balance + 11,839 + 13,853 + 14,156 + 11,608 + 1,459 + 1,544 + 1,448 + 747 ...
Netherlands Exports 40,011 40,463 42,219 29,311 3,660 3,868 3,671 3,733 ...
Imports 43,233 40,751 42,301 30,490 3,735 3,918 4,054 3,811 ...Balance − 3,222 − 288 − 83 − 1,179 − 75 − 51 − 382 − 78 ...
Spain Exports 27,841 29,436 32,364 24,204 3,287 3,202 3,178 2,465 ...
Imports 15,226 15,532 16,518 11,369 1,487 1,466 1,566 1,219 ...Balance + 12,615 + 13,903 + 15,846 + 12,835 + 1,800 + 1,736 + 1,612 + 1,246 ...
Other EU member Exports 126,503 132,016 137,674 98,656 12,544 12,384 12,234 11,640 ...states Imports 104,288 103,339 108,337 72,865 8,658 8,520 9,226 8,514 ...
Balance + 22,215 + 28,677 + 29,336 + 25,791 + 3,887 + 3,864 + 3,008 + 3,127 ...
of which
United Exports 52,764 53,761 55,597 40,527 4,949 5,233 5,537 4,647 ...Kingdom Imports 37,259 33,075 31,712 21,979 2,762 2,918 3,082 2,765 ...
Balance + 15,505 + 20,685 + 23,885 + 18,549 + 2,187 + 2,315 + 2,455 + 1,882 ...
Exports 59,624 62,588 64,331 48,774 6,251 6,692 6,597 5,686 ... 2 Other European
Imports 58,933 57,974 60,897 41,576 4,958 5,695 5,592 5,104 ... countries
Balance + 692 + 4,614 + 3,434 + 7,198 + 1,294 + 996 + 1,005 + 583 ...
II Exports 175,203 178,818 172,329 125,038 15,498 16,088 17,042 15,017 ...Non-European
Imports 157,199 144,950 148,895 104,332 13,198 13,751 13,813 13,482 ... countries
Balance + 18,003 + 33,869 + 23,434 + 20,706 + 2,300 + 2,338 + 3,229 + 1,535 ...
Exports 12,042 11,797 12,072 8,997 1,026 1,161 1,299 1,282 ... 1 Africa
Imports 11,356 10,248 10,239 6,399 691 905 820 898 ...
Balance + 686 + 1,549 + 1,832 + 2,597 + 335 + 256 + 479 + 383 ...
Exports 89,801 89,081 79,629 55,930 6,849 7,202 7,572 6,493 ... 2 America
Imports 59,575 52,822 51,948 35,633 4,736 4,967 4,694 4,402 ...
Balance + 30,226 + 36,259 + 27,681 + 20,297 + 2,113 + 2,235 + 2,878 + 2,091 ...
of which
Exports 67,824 68,263 61,654 42,921 5,305 5,574 5,889 4,840 ... United States
Imports 45,982 40,376 39,231 26,580 3,697 3,820 3,334 3,082 ...Balance + 21,842 + 27,887 + 22,423 + 16,341 + 1,608 + 1,755 + 2,555 + 1,759 ...
Exports 68,936 72,915 75,620 56,569 7,202 7,278 7,685 6,794 ... 3 Asia
Imports 84,220 79,892 84,783 60,930 7,641 7,689 8,120 7,978 ...
Balance − 15,285 − 6,977 − 9,162 − 4,361 − 439 − 412 − 435 − 1,184 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 14,130 15,045 15,511 11,280 1,490 1,438 1,566 1,432 ...
Imports 5,434 4,696 4,469 2,769 411 384 377 356 ...Balance + 8,696 + 10,349 + 11,043 + 8,511 + 1,080 + 1,054 + 1,189 + 1,076 ...
Japan Exports 13,103 12,576 11,889 8,437 902 1,020 1,170 1,067 ...
Imports 22,910 19,896 19,684 13,857 1,757 1,715 1,744 1,598 ...Balance − 9,807 − 7,320 − 7,795 − 5,419 − 855 − 695 − 574 − 531 ...
Exports 12,118 14,571 18,265 14,209 1,891 1,927 1,844 1,502 ... People‘s Republic
of China  
2 Imports 19,942 21,338 25,681 19,322 2,382 2,485 2,616 2,756 ... of China  2 
Balance − 7,824 − 6,768 − 7,417 − 5,113 − 491 − 559 − 773 − 1,254 ...
Exports 4,424 5,026 5,008 3,542 421 448 485 448 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,048 1,988 1,925 1,369 130 189 178 204 ... polar regions
Balance + 2,375 + 3,038 + 3,083 + 2,173 + 290 + 259 + 307 + 244 ...
Memo item
Exports 24,735 25,282 24,515 18,188 2,347 2,349 2,404 2,188 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 28,351 26,660 27,119 18,890 2,379 2,383 2,574 2,378 ... South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 3,616 − 1,377 − 2,603 − 702 − 32 − 35 − 170 − 190 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by regi on. —
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 
69*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
X External sector
 
4 Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1999 − 46,067 − 35,468 + 2,882 + 1,005 − 1,896 + 1,997 − 14,588 − 2,245 − 403 − 756 − 8,843
2000 − 49,067 − 37,249 + 3,386 + 1,668 − 3,012 + 2,221 − 16,081 − 2,757 − 753 − 512 − 2,129
2001 − 50,272 − 37,955 + 4,151 + 1,079 − 2,455 + 3,488 − 18,581 − 2,538 − 619 − 257 − 10,4242002 − 36,422 − 35,445 + 2,750 + 1,380 − 1,461 + 5,237 − 8,883 − 2,035 + 403 − 144 − 16,7002003 − 35,537 − 36,869 + 1,825 + 1,529 − 882 + 5,050 − 6,190 − 1,863 + 1,419 − 86 − 12,428
2003          Q1 − 8,307 − 6,921 + 168 + 449 − 293 + 1,273 − 2,983 − 574 + 473 + 216 − 4,906
         Q2 − 8,340 − 9,127 + 695 + 355 − 193 + 1,203 − 1,272 − 485 + 177 − 85 − 3,565         Q3 − 13,275 − 13,994 + 453 + 339 − 369 + 1,316 − 1,020 − 410 + 439 − 240 − 4,239         Q4 − 5,615 − 6,827 + 509 + 386 − 26 + 1,257 − 915 − 393 + 330 + 22 + 281
2004          Q1 − 8,878 − 7,018 + 517 + 351 − 188 + 1,317 − 3,858 − 342 + 214 + 210 − 4,152
         Q2 − 7,566 − 8,965 + 1,529 + 255 − 344 + 1,438 − 1,478 − 303 − 13 − 57 + 103         Q3 − 13,312 − 14,030 + 1,018 + 482 + 21 + 1,432 − 2,235 − 311 + 85 − 233 − 3,833
2003          Nov − 1,543 − 1,778 + 183 + 176 + 2 + 383 − 509 − 99 + 92 − 8 − 312
         Dec − 286 − 1,144 + 289 + 125 + 9 + 494 − 58 − 161 + 139 + 30 − 1,111
2004          Jan − 4,140 − 2,378 + 32 + 103 − 0 + 437 − 2,333 − 143 + 31 + 67 − 5,595
         Feb − 2,318 − 1,907 + 134 + 112 + 7 + 426 − 1,091 − 93 + 114 + 64 − 534         Mar − 2,420 − 2,733 + 351 + 136 − 195 + 455 − 434 − 105 + 68 + 80 + 1,977
         Apr − 3,105 − 2,689 + 578 + 66 − 125 + 470 − 1,405 − 83 − 58 − 20 + 855
         May − 1,839 − 2,557 + 256 + 121 − 24 + 453 − 88 − 107 + 61 − 25 − 74         June − 2,622 − 3,719 + 695 + 68 − 195 + 515 + 14 − 113 − 17 − 12 − 677
         July − 3,454 − 3,387 + 303 + 181 + 86 + 485 − 1,122 − 106 + 99 − 76 − 4,031
         Aug − 5,781 − 6,359 + 495 + 122 + 2 + 443 − 484 − 89 + 30 − 85 − 594         Sep − 4,077 − 4,284 + 220 + 180 − 67 + 504 − 629 − 115 − 44 − 72 + 792
1From January 2002, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Remittances Other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1999 − 25,016 − 17,348 − 15,428 − 13,846 − 1,920 − 7,667 − 3,429 − 4,239 − 154 − 1,351 + 1,197
2000 − 28,366 − 19,094 − 17,100 − 15,398 − 1,995 − 9,271 − 3,458 − 5,814 − 1,599 − 1,189 − 410
2001 − 27,425 − 16,927 − 14,257 − 12,587 − 2,670 − 10,499 − 3,520 − 6,978 − 387 − 1,361 + 9742002 − 27,883 − 16,207 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 3,162 − 11,676 − 3,470 − 8,206 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,2042003 − 28,767 − 18,793 − 15,397 − 13,732 − 3,396 − 9,974 − 3,332 − 6,642 + 316 − 1,235 + 1,551
2003          Q1 − 5,779 − 3,317 − 2,297 − 1,628 − 1,020 − 2,463 − 833 − 1,629 − 30 − 253 + 223
         Q2 − 7,890 − 5,403 − 5,375 − 4,790 − 28 − 2,487 − 833 − 1,654 + 149 − 276 + 425         Q3 − 8,820 − 6,017 − 4,896 − 4,650 − 1,121 − 2,803 − 833 − 1,970 + 208 − 249 + 457         Q4 − 6,278 − 4,057 − 2,829 − 2,665 − 1,227 − 2,222 − 833 − 1,389 − 12 − 457 + 445
2004          Q1 − 5,571 − 3,337 − 2,466 − 1,822 − 871 − 2,233 − 795 − 1,438 + 430 − 254 + 684
         Q2 − 7,090 − 4,404 − 4,474 − 4,187 + 70 − 2,687 − 795 − 1,892 + 206 − 239 + 445         Q3 − 8,013 − 5,602 − 4,442 − 4,148 − 1,160 − 2,411 − 795 − 1,616 + 192 − 264 + 456
2003          Nov − 2,899 − 2,161 − 1,684 − 1,674 − 477 − 739 − 278 − 461 + 49 − 229 + 278
         Dec − 1,505 − 824 − 515 − 477 − 310 − 681 − 278 − 403 − 35 − 141 + 107
2004          Jan − 537 + 278 + 501 + 863 − 223 − 815 − 265 − 550 + 53 − 84 + 137
         Feb − 2,615 − 1,912 − 1,547 − 1,388 − 366 − 702 − 265 − 437 − 130 − 95 − 36         Mar − 2,419 − 1,703 − 1,420 − 1,296 − 282 − 716 − 265 − 451 + 507 − 75 + 582
         Apr − 1,745 − 851 − 941 − 859 + 90 − 894 − 265 − 629 + 82 − 71 + 153
         May − 2,495 − 1,475 − 1,538 − 1,422 + 63 − 1,020 − 265 − 755 − 29 − 91 + 62         June − 2,850 − 2,078 − 1,995 − 1,906 − 82 − 773 − 265 − 508 + 153 − 77 + 230
         July − 3,117 − 2,140 − 1,623 − 1,501 − 518 − 977 − 265 − 712 + 169 − 102 + 271
         Aug − 2,292 − 1,581 − 1,193 − 1,086 − 388 − 712 − 265 − 447 + 80 − 80 + 160         Sep − 2,604 − 1,881 − 1,627 − 1,561 − 254 − 723 − 265 − 458 − 56 − 82 + 26
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
X External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2003 2004
Item 2001 2002 2003 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 270,632 − 249,672 − 189,429 − 24,246 − 77,020 − 10,199 − 97,070 − 11,712 − 24,263 − 61,095
1 Direct investment  1 − 41,185 − 9,161 − 2,268 + 1,085 + 10,210 − 2,503 − 8,114 − 442 + 1,063 − 8,735
Equity capital − 70,254 − 38,266 − 13,052 − 2,324 + 21,155 − 1,091 + 4,564 + 676 + 2,935 + 954
Reinvested earnings  2 + 17,892 + 16,224 + 1,380 + 345 + 325 + 149 + 1,051 + 333 + 409 + 309
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors + 16,260 + 20,639 + 18,881 + 6,329 − 9,760 + 935 − 11,764 − 607 − 1,867 − 9,291Other capital − 5,083 − 7,759 − 9,477 − 3,265 − 1,511 − 2,496 − 1,965 − 845 − 414 − 707
2 Portfolio investment − 124,375 − 65,848 − 32,323 − 10,668 − 25,990 − 31,569 − 19,882 − 12,005 − 3,806 − 4,071
Equity
3 − 10,581 − 4,832 + 7,628 − 5,969 + 1,230 + 926 + 6,060 + 2,019 + 336 + 3,704
Mutual fund shares  4 − 20,222 − 6,995 − 4,253 − 467 − 7,059 − 2,526 − 3,110 − 116 − 1,392 − 1,602
Bonds and notes  5 − 95,067 − 49,056 − 37,811 − 6,645 − 26,144 − 25,642 − 17,750 − 11,793 + 737 − 6,694
Money market instruments + 1,495 − 4,965 + 2,112 + 2,412 + 5,983 − 4,327 − 5,082 − 2,116 − 3,487 + 521
3 Financial derivatives  6 + 6,829 − 863 − 493 − 36 − 1,255 + 2,236 − 2,663 − 490 − 3,954 + 1,780
4 Credit transactions − 110,515 − 172,208 − 151,755 − 13,957 − 58,969 + 22,456 − 65,766 + 1,437 − 17,382 − 49,821
MFIs  7,8 − 130,648 − 132,536 − 122,307 − 10,941 − 36,597 − 14,365 − 33,208 + 4,411 − 6,619 − 31,000
Long-term − 47,636 − 33,790 − 32,556 − 4,882 + 3,570 + 5,597 − 1,007 − 2,825 + 2,556 − 738
Short-term − 83,012 − 98,746 − 89,750 − 6,059 − 40,167 − 19,962 − 32,201 + 7,236 − 9,176 − 30,261
Enterprises and households − 19,861 − 10,830 − 30,944 + 3,997 − 17,505 + 4,860 − 2,269 − 1,509 + 4,030 − 4,790
Long-term − 2,502 − 1,187 − 2,729 − 888 − 669 − 480 − 1,036 − 837 + 173 − 372
Short-term  7 − 17,360 − 9,643 − 28,215 + 4,884 − 16,836 + 5,340 − 1,233 − 672 + 3,857 − 4,418
General government + 15,980 + 7,168 + 1,265 + 1,021 + 1,158 + 64 + 1,191 + 481 + 695 + 16
Long-term + 257 + 218 + 692 + 115 + 305 + 7 + 183 + 117 + 57 + 10Short-term  
7 + 15,723 + 6,950 + 572 + 906 + 853 + 57 + 1,008 + 364 + 638 + 6
Bundesbank + 24,015 − 36,010 + 230 − 8,033 − 6,025 + 31,896 − 31,480 − 1,946 − 15,487 − 14,047
5 Other investment  9 − 1,385 − 1,592 − 2,590 − 670 − 1,016 − 819 − 645 − 212 − 185 − 248
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 244,399 + 178,948 + 119,704 − 1,518 + 62,633 − 57,670 + 65,860 + 9,060 + 18,396 + 38,404
1 Direct investment  1 + 23,622 + 38,269 + 11,400 − 12,994 − 32,076 − 5,025 − 615 − 2,331 − 2,885 + 4,601
Equity capital + 29,702 + 29,311 + 27,956 + 11,409 + 5,014 − 2,515 + 3,732 − 310 + 1,439 + 2,604Reinvested earnings  
2 − 20,520 − 13,008 − 5,484 − 1,371 − 6,898 − 910 + 31 + 44 − 139 + 126
Credit transactions of
foreign direct investors + 14,584 + 22,162 − 10,886 − 22,980 − 30,246 − 1,581 − 4,366 − 2,056 − 4,181 + 1,871Other capital − 143 − 197 − 186 − 52 + 54 − 19 − 13 − 8 − 4 − 0
2 Portfolio investment + 150,870 + 109,783 + 91,276 + 31,075 + 34,063 + 1,523 + 39,030 + 21,507 + 15,671 + 1,852
Equity  
3 + 86,812 + 15,712 + 24,204 + 20,306 + 2,793 − 11,739 + 6,738 + 3,638 + 32 + 3,068
Mutual fund shares + 951 − 673 − 1,530 + 278 + 835 − 981 + 4,038 + 3,679 + 856 − 497
Bonds and notes  5 + 80,299 + 83,473 + 69,243 + 14,389 + 42,914 + 15,436 + 34,237 + 15,292 + 13,728 + 5,217
Money market instruments − 17,191 + 11,271 − 642 − 3,897 − 12,479 − 1,193 − 5,983 − 1,102 + 1,055 − 5,937
3 Credit transactions + 69,859 + 30,814 + 17,005 − 19,580 + 60,603 − 54,247 + 27,450 − 10,113 + 5,613 + 31,949
MFIs  7,8 + 54,341 + 28,453 + 12,160 − 19,300 + 57,886 − 52,845 + 28,076 − 7,257 + 6,309 + 29,024
Long-term + 4,425 + 18,379 − 4,512 + 6,012 − 8,845 − 1,543 + 5,492 − 506 + 1,491 + 4,507
Short-term + 49,916 + 10,075 + 16,672 − 25,312 + 66,730 − 51,302 + 22,584 − 6,750 + 4,818 + 24,517
Enterprises and households + 12,008 + 3,332 − 820 + 1,068 + 7,908 − 3,371 − 1,323 − 1,946 − 668 + 1,291
Long-term + 11,743 + 5,250 − 1,901 + 57 + 3,078 + 95 − 1,735 − 335 − 538 − 862
Short-term  7 + 265 − 1,918 + 1,081 + 1,011 + 4,830 − 3,467 + 412 − 1,611 − 130 + 2,154
General government + 879 − 1,625 + 3,682 − 1,186 − 4,188 + 2,534 + 2,050 − 421 + 750 + 1,721
Long-term − 217 − 125 + 4,861 + 1,178 − 2,208 + 1,359 + 1,280 + 596 + 476 + 208Short-term  
7 + 1,096 − 1,500 − 1,179 − 2,365 − 1,980 + 1,176 + 770 − 1,017 + 274 + 1,514
Bundesbank + 2,631 + 653 + 1,983 − 161 − 1,002 − 564 − 1,354 − 489 − 777 − 87
4 Other investment + 47 + 83 + 24 − 19 + 43 + 79 − 4 − 4 − 3 + 3
III Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) − 26,233 − 70,724 − 69,725 − 25,764 − 14,387 − 67,869 − 31,210 − 2,652 − 5,867 − 22,691
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including accumulated statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9In particular, subscriptions of the Federal
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- Government to international organisations. 
71*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
X External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,4531993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2003          May 70,456 78,904 34,252 7,871 36,781 312 − 9,216 455 9,818 60,638
         June 73,550 78,425 33,435 8,292 36,698 312 − 5,663 476 10,537 63,014
         July 90,714 79,218 34,759 8,289 36,170 312 10,710 474 10,375 80,339
         Aug 98,605 84,197 37,546 8,583 38,068 312 13,592 504 11,060 87,545         Sep 91,894 81,206 36,491 8,492 36,223 312 9,902 474 10,879 81,016
         Oct 113,947 81,401 36,595 8,539 36,267 312 31,794 440 11,319 102,628
         Nov 97,130 79,624 36,705 8,374 34,545 312 16,742 452 10,518 86,612         Dec 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004          Jan 89,895 76,992 35,834 7,726 33,432 312 12,135 456 10,522 79,374
         Feb 87,987 76,089 34,930 7,736 33,423 312 11,140 446 10,078 77,910         Mar 104,464 79,717 38,266 7,610 33,841 312 23,981 454 9,545 94,920
         Apr 102,021 78,143 35,849 7,880 34,414 312 23,134 432 9,694 92,327
         May 89,877 76,473 35,705 7,685 33,083 312 12,641 451 8,537 81,340         June 69,837 76,996 35,793 7,390 33,813 312 − 7,951 480 9,003 60,834
         July 70,865 76,076 35,721 7,395 32,960 312 − 6,009 486 8,545 62,320
         Aug 87,570 77,171 37,195 7,395 32,581 312 9,455 632 7,755 79,815         Sep 100,176 75,729 36,680 6,996 32,054 312 23,480 655 7,625 92,552
         Oct 76,043 74,334 36,935 6,889 30,510 312 740 656 7,128 68,915
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Deutsche Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. Fro m
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
72*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
X External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,280
2001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003 357,399 86,627 270,772 154,953 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2004          Apr 378,176 98,826 279,350 161,096 118,254 110,603 7,651 516,565 57,255 459,310 371,128 88,182 57,028 31,154
         May 375,102 94,057 281,045 161,579 119,466 111,809 7,657 518,986 56,858 462,128 372,372 89,756 57,967 31,789         June  
r 383,333 96,394 286,939 163,660 123,279 115,754 7,525 524,609 54,845 469,764 378,353 91,411 60,242 31,169
         July  r 384,727 99,250 285,477 164,940 120,537 112,958 7,579 520,260 53,175 467,085 376,446 90,639 58,787 31,852
         Aug  r 381,232 97,032 284,200 167,632 116,568 109,048 7,520 516,323 52,422 463,901 375,020 88,881 56,170 32,711
         Sep 390,749 99,491 291,258 169,936 121,322 113,937 7,385 515,390 52,746 462,644 369,325 93,319 61,985 31,334
Industrial countries 2
 
2000 262,284 42,488 219,796 132,570 87,226 81,391 5,835 407,513 50,184 357,329 294,569 62,760 51,078 11,6822001 298,904 61,403 237,501 151,047 86,454 79,453 7,001 466,206 57,861 408,345 340,344 68,001 54,364 13,6372002  
4 278,074 62,861 215,213 133,509 81,704 75,996 5,708 493,155 55,770 437,385 372,464 64,921 50,731 14,190
2003 305,754 85,390 220,364 140,280 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,220
2004          Apr 326,684 97,406 229,278 146,701 82,577 77,612 4,965 470,049 54,973 415,076 353,847 61,229 44,745 16,484
         May 333,646 92,672 240,974 151,041 89,933 84,613 5,320 480,255 54,711 425,544 358,690 66,854 48,839 18,015         June  
r 341,730 95,129 246,601 153,095 93,506 88,252 5,254 486,319 52,718 433,601 364,538 69,063 51,545 17,518
         July  r 342,717 97,853 244,864 154,277 90,587 85,286 5,301 481,761 51,086 430,675 362,702 67,973 50,079 17,894
         Aug  r 339,570 95,681 243,889 156,974 86,915 81,610 5,305 477,574 50,293 427,281 361,822 65,459 47,726 17,733
         Sep 349,098 98,068 251,030 159,599 91,431 86,167 5,264 477,332 50,666 426,666 356,176 70,490 52,927 17,563
EU member states 2
 
2000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,5362001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003 225,973 81,430 144,543 89,392 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,642
2004          Apr 247,132 90,875 156,257 99,192 57,065 53,335 3,730 378,851 49,982 328,869 289,006 39,863 28,413 11,450
         May 255,423 86,130 169,293 103,970 65,323 61,205 4,118 391,604 49,732 341,872 295,897 45,975 33,084 12,891         June  
r 259,865 88,680 171,185 103,659 67,526 63,401 4,125 395,292 47,760 347,532 300,373 47,159 34,708 12,451
         July  r 260,893 90,783 170,110 105,315 64,795 60,688 4,107 392,332 46,239 346,093 299,384 46,709 33,963 12,746
         Aug  r 260,081 90,553 169,528 107,573 61,955 57,835 4,120 388,207 45,453 342,754 298,377 44,377 32,214 12,163
         Sep 265,981 93,212 172,769 107,724 65,045 60,936 4,109 386,096 45,948 340,148 292,005 48,143 36,042 12,101
of which:  Euro-area member states 1
 
2000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,404
2004          Apr 158,519 50,134 108,385 63,943 44,442 41,615 2,827 316,676 32,987 283,689 253,466 30,223 21,163 9,060
         May 157,317 47,971 109,346 64,396 44,950 42,112 2,838 321,627 32,318 289,309 258,190 31,119 21,768 9,351         June  
r 160,788 49,919 110,869 64,454 46,415 43,462 2,953 326,305 31,976 294,329 262,603 31,726 22,679 9,047
         July  r 161,410 50,688 110,722 66,161 44,561 41,628 2,933 324,769 30,848 293,921 262,381 31,540 22,224 9,316
         Aug  r 161,538 51,458 110,080 67,626 42,454 39,493 2,961 320,385 30,154 290,231 260,921 29,310 20,610 8,700
         Sep 165,174 53,460 111,714 67,401 44,313 41,462 2,851 317,209 30,535 286,674 254,478 32,196 23,506 8,690
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2000 58,590 974 57,616 20,182 37,434 35,580 1,854 38,547 2,479 36,068 14,455 21,613 12,015 9,5982001 59,216 1,031 58,185 20,892 37,293 35,404 1,889 39,060 2,271 36,789 14,217 22,572 11,624 10,9482002  
4 53,597 956 52,641 15,404 37,237 35,410 1,827 40,268 1,926 38,342 15,386 22,956 11,891 11,065
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,249
2004          Apr 51,492 1,420 50,072 14,395 35,677 32,991 2,686 46,516 2,282 44,234 17,281 26,953 12,283 14,670
         May 41,456 1,385 40,071 10,538 29,533 27,196 2,337 38,731 2,147 36,584 13,682 22,902 9,128 13,774         June 41,603 1,265 40,338 10,565 29,773 27,502 2,271 38,290 2,127 36,163 13,815 22,348 8,697 13,651
         July 42,010 1,397 40,613 10,663 29,950 27,672 2,278 38,499 2,089 36,410 13,744 22,666 8,708 13,958
         Aug 41,662 1,351 40,311 10,658 29,653 27,438 2,215 38,749 2,129 36,620 13,198 23,422 8,444 14,978         Sep 41,651 1,423 40,228 10,337 29,891 27,770 2,121 38,058 2,080 35,978 13,149 22,829 9,058 13,771
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in January 2001, including Greece. — 2From May 2004, including the new
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in member states: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia ,
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia. — 3All
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. — 4Change in the
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X.7. — 1From reporting population owing to an increase in the exemption limit. 
73*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
X External sector
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 9.1611 0.62883 7.5086 1.4670 1.4838 1.7376 2.03662003 1.1312 130.97 7.4307 9.1242 0.69199 8.0033 1.5212 1.5817 1.7379 1.9438
2003          Feb 1.0773 128.60 7.4317 9.1455 0.66977 7.5439 1.4674 1.6299 1.8112 1.9457
         Mar 1.0807 128.16 7.4274 9.2265 0.68255 7.8450 1.4695 1.5943 1.7950 1.9497
         Apr 1.0848 130.12 7.4255 9.1541 0.68902 7.8317 1.4964 1.5851 1.7813 1.9700
         May 1.1582 135.83 7.4246 9.1559 0.71322 7.8715 1.5155 1.6016 1.7866 2.0083         June 1.1663 138.05 7.4250 9.1182 0.70224 8.1619 1.5411 1.5798 1.7552 2.0069
         July 1.1372 134.99 7.4332 9.1856 0.70045 8.2893 1.5476 1.5694 1.7184 1.9386
         Aug 1.1139 132.38 7.4322 9.2378 0.69919 8.2558 1.5400 1.5570 1.7114 1.9137         Sep 1.1222 128.94 7.4273 9.0682 0.69693 8.1952 1.5474 1.5330 1.6967 1.9227
         Oct 1.1692 128.12 7.4301 9.0105 0.69763 8.2274 1.5485 1.5489 1.6867 1.9446
         Nov 1.1702 127.84 7.4370 8.9939 0.69278 8.1969 1.5590 1.5361 1.6337 1.8608         Dec 1.2286 132.43 7.4419 9.0228 0.70196 8.2421 1.5544 1.6131 1.6626 1.8982
2004          Jan 1.2613 134.13 7.4481 9.1368 0.69215 8.5925 1.5657 1.6346 1.6374 1.8751
         Feb 1.2646 134.78 7.4511 9.1763 0.67690 8.7752 1.5734 1.6817 1.6260 1.8262         Mar 1.2262 133.13 7.4493 9.2346 0.67124 8.5407 1.5670 1.6314 1.6370 1.8566
         Apr 1.1985 129.08 7.4436 9.1653 0.66533 8.2976 1.5547 1.6068 1.6142 1.8727
         May 1.2007 134.48 7.4405 9.1277 0.67157 8.2074 1.5400 1.6541 1.7033 1.9484         June 1.2138 132.86 7.4342 9.1430 0.66428 8.2856 1.5192 1.6492 1.7483 1.9301
         July 1.2266 134.08 7.4355 9.1962 0.66576 8.4751 1.5270 1.6220 1.7135 1.8961
         Aug 1.2176 134.54 7.4365 9.1861 0.66942 8.3315 1.5387 1.6007 1.7147 1.8604         Sep 1.2218 134.51 7.4381 9.0920 0.68130 8.3604 1.5431 1.5767 1.7396 1.8538
         Oct 1.2490 135.97 7.4379 9.0620 0.69144 8.2349 1.5426 1.5600 1.7049 1.8280
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 14.15. For additional euro reference exchange rates of the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. — 2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics.
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the euro-area member states, the Deutsche Mark value of
the ECU * and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.05076
1992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1As per data from the European exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). — 3Applicable from 1 January
Commission. — 2Up to 1998, reciprocal values of the exchange rates for the 1999. — 4Applicable from 1 January 2001. — 5Deutsche Mark conversion
Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999, euro reference rate. 
74*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
X External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item Effective nominal exchange rates of
Indicators of the German economy’s selected foreign currencies against the
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3,4 currencies of 19 industrial countries  3,5 
EER-23  1 EER-42  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  6 
In real terms
based on the
In real terms unit labour In real termsbased on the In real terms costs of the based on the based
 on the
consumer national consumer Pound Japanese based on the deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices US dollar sterling yen GDP deflator  7 economy  7 total sales  7 based on consumer prices
1999 95.9 95.9 95.8 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.8 98.2 97.7 100.8 102.3 105.1
2000 86.1 86.0 85.6 85.3 87.9 85.8 91.8 92.8 91.2 105.4 105.2 117.9
2001 86.7 86.8 86.7 85.1 90.4 87.0 92.0 93.2 91.5 112.0 103.6 106.72002 89.2 90.3 90.2 88.2 94.8 90.8 93.1 94.2 92.6 110.7 104.2 100.82003 99.9 101.7 101.5 99.3 106.6 101.6 96.7 97.9 97.2 97.7 99.2 99.9
1999          Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
         Q2 96.2 96.2 96.2 96.7 96.4 96.0 98.5 98.6 98.0 102.8 102.8 99.0         Q3 94.8 94.8 94.6 94.7 95.5 94.6 97.0 97.8 97.2 101.4 102.3 106.2         Q4 92.9 92.7 92.5 93.0 94.3 92.8 95.6 96.4 95.8 99.1 104.1 115.2
2000          Q1 89.5 89.3 88.9 88.3 91.0 89.1 93.6 94.8 93.4 101.5 106.4 114.9
         Q2 86.5 86.4 86.1 85.9 88.2 86.2 91.9 92.8 91.4 104.3 105.4 118.4         Q3 85.1 85.0 84.6 84.5 87.0 84.8 91.3 92.1 90.3 106.2 103.9 119.2         Q4 83.2 83.3 82.9 82.6 85.5 83.1 90.2 91.5 89.5 109.4 105.0 119.2
2001          Jan 88.9 88.6 . . 91.3 88.2 . 93.9 92.2 107.7 102.4 108.3
         Feb 88.0 87.7 88.1 86.3 90.5 87.6 92.8 93.7 92.0 108.8 102.0 109.9         Mar 87.8 87.8 . . 90.8 87.8 . 93.8 92.0 111.5 102.9 106.0
         Apr 86.9 87.0 . . 90.3 87.2 . 93.4 91.8 113.0 103.7 104.9
         May 85.2 85.3 85.3 83.8 88.6 85.5 91.4 92.7 90.6 113.1 104.3 107.5         June 83.8 83.9 . . 87.3 84.2 . 92.1 89.9 114.1 104.4 108.3
         July 84.6 84.7 . . 88.4 85.1 . 92.4 90.5 114.3 104.9 105.8
         Aug 87.1 87.2 86.4 84.7 91.2 87.6 91.5 93.5 91.8 111.6 103.0 106.4         Sep 87.6 87.9 . . 92.0 88.5 . 93.4 92.2 110.7 103.8 108.2
         Oct 87.4 87.8 . . 92.1 88.5 . 93.5 92.1 111.8 103.7 106.2
         Nov 86.1 86.5 87.2 85.9 90.6 86.9 92.2 92.9 91.1 113.3 104.0 106.3         Dec 86.7 87.4 . . 91.0 87.5 . 93.5 91.6 114.1 104.3 102.1
2002          Jan 86.5 87.4 . . 90.7 87.2 . 93.6 91.2 116.4 104.9 98.3
         Feb 85.7 86.6 86.9 84.9 90.1 86.5 92.3 93.2 90.9 117.3 105.3 98.2         Mar 85.7 86.8 . . 90.3 86.7 . 93.2 90.9 116.1 104.6 99.8
         Apr 86.1 87.1 . . 90.7 87.0 . 93.1 90.6 115.3 105.2 99.4
         May 87.7 88.8 88.6 86.7 92.8 89.0 92.6 93.7 91.6 112.0 103.5 101.2         June 89.8 90.9 . . 95.5 91.6 . 94.6 92.9 109.0 101.9 101.7
         July 91.2 92.4 . . 97.5 93.4 . 95.0 94.0 106.0 103.5 104.3
         Aug 90.7 91.8 92.0 90.0 96.9 92.8 93.4 94.6 93.6 107.3 103.5 104.3         Sep 90.7 92.1 . . 97.2 93.1 . 94.6 93.5 107.6 104.7 102.5
         Oct 91.1 92.5 . . 97.7 93.5 . 94.8 94.0 108.5 105.0 99.8
         Nov 91.9 93.1 93.3 91.2 98.5 94.0 93.9 95.0 94.0 106.8 104.3 100.8         Dec 92.9 94.3 . . 99.6 95.1 . 95.5 94.5 106.0 104.0 99.6
2003          Jan 95.3 96.8 . . 102.3 97.6 . 96.2 95.5 103.0 102.6 100.4
         Feb 96.6 98.2 97.6 95.6 103.7 99.0 95.6 96.8 96.4 102.2 101.2 99.2         Mar 97.4 99.0 . . 104.4 99.5 . 97.0 96.5 101.4 99.3 99.8
         Apr 97.9 99.5 . . 104.6 99.6 . 97.2 96.4 101.4 98.7 98.6
         May 101.8 103.5 102.4 100.2 108.5 103.2 97.2 98.8 98.1 96.7 96.9 97.7         June 102.2 104.2 . . 108.8 103.7 . 99.0 98.3 96.1 98.9 96.3
         July 101.0 102.9 . . 107.2 102.2 . 98.4 97.5 97.8 98.5 97.3
         Aug 99.8 101.8 101.9 100.2 106.0 101.2 96.8 98.0 96.9 99.1 98.1 98.3         Sep 99.6 101.7 . . 105.9 101.1 . 97.6 96.8 97.2 98.2 101.1
         Oct 101.3 103.3 . . 108.0 103.0 . 98.2 97.6 93.3 98.8 103.7
         Nov 101.2 103.3 104.2 101.4 108.0 102.9 97.0 98.3 97.7 93.0 99.5 103.9         Dec 104.2 106.2 . . 111.2 105.9 . 99.2 99.1 90.6 99.5 102.9
2004          Jan 105.4 107.4 . . 112.5 106.9 . 99.7 99.6 88.9 101.6 102.9
         Feb 105.3 107.3 106.8 103.9 112.3 106.8
p 97.9 99.4 99.4 89.3 104.1 102.4
         Mar 103.4 105.5 . . 110.2 104.7 . 98.9 98.5 90.9 104.2 102.1
         Apr 101.6 103.7 . . 108.3 103.0 . 98.5 97.7 91.8 104.3 104.0
         May 102.4 104.4 104.4 101.1 109.5 104.1 p 96.7 98.8 98.3 93.4 103.7 100.0
         June 102.3 104.2 . . 109.6 104.0 . 98.5 98.1 91.9 104.9 101.6
         July 102.8 104.7 . . 110.1 104.4 . 99.0 98.4 90.9 105.0 101.2
         Aug 102.7 104.8 ... ... 109.9 104.4 p 96.9 99.2 98.6 91.3 104.6 100.5
         Sep 103.0 105.2 . . 110.3 104.7 . 99.3 98.4 90.7 102.8 100.8
         Oct 104.2 106.4 . 111.5 105.8 . 99.8 99.0 88.9 101.8 100.8
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of to the EER-23 group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the fo llowing
the currency concerned. — 1ECB calculations based on the weighted countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, India, Indonesia,
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro against the currencies Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Romania,
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. — 3The
Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, method of calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB toNorway, Poland, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Sweden, compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin,
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these November 2001, pp 51−65). In contrast to footnote 1, the weights used arecalculations are based on manufactured goods trade between 1999 and based on the relevant trade in the period from 1995 to 1997. — 4Decline in
2001 and capture third-market effects. Where consumer prices were not yet the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. — 5Euro-area countries
available, estimates have been used. For details of the methodology, see as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, UnitedECB, Monthly Bulletin, September 2004, pp 69−72 and the ECB’s Occasional Kingdom and United States. — 6Euro-area countries and countries
Paper No 2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website belonging to the EER-42 group except Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania and(www.ecb.int). — 2ECB calculations. In addition to the countries belonging Malta. — 7 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X External sector

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the External Communica-tion Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2003 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2004 Monthly Report.
December 2003
– Report on the stability of the German financial
system
– Stress testing the German banking system
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004

January 2004
– The euro and prices two years on
– Payment system oversight – a contribution to
the stability of the financial system and the effi-ciency of payment operations
– The new MFI interest rate statistics – method-
ology for collecting the German data
February 2004
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2003-04
March 2004
– Public finances in crisis – the causes and the
need for action
– German balance of payments in 2003
April 2004
– Recent developments in the corporate bond
market
– Credit risk transfer instruments: their use by
German banks and aspects of financial stability
– The significance of information and communi-
cation technology
May 2004
– Effects of eastward enlargement of the EU on
the German economy
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2004June 2004
– Monetary policy under uncertainty– Purchasing power parity theory as a concept
for evaluating price competitiveness
– Overall financial flows in 2003
July 2004
– Financial development and outlook of the
statutory health insurance scheme
– Regulation of the European securites markets– Initial experience with the new monetary policy
framework and the Bundesbank’s contribution
to liquidity management by the Eurosystem
August 2004
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2004
September 2004
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2003
– Greater flexibility on the German labour
market
– How the Bundesbank analyses enterprises’
creditworthiness
– New capital requirements for credit institutions
(Basel II)
October 2004
– Report on the stability of the German financial
system
– Stress tests at German banks – methods and
results
November 2004
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2004
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20033
European economic and monetary union,February 2004
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200342 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, September 20043,5
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2003,
September 20046
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 1998 and 2000, March 20031, 6
7 Erl/C228uterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20013
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
September 2004
10 International capital links,
May 20041, 6
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2004
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20043
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.6Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2004
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Research Centre
27/2004
Do Consumer Confidence Indexes Help ForecastConsumer Spending in Real Time?
28/2004
The use of real-time information in Phillips curverelationships for the euro area
29/2004
The reliability of Canadian output gap estimates
30/2004
Forecast quality and simple instrument rules – a
real-time data approach
31/2004
Measurement errors in GDP and forward-looking
monetary policy: The Swiss case
32/2004
Estimating equilibrium real interest rates in real-time
33/2004
Interest rate reaction functions for the euro areaEvidence from panel data analysis
34/2004
The contribution of rapid financial development to
asymmetric growth of manufacturing industries:
Common Claims vs. evidence for Poland
35/2004
Fiscal rules and monetary policy in a dynamicstochastic general equilibrium model
36/2004
Inflation and core money growth in the euro areaSeries 2
Banking and Financial Supervision
1/2004
Forecasting Credit Portfolio Risk
2/2004
Systematic Risk in Recovery Rates – An EmpiricalAnalysis of US Corporate Credit Exposures
3/2004
Does capital regulation matter for bank behaviour?
Evidence for German savings banks
4/2004
German bank lending during emerging market
crises: A bank level analysis
5/2004
How will Basel II affect bank lending to emergingmarkets? An analysis based on German bank leveldata
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the internet.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

