MONTHLY REPORT
OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY
2004
Vol 56
No 10

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1Fax +49 69 5601071Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 15 October 2004.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on theinternet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
ContentsReport on the stability of the
German financial system 5
Overview 5
Macroeconomic outlook and risk factors 8International financial system 14Financial intermediaries in Germany 31Legal framework and financialinfrastructure 61Indicators of international investors’ riskaversion (Annex) 70
Stress tests at German banks –
methods and results 75
Commentaries 85
Economic conditions 85
Public finances 88Securities markets 90Balance of payments 92
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finances in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*External sector 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
4

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
5Report on the stability
of the German
financial systemOverview
The stability of the German financial system
has strengthened further since the end of lastyear. This was assisted not least by the rapidbrightening of the macroeconomic climate inthe wake of the global economic recoverythat began in the USA and East Asia. In theeuro area in general and in Germany in par-ticular muted domestic demand is still imped-ing a more vigorous recovery. Even in Ger-many, however, the moderate growth may beexpected to continue, which means that fi-nancial intermediaries in Germany can bene-fit from the more favourable underlying con-ditions. This applies both to strengtheningtheir overall profitability and to reducing de-fault risk in their lending business, which issusceptible to cyclical swings. The financialsituation of enterprises that are active in thecapital market has improved appreciably sofar this year both in the United States and inthe euro area and has helped to stabilisecredit quality.
Despite the positive overall picture, the global
financial system remains subject to certainrisks. A particular source of uncertainty forthe world economy is posed by the evolutionof crude oil prices. Should they remain highfor a prolonged period, subdued growth andrising inflation rates may be expected world-wide for a certain time. This would also de-press the financial markets, especially regard-ing the development of stock markets and ofrisk premiums for enterprises as well as ofemerging economies that are importers ofcrude oil.Improved
stability of
the German
financial system
Real economic
activity
jeopardised
especially by oil
price trend

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
6In addition, the phasing-out of fiscal and
monetary stimuli in some countries couldhighlight existing weaknesses and hamperthe cyclical momentum of global expansionon a larger-than-expected scale. One notableweakness is the increased level of householdindebtedness in a number of countries which,in conjunction with overheated real estatemarkets in some countries, makes householdsmore vulnerable to rising market interestrates. The associated risks (wealth losses forinvestors, consumption-dampening effectsand rising credit risks for the financial sector)might also impact indirectly on the Germanfinancial system.
A continuing latent risk is posed at the global
level by the fundamental imbalances, whichhave not lessened. In fact, the US current ac-count deficit has actually increased, eventhough concerns about its financeability havetemporarily abated in face of the US econo-my’s growth lead and the improved interestrate relationships in favour of the US market.Given the global imbalances coupled withcontinuing regional growth disparities, how-ever, the world economy remains vulnerableto any pronounced exchange rate volatility.
Given the abundant provision of liquidity
worldwide, the US Federal Reserve Bank’s an-nounced reversal of its previous interest ratecourse, which it duly executed at the end ofJune, initiated a cautious process of correc-tion in the financial markets. The markets’ ex-pectations of a moderate US monetary policystance aiming at a neutral level is meanwhilesubject to uncertainty. For one thing, thelong-term yields on US government bondshave to date shown little convergence to-
wards long-term growth and inflation expect-ations. To that extent there is a persistent po-tential for upward pressure on US long-terminterest rates, especially if inflation expect-ations increase. For another, an upwardmovement of yields and risk premiums in in-dividual market segments might be magnifiedby a sudden unwinding of carry trade pos-itions
1which are still very prevalent. This
could generate tension in the internationalfinancial markets which would probably spillover to Europe.
Given investors’ continuing “search for
yield”, the development of the hedge fundindustry, which has been benefiting from awidening of its investor base, likewise meritsgreater attention regarding the implicationsfor financial stability. The large inflows of re-sources which hedge funds have attracted oflate and their wide-ranging activities in di-verse market segments have increased the in-fluence on the financial markets of theselargely unregulated players. Moreover, byhaving multiple ties with prime brokers themarket-disciplining role of the latter could beimpaired by limited transparency and strongcompetitive pressure for clients.
The currently favourable outlook for the sta-
bility of the financial system, notwithstandingthese risks, is due in part to the fact that theGerman banking system’s profitability andability to sustain risks have improved. Many
1Carry trades denote the take-up of short-term loans at
low interest rates for investment in higher-remunerated
longer-term securities (such as government, corporate or
emerging market bonds).Substantial rise
worldwide in
household
indebtedness
Global external
imbalances
persist
US Fed’s rate
reversal has
triggered no
major financial
market tension
so far, though
risks remainGrowing
importance of
hedge funds
German
banking
system’s
improved
profitability and
ability to
sustain risk

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
7banks have successfully further pursued the
adjustment processes which they earlier set intrain and which have led to lower costs, analleviation of credit risks and to a strategicrefocusing. These efforts now need to becontinued unrelentingly.
The improving profitability of the large inter-
nationally operating German banks was re-flected in their published results for the firsthalf of 2004. At the moment improvementsare more apparent on the cost side in theform of lower general administrative spend-ing and risk provisions. But first positive signsare now also appearing on the income side,especially bearing in mind that the bankshave massively reduced their interest-bearingrisk assets and that the impulses for lendingbusiness ensuing from the incipient economicupturn are only slowly being mirrored in theprofit and loss result.
The current market indicators confirm this
upward trend of the large German banks.The credit ratings of the German big banksremained unchanged in the first two quartersof 2004; the outlook has improved in somecases. The credit default swap premiums ofthe German big banks are currently at a lowlevel. They nonetheless need to make upmore ground in comparison with the profit-ability of internationally operating banks,both to enhance their international competi-tiveness and – in the interests of financialstability – to bolster their resilience to theeventuality of a cyclical downturn.
The bulk of the Landesbanks lifted their
results in the first half of 2004. Most institu-tions are undergoing a major adjustment pro-
cess pending the loss of their state guaran-tees. The marked reduction of their riskassets, and hence the decline of their risk pro-visions, is an indication of this. In mid-2004several rating agencies published so-calledstand-alone ratings for the Landesbanksstripped of the state guarantees for ensuringthe institutions’ solvency ( Anstaltslast ) and for
indemnifying depositors ( Gew/C228hrtr/C228gerhaf-
tung ). Those ratings lie in a range that should
allow the Landesbanks sufficient scope tosuccessfully continue the necessary trans-formation process.
Overall, the risk situation of the large banks
shows a smaller potential for systemic disrup-tion than a year ago. Some changes haveoccurred, however, in the relative importanceof individual risk factors.
The market price risks inherent in banks’ trad-
ing book have increased noticeably over thepast year and a half. The combination of anexpanding world economy and a compara-tively low interest rate level is likely to haveraised banks’ propensity to incur greater risksin their securities trading and derivatives busi-ness. However, the systemic risk arising fromtrading is probably limited given the banks’widely differing timetables in building up andrunning down market price risks and the fair-ly small correlation between their trading re-sults.
The risks associated with lending business
have eased considerably. This is due to the insome cases substantial reduction by banks oftheir risk assets in 2002 and 2003, marked
Better results in
the first half of
2004Landesbanks in
an adjustment
process
Overall
improvement in
risk situation
Increased
market price
risks
Easing of risk
in lending
business

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
8advances in risk management and an im-
proved credit quality on average. Default riskshave diminished, in particular, at large enter-prises both in Germany and abroad and onthe part of debtors from emerging-marketeconomies. This contrasts with the still highlevel of business insolvencies among smalland medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and arising consumer insolvency trend in Germany.The risks associated with commercial real es-tate business have likewise increased, espe-cially in some regional markets that haveexperienced a falling price level.
In the past few years the banking industry
has become increasingly sensitive to oper-ational risk as well. This includes potentiallosses ensuing from errors in internal bankprocesses or IT systems and from externalevents such as natural catastrophes. In par-ticular, legal risks – stemming from courtjudgements or legislative changes in the fieldof consumer and investor protection – havelikewise assumed greater importance forbanks of late.
The savings and cooperative bank sectors
traditionally display a high degree of stabilitywhich is attributable above all to their strongmarket position in business with householdsand SMEs. A key criterion for the profitabilityof these institutions is the stabilisation oftheir net interest income. In 2003 this figure,which is the main source of income for thesetwo categories of banks, rose for the secondyear in succession, after the second half ofthe 1990s had been characterised by a sharpfall in interest income. A solid basis for furtherprogress is being laid by the ongoing consoli-dation process within each of the two groups
and the concentration of functions withintheir affiliated networks.
A difficult earnings situation persists, in par-
ticular, in the pure mortgage bank sector. Netinterest received has fallen further in that sec-tor because margins have narrowed percep-tibly and the market share of the privatemortgage banks in lending for non-government housing construction has de-clined. In some regions of Germany the lowerincome of the mortgage banks has been ac-companied by higher risks – reflected in largewrite-downs – due to the weakness of thereal estate markets.
In the German insurance industry both profit-
ability and solvency have stabilised. Thus thereturn on equity at both life and non-life in-surance companies improved appreciably in2003 thanks to the parallel strengthening ofthe results from insurance and investmentbusiness, even if past peak figures were notmatched in all cases. In addition, life insurersmassively reduced the latent burdens in theirequity portfolios through sales and write-downs and were able to fund the total inter-est on policyholders’ accounts from theirimproved capital investment result.
Macroeconomic outlook and risk factors
Global environmentGlobal economic growth has continued more
strongly than expected so far this year. Ac-cording to the IMF’s forecast from Septem-
Operational risk
becoming more
important
Savings banks
and credit
cooperativesDifficult
earnings
situation at
mortgage
banks
Stabilisation in
the insurance
sector
Strong global
economic
upturn

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
9ber, world output could expand in 2004 by
0.3 percentage point more than expectedand reach 5.0%, with a rate of 4.3% esti-mated for 2005. At the same time the macro-economic setting of the international finan-cial system has strengthened considerablycompared with last year and the upturn isnow more broadly based. While the terroristattacks in Madrid and the escalation of vio-lence in the Middle East engendered notice-able nervousness in the financial markets fora time, this does not appear to have triggereda lasting general confidence shock, so that todate the increased geopolitical risks have notseriously disrupted the global upswing. How-ever, financial markets in particular have indi-cated increasing concerns of late that thecyclical momentum of global growth couldweaken.
The favourable overall global economic out-
look has been clouded during the past fewmonths by greater upward price pressure.The average growth rate of consumer pricesin the industrial countries in the period Aprilto August amounted to 2.2%, as against1.4% in the first quarter. This was causedchiefly by the surge in international crude oilprices. Apart from speculative factors and anuncertainty premium related to geopoliticalrisks, the oil price hikes have been fuelled byboth supply and demand forces. The high en-ergy intensity of the global upswing at thepresent time notably reflects the cyclically in-duced higher demand from the two growthcentres USA and China, which both have arelatively high energy dependency. In add-ition, there are uncertainties regarding the ac-tually available production, transportationand refining capacities. The increased market
volatility was additionally driven by the dam-age caused by the hurricanes on the US Gulfcoast.
Although continuing high oil prices could
slow down world economic growth, it ap-pears unlikely at the moment that this willhalt the global upswing. Among the reasonsfor this are that the real price of oil has re-mained below its past peaks and the degreeof dependence on oil as a factor of produc-tion is not as high as in the 1970s and 1980s.The robustness of the current upturn is attest-ed by the fact that the world economy – des-pite the sharp rise in oil prices – will probablygrow in 2004 far more strongly than wasforecast in autumn 2003 and spring 2004.According to IMF simulations, a lasting in-crease in the price of oil of 5 US dollars perbarrel dents global growth by 0.3 percentagepoint.
According to the IMF’s forecast, consumer
prices in the advanced countries will riseby 2.1% in both 2004 and 2005, which is0.4 percentage point more than was forecastin April. A positive aspect is that hardly anysecond-round effects of the higher oil pricesare apparent at the moment in the form ofhigher wage increases. The long-term infla-tion expectations (breakeven inflation) in thefinancial markets in the United States and inthe euro area – as measured by inflation-indexed bonds – in early October were 2.4%and 2.3%, respectively.
There are still marked regional differences in
growth. Strong impulses are continuing to
Greater upward
price pressureOil price risk

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
10come from the USA and China. The Chinese
authorities have responded to the signs ofoverheating by restricting credit supply, a so-lution dictated by the narrow radius of mon-etary policy action due to the Chinese curren-cy’s effective peg to the US dollar. The slack-ening of growth in spring has lessened thelikelihood of a “hard landing” for the Chineseeconomy, which would have considerableeconomic consequences for its neighbouringcountries.
2In Japan the cyclical upswing has
continued even though the pace of growthhas slowed. The recovery in the euro area haslikewise gained ground, although it remainsquite heavily dependent on exports.
A global constellation with persistent regional
growth disparities is susceptible to shocksowing to the persistent external imbalancesand is subject to the latent risk of greater ex-change rate volatility. The potential for a cyc-lical reversal in the Latin American countrieshas decreased somewhat as particularly thelarger economies – supported by higher rev-enue from the export of raw materials – havereturned to a growth path. Russia and mostof the other GUS states are profiting fromhigher oil revenues. To that extent thecommodity-related shifts in the terms oftrade represent a stabilising element at theregional level.
United StatesFollowing a sharp rise in the first quarter,
overall output growth in the United Statesslowed to
3/C254% (quarter on quarter) in the
second quarter. This weakening of momen-tum was due chiefly to the muted increase inprivate consumption. This is connected with
the oil price-induced burdens on households,the waning fiscal impulses and the smallerstimuli from mortgage refinancing. Thismakes the further evolution all the more de-pendent on the extent to which private con-sumption is bolstered in future by a morerobust growth in employment. The fears of ajobless growth scenario still prevalent at thestart of 2004 have now abated somewhat.However, the increase in employment in Sep-tember (96,000 jobs) was below the expect-ations. The latest economic data show amixed picture, which points to a less dynamicpattern of cyclical development vis-/C224-vis2003. It should be borne in mind, though,that the pace of expansion of the US econ-omy up to the beginning of 2004 was wellabove the growth rate of potential output.
The financial situation of households in the
USA improved somewhat last year to the ex-tent that their debt service burden (interestpayments and capital repayments) fell slightlyto 13.2% of their disposable income on ac-count of the persistently low interest rates. Inthe first half of 2004 the figure was 13.1%.Including other regular interest-type pay-ments such as leasing charges, this ratio aver-aged 18.5% last year compared with 18.7%in 2002; in the first half of 2004 the compar-able figure was 18.2%. Households’ liabilitiesat the end of the second quarter of 2004 to-talled around 118% of their disposable in-come; this was 7 percentage points moreRegional
growth
disparities
2The IMF estimates that a decrease of 10 percentage
points in China’s import growth would reduce the rate of
GDP expansion in Asia (excluding China) by 0.4 percent-
age point compared with the baseline scenario.Slight slowing
of growth in
the second
quarterFinancial
situation of
households

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
11than in 2002. This rise was mainly attribut-
able to an increase in mortgage debt fuelledby low interest rates and rising real estate val-ues. The overall financial situation of UShouseholds merits a critical assessment, alsobecause the saving ratio of less than 1% oflate remains very low. Given the tendency to-wards higher interest rates, their interest ex-penditure ratio is likely to increase, however.
3
The income and financing patterns of USfirms improved further in 2003 and have con-tinued to do so this year. Pre-tax profits ofnon-financial corporations rose to 10
1/C252%o f
the value added generated by the sector in2003 and edged up to almost 12% in thefirst half of 2004. This enabled many enter-prises to finance their investment expenditurelargely from internally generated funds. As aresult, corporate liabilities expanded onlymarginally faster in 2003 than in 2002.
4The
interest expenditure ratio of non-financialcorporations fell in 2003 to 14.6% of theircash flow and dropped further in the firstquarter of 2004 to 13.7%. In the secondquarter the interest ratio rose again slightly,however, to 13.9%. But all in all the balancesheets of US enterprises have grown stronger.
One aspect of the US economy which re-
mains critical, however, is the combination ofthe so-called twin deficits, ie a high budgetdeficit coupled with a chronic current accountdeficit. The current account deficit rose in thesecond quarter of 2004 by over 1 percentagepoint compared with its low in autumn 2003to 5.7% of GDP . In view of the USA’s growthlead at the moment and given a scenario ofpersistently high oil prices, no lasting reduc-tion of the current account deficit is to be an-
ticipated in the short term.
JapanIn the first half of 2004 real GDP in Japan ex-
panded by 2.6% on a seasonally adjustedbasis, although the pace of expansion slowedin the second quarter compared with the firstthree months. Growth was once again givena substantial boost by exports, which rose by3
1/C252% on the first quarter at constant prices
and after seasonal adjustment. In the contextof its latest forecast the IMF also examinedJapan’s dependence on the Chinese econ-omy. It concluded that a decline in China’s im-port growth by 10 percentage points woulddent Japan’s GDP growth by 0.5 percentagepoint. The implications for Japan of the risksassociated with a possible “hard landing” inChina are consequently considerable, espe-cially as this assessment excludes third-marketeffects. These risks should not be neglected,especially as domestic demand – followingthe strong expansion in the two precedingperiods – stagnated in the second quarter,thus making the Japanese economy more reli-ant on external impulses. Moreover, despitethe currently buoyant cyclical situation overall
3The concerns about households’ financial situation are
magnified by the trend apparent in many countries to
transfer risks from the financial sector to the household
sector. This includes the growing importance of market-
related risks at life insurance companies and pension
funds, the sale of credit risks to pension funds and insur-
ance companies as well as the higher share of floating-
rate mortgages.
4The financing gap in the pension funds of many US
firms has also narrowed somewhat thanks to the stock
market recovery and higher capital market yields as well
as regulatory measures. There is still a long-term risk,
however, that some firms will not be able to honour their
growing pension liabilities.Financial
situation of
enterprises
Critical budget
and current
account deficitsBuoyant
economy but
some risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
12it should be remembered that considerable
consolidation needs persist for the financialsector and for small and medium-sized pro-ducing enterprises, in particular, and that thedeflationary trough has not yet been over-come.
Euro areaThe fragile recovery in the euro area which
began in the second half of 2003 picked upspeed from the turn of the year. In the secondquarter of this year seasonally adjusted realGDP grew by
1/C252%, just as it had in the first
three months. The contribution to growthfrom domestic demand and real foreign tradeeach amounted to
1/C254percentage point.
For the current year the ECB staff expects
euro-area GDP growth of between 1.6% and2.3% and for 2005 anticipates that growthwill lie within a range from 1.8% to 2.8%.This represents an upward revision of 0.2 and0.1 percentage point, respectively, vis-/C224-visthe Eurosystem’s June projection in reflectionof the better-than-expected outcome of thefirst half of the year. As the domestic impulsesin the euro area are still fairly muted, the cyc-lical upturn remains susceptible to global eco-nomic disruptions. The price outlook hasworsened somewhat vis-/C224-vis the June projec-tion owing to oil price movements. In add-ition, considerable upside risks remain. Thesummer projection estimates the rate of infla-tion in 2004, measured by the HarmonisedIndex of Consumer Prices (HICP), at between2.1% and 2.3% and for 2005 defines a rangeof 1.3% to 2.3%.The financial situation of enterprises in the
euro area continues to constitute no impedi-ment to a self-sustained upturn. The debtratio of non-financial corporations in the firstsix months of this year amounted to 62% ofnominal GDP . The annualised rate of increasein the total debt finance of non-financial cor-porations in the second quarter of 2004came to around 2%, after 2
1/C254% in the first
quarter. This moderate growth of indebted-ness, despite historically low external finan-cing costs, presumably mirrors greater intern-al funding as is typical of the early phase ofan upturn, especially given the still rather sub-dued expectations regarding the develop-ment of economic activity. It is also possiblethat some firms have not yet concluded theirbalance sheet adjustments. The level of cor-porate indebtedness in relation to profit hasbeen declining since mid-2003. All in all, thedebt situation of non-financial corporationsseems to have improved.
Households’ indebtedness in relation to GDP
increased to 54% in the second quarter of2004. In the second quarter of 2003 it hadstood at 52%. The rise was fuelled by the fi-nancing of the persistently high demand forhousing loans in countries with booming realestate markets. Owing to the low interestrate level, the ratio of households’ interest ex-penditure to GDP remained largely at thelevel of the mid-1990s, despite the trend in-crease in indebtedness. This indicates that thefinancing situation of euro-area households isstable overall.Sustained
growth in
second quarter
Revised ECB
staff projectionEased debt
situation of
non-financial
corporations
Overall financial
situation of
households
stable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
13Germany
In the second quarter of 2004 the cyclical re-
covery of the German economy gained somemomentum. GDP grew by 0.5% on the firstquarter. After adding the result for the firstquarter, this gives an annualised growth rateof 1
3/C254%. The country’s average rate of cap-
acity utilisation has probably increased for thefirst time in quite a long while. At themoment the recovery is still narrowly based,however. Strong positive impulses cameabove all from the external sector. Domesticdemand has remained lacklustre. This heavyexternal dependence is the Achilles heel ofthe cyclical upswing in Germany.
The higher cost of energy ensuing from the
sharp rise in oil prices is having a dampeningeffect; it is leading to real income losses foroil consumers to the benefit of oil producersand is constraining growth in Germany. TheBundesbank has carried out simulation stud-ies to analyse the implications of a perman-ently high oil price for the HICP index andGDP . If oil prices were to remain at a level of50 US dollars per barrel in the long term, con-sumer prices in 2006 would be
3/C254% higher
than according to the current baseline projec-tion and real GDP
3/C254% lower than under the
baseline forecast.
Yet on the whole key conditions for a con-
tinuation of the upturn remain in place,although the underlying cyclical momentumcould decline a little in the second half of theyear. The cost situation of domestic firms haseased and is helping to stabilise earnings. Onthe financing side the ground is set for moregrowth. The adjustment process in the non-
financial corporate sector has made goodheadway. In 2003 enterprises actually repaidbank loans on balance. This was mainly dueto a reduction of liabilities by a number oflarge firms. The financial balance was margin-ally positive, just as it had been in 2002.Enterprises’ interest burden has decreased.The debt ratio has fallen to 153
1/C252% of gross
value added (see chart on page 14).
So far this year no cyclically relevant impulses
have come from the asset markets. Stockmarket prices have recently been below theirlevel at the start of the year and in the hous-ing sector prices likewise appear to have fall-en slightly. No general revaluation has oc-curred to date, however. In 2003 the prices ofnew owner-occupied apartments and houseslikewise receded a little for the first timein a long while. The prices of second-handowner-occupied apartments have alreadybeen showing a slight downward tendencyfor quite some time. A look at the regionalbreakdown shows that prices have saggedmore in eastern Germany than in the westernpart of the country. In addition, prices havetended to drop more in big cities than insmaller areas (see chart on page 15).
Households’ consumption restraint, which
has been evident for some time now, persist-ed in the third quarter of 2004. Besides thepoor labour market situation, this could alsohave something to do with the fact that thepublic debate about the problems facing thestatutory pension and health insurance sys-tems have made the population more awareof the need for additional private cover. Pri-Cyclical
recovery heavily
dependent on
external
impulses
Increased oil
price risks
Improved
financial
situation of
enterprisesNo major
cyclical
impulses from
the asset
markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
14vate asset accumulation for the purpose of
old-age provision is to be seen as a positivedevelopment in view of the demographicchallenges. In the longer run this will improvethe financial position of households and inthat respect reinforces the stability of the fi-nancial system, even if it is acting as a dragon the cyclical upturn at present.
Households’ debt ratio remained broadly
stable in 2003, measuring 111% of their dis-posable income at the end of the year.
5At
the end of 1999 it had stood at 113%. Theirinterest expenditure ratio fell again. At 6.5%of disposable income on average, it does notconstitute an excessively large cost item forhouseholds. Although average expenditureon owner-occupied houses is very high byinternational standards, this must be seenagainst the background of a lower houseownership quota.
International financial system
In the period under review, developments in
the international financial system werestrongly shaped by ongoing abundant liquid-ity as well as the interest rate turnaround inthe USA. The initiated correction process hasso far proceeded without major market ten-sion. Nevertheless, risks and uncertainties re-main for individual segments of the inter-national financial markets. Moreover, certainspecific aspects and risk factors in the inter-%
%%
%%
Interest burden ratio 7
1st hf
1991 2004Debt ratio 6 7Households 5Financing via bank loans4(Net) interest burden3Enterprises 1
Degree of indebtedness 2Financial indicators
of the private sector
1Non-financial corporations, including
quasi-corporations pursuant to ESA 95. —
2As a percentage of gross value added;
end-of-year figures. — 3Net interest ex-
penditure as a percentage of the operating
surplus. — 4Financing via domestic bank
loans as a percentage of the total cash
flow. — 5As defined in ESA 95. —
6End-of-year figures. — 7As a percentage
of disposable income.
Deutsche Bundesbank8,0
7,57,06,5120
110100
908030+
20+
10+
0
10−
20−30
20
10160
150140130120110
- 
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03
5As the reference variable for the debt ratio is disposable
income, it is not comparable with the euro-area debt-to-
GDP ratio mentioned earlier. Its reference variable is
nominal gross domestic product.Financial
situation of
households
largely stable
Liquidity
remains
abundant in the
international
financial system

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
15national financial system are of relevance
from a financial stability perspective, in par-ticular the tight real estate markets in somecountries, the increasing significance ofhedge funds and developments in the emerg-ing market economies and the new EU states.
Financial marketsThe timing, scale and impact of the interest
rate turnaround in the United States havebeen central topics of discussion in the inter-national financial markets since the beginningof 2004. In particular, market participantshave been closely following the trend of non-farm payroll employment on the US labourmarket on the assumption that this indicatorconsiderably influences the Federal Reserve’sinterest rate decisions. Following two surpris-ingly favourable labour market reports andhigher inflation rates, the yield on 10-year USgovernment bonds temporarily rose by ap-proximately 100 basis points between the be-ginning of April and the middle of May toover 4.8%. In the summer, new doubts con-cerning the strength of the US economy to-gether with moderate inflation rates contrib-uted to a decline in the yield to less than4.0%. Comparable euro-area governmentbond yields followed these interest rate move-ments on a smaller scale.
The interest rate turnaround, which was an-
nounced in advance by the US FederalReserve and implemented in measured steps,
6
has proceeded so far without causing anymajor tension in the international financialsystem. Given the abrupt rise in yields in sum-mer 2003 and the considerable volume ofcarry trade positions, this could not be expect-
ed as a matter of course. Moreover, in Marchthe Japanese monetary authorities ceased of-ficial interventions in the foreign exchangemarket for the time being, which meant thatfrom this direction weaker demand forUS government bonds was to be expected.
7
In the USA, in particular, capital market ratesremain notably low measured in terms of long-term inflation and growth expectations.
8Con-
sequently, the risk of a sudden fall in bond2000 = 100, Annual averages, log scale
Resales
1995 2003New dwellingsReal estate prices *
in Germany
*Terraced houses and flats; Bundesbank
calculations based on primary data from
BulwienGesa AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank104
102
100
98
96104
102
100
98
96 97 98 99 00 01 02
6The Federal Reserve announced a moderate tightening
of its monetary policy in May and implemented the first
steps on 30 June, 10 August and 21 September (25 basis
points each time).
7Potential upward pressure on global capital market
yields is also being generated by the high general govern-
ment deficits.
8The Consensus Forecast projects nominal GDP growth
of 5.7% for the USA in the long term.Interest rate
turnaround by
the Fed in
May/June...
... so far
without major
market
turmoil,...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
16market prices has increased again despite the
interim rise in yields. As a result of the lowinterest rates of recent years, a large numberof outstanding US government bonds arecarrying a low interest coupon, which – at con-stant time to maturity – considerably increasesthe interest rate sensitivity of bond portfolios incomparison with 1994, for example.
Given that the US dollar yield curve remains
comparatively steep when viewed over thelonger term, there is also an incentive tofinance longer-term portfolio investmentswith short-term funds. Following the weakeconomic data in July and August, it seemslikely that an increased number of such carrytrades have again been concluded.
9Abrupt
changes in market expectations, especiallyconcerning future growth and inflationtrends, could trigger a sudden unwinding ofthe trading positions. As this investmentstrategy is widespread, the possibility of cap-ital market tensions cannot be ruled out eventhough many institutional investors factorsuch market shifts into their stress tests.
Apart from the temporary uncertainty in April
and May of this year, the implied volatility ofoptions on long-term US bond futures tendedto decline between August 2003 and Sep-tember 2004. In conjunction with the steepyield curve, this essentially reflects the mar-ket’s expectation of an orderly rise in yields. Inthe light of continued very low short-termreal interest rates, however, the moderate ad-justment path of US monetary policy to a lessBond markets in the
euro area and in the USA
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Financial
Datastream, Bundesbank calculations. —
1 End-of-week figures. — 2 Variance of fu-
ture price changes anticipated by investors.
Moving five-day averages. Calculated from
the price of at-the-money options.
Deutsche BundesbankMonthly dataBasis
points
1994 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004USA: Interest rate differential
between 10-year government
bonds and three-monthrepo rates400+
300+
200+
100+
0
100−%
%Thou-
sands
Implied volatilities
in the bond market2
US Treasury future
Eurex
Bund futureMemo item
Nonfarm payroll employment
in the USA
(Difference between market
expectations and initial data
releases, monthly data)10-year government
bond yield 1
Euro area
USA
14
12
10
8
6
42200+
100+
0
100−
200−
300−
400−5.1
4.8
4.54.2
3.9
3.6
3.3
3.0
2003 2004
9One indication of this are the changes in the portfolio
positions of government bond dealers (primary dealers)
in the USA.... however,
risks remain
Market
participants
are expecting
moderate rise
in yields

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
17expansionary level involves risks, particularly if
inflationary pressures were to increase un-expectedly along the way.
Unlike in the USA, yields in the euro area re-
main closer to the long-term nominal growthexpectations.
10Consequently, there are no
signs of overvaluations. However, there is arisk that possible adjustment shocks in theUS markets will spill over into Europe.
On the foreign exchange markets the weak-
ening of the US dollar against the euro andthe yen, which recommenced in September2003, persisted into February of this year.After dipping to lows of over 1.28, betweenMarch and September the euro-US dollar ex-change rate moved sideways within a rangeof 1.18 and 1.25. Although the monthly dataon the US current account deficit were gener-ally more negative than market participantsexpected this year, on the whole, there wasonly a restrained reaction from the exchangerate. The dollar was briefly buoyed, in particu-lar, by the improved outlook for interest ratesand growth compared with other currencyareas. Moreover, owing to the more positivedevelopment of cyclically dependent tax rev-enue, the high US general government deficitwill probably turn out to be somewhat lowerthan was forecast at the beginning of theyear. In the light of this, the predominant ex-pectation among the market players at theturn of the year that the dollar would depre-ciate further was not realised. This led, inpart, to the liquidation of speculative pos-itions and was accompanied by increasedvolatility. Nevertheless, the exchange rate re-versal in favour of the US dollar occurred
without any major market friction.
The widening US current account deficit still
poses a latent risk of sizeable depreciations ofthe US dollar, particularly as for some timenow it has been principally funded not bydirect investment but by foreign purchases ofEnd-of-week figures
US$
billionUS$
Basis
points
0US trade deficit
(monthly)Lin scale
Yield differential of
German government
bonds vis-à-visUS Treasury bonds
1Log scale
Euro-US dollar
exchange rateEuro-US dollar exchange rate
and determinants
Sources: BIS, Bloomberg. — 1In each case,
with two years’ residual maturity.
Deutsche Bundesbank55
50
45
40
35120+
90+
60+
30+
0
30−1.30
1.25
1.20
1.15
1.10
1.05
2003 2004
10The Consensus Forecast estimates long-term nominal
GDP growth for the euro area at currently 4%.Spillover risks
for euro area
US dollar’s
depreciation
stopped for the
time being
Continued
depreciation
risk from the
current account
deficit

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
18bonds, which are potentially more volatile. In
addition, major exporting countries such asJapan and China propped up the US currencyat the beginning of the year through massivepurchases. In the long term, however, thesecountries are likely to limit such interventionsfor domestic economic reasons. Ultimately,they merely postpone the necessary structuraladjustments.
While in the longer term risks stem from a fur-
ther dollar depreciation, in the short term pres-sures in the financial system could also occuras a result of an unexpected appreciation ofthe US currency. Insofar as US dollar loans atlow interest rates have been taken out tofinance foreign currency investments withhigher yields (cross-currency carry trades), adollar appreciation could lead to a reversal ofspeculative positions if US interest rates rise.The abrupt increase in the value of the broadtrade-weighted dollar index in May probablyowed something to such effects. Increased ex-change rate volatility could also have a conta-gious impact on the prices of other financialassets and foster the misallocation of globalcapital flows.
The broad rise in prices on international stock
exchanges, which began after the Iraq war,faltered in March this year. Although enter-prises’ quarterly reports mostly showed clearincreases in profits, various negative factorsemerged which led to a consolidation of shareprices and short-term fluctuations in their im-plied volatility. First, the Madrid terrorist at-tacks, the flare-up of fighting in Iraq and theraising of the terror alert codes in the USA re-peatedly reminded market participants of theongoing geopolitical uncertainties. Second, in-
creasingly mixed data on economic activity inthe USA and rising crude oil prices dampenedthe growth outlook and increased uncertaintyabout enterprises’ earning prospects.
As a result of the more muted economic out-
look, risk premiums on investments in Euro-pean shares rose again slightly until Septem-ber and, in historical terms, are still at a highlevel.
11According to I/B/E/S surveys, in August
and September risk premiums – measured asthe difference between expected earningyields
12and real interest rates – were at ap-
proximately 51/C252percentage points for both
the broad Dow Jones Euro Stoxx index andthe German DAX. Thus, risk premiums areapproximately a mere
1/C252percentage point
below the record level of spring 2003.13The
price-earnings ratios on the US and Europeanstock exchanges also fell to levels last seen inspring 2003.
14Consequently, there is current-
ly no evidence of an excessive risk appetiteamong market participants or corresponding
11Wider measures of risk propensity, such as the State
Street Investors Confidence index, point in the same
direction.
12Calculated as the ratio of expected 12 months’ for-
ward earnings according to I/B/E/S (Institutional Brokers
Estimate System) to the current price level.
13Risk premiums calculated in this way for enterprises
listed in the Euro Stoxx index and in the DAX were re-
cently more than 1 percentage point above what they
had been at the beginning of the year. By contrast, im-
plied risk premiums calculated from the three-step divi-
dend discount model (using longer-term earnings expect-
ations) remained virtually unchanged in the case of the
DAX; in the case of the Euro Stoxx index, they were
merely1/C252percentage point higher than at the beginning
of the year.
14Up to mid-September, the price-earnings ratio based
on expected 12 months’ forward earnings estimated by
I/B/E/S analysts fell to 12.7 for the DAX, 13.2 for the Dow
Jones Euro Stoxx index and 15.7 for the S&P 500 index in
the USA.Short-term
upward risks
from the
unwinding of
cross-currency
carry trades
Sideways stock
market
movements
since March,
with
fluctuationsNo signs of
overvaluations
on the stock
markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
19mispricing, which would harbour risks of
price declines.
Given the continuing abundant liquidity in
the financial markets, financing terms forenterprises active in the capital market haveremained extremely favourable so far thisyear. Overall, interest rate premiums of inter-national corporate bonds over governmentbonds narrowed even further at the begin-ning of the year, with speculative-grade cor-porate bonds denominated in US dollars andeuro reaching lows in April not seen for years.The sharp rise in capital market yields led to atemporary widening of the risk premiums oflower-rated bonds at the beginning of May.However, the uncertainty soon evaporatedfrom the market. As yields declined, risk pre-miums fell and by October they were belowthe level at the beginning of the year. This isin line with Bundesbank calculations (seeAnnex on page 69), which indicate a high riskappetite among investors in the bond marketin a long-term comparison.
In addition to the ongoing “search for yield”,
a range of other factors has probably contrib-uted to the exceptionally low risk premiums.For example, the global issuance of new cor-porate bonds (excluding banks) in the inter-national capital market declined by roughly20% in the first three quarters of 2004 whencompared with the same period of 2003. Thiswas largely due to continuing efforts by largeissuers to reduce their indebtedness. This ap-plies, for example, to companies in the tele-communications sector, which account for alarge share of outstanding bonds. The smallernumber of mergers and acquisitions together
% Earnings expectations3Current dividendsReal interest rate2Implied risk premiumMemo item
Decomposition of the
Euro Stoxx price index 1
Price-increasing factors
Falling risk premium or real interest rate
Rising dividends or earnings expectations
Price-dampening factors
Rising risk premium or real interest rateDeclining dividends or earnings expectations
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3Monthly data
S&P 500
Euro StoxxDAXPrice-earnings ratio
of major stock indices *
*On the basis of expected 12 months’ forward
earnings according to I / B / E / S. Source: Thomson
Financial Datastream. — 1 Factors contributing to
price change in the three-stage dividend discount
model pursuant to RJ Fuller and CC Hsia (1984), “ A
Simplified Common Stock Valuation Model”,
Financial Analysts Journal, September-October, pp
49-56. Anticipated long-term expectations of profit
growth: 2.5%. Balance of positive and negative
factors: changes in the price level compared to the
previous period. — 2 Calculated from the average
yields of 10-year nominal euro-area governmentbonds less the average inflation expectation over the
next ten years. Source: Consensus Forecast. —
3 Medium-term profit growth expectation (in three
to five years) according to I / B / E / S analysts’
estimates. Source: Thomson Financial Datastream.
Deutsche Bundesbank50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−
40−18
17
161514
13
12
2003 2004Very good
financing terms
for enterprises
active in the
capital market
Smaller
issuance of new
international
corporate
bonds

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
20with advance funding in 2003 were addition-
al factors in the marked decline in issuing ac-tivity in the course of 2004.
From the demand side, the narrowing of
credit spreads was supported by the stronggrowth in structured financing instruments(eg in the form of collateralised debt obliga-tions) for which corporate bonds are used asthe underlying asset. In addition, it is likelythat the downward tendency in stock marketvolatility was partly responsible for the lowerrisk premiums. This owes something to thefact that the pricing of corporate bonds hasrecently been more strongly aligned to thestock market valuations of firms.
15
Another significant factor in this context isthe increasingly stabilised credit quality of en-terprises active in the capital market. Afterthe slide in rating levels which had persistedfor several years came to a virtual halt in thefirst quarter of 2004, rating upgrades pre-dominated over corresponding downgradesin the second quarter both in western Europeand in the USA. Data – as yet only availablefor the USA – indicate that this trend persist-ed into the third quarter. Alongside the fa-vourable rating trend, payment defaults oncorporate bonds reached multi-year globallows in the course of the year. While thecredit environment in the USA stabilisedacross all sectors, in western Europe the rat-ing improvements have so far been mainlylimited to the financial sector. The trend to-End-of-week figures
Basis-
points
Basis-
pointsBasis-
points
% Implied volatility
in the US stock market
S&P 500Euro
area
USAReduced scale
Speculative-grade2ABBBUSAABBBInvestment-grade 1
Euro areaCredit spreads
of corporate bondsover government bonds
Sources: Merrill Lynch, Bloomberg. —
1Seven to ten-year corporate bonds from
the relevant rating grade vis-à-vis govern-
ment bonds with a comparable maturity. —
2Corporate bonds with a residual maturity
of at least one year vis-à-vis government
bonds with a comparable maturity.
Deutsche Bundesbank40
30
20
101400
12001000
800600
400
200400
300
200
100
0300
200100
0
2002 2003 2004
15Many conventional valuation models for corporate
bonds decompose them into a risk-free bond and a writ-
ten put option whose price depends, in part, on the ex-
pected volatility of the firm’s value (ie its share price), see
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, April 2004, p 25.High demand
and modified
pricing
Significant
improvement in
credit quality of
enterprises
active in the
capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
21wards higher credit worthiness among enter-
prises active in the capital market reflects notonly the brightening of the macroeconomicoutlook but also an appreciable rise in profits.In recent months, however, many enterpriseshave used their cash flows not for furtherdebt reduction but for other measures, suchas extra dividend distributions and share buy-backs, which have especially benefited share-holders. This is a further indication that thereis virtually no more scope for further reduc-tions in risk premiums of corporate bonds.
The improved fundamentals should, on
balance, limit the setback potential for riskpremiums in the case of corporate bonds.However, the exceptionally low level atpresent may prove vulnerable to corrections.In the first place, a rising interest rate levelwould probably be accompanied by an in-crease in interest rate premiums, especiallyas, in the medium term, a rise in yields is asso-ciated with increased accrued interest liabil-ities for enterprises as a result of new finan-cing and refinancing. Secondly, a weakergrowth momentum could place particularpressure on the credit spreads of issuers withpoorer credit worthiness that have been in-creasingly exploiting the favourable condi-tions for debt financing in the bond marketover the last few months.
The situation in the bank lending market has
also stabilised in the past few months. Theresults of the Eurosystem’s Bank LendingSurvey for the euro area in the second quarterof 2004 showed no further tightening ofcredit standards overall. At the same time,US$
billion
US$
billion
%
1990 95 00 2004Defaults on bonds2
Rest
of the worldUSACredit quality
improves
Credit quality
deteriorates... in western Europe 1
010203040506070Credit quality
improves
Credit quality
deterioratesChanges in companies’ ratings ...
... in the USA 1
0102030405060708090100Balance of bond volume affectedby rating changes (left-hand scale)
Upgrades as % of all
rating changes (right-hand scale)Credit quality indicators
Source: Moody’s, Bundesbank calcula-
tions. — 1Moving average over four quar-
ters. -  = Latest position: 2004 Q3 (USA) or
2004 Q2 (western Europe). — 2As well as
insolvencies, this includes default on
interest payments and capital repayments.
Issuers affected as a percentage of allissuers with a rating grade; moving average
over twelve months.
Deutsche Bundesbank6
5
4321
0100
50
0
50−
100−
150−
200−
250−250+
200+
150+
100+
50+
0
50−
100−
150−
200−
250−
- - - - 
Setback
potential of
corporate
bonds limited
on balance
No further
tightening of
euro-area
banks’ credit
standards

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
22the trend towards greater risk differentiation
in lending terms continued.
The short-term interest rates in the euro-area
interbank market have changed only slightly,reflecting the fact that the key interest ratesin the euro area have remained unchangedsince June 2003. By contrast, there werenoticeable fluctuations in the longer-termmoney market rates caused by uncertaintyover future interest rate developments. In thefirst quarter of 2004, the 12-month EURIBOR– which had started to fall at the beginningof December 2003 from a level of 2.50% –continued its decline and at the end of Marchbriefly fell just below the 2% minimum bidrate on the main refinancing operations asmarket participants no longer ruled out afurther interest rate cut by the ECB. However,this downward movement was corrected bymid-June. The 12-month EURIBOR then de-clined again to just under 2.30% before sta-bilising at 2.40% in September.
Despite these fluctuations, activity in the
interbank market was calm. The average im-plied volatility over the period from Januaryto September 2004, measured by the pricesof at-the-money options on 3-month EURI-BOR futures contracts, declined by 6 percent-age points compared with the same period in2003. In general, liquidity conditions were re-laxed and, in most maturity bands, this wasreflected in a perceptible decrease in the bid-ask spreads for uncollateralised transactionsby up to 5 basis points to between 2 and6 basis points. Similarly, there was discerniblyless uncertainty about counterparties’ credit-worthiness compared with last year. The dif-ferential between yields on unsecured and se-
cured transactions, known as the “depo-repospread”, ranged from 2 to 7 basis points de-pending on maturity. This equalled a drop ofup to 2 basis points on the 2003 levels. Thesmooth transition in March 2004 to the Euro-system’s new monetary policy framework hasfurther reinforced money market stability.
16
Selected risks in the global financialsystem and in major countries
In terms of the international environment,
the development of real estate prices stillposes a significant risk to stability. The Ger-man financial system faces associated risksvia real economic effects as well as throughbusiness relationships with other internation-al financial institutions and direct credit ex-posures. Since the slump in stock marketprices which began in 2000, real estate inmany industrial countries has profited fromthe search for alternative investment oppor-tunities. Inflows of funds have been magni-fied by the historically favourable financingterms. Unlike in previous years, inflationhedging probably played a very minor role inrecent property acquisitions.
Among the larger economies in the euro
area, Spain, France and Italy have recordedpersistent, substantial price increases in thehousing sector that are exceeding house-holds’ income growth and increasingly raisingthe question of overheating. By contrast, in
16A detailed description of the new monetary policy
framework can be found in Deutsche Bundesbank, Initial
experience with the new monetary policy framework and
the Bundesbank’ s contribution to liquidity management
by the Eurosystem, Monthly Report , July 2004, pp 49-66.Marked swings
in longer-term
euro-area
money market
rates
Relaxed
liquidity
conditions in
the interbank
marketReal estate
markets a risk
factor
Risk situation
differs across
European
housing
markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
23the Netherlands house price inflation has de-
celerated slightly since 2002. Particularly inSpain, an abrupt price adjustment in conjunc-tion with rising financing costs could lead toan increase in household credit defaults, aswell as having direct consequences for themacroeconomically important constructionsector. There are two main reasons for this.First, the indebtedness of Spanish householdsin relation to their income is higher than thecorresponding ratios in France and Italy.Second, in Spain (as in the UK) the prevalenceof variable-rate mortgages means that thereis also a risk that households will underesti-mate their financial burden when interestrates rise. In the context of increased uncer-tainty about future property price develop-ments, creditors can protect themselvesagainst losses by, for example, applying ap-propriate lending limits. However, keen com-petitive pressure is creating incentives for fi-nancial institutions to expand their businessvolume and to relax their lending terms.
Following several interest rate rises by the
Bank of England,
17the annual rate of in-
crease in UK housing prices seems to be slow-ing noticeably, whereas previously there hadbeen increasing signs of overvaluation in thismarket. The risk of abrupt price falls is likelyto be limited, however, by the scarce housingsupply, robust income growth and low un-employment. In the USA, the upward thrustof house prices has been accelerating sincethe beginning of the year. In 15 states – in-cluding California, Florida and New York –the annual rate of increase was, in somecases, well over 10%.
18As a result of large-scale staff cuts in recentyears, the markets for commercial offices inmany European and US cities have comeunder pressure. The expected easing of thesituation will essentially depend on howquickly the economic recovery leads to moreoffice jobs. Compared to the office markets,demand for retail space has proved stable inmany countries, supported by brisk and par-tially credit-financed private consumption. Insome countries, the high household indebt-edness could, however, prove to be a futureburden if it has a negative impact on con-sumer demand.1996 Q1 = 100
1996 2004NetherlandsSpain
USAUK
France
ItalyReal estate prices *in
relation to nominal GDP
Sources: National statistics, Bundesbank cal-
culations. — *Owing to differing index
compositions, cross-country comparisons
have to be interpreted with caution.
Deutsche Bundesbank180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
97 98 99 00 01 02 03
17Between 6 November 2003 and 5 August 2004, the
Bank of England raised its official interest rate in five
steps from 3.50% to 4.75%.
18Price index of the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise
Oversight (OFHEO).Commercial
property
markets partly
under pressure

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
24In the first half of 2004, the US banking mar-
ket, which is of particular relevance for theinternational banks’ risk situation, continuedto benefit from the buoyant economic expan-sion and the fact that, on the whole, interestrates increased only slightly. The low share ofbad loans, which in the first quarter of 2004fell below the level of the boom years 1999/2000 for the first time, lessened the need forrisk provisions. One of the driving forces be-hind the favourable operating environmentenjoyed by the commercial banks in the firsthalf of the year was the strong demand forhousing loans, although it grew more slowlyin the summer months. In addition, applica-tions for refinancing existing mortgages havedeclined considerably following the hike ininterest rates at the beginning of the secondquarter, reducing the banks’ commission
income.
In the medium term, however, moderately ris-
ing capital market rates should be easier forbanks to cope with than persistently lowinterest rates, which generally place increas-ing pressure on their margins. However, risinginterest rates could lead to higher defaultrates on consumer loans and place pressureon some regional housing markets. Moreover,the credit risks of some banks are stronglyconcentrated on commercial property. Thebanking system as a whole, however, appearsto be in a good position to absorb shocks inview of its sound profitability and capitalbase. This is also reflected in the changes inthe ratings of US banks, with upgradesstrongly outweighing downgrades since asearly as the beginning of 2002.
The results of some big US banks are still
being impaired, however, by considerablerisks arising from current litigation proceed-ings. In the first half of 2004, claims relatedto Enron and WorldCom alone gave rise toprovisions and damages totalling more than7 billion US dollars.
Following a successful first half of the year,
the share price movement of US investmentbanks point to a more difficult capital marketsituation. The S&P 500 sub-index for invest-ment banks shows considerable underper-formance since the beginning of the year incomparison with the main index. The increasein their disclosed market risk positions mayhave played a role in this as it generally entailsincreased risk potential in the event of unex-
Beginning of 2004 = 100, daily data
Memo item
S&P 500
S&P 500 Investment banksS&P 500 Commercial banksStock indices of the
US banking sector
Source: Bloomberg.
Deutsche Bundesbank115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
JF M A M J JAS O N D
2004
US banks in
favourable
situationRising capital
market rates
have overall
positive effect
on banks
Legal risks...
...and market
risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
25pected market developments. In other areas
of investment banking, such as equity trad-ing, underwriting and advising on mergers,business activity is currently subdued.
One of the consequences of the prolonged
low interest rate phase has been that hedgefunds have profited from the “search foryield” and have received large inflows of re-sources which have only recently begun toabate. A growing number of banks, insurancecompanies and pension funds are also invest-ing in hedge funds.
19The aggregate global
volume of the hedge fund industry was esti-mated at between 800 and 1,100 billionUS dollars as per June 2004, with investmentsin funds of hedge funds
20having increased
markedly – they currently account for ap-proximately one-fifth of investments in hedgefunds. Given their disproportionately hightransaction velocity, hedge funds have be-come important players in individual marketsegments. Furthermore, they represent an im-portant source of commission income fortheir house banks (prime brokers).
The last few months have proved less suc-
cessful for a range of investment strategies.In particular, trend-oriented strategies wereaffected by the change of direction in themarkets. This will probably lead to increasedperformance pressure on hedge funds as therelative yield advantages over traditional in-vestment forms decline when market ratesrise (see box on page 28 concerning perform-ance measurement difficulties). At the sametime, the costs of debt financing to exploitleverage effects are rising. Moreover, con-sidering the sharp rise in investable funds inthe hedge fund sector, it seems likely that the
earning opportunities could also decline assuccessful strategies are imitated and marketinefficiencies eliminated.
It is difficult to assess the potential risk posed
by hedge funds in this changed market en-vironment, not least because of the poormarket transparency. Firstly, in the event oflosses, risks are associated with a high indebt-edness (leverage). If one considers all of thedirect debt financing links along the invest-ment chain – investor, fund of hedge funds,single hedge fund – as well as derivative pos-End-of period positions
US$
billion
Assets under
management
I II III IVNumberNumber and assets under
management of hedge funds
Source: Hedge Fund Research.
Deutsche Bundesbank900
800
700
600500400
300
200100
07000
600050004000
3000
    
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
19See box on page 40 concerning the links between
hedge funds and banks.
20Funds of hedge funds invest their investors’ money in
a portfolio of hedge funds. In this way, investors can di-
versify their portfolio more effectively and invest in funds
requiring high minimum payments.Large inflows of
capital to
hedge funds
Increased
pressure on
profitabilityRisk potential
that is difficult
to assess
requires greater
transparency

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
26itions (indirect leverage), the leverage effect is
probably much greater than market estimateswould indicate as they are generally basedonly on the direct debt financing share ofhedge funds. Furthermore, considerable li-quidity risks exist in less liquid market seg-ments especially in the event of parallel trad-ing strategies by hedge funds. In view of this,it is possible that risks could also spread tothe hedge funds’ prime brokers if increasedcompetition among the latter for hedge fundbusiness were to lead to a relaxation of stand-ards for monitoring and limiting credit risks.Thus, from a financial stability aspect, itwould be beneficial if official agencies hadgreater insight into the scale of leverage andmarket risks of hedge funds.
The situation in the Japanese banking system
has improved perceptibly. This was primarilydue to the sustained economic upswing aswell as the increasing pressure placed on thebanks by the government and, in particular,the Financial Services Agency. Improvementscan be seen in the quality of the banks’ assetsand capital. By contrast, income growth is,however, still not satisfactory despite recog-nisable upward trends. Non-performing loanshave been reduced from ¥52.4 trillion or3394 billion (peak reached in March 2002) to
¥34.6 trillion ( 3260.2 billion) in March 2004.
The big banks have almost achieved the gov-ernment’s target of halving non-performingloans – based on the level in March 2002 – byMarch 2005. By contrast, the regional banksand the cooperative credit institutions, whichin effect are significant only at the regionallevel, are lagging far behind in the reductionof problem loans and the implementation of
necessary structural reforms.
With regard to market risks, although the
Japanese banks’ equity portfolios have de-clined further, they are still large enough forindividual credit institutions to experience set-backs in the event of falling share prices.Their holdings of Japanese governmentbonds (JGBs) have, however, increased – asan alternative, as it were, to their low level oflending. An abrupt rise in interest rates couldtherefore place considerable pressure onmany banks, especially as non-performingloans would also increase as a result. On thewhole, however, the market risk of Japanesebanks appears to have declined. While theabolition of the unlimited state deposit guar-antee planned for April 2005 could have anunfavourable effect on weak banks, it shouldnot entail risks for the banking system as awhole.
In the past year, progress in the economic
fundamentals of the emerging market econ-omies but also, in particular, abundant liquid-ity and greater risk appetite on the part ofinternational investors have led to a sharp risein the net inflows of private capital to thesecountries (from US$44 billion in 2001 toUS$115 billion in 2003)
21and to a decline in
risk premiums in the government bond mar-kets to, in some cases, historically low levels.Following speculation about an impendinginterest rate swing in the US markets, the risk
21Pursuant to the definition in the IMF’s World Economic
Outlook , September 2004. This also includes net inflows
of capital to developing countries and Hong Kong, Israel,
Korea, Singapore and Taiwan.Marked
improvement
of the situation
in the Japanese
banking
system......but market
risks persist
Volatile trend in
risk premiums
for emerging
market
economies

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
27premium trend started to reverse in Janu-
ary 2004, with the average spread rising bymore than 150 basis points by the beginningof May. Since then risk premiums on emerg-ing market bonds have receded almost totheir level at the beginning of the year. Themain reason for this was that market partici-pants had almost ceased to expect a leap inthe global interest rate level. Countries suchas Brazil and Turkey were especially stronglyaffected by the volatile development of riskpremiums, while there was notably less fluc-tuation, in particular, in the risk premiums ofemerging Asian economies.
22There is much
to indicate that the markets are now differen-tiating more strongly between individualcountries, with the result that a further rise inglobal interest rates would have differing im-pacts on the various emerging market econ-omies. An increase in risk premiums will notbe a problem for those countries which havemade considerable adjustment progress pro-vided the prospect of rising exports andstrong growth remains favourable.
Despite the progress it has made in adjusting,
Brazil, in particular, remains susceptible to cri-ses because of the high level and unsoundstructure of its general government debt.One positive aspect is, however, that the vol-ume of exchange-rate indexed governmentdebt has now declined and the governmenthas already covered a large part of its externalrefinancing needs for this year. A high level ofrisk also exists for Turkey. Turkey’s reducedbut still high level of external debt coupledwith its current account deficit, which is risingagain, could result in confidence losses, espe-cially as a large part of the financing needscan be met only in the short term. For the
Philippines, financing the ongoing generalgovernment deficits is proving an increasingburden. The large public debt is mostly de-nominated in foreign currency. The resultanthigh external financing needs render thecountry vulnerable to sudden changes in theEnd-of-week figures
Basis-
points
Basis-
points
Reduced scale
Selected countries
RussiaBrazil
TurkeyGroups of countries
All countries
(EMBI Global 1)
Eastern Europe2Latin America
AsiaRisk premiums *
on government bonds from
emerging-market countries
Source: JP Morgan. — *Yield on bonds
denominated in US dollars less yield on
long-term US government bonds. —
1Emerging Markets Bond Index. — 2In-
cluding Russia, Turkey, Ukraine.
Deutsche Bundesbank3000
2500
20001500
1000
500
01500
1200
900
600
300
0
2002 2003 2004
22This is probably also partly due to the fact that short-
term-oriented investors make greater use of more liquid
market segments to change their positions.Brazil, Turkey
and the
Philippines
remain
vulnerable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
28The sharp growth of the hedge fund sector has
brought with it an increased demand for
indices1which provide information on the per-
formance of hedge funds. These can be used
both to measure the investment result of indivi-
dual hedge funds and also to compare hedge
funds with traditional forms of investment
(eg equity and bond investments).
It has, however, become apparent that there are
often considerable discrepancies in the perform-
ance data used by different indices to measure
the overall results of the sector, particularly
when market conditions are difficult. This is
mainly due to the fact that hedge funds do not
constitute a homogeneous investment class, but
rather comprise diverse investment strategies.
The number, choice and weighting of the funds
can vary considerably between individual index
providers. Divergences can also be seen in
the sub-indices for individual strategy types
(eg global macro, relative value arbitrage , long/
short equity). This is partly due to the different
definitions of strategy types applied by indivi-
dual index providers.
Moreover, compilers of hedge fund indices face
greater methodological difficulties than those
of indices for traditional investment forms. The
performance data of hedge fund indices seem tobe subject to greater systematical distortions.
This is partly due to the fact that hedge fund
reporting is voluntary and non-standardised,
which impairs the reliability of the data, renders
comparisons more difficult and qualifies com-
ments on published risk coefficients.
Academic literature differentiates, in particular,
between the following potential forms of bias
in the assessment of yield developments por-
trayed in hedge funds indices.2
–Selection bias (self-reporting bias): This oc-
curs as a result of the limited representativ-
ness of the underlying dataset. The voluntary
basis of hedge fund reporting is a significant
factor behind this. For example, the incentive
to disclose data is presumably greater for
successful hedge fund managers on the look-
out for new investors than for hedge fund
managers who have already achieved their
targeted investment volume or whose per-
formance has been unfavourable.
–Survivorship bias: This results from the fact
that the unfavourable performance of funds
which are removed from the index is disre-
garded or neglected.3Market estimates indi-
cate that every year up to 20% of all hedge
funds exit the market. Thus, yield calculations
Deutsche BundesbankDifficulties in measuring performance for hedge fund indices
1Providers of hedge fund indices include Credit Suisse First Boston/
Tremont, TASS Research, Hedge Fund Research, Van Hedge FundAdvisors International, Hennessee Group and Zurich Capital Markets(formerly Managed Accounts Reports – MAR). — 2For an overview of
empirical studies on the problem of performance measurement, see,for example, Andreas Signer (2003), Generieren Hedge Funds einenMehrwert? , Berlin, Stuttgart, Vienna. — 3The reasons for removal
from the index are probably not only the dissolution of individualhedge funds, but also the cessation of (voluntary) reporting.However, it might be possible that the majority of these funds arewithdrawn as a result of poor performance. — 4The strategy type
also plays a role. Furthermore, funds of hedge funds, for example,

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
29which are based solely on the performance
data of “surviving funds” suggest an overly
favourable performance.
–Instant history bias (backfilling bias): Hedge
fund managers are more likely to apply for
listing in an index following a phase of above-
average performance rather than at times in
which performance has been poor. The retro-
spective recording of the entire history of suc-
cessful hedge funds means that the actual
investment results tend to be overstated.
As a result of such forms of systematic bias, there
may be a tendency for the published yields to be
too high. Quantifying these distortionary effects
is difficult and depends on the reporting period
and the choice of sample, as well as other fac-
tors;4furthermore, some index providers make
efforts of their own to reduce the bias. A number
of studies5put the figure for the possible overes-
timation of actual hedge fund yields at between
1.3 and 4.0% per year as a result of survivorship
bias6and at 0.5 to 4.0% per year as a result of
instant history bias, while there are no estimates
available for selection bias.
Another problem is posed by “ managed prices ”.
Hedge funds are often invested in unlisted or
illiquid assets for which there are no establishedmarket prices, which means that there is scope
for discretion in the valuation. Hence, the US
securities watchdog, the SEC, recently launched
a regulatory offensive aimed at, among other
things, the problem of return smoothing,
whereby fund managers tend to artificially
smooth yield fluctuations in an attempt to posi-
tively influence the volatility of their returns.
This can also be achieved if an older valuation is
not updated over a longer period of time owing
to the lack of a more recent value. As a result,
both data on volatility as well as on the correla-
tion with traditional investment forms tend to
be too low.
The potential distortions urge a cautious inter-
pretation of the reported performance trends of
hedge fund indices. Moreover, the recent poorer
performance of almost all strategies indicates
that not even diversified funds of hedge funds
can decouple themselves permanently from cer-
tain market conditions. Thus, it is even more im-
portant in the case of hedge funds than in the
case of other investment forms that investors do
not derive their yield expectations exclusively
from historical index comparisons, but that they
also develop a sound knowledge of the various
products and strategies.
are less affected by survivorship bias than single hedge funds. — 5See
A Signer, loc.cit.; N Posthuma and PJ van der Sluis (2003), A Reality
Check on Hedge Fund Returns , Amsterdam; W Fung and D A Hsieh
(2002), Performance characteristics of hedge funds and CTA funds:
Natural versus spurious biases , Journal of Quantitative and Financial
Analyses, 35, pp 291-307; G Amin and H Kat (2002), Welcome to thedark side – Hedge Fund Attrition and Survivorship Bias over the Peri-
od 1994–2001 , working paper, Cass Business School; B Liang (2002),
Hedge Funds: the living and the dead , Journal of Financial and Quan-
titative Analysis, 35(3), pp 309–360. — 6In comparison, the survivor-
ship bias in the case of mutual funds is estimated at 0.5–1.5%.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
30perceptions of international investors. How-
ever, the current account surplus provides acounterweight. Argentina’s unresolved debtproblems place a heavy responsibility on theIMF which should consider extending its ownfinancial aid only on the basis of a compre-hensive adjustment programme. This strin-gency is necessary in order to encourage fairconduct on the part of the Argentineanauthorities towards their private creditors andto reduce the country’s liabilities vis-/C224-vis theIMF as quickly as possible. Leniency on thepart of the IMF could also weaken otherdebtor countries’ commitment to adjust-ment.
In order to further strengthen the ability of
the emerging market economies to withstandcrises, in the longer term conditions need tobe created whereby they are increasingly ableto borrow foreign capital in their own cur-rency and reduce foreign currency borrowing.Thus, efforts must be made to develop stableand efficient domestic financial sectors whichare able to serve as a channel for the inflowof foreign savings. Borrowing in foreign cur-rencies also becomes less attractive if the ex-change rate regime is made more flexible asthe borrowers’ risk awareness then increases.The G20, in particular, has identified the pro-motion of domestic financial markets as amajor objective (see box on page 32).
The financial systems in the new EU member
states are primarily bank-based, while theequity and bond markets are still compara-tively small. In recent years, the majority ofdomestic banks have been taken over bywestern institutions, mostly from the old EUcountries. As a result, the financial markets in
the new EU member states already have closelinks to the international financial system,although the resulting risks for the Germanfinancial system are small. Following EUaccession and the complete integration intothe European financial market which thisentails, competition among banks, pressureon profit margins and the trend towards con-solidation are likely to increase further.
In the majority of new EU member states, the
rate of increase in bank loans is far exceedingmacroeconomic growth. The trend towardsmore intense financial intermediation is re-lated to the positive economic outlook in theregion following accession, but also to thecurrent interest rate terms, which are, for themost part, at historically low levels. In gen-eral, the banking sector in these countries isconsidered profitable, liquid and sufficientlycapitalised. Nevertheless, the dynamic growthin lending needs to be monitored closely byboth the banks themselves and the publicsupervisory authorities in order to avoid un-welcome developments. At the same time,the banking sector still has, in some cases, aconsiderable old stock of non-performingloans and bad debts to manage. At the endof 2003, no less than 22% of all bank loansin Poland were classified as problematic, witha downward trend not being recorded untilmid-2003. Although relatively stringent clas-sification rules are a factor in this high ratio,which is well above comparable figures forthe other countries, it could also indicate un-resolved structural problems in the enterprisesector as well as flaws in the banks’ internalrisk management strategies.
Promotion of
domestic
financial
markets is an
important
aspect of crisis-
prevention
Bank-based
financial
systems in the
new EU
member statesStrong credit
growth as
a result of
positive
economic
developments
and low
interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
31Furthermore, in two respects, specific risks in
the ongoing credit business are apparentwhich could adversely affect the domestic fi-nancial system. First, the increased householdborrowing in some central European and Bal-tic states to finance the purchase of homesand other purchases. At the end of 2003, theHungarian government amended its systemof housing construction subsidies in order tocounter a possible overheating of the market.Second, the increasing importance of foreigncurrency loans in the region also needs to bemonitored closely. According to the consoli-dated BIS statistics, cross-border claims onthe new EU member states and foreign cur-rency claims of banks in this area rose lastyear by US$36 billion to US$141 billion. It islikely that this sharp rise is, in part, a reflec-tion of the exchange rate development be-tween the US dollar and the euro, in whichmost of these claims are presumably denom-inated. However, as a result, the volume offoreign currency loans recorded by the BIS atthe end of 2003 was US$7 billion higher thanbank loans in local currency as reported bythe branches and subsidiaries of foreignbanks in the region. The preference for for-eign currency loans is primarily due to interestrate advantages over borrowing in nationalcurrency, but is also based on borrowers’ ex-pectations that the euro exchange rate willnot shift significantly. If any major exchangerate movements on the foreign exchangemarket should occur, however, this could leadto loan servicing problems and thus havemajor implications for the banks concerned.Financial intermediaries in Germany
German credit institutions making
headway
Having implemented various adjustment
measures necessary to adapt to the changedbusiness environment, German credit institu-tions are now making headway. Many bankshave successfully managed to curb costs on apermanent basis, to significantly reduce creditrisks and at the same time, by reorientingtheir strategies and refocusing their business,to lay the basis for generating more income,even if this stream is still somewhat subdued.Although risk provisioning is still high,marked declines in this item indicate that therisk situation in lending business has probablypeaked. Banks have been resolutely weedingout or selling off risky exposures, simultan-eously augmenting their profile by improvingthe quality of their credit checks in new lend-ing and striving to push through risk-adjustedterms and conditions. At the same time, adrop in the probability of default both in lend-ing to domestic firms and in many of the for-eign credit markets has contributed to a de-cline in credit risks. However, risks arisingfrom real estate loans have gained consider-ably in importance.
Marked growth
in housing
and foreign
currency loans

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
32Deutsche BundesbankStable and efficient financial systems in the emerging-market economies as a means of crises prevention
The informal Group of 20 (commonly known as the
G-20)1is mainly involved with issues concerning the
international monetary and financial system and world
economic integration (globalisation). During the past
two years the debate has focused on the underlying
institutional requirements for stable and efficient fi-
nancial sectors. Numerous G-20 members have pre-
pared publicly available studies of their own experi-
ence in creating the institutional framework (see
www.G20.org). The studies emphasise the importance
of efforts aimed at deregulation and liberalisation as
the driving force behind improvements in the institu-
tional framework. On the basis of this a G-20 work-
shop in which representatives of the private sector
and the academic world took part considered in
depth the question of how the national financial mar-
kets in the emerging economies could be strength-
ened in order to boost national saving, prevent capi-
tal flight and foster the import of capital in domestic
currency instead of in foreign currency.2Progress
along these lines would decrease the emerging mar-
kets’ vulnerability to crises significantly. The main
findings of the workshop appear below.
The international debt crises that have occurred since
the mid-1990s show that currency mismatches are
mostly the root cause of such crises. Many emerging
markets had accumulated serious currency mis-
matches by financing domestic projects largely
through foreign currency loans without simultan-
eously creating a corresponding stock of reserve as-
sets. In the event of a loss of confidence this not only
led to balance of payments difficulties but also made
the countries concerned susceptible to depreciations.
Whenever the burden of debt servicing rose suddenly
in terms of the domestic currency, soaring govern-
ment expenditure, corporate insolvencies and bank-
ing crises were the inevitable result. The countries ex-
periencing balance of payments difficulties therefore
ran into an even more serious economic crisis.
Currency mismatches are sometimes ascribed to the
fact that emerging markets, which depend on capital
imports, are virtually unable to borrow on the inter-
national markets in their own currency.3This is
coupled with the call for international agencies to
raise large-scale loans in units of a basket of debtorcountry currencies. It is argued that currency mis-
matches would largely be avoided if these funds were
then passed on to the emerging markets. However,
this overlooks the fact that fairly small industrial
countries are likewise rarely able to borrow on the in-
ternational markets in their own currency. Like the
large industrial countries, however, these countries
have stable and efficient domestic financial systems
which are also attractive to foreign investors and en-
able capital to be imported in their own currency.
Emerging markets economies should take similar steps
in order to achieve long-term crisis prevention.
Major emerging market economies have actually
made great efforts in the past few years to upgrade
their domestic financial markets. According to the
IMF, the aggregate public and private issues of 13 se-
lected emerging markets (China, Hong Kong, Korea,
Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand; Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Mexico; the Czech Republic, Hungary and
Poland) amounted to US$3,271 billion between 1997
and 2003. Of these, 90% were issued in their own
markets (and therefore largely in their own currency).
As a result, foreigners, in principle, have considerable
scope for making financial investments in local cur-
rencies.
Against this background, the workshop participants
discussed what framework conditions may contribute
crucially to strengthening domestic financial markets.
The requirements which they identified are sum-
marised below.
Monetary and fiscal policy disciplineIf inflation rates are high and volatile, a broad and
deep financial market in domestic currency cannot
develop because creditors will avoid long-term instru-
ments or show a preference for foreign-currency as-
sets. A monetary policy that is geared to price stability
and supported by a disciplined fiscal policy is there-
fore essential if a financial market is to operate effi-
ciently. In addition, the fiscal policymakers need to
monitor the level of debt and the size of the foreign
currency component of public debt in order to mini-
mise susceptibility to crises and the risk to monetary
stability.
1The G-20 consists of the major industrial countries as well as the
economically most important emerging market economies, the Euro-pean Union and representatives of the International Monetary Fundand the World Bank. The coordination of its joint activities is the re-sponsibility of finance ministries and central banks. — 2The Bank of
Canada and the Bundesbank jointly organised a workshop entitledDeveloping Strong Domestic Financial Markets in Ottawa (Canada)
in April 2004. The record of the seminar can be viewed at

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
33Implementation of international standards and codes
The standards and codes devised by international fi-
nancial institutions and other agencies to achieve and
maintain transparent, stable and efficient financial
systems provide valuable assistance to countries seek-
ing to strengthen the institutional framework of their
financial sector. The aim of these standards is to im-
prove the transparency of economic policy and eco-
nomic data and to create efficient supervision of and
infrastructure for the financial sector. The IMF and the
World Bank have now developed joint procedures
which are accelerating the implementation of stan-
dards and codes discernibly.
Sound legal frameworkA stable and efficient financial sector requires trans-
parent, consistent and effective contract law and
property rights. The provision of long-term capital
can be improved especially by collateral and insol-
vency legislation which gives the protection of the
investor priority.
Prudent deregulationFollowing the establishment of sound monetary and
fiscal policies, the financial sector should first be ex-
posed to increased domestic competition. These meas-
ures would then have to be augmented by the liberal-
isation of capital movements, with long-term financial
transactions – especially foreign direct investment –
being freed from controls before short-term transac-
tions. An effective system of banking and financial
market supervision should be established prior to full
deregulation and liberalisation.
Linking the liberalisation of capital movements to
greater exchange rate flexibility
The international debt crises have shown that vulner-
ability to crises increases rapidly when capital move-
ments are liberalised but a regime of fixed exchange
rates is retained, with the attendant emergence of
currency mismatches. The liberalisation of capital
movements should therefore be combined with
greater exchange rate flexibility. This not only reducesthe danger of sudden exchange rate adjustments but
also increases the incentive for market participants to
curb currency mismatches, not least by hedging cur-
rency positions against exchange rate movements.
Robust banking sector important for market
development
A stable banking sector is essential if securities mar-
kets are to develop successfully. Credit institutions
play an important role in issuing both their own secu-
rities and those of third parties and are a vital media-
tor between investors and the securities markets.
In order to make use of foreign know-how obstacles
to direct investment in the financial sector should be
removed.
Carefully targeted financial market policyFinancial market policy can provide a decisive stimulus
to the development of long-term securities markets.
Funded social security systems can make a very posi-
tive contribution to market development on the de-
mand side.
4On the supply side it is government debt
management that plays an important role because li-
quid government securities covering a wide maturity
range can assume benchmark functions. Furthermore,
collateralised debt obligations can bolster the devel-
opment of the domestic market. In this context the
Bundesbank emphasised the merits of the German
Pfandbrief. Stringent statutory requirements guaran-
tee a high degree of investor protection and make
the Pfandbrief an attractive long-term capital invest-
ment vehicle. The development of a Pfandbrief mar-
ket is therefore particularly interesting for countries
whose market is not yet ripe for government bonds.
Another factor is that, as a security that refinances
lending to other debtors, the Pfandbrief also affords
indirect access to the capital market to those bor-
rowers who otherwise would not have recourse to it
at all or who would do so only on much less favour-
able terms.
www.G20.org. — 3See Eichengreen, Hausmann, Panizza (2003): Cur-
rency Mismatches, Debt Intolerance and Original Sin: Why they arenot the same and why it matters, NBER Working Paper No 10036,Cambridge, Mass. — 4See Global Financial Stability Report,
April 2004, “Institutional Investors in Emerging Markets”, IMF,Washington DC.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
34Current trends at large, internationally
operating banks23
At a number of large institutions, the meas-ures to enhance earnings initiated in the pastyear were outweighed by large write-downson participating interests in enterprises to ad-just for hidden losses. These value adjust-ments, which in some cases were referred toas a “big clear-out”, also created new busi-ness policy leeway. The process of reducingthe volume of risk-weighted assets observedsince 2002 is accordingly now practicallycomplete. In the first half of 2004, the com-bined risk-weighted assets of the group oflarge, internationally operating banks fell byless than 2% to 31,035 billion as at end-
June 2004, and three of the eight banks inthe reference group actually increased theirrisk assets. In the second half of 2003, the
risk-weighted assets had fallen by nearly12%. This suggests that the process of bal-ance sheet adjustment is nearing its end andthat the institutions are now turning their at-tention again to the earnings potential oflending business.
In the first half of this year, internationally op-
erating German banks improved their pre-taxresults perceptibly (see table on page 35).Balance sheet trends of large, internationally operating German banks
Balance sheet
totalof which
Claims onnon-banksRisk-weighted
assets
1Risk-weightedassets
1/
balance sheettotalCore capital
ratio
1
As at end in 5billion As percentage
2000 Q4 3,383 1,588 1,397 41 6.49
2001 Q2 3,749 1,741 1,472 39 6.63
Q4 3,817 1,742 1,436 38 6.98
2002 Q2 3,622 1,693 1,407 39 6.91
Q4 3,336 1,441 1,278 38 6.94
2003 Q2 3,490 1,540 1,204 35 7.66
Q4 3,102 1,379 1,067 34 8.37
2004 Q2 3,301 1,419 1,049 32 8.04
1In accordance with consolidated Principle 1 pursuant to
sections 10 and 10a of the Banking Act (excluding marketrisk positions).
Deutsche Bundesbank
23The aggregate comprises a group of eight German
banks from all three sectors, whose group balance sheet
total each exceeds 3250 billion (as at 30 June 2004). All
of the banks in the group not only operate in Germany
but also carry out major operations in the international
markets. The amount of their claims on non-residents,
both in absolute terms and as a percentage of their bal-
ance sheet, was taken as a measure of their international
operations. The following analysis is based on the re-
spective consolidated data of the institutions.Only slight fall
in risk assets
Improved result
in the first half
of 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
35The main contribution to improved earnings
came from the marked reduction in the provi-sions for losses on loans and securities. Bankswere able to halve their risk provisioning vis-/C224-vis the first half of 2003 mainly as a resultof radically streamlining their loan portfolios.Following simultaneous extensive restructur-ing of their equity portfolio through sell-offsand value adjustments, all of the eight banksshould (as at mid-2004) again have, on bal-ance, hidden reserves at their disposal, mostof which can be made liquid at short notice.
General administrative spending also declined
further in the first half of 2004. Evidently, theextensive retrenchment programmes whichmany large banks launched in the past fewyears are being increasingly reflected in theresults. For banks to continue to improvetheir performance, it is imperative that costreductions prove to be sustainable.
In contrast to the cost side, there have only
been slight signs of improvement in operatingincome up to now.
24In absolute terms, this
income dropped by just under 2% from thefirst half of 2003 to the first half of 2004, al-though admittedly the volume of risk-weighted assets
25concurrently declined by
over 13%. This reduction in risk incurrenceexplains, in particular, the year-on-year de-cline in net interest income of around 5% inthe first half of 2004. At 4
1/C252% in the first half
of 2004, growth in net commissions receiveddeveloped positively. Banks suffered a declinein their net trading result of 5% in the firsthalf of 2004 owing to diverging develop-ments in the international capital marketscompared with the same period last year.With respect to the composition of operating
income, the trend observed in the past fewyears towards a gradual shift in the relativeshares away from net interest income to-wards of non-interest income continued.Since 1998, the share of net interest incomein operating income has dropped by around12 percentage points to just under 45%.
The decline in general administrative spend-
ing has helped to reduce the cost-incomeratio, ie the ratio of general administrativespending to operating income. At 73.5%,this ratio was a good 2 percentage pointslower than in the first half of 2003. TakingMain components of the profit and
loss account of large, internationallyoperating German banks
Amounts as a
percentage of thebalance sheet total
ItemFirst half
of 2003First half
of 2004Change (%)
in absoluteamountsfrom firsthalf of 2003to first halfof 2004
Net interest
income 0.35 0.34 – 5.2
Net commissions
received 0.25 0.27 4.5
Trading result 0.15 0.15 – 5.0Operating income 0.76 0.76 – 1.9General adminis-
trative spending 0.57 0.56 – 4.6
Risk provisions 0.14 0.07 – 52.9Profit for the year
before tax 0.04 0.16 > 100
Deutsche Bundesbank
24Operating income comprises net interest income, net
commissions received and the net trading result.
25In accordance with consolidated Principle I pursuant
to sections 10 and 10a of the Banking Act (excluding
market risk positions).Risk provision-
ing reduced by
half
Further
reduction in
general
administrative
spending
Only small
improvement
in operating
income
Further
reduction in the
cost-income
ratio

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
36Earnings situation and market indicators of selected banks
Sources: Bloomberg, S&P, Moody’s, db research, Morgan Stanley, Bundesbank calculations. — 1 The
aggregate comprises a group of eight German banks from all three sectors, whose group balance sheet total
each exceeds €250 billion and who operate to a large extent in the international markets. — 2 Balance of
upgrades and downgrades as a percentage of the number of banks recorded in each group.
Deutsche Bundesbank%Relative rating frequencies of
selected banks
European banks
(excluding Germany)
German banks
(with state guarantees)
German banks
(without state guarantees)
AAA AA A BBB80
70605040
30
2010
0%
Rating upgrades and downgrades
(balance2) of selected banks
German banks
(without state guarantees)German banks
(with state
guarantees)European banks
(excluding Germany)20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−
2003 2004Basis
points Daily data
Credit default swap premiums
of German big banks
Commerzbank
Deutsche Bank
Dresdner Bank
Hypovereinsbank360
330300270240210180150120
906030
0
2003 2004Profit and loss account of internationally operating German banks 1
As % of operating income
Share of individual
income components
Net interest income
Net commissions received
Trading result70
60
50
403020
10
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Selected cost items
Risk
provisions
General
adminis-
trative
spending
0110
100
90
807060
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
37both expenditure components, ie general ad-
ministrative spending and risk provisioningtogether, in the first six months of 2004 theseequalled around 83% of operating income,which represents a marked improvementcompared with 2002 and 2003 (108% and98% respectively).
By international standards, the large German
banks still have some catching-up to do. Theirreturn on equity – calculated as pre-tax earn-ings in relation to balance sheet capital – ofaround 13% still lags behind the returns oftheir international competitors (mostly wellover 20%). Even though the gap vis-/C224-vis theinternational level of returns in the bankingindustry has been narrowed somewhat andGerman banks have begun to make up theleeway, further efforts will be required inorder to gain a stronger competitive positionin the international banking sector.
The national and international capital ad-
equacy requirements have been met through-out 2004 so far with a virtually unchangedcapital base. At an average of 8%, the corecapital ratio of the banks included in theanalysis remains at at a comfortable level.
Over the course of 2004 to date, the ratings
of German banks have remained largely un-changed. In the first quarter of 2004, twomortgage banks were downgraded and onecommercial bank was upgraded. While theratings of the German big banks did notchange in the first half of 2004, their outlookhas improved in some cases. The median rat-ing of German banks is A-, while the medianrating for banks in other European countriesis currently AA-. This is partly a consequence
of the development in early 2003 when, inrelative terms, many more German bankswithout a state guarantee suffered down-grades than banks in other countries.
The credit default swap premiums of German
big banks are currently at a low level. Hence,market participants assess the risks of the in-stitutions as being considerably lower than ayear ago. It is striking that this assessmenthas been stable since the fourth quarter of2003. At the same time, the premiums for in-dividual institutions have converged some-what in the past few months. With the ex-ception of Deutsche Bank, the premiums arestill above the European average, however.On balance, the credit default swap pre-Stand-alone ratings of Landesbanks
Published credit rating
BankBalance
sheet totalas at31.12.2003in5billion S&P Fitch
Landesbank
Baden-W/C252rttemberg 323.3 A+ A+
Bayerische Landesbank 313.4 A– A+WestLB AG 256.2 A– A–Norddeutsche
Landesbank 193.1 – A
HSH Nordbank AG 171.7 A ALandesbank
Hessen-Th/C252ringen 139.4 A A+
Landesbank Berlin 92.6 – BBB+Landesbank Sachsen 76.1 BBB+ A–Landesbank
Rheinland-Pfalz 64.2 A– A
Landesbank Bremen
KreditanstaltOldenburg 32.4 – A
Landesbank Saar 16.6 – A
Source: rating agencies
Deutsche BundesbankInternational
comparison
reveals
continued need
to catch up
Capital require-
ments met
Ratings mostly
unchangedPremiums on
credit default
swaps at low
level

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
38miums of the big banks do not indicate any
heightened risk potential.
The stability of the Landesbanks pending
the loss of their state guarantees
The majority of the Landesbanks managed to
increase their earnings in the first half of2004. This was based particularly on the fur-ther reduction of risk provisions and a slightdecrease in general administrative spending.Operating income, by contrast, fell in somecases. For example, in the first half of 2004,net interest income at the Landesbanks wentdown by around 1
1/C252%; however, they simul-
taneously reduced their risk-weighted assetsby over 10%. Net commissions received fellby as much as 9% compared with the sameperiod in 2003. This indicates an ongoingweakness in operating income at the Landes-banks.
Following the agreement on the interest to
be paid retrospectively on housing assetsloaned by state governments, the EU investi-gations into the alleged granting of state aidto several Landesbanks are likely to be com-pleted soon, thereby establishing legal cer-tainty. The cash payments to be made – insome cases quite considerable amounts – arelikely to be sustainable, especially given theability and willingness of the shareholders toprovide compensatory capital.
In the middle of this year, several rating agen-
cies published stand-alone ratings for theLandesbanks stripped of their state guaran-tees. These ratings lie within a range whichallows the Landesbanks to master the neces-Value at Risk and proprietary market
risk models
Alongside lending business, own-account
trading in securities, derivatives and othermarket-price-related financial market prod-ucts continues to be a significant area ofbusiness for nationally and world-wide op-erating banks. Risks arise through counter-party default risk, on the one hand, andthrough interest rate changes and pricevolatility, on the other. Compared with therisks in the banking book, particularly bor-rower default risk, the market price risks as-sociated with own-account trading are ofminor importance. At a typical big bank,approximately 4% of regulatory capital iscurrently used to back market price risks inown-account trading.
1This relatively small
share is not only due to the predominanceof lending business. The fact that marketprice risks can be modelled very well alsoallows a relatively parsimonious capitalbacking of these risks.
Under certain conditions, banks are permit-
ted to model the market price risks inher-ent in own-account trading using theirown risk models. At the moment, 15 bankssatisfy the banking supervisory require-ments and calculate the regulatory capitalrequired to back market price risks usingtheir own risk models. The term “Value atRisk (VaR)” is used as the risk coefficient.This variable denotes the loss (in euro)which, given a holding period of 10 days,has a 99% probability of not being ex-ceeded.
Even though banks currently use VaR
models as a standard instrument in riskmanagement, it should be rememberedthat such models understate the risk in ex-treme situations (eg on 11 September 2001).
1The counterparty risks in the trading book are not
included in the 4% Nor does this figure include themarket price risks in the banking book, provided thesecomprise interest rate risks and share price risks.
Deutsche BundesbankImproved
results in the
first half of
2004
Stand-alone
ratings

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
39sary transformation process which they have
started. The grandfathering arrangementsagreed
26mean that the changed rating basis
will only gradually affect refinancing costs.
One common strategic feature of the Landes-
banks’ adjustment process is the forging ofcloser links with their primary institutions:first, by gearing their business models moretowards providing services for the savingsbanks and, second, by reinforcing the ar-rangements for mutual assistance and liabil-ity. The closer integration of savings banksand Landesbanks should have a generallypositive impact on financial stability as theLandesbanks will benefit more, either directlyor indirectly, from the stability of retail busi-ness. The stronger focus on the efficientbundling of functions and a promising initia-tive to retain a presence in international in-vestment and wholesale business with signi-ficant market shares are likely to require aconcentration of forces.
Risk situation in the German banking
industry
The international debate on financial stability
has focused for some time now on the dis-cernible increase in market price risks. Indeed,the market price risks in German banks’ trad-ing book have increased considerably in thepast one-and-a-half years.
27The combination
of an expanding global economy and relative-ly low interest rates is likely to have strength-ened banks’ willingness to incur greater risksin securities and derivatives trading. For in-stance, the total value at risk (VaR) of all ofthe banks analysed here increased by morethan 40% in the period from the end of 2002
to mid-2004 (see box on page 38).
28Two ef-
fects make the increased risk in the tradingbook appear striking. First, banks’ businessvolume as at mid-2004 was largely the sameQuarter-on-quarter change
%
Maximum
Minimum75% quantile
Median
25% quantileMarket risk: Value
at risk (VaR) of selected
German banks*
*VaR represents the loss of a bank’s port-
folio or overall trading book which in a cer-
tain period (here ten days), has a certain
probability (here 99%) of not being ex-
ceeded. Data are available for banks which,for regulatory purposes, have been licensed
to use their own risk management model.
Deutsche Bundesbank100+
80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−
2003 2004
26The Brussels agreement provides for the following
transitional arrangements: liabilities incurred before
18 July 2001 will continue to be covered up to maturity
by the state guarantees for ensuring institutions’ solvency
and for indemnifying depositors. Liabilities entered into
from 19 July 2001 until 18 July 2005 are covered by the
state guarantees as long as their maturity does not ex-
tend beyond 31 December 2015.
27All of the following data pertain to a group of current-
ly 15 banks, which are allowed to use their own risk
model to determine the amount of regulatory capital re-
quired to cover the market price risks in their trading
book. Where applicable, banks with breaks in the time
series have been excluded from the analysis.
28However, the sum of the individual value at risk fig-
ures would only match the aggregate value at risk if the
results of own trading of the individual banks were com-
pletely positively correlated. Analyses show, however,
that this correlation tends to be low. It follows that the
aggregate value at risk is far smaller than the value
attained by a simple addition of the individual figures.In future, closer
affiliation with
savings banks
as security pillar
Market price
risks increasing

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
40Links between hedge funds and banks
With increasing investments being made in hedge
funds, the importance of the latter is also growing forthe German banking industry. This is giving rise to in-terlinkages between hedge funds and banks, especiallythrough their activities as prime brokers, lenders,investors and stakeholders.
Big German banks are increasingly joining leading
US investment houses as prime brokers in the hedgefund market. A prime broker acts as an interface be-tween the hedge fund and its investors. The banks’tasks in this field are not limited to technical matterssuch as calculating risk ratios, settling transactions andmanaging safe custody accounts; rather, banks alsogive credit, lend securities and act as counterparties inderivative transactions vis-/C224-vis hedge funds, thusthemselves incurring significant risks. Competition forprime broker mandates is likely to increase further,since these activities are turning into a growth industryfor commission income.
Banks can also be direct counterparties of hedge funds
without acting as a prime broker. They give bank loansthat are used to gain a high degree of leverage andare counterparties in derivative transactions such asswaps or OTC options.
Moreover, from a risk point of view, banks’ own invest-
ments in hedge funds are important. Owing to theirrelative lack of correlation with traditional forms of in-vestment and their special trading strategies aimed atusing competitive advantages in selected market seg-ments, hedge funds can generally be used for portfoliooptimisation and to create new risk-return combin-ations. The default of a hedge fund, however, can leadto considerable losses if the bank’s risk management isinadequate, its positions are overextended or thehedge fund’s return is running in parallel with that ofother own-account positions of the bank. The particu-lar risk management problem for a bank in this respectis that the complexity of hedge fund strategies andtheir frequent lack of transparency often allow only alimited insight into the actual risk situation.
In addition, banks also invest in hedge fund providers
in order to share in their market success. It has beenobserved thus far that large German banks do not es-tablish these companies directly but mainly via subsid-iaries. The total volume of stakes held – compared withthe total amount of participating interests held by
banks – remains low. However, large German banks areseeking to step up their activities in selling and issuinghedge funds via both subsidiaries and strategic part-nerships.
In Germany, the aforementioned links between banks
and hedge funds are ultimately confined to a few largecredit institutions. This makes it all the more importantfor them to have risk management structures that takedue account of all contagion channels and are in linewith the respective institution’s other risk positions.
The Investment Modernisation Act ( Investmentmoder-
nisierungsgesetz ) has permitted the sale of hedge
funds in Germany since the beginning of this year.Even though the requirements for hedge funds arerelatively liberal by international standards, sales havestarted quite sluggishly. In the case of private investors,this may be due, among other things, to the obscurityof the funds of hedge funds (ie those funds which maybe sold to them without special restrictions). Althoughinitial uncertainty about investment principles on thepart of insurance companies and pension funds hasnow been resolved, it is unlikely that their hitherto lowdegree of interest in hedge funds will increase signifi-cantly in the near future.
1For example, insurance com-
panies may invest up to 5% of their restricted assets inhedge funds – but only if they can bear a sufficientamount of risk – although no more than 1% of their re-stricted assets may be placed into a single hedge fund.
Four funds of hedge funds and four single hedge funds
have been established in Germany so far – mainly bysubsidiaries of domestic banks. An application for an-other single hedge fund is currently in the processingstage. Although German single hedge funds are alsopermitted to cooperate with a prime broker, only onehedge fund has made use of this option thus far. For-eign hedge fund providers have become increasinglyinterested in the German market: three funds of hedgefunds have been licensed to operate, while three otherforeign providers have already submitted applicationsfor a licence. These include several funds that were al-ready introduced abroad at an earlier point in time bysubsidiaries of German banks. In August 2004, totalassets held by German hedge funds amounted to5819.4 million. The inflow of funds tailed off distinctly
in the middle of the year, however.
2
1According to a study of the investment behaviour of in-
stitutional investors in Germany, hedge funds accountedfor only around 0.7% of the total portfolio of all investorssurveyed in 2003. See Invesco, BVI: German InstitutionalAsset Management Survey 2004, Results of the 5th Studyon the Investment Behaviour of Institutional Investors inGermany, July 2004. — 2Whereas 5409.1 million was
invested in hedge funds in May 2004, the inflow of fundsrecently fell distinctly ( 539.2 million in June, 517.2 million
in July and 530.7 million in August). Source: BVI Funds
Statistics.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
41as at year-end 2002. Hence, the risks in the
trading book have grown not only in absoluteterms, but also vis-/C224-vis the banking book.Whereas in December 2002 the share ofregulatory capital required to back marketprice risks in the trading book was 2.7%, byyear-end 2003 this ratio had risen to 3.5%and by mid-2004 to 4.3%. Second, capitalmarket volatility waned, at least in the firsthalf of 2004. The counterdirectional increasein value at risk indicates that many banksdeliberately expanded their trading book soas to exploit income opportunities.
However, the individual differences in the
structure of market price risks show that asimple addition of the VaR figures clearlyoverstates the risk. The chart on page 39shows the distribution of the relative changesin the VaR amounts. The spread of banks’ in-dividual figures illustrated here is consider-able. This heterogeneous phasing of thebuild-up and run-down of market risk andthe rather low correlation between banks’trading results curbs the systemic risk stem-ming from the market.
Credit risk is the most important single risk of
German banks. The amount of risk provision-ing is influenced to a large degree by themacroeconomic environment. There havebeen signs of a slight easing in the risk situ-ation in the area of domestic wholesale lend-ing. It is true that Moody’s KMV still considersthe default risks of listed German enterprisesto be high. However, the expected default
€ billion30 June 2004
30 June 2003Lending by sector3
Cultural and sporting
activities, mediaServices, production
of consumer goodsTechnology, telecom-
municationConstructionWholesale and retail tradeMechanical engineering
products, machinery andequipmentTransportationOtherReal estate
1Write-downs and value adjustments on
claims and transfers to loan loss provisions;
includes all credit institutions. — 2Expected
default frequency according to Moody’s
KMV. E75 means that 25 % of all enterprises
have an increased probability of default and
75 % a lower probability of default (EDF).
The same applies to E50 and E25. — 3Only
lending to enterprises, excluding the finan-
cial intermediation sector (as reported to
the central credit register for loans of €1.5
million or more).
Deutsche Bundesbank600 400 200 0%
%
%
E75
E50
E25Log scale
Probability of default2
of listed German
enterprisesMemo item, scale reduced
Real gross domestic product
Year-on-year changeLin scale
Ratio of risk provisions 1
to loans (outstanding
amounts) to non-banks
0Credit risks
of German banks
10.00
5.00
2.25
1.00
0.50
0.25
0.10
0.055.00
0.026.0
4.0
2.0
01.6
1.20.8
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Low correlation
of trading
results curbs
systemic risk
Slight decline
in credit risks
in domestic
wholesale
business

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
42frequency (EDF)29has declined somewhat
compared with last year, despite a partial re-versal of the declining trend in the averageEDF in the second quarter. The slight declinein the year-on-year EDF relates more or lessequally to all sectors; one exception, how-ever, is the real estate sector for which noclear EDF trend could be discerned andwhose individual firm data show a wide dis-persion. The chart on page 41 shows thebreakdown of credit volume by sector. Thishas remained virtually unchanged over thecourse of the year, meaning that the declinein the average EDF has resulted in a slightlylower exposure at risk
30in all sectors.
Credit risks in lending to small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs) remain rather high.After quite a lot of large enterprises becameinsolvent, particularly in 2001 and 2002, the
current insolvency pattern is more in accordwith Germany’s economic structure. Just over70% of all the enterprises which became in-solvent in 2003 (compared with just under64% in 2002) employed no more than fivepeople.
31This size structure of the insolven-
cies in the corporate sector is also likelyto have contributed to a slight decline in thevolume of related claims.
The increase in the overall number of insolv-
encies in Germany to the record level of57,000 in the first half of 2004 is due to a fur-ther rise in the number of consumer insolven-cies. Even so, the creditworthiness of house-holds in Germany remains high. Furthermore,typical retail portfolios display a large degreeof granularity. Hence, in the near future nosytemic risk to German banks is discerniblefrom consumer insolvencies.
In Germany, real estate loans form the most
important type of credit. Around 60% of allloans to domestic enterprises and households(totalling 32,230 billion in mid-2004) are
granted for residential or commercial con-struction. Approximately 84% of these loansare secured by mortgages on real estate. Ofthese, 23% ( 3260 billion) concern commer-
cial building projects.Insolvencies and affected claims
Item NumberYear-on-
yearchange(%)Claims
likelyto beaffectedin5bil-
lion
Total insolvencies
1
2004 1st half 56,836 + 14.8 19.9
2003 100,723 + 19.3 41.9
of which
Consumerinsolvencies2004 1st half 21,856 + 39.5 1.72003 33,609 + 56.8 3.1
Corporate
insolvencies2004 1st half 19,939 – 0.1 13.82003 39,320 + 4.6 30.5
Source: Destatis. — 1Apart from consumer and corpo-
rate insolvencies, total insolvencies include natural per-sons as members of partnerships and the like, formerlyself-employed persons and deceased persons’ insolventestates.
Deutsche Bundesbank
29EDF (Expected Default Frequency) is a measure of an
enterprise’ s probability of default developed by Moody’s
KMV .
30The exposure at risk is defined here as the product of
the credit volume (as reported to the central credit regis-
ter for loans of 31.5 million or more) and the associated
probability of default of a given sector. Moody’s KMV Ex-
pected Default Frequencies (EDF) were used as the meas-
ure of the probability of default.
31Source: Creditreform.Credit risks
in lending to
SMEsConsumer
credit risks
Risks in
real estate
business ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
43In the commercial construction sector, lenders
face various risks in the event that the marketexperiences a downturn. In this case, thecreditworthiness of commercial borrowersfalls as does the eligibility ratio of the real es-tate used as collateral. In the period from2001 to June 2004, peak rents in five selectedurban centres fell by between 12% and29%. At the same time, the vacancy rate (ex-cluding sub-let agreements) in two of the fivecities rose to over 10% and increased consid-erably in the other cities as well. Moreover,new office buildings with large commercialspace are being built in several cities.
32For
several years now, the market has beenundergoing a phase of price adjustment tothe cyclically induced low demand. Accordingto market participants, this phase is not yetover.
Around 30% of all housing loans ( 3329 bil-
lion) are granted to commercial (real estate)borrowers who construct housing. Over thepast several years, this market, too, has ex-perienced a phase of downward price adjust-ment, as a result of which borrowers’ credit-worthiness has tended to fall. However, therelatively moderate pace of adjustment gavebanks time to react to developments. At a re-gional level, the market outlook for residen-tial real estate is heterogeneous. In particular,banks with a strong focus in regions whereprices continue to fall remain exposed torisks.
Lending to private contractors for residential
building carries a much lower risk. Admitted-ly, at 3749 billion, the volume of lending to
these persons exceeds lending to commercialclients. Moreover, the increase in consumer
insolvencies has been accompanied by a risein foreclosure sales of houses and flats
33(over
60,000 in 2003 and more than 30,000 prop-erties in the first half of 2004)
34which may
indicate an increased lending risk. However,the correlation between the price trends ofthe corresponding real estate, borrowers’ability to service the debt and the realisationrate of foreclosure sales in the residentialhousing segment is not as close as in thecommercial segment.
With respect to the credit risk arising from
international lending, lending to emergingRegional breakdown of country risk
5billion
Period AsiaLatin
America Europe
Credit volume by region
June 2003 66.76 46.92 97.19
June 2004 68.59 45.83 121.54
Exposure at risk 1by region
June 2003 1.30 5.32 2.92
June 2004 1.01 4.19 1.41
1The exposure at risk is defined here as the product
of the credit volume (as reported to the central creditregistry for loans of 51.5 million or more) and the
associated default probability of each country. Thelatter is calculated from the corresponding Standard &Poor’s ratings after they have been transformed into acardinal scale based on 2-year corporate default data.
Deutsche Bundesbank
32Source: Jones Lang LaSalle.
33Owner-occupied apartments, one and two-family
houses, semi-detached houses.
34Source: Argentra AG.... in commer-
cial construc-
tion
... in housing
construction
... and for
private
contractorsReduced risk
exposure to
emerging
economies

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
44economies merits special attention. The vol-
ume of exposures at risk to the emergingmarket countries of Asia, Latin America andEurope has decreased perceptibly since mid-2003. This development can be explained pri-marily by improvements in the underlyingmacroeconomic setting, which are reflectedin corresponding rating upgrades.
At the same time, it is apparent that banks
have shifted their lending towards easternEurope. Lending to Latin America and Asia,by contrast, has remained virtually un-changed.
With respect to the amount of exposure at
risk, however, Latin America still tops the list.Argentina accounts for the largest singleamount ( 32.5 billion), but this is a specialcase resulting from the country’s earlier de-
fault. This is followed by Brazil (with an ex-posure at risk of 3831 million), Venezuela
(3307 million) and Panama ( 3244 million, see
above chart). Although lending to Asia wasstable on the whole, shifts are apparent with-in this region. Banks have curtailed their lend-ing above all to countries with poor ratingssuch as Indonesia and the Philippines.
Lending to eastern Europe was particularly
concentrated on the two new EU memberstates, Poland and Hungary, and on Russia.At336.4 billion, Poland represented the larg-
est credit volume in summer 2004, whilelending to Hungary increased to 320.4 billion.
Lending to Russia also increased this summerto316.7 billion. Despite the upgrade of Tur-
key’s foreign currency sovereign credit rating,€ billion
€ billion
Exposure at risk 1
Scale enlarged
Argen-
tinaBrazil Turkey Indo-
nesiaRussia Vene-
zuelaPanama India Pol-
andLeba-
nonMexico Philip-
pinesCro-
atiaHun-
garyEgyptTotal lending volume
June 2003
June 2004Lending to selected countries
Source: Standard & Poor’s, Bundesbank calculations. — 1The exposure at risk is defined here as the product of
the average default probability and the credit volume (as reported to the central credit register for loans of
€1.5 million or more). The default probability was determined on the basis of the average two-year default
rates of companies with relevant S&P ratings.
Deutsche Bundesbank4
3
2
1035
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
A shift in
lending to
eastern Europe
Allocation of
risks by region

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
45German banks have shown restraint in grant-
ing additional loans to Turkey.
The current risk situation is determined by
credit volumes and the prevailing credit qual-ity. However, information on banks’ treat-ment of credit risk in new lending business isalso interesting. In this context, the BankLending Survey
35provides valuable signals
and insights. Data for Germany indicate a fur-ther increase in risk differentiation. Particular-ly in retail banking, the survey data indicate apersistent risk-differentiated margin spread:whereas the margins for average-risk loansactually narrowed in some cases, some of therespondent banks widened their margins onhigher-risk loans further. In corporate lendingbusiness, by contrast, banks increased theirmargins both for average-risk and for higher-risk loans. However, on balance, Germanbanks do not appear to have further tight-ened their credit standards so far this yearcompared with the adjustments they madelast year.
In the past few years, the banking industry
has become more acutely aware of oper-ational risks. This risk category comprises pos-sible losses resulting from internal factors –errors in banks’ internal processes, humanerrors and errors in IT systems – and threatsfrom external events such as natural catas-trophes. It is also international standard prac-tice to expressly include legal risks in thiscategory.
36Impact of Basel II on the stability
of the financial system
The new minimum capital requirements
for credit institutions published in June2004 (Basel II) have already begun tohave an impact on German banks’ riskmanagement practices. Around one-third of German credit institutions areplanning to implement an internalratings-based approach, which repre-sents an important enhancement of thecurrent Principle I rules. In future, oper-ational risk will also have to be backedexplicitly by equity capital and the riskweights to be applied to defaultableassets will no longer depend solely onthe asset class but also, in addition, onthe internal rating.
With the improvement of the risk sensi-
tivity of the capital requirements incen-tives for more risk-appropriate lendingconditions will be created. This is expect-ed to entail efficiency gains in the bank-ing system in future, which will furtherimprove the stability of the financial sys-tem.
A more risk-oriented allocation of liable
capital is closely linked to another keyobjective of Basel II: to converge super-visory risk-weighting practices with riskmeasurement in the banks. In this way,unwelcome developments such as capitalarbitraging opportunities can be pre-vented.
The issue of “calibrating” capital require-
ments is an important element in creat-ing more convergence between the twoconcepts of capital. Only by adequatelyadapting the risk-weight functions can itbe ensured not only that the risk sensitiv-ity of the capital requirements is in-creased and incentives for selecting amore risk-sensitive approach are pro-vided but also that the total capital inthe financial system is preserved. To thatend, calibration will be rereviewed in2006 shortly before the entry into forceof Basel II.
Deutsche Bundesbank35 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report,
August 2004, pp 26ff.
36See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Inter-
national Convergence of Capital Measurement and Cap-
ital Standards, June 2004.Bank Lending
Survey
Rising
operational
risks ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
46Legal risks have recently attracted attention
in the wake of court rulings and legislative ini-tiatives, eg in the area of consumer and in-vestor protection.
37Claims for damages in
connection with the insolvency of large com-panies, for example in the case of Parmalat,also entail financial risks for those institutionsinvolved. All in all, such risks are sustainablefor the individual institutions and, moreover,are basically not a new phenomenon. Theyhave, however, recently gained in importanceand, from a stability viewpoint, must be seenin an overall context together with the riskpotential arising from credit, market andother operational risks.
Apart from legal risks, the other causes of op-
erational risk have also gained in importance.These include human error or fraud, often inconnection with faulty processes or IT systemdefects. Banks’ and financial intermediaries’large and growing dependence on IT functions– particularly in combination with the ongoingtrend towards outsourcing, greater depend-ence on often just a few service providers andweaknesses in e-banking applications – consti-tutes an increasing risk potential
38. However,
the new Basel Accord, which for the first timeimplements separate capital requirements foroperational risk, has contributed not leasttowards heightening the awareness of oper-ational risk in the banking industry.
Savings banks and cooperative banksThe earnings and risk situation as well as the
outlook for these two banking groups, whichare each organised as a network of affiliatedinstitutions, have improved.In 2003, both the savings banks and the co-
operatives banks were able to increase theiryear-on-year net interest income by 0.04% ofthe average balance sheet total. This meansthat the main source of income for these twogroups of banks increased for the secondyear in succession, after their interest incomeshad sagged sharply in the second half of the1990s. The savings banks’ and credit co-operatives’ net interest income currentlytotals 2.42% and 2.53% of their average bal-ance sheet total, respectively. The rise in netinterest income was mainly due to the favour-able possibilities for maturity transformationpresented by a steeper yield curve. The differ-ence between long and short-term interestrates has widened again in the past two yearsafter the yield curve had flattened somewhatin the preceding period.
Investors’ high liquidity preference created
leeway for both groups of banks to take ad-vantage of the possibilities for maturity trans-formation. Developments so far this yearhave not yet offered any clear indication,however, as to whether the recovery in netinterest income will continue. On the onehand, investors’ preference for liquidity hasweakened somewhat, meaning that the refi-
37For instance, several investor lawsuits were recently
successful in the Federal Supreme Court. These investors
had made losses on credit-financed investments in
closed-end real estate funds. Depending on the way in
which the transaction was initiated, they claimed there
had been a breach of the Consumer Credit Act or the Act
governing door-to-door selling.
38However, many of the risk factors mentioned are only
the obverse side of fundamentally positive developments,
such as economies of scale through the use of IT and out-
sourcing, achieving the optimal operating size and step-
ping up necessary structural changes as well as the ef-
fective use of complicated risk management practices.
However, these positive effects can only be effective if
the attendant operational risks are managed properly.... arising from
legal issues
and ...
... from a heavy
dependence on
IT functionsFurther rising
net interest
income...
High liquidity
preference and
steep yield
curve favour
maturity trans-
formation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
47nancing of the institutions could become
more expensive. Furthermore, the demandfor credit is still weak; in particular, the de-mand for real estate loans, which fuelled thebusiness of both banking groups in 2003, hasreceded. On the other hand, the yield curve isstill steeply upward sloping. So far this year,the yield spread between Federal securitieswith a residual maturity of seven years andthose with a residual maturity of threemonths has been on average around 30 basispoints above the average spread seen in 2003.
Besides higher net interest income, earnings
have been supported by a rise in commissionincome, even though the short-term poten-tial of this source of income, which equals22% of net interest income at savings banksand 24% at credit cooperatives, is probablylimited. By international standards, however,the cross-selling potential in these two sectorshas not yet been fully exploited.
As regards operating costs, institutions in
both sectors probably still have extensivescope for cost reduction despite continuedconsolidation. The network structure of thesetwo sectors allows institutions to strike a bal-ance between a clear division of labour andmanagerial independence. To achieve this,however, the network advantages have to beexploited systematically and further econ-omies of scale have to be attained throughamalgamation. Together, the reduction ingeneral administrative spending and an in-crease in commission income can create abuffer which serves to compensate for fluctu-ations in the net result from the valuation ofassets.In 2003, the developments in the capital mar-
ket resulted in a positive net result from thevaluation of assets in the securities portfolio
39
which ultimately led to a decline in the overalllevel of risk provisions. By contrast, theAs a percentage of the average balance sheet total
Credit cooperatives
Operating incomeGeneral administrative spending plus net
income or net charges from the valuation of assets
of which
General
administrative spending
Net charges from the
valuation of assetsSavings banks
Operating incomeGeneral administrative spending plus net
income or net charges from the valuation of assets
of which
General
administrative spending
Net charges from the
valuation of assetsItems in the profit and
loss account
Deutsche Bundesbank4.5
4.0
3.53.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
004.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.01.5
1.0
0.5
00
1996 97 98 99 00 01 2003 02
39Provisional projection based on 90% of all savings
banks and 95% of all credit cooperatives: profit contribu-
tion from securities portfolio – savings banks +0.07%
and credit cooperatives +0.04% of the average balance
sheet total. Profit contribution from loan portfolio: sav-
ings banks – 0.53% and credit cooperatives – 0.47% of
the average balance sheet total.Rising commis-
sion income
Fall in general
administrative
spending
Positive net
result from the
valuation of
assets in the
securities
portfolio

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
48second component of the net result from the
valuation of assets, namely loan loss provi-sioning, increased compared to last yearowing to cyclical developments.
Institutions’ risk positions in both banking
groups are concentrated largely on loans to do-mestic enterprises and self-employed personsand on loans to domestic households.
As regards commercial loans, a large portion
of these are granted for the construction oracquisition of real estate. In the current mar-ket environment, outstanding real estateloans, particularly loans for office buildings,may necessitate write-downs, especially if thebulk of an institution’s business – given by theregional principle – is in areas with a poorlyperforming real estate market.
The analysis of the data on large exposures
40
shows that the quality of the portfolios41of
credit cooperatives has deteriorated slightlycompared with last year’s Stability Report
while that of the savings banks has improvedslightly. Thus, in particular, the percentage ofsavings banks which have neither large ex-posures with latent risks nor specific provi-sions for large exposures in their portfolio hasincreased.Institu-
tions
in %
Institu-
tions
in %Institu-
tions
in %
Institu-
tions
in %
84
8076
72Individually adjusted
large exposures
#
Large exposures as a percentage of liable capital0 <0.5 <1 <1.5 <2 <4 <8 <12 <20 <40 <80 <100 ≥ 100Credit cooperatives
Large exposureswith latent risks72
68
6460Individually adjusted
large exposures80
7672Savings banks
Large exposures
with latent risks
End-June 2003
End-June 200464
60
56Ratio of large exposures
to liable capital
#Example: as at end-June 2004 just under
4 % of the credit cooperatives had individu-
ally adjusted large exposures amounting to
between 2% and 4% of their liable capital.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
8
4
012
84012
84012
840
40Pursuant to sections 13, 13a and13b of the Banking
Act, large exposures are loans which exceed 10% of a
bank’s tier 1 and tier 2 capital. Such loans are divided into
three risk classes: Class 1 – has no recognisable risks.
Class 2 – has latent risks. Class 3 – specific provisions
have already been made.
41While large exposures, with respective shares of 26%
of the average volume of business at the savings banks
and 33% at the credit cooperatives, do not give a full pic-
ture of the commercial portfolios of the two categories
of banks, they do allow an approximation.Manageable
risks in the
commercial...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
49Private real estate loans represent the most
important credit class in terms of volume inboth banking groups. There are indeed signsthat the risks in this portfolio are likely to in-crease slightly. But, with respect to financialstability, the still high creditworthiness ofthese borrowers and the mostly stable valueof the collateral indicate that the large shareof privately financed real estate in the savingsbanks’ and credit cooperatives’ portfolio doesnot represent any particular risks.
However, it cannot be excluded that individ-
ual institutions in both banking groups mayface an increased need for value adjustmentsin future, mainly in respect of their commer-cial loan portfolio.
On a positive note, the cushion against losses
at the savings banks and credit cooperativeshas been enlarged as a result of the improvedearnings situation in 2003. In the first eightmonths of this year, savings banks’ and creditcooperatives’ tier 1 and tier 2 capital rose by5.2% and 6.0% respectively. The capital ratioand core capital ratio are both considerablyabove the minimum regulatory requirementof 8% and 4% respectively.
The overall positive assessment of savings
banks’ and credit cooperatives’ stability is sup-ported by the results of a hazard rate modelused by the Deutsche Bundesbank to assessthe creditworthiness of individual banks (seebox on page 50). Various ratios on the earn-ing situation, solvency and risk are condensedinto one probability of default figure. Thecreditworthiness assessment for 2004 and2005 based on this model has improved for
both categories of banks.
A key component of the stability situation of
these two categories of banks that are organ-ised in networks are their institutional mutualinsurance schemes. The wave of insolvenciesin the corporate sector in the wake of theeconomic stagnation of the past years hascaused the rate of contributions to the mu-tual insurance scheme of the credit coopera-tives to be raised to 2 per mill of the respect-ive asset base. The savings banks pay only0.3 per mill of a similarly defined base; how-ever, the solvency of the individual institutionsis currently insured not only by the generalfund but also by guarantees from state gov-ernment. As these state support mechanismswill be abolished in future, these public-sectorSelected balance sheet items of savings
banks and credit cooperatives
As at 30 June 2004, 5billion
Loans toSavings
banksCredit co-
operatives
Domestic enterprises and
households 574.7 338.9
of which
Domestic enterprises andself-employed 279.6 154.4
Domestic employed
persons and other persons 291.2 181.4
Construction loans
(commercial and private) 352.4 216.9
of which
to households forresidential construction 217.9 133.3
to commercial borrow-
ers for residentialconstruction
1 74.2 38.6
loans for commercial
construction, secured bymortgages
1 60.3 45.0
1Loans for commercial construction which are not se-
cured by mortgages are not included in the statistics.
Deutsche Bundesbank...and retail
portfolio
Increase in
equity capital
and core capital
Results of a
hazard rate
modelInstitutional
protection

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
50Deutsche BundesbankHazard rate models
Hazard rate models (lifespan models) are used to 
determine the probability of default over time. Compared with other methods used to estimate default probability, they are distinguished by the fact that data collected both over time and in a cross-section analysis are processed simultaneously (panel data). The Bundesbank has developed a hazard rate model to estimate the probability of default of savings banks and credit cooperatives. 
The hazard rate model supports macroprudential 
supervision when assessing risks in the banking sec-
tor. The model is calibrated to a forecast horizon of one year and so estimates the probability of default over 12 months. Institutions are considered to have defaulted if their existence is endangered 
within the coming year without support from their 
afﬁ liated network. The likelihood of this happen-
ing is determined by institution-speciﬁ  c, regional 
and macroeconomic ratios. The institution-speciﬁ  c 
ratios relate to the capital base, proﬁ  tability, credit 
risk and market risk of the respective savings bank 
or credit cooperative. In addition, regional and macro economic factors determine the development 
of the average probability of default over time. 
A panel of historical data on all savings banks and 
credit cooperatives since 1993 was available for the selection of the ratios and the determination of the weights (full survey). The default dataset comprised inter alia  restructuring mergers and capital support 
measures of the afﬁ  liated network. The hazard rate 
model was estimated with a Logit link function, taking due account of the data panel structure. This produced a good ﬁ  t of the estimated prob-
abilities of default to the historical default rates 
and a high discrimination between defaults and 
non-defaults (Gini coefﬁ  cient: 0.62). The estima-
tion shows that the capital base is by far the most important feature for discrimination. This was fol-lowed by proﬁ  tability, credit risk and market risk, 
which were of roughly equal importance. Regional 
and macroeconomic factors also make a signiﬁ  cant contribution to explaining default rates over time. 
It is not possible to extend the model to the whole banking industry owing inter alia to the greater heterogeneity and the smaller number of institu-tions in the other categories of banks.
The chart below illustrates the distribution of the 
institutions into various risk categories for a period of ten years. The relative population frequencies in the individual categories ﬂ  uctuate substantially 
over time. Thus in 2001 the share of institutions in 
the high-risk categories was well above the aver-
age. Since then, there has been a relative increase in the share of the low-risk categories. The share of credit cooperatives in the low-risk categories is actually higher at the current margin than in the 
other years of the observation period.
1 Based on the data from year t (eg 2003), the hazard rate 
model assigns a default probability to each institution for year t+2 (eg 2005).Institutions in %
1996 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 2005Credit cooperatives
PD < 0.3%0.3% < PD < 1%1% < PD < 2.5%2.5% < PD < 6.3%6.3% < PDSavings banks
PD < 0.3%0.3% < PD < 1%1% < PD < 2.5%2.5% < PD < 6.3%6.3% < PDDistribution of the
probability of default (PD) 1
100
8060
40
20
0100
8060
40
20
0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
51institutions may also face higher average
charges in future. In the light of these devel-opments, the institutional reforms of bothmutual insurance schemes recently carriedout are a welcome move. For example, initialexperience shows that simply the awarenessthat contributions will be geared in future tothe institution’s rating, along with the internalcredit risk assessments within each institu-tional network, has heightened the price riskawareness of the member banks, thus pro-moting the long-term soundness of the mu-tual insurance schemes. Overall, the institu-tional mutual insurance schemes of bothbanking networks make an appreciable con-tribution to the stability of the financial sys-tem as they strengthen creditor confidence.Privately organised and financed schemes likethese do not conflict with a liberal economicsystem.
Regional and other commercial banksAgainst the general trend, several institutions
of this rather heterogeneous group of banksmanaged to expand even in the past fewyears of economic stagnation. For example,particularly banks which specialise in retailbusiness were able to increase their lendingto domestic households at an above-averagerate in 2003; this trend continued in the firsthalf of 2004 at a similar pace. It is true thatthe increasing number of private insolvenciesis placing a strain on the profitability of retailinstitutions: contrary to the general trend,these institutions faced a sharp rise in write-downs and value adjustments on claims aswell as transfers to provisions in their lendingbusiness. Even so, the situation of these spe-cialised institutions is quite comfortable. First,
the business model they pursue is economic-ally attractive on account of the high marginsinvolved. Second, the portfolios of thesebanks are very granular and the individualrisks have a low correlation, so no concentra-tion of exposures or domino effects occur. Atthe same time, the large amount of customerdata which they accumulate provides a goodstatistical basis for developing credit riskassessment procedures.
Retail business was not the only area in the
recent past that was blessed by commercialsuccess. Last year, for example, institutionswhich specialise in managing the assets ofprivate clients were able to increase their netprofit for the financial year before tax consid-erably. The aforementioned examples showthat a clear profile and a simple businessmodel which is readily understandable forcustomers and employees alike can be suc-cessful in a difficult market environment. Thefact that individual institutions within thisbanking group have meanwhile made an exitfrom the market is a – welcome – sign of thenormal selection process in a market econ-omy and does not conflict with the goodresults attained by many commercial banks.
The situation at private mortgage banks
42
Particularly the pure mortgage banks have
been finding it hard to generate sufficient in-
42The private mortgage banks analysed here (excluding
Bayerische HypoVereinsbank) belong, in line with the
Bundesbank’ s classification of institutions, to the group
of real estate credit institutions. In June 2004, the private
mortgage banks held over 96% of the average balance
sheet total of all real estate credit institutions.Earnings
potential of
specialised
retail banksSuccess
through
specialisation
Limited
business
opportunities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
52come for several years now. Despite several
additions over time, the scope of business ofthese banks still mainly comprises the finan-cing of real estate and property and providingcredit to the public sector. While the FourthFinancial Market Promotion Act extended thebusiness scope of these institutions by allow-ing them to engage in ancillary commissionbusiness and extended their regional radiusof action considerably, the majority of suchinstitutions have not yet been able to earn asizeable surplus from commission business. In2003 interest income accounted for 98% ofall income at mortgage banks and interest ex-penditure accounted for 91% of all expenses.
However, the net interest income of these
banks has been on the decline for some yearsnow as margins in both private and in publicsector mortgage lending business have
eroded substantially in the past few years.Furthermore, the business volume of privatemortgage banks in Germany has declined intandem with shrinking market shares. As aresult, the volume of outstanding housingloans of these institutions to domestic enter-prises and households fell by 2.8% in 2002,by 1.7% in 2003 and by 1.4% in the first halfof 2004. In the early 1990s, their share of allhousing loans to domestic enterprises andhouseholds had stood at 18%; by the end of2003 this figure had fallen to 13%. The mar-gins in their “second-pillar” of business, pub-lic sector financing, are tight owing to thenature of the business. Despite rising govern-ment debt, the scope for boosting income byexpanding the business volume is limited bythe fact that government is nowadays resort-ing increasingly to bonded debt to the detri-ment of traditional bank borrowing. The en-deavours by some mortgage banks to gainpremature access to future interest incomestreams through derivative transactions canprovide only temporary relief.
The drop in mortgage banks’ income is com-
pounded by increased risks and large valueadjustments. The price adjustments for realestate after the German reunification boomalong with rising vacancy rates, particularly inthe east German real estate market, led to ris-ing risk provisions. Consequently, the operat-ing result after risk provisioning is much lowerthan it was in the late 1990s.
Against the backdrop of households’ increas-
ing debt servicing problems and the con-tinued poor market outlook, particularly for
Credit cooperatives
Savings banks
Yield differential of Federal securities
with seven-year and three-month maturities 2Net interest income 1
%-pointsLinear
regression1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
200120022003
2003Correlation between the
yield differential of
Federal securities and
net interest income
1 Up to end-1998, as a percentage of the
average business volume; from 1999, as a
percentage of the average balance sheet
total. — 2Source: Bloomberg.
Deutsche Bundesbank2.9
2.8
2.7
2.6
2.5
2.4
2.3      
  
  
  
  
      
2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0
Declining net
interest
income ...... and high
risks
Far-reaching
restructuring
measures

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
53commercial real estate, the far-reaching re-
structuring programmes implemented bymany mortgage banks must therefore beseen as a very positive development. Thefocus of such measures has been adjustingthe portfolio for “old debt”, developing newsources of income, including commissionbusiness and/or business in foreign markets,and further refining their risk managementsystem. The latter is of particular importancegiven the rise in foreign exposure. While itmay be possible to achieve higher marginsoutside Germany, the risks are considerableowing to volatile and/or high-priced markets.
The Federal government is planning to re-
place the existing Mortgage Bank Act and theAct relating to public-sector Pfandbriefe by ageneral Pfandbrief Act (see box on page 54).This would spell the end of the specialist bankprinciple, which has existed for more than100 years. The advantage of this legislativechange for the pure mortgage banks wouldbe that their business scope and hence in-come opportunities would be extended. Thethreat of greater competition for the existingmortgage banks in the Pfandbrief market islimited as nearly all categories of banks are al-ready present in the mortgage market andnew competitors would presumably considermarket entry unattractive on account of thelow margins. Moreover, the acceptance of is-suers in the Pfandbrief market can only be se-cured through high volumes and a goodcredit standing. This limits the range of po-tential issuers. Even if individual mergers andexits from the market cannot be excluded,the currently available information points to-wards an orderly transition to a new legal en-
Share of cover fund in eastern Germany%Credit risk provisions in %3Cover fund and write-downs2
1Mortgage rates (up to 2002, ten-year fixed
rate mortgage on residential properties,
effective rate; from 2003, housing loans to
households, interest rate fixation over ten
years; effective rate) less yield on mortgage
Pfandbriefe outstanding with an average
residual maturity of over nine to ten
years. — 2Values of 14 selected mortgage
banks. — 3Amount plus expenses for rescue
acquisition of real estate.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.0+
0.8+
0.6+
0.4+
0.2+
0      
      
  
        
    
  
80 60 40 20 0Interest rate differential 1
in basis points
1996 97 98 99 00 01 02 2003Correlation between net interest
income and interest rate differential
Net interest incomeas % of the average balance sheet total
Operating income and costs
Operating incomeAnalysis of profit and loss
account of selectedprivate mortgage banks
100+
90+
80+
70+0.7
0.60.50.4
0.30.7
0.60.5
0.4
0.3
0.20.10
General administrative expenses
plus net income or net chargesfrom the valuation of assets
Likely changes
in legislative
setting

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
54vironment. From a banking supervision stand-
point it is important that mortgage banks donot incur new and unmanageable risks as aresult of their extended business scope andwithout sufficient expertise.
Insurance companiesAside from credit institutions, insurance com-
panies are also of key importance for the sta-bility of the German financial system. Life in-surers in particular are closely linked to thebanking sector; they are often affiliated tonon-life insurers within a corporate group.
43
Reinsurance companies have a network pos-ition in the industry owing to their role as in-surers of direct insurers’ insurance business.
44
The earnings situation and solvency of theGerman insurance industry stabilised in 2003.There was an improvement in the respectivereturn on equity in the life and non-life sec-tors, thanks to the parallel enhancement ofthe results from insurance business and fromcapital investments, from 6.3% and 7.9% in2002 to 9.3% and 15.8% in 2003. Life in-surers have, however, not yet regained theirlevel of 1999 (12.1%)
45as the extraordinary
burdens of the past three years (capital mar-ket developments, overly generous bonusesetc) are still having an effect.The planned Pfandbrief Act
The Federal Government has presented a draft
Act to reform German Pfandbrief legislation. The
Pfandbrief Act ( Pfandbriefgesetz ) is intended to
replace the Mortgage Bank Act ( Hypotheken-
bankgesetz ) and the Act on Pfandbriefe and
Similar Instruments Issued by Public-Law Credit
Institutions ( Gesetz /C252ber die Pfandbriefe und
verwandten Schuldverschreibungen /C246ffentlich-
rechtlicher Kreditinstitute ). The aim of the new
Act is to allow all credit institutions which fulfil
the stringent quality standards for Pfandbrief
issuance set out in the legislation to engage in
Pfandbrief business. At the same time, the spe-
cialist bank principle applicable to private mort-
gage banks, ie the restriction of permissible busi-
ness to low-risk mortgage loans and municipal
loans and refinancing via collateralised debt
securities, will be abolished.
The restrictions of the Mortgage Bank Act, which
allow private mortgage banks little scope to di-
versify their range of services, have proven to be
increasingly counterproductive in recent years as
they limit the institutions’ means of generating
income. In addition, the parallel coexistence of
private mortgage banks governed by the Mort-
gage Bank Act and public-sector issuers of Pfand-
briefe governed by the Act on Pfandbriefe and
Similar Instruments Issued by Public-Law Credit
Institutions (essentially Landesbanks, but also
some savings banks) needs to be improved in the
interests of fair competition. This is especially im-
portant given the fact that the two Acts lay
down different requirements for issuing Pfand-
briefe. Moreover, the elimination of the guaran-
tors’ responsibility for ensuring the solvency of a
public-law institution ( Anstaltslast ) and guaran-
tors’ uncalled liability ( Gew/C228hrtr/C228gerhaftung )
will result in a fundamental change in the under-
lying conditions for Landesbanks and savings
banks.
Under the new Act, the requirements for Pfand-
brief issuance will be based on high standards,
particularly with regard to the choice of property
used as collateral, establishment of the loan
value, compliance with the lending limits, risk
management, increased demands on the trustee,
insolvency remoteness and more intensive super-
vision. The Pfandbrief Act is intended to further
improve the already high quality of the Pfand-
brief and strengthen investor confidence in this
form of investment. It is to enter into force be-
fore the elimination of the guarantors’ responsi-
bility for ensuring the solvency of a public-law
institution and guarantors’ uncalled liability.
Deutsche Bundesbank43Of the 50 largest life insurers, 46 are part of a com-
posite corporate group.
44In 2003, the 50 largest German non-life insurers trans-
ferred 25.9% of their primary insurance business to
reinsurance companies. Life insurers transferred 7.8%.
45This percentage and the following figures relate to the
50 largest German life insurers (market share: approxi-
mately 95% of the gross premiums written in 2003) and
the 50 largest German non-life insurers (market share:
92.6% of the gross premiums written in 2003).Stabilisation
of earnings
and solvency
situation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
55The easing of the situation on the capital
markets led to a distinct improvement in thenet investment income of all insurance com-panies in 2003 (+13.8% in the life sector and+7.4% in the non-life sector). Another posi-tive development is that – according to esti-mated figures from the German Insurance As-sociation ( Gesamtverband der deutschen Ver-
sicherungswirtschaft ) – the hidden losses in
life insurers’ equity portfolio fixed assets fellfrom 316 billion in 2002 to around 35 billion
at the end of 2003 owing to sales and write-downs and now amount to less than 1% oftotal investments. However, as this decline isattributable partly to sales of equities, the lifeinsurance industry will be able to participatein possible future capital gains to only a limit-ed extent, despite the share price-relatedincrease in the ratio of equities (held bothdirectly and via funds) to total investmentsfrom 7% in 2002 to 8% in 2003.
Compared with five years ago, life insurers
are investing more and more in bond-basedfunds, followed by borrowers’ notes andloans; the share of fixed-income investmentsis now around 80%. The life insurance indus-try can thus match the interest sensitivity(duration) of long-term actuarial reserves tiedto the statutory minimum rate of return onthe liability side of their balance sheet moreclosely to that of the – on average – shorter-term investments on the asset side. Further-more, switching to fixed-income investmentsreduces the volatility of the assets. Therefore,only a small number of insurers have investedsignificantly in alternative instruments such ascorporate bonds, hedge funds, private equityand structured products, although invest-ments in credit-linked notes and asset-backed
securities increased slightly in the last twelvemonths.
Life insurers’ considerably stronger perform-
ance – measured in terms of the increase inthe profit for the year (2002: 3494 million,
2003: 3754 million) – is also a consequence
of the improvement in the insurance tech-nical result. The volume of gross premiumswritten by the 50 largest companies grew by4.1% to 363.2 billion. The buoyant new busi-
ness indicates that, partly owing to the lackof alternative private pension products, thereis still a high degree of public confidence inthe life insurance policy product. However,compared with previous years, it is noticeablethat the difference in individual companies’profits from new business is becoming more
As at end of 2003
Reinsurers
(11%)
Life
insurers
(28%)Non-life
insurers
(61%)Number of companies
Reinsurers
(27%)
Life insurers
(41%)Non-life
insurers
(32%)Gross premiums written
(estimated figures)Structure of the German
insurance sector
Source: Federal Financial Supervisory Au-
thority (BaFin).
Deutsche BundesbankNet investment
income today...
...and in the
future
Greater
competition
among life
insurers in
writing new
business ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
56pronounced. This heterogeneous trend across
the industry suggests a heightening of the al-ready intense competition which, owing tothe changing circumstances – eg partial aboli-tion of the tax privilege for the flagship prod-uct, ie the endowment life insurance policy,and the growing importance of private old-age provisions – will become even stronger.
The life insurance industry has reacted to this
development by redesigning and restructur-ing its products. It has done so firstly inresponse to shifts in demand. For example, inrecent years, life insurers have set up or pro-vided access to pension schemes and – lesssignificantly – pension funds which, whilstnoticeably enhancing premium incomegrowth in 2003, constitute relatively low-margin business in comparison with individ-ual policies. Secondly, insurers are favouring
products with which they can reduce theirown risk. These include unit-linked life insur-ance policies which, without a statutory min-imum rate of interest, shift the capital marketrisk onto the customers, who are showingonly a lukewarm interest in this kind of insur-ance (average share of regular premium vol-ume: 8.9%). These changes – although re-quired for operational reasons – lead to a risein the volatility of the industry’s earnings,which in itself may, in principle, increase therisk of difficulties in the industry.
The intense competition within the industry
has, in the past few years, also been reflectedin the high expectations of policyholders withregard to bonuses over and above the statu-tory minimum rate of return. These expect-ations could be met only by continuously run-ning down income reserves. In the meantime,however, the low financial base is forcing theindustry to reduce these amounts. In 2003, itwas again possible to fully fund the overallinterest on policyholders’ credit balancesfrom the improved net investment income,which meant that the income buffers in thereserve for premium refunds as well as thevaluation reserves from investments expand-ed once again. However, if these permanentlysustainable dividends are to be continued,sufficient investment earnings will have to beattained at all times, including in periods oflow interest rates.
In non-life insurance, a combination of the
falling volume of claims incurred and the ris-ing volume of premiums written meant that,in 2003, this sector had a combined ratio of
Investments of German life
insurance companies
Source: Federal Financial Supervisory Au-
thority (BaFin).
Deutsche BundesbankTotal volume
(book value as at 31 March 2004)
€614 billion
Participating interests
and shares in affiliated
undertakings
(4%)
Stocks
(1%)
Bonds
(7%)
Mutual fund
shares
(23%)Other
investments
(5%)
Registered debt securities
and various loans
(60%)...with lower
bonuses
Good results
achieved by
non-life insurers

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
57under 100% for the first time since 1998.
Having recorded a profit of 32.7 billion ( 32.4
billion in 2002), non-life insurance proved tobe the most stable sector; this made it easierfor composite groups to provide their life in-surance segments with capital support. Non-life insurers may also produce stable results in2004: firstly, the prevalent hard market
46
– characterised by high premiums and morerestrictive policies – is only slowly drawing toan end; secondly, the number of major losses,man-made disasters and natural catastrophescovered by German non-life insurers has beenrelatively small up to now.
While (largely one-off) strains in the reinsur-
ance industry – owing to ties with banks andprimary insurers – depressed the result in2003, generally favourable conditions in op-erational business also led to a reduction inreinsurers’ combined ratio to well below100% – measured in terms of the two global-ly active German market leaders. They maybe unable to match this good ratio in 2004owing to the recent spate of major hurri-canes.
The sustainability of the fundamentally posi-
tive earnings trend depends not only on theoccurrence of losses and loss payments, butalso on how reinsurers respond to the emer-ging phase of cyclically-induced lower pre-miums. German reinsurers appear initially tobe maintaining their cautious premium policy,
%
Statutory minimum rate of return
(new business)Bonus interest rate3Remuneration policy
Transfer to the reserve
for premium refunds
Net investment
income as % of
investmentsHidden
reserves2Net investmentincome
Adjusted income
 1
Operating
costsAs % of gross premiums written
Earnings situation
Claims
incurred and
change in
insurance reservesData on the 50 largest
German life insurancecompanies
Sources: Federal Financial Supervisory Au-
thority (BaFin), Moody’s, Assekurata. —
1Profit for the year plus transfer to the
reserve for premium refunds. — 2Ratio of
the difference between the market value
and book value of all investments and the
book value of the investments. — 3Interest
rate on policyholders’ credit balances for
the following year.
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
025
2015
10
5065
60
55
50454035
30
25201510
5160
145155
140150
135145
130
125
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
46The operational results in non-life business follow a
cyclical pattern caused, amongst other things, by (un)-
favourable loss experiences, the return on investments
and insurers’ endeavours to gain larger market shares.
The cycles are divided into phases with low premium
rates (soft markets) and ones with high premium rates
(hard markets).Improvement
in situation for
reinsurers

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
58which can be explained by the losses suffered
in recent years, the capital market yields– which will probably remain at a low level inthe future – and the desire to regain the highratings essential for price negotiations. How-ever, the German reinsurance industry is con-fronted by the problem that new rival com-panies which have recently been set up off-shore are unencumbered by the capital mar-ket and loss developments of the past fewyears and therefore have a wider action ra-
dius in their pricing policy.
The stress tests for life and health insurance
companies, which have been conducted bythe Federal Financial Supervisory Authority(BaFin) since 2003, serve as an early warningsystem in investment management. Stresssituations on the capital markets defined bythe supervisory authority
47are used to exam-
ine whether the market value of a company’sinvestments will still adequately cover thecompany’s reserves and own funds under cer-tain extreme circumstances. At the referencedate of 31 December 2003, a total of twelvelife insurers and two health insurers had failedin at least one of the three test scenarios.Owing to the specific assumptions of the test,however, a “fail” does not necessarily meanthat the insurer concerned would be immedi-ately insolvent if the relevant scenario were tooccur. For example, the test is based on thepremise that all of an insurance company’sobligations fall due immediately and simul-taneously. In actual fact, however, life in-surers’ obligations are spread across 20 ormore years. It is, therefore, not possible to de-duce any direct risks to financial stability fromthe outcome of the test; it may, however, in-dicate that the industry has not yet fully re-gained its financial strength.
48€ billion
Gross premiums writtenProfit for the year
as % of premiumsNet investment income
as % of investmentsCombined ratio 1Earnings situation of the 50
largest German non-life
insurance companies
Source: Moody’s. — 1Ratio of claims in-
curred in the financial year and operating
expenses to gross premiums earned, includ-
ing incidental payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank50
45
40357
6
543105
100
959085
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
47Scenario A measures the effect of a 35% fall in equity
prices. In scenario R, a 10% decline in the value of bonds
is imputed. In scenario AR, the effects of simultaneous
decreases in equity prices (-25%) and bonds (-5%) are
examined.
48A comparison with the previous year’s figures would
not make sense as BaFin has refined and greatly changed
the scenarios and assumptions on which the tests are
based.Stabilisation of
financial
strength: stress
test results...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
59This impression is mirrored in the solvency
ratios of the life insurance companies. Al-though solvency improved – like in the otherfields of insurance – thanks to a better earn-ings situation and increases in own funds (thesolvency margin
49– estimated on the basis of
companies’ annual reports – widened froman average of 159% in 2002 to 167% in2003), the previous level has still not yet beenregained. It is worth noting that the solvencyof medium-sized companies does not fallshort of that of major players, rather somesmaller life insurers are reporting above-average figures – not least owing to theirfairly conservative capital investment policy ofrecent years.
The information value of the solvency ratios is
qualified by the fact that neither investmentrisks nor full market values are taken into ac-count in their calculation. Nor do they capturethe rapidly changing underlying conditions,which will force German – but also otherEuropean – life insurers to significantly in-crease their regulatory and economic capitalin future. The phased introduction from 2005of fair value accounting in accordance withInternational Financial Reporting Standards(IFRS) will, in connection with Solvency II – themore risk-appropriate EU solvency regime forinsurance companies –, align regulatory cap-ital more closely with economic capital. Thelatter especially is likely to rise as a result ofdemographic developments. For example,owing to the higher life expectancy of thepopulation, the mortality tables drawn up in1994 have been revised for the coming year.Furthermore, once the baby-boom gener-ation reaches retirement age, the number oftraditional new business customers will tend
to fall. In order to ensure that this changedsetting poses no risks to financial stability, at-tention should be paid to the further develop-ment of asset and liability management andto the competitive behaviour of insurers. Itwill be crucial for insurers to convert thepopulation’s growing interest in non-statepension provisions into a large number of lu-crative new contracts. To achieve long-termsuccess in this field, insurers will need, firstly,to strengthen their financial base as a com-petitive parameter for customers and insur-ance agents alike and, secondly, to pay abonus that matches the returns offered else-where within the industry, but also by banks
As % of gross premiums
Net resultNet investment income
1Combined ratioEarnings situation of German
reinsurance companies
Sources: Federal Financial Supervisory Au-
thority (BaFin), companies’ own data. —
12003 figures only for the two market
leaders.
Deutsche Bundesbank20
10
0120
110100
90
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
49The solvency margin expresses the ratio of an insur-
ance company’s own funds to certain insurance technical
reserves, insured sums and premiums....and solvency
ratios
Future chal-
lenges

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
60and mutual funds with their very different
calculation basis.
The insurance companies are attempting to
tackle this dilemma by means of capital in-creases, ambitious cost-cutting programmesand general risk mitigation, whether by redu-cing their equity exposure as describedabove, adopting more judicious competitivebehaviour or marketing unit-linked insuranceproducts. These measures must be resolutely
continued, especially as earnings in the com-ing years are likely to be less strongly bol-stered by investment income. Lastly, toachieve returns to scale, the much discussedbut hitherto barely initiated possibility of con-solidation within the industry is a conceivableoption. Despite financial weaknesses and ser-ious efforts on the part of public sector in-surers to cooperate more closely, the stronglyfragmented life and non-life insurancemarkets have made little progress towardsconcentration in the past five years.
The market indicators for the insurance in-
dustry on the whole suggest that the situ-ation has stabilised. Credit default swap pre-miums, as a measure of the default risk in themarkets’ perceptions, indicate no particularrisks for the two largest German insurers byinternational comparison. Equity prices bot-tomed out in late spring 2003 and have nowstabilised at a low level. Nevertheless, life in-surers and reinsurers have so far hardly sharedin the upswing in the DAX Index. The mar-kets’ scepticism about future earnings pro-spects which this expresses is also reflected inthe negative outlook of the rating agenciesfor the German – and the British – life insur-ance sector and reinsurance industry. How-ever, the rating outlook for reinsurers was up-graded to “stable” in September, an improve-ment which is suggestive of stabilisation inthis sector. Moreover, a European comparisonof ratings shows that German insurers havenot experienced an above-average number ofrating downgrades in the past five quarters.Solvency of the 50 largest
German life insurance
companies
Source: Moody’s. — 1 The solvency margin
expresses the ratio of an insurance com-
pany’s own funds to certain insurance tech-
nical reserves, insured sums and pre-
miums. — 2 Including valuation reserves as
a percentage.
Deutsche BundesbankSolvency
margin 2
Balance sheet total in € billion110 120Connection between the size of
an insurer and its solvency
500
400300200100
0  
    
            
      
      
    
        
      
    
    
    
                
  
          
      
    
  
40 30 20 10 0%
Solvency margins 1...
... including valuation reserves... excluding valuation reserves700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Insurers’
responseMarket indica-
tors confirm
stabilisation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
61Legal framework and financial
infrastructure
IAS accountingThe disclosure of corporate information is
currently a particularly topical issue for finan-cial intermediaries in two respects. Firstly, Pil-lar 3 (market discipline) of the recently adopt-ed new Basel Framework (Basel II) will raisetransparency requirements for banks in thefuture. Secondly, pursuant to the relevant EUregulation,
50all publicly traded companies
will have to draw up and publish their con-solidated financial statements according toInternational Accounting Standards (IAS) –new standards will in future be called Inter-national Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)– as of 2005. A number of German credit in-stitutions are already making use of the op-tion available since 1998 under section 292aof the German Commercial Code ( Handelsge-
setzbuch, HGB) which lets them draw up
consolidated financial statements accordingto internationally recognised accountingstandards rather than the German Commer-cial Code.
Whereas the defining features of traditional
German accounting principles as enshrined inthe Commercial Code are creditor protectionand, by association, the principle of pru-dence, IAS is geared towards informing in-vestors, for whom the balance sheet is pri-marily intended. Consequently, IAS containsDaily data
%Basis
points
Memo item
GermanyEurope
(excluding Germany)Upgrades/downgrades of European
life and non-life insurers
and reinsurers2
(quarterly)Lin scale
Credit default swap premiumsEnd-2002 = 100, log scale
Share price indices
Reinsurers 1Non-life insurers 1
Life insurers 1DAX Performance
Index
Allianz
Munich Re
Swiss Re
AXA
GeneraliMarket indicators for
the insurance sector
1German insurance companies. Sources:
Thomson Financial, Bundesbank calcula-
tions. — 2Balance of upgrades and down-
grades as a percentage of the number of
insurance companies in each group.
Sources: Moody’s, Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank5
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−120
100
80
60
40
20
0180
160
140
120
100
80
60
50
2003 2004
50Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 19 July 2002 on the applica-
tion of international accounting standards (the IAS Regu-
lation); Official Journal of the European Communities,
L 243 of 11 September 2002, p 1.Topicality of
public disclos-
ure issues
IAS concept

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
62more comprehensive recognition rules than
the German Commercial Code. For example,all derivative instruments are to be recordedon the balance sheet for the first time. More-over, under IAS, valuation is largely based onthe concept of fair value, expressed either asactual market values or estimated present val-ues regardless of realisation. Such a transitionto less prudent accounting and valuationrules has aroused misgivings among centralbanks owing to its possible adverse effects onthe stability of the financial markets. Theyfear that the abandonment of tried and test-ed principles such as the historical cost prin-ciple, the realisation principle and the impar-ity principle could contribute to increasing thesystemic risks on the financial markets, in par-ticular, in turnaround phases.
IAS 39 (Financial Instruments: Recognition
and Measurement), which is of major signifi-cance for banks, is still hotly disputed. Thepossibility of measuring any financial instru-ment at full fair value without requiring anyproof of an intention to trade (fair value op-tion) appears to be problematic. For example,in the case of instruments for which appropri-ate market values do not exist, the questionarises as to the reliability of the valuation ap-proach, in particular if values estimated onthe basis of models are used. Initial studieshave shown that banks intend to make use ofthe possibility of fair value measurement tovarying degrees. Less uniformity in measure-ment practices would impair the comparabil-ity of financial statements in future. More-over, if full fair value measurement is adopt-ed, the balance sheet values are likely to bemore volatile. This could result in greater un-certainty on the part of market participants
and a possible move towards shorter-term fi-nancial relationships. From a stability point ofview, the decisive factor will ultimately be thepractical application of more or less extensivefair value accounting for financial instru-ments. If the fair value option is appropriatelylimited and is applied in a risk-sensitive man-ner, a reduction in balance sheet volatility isalso quite possible.
Furthermore, the application of IAS 39 could
provoke artificial volatility owing to the in-accurate accounting of hedging activities(hedge accounting). The IAS rules primarilyadmit micro hedge accounting. Macro hedgeaccounting, however, is to be possible only toa limited extent. The non-recognition of in-ternal contracts is likewise a problem in thisconnection.
51Continental European banks
use these as a key part of their prudentiallyapproved risk management procedures andso they should be duly permitted in externalaccounting. Different internal and externalaccounting approaches inevitably createsources of errors and hence potential hazardsin risk management.
Apart from the discussion about the contents
of IAS 39, it is important to create a level ofcertainty with regard to its legal implementa-tion. Following lengthy negotiations, it wasrecently agreed that IAS 39 will be only par-tially endorsed at a European level. The con-troversial rules concerning the fair value op-
51Credit institutions use internal contracts to bundle to-
gether the risks from their various business areas in a cen-
tral treasury where they can manage them cost-
effectively.Fair value
optionHedge
accounting
Endorsement

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
63tion and macro hedge accounting have been
carved out for the time being. It is imperativeto end this transitional situation as quickly aspossible.
IMF Financial Soundness Indicators
project
The intensified international efforts to
strengthen the stability of financial systems inrecent years are reflected inter alia in the pro-
ject on Financial Soundness Indicators
52(FSIs)
initiated by the International Monetary Fund(IMF). Conceived as part of a comprehensivemacroprudential analytical framework, thesequantitative indicators of financial stability areintended to contribute towards enhancingthe transparency of financial systems andstrengthening market discipline. In addition,the chances of preventing crises are to be im-proved with the aid of a continuous assess-ment of the situation and risks based onthese indicators. Against this backdrop, theIMF’s initiative also serves to use such indica-tors as part of Article IV consultations and Fi-nancial Sector Assessment Programs (FSAPs)to assess the stability of financial systems.
In 2001, following initial preliminary work (in-
cluding a survey among member states), theExecutive Board of the IMF adopted a set ofFSIs deemed relevant, a revised version ofwhich is now available. The set of indicatorscomprises aggregate microprudential data onthe banking system, including capital ad-equacy, profitability, asset quality, liquidityand sensitivity to specific market risks. This re-flects the pivotal role which credit institutionsplay in financial systems and the fact thattheir financial situation and/or shock resist-
ance is of paramount importance for systemicstability. But the FSIs also include structuralmeasures of the state of the enterprise andhousehold sectors as well as indicators re-flecting developments in markets that are ofkey relevance to financial institutions (such asthe capital or real estate markets). In order toallow a certain degree of flexibility, allowingfor the varying availability of individual indica-tors, especially in less developed countries,and in order to set priorities, the list of indica-tors is split into two categories. It consists of acore set, whose 12 indicators are binding onthe countries taking part in the project, andan encouraged set, with 27 indicators to becalculated to the extent possible and avail-able.
In a further stage of the project, the IMF in-
vited a larger group of countries to a trial (Co-ordinated Compilation Exercise) in spring2004 to compile national FSIs. The methodo-logical requirements for this are documentedin an extensive handbook (Compilation Guideon Financial Soundness Indicators
53), the final
version of which was published in the middleof this year. The Bundesbank has, after con-sulting the Federal Ministry of Finance andthe Federal Financial Supervisory Authority,promised the IMF that Germany will take partin this exercise and will act as the national co-ordinator. According to the IMF’s plans, con-crete national figures on the FSIs, whichcould, in the long term, be included in theSpecial Data Dissemination Standard
52Details at www.imf.org/external/np/sta/fsi/eng/fsi.htm
53 Available at www.imf.org/external/np/sta/fsi/eng/
guide/index.htmFSIs as part of
macropruden-
tial analysis
Indicators for
the banking
system and......the relevant
sectors and
markets
Coordinated
Compilation
Exercise

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
64The IMF’s Financial Soundness Indicators
Core Set
Deposit-takers
Capital adequacy Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets
Regulatory Tier I capital to risk-weighted assetsNonperforming loans net of provisions to capital
Asset quality Nonperforming loans to total gross loans
Sectoral distribution of loans to total loans
Earnings and profitability Return on assets
Return on equityInterest margin to gross incomeNoninterest expenses to gross income
Liquidity Liquid assets to total assets (liquid asset ratio)
Liquid assets to short-term liabilities
Sensitivity to market risk Net open position in foreign exchange to capital
Encouraged Set
Deposit-takers Capital to assets
Large exposures to capitalGeographical distribution of loans to total loansGross asset position in financial derivatives to capitalGross liability position in financial derivatives to capitalTrading income to total incomePersonnel expenses to noninterest expensesSpread between reference lending and deposit ratesSpread between highest and lowest interbank rateCustomer deposits to total (non-interbank) loansForeign currency-denominated loans to total loansForeign currency-denominated liabilities to total liabilitiesNet open position in equities to capital
Other financial corporations Assets to total financial system assets
Assets to GDP
Nonfinancial corporate sector Total debt to equity
Return on equityEarnings to interest and principal expensesNet foreign exchange exposure to equityNumber of applications for protection from creditors
Households Household debt to GDP
Household debt service and principal payments to income
Market liquidity Average bid-ask spread in the securities market
1
Average daily turnover ratio in the securities market
Real estate markets Real estate prices
Residential real estate loans to total loansCommercial real estate loans to total loans
1Or in other markets that are most relevant to bank liquid-
ity, such as foreign exchange markets.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
65(SDDS54), will be published by the IMF for the
first time at the end of 2006.
The project promotes the international avail-
ability and comparability of data for assessingnational financial systems, although con-straints need to be taken into account. Dueto differences in the conception of the bank-ing statistics and prudential reporting systemas well as divergent national legal frame-works (such as accounting rules), cross-country comparisons based purely on indica-tors are still not very meaningful. During theFSI project, therefore, particular importancewill need to be attached to the so-calledmetadata that will be published with the fig-ures, which will detail national deviationsfrom the methodological requirements of thehandbook accepted by the IMF. Furthermore,FSIs can only represent one component of amore comprehensive stability analysis. Besidesmonitoring additional macroeconomic data,eg on inflation and exchange rates, this alsocomprises qualitative analyses and stress teststo simulate shocks.
Infrastructure of payment and securities
settlement
Secure and efficient infrastructures for set-
tling payment transactions are an importantrequirement for the stability of the financialsystem. The ongoing development and im-provement of these infrastructures hashelped to reduce the risks to financial stabil-ity.
Being responsible for payment systems over-
sight,
55the Bundesbank carried out an analy-sis of correspondent banking this year on be-
half of the European System of Central Banks(ESCB). To this end, major market participantswere asked about the features of their europayment operations as well as other pay-ments which they clear and settle directlywith other credit institutions bilaterally. Theanalysis applied a broad interpretation whichdeviated from the normal approach since notonly cross-border but also domestic linkswere examined. The objective of the studywas to analyse whether transactions are sub-ject to risks which could impair the smoothfunctioning of the payment system. Risksmay, for example, arise from the fact that bi-laterally exchanged incoming and outgoingpayments are finally settled only at the end ofthe day (netting). This means that if a partici-pating correspondent bank were to becomeinsolvent during a business day, transactionswould be subject to unwinding risks, whichmight result in credit and liquidity risks for therecipient banks involved. However, the datacollected and the in-depth discussions carriedout with the German credit institutions withthe highest turnover in this business showedthat euro payments settled via correspondentbanks currently represent no potential risk forGermany’s financial stability.
The service provider SWIFT (Society for
Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommuni-cation), a cooperative based in Belgium, pro-vides the banking industry with facilities for
54Special Data Dissemination Standard, see http://
dsbb.imf.org
55Section 3, second sentence of the Bundesbank Act:
“It ... shall arrange for the execution of domestic and
cross-border payments and shall contribute to the stabil-
ity of payment and clearing systems.”Significance of
metadataESCB study of
correspondent
banking
SWIFT oversight

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
66the exchange of messages. SWIFT partici-
pants – financial institutions from all contin-ents – use these services, inter alia , for carry-
ing out their payments and securities transac-tions. Furthermore, SWIFT actively definesand promotes global standards for the finan-cial sector (eg message formats suitable forautomated processing). The German bankingindustry is the third largest SWIFT user world-wide. The high availability of the SWIFT net-work makes an important contribution to fi-nancial stability. The RTGS
plussystem oper-
ated by the Bundesbank is likewise based onSWIFT standards and uses the SWIFT commu-nication network. Based on correspondingagreements of the G10 central banks, a co-operative oversight of SWIFT has been carriedout since 1998 with the National Bank of Bel-gium as lead overseer. It is responsible for theongoing oversight activities and is supportedby a working group made up of membersfrom various G10 banks – including the Bun-desbank – in much of the basic work. The ob-jective of the oversight is to focus primarilyon the security and availability of the SWIFTinfrastructure, the resilience of SWIFT in crisissituations as well as the implications of stra-tegic decisions (for example, the ongoing de-velopment of the SWIFT network architec-ture).
The Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS) sys-
tem, which has been operating sinceSeptember 2002 for the global settlement offoreign exchange transactions, is designed tolargely eliminate FX settlement risk. It is sub-ject to cooperative payment system oversightunder the direction of the Federal ReserveBank of New York, in which the Bundesbankis also involved. At present, 11 currencies can
be settled via CLS. Of the 55 current settle-ment members of CLS,
56five are German
credit institutions. The new IT platform imple-mented at the end of May 2004 improvedthe transparency of the settlement processfor participants and speeded up the clearingof transactions. In view of the further increasein the settlement volumes from new partici-pants and the acceptance of additional cur-rencies envisaged by the CLS group, the highavailability of the CLS system is now of evengreater importance.
The stability of the payment and settlement
systems is reinforced by the Bundesbankthrough various preventive measures in andfor the banking industry. For example, inagreement with the German banking feder-ations represented on the Central CreditCommittee (CCC) and major market players,a communication network was set up whichwill be used to exchange key information andto agree subsequent procedures in individualpayment transactions in the event of a crisisor other serious contingency. This communi-cation network was successfully tested forthe first time in the first half of this year aspart of the regular oversight activities.
Owing to its large volume, the monetary
settlement of securities transactions is ofgreat importance for the stability of the Ger-man financial centre. In November 2003,Clearstream Banking AG (Clearstream) suc-cessfully introduced the first stage of the newsettlement model with support from the Bun-
56“Settlement members” are shareholders of the CLS
group and direct participants in the CLS system.Continuous
Linked Settle-
ment (CLS)Crisis
management
New settlement
model from
Clearstream
First stage ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
67desbank. As a result, the risk of an unwinding
of the transactions during overnight process-ing should a participant be unable to meet itsmonetary obligations has been eliminated. Itshould be pointed out, however, that this riskhas never actually materialised. A possible un-winding could have negative implications forthe securities processing cycles and the pay-ment system (domino effect).
As part of the new settlement model, banks
are now required to provide secure centralbank money for overnight processing upfront. In a further extension, it is intended toexpand this procedure to daytime processing,too. This will eliminate the above-mentionedrisk for all processing cycles and means thatthe Clearstream settlement system will befully compliant with the recommendationsmade by the G10 central banks and IOSCO.
57
Since the introduction of the new method-ology, new issues as well as interest paymentsand capital repayments of the Federal Gov-ernment have also been processed overnight.Thanks to the early availability of incomingpayments from the Federal Government’sdebt service, which can, for example, be usedto finance new (follow-up) issues of the Fed-eral Government, this promotes the smoothplacement of Federal Government issues andthus contributes to the stability of the finan-cial markets.
Furthermore, following the introduction of
the new settlement model and in cooperationwith Clearstream and other interested Euro-system central banks, the Bundesbank de-veloped a model which enables foreignparticipants to directly connect to Clear-
stream overnight processing. With a guaran-tee from their home central bank, foreignparticipants are able to use the central bankliquidity available there to collateralise secur-ities transactions in Clearstream overnightprocessing (so-called guarantee model). Thiscross-border use of central bank money out-side of the opening times of the TARGET pay-ment system supports the central liquiditymanagement of pan-European banks andsimultaneously reduces systemic risks sinceforeign participants can settle directly in cen-tral bank money and do not depend on theservices of commercial banks. In a further en-hancement of liquidity management, fromNovember 2004 Clearstream customers cansimultaneously draw on several liquiditysources for securities settlement; this will pro-mote the willingness to provide high liquidityamounts for very early settlement in over-night processing, which is designed to be freeof systemic risk. In spring 2005, a furthersettlement cycle will be introduced in over-night processing. This means that a consider-able part of daytime settlement, which is stillthreatened by the above-mentioned risks, willbe shifted to safe overnight processing. Theassociated improved interlinking with the twointernational central securities depositorieswill speed up cross-system settlement and re-duce the number of non-settled transactions.At the same time this represents an importantcontribution to the European objectives ofenhancing efficiency in cross-border settle-ment, avoiding operational and systemic risksand integrating European capital markets.
57International Organization of Securities Commissions... and next
stage
Overnight
processing of
Bund issues
Guarantee
model for con-
necting foreign
participants

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
68At the European level, the Bundesbank sup-
ports various initiatives aimed at enhancingthe efficiency and security of cross-border se-curities settlement, for example through par-ticipation in a joint committee of the ESCBand the CESR
58or by advising the Federal
Government on initiatives from the EuropeanCommission concerning securities clearingand settlement. At an international level, it isinvolved, inter alia , in a CPSS
59/IOSCO work-
ing group, which is drawing up recommenda-tions for central counterparties (CCPs) thatare to be adopted in the near future. CCPstake on a risk management and hedgingfunction for many financial and commoditiesfutures markets. The recommendations pri-marily concern risk management and shouldcontribute to the stability of the financialmarkets.
Act improving investor protectionStable financial markets require investor con-
fidence in the integrity of market players, afair and orderly functioning of the marketsand the soundness of traded products. Withthe introduction of the 10-point programmefor improving corporate governance and in-vestor protection, which was first presentedin summer 2002 and finalised in February2003, the Federal Government was aiming tocomprehensively modernise and stiffen allstatutory provisions in this area. The Act im-proving investor protection, which wasadopted by the Bundestag on 1 July 2004, isan important component of this programme.This Act – which entered into force in Octo-ber – implemented the EU market abuse dir-ective
60and introduced a disclosure obliga-tion for investment vehicles in the so-called
“grey capital market”.
The Act improving investor protection has no-
ticeably tightened the prohibition on insiderdealing as defined in the Securities TradingAct and significantly increased the ad hoc dis-closure and reporting requirements of so-called directors’ dealings. The currently usedterm “insider fact” has been replaced by the
much broader concept of “insider informa-
tion”, which will also apply in the future to
obligations for ad hoc disclosures. Insider in-formation encompasses concrete informationabout not-yet publicised circumstances orevents which, on being made public, are li-able to considerably influence the price of thecorresponding securities. Circumstances orevents also expressly apply to those for whichit can be assumed with a sufficient likelihoodthat they will occur in the future. An addition-al innovation is that issuers are obliged tomaintain a list of insiders.
The circle of people who, pursuant to sec-
tion 15a of the Securities Trading Act, are re-quired to report “directors’ dealings” inshares will be enlarged in the future. Previousexemptions cease to apply. In addition, thecurrent de minimis exemption for the report-
ing requirement of 325,000 within 30 days
per reporting entity will be reduced to 35,000
per year.
58Committee of European Securities Regulators
59Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems
60Directive 2003/6/EC on insider dealing and market
manipulation.European and
international
initiatives
Act improving
investor protec-
tion as part of
a 10-point
programmeChanges con-
cerning ban
on insider
dealing ...
... directors’
dealings ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
69The prohibition of market and other price
manipulation also defined in the SecuritiesTrading Act has likewise been made moreconcrete and stricter. The rights and powersof the Federal Financial Supervisory Authorityto investigate insider dealing and market ma-nipulation have been extended.
The Act improving investor protection has
also brought about considerable amend-ments to the Securities Prospectus Act, whichis designed to protect private customers frompurchasing dubious capital market productsby enforcing appropriate prospectus require-ments on the seller. This prospectus obliga-tion, which has previously only applied to se-curities, will be extended from 1 July 2005
61
to certain products on the so-called “greycapital market” with a share value of up to3200,000
62as part of the Act improving in-
vestor protection. The new regulation also af-fects corporate equity holdings (such as
shares in private limited companies, shares incooperatives) and closed-end mutual funds(such as real estate funds, ship funds, windenergy funds etc). The Federal FinancialSupervisory Authority (BaFin) is obliged bythis law to check the prospectuses whichhave been submitted within 20 days for for-mal accuracy. Investors’ liability claims on theseller have also been improved; in future theywill include an obligation on issuers to pro-vide compensation not only if prospectusesare erroneous but also if they have failed tosubmit a disclosure at all.
Annex
Indicators of international investors’ risk
aversion
The extent to which fluctuations in the prices of se-
curities are triggered by changes in the risk situ-ation or in risk premiums is often a decisive factorfor the stability of the financial system. The markeddecline in yield premiums on corporate bonds in2003 can be cited as an example. This could beattributable to a decrease in the probability ofdefault or an increase in the expected rate ofredemption as well as to an increase in marketparticipants’ risk propensity. In the former case,the decline in the yield premium is a sign that the
situation in the financial markets is easing inresponse to real economic fundamentals; in thelatter case, it might be an indication of speculativeexaggerations which later lead to painful adjust-ments.
As the degree of risk aversion, which fluctuates
over time, cannot be observed directly in the mar-ket, various indicators are used to try to approxi-mate it. A distinction can be made between simpleindicators and more complex indicators which arederived with the aid of statistical methods.61This long lead time should prevent the need for pro-
spectuses to be issued retrospectively for current sales.
The other provisions of the Act improving investor protec-
tion enter into force on the day of the promulgation of
the Act.
62In this way, considerably more sellers will be affected
by the prospectus obligation than with the originally en-
visaged threshold of only 350,000 – which was con-
sidered by consumer protection experts to be too low.... ban on price
manipulation ...
... and in the
Securities Pro-
spectus Act
Risk and risk
propensity
Indicators of
risk appetite

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
70The information value of simple indicators is gener-
ally based on the subjectively perceived “safety” ofcertain assets. The underlying hypothesis is thatduring periods of uncertainty investors shift re-sources to “safe havens” such as gold. An increasein risk aversion would consequently be reflected inrising gold prices. However, the problem is thatsimple indicators are affected by a number ofother factors that are unrelated to risk aversionand therefore present only unreliable measures ofrisk appetite among market players.
Another simple method is to ask fund managers
about their risk preferences. For instance, a US in-vestment bank conducts a global fund managersurvey each month among more than 200 institu-tional investors and records the degree of risk thatthey factor into their investment strategy. It has tobe noted that the level of perceived risk frequentlyrises over the investment time frame. In addition,the frequency of indicators based on surveys dif-fers is lower than that of indicators derived frommarket prices.
More broadly defined indicators of “risk appetite”
can be gleaned from the bond markets. A widelyused measure is the yield spread between safegovernment bonds and risky corporate bonds witha given rating. However, a change in yield spreaddoes not necessarily mean a change in investors’risk aversion, as the probability of default of therating category in question does not remain con-stant over time.
The equity risk premium also fluctuates in line with
investors’ risk appetites. Investors require this pre-mium as a mark-up on the yield on safe investmentalternatives in return for investing in the equitymarkets because of the associated risks. Using theGordon equity valuation model it can be estimatedas the sum of dividend yield (dividend-price ratio)
and expected dividend growth less the yield on arisk-free bond.
Finally, information implicit in option prices can be
used to gauge risk appetite. In particular, impliedvolatility
63on options and its deviation from histor-
ical data may provide an indication of how muchinvestors are prepared to pay for hedging againstthe risk of adverse market movements. For in-stance, the Chicago Board of Exchange markets itsVIX index as an “investor fear gauge”. Nonethe-less, an expected change in the volatility patterndoes not necessarily mean that there has been aparallel change in risk appetite. High implied vola-tility could reflect actual risks rather than risk pro-pensity.
64Overall, however, the indicator’s high
sensitivity to the daily flow of data seems to renderit eminently suitable to detect turnarounds in atti-tudes to risk.
In addition to these “simple” indicators, a range of
more complex indicators have been developed re-cently. For instance, Kumar and Persaud constructa risk appetite index that is based on a number ofdifferent foreign exchange markets.
65Another ex-
ample of a complex indicator is the State Street In-vestor Confidence Index, which is based on theportfolio shifts of a large number of institutionalinvestors and focuses on the changes in the re-gional composition of the portfolios.
63The variance of future price adjustments assumed by
investors. For further details, see Deutsche Bundesbank,
The information content of derivatives for monetary pol-
icy,Monthly Report, November 1995, pp 17-32.
64Furthermore, experience has shown that during crisis
periods expected future volatility is estimated as being
particularly high, which could distort the assessment of
risk propensity.
65See M Kumar and A Persaud (2001), Pure Contagion
and Investors’ Shifting Risk Appetite: Analytical Issues
and Empirical Evidence, IMF Working Paper 01/134.Simple
indicators ...
... derived from
surveys ...
... and from
bond market
prices, ...
... in the equity
market, ...... and in the
derivatives
market
More complex
indicators

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
71In addition, new methods of interpreting the infor-
mation inherent in option prices have been de-veloped.
66In particular, preference-weighted prob-
ability density functions can be derived from op-tions contracts and compared with the statistical(or risk-neutral) density function.
67Empirical analy-
ses of option prices show the tendency of investorsto attribute a particularly high probability to verynegative events. The extent of the deviation fromthe “statistical” probability thus gives valuable in-dications of the varying degrees of risk aversionover time. The quality of such indicators standsand falls with the statistical model’s ability toexplain future price trends.
A further possibility is to use a principal compon-
ent analysis to form a composite indicator by ag-gregating several separate indicators of risk pro-pensity. Principal component analysis is a statisticalmethod that extracts a common time-variable de-terminant from several correlated variables. Theadvantage of this approach is that – in an idealcase – it can separate the impact of risk appetite,which is apparent in all observed markets or vari-ables, from the numerous other autonomous de-terminants that relate only to the individual marketor the individual variable. It thus comes far closerto capturing “global” risk appetite than other indi-cators. Principal component analysis has so farbeen used, for example, by McGuire and Schrijversin their study of variations that are common tointerest rate spreads in several emerging marketeconomies.
68
Baker and Wurgler also use a principal componentanalysis to create a composite indicator of risk ap-petite.
69In contrast to McGuire and Schrijvers,
they extract the common factor from six categoriesof data that they expect to evolve in tune with in-vestor sentiment: the difference between the bookvalue of closed-end stock fund shares and their
market prices, the share turnover on the New YorkStock Exchange (NYSE), the first-day return onIPOs, the share of equity issues in total securities is-suance and the dividend premium, ie the differ-ence in the market-to-book ratios between stocksthat pay dividends and those that do not. Anotheranalysis, by Sløk and Kennedy, identifies a com-mon factor from time series of yield spreads oncorporate and emerging market bonds and fromequity risk premiums for both the United Statesand Europe.
70
In the following a principal component analysis isused to attempt to extract a time series for riskaversion as the common factor of various financialvariables. The underlying sample was derived fromtime series on the yield spread of investment gradeand high-yield corporate bonds and emergingmarket bonds over Treasuries as well as from esti-mated data on equity premiums in the UnitedStates between 1994 and 2004. A shorter samplestarting from July 1998 also includes correspond-ing data for Europe. Other potential explanatoryvariables for risk appetite, such as the gold priceand the VIX volatility index, were added to thecore dataset but they provide little, if any, addition-al information on the profile of the resultant com-mon component.
66See N Trashev, D Tastsaronis and K Karampatos
(2003), Investors’ attitude towards risk: what can we
learn from options, BIS Quarterly Review, June 2003.
67See Deutsche Bundesbank, Instruments used to ana-
lyse market expectations: risk-neutral density functions,
Monthly Report, October 2001, pp 31-47.
68See P McGuire and M Schrijvers (2003), Common fac-
tors in emerging market spreads, BIS Quarterly Review,
December 2003.
69See M Baker and J Wurgler (2004), Investor Sentiment
and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns, NBER Working
Paper 10449.
70See T Sløk and M Kennedy (2004), Factors driving risk
premia, OECD Economics Department, Working Paper
No 385.Principal
component
analysis of risk
aversionRisk aversion
as a common
factor ...
... in yield
premiums, ...
... equity
premium, the
gold price and
the volatility
index

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
72Monthly data
High risk
aversion
Low risk
aversion
%Percent-age
points
US$
Log scale
Gold
(one troy ounce of fine gold)Memo item
Chicago Board Options Exchange
volatility index based onS&P 500Yield spread of
US high-yield corporate bonds
over ten-year US Treasuries
3
Yield spread ofUS corporate bonds
with a BBB rating
over ten-year US Treasuries
3Risk premium4
on shares in the S&P 500 indexSelected indicators incorporated in the principal component analysis...1994 to 2004
...1998 to 20042Lin scale
First common factor derived from the
principal component analysis (degree of risk aversion) 1
Estimation for...Estimation of risk aversion using principal component analysis
1Monthly averages of the estimations using daily data. Positive (negative) figures indicate excessively high
(low) risk aversion. As additional indicators that are not shown in the chart, the principal component analysis
also took account of yield spreads of Asian and Latin American government bonds over US Treasuries. — 2In
this estimation, the following indicators were taken into account in addition to those in this chart and indi-
cated in footnote 1: yield spreads of seven to ten-year European corporate bonds with a BBB rating over
government bonds, yield spreads on similar bonds with a lower rating over government bonds and risk
premiums on DAX values, measured as a quotient of expected year-on-year earnings and the DAX price indexless the real interest level. — 3Source: Lehman Brothers. — 4Measured as a quotient of expected
year-on-year earnings (Source: I / B / E / S) and the S&P 500 share index less the real interest level in the USA.
Deutsche Bundesbank450
400
350
300
25040
30
20
1010
8
6
4
2
04+
2+
0
2−
4−
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
73Roughly half the overall variance can be traced
back to the first principal component. However, itsability to explain the equity risk premium is relative-ly limited. This is likely to be due primarily to themarked divergence in price developments in theequity and bond markets since early 2002. It there-fore presents merely an approximation of stockmarket participants’ risk aversion and shouldhence be considered only in connection with othervariables.
Anecdotal evidence of general investor sentiment
gleaned from individual events in recent yearsseems to depict the data series of the commonfactor far better than individual indicators such asthe price of gold (see chart on page 72).
In 1994-95 – which coincides with the currency cri-
sis in Mexico – the common factor shows a distinctincrease in risk aversion. A period of relative invest-or confidence from 1996 to 1997 ended in theemerging market crises in 1997 and 1998, withthe Russian crisis and the subsequent collapse ofthe LTCM hedge fund in the summer of 1998probably having the strongest negative impact oninvestor confidence. From 1999 to 2000 it re-
covered slightly at first but then followed a periodwhich was characterised by a general aversion torisk; extreme caution could be observed among in-vestors at times. Three periods of marked risk aver-sion can be clearly identified. The first phase ofhigh risk aversion occurred in October/November2000 and was linked to fears of an equity melt-down, especially in the technology sector. Asecond spike occurred in the month following theSeptember 2001 terrorist attacks. Investor anxietyreached its climax in the second half of 2002 in thewake of corporate scandals in the United States(most notably the Worldcom and Tyco scandals).Risk aversion remained strong in the run-up to theIraq war in early 2003 but the indicator then re-versed sharply as the year progressed, as evidencedby the sharp compression of yield spreads betweenriskier bonds and Treasuries. As for 2004, the indi-cator points to a relatively relaxed attitude to riskon the part of investors, buoyed by the currentpositive expectations for the global economy. Theextremely small yield premiums that are currentlyobservable in the corporate bond market are alsolikely to be related to investors’ high risk appetite.
High
explanatory
power of first
principal
component
Development
of risk aversion

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
74

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
75Stress tests at
German banks –
methods and resultsWith the aid of stress tests, credit insti-
tutions are able to make an in-depthstudy of the potential implications ofcritical developments and take appro-priate countermeasures in advance.Stress tests have therefore become animportant part of banks’ risk manage-ment during the past few years. Thecontinuous performance of stress testsis not just in the interests of the indi-vidual bank; it also makes a valuablecontribution to overall financial stabil-ity. Recent surveys show that the creditinstitutions have continued to developtheir stress test methods and performvery detailed and realistic analyses, es-pecially in the area of market risk. Fur-thermore, a great deal of variety is evi-dent in the design of the stress scen-arios and the stress test methods used.This diversity is an advantage since itreduces the risk of “herd behaviour”on the part of the banks, which wouldjeopardise stability.
The results of a quantitative analysis
performed by the Bundesbank in sum-mer 2004 show no risk to financial sta-bility at present despite the consider-able scale of the assumed shocks. Thisconclusion is suggested by both the in-dividual risk-based sensitivity analysesand the macro stress tests developedon the basis of econometric models.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
76Stress tests as a part of the banks’ risk
management
In the past few years, the banks have consid-
erably expanded and refined their instru-ments for assessing the riskiness of their port-folios. The concept of “value at risk” has nowbecome established as a standard in the areaof market risk. Risk models based on this canbe recognised by the banking supervisors forthe purpose of calculating minimum capitalrequirements. Nevertheless, it is not enoughto judge the risk solely on the basis of a singlemathematical ratio. First of all, the commonlyused value at risk approaches are unsuited toassessing the losses in extreme market situ-ations (fat tails). Second, assessing risk on thebasis of value at risk is bound to historicaldata, which means, fundamentally, that it isnot possible to extend stress scenarios tohypothetical events not observed in the past.A supplementary assessment by risk manage-ment of future risky market developments is,however, essential. With the aid of stresstests, credit institutions can depart from therigid statistical requirements and simulate ex-ceptional market developments that are notconsidered in the risk models.
In summer 2004, the Bundesbank surveyed a
group of large, internationally operatingbanks in Germany about the stress tests theyconduct in the areas of market and creditrisks. The aim of this survey was to gain anoverview of the current methods and stresstest scenarios. A similar study had alreadybeen conducted on behalf of the Committeeon the Global Financial System at the Bankfor International Settlements (BIS). This willbe used partly as a basis for comparison. In
parallel with this qualitative survey, the Bun-desbank conducted its own stress test analy-ses with a representative selection of banks.
Qualitative survey
As in 2000, the findings of the qualitative sur-
vey confirm that a variety of methods and as-sumed scenarios are being used. Since then,there has been a further increase in thesophistication of the stress tests. This is to berated as a positive development as it takesbetter account of the reality and prevents“herd behaviour” that endangers stability.
Despite their heterogeneity in terms of the
specific design, all stress tests are based onthe same structure.
1They investigate how
much the value of a portfolio of securities orloans changes given an assumed shock in therisk parameters. Naturally enough, tradableassets are easier to evaluate than illiquid in-struments. This also explains why stress testsare more widespread in the area of marketrisk than in the credit risk category.
Risk parameters that come into consideration
are, above all, interest curves, exchangerates, equity prices and borrowers’ ratings. Interms of the number of risk factors used, arough distinction can be made between uni-variate and multivariate stress tests. Whichvariant is to be preferred depends on the spe-cific question to be answered; in most cases,
1This refers to stress tests for portfolios of securities and
loans.Stress tests
supplement
risk ratios
Stress testing
becoming more
diverse in
character
Development
of stress testing
in the area of
market risk well
advanced

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
77however, the institutions use both methods in
parallel.
The advantage of univariate stress tests is
that they can isolate the specific influence ofindividual risk factors from that of other fac-tors. Such stress tests are also called “sensitiv-ity analyses” as credit institutions can usethem to identify the weaknesses of theirportfolio structure relatively accurately. Onedrawback, however, is that this approachignores the interaction of various risk factorsthat exists in reality. Precisely the accumula-tion of “stress events” may have a stability-jeopardising impact, however, while isolatedshocks by themselves may appear relativelyunproblematical.
Therefore, the sensitivity analyses are supple-
mented in many cases by multivariate stresstests. One particular difficulty in this respect isthe realistic modelling of the scenarios. Forthis purpose, two main methods are found inpractice. With the aid of historical simulation,extreme combinations of risk factors ob-served in the past are applied to the currentportfolio.
Alternatively, scenarios can be selected using
econometric methods. Macro stress tests area special case in this context – macroeconom-ic framework scenarios, such as the scenarioof a deep recession, are defined ex ante and
implemented using a macroeconomic model.
On the whole, the institutions seem to be
moving increasingly towards employingmulti-factor analyses (see chart on this page).This is gratifying since it permits a more realis-tic analysis. At the same time, the overall
number of stress tests is increasing, whichmeans that sensitivity analyses are not beingneglected either. These multivariate analysesare predominantly based on historicalscenarios.
The individual institutions’ analyses differ
clearly with regard to both the type of shocksand the combination of risk factors. As is tobe expected, it is only in the historical simula-tions that the similarity is greater. A compara-tively large number of historical scenarios isderived from the Russia crisis in 1998, theevents of 11 September 2001 and the 2003Iraq war. Nevertheless, even here, consider-able differences in the implementation are tobe noted. For instance, changes in the riskparameters hinge crucially on what start andStress test methods
of the German banks
Deutsche Bundesbank%
Hypothetical
scenarios 
Historical
scenarios 
Sensitivity
analyses
2000 2004100
90
80
7060
50
40
30
20
10
0Variety of risk
factors and
methods
Increased use
of multivariate
analyses

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
78end dates are assumed for the historical
scenario.
The surveys confirm that stress tests are em-
ployed mainly in the area of market riskwhere the interest rate risk is to the fore. Bycontrast, credit risks are analysed in no morethan about 30% of the cases. The low figuresfor credit risk are probably due to the factthat the modelling of the credit risk is a com-paratively new area. Moreover, the situationwith regard to data availability is much poorerthan it is in the area of market risk.
Nevertheless, the analysis of credit risks has
gained increasing importance over the pastfew years. This development is likely to be-come even stronger since many institutionsare at present expanding their risk manage-ment systems in credit business. Not least,the preparations for Basel II are a major factorin this context.
It is also worth noting that the banks are in-
creasingly defining scenarios in which the riskparameters are selected from different riskcategories. In particular, it is more and morethe case that banks are using scenarios thatsimultaneously include parameters from themarket and credit areas. Just under half ofthe multivariate analyses, however, are stillscenarios in which only parameters of thesame risk category are changed (for example,various stock price indices). This might be dueto the fact that many banks have notyet completely integrated the various riskmodules into a standard risk model.Risk categories
The various risk factors that play a key role
in valuing a bank’s assets are usually div-ided into market price risks and credit risks.The liquidity risk, which is likewise relevantto the valuation of the portfolio, is a specialcase and is not considered here. The samegoes for the operational risk.
The credit risk in the narrower sense refers
to the risk that borrowers will not fulfiltheir payment obligations or not fulfilthem on time (default risk). In a broadersense, the term denotes the risk of a deteri-oration in a borrower’s creditworthiness(migration risk), which leads to a revalu-ation of the relevant assets.
The market price risk denotes the risk of a
change in the market value of long or shortpositions owing to fluctuations in theunderlying market prices. Depending onthe position being analysed, a distinction ismade between interest rate risk, equityprice risk, commodity price risk, and ex-change rate risk. A further category to beconsidered is the volatility risk, which ismainly relevant to derivatives. However, ittends to play a minor role overall.
While the valuation of financial instru-
ments that are traded on the market gener-ally poses no problems, the valuation ofnon-traded or illiquid assets at marketprices is a controversial subject even irre-spective of accounting considerations. Thisis probably one of the reasons why stresstests in the area of market risk often relateonly to positions in the trading book butnot to positions in the banking book. Thisapplies especially to the interest rate risk.
Deutsche BundesbankStress testing of
loan portfolios
increasingly
important
More complex
scenarios

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
79In summary, it may be said that there is dis-
cernible good progress in the application ofstress tests. The number of analyses at the in-stitutional level has increased and more de-tailed and more realistic analyses are beingperformed. Overall, the scale of the analysesshows that stress tests are now an integralpart of risk management at many banks.A crucial criterion for the meaningful deploy-ment of stress tests, however, is that thescenarios are reviewed regularly in terms oftheir relevance. In this connection, it is inter-esting that nearly 40% of the scenarios cur-rently being employed have been revised ornewly drawn up during the current year. Fur-thermore, risk assessments using stress testscan only be meaningful if they are performedon a regular basis. Nearly all the surveyed in-stitutions conduct their stress tests at leastonce a month and as much as roughly 50%
do so on a weekly basis.
The greater inclusion of credit risks is also to
be welcomed. A further expansion of stresstesting in credit business – as is becoming ap-parent – is desirable since the credit risk isgenerally the banks’ most important risk cat-egory. The requirements that Basel II stipu-lates for the authorisation of banks’ internalrating systems suggest further developmentsin this area. For example, the new capital re-quirements prescribe that banks qualifyingfor the IRB approach
2assess their capital ad-
equacy with the aid of stress tests. In particu-lar, the implications for the borrowers’ prob-ability of default as well as the loss given de-Risk categories
As a percentage
Share of risks in the scenariosExcluding multiple counting from
multivariate scenarios
1Including multiple countingfrom multivariate scenarios
2
Type of risk factor 2004 2000 2004 2000
Market price risks overall 42 69 70 82
Interest rate risks 22 28 49 41Equity price risks 10 21 30 26Exchange rate risks 10 15 38 28Commodity price risks 0538
Credit risks 22 15 33 18Other 9 3 10 3Simultaneously more than one risk of various
categories 28 13 – –
Sources: Deutsche Bundesbank, information provided by
the institutions. — 1Percentage of each category in the
stress tests. Cases with risks from various categories areviewed as a separate group. — 2Percentage of each cat-egory in the stress tests. Cases with risks from various
categories are counted more than once and assigned toall relevant categories (total does not equal 100%).
Deutsche Bundesbank
2Internal ratings based approach.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
80fault and the exposure at default have to be
calculated. The appropriateness of thesestress tests will be one of the matters exam-ined in the Supervisory Review Process (SRP).
Quantitative survey
In summer 2004, the Bundesbank conducted
a series of uniform, quantitative stress testanalyses at a selected number of banks.These analyses were designed along the linesof the stress tests conducted in cooperationwith the IMF
3during the Financial Sector
Assessment Program in 2003.4As then, this
year’s stress tests focused on the credit insti-tutions’ markets risks arising from interestrates, stock prices and exchange rates. In par-allel with this, the Bundesbank performedmacro stress tests for credit business.
The advantage of uniform stress tests is that
the results can be compared across the insti-tutions. Moreover, in this case they allow aninformative comparison to be made with theprevious year. Such a comparison is interest-ing precisely because the large-scale restruc-turing undertaken by the banks means thatthey now appear to have come through theworst of their exposure and are now increas-ingly turning to new business.
To survey market price risks, the banks were
asked to calculate the changes in the marketvalue of their overall position (trading bookand banking book) on the basis of predefinedscenarios. For the sake of simplicity, it was as-sumed that the resulting losses had a directimpact on the bank’s capital base. Any adjust-ment measures taken by the institutions as
well as differing accounting rules for thebanking book and trading book were nottaken into consideration.
The stress tests for the interest rate risk relate
to the whole yield curve as it is, above all,asymmetrical changes in interest rates thatmay pose problems for credit institutions.Three types of changes were analysed (seetable on page 81): twists of the yield curve atthe short end, parallel shifts across all matur-ities, and fluctuations in the medium-termrange.
To analyse the exchange rate risk, an appreci-
ation and depreciation of the euro by 15% ineach case was assumed. With regard to theequity price risk, a 30% slide in share pricesoccurring simultaneously on all markets wasassumed. The implied volatilities werechanged by 30 basis points.
In comparison with last year, considerable
changes in the banks’ risk positions are iden-tifiable. In terms of interest rates, it can gen-erally be said that nearly all the larger bankswould be less affected by the predefinedscenarios than was the case last year. Where-as the majority of banks in 2003 appear tohave placed their faith in falling interest rates– and would therefore have had to expect po-tential losses in the event of a rise – there isno discernible general trend in the present
3In the first half of 2003, the IMF studied the stability
of the German financial system as part of the Financial
Sector Assessment Program with stress tests also being
conducted for the German credit institutions.
4For a detailed account of these stress tests see
Deutsche Bundesbank, Stress testing the German bank-
ing system, Monthly Report, December 2003, p 53-61.Uniform stress
scenariosReduction of
the interest rate
risk

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
81analysis. In terms of exchange rates, too,
which is of lesser significance given the scaleof the risks involved, the banks have reducedtheir unmatched positions.
Equities initially seem to confirm the impres-
sion of lower risks. However, these figures areskewed by the fact that the reduction in risk,in the case of one bank, is due to value ad-justments in its banking book. In the case ofall the other large banks, however, the poten-tial market value losses have increased: inprinciple, this suggests an expansion of thelong positions contracted in this segment.Nevertheless, many of the expanded pos-itions in the banking book are likely to beprice-induced. The ratio of liable capital topotential losses tends to overstate the actualexposure since the undisclosed reservescreated by value increases in the interim can-not be considered.
The situation of small and medium-sized
banks, which are less involved in securitiesbusiness, differs significantly in some casesfrom that of larger institutions. On the whole,the business of small and medium-sizedbanks is more geared to interest rates, withthe exposure to interest rate risk even show-ing an increase in year-on-year terms. Overall,the sensitivity analyses revealed no pointsthat would give rise to doubts about the ro-bustness of the banks included in the stresstests.Macro stress tests
Besides sensitivity analyses, macro stress tests
are becoming more and more the focus ofthe banks’ risk analysis since macroeconomicdevelopments are one of the main factorsinfluencing credit risks. The considerableamount of input required for modelling, how-ever, means that, at present, only the largebanks are in a position to conduct large-scalemacro stress tests. Surveying these institu-tions direct would not be representative,though.
For this reason, in late summer 2004, the
Bundesbank used econometric estimates, theprudential data available to it as well as bal-ance sheet data for 2003 in order to performits own macro stress tests for the GermanScenarios for the yield curve
Changes in basis points
Scenarioshort-
term 1medium-term
2long-term
3
Twist (+) 110 60 40
Parallel (+) 70 70 70Peak (+) 0 30 0Twist (–) – 110 – 60 – 40Parallel (–) – 70 – 70 – 70Peak (–) 0 – 30 0
1No more than three months. — 2More than three
months but not more than five years. — 3More than
five years.
Deutsche BundesbankGreater
exposure in
stock trading
Smaller banks’
assets relatively
heavily geared
towards
interest ratesMacro stress
tests investigate
cyclical
implications
Framework
scenarios

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
82banking system. In addition to the baseline
scenario, the following two framework scen-arios were assumed.
– Oil price scenario: a marked rise in oil
prices in the third quarter of 2004 and theoil price persisting at that high level in thefollowing quarters. Global economic activ-ity is suppressed by the high oil prices, andgrowth in German sales markets is declin-ing. Furthermore, the prices of foreigncompetitors rise.
– Interest rate scenario: higher inflation ex-
pectations combined with uncertainty onthe financial markets lead to an increasein the risk premiums in the lending rates.Therefore, long-term interest rates go upworldwide, resulting in reduced growth ofthe German export markets. Furthermore,the foreign competitor price level risesand the euro depreciates in nominal termsagainst the US dollar.
The credit risk was forecast on the basis of
the various scenarios using an econometricmodel. The formation of specific provisions inlending business and/or the individual valueadjustment levels (in each case relative to theoverall volume of lending to non-banks) wereentered as a dependent variable into theregression. Balance sheet ratios and macro-economic variables were used as explanatoryvariables. The equation for this was based ona dynamic panel regression. In contrast totime series analysis methods, this makes itpossible to predict not only the mean valuesbut also the entire future distribution of theResults of the stress tests in market risk
Changes in market value as a percentage of the liable
capital
2003 2004
Scenarios 1Mean
valueMean
valueLower
limitUpper
limit
Large, internationally operating
banks
Interest rates
Twist (+) – 1.20 – 0.62 – 1.72 – 0.25Parallel shift (+) – 0.84 – 0.52 – 1.62 0.21Peak (+) – 0.37 – 0.15 – 0.97 0.13Twist (–) 1.16 0.63 0.13 1.60Parallel shift (–) 0.70 0.60 0.21 1.34Peak (–) 0.43 0.16 – 0.01 0.91
Euro appreciation – 0.29 0.07 – 1.25 0.74Euro depreciation 0.19 0.18 – 0.74 1.27Fall in share prices – 9.86 – 8.00 – 15.49 – 3.72Volatility 0.05 – 0.06 – 0.26 0.07
Small and medium-sized banks
Interest rates
Twist (+) – 0.91 – 1.09 – 11.47 – 0.34Parallel shift (+) – 0.95 – 1.22 – 15.11 0.42Peak (+) – 0.40 – 0.46 – 4.25 – 0.08Twist (–) 0.85 1.01 – 0.27 11.46Parallel shift (–) 0.86 1.24 – 0.43 14.88Peak (–) 0.41 0.41 – 4.15 2.27
Euro appreciation 0.10 – 0.33 – 2.25 0.63Euro depreciation – 0.06 0.42 0.01 2.17Fall in share prices – 0.84 – 1.48 – 10.00 – 0.17Volatility 0.03 0.00 – 0.01 0.05
Sources: Deutsche Bundesbank, calculations by the
institutions. — 1The scenarios are defined as follows:
Interest rate scenario as in table on page 81; 30% fall inshare prices on all markets, €15% change in exchangerates; 30% changes in volatility.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
83value adjustments.5In particular, this permits
identification of institutions for which a con-siderable need for specific provisions in theloan portfolio may be expected and whosecapital cover may not be able to absorb theoccurring losses.
The basic situation in all the scenarios is char-
acterised by the high specific provisions andrisk provision ratios of the past two years.Despite the expected favourable economicoutlook, which is reflected in the lower trans-fers to the value adjustments, the risk provi-sion ratios (portfolios) are likely to persist at acomparatively high level (or even rise slightly)in the baseline scenario as well, as there willbe a time lag before the positive developmentof the economy shows itself in the creditquality of the old portfolios. It is also note-worthy that the gap between institutions
with a low level of risk provisioning in theloan portfolio and those with a high level iscontinuing to grow. Nevertheless, a high pro-vision ratio on its own cannot be taken toimply that the institutions in question have ahigher solvency risk – an actual risk potentialarises only in connection with a low level ofcapital cover and a lack of undisclosedreserves.
A risk to the stability of the banking system
cannot be inferred from the two stress scen-arios either. Since only relatively minor effectson GDP are expected in the oil price scenario,the value adjustment ratios are likely to re-Results of the macro stress tests*
Figures as a percentage; reference date: end-August 2004
YearNew specific
provisions 1Riskprovisioning
1
(mean value)Risk
provisioning 1
(median)Risk
provisioning 1
5% quantileRisk
provisioning 1
95% quantile
Basic situation for all three scenarios
2002 1.27 3.16 3.04 0.61 9.04
2003 1.23 3.23 3.07 0.58 8.60
Baseline scenario
2004 1.08 3.20 3.20 0.56 9.64
2005 1.09 3.58 3.31 0.50 11.50
Oil price scenario
2004 1.08 3.20 3.20 0.56 9.64
2005 1.10 3.60 3.33 0.50 11.55
Interest rate scenario
2004 1.15 3.35 3.36 0.59 10.09
2005 1.19 3.91 3.64 0.55 12.51
*Panel estimation based on German banks’ balance
sheet data. — 1Share of loans to non-banks.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5In terms of methodology, the regression is modelled on
the estimate made in 2003. The December 2003 Monthly
Report contains a more detailed account.Risk
provisioning
persisting at a
high level ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
84main almost unchanged in comparison with
the baseline scenario. It is only in the interestrate scenario that a greater need for riskprovisioning is to be expected since theborrowers would be more affected by a sharprise in long-term interest rates than by theassumed comparatively mild decrease in GDP
growth.
All in all, the magnitude of the changes in the
value adjustments due to the specified scen-arios seems to be manageable.... but no
exceptional
increase in
value adjust-
ments to be
expected

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
85CommentariesEconomic conditions
IndustryFollowing a sharp upswing in the first half of
2004, the pace of industrial activity becamemore subdued in the middle of the year.There was a seasonally adjusted increase inorders in July but, to a large extent, this wasdue to the fact that holidays had a compara-tively minor impact. Orders declined some-what in August, a month in which there wasa heavier concentration of holidays thanusual. Taking July and August together inorder to offset the short-term special move-ments, new orders were roughly as high asthey had been in the second quarter. Theyear-on-year increase went down to 6
1/C252%
from 71/C252% in the preceding quarter.
Foreign demand for German industrial prod-
ucts held up relatively well. In the two-monthperiod, there was slight seasonally adjustedgrowth of just over
1/C252% on the second quar-
ter, when a sizeable volume of orders hadbeen placed. The year-on-year rise amountedto 9%. By contrast, domestic orders in theJuly-August period were a seasonally adjusted
1/C254% down on the months before and were
around 41/C252% up on the year.
The particular influence of the holidays was
also felt in terms of output. Seasonally adjust-ed output in August failed to match the Julylevel. The preliminary data show that takingthese two third-quarter months togethergives an increase in output on the secondquarter of somewhat more than
1/C252%. A
downward adjustment has to be expected,Orders received
Output

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
86however. This means that the year-on-year
rise in output, which stands at almost 41/C252%
according to the current data, will not bequite so large.
ConstructionEarly in the second half of the year, the situ-
ation in construction continued to be charac-terised by weak demand and a low level ofoutput. Seasonally adjusted new constructionorders in July (more recent data are unavail-able) were clearly down on the month and onthe second quarter as a whole as well asnearly 15% down on the year.
Seasonally adjusted construction output in
August was likewise down on the month.July and August together were around
3/C254%
down on the average level of the secondquarter. The data available at present show atwo-digit decline on the year. Even though anupward revision is likely as part of this year’soverall survey, there remains a sharp down-turn in construction activity.
Overall outputDevelopments in industry and trade as well as
indicators from several branches of the ser-vices sector suggest that overall output wasexpanded further in the third quarter. Evenso, the pace of growth is likely to have beenslower than in the second quarter, when anincrease of 0.5% had been achieved. Thiswas due, in particular, to a certain slackeningof export demand. Domestic demand wasunable to offset this, even though privateconsumption is likely to have picked up some-Economic conditions in Germany*
Seasonally adjusted
New orders (volume); 2000 = 100
Industry 1
of which
Period Total Domestic ForeignCon-
struction
2003 Q4 100.5 95.7 106.5 79.5
2004 Q1 101.1 95.9 107.7 78.8
Q2 102.9 96.1 111.4 73.3
June 101.0 95.4 108.0 74.0July 103.8 96.3 113.3 71.7
Aug 102.2 95.3 110.9 ...
Output; 2000 = 100Industry
2
of which
TotalInter-
mediategoodsCapital
goods
3Con-struction
2003 Q4 101.0 101.1 104.2 85.7
2004 Q1 101.0 102.1 103.1 82.1
Q2 102.8 103.3 106.4 77.3
June 102.3 103.1 105.6 77.5July 103.8 104.1 107.3 77.6
Aug 103.1 104.3 106.5 75.9
Labour market
Em-
ployed
4VacanciesUn-
employed
Number in thousandsUn-
employ-mentratein %
5
2004 Q1 38,303 304 4,304 10.3
Q2 38,368 288 4,366 10.5Q3 ... 280 4,408 10.6
July 38,379 282 4,392 10.6
Aug ... 278 4,418 10.6Sep ... 280 4,445 10.7
Import
pricesProducer
prices ofindustrialprod-ucts
6Construc-tionprices
7Con-sumerprices
2000 =100
2004 Q1 95.6 104.3 100.5 105.4
Q2 97.0 105.3 101.4 106.1Q3 ... ... 101.8 106.5
July 97.6 106.0 ... 106.3
Aug 98.3 106.4 ... 106.6Sep ... ... ... 106.6
*Data in many cases provisional. — 1Manufacturing sectors
excluding, in particular, food products, beverages and to-bacco, and refined petroleum products. — 2Manufacturing
industries not classified under energy plus mining andquarrying. — 3Including manufacture of motor vehicles,
trailers and semi-trailers. — 4Workplace concept. — 5Meas-
ured on the basis of all civilian members of the labourforce. — 6Domestic sales. — 7Calculated by the Bundes-
bank; not seasonally adjusted. Mid-quarter level.
Deutsche BundesbankOrders received
Output
GDP

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
87what compared with the second quarter and
the strains stemming from construction in-vestment were probably no longer as great.Expected annual average GDP growth at justunder 2% – or at around 1
1/C252% after adjust-
ment for variations in the number of workingdays – does not yet appear to be at risk so far,however.
Labour marketA cyclical assessment of the labour market is
made more difficult by a further revision ofthe employment figures recorded by the Fed-eral Statistical Office. According to the latestfigures, the seasonally adjusted number ofpersons in work in June and July was 38.38million. Compared with the previous Junelevel, this represents an upward adjustmentof around 185,000, which stemmed largelyfrom part-time workers below a certain earn-ings level. As a result of the revised calcula-tion method, which applies from the start of2004, the seasonally adjusted decline in em-ployment already stopped at the end of 2003and gave way to an increase. The increasewas at its highest in spring but slowed downagain thereafter. It seems doubtful, however,whether the new pattern can be seen as acyclical upturn on the labour market. In fact,labour market policy measures and statisticalfactors are likely to have played a key role.This is also indicated by the fact that therewas no improvement in employment subjectto social security contributions up to the endof the period under review.
Furthermore, there has been a sharp season-
ally adjusted increase in the number of per-sons officially registered as unemployed over
the past few months. At the end of Septem-ber, the number was 4.45 million, ie almost180,000 more than in January. There was anincrease on the year of just under 50,000. In-cluding persons taking part in aptitude testsand training schemes, who are no longerrecorded in the statistics, the increase was160,000.
PricesThe rate of consumer price increase slowed in
September. The general price level remainedunchanged in seasonally adjusted terms. Ac-cording to the national index, the year-on-year rate of increase went down from 2.0%in August to 1.8% in September. The HICPrate in the same period fell from 2.1% to1.9%. This is due partly to price reductionsfor seasonal food owing to good harvests offruit and vegetables. Added to this were con-tinuing moderate price developments in thecase of industrial goods; clothing and shoes,household appliances as well as computersremained cheaper than in the same period of2003. There has been hardly any increase inhousing rents either. The fact that transportservices became more expensive is due mainlyto new charges for issuing flight tickets. Thesharp rise in the price of heating oil was morethan offset in September by lower prices forpetrol.
These price reductions are likely to have been
no more than temporary, however. That is be-cause prices on the international oil marketshave shot up during the past few weeks toaround US$50 for a barrel of Brent North Sea
Employment
UnemploymentConsumer
prices
Oil prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
88Oil. Given the persistently high international
demand and limited capacity reserves, thereis now an increasingly firm impression of con-tinuing high oil prices.
Higher energy prices have clearly left their
mark on the imports side. Added to this wasthe noticeably higher cost of non-ferrousmetals and steel, which were likewise caughtup in the wake of heavy worldwide demand.In August, total imported goods were there-fore 2.5% more expensive than one year earl-ier. As the year-on-year increase in the priceof exports was considerably lower at no morethan 1.1%, the terms of trade deterioratedaccordingly. German domestic industrial fac-tory gate prices were also shaped by the high-er prices for raw materials and energy. Pricesin August were 2.2% up on the year.
Public finances
Indebtedness of central, state and local
government
In August the indebtedness of central, state
and local government rose again by 35.4 bil-
lion. With 33.3 billion, central government
once again accounted for the bulk of this in-crease. Although it ran down its money mar-ket liabilities by 36.9 billion, it increased its
capital market debt by 310.2 billion. The out-
standing amount of Federal bonds (Bunds)(+37.1 billion) and five-year Federal notes
(Bobls) (+ 32.5 billion), in particular, went up.
However, the outstanding volume of two-year Treasury notes (Sch/C228tze) also rose by30.8 billion.State government increased its net indebted-
ness in August by 31.7 billion. The issuance
of Treasury notes alone contributed 31.6 bil-
lion to this amount, whereby 31.1 billion was
accounted for by the state of North Rhine-Westphalia. Whereas a further 30.4 billion
was raised from loans against borrowers’notes, cash advances were reduced by 30.3
billion. In the case of those special funds notintegrated into central government debt,bank loans granted to the German UnityFund against borrowers’ notes rose slightly.Local government indebtedness also appearsto have marginally increased again in August.
Central government borrowingAlthough central government raised 318.6
billion gross on the capital market in Septem-Net borrowing in the market
5billion
2003 2004
Borrower Totalof
whichJan-AugJan-
Aug
peAug pe
Central govern-ment
1 + 42.4 + 39.0 + 56.8 + 3.3
State government + 31.6 + 23.9 + 20.0 + 1.7Local govern-
ment
2, pe + 7.7 + 4.4 + 3.9 + 0.4
ERP Special Fund – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.7 –German Unity
Fund – 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1
Central, state and
local government,total + 81.2 + 67.7 + 80.3 + 5.4
1Including the off-budget special funds not shown
separately here. — 2Including special purpose associ-
ations.
Deutsche BundesbankImport and
industrial
producer prices
August
In September ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
89ber, this was easily offset by a very high vol-
ume of redemptions amounting to 329.0 bil-
lion. Including the repayment of money mar-ket liabilities amounting to 30.2 billion, there
was a decline of 310.6 billion in central gov-
ernment’s overall debt. However, it concur-rently reduced its deposits on the money mar-ket by 311.1 billion. Sch/C228tze accounted for
the largest share of gross borrowing. A newissue with a coupon of 2.5% (previously2.75%) alone raised 38.4 billion in the tender
allotment. Including market management op-erations and after deducting redemptions ofa security carrying a 3.25% interest rateamounting to 312 billion, the outstanding
amount, however, fell by 33.1 billion. The
monthly issue of Treasury discount paper(Bubills) yielded revenue of 35.4 billion. Com-
pared with the previous month, the yield rosemarginally to 2.1%. The outstanding amountof Bubills rose by 30.5 billion. The volume of
Bobls in circulation expanded by 31.1 billion
owing to current sales. While Bunds yieldedalmost as much from market managementoperations, two securities – each with a vol-ume of 35.1 billion – matured. Firstly, the last
bond issued by the Treuhand agency, whichstill had an interest rate of 7.5%, was re-deemed. Secondly, the only Bund with a vari-able interest rate matured, which with a dis-count of
1/C254percentage point to the three-
month Euribor was latterly a very inexpensivefinancing instrument for central government.Overall, the outstanding amount of Bundsdeclined by 39.1 billion.
In the period from January to September cen-
tral government borrowing in the marketamounted to 3183.5 billion gross and 346.3billion net. The amount of 329.3 billion envis-
aged in the original Budget Act has thereforealready been substantially exceeded. Owingto revenue shortfalls from taxes and the Bun-desbank profit, and labour market-relatedadditional expenditure, the Federal Cabinethas now adopted a supplementary budget,which increased the borrowing limit to 343.7
billion. Whether it can be kept within thatceiling also depends on the extent to whichthe anticipated high revenue from asset dis-posals is actually realised. As a result of thehigher borrowing requirement, the issuancecalendar – as in the third quarter – was re-vised for the last quarter of 2004. However,the change is confined to an additionaltopping-up of Sch/C228tze by 32 billion. With re-
gard to the structure of new borrowing in thefirst three quarters, Bunds and Bobls featuredBorrowing in the market by central
government
5billion; 2004
SeptemberJanuary-
September
Item Gross Net Gross Net
Change in money
market debt – 0.2 – 0.2 4.6 4.6
Change in capital
market debt, total 1 18.6 – 10.4 178.9 41.6
Treasury discount
paper (Bubills) 6.5 0.5 54.2 0.8
Federal Treasury
financing paper 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.2
Treasury notes (Sch/C228tze) 8.8 – 3.1 43.5 7.7
Five-year Federal notes
(Bobls) 1.1 1.1 27.3 13.5
Federal savings notes 0.2 – 0.1 0.8 – 2.3
Federal bonds (Bunds) 1.0 – 9.1 246.6 23.1
Bank loans 1.0 0.4 5.9 – 1.6
Loans from non-banks – – – 1.8
Other debt – – – – 1.2
Total borrowing 18.4 – 10.6 183.5 46.3
1Memo item: Borrowing according to central government’s plans
for the whole of 2004: 5215.4 billion gross, 529.3 billion net. —
2Including borrowing for the German Unity Fund: 546.8 billion.
Deutsche Bundesbank
... and in the
first three
quarters

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
90prominently, accounting for 323.1 billion and
313.5 billion respectively. However, two-year
Sch/C228tze also weighed in strongly with theiroutstanding amount growing by 37.7 billion.
By contrast, redemptions prevailed in the caseof Federal savings notes and loans againstborrowers’ notes.
Securities markets
Bond marketSales activity in the German bond market was
weaker in August following buoyant issuancein July. Month-on-month gross sales of debtsecurities issued by domestic borrowers fellfrom 3112.1 billion to 386.1 billion. After de-
ducting redemptions and changes in issuers’holdings of their own bonds, net sales alsodropped from 320.0 billion to 312.7 billion.
Sales of foreign bonds and notes in Germanyraised 32.9 billion net. Overall, sales of do-
mestic and foreign bonds yielded 315.6 bil-
lion in August, just under half of the amountraised in July ( 333.9 billion).
The public sector tapped the German bond
market again to a somewhat greater extentin August, raising 39.2 billion net ( 34.4 billion
in July). The Federal Government took thelead here, raising 310.7 billion from the sale
of debt securities. The Federal Governmentadded to its longer tenors, issuing 37.2 billion
in ten-year Bunds and 32.9 billion (net) in
five-year Bobls. It also raised 30.6 billion
through the sale of two-year Federal Treasurynotes, compared with 34.9 billion in the pre-
vious month. The Federal state governments,which had reduced their bonded debt by
31.3 billion in July, tapped the bond market
for31.0 billion in August. A bond issued by
the former Federal Post Office was redeemedfor32.6 billion.
In August, sales of domestic bank bonds
raised 34.0 billion, some 33.0 billion less than
in the previous month. Thus, financial institu-tions did raise a large amount of fundsthrough the sale of other bank bonds ( 37.3
billion) and the issuing activity of specialisedcredit institutions ( 33.1 billion). However, on
balance, more public Pfandbriefe and mort-gage Pfandbriefe were redeemed thanissued.
After achieving a record level of 310.6 billion
in July (which included not only “traditional”corporate bonds but also paper issued follow-ing the securitisation of the Federal Govern-ment’s claims on Russia), sales of corporatebonds fell to 30.9 billion. The volume of com-
mercial paper outstanding fell by 31.3 billion,
causing the volume of debt securities out-standing issued by domestic non-financialenterprises to fall by 30.5 billion.
The debt securities issued in August in the
German capital market were purchased al-most exclusively by foreign investors who, onmuch the same scale as in the previousmonth, added 314.6 billion to their holdings
of German debt securities. They acquired39.8 billion in public sector bonds and 34.8
billion in private sector bonds. At 34.9 billion,
German credit institutions were less active inthe bond market than they had been in July(311.8 billion), purchasing 33.1 billion in for-
Bond sales
Public sector
bondsBank bonds
Corporate
bonds
Purchases of
debt securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
91eign debt securities and 31.7 billion in do-
mestic debt securities. On balance, domesticnon-banks invested only in domestic privatesector issues ( 31.2 billion). After having
reduced their holdings of public sector debtsecurities by 310.2 billion in July, domestic
non-banks sold an additional 34.8 billion of
this paper in August. They also sold 30.2 bil-
lion worth of foreign debt securities.
Equity marketAgain hardly any funds were raised in the
German equity market. Domestic enterprisesissued only 30.3 billion worth of new shares.
Foreign equities recorded outflows of 31.6
billion. Domestic credit institutions primarilypurchased foreign shares ( 30.7 billion). Much
as in the previous months, they sold domesticshares on balance, this time amounting to31.0 billion. Non-banks bought 31.3 billion
worth of domestic shares and reduced pos-itions in foreign shares by 32.3 billion. Foreign
investors, who in July had purchased 33.6 bil-
lion worth of shares, made no net purchasesof German shares in the month under review.
Mutual fund sharesDomestic mutual funds recorded outflows of
30.3 billion in August. In particular the special
funds, which are reserved for institutional in-vestors, bought back 30.4 billion in fund
shares. The domestic investment funds opento the general public saw net inflows of 30.1
billion. Money market funds were most in de-mand ( 31.2 billion). There was also demand,
to a lesser extent, for open-end real estatefunds ( 30.2 billion). However, share-basedfunds and other securities-based funds re-
corded net outflows (- 31.2 billion). The
amount outstanding of foreign mutual fundshares in the German market increased by31.4 billion in the month under review (July:
30.1 billion).
Credit institutions and foreign investors each
bought 30.9 billion worth of mutual fund
shares, with credit institutions investing onlyin foreign mutual funds. Non-banks wereagain net sellers, redeeming domestic fundshares worth 31.1 billion, much like in the
previous month. They purchased 30.4 billion
worth of foreign mutual fund certificates.Sales and purchases
of bonds and notes
5billion
2004 2003
Item July August August
Sales of domestic bonds
and notes 1 20.0 12.7 – 8.8
of which
Bank bonds 6.9 4.0 – 10.8Public sector bonds 4.4 9.2 0.8
Foreign bonds andnotes
2 13.9 2.9 – 0.3
Purchases
Residents 19.7 1.0 – 0.5
Credit institutions 3 11.8 4.9 – 14.6
Non-banks 4 8.0 – 3.8 14.1
of which
Domestic bondsand notes 0.2 – 3.6 8.0
Non-residents
2 14.2 14.6 – 8.6
Total sales/purchases 33.9 15.6 – 9.2
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’
holdings of their own bonds. — 2Transaction values. —
3Book values, statistically adjusted. — 4Residual.
Deutsche BundesbankSales and
purchases of
shares
Sales of mutual
fund sharesPurchases of
mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
92Balance of payments
The German current account recorded a sur-
plus of 30.9 billion in August compared with
one of 31.7 billion in the previous month. The
cause of this decline was a decrease in thetrade surplus. By contrast, there was a fall inthe deficit on invisible current transactions,which comprise services, factor income andcurrent transfers.
According to provisional figures from the Fed-
eral Statistical Office, the trade surplus wentdown by 32.5 billion on the month to 311.1
billion in August. After the elimination of sea-sonal factors, the trade surplus fell by 31 bil-
lion to 312 billion as there was a smaller fall
in the imports of goods than in the exports ofgoods. Thus exports went down by a season-ally adjusted 1
1/C252% in August compared with
the previous month whereas imports hardlydeclined at all. Taking June, July and Augusttogether, exports stagnated in seasonally ad-justed terms compared with the previousthree months. Imports increased by 3
1/C252%i na
three-month comparison, but this was duepartly to price developments.
The deficit on invisible current transactions
decreased in August by 31.5 billion on the
month to 39.2 billion. The fall was due, in
particular, to lower net expenditure on cross-border factor income. The deficit on factor in-come therefore went down to 30.8 billion in
August, 33.3 billion below the deficit in July.
Net expenditure on current transfers also fellin August. It amounted to 32.3 billion com-
pared with 33.1 billion in the previous month.
However, the deficit on services increased,Major items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2003 2004
Item August July r August
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 49.9 62.5 56.3Imports (cif) 39.3 48.9 45.2
Balance + 10.6 + 13.6 + 11.1
Memo itemSeasonally adjustedfigures
Exports (fob) 55.8 61.8 60.9Imports (cif) 43.8 49.0 49.0
2 Supplementary trade
items
2 –0 . 4 –1 . 2 –0 . 9
3 Services
Receipts 9.0 9.6 8.7Expenditure 14.4 13.1 14.8
Balance – 5.4 – 3.5 – 6.1
4 Factor income (net) – 0.1 – 4.1 – 0.85 Current transfers
from non-residents 0.9 0.9 1.3to non-residents 3.9 4.0 3.6
Balance – 3.0 – 3.1 – 2.3
Balance on current account + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.9
II Capital transfers (net)
3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1
III Financial account
(net capital exports: –)
Direct investment + 2.9 – 2.8 – 2.2
German investmentabroad + 0.6 – 0.4 + 0.1Foreign investmentin Germany + 2.4 – 2.3 – 2.3
Portfolio investment – 5.5 + 9.5 + 10.8
German investmentabroad – 0.1 – 12.0 – 4.7of which
Shares – 0.1 + 2.0 – 0.4Bonds and notes + 1.8 – 11.8 + 0.2
Foreign investmentin Germany – 5.4 + 21.5 + 15.5of which
Shares + 2.5 + 3.6 + 0.0Bonds and notes + 3.0 + 15.3 + 13.5
Financial derivatives + 0.3 – 0.5 – 2.7Credit transactions – 7.8 – 8.7 – 12.6
Monetary financialinstitutions
4 – 10.5 – 2.8 – 0.3
of whichShort-term – 3.6 + 0.5 – 4.4
Enterprises and individuals + 4.4 – 3.5 + 2.5General government + 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.4Bundesbank – 2.3 – 2.4 – 16.3
Other investment – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2
Overall balance on financial
account – 10.2 – 2.7 – 6.9
IV Change in the reserve assets
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 – 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.5
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 8.9 – 0.0 + 5.4
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Mainly warehouse trans-
actions for account of residents and deduction of goods re-turned. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced
non-financial assets. — 4Excluding Bundesbank — 5Excluding
allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due to value adjust-ments.
Deutsche BundesbankCurrent
account
Foreign trade
Invisibles

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
93mainly due to seasonal factors, by 32.6 billion
to36.1 billion.
Net capital imports in August resulting from
portfolio investment remained at roughly thesame level as in the previous month ( 310.8
billion compared with 39.5 billion in July).
The main reason for the inflows of funds wasthat foreigners again invested in the Germancapital markets ( 315.5 billion). As in July, they
invested particularly heavily in bonds andnotes ( 313.5 billion), especially public bonds
(38.9 billion). They invested considerably less
in money market paper and investment cer-tificates ( 31.1 billion and 30.9 billion, respect-
ively). German investors acquired foreign se-curities for 34.7 billion in August, buying pri-
marily foreign money market paper ( 33.1 bil-
lion) and investment certificates ( 31.4 billion)
whereas, on balance, they hardly acquiredany bonds and notes or shares during theperiod under review.
In the field of direct investment, the cross-
border activities of enterprises remained quitesubdued and led to net capital exports of32.2 billion in August. This can be attributed
to foreign investors withdrawing funds fromGermany ( 32.3 billion). Groups’ internal
credit transactions accounted for almost allcapital exports. Net investment by Germanenterprises abroad remained almost un-changed, however. Whereas they slightly re-duced the investment capital of their foreignbranches on balance ( 32.5 billion), they sim-
ultaneously provided them with additionalloans of a similar value ( 32.2 billion).
In the case of non-securitised credit transac-
tions, the financial transactions of non-banksled to net capital imports of 34.0 billion, 32.5
billion of which was accounted for by enter-prises and individuals while general govern-ment recorded net inflows of funds amount-ing to 31.4 billion. By contrast, the credit
transactions of the monetary financial institu-tions (including the Bundesbank) resulted innet capital exports of 316.6 billion. This was
mainly attributable to the increase in claimsof the Bundesbank ( 316.3 billion), which
were due, in particular, to transactions madeby other market participants via the paymentsystem TARGET.
The Bundesbank’s reserve assets – at transac-
tion values – fell by 30.5 billion in August.Portfolio
investment
Direct
investmentCredit
transactions
Reserve assets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
94

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and resident
individuals, housing loans, sectorsof economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of resident individuals and
domestic non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public
authorities at banks (MFIs) inGermany, by creditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the euro area 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004

VIII Public finances in Germany
1 General government budgetary
position 52*
2 Budgetary position of central,
state and local government 52*
3 Government fiscal position as
defined in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of central, state and
local government 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*
6 Specific taxes levied by central,
state and local government 54*
7 General government debt 55*8 Change in general government
debt 57*
9 Loans raised by general govern-
ment against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Central government debt 58*11 Central government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets
of the wage and salary earners’pension insurance fund 59*
13 Revenue and expenditure of the
Federal Employment Agency 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 60*
2 Output in the production sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 67*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the euro-area memberstates, the Deutsche Mark value ofthe ECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2003          Feb 10.4 7.6 8.2 8.0 4.4 4.9 4.7 2.76 2.69 4.0
         Mar 11.7 8.2 8.3 8.4 4.1 4.8 4.4 2.75 2.53 4.1
         Apr 11.1 8.2 8.9 8.6 4.7 5.1 4.7 2.56 2.53 4.2
         May 11.4 8.7 8.8 8.7 5.0 5.2 4.5 2.56 2.40 3.9         June 11.3 8.5 8.6 8.7 4.8 5.1 5.1 2.21 2.15 3.7
         July 11.3 8.6 8.8 8.6 5.4 5.5 5.2 2.08 2.13 4.0
         Aug 11.7 8.7 8.4 8.3 5.5 5.6 5.3 2.10 2.14 4.2         Sep 11.1 8.3 7.6 8.0 5.5 5.4 5.4 2.02 2.15 4.2
         Oct 11.6 8.2 8.0 7.7 5.7 5.4 5.8 2.01 2.14 4.3
         Nov 10.5 7.7 7.4 7.5 6.2 6.0 6.1 1.97 2.16 4.4         Dec 10.7 7.7 7.2 7.1 5.9 5.8 5.9 2.06 2.15 4.4
2004          Jan 11.5 7.5 6.6 6.6 5.8 5.8 6.0 2.02 2.09 4.2
         Feb 10.7 6.8 6.2 6.3 5.7 5.7 6.1 2.03 2.07 4.2         Mar 11.4 6.8 6.2 5.9 6.0 5.8 6.7 2.01 2.03 4.0
         Apr 10.9 6.2 5.4 5.5 6.0 5.9 7.1 2.08 2.05 4.2
         May 9.3 5.4 4.8 5.2 5.9 5.9 7.3 2.02 2.09 4.4         June 9.6 5.7 5.3 5.2 6.4 6.1 7.2 2.03 2.11 4.4
         July 10.1 5.9 5.4 5.4 6.3 6.3 6.9 2.07 2.12 4.3
         Aug 9.3 5.7 5.5 ... 6.1 6.0 6.9 2.04 2.11 4.1         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.05 2.12 4.1
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.5, p 44*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from 2001, Euro12. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2003          Feb + 2,645 + 8,483 − 21,238 + 2,318 − 7,098 − 21,798 + 5,340 1.0773 96.6 98.2
         Mar + 4,271 + 6,782 + 10,897 + 2,037 + 15,221 − 11,353 + 4,992 1.0807 97.4 99.0
         Apr − 7,378 + 6,607 + 17,450 − 11,561 + 24,770 + 3,031 + 1,210 1.0848 97.9 99.5
         May − 1,623 + 7,443 − 23,004 + 642 + 11,068 − 35,072 + 358 1.1582 101.8 103.5         June + 2,083 + 10,107 − 26,419 + 13,612 + 24,804 − 65,588 + 754 1.1663 102.2 104.2
         July + 2,834 + 15,457 + 323 − 4,031 − 36,091 + 38,614 + 1,831 1.1372 101.0 102.8
         Aug + 3,033 + 10,501 + 5,943 − 5,564 − 38,761 + 50,017 + 251 1.1139 99.8 101.8         Sep + 5,645 + 10,865 − 6,902 − 9,529 + 11,173 − 8,490 − 57 1.1222 99.6 101.7
         Oct + 7,993 + 13,391 − 111 − 9,209 + 35,686 − 27,339 + 750 1.1692 101.3 103.3
         Nov + 3,251 + 8,654 + 13,242 + 3,867 + 4,029 − 172 + 5,518 1.1702 101.2 103.3         Dec + 6,094 + 8,635 − 16,689 − 4,308 − 33,290 + 13,587 + 7,321 1.2286 104.2 106.2
2004          Jan − 3,082 + 5,231 − 19,707 − 10,596 − 3,439 − 2,676 − 2,997 1.2613 105.4 107.4
         Feb + 5,221 + 9,437 + 16,680 + 7,834 + 17,369 − 17,174 + 8,650 1.2646 105.3 107.3         Mar + 11,146 + 13,398 − 11,006 − 26,100 − 2,493 + 13,850 + 3,737 1.2262 103.4 105.5
         Apr + 338 + 10,660 − 8,492 − 2,922 − 3,038 + 155 − 2,687 1.1985 101.6 103.7
         May + 3,378 + 11,237 − 7,137 − 1,601 − 25,544 + 19,344 + 664 1.2007 102.4 104.4         June + 5,442 + 12,218 + 797 − 7,814 + 31,279 − 21,573 − 1,095 1.2138 102.3 104.2
         July + 3,132 + 13,738 − 11,754 − 8,271 − 31,340 + 27,241 + 616 1.2266 102.8 104.7
         Aug ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2176 102.6 104.8         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2218 103.0 105.2
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables X.12 and 13, pp 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-23 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area 7 
Real gross domestic product 1 
2001 0.6 0.8 1.1 2.1 4.3 6.0 1.8 1.5 1.4 0.8 1.6 2.8 1.6
2002 0.7 0.1 2.3 1.2 3.6 6.1 0.4 2.5 0.6 1.4 0.4 2.0 0.82003 1.1 − 0.1 1.9 0.5 4.5 3.7 0.3 2.9 − 1.2 0.7 − 1.2 2.4 0.5
2003          Q1 1.3 0.4 2.5 1.4 4.9 3.6 0.9 − 0.2 0.9 − 1.4 2.3 1.1
         Q2 0.9 − 0.7 1.6 − 0.5 4.0 5.3 0.1 − 1.4 0.5 − 2.2 2.3 − 0.1         Q3 1.0 − 0.3 2.4 0.2 4.6 0.5 0.1 − 1.4 0.7 − 0.9 2.3 0.3         Q4 1.2 0.2 1.7 1.0 4.5 5.1 0.0 − 0.5 0.6 − 0.4 3.0 0.7
2004          Q1 3.0 1.5 2.9 2.0 4.0 6.1 0.8 1.2 0.8 0.1 2.7 1.7
         Q2 2.6 2.0 3.2 2.7 3.9 4.1 1.4 1.3 1.9 ... 2.5 2.2
Industrial production 1,2 
2001 − 0.3 0.2 0.1 1.1 1.0 10.1 − 1.2 3.2 0.4 2.8 3.1 − 1.5 0.42002 1.3 − 1.0 2.1 − 1.4 1.7 7.8 − 1.3 0.4 − 0.3 0.9 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.52003 0.7 0.4 0.8 − 0.3 1.5 6.3 − 0.5 2.6 − 2.4 2.2 − 0.1 1.4 0.3
2003          Q1 1.5 1.5 2.3 0.0 0.7 2.4 − 0.2 4.5 0.3 4.1 0.6 1.6 1.0
         Q2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.9 2.1 2.2 − 1.7 − 1.3 − 5.1 0.0 − 2.8 1.7 − 0.8         Q3 0.4 − 1.1 1.6 − 0.6 2.2 5.4 − 0.2 4.7 − 4.0 2.5 1.1 1.0 − 0.3         Q4 1.5 1.5 0.8 1.3 0.7 15.2 0.3 2.9 − 1.2 2.3 1.0 1.1 1.4
2004          Q1 2.2 1.5 − 0.5 0.5 2.6 4.4 0.0 ... 1.1 2.2 − 2.9 1.3 1.1
         Q2 2.3
r 4.0 4.6 2.8 0.7 2.2 1.1 ... 3.0 5.9 − 1.8 2.5 2.7
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2001 82.3 84.4 85.7 87.4 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.52002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 77.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.42003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.8 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 79.0 78.9 81.1
2003          Q2 78.6 81.8 82.8 84.9 77.1 75.1 75.6 85.9 81.9 80.4 77.6 78.2 80.9
         Q3 77.9 81.0 80.7 84.8 76.8 77.1 76.1 84.8 81.0 79.4 76.4 79.5 80.7         Q4 79.0 82.9 82.0 84.4 76.1 73.6 76.1 83.9 81.4 80.3 84.3 79.3 81.4
2004          Q1 79.4 82.8 82.8
4 81.4 77.5 74.4 76.8 83.5 82.1 80.0 80.6 77.0 4 80.7
         Q2 79.6 82.6 83.4 81.8 74.6 77.7 75.9 85.6 82.8 80.4 79.3 79.7 80.7
         Q3 81.5 83.4 84.7 82.6 76.3 75.3 76.6 87.4 83.1 82.3 81.4 79.8 81.3
Unemployment rate 5 
2001 6.7 7.8 9.1 8.4 10.4 3.9 9.4 2.1 2.5 3.6 4.0 10.6 8.02002 7.3 8.7 9.1 8.9 10.0 4.3 9.0 2.8 2.7 4.2 5.0 11.3 8.42003 8.1 9.6 9.0 9.4 9.3 4.6 8.6 3.7 3.8 4.3 6.3 11.3 8.9
2004          Mar 8.5 9.7 9.0 9.5 4.5 ... 4.1 4.7 4.5 6.3 11.1 8.9         Apr 8.5 9.7 9.0 9.5 4.5 ... 4.2 4.8 4.5 6.5 11.0 9.0
         May 8.6 9.8 9.0 9.5 4.5 ... 4.2 4.8 4.5 6.5 11.0 9.0         June 8.6 9.8 9.0 9.6 4.5 ... 4.2 4.8 4.5 6.4 11.0 9.0
         July 8.6 9.9 9.0 9.6 4.4 ... 4.3 4.8 4.5 6.4 11.0 9.0
         Aug 8.6 9.9 ... 9.6 4.4 ... ... ... 4.5 6.4 10.9 9.0         Sep ... 9.9 ... ... 4.4 ... ... ... ... ... 10.9 ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2001 2.4 1.9 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.32002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.32003 1.5 1.0 1.3 2.2 3.4 4.0 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.1 2.1
2004          Mar 1.0 1.1 − 0.4 1.9 2.9 1.8 2.3 2.0 1.2 1.5 2.2 2.2 1.7         Apr 1.7 1.7 − 0.4 2.4 3.1 1.7 2.3 2.7 1.5 1.5 2.4 2.7 2.0
         May 2.4 2.1 − 0.1 2.8 3.1 2.1 2.3 3.4 1.7 2.1 2.4 3.4 2.5         June 2.0 1.9 − 0.1 2.7 3.0 2.5 2.4 3.8 1.5 2.3 3.7 3.5 2.4
         July 2.1 2.0 0.2 2.6 3.1 2.5 2.2 3.8 1.2 2.1 2.9 3.3 2.3
         Aug 2.0 2.1 0.3 2.5 2.8 2.5 2.4 3.6 1.2
p 2.2 2.4 3.3 p 2.3
         Sep 1.8 p 1.9 0.2 p 2.2 2.9 ... e 2.1 3.1 p 1.1 ... ... e 3.1 e 2.2
General government financial balance 6 
2001 0.6 − 2.8 5.2 − 1.5 − 3.7 0.9 − 2.6 6.4 − 0.1 0.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 1.62002 0.1 − 3.7 4.3 − 3.2 − 3.7 − 0.2 − 2.3 2.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 2.42003 0.4 − 3.8 2.3 − 4.1 − 4.6 0.1 − 2.4 0.8 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 2.8 0.4 − 2.7
General government debt 6 
2001 108.1 59.4 43.8 56.5 114.7 35.9 110.6 5.5 52.9 67.1 55.8 57.5 69.62002 105.8 60.9 42.6 58.8 112.5 32.7 107.9 5.7 52.6 66.6 58.4 54.4 69.42003 100.7 64.2 45.6 63.7 109.9 32.1 106.2 5.4 54.1 65.1 60.3 50.7 70.7
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central and euro area from first quarter 2004 not seasonally adjusted. —
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — 5  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece and Portugal is calculated adjusted. — 6  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition;
from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; ad- including proceeds from sales of UMTS licences. — 7  Including Greece
justed for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally (Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, general government financial
adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and October. — 4  France balance and general government debt from 2001 only). 
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€
 billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2003          Jan 53.9 31.1 5.6 22.8 21.6 8.8 19.5 10.6 17.0 − 0.7 − 2.1 8.3 11.4
         Feb 51.4 36.0 4.8 15.3 17.7 10.6 66.8 56.2 12.0 7.1 − 1.2 10.2 − 4.1         Mar 48.8 37.7 6.1 11.1 10.4 14.1 4.2 − 9.9 13.2 7.4 − 1.6 13.3 − 5.9
         Apr 83.7 71.5 27.1 12.3 17.6 − 4.2 41.7 45.9 10.2 − 2.8 − 2.6 13.1 2.6
         May 68.6 43.2 13.9 25.3 29.3 38.5 41.9 3.4 21.5 6.7 − 1.3 22.2 − 6.1         June 11.5 24.6 − 7.3 − 13.1 − 13.8 61.6 39.0 − 22.6 15.9 2.8 − 1.6 7.4 7.3
         July 38.6 15.1 − 5.0 23.5 15.5 − 38.5 − 31.5 7.0 31.5 5.2 − 2.1 18.6 9.8
         Aug − 0.2 10.1 4.2 − 10.3 − 3.9 − 31.9 − 70.8 − 38.9 15.2 7.6 − 1.6 2.2 7.1         Sep 58.3 33.2 1.6 25.1 23.4 14.0 31.8 17.8 28.9 0.8 − 0.6 21.7 6.9
         Oct 51.1 32.6 3.4 18.5 18.7 11.5 49.9 38.4 27.3 4.9 0.1 20.5 1.8
         Nov 91.8 68.2 14.7 23.7 14.0 18.3 44.2 25.9 30.1 8.0 0.2 17.7 4.2         Dec 22.7 45.3 4.5 − 22.6 − 32.7 − 9.5 − 12.2 − 2.7 22.5 16.9 1.1 2.5 2.1
2004          Jan 42.5 27.7 5.0 14.8 17.5 22.0 110.9 88.9 17.1 1.6 − 1.1 15.9 0.6
         Feb 45.2 31.9 6.6 13.3 21.5 8.6 24.3 15.7 16.9 7.6 − 0.3 10.4 − 0.9         Mar 75.8 45.2 16.0 30.7 14.4 8.1 78.2 70.1 45.0 7.1 − 0.2 30.2 7.8
         Apr 90.0 85.2 26.6 4.8 11.7 6.2 69.1 62.9 27.2 10.3 − 1.1 15.8 2.2
         May 70.0 45.2 1.4 24.8 30.7 − 19.2 − 10.4 8.8 24.6 5.6 − 0.9 20.7 − 0.7         June 66.0 47.9 − 6.0 18.1 12.2 18.4 − 19.8 − 38.3 24.9 9.8 − 0.4 7.4 8.1
         July 26.0 27.2 − 7.8 − 1.2 − 8.6 − 0.8 − 8.1 − 7.2 26.8 7.4 0.1 14.9 4.4
         Aug − 15.0 − 9.5 − 6.1 − 5.5 − 0.2 29.3 44.5 15.3 21.5 6.3 − 0.0 9.7 5.6
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2003          Jan 18.3 1.8 3.1 16.4 10.8 − 3.0 9.4 12.4 4.1 − 1.6 − 2.0 3.9 3.9
         Feb 0.7 7.9 − 1.3 − 7.2 0.5 10.3 20.2 9.9 4.4 6.3 − 1.2 0.8 − 1.5         Mar 4.6 2.7 − 1.2 1.9 5.1 18.7 25.2 6.5 1.7 1.9 − 1.6 − 1.1 2.6
         Apr 4.9 6.6 5.9 − 1.7 − 2.6 4.5 14.7 10.1 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 2.5 0.5 1.5
         May 1.9 4.0 3.0 − 2.1 2.4 27.6 22.6 − 5.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.5 4.8 − 4.4         June − 18.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 17.1 − 10.0 38.5 24.6 − 13.9 4.8 0.1 − 1.4 3.7 2.4
         July 0.6 − 8.4 − 0.5 9.0 − 1.6 − 24.6 − 18.6 6.0 8.7 4.9 − 2.1 4.9 1.0
         Aug − 13.6 2.7 0.9 − 16.3 − 11.0 16.7 − 20.6 − 37.3 5.7 3.2 − 1.5 2.2 1.8         Sep 17.7 12.8 − 3.6 4.9 10.8 − 1.8 10.5 12.3 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 9.1 − 4.8
         Oct − 1.8 − 9.3 − 3.4 7.5 4.5 6.4 − 0.2 − 6.6 3.1 0.3 0.1 2.6 0.2
         Nov 24.5 15.5 5.5 8.9 2.4 7.9 12.4 4.6 3.3 0.2 0.2 3.0 − 0.1         Dec − 10.1 0.0 1.1 − 10.2 − 7.8 11.4 12.4 1.1 − 0.2 1.5 1.0 − 2.9 0.2
2004          Jan − 0.6 − 6.8 1.4 6.2 6.1 23.0 34.9 11.9 2.6 − 0.2 − 1.1 6.5 − 2.7
         Feb 16.6 2.9 − 3.6 13.7 22.4 − 23.5 − 2.7 20.8 − 5.8 0.6 − 0.4 0.5 − 6.5         Mar 28.7 10.4 9.6 18.3 5.8 − 2.0 10.3 12.3 9.4 0.0 − 0.2 9.4 0.2
         Apr 10.8 16.4 13.3 − 5.6 1.1 14.8 22.0 7.2 13.0 4.5 − 1.2 6.2 3.4
         May − 10.4 − 10.6 − 8.3 0.1 6.0 11.3 − 4.9 − 16.2 5.0 4.3 − 0.9 4.9 − 3.3         June − 9.2 − 12.4 − 12.7 3.2 8.5 21.1 − 8.6 − 29.7 7.9 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 6.0
         July 6.4 − 4.1 − 1.5 10.5 1.5 − 3.3 − 9.4 − 6.1 7.8 1.7 0.1 2.2 3.9
         Aug − 6.3 − 7.1 − 4.4 0.8 5.4 11.5 11.7 0.2 3.6 2.0 − 0.0 5.4 − 3.7
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
15.2 22.0 − 8.6 − 33.0 − 60.8 − 7.4 − 53.3 2.7 25.0 14.6 19.5 7.5 2003          Jan 
18.6 − 9.3 − 40.7 28.1 10.4 7.2 3.2 2.4 15.3 0.4 12.4 − 0.2          Feb 
− 1.1 5.3 − 45.4 56.5 47.0 7.9 39.1 − 5.7 15.1 − 9.2 8.1 − 9.9          Mar 
− 16.5 0.8 − 85.0 49.7 31.2 9.1 22.1 11.1 7.4 6.4 10.2 18.6          Apr 
10.4 19.1 − 56.1 65.4 37.9 7.4 30.4 19.9 7.7 1.3 6.6 − 17.2          May
30.2 19.9 − 7.1 28.9 55.1 7.3 47.8 − 39.6 13.4 − 16.7 − 1.7 − 3.5          June
− 24.6 − 13.0 − 6.2 − 4.5 − 19.0 11.1 − 30.0 3.2 11.3 5.2 10.2 − 4.8          July− 10.0 − 31.3 − − 6.1 − 3.4 − 14.1 1.2 − 15.2 3.4 7.2 − 2.9 2.2 − 2.0          Aug 
20.9 23.1 − − 0.5 17.4 46.2 2.1 44.0 − 29.0 0.3 − 4.5 − 8.4 − 5.1          Sep 
− 18.0 3.1 − 50.3 19.8 4.3 6.4 − 2.1 10.4 5.1 13.2 5.7 11.6          Oct 
14.6 16.8 − 48.7 52.7 49.5 7.9 41.6 − 3.8 7.0 − 1.0 − 4.0 0.9          Nov 
− 26.8 − 49.2 − 66.7 96.8 67.4 18.8 48.6 0.7 28.7 − 16.0 − 2.8 − 11.3          Dec 
20.5 38.0 − − 11.1 − 31.0 − 26.9 − 8.8 − 18.1 − 21.6 17.5 6.9 9.0 4.1 2004          Jan 
18.9 − 8.1 − 26.0 2.4 1.7 4.3 − 2.6 − 6.1 6.7 14.0 7.5 2.2          Feb 
− 9.2 23.7 − 24.4 33.3 40.5 6.1 34.4 − 12.4 5.2 − 10.7 4.8 − 3.0          Mar 
− 4.7 21.0 − 52.6 33.1 24.4 9.8 14.6 0.4 8.3 5.8 8.4 5.4          Apr 
15.5 − 14.2 − 24.8 34.9 17.9 7.3 10.6 11.1 6.0 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 5.4          May
29.2 1.1 − 29.2 33.2 46.3 6.3 40.0 − 25.3 12.2 − 4.0 − 5.2 5.2          June
− 22.6 − 1.9 − 22.9 17.1 − 0.5 13.2 − 13.7 10.0 7.6 5.1 3.8 − 3.1          July− 8.5 14.0 − − 12.7 − 28.3 − 37.4 − 2.8 − 34.6 3.4 5.7 3.0 11.4 1.2          Aug 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Debt securities
Deposits with
Intra- with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 0.8 15.1 0.5 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 9.3 − 4.7 4.1 5.3 2.5 − 1.1 2003          Jan 
1.4 − 14.2 2.2 1.7 19.5 5.6 − 0.7 3.0 2.3 1.3 8.1          Feb 
− 1.7 22.8 1.5 2.5 0.4 7.1 − 5.2 1.7 0.4 0.5 − 4.0          Mar 
− 1.1 4.4 0.9 2.8 8.7 8.2 − 2.0 1.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.4          Apr 
2.2 14.8 2.4 1.3 15.3 6.8 7.4 0.7 1.0 0.4 − 1.0          May
0.4 13.3 0.6 2.8 1.9 16.4 − 11.8 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 1.6          June
− 2.8 − 15.7 1.1 3.4 − 14.2 − 12.5 − 1.3 2.0 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.2          July
0.6 − 4.5 2.5 − 0.1 1.2 1.7 2.9 2.7 1.5 − 0.4 − 7.2          Aug 0.3 11.8 1.3 0.9 1.5 10.8 − 13.8 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 0.5          Sep 
− 0.7 − 3.6 1.2 1.3 5.9 3.3 − 3.5 0.9 5.6 − 0.7 0.2          Oct 
0.1 3.3 1.0 2.4 25.5 22.8 − 0.3 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 4.1          Nov 0.2 4.2 0.2 4.5 − 3.0 − 10.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.9 0.2 1.2          Dec 
0.0 22.5 3.5 − 5.0 − 2.7 8.3 − 14.1 1.3 2.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 2004          Jan 
1.3 − 1.8 1.1 0.9 − 0.6 5.7 − 5.2 1.2 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0          Feb 
0.6 12.2 1.2 2.3 4.4 1.2 − 0.1 0.1 0.8 − 0.5 3.0          Mar 
− 0.6 12.7 1.9 2.7 0.5 5.8 − 5.0 0.9 − 1.0 0.1 − 0.3          Apr 
1.0 − 10.7 1.0 2.3 5.5 − 2.7 8.7 0.2 − 0.3 0.3 − 0.8          May2.4 10.3 0.6 2.3 − 8.7 3.3 − 9.8 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.8          June
− 1.0 0.1 1.7 3.6 − 3.9 − 8.5 3.8 0.5 0.6 3.9 − 4.2          July
2.4 − 3.3 3.0 − 0.8 2.5 1.7 0.7 0.7 − 2.5 1.3 0.8          Aug 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Up to end-2002, including national banknotes and German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the
coins still in circulation. — 10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
2002          July 13,678.9 9,652.9 7,586.1 6,692.6 344.4 549.1 2,066.8 828.5 1,238.3 2,755.6 1,270.3
         Aug 13,649.1 9,645.5 7,591.1 6,692.3 339.7 559.1 2,054.4 818.0 1,236.4 2,745.1 1,258.5         Sep 13,822.3 9,700.5 7,625.2 6,726.8 349.4 549.1 2,075.3 820.8 1,254.5 2,813.5 1,308.3
         Oct 13,863.8 9,726.3 7,657.4 6,742.7 353.1 561.6 2,068.8 820.4 1,248.5 2,862.9 1,274.6
         Nov 14,010.9 9,761.7 7,678.1 6,754.5 356.7 566.9 2,083.6 829.2 1,254.4 2,936.6 1,312.6         Dec 13,931.2 9,779.1 7,720.9 6,781.2 367.0 572.7 2,058.2 837.2 1,221.0 2,839.6 1,312.4
2003          Jan 13,975.4 9,853.6 7,748.3 6,804.6 375.0 568.7 2,105.3 829.2 1,276.1 2,851.5 1,270.3
         Feb 14,114.0 9,905.6 7,778.0 6,831.3 381.4 565.3 2,127.7 828.6 1,299.1 2,908.5 1,299.9         Mar 14,123.7 9,945.1 7,807.4 6,854.6 386.3 566.5 2,137.7 829.1 1,308.6 2,891.9 1,286.7
         Apr 14,227.9 10,027.8 7,880.8 6,891.0 404.3 585.5 2,147.0 823.5 1,323.5 2,905.4 1,294.7
         May 14,301.6 10,088.9 7,911.7 6,907.1 407.2 597.5 2,177.1 819.1 1,358.1 2,878.0 1,334.8         June 14,379.6 10,102.8 7,942.5 6,942.3 406.4 593.7 2,160.3 818.0 1,342.4 2,958.6 1,318.2
         July 14,372.0 10,160.5 7,983.4 6,963.1 403.9 616.4 2,177.2 826.1 1,351.1 2,943.4 1,268.1
         Aug 14,361.6 10,168.5 8,002.2 6,975.6 407.3 619.3 2,166.3 820.0 1,346.3 2,930.2 1,262.8         Sep 14,407.6 10,214.4 8,023.9 6,996.3 412.8 614.8 2,190.5 821.3 1,369.2 2,888.7 1,304.5
         Oct 14,493.3 10,261.3 8,058.2 7,025.0 420.4 612.7 2,203.2 821.1 1,382.1 2,951.8 1,280.1
         Nov 14,607.5 10,349.8 8,119.1 7,071.5 425.0 622.5 2,230.8 830.5 1,400.2 2,954.6 1,303.1         Dec 14,554.4 10,362.4 8,153.3 7,102.5 427.0 623.8 2,209.1 841.7 1,367.4 2,884.8 1,307.2
2004          Jan 14,765.8 10,411.8 8,177.3 7,118.0 426.5 632.8 2,234.5 839.2 1,395.3 3,014.0 1,339.9
         Feb 14,861.3 10,455.7 8,205.2 7,139.0 432.2 634.0 2,250.5 830.8 1,419.7 3,033.2 1,372.4         Mar 15,063.6 10,533.8 8,253.4 7,170.9 433.1 649.4 2,280.5 846.0 1,434.5 3,152.7 1,377.1
         Apr 15,226.1 10,624.2 8,338.7 7,229.0 437.6 672.1 2,285.5 840.2 1,445.3 3,229.3 1,372.6
         May 15,251.5 10,685.2 8,377.4 7,268.9 441.9 666.6 2,307.8 834.3 1,473.5 3,196.6 1,369.8         June 15,326.2 10,753.0 8,423.4 7,320.2 445.8 657.4 2,329.6 840.7 1,488.9 3,182.4 1,390.8
         July 15,348.0 10,780.9 8,451.6 7,354.6 448.1 648.9 2,329.3 848.0 1,481.3 3,184.0 1,383.1
         Aug 15,383.9 10,763.4 8,436.7 7,346.0 447.8 642.8 2,326.8 842.6 1,484.2 3,223.1 1,397.4
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
2002          July 4,303.6 3,317.5 2,589.5 2,291.3 69.8 228.4 728.0 489.0 239.0 801.2 184.9         Aug 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.2 181.5         Sep 4,355.6 3,327.5 2,605.3 2,301.6 66.5 237.3 722.2 477.0 245.2 841.9 186.1
         Oct 4,370.5 3,332.3 2,611.3 2,299.8 69.8 241.7 721.0 480.4 240.6 850.3 188.0
         Nov 4,413.9 3,341.1 2,615.3 2,299.5 69.6 246.2 725.8 481.7 244.1 879.3 193.5         Dec 4,359.5 3,344.6 2,630.8 2,304.4 66.6 259.8 713.8 478.4 235.4 823.8 191.1
2003          Jan 4,360.7 3,353.2 2,623.2 2,298.5 66.1 258.7 730.0 484.0 246.1 823.2 184.3
         Feb 4,383.3 3,351.8 2,627.3 2,303.8 66.5 257.0 724.6 477.9 246.6 841.2 190.2         Mar 4,395.2 3,351.2 2,624.8 2,302.6 67.2 255.0 726.4 474.6 251.7 861.1 182.9
         Apr 4,400.8 3,353.3 2,629.0 2,300.8 67.3 260.9 724.3 475.4 248.9 867.3 180.3
         May 4,401.1 3,351.6 2,629.9 2,298.8 67.9 263.2 721.7 470.7 251.1 871.8 177.7         June 4,411.5 3,334.6 2,629.8 2,301.7 67.0 261.1 704.8 463.7 241.2 906.3 170.6
         July 4,391.1 3,334.6 2,620.8 2,293.4 64.4 263.0 713.9 474.3 239.6 891.4 165.1
         Aug 4,373.2 3,322.7 2,624.8 2,296.4 64.5 263.9 697.9 469.1 228.8 886.0 164.4         Sep 4,384.6 3,337.1 2,634.6 2,309.9 64.2 260.5 702.5 463.0 239.4 877.7 169.8
         Oct 4,387.2 3,333.3 2,624.5 2,303.4 66.5 254.6 708.8 466.1 242.7 882.7 171.3
         Nov 4,409.5 3,355.4 2,637.9 2,311.5 66.9 259.5 717.5 472.5 245.0 884.0 170.2         Dec 4,392.5 3,337.7 2,630.9 2,303.9 69.0 258.0 706.7 469.9 236.8 880.9 173.9
2004          Jan 4,416.6 3,334.2 2,621.1 2,291.7 68.4 260.9 713.2 470.2 242.9 921.4 161.0
         Feb 4,424.0 3,346.3 2,619.5 2,295.4 67.9 256.2 726.7 461.6 265.2 916.1 161.5         Mar 4,479.7 3,374.8 2,629.5 2,295.8 66.6 267.0 745.3 474.2 271.1 939.4 165.5
         Apr 4,514.1 3,385.7 2,646.0 2,299.2 65.4 281.5 739.6 467.5 272.2 962.8 165.7
         May 4,495.6 3,374.2 2,634.5 2,296.1 66.2 272.3 739.7 461.6 278.0 952.1 169.3         June 4,477.8 3,364.6 2,621.6 2,295.8 66.5 259.2 742.9 456.3 286.6 944.6 168.6
         July 4,479.3 3,372.7 2,619.4 2,292.9 70.7 255.8 753.4 465.2 288.2 937.4 169.1
         Aug 4,477.8 3,363.2 2,609.0 2,286.8 69.1 253.1 754.2 460.6 293.6 948.7 165.9
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to end-2002, also including nati onal
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central banknotes and coins still in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*).
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). From 2002, the German contribution
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills includes the volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the
and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4From
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
296.6 5,725.7 5,384.9 5,422.5 1,872.6 948.2 82.6 1,154.1 1,258.9 106.2 2002          July
301.1 5,688.0 5,358.6 5,396.2 1,840.9 959.7 83.3 1,142.5 1,263.4 106.4          Aug 
306.7 5,730.1 5,399.2 5,434.7 1,894.9 941.0 82.9 1,143.6 1,265.5 106.8          Sep 
313.9 5,745.4 5,410.6 5,446.2 1,875.8 964.2 82.8 1,144.9 1,272.8 105.8          Oct 
321.4 5,799.5 5,467.0 5,504.7 1,927.1 956.8 82.4 1,148.4 1,284.7 105.3          Nov 341.2 5,879.5 5,566.7 5,592.2 1,980.7 947.8 81.2 1,163.9 1,313.4 105.2          Dec 
312.1 5,869.8 5,536.5 5,569.2 1,956.3 953.1 76.7 1,168.2 1,311.7 103.1 2003          Jan 
319.3 5,913.0 5,560.3 5,586.5 1,956.1 952.7 75.4 1,175.6 1,324.8 101.9          Feb 
327.2 5,963.6 5,610.2 5,639.9 1,995.3 948.2 75.9 1,182.7 1,337.5 100.4          Mar 
336.3 5,979.6 5,640.1 5,671.4 2,012.8 961.3 74.1 1,179.6 1,345.8 97.7          Apr 
343.8 6,041.4 5,695.7 5,715.4 2,035.9 972.4 73.0 1,185.2 1,352.6 96.4          May351.0 6,100.7 5,715.9 5,744.9 2,083.6 940.3 72.4 1,188.1 1,365.6 94.8          June
361.5 6,093.3 5,739.0 5,770.2 2,090.1 944.5 72.1 1,194.4 1,376.3 92.8          July
362.7 6,089.2 5,741.0 5,779.2 2,078.5 951.1 72.2 1,203.8 1,382.4 91.2          Aug 364.8 6,117.9 5,754.9 5,789.2 2,117.6 922.4 73.0 1,203.3 1,382.3 90.6          Sep 
371.2 6,118.4 5,769.3 5,806.7 2,112.8 934.7 73.9 1,208.4 1,386.3 90.6          Oct 
379.2 6,179.9 5,818.4 5,851.8 2,151.0 927.4 75.5 1,215.5 1,391.5 90.8          Nov 397.9 6,239.3 5,916.5 5,936.2 2,191.0 921.6 74.9 1,232.2 1,424.6 91.8          Dec 
389.1 6,244.5 5,891.5 5,923.5 2,177.9 904.2 75.1 1,235.3 1,440.3 90.8 2004          Jan 
393.5 6,263.6 5,893.3 5,924.9 2,171.9 899.2 74.6 1,242.6 1,446.1 90.5          Feb 
399.6 6,290.5 5,922.5 5,966.5 2,210.5 891.9 73.2 1,250.4 1,450.2 90.3          Mar 
409.4 6,322.1 5,949.8 5,997.8 2,225.2 893.8 71.7 1,261.1 1,456.8 89.2          Apr 
416.6 6,366.8 5,981.8 6,023.1 2,235.6 900.2 71.3 1,266.1 1,461.7 88.3          May423.0 6,435.3 6,025.4 6,061.8 2,277.0 876.1 71.6 1,276.2 1,472.9 88.0          June
436.2 6,417.9 6,030.5 6,069.3 2,260.6 886.8 70.9 1,283.6 1,479.4 88.0          July
433.4 6,385.0 6,003.2 6,046.1 2,224.4 891.8 69.4 1,289.6 1,483.0 88.0          Aug 
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
83.4 2,112.5 2,030.5 1,993.2 525.8 235.8 17.6 653.9 455.5 104.6 2002          July
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8          Aug 85.9 2,105.7 2,023.7 1,987.6 536.6 233.0 17.5 639.6 456.5 104.3          Sep 
87.4 2,115.1 2,035.2 2,003.0 538.0 243.7 17.5 641.5 458.8 103.5          Oct 
89.9 2,147.3 2,066.9 2,035.6 569.5 237.6 17.9 645.7 462.0 102.9          Nov 94.2 2,170.7 2,092.1 2,054.2 567.8 242.4 18.2 648.0 474.8 103.1          Dec 
84.9 2,159.7 2,082.0 2,048.3 561.2 238.7 18.6 649.7 478.9 101.2 2003          Jan 
86.6 2,173.9 2,094.9 2,058.5 564.8 237.3 18.5 656.1 481.8 100.0          Feb 
89.0 2,175.8 2,098.2 2,063.3 572.0 232.8 18.6 657.9 483.5 98.4          Mar 
91.9 2,176.7 2,100.4 2,068.2 580.4 233.5 18.1 655.8 484.6 95.8          Apr 
93.2 2,189.4 2,112.0 2,073.9 585.9 236.9 17.8 653.8 485.3 94.3          May96.0 2,194.7 2,115.7 2,076.1 600.0 225.8 17.6 653.4 486.3 92.9          June
99.4 2,183.0 2,107.8 2,071.3 591.1 225.3 17.3 658.5 488.3 90.8          July
99.3 2,193.4 2,117.6 2,082.5 593.2 228.9 17.5 662.7 491.0 89.3          Aug 
100.2 2,188.3 2,112.7 2,079.6 603.5 217.2 17.5 661.0 491.8 88.5          Sep 
101.5 2,188.7 2,113.6 2,083.5 606.9 216.1 17.8 661.3 492.8 88.6          Oct 
103.9 2,211.8 2,137.8 2,105.1 628.8 214.6 18.3 661.2 493.4 88.9          Nov 108.5 2,215.1 2,143.0 2,105.2 616.1 216.3 18.5 662.1 502.3 89.9          Dec 
103.5 2,209.9 2,137.7 2,102.7 626.1 202.7 18.5 662.9 503.6 88.8 2004          Jan 
104.4 2,213.0 2,140.9 2,103.8 630.1 198.8 18.3 663.3 504.7 88.5          Feb 
106.7 2,215.1 2,142.0 2,106.6 631.3 200.7 18.0 663.6 504.8 88.2          Mar 
109.3 2,219.4 2,145.3 2,112.5 637.8 196.2 17.5 668.3 505.6 87.1          Apr 
111.6 2,229.8 2,154.8 2,118.4 634.1 202.7 16.9 672.6 505.8 86.2          May113.8 2,229.2 2,151.6 2,114.1 636.3 193.0 16.6 676.9 505.5 85.8          June
117.4 2,226.0 2,149.7 2,113.7 629.2 197.9 16.2 678.5 506.0 85.9          July
116.7 2,232.2 2,153.1 2,119.1 630.6 199.7 16.0 680.3 506.6 85.8          Aug 
Bundesbank in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim
Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). — 5Excluding
volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can be central governments’ deposits. — 6 In Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
2002          July 151.9 151.3 69.3 51.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 228.8 224.9 450.1 1,795.6 1,478.8
         Aug 141.0 150.8 67.8 52.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 236.5 231.9 463.4 1,813.6 1,496.0         Sep 146.3 149.1 70.7 48.4 1.3 25.9 2.4 0.4 238.3 234.4 460.9 1,812.1 1,494.1
         Oct 151.8 147.4 72.2 45.3 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 235.6 232.1 463.1 1,822.4 1,492.8
         Nov 147.5 147.4 71.9 45.6 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 229.6 225.8 477.6 1,829.6 1,494.1         Dec 136.4 150.9 75.6 45.1 1.4 25.6 2.8 0.4 226.9 224.4 470.5 1,817.0 1,490.3
2003          Jan 154.7 145.9 71.0 45.9 1.2 24.8 2.6 0.4 232.8 229.6 535.0 1,793.4 1,481.6
         Feb 175.8 150.6 72.2 49.9 1.0 24.4 2.7 0.4 233.3 229.7 547.6 1,802.1 1,485.6         Mar 176.2 147.5 71.8 47.1 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 224.0 220.8 554.9 1,802.3 1,484.7
         Apr 159.7 148.4 75.0 45.2 1.0 24.2 2.8 0.3 230.5 227.0 565.5 1,832.5 1,516.2
         May 170.1 155.9 76.9 50.8 0.9 24.1 2.8 0.3 231.7 228.2 571.5 1,817.9 1,514.2         June 200.3 155.5 80.1 46.8 0.9 24.6 2.8 0.3 215.0 212.1 570.5 1,831.9 1,514.9
         July 173.0 150.1 75.2 46.4 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 219.9 216.4 585.0 1,847.9 1,516.8
         Aug 163.0 147.0 73.4 45.7 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.3 217.1 214.2 587.3 1,861.0 1,513.6         Sep 183.9 144.9 74.8 42.0 1.0 23.9 2.8 0.3 211.5 207.9 576.9 1,856.5 1,517.3
         Oct 165.8 145.9 78.1 39.9 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.4 224.7 221.1 582.3 1,892.5 1,538.7
         Nov 180.4 147.7 80.0 39.6 0.9 24.0 2.9 0.3 224.7 220.9 585.1 1,901.0 1,552.0         Dec 153.6 149.6 79.7 41.5 0.9 24.3 2.9 0.4 208.7 206.4 582.0 1,874.6 1,535.4
2004          Jan 174.1 146.9 78.4 41.2 0.9 23.2 2.9 0.3 214.6 211.9 591.6 1,899.3 1,548.4
         Feb 193.0 145.7 76.7 41.3 0.9 23.5 3.0 0.4 228.6 225.3 599.2 1,910.0 1,558.5         Mar 183.8 140.3 73.5 39.1 0.9 23.3 3.1 0.4 219.4 215.8 602.0 1,947.9 1,576.1
         Apr 179.6 144.7 77.7 39.2 1.0 23.1 3.2 0.4 225.5 222.5 610.8 1,972.4 1,586.2
         May 195.1 148.5 78.3 42.5 1.0 23.1 3.3 0.4 221.9 218.5 609.7 1,982.5 1,589.0         June 224.3 149.2 81.1 40.6 1.0 22.8 3.3 0.4 217.9 214.4 608.6 1,995.9 1,599.2
         July 201.7 146.9 77.7 41.4 1.0 22.9 3.4 0.4 222.9 219.5 613.0 2,011.9 1,607.5
         Aug 193.1 145.8 78.0 40.7 1.0 22.1 3.5 0.5 225.9 221.8 624.5 2,020.6 1,615.7
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
2002          July 47.6 71.7 13.9 32.3 1.0 22.5 1.5 0.4 3.1 3.1 31.4 817.3 715.7         Aug 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 32.9 840.1 733.6         Sep 49.9 68.2 13.1 30.0 0.9 22.2 1.6 0.4 10.7 10.7 33.5 841.1 733.7
         Oct 48.3 63.7 12.8 26.0 0.9 22.0 1.6 0.4 9.6 9.6 34.0 844.6 730.7
         Nov 47.7 64.1 13.1 26.2 0.9 21.9 1.6 0.4 6.4 6.4 33.9 844.9 728.7         Dec 47.7 68.7 15.7 27.7 1.0 22.2 1.6 0.4 3.3 3.3 32.9 826.4 716.6
2003          Jan 46.9 64.5 12.7 26.9 1.0 21.8 1.7 0.4 8.6 8.6 35.5 817.6 702.1
         Feb 48.3 67.2 14.8 28.0 0.7 21.7 1.7 0.4 10.9 10.9 36.7 825.8 710.3         Mar 46.6 65.9 14.5 27.1 0.7 21.6 1.6 0.3 11.2 11.2 37.3 819.4 701.0
         Apr 45.5 63.1 14.1 24.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 11.3 11.3 37.2 818.7 699.8
         May 47.7 67.8 14.8 28.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 12.3 12.3 37.7 814.0 698.7         June 48.1 70.5 17.4 28.4 0.7 22.1 1.6 0.3 10.8 10.8 37.2 819.6 699.7
         July 45.3 66.3 14.0 27.9 0.6 21.9 1.6 0.3 10.9 10.9 36.8 822.7 696.4
         Aug 46.0 65.0 14.0 27.1 0.6 21.2 1.7 0.3 12.4 12.4 36.4 821.8 688.4         Sep 46.3 62.5 13.9 24.7 0.7 21.2 1.7 0.3 15.6 15.6 36.3 825.6 689.8
         Oct 45.5 59.7 13.8 22.1 0.6 21.2 1.6 0.4 21.1 21.1 35.7 829.7 692.4
         Nov 45.7 61.0 14.4 22.6 0.6 21.4 1.6 0.3 20.0 20.0 35.2 833.2 698.6         Dec 45.9 64.0 15.8 23.9 0.6 21.6 1.6 0.4 14.1 14.1 35.3 826.4 693.3
2004          Jan 46.0 61.3 14.4 23.6 0.6 20.7 1.7 0.3 16.6 16.6 34.9 836.4 695.5
         Feb 47.3 62.0 15.2 23.3 0.6 20.9 1.7 0.4 17.5 17.5 34.7 833.7 695.2         Mar 47.9 60.6 15.4 21.7 0.6 20.7 1.8 0.4 18.2 18.2 34.2 851.5 698.5
         Apr 47.3 59.7 14.9 21.4 0.6 20.6 1.8 0.4 17.3 17.3 34.2 858.7 698.9
         May 48.3 63.1 15.7 24.1 0.6 20.5 1.8 0.4 17.0 17.0 34.6 861.5 701.5         June 50.7 64.4 17.3 24.0 0.6 20.3 1.8 0.4 16.1 16.1 34.4 859.1 697.1
         July 49.7 62.6 15.6 23.7 0.6 20.4 1.9 0.4 16.8 16.8 38.2 860.1 692.4
         Aug 52.1 61.0 15.7 22.8 0.6 19.5 2.0 0.5 14.2 14.2 39.5 865.1 696.9
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building with money market fund shares. — 5Excluding liabilities arising from
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central securities issued. — 6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 7The
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates should on
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with or M3. — 8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution, the difference
January 2002 Monthly Report , they were published in this table together
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post,
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reseves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
... ... 1,669.1 2,648.3 993.4 − 2.9 1,542.7 − 2,328.0 4,757.9 5,562.3 3,950.5 174.9 2002          July
... ... 1,685.7 2,616.3 1,004.3 − 0.2 1,525.4 − 2,301.2 4,749.7 5,576.1 3,967.0 177.7          Aug 
... ... 1,679.0 2,674.3 1,015.9 − 5.0 1,588.0 − 2,364.1 4,791.4 5,622.0 3,973.4 178.3          Sep 
... ... 1,687.5 2,697.5 1,014.0 3.3 1,568.2 − 2,354.8 4,810.4 5,642.8 3,979.4 180.3          Oct 
... ... 1,695.4 2,737.3 1,016.2 − 3.4 1,601.5 − 2,414.5 4,875.0 5,713.3 3,994.4 181.8          Nov ... ... 1,686.9 2,627.0 1,006.4 10.8 1,550.9 − 2,499.4 4,981.0 5,806.0 3,990.8 192.4          Dec 
... ... 1,684.3 2,662.5 1,016.9 10.0 1,541.9 − 2,440.8 4,923.5 5,800.5 3,997.7 192.8 2003          Jan 
... ... 1,693.1 2,714.0 1,010.3 13.5 1,560.5 − 2,451.2 4,951.5 5,841.4 4,005.7 197.4          Feb 
... ... 1,702.5 2,691.3 999.6 13.2 1,546.6 − 2,497.5 5,006.2 5,884.9 4,009.9 199.3          Mar 
... ... 1,710.0 2,714.0 997.0 − 20.9 1,592.6 − 2,527.2 5,052.4 5,970.9 4,008.9 198.1          Apr 
... ... 1,714.2 2,654.5 993.6 − 4.3 1,649.9 − 2,561.5 5,109.4 6,016.3 4,013.8 200.4          May... ... 1,732.1 2,669.3 997.6 15.5 1,626.1 − 2,605.4 5,130.1 6,015.5 4,037.7 186.6          June
... ... 1,753.8 2,679.5 999.8 6.0 1,577.2 − 2,584.8 5,124.3 6,023.3 4,065.6 154.4          July
... ... 1,768.5 2,678.3 1,014.3 − 3.1 1,553.2 − 2,573.2 5,126.0 6,022.8 4,102.0 156.2          Aug ... ... 1,768.9 2,643.4 1,016.6 5.8 1,612.6 − 2,615.6 5,136.9 6,013.0 4,103.7 156.3          Sep 
... ... 1,792.9 2,691.7 1,014.1 9.7 1,587.3 − 2,620.4 5,157.9 6,064.5 4,130.3 157.3          Oct 
... ... 1,801.5 2,686.4 1,014.3 5.0 1,631.3 − 2,667.8 5,206.1 6,115.4 4,146.5 158.1          Nov ... ... 1,786.3 2,635.1 1,010.7 7.8 1,597.8 − 2,729.3 5,297.9 6,177.0 4,145.6 162.9          Dec 
... ... 1,808.4 2,750.5 1,008.8 17.2 1,649.7 − 2,703.1 5,271.7 6,168.9 4,166.8 161.8 2004          Jan 
... ... 1,817.7 2,766.4 1,008.0 21.2 1,670.3 − 2,703.6 5,273.5 6,193.5 4,182.7 166.4          Feb 
... ... 1,858.2 2,857.4 1,025.9 21.6 1,699.1 − 2,745.7 5,310.2 6,221.4 4,248.4 168.2          Mar 
... ... 1,877.7 2,938.0 1,021.8 16.2 1,709.7 − 2,770.9 5,344.4 6,275.5 4,273.4 166.4          Apr 
... ... 1,893.3 2,931.9 1,016.1 17.4 1,688.1 − 2,787.8 5,376.3 6,297.2 4,287.3 166.0          May... ... 1,901.9 2,896.5 1,027.0 8.9 1,712.8 − 2,834.7 5,409.8 6,330.3 4,316.2 163.2          June
... ... 1,921.7 2,900.0 1,032.4 21.2 1,691.9 − 2,834.3 5,428.0 6,354.2 4,349.0 170.5          July
... ... 1,929.3 2,904.9 1,042.1 22.8 1,723.2 − 2,796.4 5,398.5 6,340.3 4,371.5 173.4          Aug 
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
26.0 38.7 752.7 705.5 267.7 − 39.0 405.0 18.8 539.7 1,283.4 1,382.7 1,801.9 − 2002          July
28.4 37.5 774.2 698.7 272.4 − 50.5 410.3 22.0 534.5 1,282.0 1,385.1 1,814.5 −          Aug 28.4 36.8 775.9 713.1 274.4 − 48.6 425.8 24.1 549.6 1,289.2 1,397.9 1,816.9 −          Sep 
32.2 37.1 775.2 706.5 272.8 − 42.1 430.1 26.2 550.8 1,299.3 1,411.9 1,815.4 −          Oct 
32.1 38.1 774.7 716.9 274.2 − 47.5 437.8 27.6 582.6 1,328.8 1,438.8 1,819.8 −          Nov 32.1 39.0 755.3 661.0 277.7 − 56.9 444.3 29.1 583.5 1,349.2 1,456.6 1,806.8 −          Dec 
26.9 37.4 753.4 670.1 283.0 − 50.3 436.6 29.6 574.0 1,339.7 1,448.0 1,809.5 − 2003          Jan 
34.6 37.7 753.4 679.1 279.5 − 63.2 440.5 31.9 579.5 1,347.5 1,467.5 1,811.1 −          Feb 
31.9 36.5 751.0 682.6 280.3 − 48.9 437.6 33.3 586.5 1,350.9 1,467.7 1,809.6 −          Mar 
33.5 36.3 748.9 686.4 281.1 − 55.5 444.9 34.2 594.5 1,357.8 1,476.1 1,803.5 −          Apr 
32.2 34.1 747.7 666.8 277.5 − 43.6 447.0 36.6 600.7 1,371.8 1,488.0 1,795.1 −          May33.0 31.6 754.9 661.1 279.0 − 42.6 451.8 37.3 617.5 1,377.9 1,490.5 1,802.6 −          June
30.6 31.7 760.4 668.9 280.4 − 63.1 451.5 38.4 605.0 1,366.0 1,476.0 1,812.5 −          July
25.7 29.5 766.7 640.5 285.5 − 67.4 450.4 40.8 607.2 1,374.0 1,477.8 1,825.8 −          Aug 26.4 29.3 770.0 639.8 279.8 − 60.1 459.3 42.2 617.3 1,370.9 1,478.4 1,820.9 −          Sep 
25.7 30.1 773.9 638.2 279.6 − 63.5 457.6 43.4 620.7 1,371.7 1,484.4 1,825.0 −          Oct 
28.6 31.5 773.1 635.5 279.6 − 70.8 465.2 44.4 643.2 1,394.3 1,509.6 1,824.4 −          Nov 30.0 31.3 765.1 625.5 279.6 − 67.8 464.3 44.6 631.9 1,395.2 1,505.9 1,818.7 −          Dec 
31.2 29.8 775.4 642.8 276.3 − 47.1 446.8 48.1 640.5 1,391.1 1,503.6 1,824.6 − 2004          Jan 
26.7 31.3 775.8 663.0 270.2 − 60.8 452.6 49.2 645.3 1,392.7 1,502.8 1,819.0 −          Feb 
29.6 31.4 790.6 680.7 273.8 − 54.5 460.7 50.4 646.8 1,394.2 1,507.6 1,837.3 −          Mar 
29.8 31.1 797.7 690.9 274.2 − 52.8 472.2 52.3 652.7 1,395.8 1,508.3 1,848.3 −          Apr 
27.6 32.3 801.5 671.6 270.6 − 61.3 471.9 53.3 649.8 1,401.8 1,513.4 1,851.8 −          May29.5 29.7 799.9 642.5 276.7 − 54.5 474.3 53.9 653.5 1,395.1 1,504.7 1,860.1 −          June
27.2 27.7 805.2 638.2 280.6 − 59.0 478.3 55.6 644.8 1,391.0 1,501.0 1,871.1 −          July
29.2 26.5 809.5 636.6 279.5 − 69.5 480.2 58.6 646.4 1,394.0 1,503.3 1,875.1 −          Aug 
between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central govern-
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen ments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetaryby the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo transactions, money
III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding central governments’ deposits), market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities up to 2
and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments’ years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2002          Apr 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6         June 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         July 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8         Sep 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
         Oct 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
         Nov 372.1 147.5 45.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 334.0 42.8 58.6 129.3 463.4         Dec 371.5 168.1 45.0 1.1 2.0 0.2 − 350.7 51.7 55.5 129.5 480.5
2003          Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3         June 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         July 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
         Aug 315.8 213.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 391.6 51.5 − 1.6 132.8 524.6         Sep 315.0 214.0 45.0 0.1 − 0.6 − 391.7 54.4 − 4.4 132.0 524.2
         Oct 321.3 208.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 395.5 48.3 − 1.1 131.9 527.5
         Nov 321.8 205.8 45.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 399.4 43.4 − 2.2 131.8 531.4         Dec 320.1 235.5 45.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 416.1 57.0 − 4.5 132.6 548.7
2004          Jan 309.2 232.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 427.6 37.0 − 11.2 133.6 561.4
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 303.3 219.4 56.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 418.0 48.6 − 21.1 134.1 552.3
         Apr 301.4 217.9 67.1 0.4 − 0.4 − 425.3 51.5 − 25.7 135.3 561.0
         May 310.7 213.2 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 436.4 46.0 − 18.9 135.0 571.5         June 311.3 224.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.5 − 442.5 52.2 − 21.1 137.1 580.1
         July 308.2 245.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 449.1 65.0 − 24.1 138.8 588.1
         Aug 300.8 253.6 75.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 460.9 61.1 − 31.8 139.1 600.1         Sep 299.4 251.6 75.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 462.8 56.3 − 32.4 139.3 602.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Apr 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0         June 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         July 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2         Sep 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
         Oct 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
         Nov 84.3 73.2 31.6 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.6 0.1 56.5 37.9 132.6         Dec 84.4 91.1 33.8 0.9 0.7 0.2 − 99.3 0.1 73.5 37.8 137.3
2003          Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7         June 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         July 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
         Aug 73.7 111.0 29.6 0.2 − 0.1 − 109.6 0.1 66.5 38.2 147.9         Sep 73.9 114.0 29.1 0.1 − 0.4 − 109.8 0.1 69.2 37.7 147.9
         Oct 75.7 106.5 29.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 110.8 0.1 63.4 37.5 148.4
         Nov 76.1 102.3 30.8 0.0 − 0.2 − 111.5 0.1 60.0 37.5 149.1         Dec 76.1 118.3 30.9 0.3 − 0.1 − 115.9 0.1 72.2 37.4 153.4
2004          Jan 73.1 119.5 32.3 0.2 − 0.1 − 116.2 0.1 70.9 37.9 154.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 72.4 109.7 41.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 113.5 0.1 72.0 37.9 151.5
         Apr 72.9 97.9 48.7 0.2 − 0.3 − 115.8 0.1 65.7 37.8 153.9
         May 75.4 100.7 51.8 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 119.3 0.1 70.9 37.7 157.0         June 75.6 115.6 49.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.2 0.1 80.9 38.3 159.9
         July 74.6 127.9 49.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 122.7 0.1 91.1 38.5 161.1
         Aug 72.1 136.9 50.3 0.0 − 0.1 − 126.2 0.1 94.7 38.3 164.6         Sep 72.2 131.7 50.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 127.5 0.1 88.8 37.9 165.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem forof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7 2002          Apr 
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 − 1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May
− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 − 2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          June
− 27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 − − 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 − 30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          July
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 − 9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug + 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep 
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2          Oct 
+ 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 4.8 − 2.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 5.8          Nov − 0.6 + 20.6 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 − + 16.7 + 8.9 − 3.1 + 0.2 + 17.1          Dec 
− 10.6 + 8.2
+ 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan 
− 4.5 − 7.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − − 13.2 + 6.5 − 5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb 
− 3.9 + 10.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 − 7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar 
− 15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 − 20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr 
− 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 − 5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 − 2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          June
− 10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 − 10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          July
− 4.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 8.9 − 0.9 − 4.5 + 0.6 + 9.4          Aug − 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 6.3 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.4 − + 3.8 − 6.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.3          Oct 
+ 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 3.9 − 4.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.9          Nov − 1.7 + 29.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − + 16.7 + 13.6 − 2.3 + 0.8 + 17.3          Dec 
− 10.9 − 2.9
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − + 11.5 − 20.0 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 12.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 5.9 − 13.2 + 11.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 9.6 + 11.6 − 9.9 + 0.5 − 9.1          Mar − 1.9 − 1.5 + 10.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 7.3 + 2.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.7          Apr 
+ 9.3 − 4.7 + 7.9 − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 5.5 + 6.8 − 0.3 + 10.5          May+ 0.6 + 11.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − 0.4 + 6.1 + 6.2 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 8.6          June
− 3.1 + 20.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 12.8 − 3.0 + 1.7 + 8.0          July
− 7.4 + 8.2
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 11.8 − 3.9 − 7.7 + 0.3 + 12.0          Aug 
− 1.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 − 4.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.2          Sep 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7 2002          Apr 
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 − 8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          June
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 − − 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          July
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 − 10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug − 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep 
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2          Oct 
+ 0.4 + 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.0          Nov + 0.1 + 17.8 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − + 4.7
+ 0.0 + 17.1 − 0.2 + 4.6          Dec 
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.0 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan 
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − − 2.8 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb + 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar 
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2
+ 0.0 − 3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr 
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May
− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          June
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          July
− 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 2.5 + 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.1 + 2.5          Aug + 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.8 − 7.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 − − 0.2 − + 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.2 + 0.6          Oct 
+ 0.4 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.7          Nov + 0.0 + 16.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.1 − + 4.4 + 0.0 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 4.2          Dec 
− 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 0.8 − 9.8 + 9.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 2.6          Mar + 0.5 − 11.8 + 7.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 2.4 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 2.5 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 3.1          May+ 0.2 + 14.9 − 2.4 + 0.1 − + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 2.9          June
− 1.0 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 1.3          July
− 2.5 + 9.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 3.5          Aug + 0.1 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.3 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 + 0.8          Sep 
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingeuro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2004 Jan                30 824.4 130.3 178.3 29.0 149.3 17.1 7.6 7.6 −
         Feb                  6 817.0 130.3 177.5 29.0 148.5 17.6 7.3 7.3 −
                              13 813.2 130.3 173.8 29.0 144.8 17.3 7.1 7.1 −
                              20 816.9 130.3 171.2 28.9 142.3 17.6 7.3 7.3 −
                              27 824.0 130.3 168.6 28.9 139.6 18.0 7.3 7.3 −
         Mar                  5 826.8 130.3 168.1 28.9 139.2 17.5 7.2 7.2 −
                              12 819.7 130.3 167.0 27.6 139.4 17.3 7.4 7.4 −
                              19 822.8 130.3 166.6 27.6 138.9 17.2 7.2 7.2 −
                              26 830.3 130.3 167.0 28.5 138.6 16.6 7.2 7.2 −
         Apr                  2 3 847.1 3 136.5 3 171.6 3 29.3 3 142.3 3 17.8 8.5 8.5 −
                                8 848.1 136.5 171.4 29.3 142.2 16.8 8.3 8.3 −
                              16 835.3 136.5 171.2 29.3 141.9 17.0 8.0 8.0 −
                              23 842.7 136.5 171.7 29.7 142.0 17.5 7.4 7.4 −
                              30 853.5 136.5 173.6 29.7 143.9 17.7 7.4 7.4 −
         May                 7 846.2 136.5 175.0 29.7 145.3 17.4 7.1 7.1 −
                              14 842.0 136.2 174.2 29.8 144.4 17.3 7.4 7.4 −
                              21 860.0 136.2 174.4 29.6 144.9 17.2 7.4 7.4 −
                              28 867.3 136.2 173.0 29.6 143.4 16.7 7.4 7.4 −
2004 June                 4 870.1 136.2 173.3 29.5 143.8 16.2 7.7 7.7 −
                              11 869.1 136.1 174.7 29.5 145.2 16.0 7.2 7.2 −
                              18 867.8 136.1 174.8 29.2 145.5 16.0 7.0 7.0 −
                              25 895.8 136.1 173.9 28.6 145.4 16.5 7.1 7.1 −
         July                 2 3 882.4 3 127.4 3 174.1 28.4 3 145.7 16.6 6.9 6.9 −
                                9 881.0 127.4 175.6 28.4 147.2 16.4 6.7 6.7 −
                              16 868.8 127.4 173.7 28.2 145.6 16.9 7.0 7.0 −
                              23 887.6 127.4 174.8 28.1 146.7 17.0 7.7 7.7 −
                              30 883.7 127.4 172.1 28.0 144.1 17.3 7.9 7.9 −
         Aug                  6 880.2 127.4 170.7 28.1 142.7 17.8 7.7 7.7 −
                              13 871.6 127.4 170.1 28.1 142.0 18.2 7.7 7.7 −
                              20 872.0 127.4 173.0 27.8 145.2 17.1 7.3 7.3 −
                              27 881.9 127.4 170.0 27.8 142.3 16.8 7.8 7.8 −
         Sep                  3 876.6 127.4 168.8 27.6 141.2 17.9 7.7 7.7 −
                              10 874.6 127.4 167.5 27.4 140.1 17.6 7.9 7.9 −
                              17 875.2 127.4 167.7 27.5 140.2 17.5 7.6 7.6 −
                              24 885.8 127.4 168.8 27.2 141.6 17.3 8.1 8.1 −
         Oct                  1 3 882.3 3 130.7 3 165.3 26.5 3 138.8 17.1 7.6 7.6 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Nov 229.9 36.2 53.0 8.6 44.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 240.0 36.2 3 48.8 8.3 3 40.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2003          Jan 233.9 36.2 48.9 8.2 40.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 236.2 36.2 49.2 8.2 41.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 239.2 3 34.1 3 48.4 8.3 3 40.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 230.5 34.1 47.0 8.2 38.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 258.1 34.1 47.8 8.3 39.6 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 258.2 3 33.4 3 45.0 8.3 3 36.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 246.9 33.4 44.8 8.3 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 248.9 33.4 45.5 8.3 37.1 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 257.5 3 36.5 3 44.7 8.5 3 36.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 257.6 36.5 45.0 8.5 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 254.4 36.5 44.5 8.5 36.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 267.7 36.5 3 40.1 7.6 3 32.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2004          Jan 258.1 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 258.2 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 256.2 3 38.3 3 41.5 7.6 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 268.0 38.3 42.1 7.9 34.2 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 276.6 38.3 41.5 7.8 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 290.3 3 35.8 3 41.2 7.4 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 295.9 35.8 40.4 7.4 33.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 284.2 35.8 39.8 7.4 32.4 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 283.6
3 36.7 3 39.1 7.0 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
279.0 224.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 63.6 42.7 104.7 2004 Jan                30
270.0 215.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 65.3 42.6 105.3          Feb                  6
268.0 213.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.5 66.0 42.6 106.5                               13
275.0 220.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.4 66.1 42.6 105.4                               20
283.9 218.7 65.0 − − 0.2 0.0 1.3 66.5 42.6 105.4                               27
285.9 220.7 65.0 − − 0.2 0.0 1.2 68.0 42.6 106.0          Mar                  5
277.7 212.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.2 1.2 68.9 42.6 107.3                               12
281.5 216.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.3 69.0 42.6 107.1                               19
289.5 224.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.2 68.9 42.6 106.9                               26
293.0 218.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 3 68.5 42.6 3 107.5          Apr                  2
293.5 218.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 69.9 42.6 108.1                                 8
280.5 205.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 70.0 42.6 108.4                               16
286.0 211.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.9 71.2 42.5 108.9                               23
295.1 220.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 71.0 42.5 108.7                               30
286.1 211.0 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 1.1 71.8 42.6 108.6          May                  7
282.0 207.0 75.0 − − 0.0 − 0.6 72.5 42.6 109.3                               14
298.6 223.5 75.0 − − 0.1 − 0.7 73.6 42.6 109.4                               21
308.2 232.5 75.0 − − 0.6 0.0 0.9 72.8 42.6 109.6                               28
311.1 236.0 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 0.7 72.9 42.6 109.4 2004 June                  4
308.6 233.5 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 0.9 73.6 42.6 109.4                               11
307.0 232.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 73.8 42.6 109.6                               18
335.2 260.0 75.0 − − 0.2 0.0 0.8 73.7 42.6 109.9                               25
331.0 256.0 75.0 − − 0.0 − 0.7 3 73.4 42.1 3 110.2          July                  2
328.0 253.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.5 73.8 42.1 110.5                                 9
317.5 242.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.8 73.2 42.1 110.2                               16
334.5 259.5 75.0 − − − 0.0 0.9 72.9 42.1 110.5                               23
333.0 258.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.9 67.5 42.1 115.5                               30
330.0 255.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 0.8 68.0 42.1 115.7          Aug                  6
322.5 247.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 68.0 42.1 114.7                               13
321.0 246.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 1.4 67.9 42.1 114.9                               20
334.0 259.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 67.9 42.1 114.6                               27
329.0 254.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.5 67.9 42.1 114.3          Sep                  3
327.6 252.5 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 1.5 67.9 42.1 115.2                               10
328.0 253.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.6 68.0 42.1 115.4                               17
337.5 262.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.6 67.6 42.1 115.4                               24
334.0 259.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.8 67.4 42.1 3 116.3          Oct                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
111.1 77.0 34.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8 2002          Nov 
125.5 87.1 36.1 − − 2.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec 
124.3 87.5 36.6 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.8 2003          Jan 
126.3 91.6 34.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Feb 
130.9 98.4 32.1 − − 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.1          Mar 
125.0 92.5 32.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Apr 
151.8 118.7 32.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          May155.0 122.5 32.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          June
144.0 115.1 28.8 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.9          July
145.2 116.0 29.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Aug 151.4 121.5 29.7 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4
3 20.1          Sep 
133.0 101.9 31.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 38.4          Oct 145.4 115.0 30.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 23.3          Nov 162.3 129.9 32.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Dec 
157.4 117.4 40.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0 2004          Jan 
157.6 109.9 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 
141.7 94.1 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 30.1          Mar 
153.7 104.3 49.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.1          Apr 
173.2 123.7 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          May189.4 139.9 49.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          June
196.0 145.1 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
184.8 135.3 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Aug 173.6 127.4 45.6 − − 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.5          Sep 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  2,3 liabilities
 Eurosystem 5
 
2004 Jan                30 824.4 415.6 132.1 132.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 60.1 54.0 6.1
         Feb                  6 817.0 418.8 133.2 133.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 48.6 42.5 6.1
                              13 813.2 418.5 135.4 135.3 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 44.8 38.7 6.2
                              20 816.9 417.5 131.0 131.0 0.0 − − − 0.3 1.1 56.7 50.4 6.3
                              27 824.0 418.9 128.9 128.8 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 67.4 61.1 6.2
         Mar                  5 826.8 423.7 137.7 137.6 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 56.6 50.8 5.9
                              12 819.7 424.1 135.2 135.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 51.8 46.1 5.7
                              19 822.8 423.8 133.2 133.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 57.4 51.8 5.6
                              26 830.3 423.8 131.9 131.8 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 66.7 61.1 5.5
         Apr                  2 6 847.1 431.0 140.2 140.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 54.9 48.9 5.9
                                8 848.1 441.4 135.1 135.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 51.6 45.6 6.0
                              16 835.3 435.8 135.2 135.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 44.3 38.3 6.0
                              23 842.7 432.0 131.1 131.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 59.0 53.4 5.7
                              30 853.5 435.4 133.6 133.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 62.1 56.3 5.8
         May                 7 846.2 439.8 136.8 136.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 46.1 40.2 5.8
                              14 842.0 440.1 136.7 136.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 43.3 37.5 5.8
                              21 860.0 441.1 137.4 137.3 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 58.3 52.3 6.0
                              28 867.3 443.7 138.7 136.0 2.8 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 64.0 58.2 5.8
2004 June                 4 870.1 447.4 139.3 139.1 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 63.6 57.5 6.1
                              11 869.1 448.4 141.1 141.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 59.0 53.0 6.0
                              18 867.8 447.6 140.4 140.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 57.7 51.5 6.2
                              25 895.8 448.1 136.8 136.7 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 88.0 82.4 5.6
         July                 2 6 882.4 454.5 140.8 140.3 0.5 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 73.1 67.2 5.9
                                9 881.0 458.2 137.6 137.5 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 70.7 65.0 5.7
                              16 868.8 459.2 140.1 140.1 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 56.1 50.4 5.6
                              23 887.6 458.7 136.8 136.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 78.2 72.5 5.6
                              30 883.7 463.1 131.3 131.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 77.1 71.2 5.9
         Aug                  6 880.2 467.9 140.1 140.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 59.7 53.7 6.0
                              13 871.6 466.7 138.7 138.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 55.9 49.9 5.9
                              20 872.0 462.2 140.4 140.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 56.1 50.2 5.9
                              27 881.9 460.0 137.9 137.9 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 74.0 68.4 5.6
         Sep                  3 876.6 464.3 137.7 137.6 0.1 − − − 0.1 1.1 64.1 58.3 5.8
                              10 874.6 465.3 137.4 137.4 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 62.9 57.1 5.8
                              17 875.2 463.9 138.5 138.4 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 61.6 55.7 5.9
                              24 885.8 462.6 137.2 137.2 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 73.9 68.0 5.9
         Oct                  1 6 882.3 466.8 142.5 142.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 60.9 54.9 6.0
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Nov 229.9 95.7 41.0 40.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.8 0.1 0.7
         Dec 6 240.0 104.5 44.8 44.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
2003          Jan 233.9 94.5 40.9 40.8 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Feb 236.2 96.1 38.1 38.1 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.5         Mar 
6 239.2 98.1 48.1 48.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Apr 230.5 101.8 36.4 36.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         May 258.1 103.2 36.3 36.2 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         June
6 258.2 105.2 38.8 38.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 246.9 108.5 39.6 39.5 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Aug 248.9 108.6 41.0 41.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 
6 257.5 109.2 41.7 41.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 257.6 110.8 42.0 42.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         Nov 254.4 112.7 36.4 36.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5         Dec 
6 267.7 121.4 44.6 44.5 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.6 0.1 0.5
2004          Jan 258.1 112.4 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Feb 258.2 113.3 36.8 36.7 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Mar 
6 256.2 115.0 31.0 31.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.4 0.4
         Apr 268.0 117.7 38.3 38.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         May 276.6 120.8 43.4 43.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         June
6 290.3 122.3 36.6 36.6 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 295.9 126.0 39.3 39.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Aug 284.2 125.2 41.4 40.9 0.4 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 283.6 126.5 40.1 40.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2From 2002, euro
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial banknotes and up to end-2002, banknotes still in circulation issued by the
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states national central banks of the Eurosystem (see also footnote 4). —(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and 3According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euroter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
3 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  4 
Eurosystem 5
 
9.6 0.4 13.5 13.5 − 5.8 54.8 − 69.1 62.0 2004 Jan                30
9.5 0.4 15.0 15.0 − 5.8 53.2 − 69.1 62.0          Feb                  6
9.5 0.4 12.3 12.3 − 5.8 53.4 − 69.1 62.5                               13
9.3 0.4 10.6 10.6 − 5.8 52.5 − 69.1 62.8                               20
9.3 0.4 8.7 8.7 − 5.8 52.1 − 69.1 62.1                               27
10.0 0.5 8.9 8.9 − 5.8 51.0 − 69.1 62.1          Mar                  5
9.1 0.5 9.7 9.7 − 5.8 51.0 − 69.1 62.1                               12
9.0 0.4 9.3 9.3 − 5.8 51.5 − 69.1 62.1                               19
9.0 0.4 9.3 9.3 − 5.8 51.5 − 69.1 61.6                               26
8.6 0.3 9.6 9.6 − 5.9 6 55.2 − 6 80.6 59.5          Apr                  2
8.6 0.3 9.0 9.0 − 5.9 55.0 − 80.6 59.3                                 8
8.5 0.3 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 55.6 − 80.6 59.3                               16
8.4 0.3 8.8 8.8 − 5.9 56.0 − 80.6 59.3                               23
8.6 0.3 10.3 10.3 − 5.9 56.2 − 80.6 59.3                               30
8.2 0.3 11.2 11.2 − 5.9 56.6 − 80.6 59.4          May                  7
8.1 0.3 10.2 10.2 − 5.9 56.1 − 80.6 59.4                               14
8.0 0.3 10.2 10.2 − 5.9 57.3 − 80.6 59.5                               21
8.0 0.3 8.2 8.2 − 5.9 56.6 − 80.6 59.8                               28
7.8 0.3 8.2 8.2 − 5.9 55.9 − 80.6 59.8 2004 June                  4
7.9 0.3 9.3 9.3 − 5.9 55.6 − 80.6 59.8                               11
7.8 0.3 9.9 9.9 − 5.9 56.5 − 80.6 59.8                               18
8.0 0.2 10.3 10.3 − 5.9 56.8 − 80.6 59.8                               25
9.0 0.2 11.5 11.5 − 5.9 6 56.0 − 6 70.2 59.8          July                  2
8.2 0.2 13.1 13.1 − 5.9 55.8 − 70.2 59.8                                 9
8.2 0.2 11.3 11.3 − 5.9 56.6 − 70.2 59.8                               16
8.6 0.2 11.5 11.5 − 5.9 56.6 − 70.2 59.8                               23
8.8 0.2 9.4 9.4 − 5.9 56.8 − 70.2 59.8                               30
8.5 0.2 9.8 9.8 − 5.9 56.8 − 70.2 59.8          Aug                  6
8.7 0.2 9.9 9.9 − 5.9 54.5 − 70.2 59.8                               13
9.0 0.2 11.9 11.9 − 5.9 55.1 − 70.2 59.8                               20
9.0 0.2 8.8 8.8 − 5.9 55.0 − 70.2 59.8                               27
9.3 0.3 8.9 8.9 − 5.9 55.1 − 70.2 59.8          Sep                  3
9.1 0.3 7.4 7.4 − 5.9 55.2 − 70.2 59.8                               10
9.1 0.4 7.4 7.4 − 5.9 57.3 − 70.2 59.8                               17
9.3 0.4 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 56.9 − 70.2 59.8                               24
9.2 0.3 8.2 8.2 − 5.8 6 56.9 − 70.7 59.9          Oct                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
7.1 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.6 10.5 27.6 37.3 5.1 2002          Nov 
7.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.6 11.1 29.1 6 34.2 5.0          Dec 
7.8 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.6 17.6 29.6 34.2 5.0 2003          Jan 
7.3 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 19.1 31.9 34.2 5.0          Feb 
7.1 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 6 11.7 33.3 6 30.4 5.0          Mar 
7.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 11.6 34.2 30.4 5.0          Apr 7.3 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 34.5 36.6 30.4 5.0          May7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 31.3 37.3
6 28.2 5.0          June
7.3 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 14.9 38.4 28.2 5.0          July7.4 0.0 3.5 3.5 − 1.5 12.4 40.8 28.2 5.0          Aug 7.3 0.0 3.6 3.6 − 1.5 16.2 42.2
6 30.2 5.0          Sep 
7.4 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.5 12.9 43.4 30.2 5.0          Oct 7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 12.9 44.4 30.2 5.0          Nov 7.7 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.4
6 10.5 44.6 6 29.1 5.0          Dec 
7.3 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 11.4 48.1 29.1 5.0 2004          Jan 
7.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.4 12.7 49.2 29.1 5.0          Feb 6.5 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.5 10.8 50.4
6 32.2 5.0          Mar 
6.2 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 10.9 52.3 32.2 5.0          Apr 5.8 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 11.5 53.3 32.2 5.0          May5.6 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 32.2 53.9
6 29.3 5.0          June
5.9 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.5 30.3 55.6 29.3 5.0          July5.8 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 15.2 58.6 29.3 5.0          Aug 5.6 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4 12.0 60.9 29.6 5.0          Sep 
 
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of eu ro
related to euro-banknote issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem
euro banknotes in circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly claim/ liability related to banknote issue“. — 4For the Deutsche Bundes-
basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro bank- bank: from 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-notes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The note 2). — 5Source: ECB. — 6Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2002          Nov 6,453.5 13.2 2,130.2 1,780.8 1,150.6 630.2 349.5 267.3 82.1 3,336.6 3,088.4 2,496.7 2,238.4
         Dec 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003          Jan 6,380.7 13.2 2,104.3 1,748.5 1,136.2 612.3 355.8 277.0 78.8 3,348.8 3,101.1 2,501.4 2,237.9
         Feb 6,424.9 13.2 2,124.3 1,751.7 1,142.1 611.7 370.5 289.5 81.1 3,347.4 3,097.7 2,501.7 2,239.2         Mar 6,434.8 12.9 2,121.5 1,747.2 1,135.0 614.4 371.9 288.9 83.1 3,346.7 3,100.4 2,498.0 2,238.1
         Apr 6,430.3 13.8 2,107.6 1,732.2 1,118.6 613.6 375.4 291.6 83.8 3,348.8 3,102.2 2,499.1 2,234.6
         May 6,467.7 14.0 2,144.0 1,756.9 1,143.6 613.2 387.1 303.3 83.8 3,347.2 3,101.9 2,499.2 2,232.0         June 6,472.9 13.3 2,139.0 1,748.0 1,137.1 610.9 390.9 305.4 85.5 3,330.2 3,089.9 2,502.9 2,239.7
         July 6,425.7 13.3 2,113.5 1,728.1 1,109.7 618.4 385.3 297.4 88.0 3,330.2 3,093.7 2,494.1 2,231.1
         Aug 6,395.1 13.5 2,105.5 1,720.3 1,104.5 615.8 385.2 296.8 88.3 3,318.3 3,084.7 2,495.6 2,231.4         Sep 6,403.1 13.3 2,099.4 1,712.2 1,095.3 616.9 387.2 297.5 89.7 3,332.6 3,089.6 2,504.9 2,245.2
         Oct 6,399.3 13.6 2,092.9 1,715.9 1,096.1 619.9 376.9 285.3 91.7 3,328.9 3,086.1 2,496.9 2,242.9
         Nov 6,456.1 13.1 2,126.2 1,742.4 1,117.5 624.9 383.7 292.5 91.3 3,350.9 3,103.5 2,505.0 2,246.9         Dec 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004          Jan 6,424.2 13.2 2,084.1 1,713.6 1,101.3 612.4 370.4 278.3 92.1 3,329.8 3,078.3 2,489.0 2,230.4
         Feb 6,448.7 13.2 2,100.2 1,722.7 1,101.9 620.8 377.5 282.5 94.9 3,341.8 3,081.9 2,483.5 2,230.2         Mar 6,506.7 12.7 2,106.5 1,725.6 1,098.7 626.9 380.9 282.2 98.7 3,370.4 3,102.9 2,491.9 2,228.9
         Apr 6,568.8 12.9 2,132.5 1,749.7 1,115.1 634.6 382.9 282.4 100.4 3,381.2 3,110.1 2,506.6 2,230.4
         May 6,583.5 13.8 2,163.3 1,771.6 1,127.6 644.0 391.7 289.0 102.7 3,369.7 3,101.0 2,497.0 2,229.7         June 6,551.3 13.1 2,150.2 1,746.3 1,112.7 633.6 404.0 299.5 104.4 3,360.1 3,090.4 2,483.2 2,229.4
         July 6,574.9 13.2 2,171.4 1,765.1 1,130.4 634.7 406.3 303.2 103.0 3,368.3 3,093.3 2,477.1 2,225.1
         Aug 6,567.5 13.2 2,166.6 1,759.6 1,126.4 633.2 407.0 301.7 105.3 3,358.7 3,086.1 2,470.3 2,221.8
 Changes 1
1996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 − 0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.21999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.12002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.4
2002          Dec − 29.0 4.7 3.0 1.0 13.7 − 12.7 1.9 4.4 − 2.4 11.4 10.8 16.1 7.8
2003          Jan − 14.6 − 4.7 − 25.1 − 30.7 − 28.1 − 2.7 5.7 5.3 0.4 18.3 17.1 3.7 1.4
         Feb 41.3 0.0 17.0 3.2 5.9 − 2.8 13.9 12.5 1.4 0.7 − 1.3 2.4 3.4         Mar 14.1 − 0.4 − 2.9 − 4.3 − 7.1 2.8 1.4 − 0.6 2.1 4.6 7.8 1.4 3.9
         Apr 4.5 1.0 − 13.7 − 17.2 − 16.5 − 0.8 3.5 2.7 0.8 4.9 4.2 3.2 − 1.2
         May 57.3 0.2 36.6 24.8 25.1 − 0.3 11.9 11.8 0.1 1.9 2.5 2.9 − 0.0         June − 5.9 − 0.7 − 5.2 − 8.9 − 6.5 − 2.4 3.8 2.0 1.7 − 18.0 − 12.5 3.2 7.2
         July − 49.6 − 0.1 − 25.7 − 20.1 − 27.4 7.3 − 5.6 − 8.0 2.4 0.6 4.5 − 8.1 − 8.1
         Aug − 43.7 0.3 − 8.1 − 7.9 − 5.2 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 − 13.6 − 10.0 0.5 − 0.6         Sep 26.2 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 8.1 − 9.2 1.2 2.1 0.7 1.4 17.7 7.4 11.8 16.2
         Oct − 5.0 0.3 − 6.5 4.1 0.8 3.3 − 10.6 − 12.6 2.0 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 1.7
         Nov 67.6 − 0.5 33.6 26.6 21.4 5.1 7.1 7.2 − 0.1 24.5 19.2 9.8 5.6         Dec − 8.6 4.2 − 14.4 − 10.3 − 0.7 − 9.6 − 4.1 − 4.7 0.7 − 10.1 − 13.7 − 1.4 0.3
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 4.1 − 26.5 − 18.1 − 15.5 − 2.6 − 8.5 − 9.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 4.6 − 6.6
         Feb 26.4 0.0 17.3 9.0 0.4 8.6 8.3 4.2 4.1 16.6 8.0 − 1.1 2.5         Mar 47.2 − 0.5 6.2 2.8 − 3.2 6.0 3.4 − 0.3 3.7 28.7 21.7 9.0 − 0.9
         Apr 57.9 0.1 26.1 24.1 16.4 7.7 1.9 0.2 1.7 10.8 7.1 14.6 1.4
         May 19.5 1.0 30.7 21.9 12.5 9.3 8.9 6.5 2.3 − 10.4 − 8.2 − 8.8 0.1         June − 33.2 − 0.7 − 13.0 − 25.2 − 14.9 − 10.4 12.2 10.6 1.7 − 9.2 − 10.1 − 13.2 0.2
         July 21.8 0.1 23.4 18.8 17.7 1.2 4.6 3.7 0.9 6.4 3.3 − 5.6 − 3.8
         Aug − 5.3 − 0.1 − 7.5 − 5.5 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 2.0 − 4.3 2.3 − 6.3 − 6.7 − 6.4 − 2.9
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.7 645.6 166.4 2003
258.2 591.7 449.2 142.5 248.2 118.6 61.0 129.6 28.0 101.6 791.0 634.2 182.4 2002          Nov 
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9          Dec 
263.4 599.8 453.0 146.7 247.6 121.8 60.5 125.8 26.5 99.3 738.3 591.8 176.2 2003          Jan 
262.4 596.0 447.3 148.7 249.7 125.6 64.6 124.1 26.2 97.9 757.7 612.1 182.2          Feb 
259.9 602.4 444.0 158.4 246.3 126.8 64.5 119.5 26.2 93.3 778.6 630.9 175.1          Mar 
264.5 603.1 445.8 157.4 246.6 129.9 66.2 116.7 25.2 91.5 787.6 641.1 172.5          Apr 
267.2 602.7 439.8 162.9 245.3 130.7 66.7 114.6 26.5 88.2 792.4 644.3 170.2          May263.2 587.0 434.6 152.4 240.2 126.9 61.9 113.4 24.6 88.7 827.6 668.9 162.8          June
263.0 599.6 444.9 154.7 236.5 126.7 62.3 109.8 24.9 84.9 811.5 651.6 157.3          July
264.1 589.1 440.6 148.5 233.6 129.2 65.0 104.4 24.1 80.3 801.2 642.0 156.6          Aug 259.8 584.6 435.2 149.4 243.1 129.7 64.7 113.4 23.4 90.0 795.8 642.4 161.9          Sep 
254.0 589.2 436.6 152.6 242.8 127.6 60.6 115.2 25.1 90.1 800.6 643.9 163.3          Oct 
258.1 598.5 442.5 156.0 247.4 132.9 64.7 114.5 25.6 89.0 803.7 648.2 162.2          Nov 256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.7 645.6 166.4          Dec 
258.6 589.2 440.2 149.0 251.5 132.0 61.2 119.5 25.6 93.9 843.7 683.0 153.4 2004          Jan 
253.3 598.3 432.1 166.2 260.0 136.0 65.2 124.0 25.0 99.0 839.5 680.6 154.0          Feb 
263.0 611.0 444.9 166.2 267.4 137.6 67.0 129.8 24.9 104.9 859.1 697.2 158.0          Mar 
276.2 603.5 437.2 166.3 271.1 139.4 68.8 131.7 25.8 105.9 884.1 722.1 158.1          Apr 
267.2 604.1 431.4 172.7 268.7 137.6 66.3 131.1 25.8 105.3 875.0 707.5 161.6          May253.9 607.2 426.2 181.0 269.7 138.4 66.5 131.3 25.7 105.6 867.0 695.6 160.8          June
252.0 616.2 434.4 181.8 275.0 142.3 67.7 132.8 26.4 106.4 860.7 687.7 161.3          July
248.5 615.8 429.9 186.0 272.6 138.7 65.0 133.9 26.2 107.6 871.0 696.4 158.0          Aug 
Changes 1
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 199630.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 − 2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 199830.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 113.4 98.5 − 38.7 2003
8.3 − 5.3 − 0.8 − 4.6 0.6 6.9 3.1 − 6.3 − 2.3 − 4.0 − 39.1 − 32.8 − 8.4 2002          Dec 
2.3 13.4 4.6 8.8 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.7 3.0 1.1 2.0 9.4 10.1 − 12.5 2003          Jan 
− 1.0 − 3.7 − 5.7 2.0 2.0 5.5 5.8 − 3.5 − 2.0 − 1.4 19.9 20.7 3.6          Feb − 2.5 6.4 − 3.3 9.7 − 3.2 1.3 0.0 − 4.5 0.1 − 4.5 24.4 21.8 − 11.6          Mar 
4.4 1.0 1.8 − 0.9 0.7 3.4 1.9 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.7 16.1 16.3 − 3.8          Apr 2.9 − 0.4 − 5.9 5.5 − 0.6 1.1 1.0 − 1.7 1.5 − 3.1 21.8 18.8 − 3.2          May
− 4.0 − 15.7 − 5.2 − 10.5 − 5.6 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.9 0.5 25.4 16.1 − 7.5          June
0.0 12.6 10.3 2.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 0.3 − 3.6 0.3 − 3.9 − 18.6 − 19.0 − 5.9          July1.1 − 10.5 − 4.3 − 6.2 − 3.6 2.2 2.4 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 4.8 − 21.0 − 19.0 − 1.2          Aug 
− 4.3 − 4.4 − 5.4 0.9 10.3 1.0 0.3 9.3 − 0.5 9.9 10.2 14.5 4.4          Sep 
− 5.6 5.3 1.4 3.9 0.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 2.2 1.6 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 3.5          Oct 
4.1 9.4 6.0 3.4 5.3 5.7 4.3 − 0.4 0.6 − 1.0 13.0 12.4 − 3.0          Nov 
− 1.7 − 12.4 − 2.9 − 9.5 3.6 1.4 − 1.4 2.2 0.5 1.7 13.4 9.4 − 1.7          Dec 
2.1 3.6 0.6 3.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 2.7 − 0.4 3.1 34.7 32.1 − 18.8 2004          Jan 
− 3.7 9.1 − 8.0 17.2 8.6 4.0 4.0 4.6 − 0.6 5.2 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 4.8          Feb 
9.8 12.7 12.7 − 0.0 7.0 1.4 1.6 5.6 − 0.1 5.8 10.7 8.6 2.1          Mar 
13.2 − 7.5 − 7.6 0.1 3.6 1.8 1.7 1.9 0.9 1.0 21.3 21.2 − 0.4          Apr 
− 8.9 0.6 − 5.9 6.5 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 2.4 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.4 − 10.4 2.6          May
− 13.4 3.1 − 5.2 8.3 0.9 0.8 0.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.2 − 8.9 − 14.1 − 1.5          June
− 1.8 9.0 8.2 0.8 3.1 1.5 1.2 1.5 0.8 0.8 − 8.2 − 9.8 0.1          July
− 3.5 − 0.3 − 4.5 4.2 0.4 − 0.7 0.2 1.1 − 0.1 1.2 12.1 10.4 − 3.4          Aug 
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2002          Nov 6,453.5 1,460.0 1,214.3 245.7 2,146.5 2,008.8 571.8 874.6 273.2 562.4 460.2 90.1 10.0
         Dec 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003          Jan 6,380.7 1,457.2 1,213.2 244.0 2,160.0 2,024.7 564.4 882.9 275.8 577.4 477.0 88.5 9.1
         Feb 6,424.9 1,466.4 1,224.6 241.9 2,173.4 2,036.7 571.1 886.4 272.1 579.2 479.9 88.5 8.0         Mar 6,434.8 1,471.5 1,218.2 253.2 2,175.3 2,040.7 578.3 883.1 266.2 579.3 481.6 88.0 7.7
         Apr 6,430.3 1,455.5 1,200.9 254.6 2,176.2 2,044.3 585.8 880.6 264.8 577.9 482.7 86.5 8.2
         May 6,467.7 1,508.5 1,253.9 254.6 2,188.9 2,053.8 591.4 885.3 270.9 577.1 483.4 87.4 8.8         June 6,472.9 1,509.2 1,252.8 256.4 2,194.2 2,059.3 608.2 874.5 260.2 576.7 484.4 86.7 9.0
         July 6,425.7 1,457.9 1,207.6 250.3 2,182.5 2,051.4 595.2 879.5 259.0 576.8 486.5 85.7 9.3
         Aug 6,395.1 1,450.5 1,198.0 252.5 2,193.0 2,061.5 597.8 885.7 261.3 578.0 489.3 85.5 8.9         Sep 6,403.1 1,451.2 1,188.3 262.9 2,187.8 2,057.4 607.3 871.8 248.1 578.3 490.2 84.2 9.6
         Oct 6,399.3 1,439.5 1,179.5 260.0 2,188.2 2,057.3 609.5 868.5 243.9 579.4 491.2 85.4 10.7
         Nov 6,456.1 1,463.6 1,214.6 249.0 2,211.2 2,082.4 632.7 869.4 244.7 580.3 491.9 83.1 9.9         Dec 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004          Jan 6,424.2 1,461.1 1,212.6 248.5 2,209.5 2,082.6 630.5 861.5 233.5 590.6 502.1 80.9 9.5
         Feb 6,448.7 1,454.4 1,215.7 238.7 2,212.3 2,085.6 633.8 860.3 230.1 591.5 503.3 79.5 10.8         Mar 6,506.7 1,459.9 1,203.6 256.3 2,214.3 2,088.7 632.9 864.4 230.9 591.4 503.5 77.8 13.1
         Apr 6,568.8 1,482.1 1,227.2 254.9 2,219.0 2,097.2 641.7 864.4 225.6 591.2 504.3 74.5 10.6
         May 6,583.5 1,496.5 1,251.2 245.4 2,229.4 2,105.3 640.0 874.8 232.1 590.6 504.6 75.8 9.4         June 6,551.3 1,501.5 1,256.7 244.8 2,228.7 2,101.4 640.7 870.7 224.0 590.0 504.3 76.7 12.4
         July 6,574.9 1,524.1 1,274.6 249.6 2,225.5 2,103.0 634.7 877.7 228.7 590.6 504.9 72.9 9.7
         Aug 6,567.5 1,510.2 1,259.4 250.8 2,231.7 2,105.7 636.1 878.2 228.9 591.3 505.6 74.0 9.8
 Changes 1
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 − 41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.01997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 − 3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 − 0.31998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2002          Dec − 29.0 22.0 23.3 − 1.2 24.6 26.7 3.4 10.5 6.3 12.8 12.6 − 2.2 − 1.9
2003          Jan − 14.6 − 19.2 − 22.2 3.0 − 14.2 − 13.7 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.2 2.1 4.1 0.3 0.9
         Feb 41.3 9.1 11.4 − 2.3 14.3 11.9 6.7 3.4 − 3.7 1.8 3.0 1.0 − 1.1         Mar 14.1 5.9 − 5.9 11.9 2.2 4.1 7.4 − 3.3 − 5.9 0.1 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3
         Apr 4.5 − 14.0 − 16.5 2.5 1.6 3.9 7.7 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 1.4 1.1 − 1.2 0.5
         May 57.3 54.5 52.0 2.5 13.9 10.2 6.1 4.9 6.3 − 0.8 0.7 1.5 0.7         June − 5.9 − 1.2 − 1.7 0.6 4.6 5.1 16.4 − 10.9 − 10.8 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.0
         July − 49.6 − 52.1 − 45.6 − 6.4 − 11.8 − 7.9 − 13.0 5.1 − 1.1 0.1 2.1 − 1.1 0.5
         Aug − 43.7 − 10.0 − 10.5 0.5 9.7 9.6 2.3 6.1 2.3 1.3 2.8 − 0.5 − 0.5         Sep 26.2 4.5 − 8.4 12.9 − 4.0 − 3.5 10.0 − 13.7 − 13.1 0.2 0.9 − 0.8 0.8
         Oct − 5.0 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 0.3 − 0.1 2.2 − 3.4 − 4.2 1.1 1.0 1.1 1.1
         Nov 67.6 26.1 35.8 − 9.7 23.6 25.4 23.5 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7         Dec − 8.6 10.4 15.9 − 5.5 4.4 5.1 − 10.2 5.3 3.4 10.0 8.9 − 1.0 − 0.5
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 11.1 − 17.2 6.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 8.2 − 13.1 − 14.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 0.2
         Feb 26.4 − 6.3 3.3 − 9.6 3.0 3.1 4.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 0.9 1.2 − 1.4 1.3         Mar 47.2 4.0 − 12.6 16.6 1.6 2.8 − 1.1 4.0 0.7 − 0.1 0.1 − 1.8 2.3
         Apr 57.9 21.3 23.2 − 1.9 4.7 8.7 8.6 0.3 − 5.1 − 0.2 0.9 − 3.5 − 2.6
         May 19.5 15.3 24.2 − 8.9 10.7 8.3 − 1.5 10.4 6.6 − 0.6 0.3 1.4 − 1.2         June − 33.2 4.7 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 4.0 0.3 − 3.7 − 7.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.8 3.0
         July 21.8 22.3 17.8 4.6 − 3.3 1.5 − 5.8 6.6 4.3 0.7 0.5 − 3.9 − 2.8
         Aug − 5.3 − 13.5 − 14.9 1.4 7.3 3.7 1.5 1.5 0.2 0.7 0.7 1.2 0.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated footnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  
7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
75.6 9.4 4.5 3.4 47.6 46.3 6.4 37.9 1,496.8 68.8 653.5 342.5 309.8 2002          Nov 
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8          Dec 
74.8 10.4 4.7 3.6 46.9 45.2 7.6 38.5 1,461.1 138.9 602.9 350.5 305.9 2003          Jan 
75.9 12.3 4.6 3.6 48.2 45.1 10.9 39.6 1,468.4 145.7 606.7 354.1 305.4          Feb 
75.7 13.0 4.6 3.6 46.6 45.2 11.2 40.2 1,467.9 143.5 612.1 353.1 303.6          Mar 
73.8 12.3 4.5 3.5 45.5 44.9 11.3 39.6 1,468.6 142.6 620.2 351.6 307.2          Apr 
74.1 13.3 4.4 3.5 47.7 44.4 12.3 39.4 1,463.3 133.3 599.0 351.0 305.4          May73.4 12.2 4.4 3.5 48.1 44.6 10.8 38.7 1,470.0 128.7 594.8 348.2 307.0          June
72.1 12.1 4.3 3.4 45.3 43.8 10.9 38.4 1,482.8 133.0 603.6 348.1 301.6          July
72.4 12.8 4.2 3.4 45.9 43.8 12.4 38.1 1,480.0 122.1 579.2 344.0 298.0          Aug 70.5 12.0 4.1 3.3 46.2 43.4 15.6 38.0 1,485.5 124.4 579.7 341.0 304.3          Sep 
70.6 12.7 4.0 3.3 45.5 43.0 21.1 37.6 1,494.1 126.2 574.2 344.6 299.9          Oct 
69.3 11.4 4.0 3.2 45.7 43.6 20.0 37.1 1,502.7 131.5 574.6 343.0 304.0          Nov 68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8          Dec 
67.5 11.9 3.8 3.1 45.9 45.2 16.6 36.4 1,493.9 128.6 585.4 336.8 284.5 2004          Jan 
64.9 10.9 3.8 3.1 47.3 45.8 17.5 36.2 1,503.7 127.3 604.4 332.2 288.0          Feb 
60.9 10.1 3.7 3.1 47.8 46.2 18.2 35.8 1,532.3 134.7 623.1 330.1 292.8          Mar 
60.2 10.2 3.7 3.1 47.2 46.2 17.3 35.7 1,549.0 135.3 632.3 333.7 299.7          Apr 
62.7 12.3 3.7 3.0 48.3 45.8 17.0 36.1 1,559.8 132.3 612.5 336.4 295.8          May60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 50.7 47.1 16.1 36.0 1,554.2 123.6 582.1 337.5 295.2          June
59.6 9.7 3.6 3.0 49.7 47.2 16.8 39.9 1,558.7 120.0 576.6 339.4 293.9          July
60.7 10.2 3.6 3.0 52.1 47.6 14.2 41.1 1,562.9 120.7 577.2 336.9 293.3          Aug 
Changes 1
23.3 − 2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 − − 5.1 196.3 − 15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 199625.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 − 6.2 − 6.2 − − 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 199724.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.0 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003
− 0.6 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 1.2 − 24.8 − 6.6 − 42.1 1.3 − 6.0 2002          Dec 
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 5.3 1.8 4.8 2.9 11.3 3.2 − 7.7 2003          Jan 
2.1 3.0 − 0.0 0.0 1.4 − 0.1 2.3 1.1 8.1 6.8 4.4 3.7 − 1.7          Feb 
− 0.0 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6 0.1 0.4 0.5 0.8 − 2.4 8.2 − 0.7 − 3.2          Mar − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.5 3.5 − 0.8 13.7 − 0.9 1.2          Apr 
0.9 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.5 1.0 − 0.2 3.4 − 6.9 − 8.2 0.7 − 7.8          May
− 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.4 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 3.1 − 4.5 − 11.4 − 3.6 4.7          June
− 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.8 0.2 − 0.4 12.1 4.3 7.0 − 0.2 − 4.6          July
0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.0 1.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 − 10.9 − 32.4 − 4.9 − 0.2          Aug 
− 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.4 3.2 − 0.1 11.6 2.4 12.3 − 1.9 0.7          Sep 
0.1 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 5.6 − 0.5 7.8 1.8 − 10.3 3.4 − 1.1          Oct 
− 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 12.3 5.3 6.8 − 1.0 1.3          Nov 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 0.6 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 10.6 − 0.1 3.2 − 1.8 − 7.9          Dec 
− 1.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.9 2.5 − 0.3 4.2 − 2.7 12.7 − 3.9 − 13.9 2004          Jan 
− 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.6 0.9 − 0.2 10.0 − 1.3 19.6 − 4.6 4.1          Feb 
− 4.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.8 − 0.5 23.2 7.5 14.0 − 2.5 6.7          Mar 
− 0.8 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 15.5 0.3 6.4 3.4 7.7          Apr 
2.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.3 12.2 − 2.8 − 16.7 2.6 − 4.6          May
− 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.9 − 8.6 − 31.0 1.1 − 0.5          June
− 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 0.0 0.6 3.9 3.6 − 3.6 − 7.0 1.8 − 0.1          July
1.1 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 0.4 − 2.5 1.2 5.4 0.7 2.1 − 3.3 − 2.0          Aug 
than four years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
collected separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2004          Mar 2,219 6,542.8 43.9 2,459.8 1,762.0 687.8 3,633.3 481.1 2,559.0 3.7 580.5 147.0 258.9
         Apr 2,216 6,604.4 52.3 2,498.9 1,791.0 697.0 3,648.7 476.7 2,563.8 3.7 594.5 145.9 258.4
         May 2,213 6,618.6 55.2 2,529.2 1,806.8 712.7 3,626.7 452.4 2,566.7 3.7 594.1 146.5 260.9         June 2,200 6,587.5 50.5 2,507.2 1,792.0 705.3 3,622.4 449.1 2,566.6 3.5 590.4 145.6 261.8
         July 2,184 6,608.2 53.1 2,516.2 1,799.5 708.0 3,633.5 453.0 2,568.9 3.6 590.5 142.7 262.7
         Aug 2,178 6,599.5 54.8 2,507.3 1,790.0 708.0 3,636.8 450.0 2,570.3 3.5 593.9 141.4 259.2
Commercial banks 5
2004          July 252 1,847.8 17.7 684.3 550.0 132.1 970.7 246.4 544.5 1.9 167.9 76.6 98.5         Aug 252 1,846.0 20.2 677.7 544.3 130.9 978.1 248.0 544.8 1.9 171.8 75.6 94.4
   Big banks 6
2004          July 4 1,059.1 9.6 389.2 335.8 52.1 525.0 155.8 264.8 1.2 94.9 67.1 68.3         Aug 4 1,061.4 11.1 387.5 333.1 53.4 532.9 159.6 263.8 1.2 98.3 66.0 63.8
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2004          July 164 702.7 7.0 251.0 173.1 77.2 408.1 73.0 263.1 0.6 69.9 9.5 27.1         Aug 164 696.5 8.6 242.3 167.9 73.3 408.6 71.6 264.3 0.6 70.6 9.5 27.4
   Branches of foreign banks
2004          July 84 86.0 1.1 44.2 41.0 2.8 37.6 17.6 16.6 0.0 3.0 0.1 3.1         Aug 84 88.1 0.5 47.8 43.2 4.2 36.6 16.8 16.7 0.0 2.9 0.1 3.1
Landesbanken
2004          July 13 1,403.9 4.1 724.3 575.2 147.2 593.2 67.0 411.3 0.3 112.1 30.7 51.7         Aug 13 1,398.9 3.6 723.2 571.4 149.7 589.3 63.0 412.0 0.3 111.6 30.4 52.5
Savings banks
2004          July 483 984.4 17.4 228.9 72.7 155.7 701.9 70.5 538.7 0.9 91.6 14.7 21.4         Aug 481 982.8 17.8 227.6 72.8 154.4 701.3 69.3 539.8 0.9 91.2 14.7 21.4
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2004          July 2 196.0 1.1 134.0 91.8 41.7 41.9 9.8 20.5 0.1 11.4 11.4 7.6         Aug 2 198.1 0.2 137.0 94.7 41.9 42.5 10.3 20.3 0.1 11.8 11.4 6.9
Credit cooperatives
2004          July 1,368 566.7 11.4 145.8 58.7 85.4 386.6 43.0 301.3 0.5 41.7 6.0 16.8         Aug 1,364 567.1 11.8 145.5 59.6 84.2 386.9 42.6 302.3 0.5 41.3 6.0 16.8
Mortgage banks
2004          July 25 871.6 1.1 230.4 140.9 88.0 621.8 9.8 487.9 − 121.1 0.8 17.5         Aug 25 868.9 0.9 227.8 137.2 89.0 621.1 11.0 486.3 − 121.0 0.8 18.3
Building and loan associations
2004          July 27 177.0 0.0 43.2 31.2 11.9 121.3 1.5 106.7 . 12.4 0.4 12.1         Aug 27 177.3 0.0 42.7 30.7 11.8 122.0 1.5 106.9 . 12.5 0.4 12.1
Special purpose banks
2004          July 14 560.8 0.3 325.2 279.0 46.0 196.1 5.0 157.9 − 32.5 2.1 37.2         Aug 14 560.4 0.3 325.7 279.4 46.1 195.5 4.4 158.0 − 32.5 2.1 36.8
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2004          July 126 399.6 2.7 175.0 124.0 50.5 208.6 37.4 124.9 0.2 45.8 0.8 12.5         Aug 126 399.8 3.1 174.2 122.0 51.6 209.0 36.9 125.7 0.2 46.0 0.8 12.8
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2004          July 42 313.6 1.6 130.8 83.0 47.7 171.0 19.7 108.3 0.2 42.8 0.7 9.4         Aug 42 311.7 2.6 126.3 78.7 47.4 172.5 20.1 109.1 0.2 43.1 0.7 9.6
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,844.5 276.3 1,568.0 2,472.0 697.2 320.2 746.6 83.6 601.3 511.3 106.8 1,576.3 283.6 366.4 2004          Mar 
1,873.9 270.9 1,602.9 2,477.8 701.0 319.4 750.3 84.4 601.0 512.2 106.0 1,593.8 286.2 372.7          Apr 
1,868.9 248.3 1,620.4 2,487.6 705.5 322.3 753.7 76.9 600.4 512.4 105.7 1,606.1 287.2 368.7          May1,861.1 258.6 1,602.4 2,468.5 704.0 302.5 756.9 68.0 599.7 512.1 105.4 1,601.3 287.6 369.0          June
1,873.9 249.5 1,624.2 2,470.3 691.7 314.6 758.3 72.1 600.3 512.6 105.3 1,607.5 287.9 368.7          July
1,854.6 229.2 1,625.3 2,480.0 696.3 319.3 758.0 76.3 601.0 513.4 105.5 1,610.2 286.7 368.0          Aug 
Commercial banks 5
721.7 142.3 579.3 702.6 318.8 151.1 122.1 62.9 101.6 91.7 9.1 208.7 91.9 122.8 2004          July
711.3 131.0 580.1 711.8 320.8 155.7 123.1 66.4 102.9 93.4 9.3 210.7 89.7 122.6          Aug 
Big banks 6
440.3 99.5 340.8 348.3 143.6 104.9 69.3 57.1 30.0 28.2 0.5 144.7 53.0 72.8 2004          July
436.9 89.6 347.2 355.7 143.9 109.3 70.3 60.8 31.6 29.8 0.5 146.5 50.6 71.8          Aug 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
216.8 31.8 184.9 339.2 164.6 43.6 50.9 5.8 71.6 63.6 8.5 64.0 36.4 46.2 2004          July
207.9 31.5 176.3 340.7 166.4 43.4 50.9 5.6 71.3 63.6 8.7 64.2 36.7 47.0          Aug 
Branches of foreign banks
64.6 11.1 53.5 15.2 10.6 2.7 1.9 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 3.8 2004          July
66.6 9.9 56.6 15.3 10.4 3.0 1.9 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 3.8          Aug 
Landesbanken
469.6 60.2 409.5 323.9 43.6 39.4 224.8 6.7 15.3 14.4 0.8 487.6 60.6 62.3 2004          July
464.8 55.6 409.2 324.7 45.1 38.9 224.5 7.0 15.3 14.4 0.8 489.4 60.6 59.5          Aug 
Savings banks
215.8 6.0 209.8 630.1 195.4 51.2 11.1 − 302.4 250.8 70.1 44.3 47.5 46.8 2004          July
213.8 5.7 208.1 630.4 196.2 51.1 11.1 − 302.0 250.4 70.0 44.2 47.5 46.9          Aug 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
117.9 29.3 88.6 29.2 6.0 6.7 16.2 2.3 − − 0.3 29.9 10.1 9.0 2004          July
118.7 28.1 90.5 29.2 5.9 7.0 16.0 2.9 − − 0.3 29.7 10.1 10.4          Aug 
Credit cooperatives
76.0 1.8 74.1 404.1 122.6 51.7 24.3 − 180.8 155.3 24.7 32.4 31.1 23.1 2004          July
75.8 1.3 74.5 404.5 122.9 52.3 24.2 − 180.4 154.8 24.7 32.5 31.2 23.1          Aug 
Mortgage banks
135.5 6.5 129.0 149.2 1.3 5.4 142.3 0.2 − − 0.2 540.9 21.2 24.8 2004          July
135.5 4.3 131.2 148.5 1.1 5.4 141.8 − − − 0.2 537.5 22.1 25.3          Aug 
Building and loan associations
29.2 1.9 27.4 112.9 0.4 0.8 111.2 − 0.4 0.4 0.2 7.0 7.4 20.5 2004          July
29.3 1.3 28.0 113.2 0.3 0.8 111.4 − 0.4 0.4 0.2 7.0 7.4 20.4          Aug 
Special purpose banks
108.2 1.6 106.5 118.3 3.6 8.1 106.5 − − − − 256.5 18.2 59.6 2004          July
105.4 1.8 103.6 117.8 3.9 8.0 105.8 − − − − 259.2 18.2 59.8          Aug 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
139.2 23.7 115.5 126.3 79.8 12.0 24.5 0.2 6.9 6.7 3.1 99.0 13.0 22.0 2004          July
136.9 22.5 114.3 129.4 80.7 14.1 24.7 0.2 6.9 6.7 3.1 98.2 13.0 22.2          Aug 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
74.6 12.6 62.0 111.1 69.3 9.3 22.6 0.2 6.9 6.7 3.1 99.0 10.6 18.2 2004          July
70.4 12.6 57.7 114.1 70.2 11.1 22.8 0.2 6.9 6.7 3.1 98.2 10.6 18.4          Aug 
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Commercial included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Mortgage banks”. 
bank AG. — 7Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2003          Mar 12.6 47.5 1,655.8 1,081.1 0.0 10.0 564.7 2.5 3,005.5 2,677.5 3.8 4.8 316.4
         Apr 13.5 37.7 1,648.8 1,074.6 0.0 9.9 564.3 2.5 3,007.6 2,676.4 3.8 5.0 319.4
         May 13.7 38.3 1,674.3 1,099.7 0.0 9.2 565.3 2.5 3,003.6 2,667.8 3.9 4.5 324.5         June 12.9 40.9 1,665.5 1,090.9 0.0 9.9 564.7 2.5 2,992.4 2,670.2 3.9 3.9 311.4
         July 12.9 40.5 1,645.6 1,063.8 0.0 10.9 571.0 2.4 2,996.0 2,671.8 4.0 3.4 314.7
         Aug 13.2 42.5 1,636.2 1,056.4 0.0 9.3 570.5 2.4 2,986.9 2,667.9 4.0 3.4 309.6         Sep 12.9 42.1 1,627.9 1,047.0 0.0 9.7 571.2 2.4 2,995.7 2,676.3 3.9 2.1 311.4
         Oct 13.3 44.3 1,630.0 1,046.2 0.0 9.7 574.1 2.4 2,992.9 2,675.4 3.9 3.1 308.4
         Nov 12.8 38.2 1,663.1 1,073.8 0.0 10.5 578.8 2.3 3,012.2 2,685.5 3.7 3.4 317.5         Dec 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004          Jan 12.9 39.5 1,632.9 1,055.9 0.0 8.4 568.5 2.3 2,992.0 2,667.0 3.5 2.6 316.8
         Feb 12.9 37.6 1,645.1 1,058.5 0.0 8.5 578.0 2.3 2,994.8 2,658.8 3.4 2.5 328.1         Mar 12.4 31.1 1,656.6 1,062.0 0.0 8.1 586.4 2.4 3,015.7 2,670.4 3.2 2.1 338.0
         Apr 12.6 39.4 1,673.5 1,070.7 0.0 8.6 594.1 2.4 3,022.9 2,664.3 3.2 3.0 350.5
         May 13.5 41.4 1,693.0 1,081.2 0.0 7.7 604.1 2.4 3,013.6 2,657.8 3.2 2.9 347.8         June 12.8 37.3 1,671.7 1,070.0 0.0 7.7 594.0 2.3 3,003.5 2,652.5 3.0 3.6 342.6
         July 12.8 39.9 1,687.1 1,082.3 0.0 6.9 597.9 2.3 3,007.5 2,656.4 3.0 6.8 340.2
         Aug 12.8 41.6 1,679.0 1,075.6 0.0 7.4 596.0 2.3 3,001.8 2,648.6 3.0 5.9 343.3
Changes *
1995 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 2.91996 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 − 2.0 + 4.7 + 10.61997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 − 1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 36.51998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.11999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2003          Mar − 0.4 + 8.5 − 11.8 − 14.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 3.7 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 7.4
         Apr + 0.9 − 9.8 − 7.0 − 6.5 − − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 3.1
         May + 0.2 + 0.6 + 25.5 + 25.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 8.7 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.3         June − 0.7 + 2.6 − 8.8 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 11.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 13.1
         July − 0.0 − 0.4 − 20.1 − 27.2 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.4
         Aug + 0.2 + 2.0 − 9.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.1         Sep − 0.2 − 0.3 − 7.8 − 9.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 8.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 2.6
         Oct + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.5 − 6.1 + 33.1 + 27.6 − + 1.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 + 19.3 + 10.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 9.1         Dec + 4.2 + 8.5 − 19.3 − 9.8 − − 1.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 16.1 − 8.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 7.4
2004          Jan − 4.1 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 8.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 7.2
         Feb + 0.1 − 1.9 + 12.0 + 2.4 − + 0.1 + 9.5 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 8.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 11.3         Mar − 0.5 − 6.5 + 11.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.4 + 0.1 + 20.9 + 11.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 9.9
         Apr + 0.1 + 8.3 + 16.9 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 7.7 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.6
         May + 0.9 + 2.0 + 19.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7         June − 0.7 − 4.1 − 21.3 − 11.2 − − 0.1 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 10.1 − 5.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 5.2
         July + 0.1 + 2.5 + 15.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 3.9 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 2.3
         Aug − 0.0 + 1.7 − 8.1 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 3.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). — 5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). — 6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. — 7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). — 8Up to December
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). — 4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. — 11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month *
 
68.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
3.0 54.8 116.1 1,218.0 144.0 1,073.9 0.2 25.5 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 579.3 103.0 42.1 2003          Mar 
3.0 54.6 116.7 1,203.4 137.4 1,065.9 0.1 25.5 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 577.9 102.4 41.8          Apr 
3.0 54.5 119.6 1,254.2 146.4 1,107.7 0.1 25.5 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 577.1 101.9 41.7          May3.0 54.4 118.1 1,252.5 150.5 1,101.8 0.1 25.4 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 576.7 101.3 41.8          June
2.0 54.2 119.1 1,207.7 123.6 1,084.0 0.1 25.3 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 576.8 100.9 41.7          July
2.0 54.6 118.8 1,198.2 120.9 1,077.2 0.1 25.7 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 578.0 100.4 41.7          Aug 2.0 54.4 115.1 1,188.2 116.0 1,072.0 0.1 25.5 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 578.3 99.9 41.5          Sep 
2.0 53.9 115.0 1,179.6 122.1 1,057.4 0.1 25.3 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 579.4 100.0 40.7          Oct 
2.0 54.1 113.3 1,214.5 135.3 1,079.1 0.1 25.5 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 580.3 100.1 40.7          Nov 2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5          Dec 
2.0 57.2 108.9 1,213.2 142.0 1,071.1 0.1 28.3 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 590.6 100.3 40.3 2004          Jan 
2.0 56.6 108.8 1,215.7 134.0 1,081.6 0.1 28.2 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 591.5 100.1 40.5          Feb 
2.0 54.9 107.2 1,204.3 140.0 1,064.2 0.1 27.8 2,145.8 635.3 819.2 591.4 99.8 39.3          Mar 
2.0 54.4 106.6 1,227.8 143.2 1,084.5 0.1 27.7 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 591.2 99.2 39.0          Apr 
2.0 54.3 107.1 1,252.0 134.2 1,117.7 0.1 27.6 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 590.6 98.9 39.0          May2.0 54.9 106.7 1,257.3 129.2 1,128.0 0.1 28.4 2,158.3 643.5 826.2 590.0 98.7 38.8          June
1.0 55.9 103.5 1,275.2 125.7 1,149.4 0.1 29.5 2,160.4 637.6 833.6 590.6 98.6 38.7          July
1.0 55.8 102.2 1,260.2 122.4 1,137.7 0.1 29.4 2,161.3 639.1 832.2 591.3 98.7 38.6          Aug 
Changes *
− 1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 − 14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996− 5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
+ 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 6.7 + 9.5 − 16.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 2003          Mar 
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 14.6 − 6.6 − 8.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 3.0 + 50.8 + 8.9 + 41.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1          May
− 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.7 + 4.2 − 5.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1          June
− 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 44.9 − 27.0 − 18.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.5 − 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.1          Aug + 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 8.7 − 3.5 − 5.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 8.6 + 6.1 − 14.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3          Oct 
− + 0.2 − 1.7 + 34.9 + 13.2 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 2.7 − 4.1 + 15.1 − 18.6 + 33.6 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 10.0 + 0.1 − 0.2          Dec − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 16.3 + 25.3 − 41.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Jan 
− − 0.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 − 8.0 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.4 + 6.0 − 17.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2          Mar − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 23.2 + 3.2 + 20.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 24.2 − 9.0 + 33.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          May
− + 0.6 − 0.4 + 5.3 − 5.0 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2          June
− 0.9 + 1.1 − 3.1 + 17.9 − 3.4 + 21.4 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 5.5 + 7.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1          July+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 3.3 − 11.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1          Aug 
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. — 17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. — 13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). — 20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer
one month. — 16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2003          Mar 0.3 733.3 654.1 504.0 150.1 1.0 78.3 2.6 574.8 354.5 113.1 241.3 8.5 211.8
         Apr 0.3 738.6 657.2 505.9 151.2 1.7 79.8 2.6 583.3 364.8 125.1 239.7 7.4 211.1
         May 0.3 760.1 676.4 524.6 151.8 1.3 82.4 2.5 578.6 362.3 126.8 235.6 6.8 209.4         June 0.4 794.3 707.2 553.1 154.1 1.3 85.8 2.6 578.1 351.6 115.2 236.4 7.0 219.5
         July 0.3 779.1 689.4 533.9 155.5 1.4 88.3 2.6 567.4 345.3 106.5 238.8 6.8 215.3
         Aug 0.3 771.9 682.3 522.9 159.4 1.3 88.3 2.6 561.3 344.3 101.3 243.0 7.4 209.5         Sep 0.4 769.8 680.3 520.2 160.1 1.3 88.2 2.3 569.4 346.6 110.3 236.3 7.2 215.6
         Oct 0.4 757.0 664.9 502.0 162.9 0.9 91.2 1.6 576.6 348.6 106.0 242.6 8.0 219.9
         Nov 0.3 764.6 672.3 512.8 159.5 1.3 91.1 1.6 583.8 357.5 118.0 239.6 6.4 219.8         Dec 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004          Jan 0.3 788.7 693.8 531.9 161.9 1.2 93.6 1.6 588.4 353.0 118.0 235.0 5.5 229.8
         Feb 0.3 790.5 691.5 530.7 160.8 1.3 97.7 1.6 598.7 360.7 126.1 234.6 6.0 232.0         Mar 0.3 803.2 700.1 538.5 161.6 1.7 101.4 1.7 617.6 370.2 133.9 236.4 4.8 242.5
         Apr 0.3 825.5 720.4 557.5 162.9 2.2 102.8 1.7 625.8 376.7 137.2 239.5 5.0 244.0
         May 0.3 836.2 725.7 570.5 155.2 1.9 108.7 1.7 613.1 361.8 123.6 238.2 5.0 246.3         June 0.4 835.5 722.1 566.9 155.2 2.1 111.3 1.7 618.9 363.8 124.6 239.1 7.3 247.8
         July 0.4 829.1 717.3 557.4 159.9 1.7 110.1 1.6 626.0 366.1 127.6 238.5 9.7 250.2
         Aug 0.4 828.3 714.6 557.9 156.7 1.8 112.0 1.6 635.0 372.4 134.6 237.7 12.1 250.5
Changes *
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.11996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.41997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 − 0.1 + 10.4 − 1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.91998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.01999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2003          Mar + 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 16.3 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 3.5 + 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.5
         Apr + 0.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 12.8 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.2
         May + 0.0 + 30.1 + 28.0 + 24.9 + 3.2 − 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 5.6 + 6.0 + 3.8 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0         June + 0.1 + 29.4 + 26.3 + 25.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 6.2 − 14.9 − 12.6 − 2.3 + 0.1 + 8.6
         July − 0.1 − 16.5 − 19.1 − 20.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 12.3 − 7.5 − 9.0 + 1.5 − 0.3 − 4.6
         Aug + 0.0 − 13.2 − 12.8 − 15.3 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 13.0 − 6.1 − 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 7.3         Sep + 0.0 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 19.1 + 10.6 + 10.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 8.5
         Oct − 0.0 − 14.4 − 17.0 − 18.8 + 1.8 − 0.4 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 4.2
         Nov − 0.0 + 12.5 + 12.1 + 14.3 − 2.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 13.3 + 12.9 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.0         Dec − 0.0 + 11.7 + 9.9 + 7.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 6.0 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.8
2004          Jan + 0.0 + 16.3 + 14.8 + 14.0 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 5.3 + 6.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 2.9
         Feb − 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 11.1 + 8.0 + 8.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.5         Mar + 0.0 + 6.1 + 2.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 15.6 + 7.4 + 7.0 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 9.4
         Apr − + 20.3 + 18.4 + 17.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 5.6 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.3
         May + 0.0 + 13.0 + 7.5 + 14.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 + 5.8 − 0.0 − 9.7 − 12.7 − 13.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.0         June + 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.7
         July + 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.9 − 10.2 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.8 − 1.6 + 2.4 + 0.1
         Aug − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.5 − 1.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
17.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
15.4 43.3 621.7 131.7 490.0 384.4 105.6 1.0 339.8 43.3 296.5 109.2 187.3 4.2 2003          Mar 
15.1 43.2 634.6 141.6 493.0 387.9 105.1 1.0 333.3 39.3 294.0 110.3 183.7 4.0          Apr 
14.7 41.7 620.9 128.0 492.9 386.0 106.9 1.0 332.0 43.6 288.4 109.8 178.7 3.8          May15.1 42.2 622.8 143.1 479.7 372.8 106.9 1.0 324.6 43.8 280.8 99.8 180.9 3.9          June
15.2 43.1 617.2 123.6 493.7 384.1 109.6 0.9 328.0 40.3 287.7 108.5 179.2 3.9          July
15.3 43.1 601.1 108.0 493.1 386.3 106.8 0.3 324.7 39.5 285.2 103.5 181.7 4.7          Aug 15.0 43.7 607.5 144.2 463.3 361.2 102.1 0.3 326.6 40.0 286.6 109.5 177.1 6.8          Sep 
11.7 43.0 597.1 129.1 468.0 360.1 107.9 0.3 332.0 38.2 293.8 116.4 177.5 3.4          Oct 
11.7 41.3 583.1 113.9 469.2 361.3 107.9 0.3 333.5 38.8 294.7 121.6 173.1 3.3          Nov 11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6          Dec 
11.7 40.9 606.8 138.7 468.2 359.1 109.0 0.5 315.6 44.8 270.8 99.6 171.2 3.7 2004          Jan 
12.0 39.7 602.9 122.7 480.2 368.1 112.1 0.5 328.7 55.9 272.8 104.6 168.2 3.4          Feb 
9.5 39.8 640.2 136.3 503.8 389.4 114.4 0.5 326.2 61.8 264.4 103.0 161.4 0.9          Mar 
9.6 39.3 646.0 127.7 518.3 403.7 114.6 0.5 323.8 56.9 266.8 106.6 160.2 0.9          Apr 
9.6 39.4 616.9 114.2 502.7 389.0 113.8 0.5 325.2 62.9 262.4 102.3 160.0 0.9          May9.6 38.9 603.8 129.4 474.4 360.2 114.2 0.5 310.2 60.6 249.6 90.0 159.7 0.9          June
9.7 39.2 598.6 123.8 474.8 359.8 115.1 0.5 309.9 54.1 255.8 96.6 159.1 0.9          July
9.7 39.3 594.3 106.8 487.5 371.5 116.0 0.5 318.7 57.2 261.5 102.7 158.8 0.9          Aug 
Changes *
− 0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 − 1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 − 0.9 1995− 2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 − 1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 − 2.0 1996+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
− 0.1 + 1.0 + 7.4 + 14.3 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 1.9 − 0.1 2003          Mar 
− 0.3 + 0.1 + 17.1 + 10.6 + 6.5 + 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 1.8 − 1.9 − 0.3          Apr 
− 0.4 − 0.7 − 4.3 − 11.8 + 7.5 + 4.2 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.2          May+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 14.1 − 17.1 − 16.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 10.9 + 0.0 − 10.9 − 10.6 − 0.3 + 0.2          June
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 6.9 − 19.8 + 12.8 + 10.4 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 3.6 + 6.4 + 8.5 − 2.1 − 0.0          July
+ 0.2 − 0.5 − 22.3 − 16.7 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 1.1 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.2 + 0.1          Aug − 0.3 + 1.2 + 16.1 + 37.6 − 21.5 − 18.4 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 7.8 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 7.5 − 0.8 + 2.1          Sep 
+ 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.8 − 15.4 + 3.6 − 1.5 + 5.1 − + 1.4 − 1.8 + 3.2 + 6.7 − 3.6 + 0.0          Oct 
− 0.0 − 1.3 − 9.2 − 14.2 + 5.1 + 4.0 + 1.0 − + 4.9 + 0.9 + 4.0 + 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.1          Nov − 0.1 + 0.6 + 14.9 − 17.7 + 32.6 + 31.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 − 21.2 − 6.2 − 15.0 − 17.7 + 2.7 + 0.3          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 12.9 + 43.2 − 30.2 − 30.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 5.8 + 12.5 − 6.7 − 3.5 − 3.2 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 15.9 + 12.7 + 9.4 + 3.2 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 11.1 + 2.2 + 5.1 − 2.9 − 0.3          Feb 
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.7 + 13.1 + 17.6 + 19.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 5.8 − 7.3 − 2.2 − 5.1 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 − 0.6 + 3.8 − 9.1 + 12.8 + 13.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 5.1 + 1.3 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 26.7 − 13.1 − 13.6 − 13.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 − 3.3 − 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0          May+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 13.5 + 15.2 − 28.7 − 29.1 + 0.3 − − 15.1 − 2.3 − 12.8 − 12.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          June
+ 0.1 + 0.1 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 6.6 + 5.4 + 6.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 16.9 + 13.5 + 12.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 3.1 + 6.4 + 6.2 + 0.2 − 0.0          Aug 
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). — 5Up capital supplied to branches abroad. — 8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 9Up to December 1998,
registered debt securities. — 6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). — 7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2003          Mar 3,005.5 2,681.3 369.2 332.5 330.4 2.2 36.7 34.0 2.7 2,636.3 2,071.6
         Apr 3,007.6 2,680.2 366.3 326.5 324.2 2.2 39.8 37.0 2.8 2,641.3 2,079.0
         May 3,003.6 2,671.7 356.2 321.4 319.1 2.3 34.7 32.6 2.2 2,647.4 2,080.5         June 2,992.4 2,674.1 359.6 328.9 326.9 2.0 30.7 28.8 1.9 2,632.8 2,077.4
         July 2,996.0 2,675.8 357.5 315.5 314.2 1.3 42.0 39.8 2.2 2,638.6 2,081.8
         Aug 2,986.9 2,671.9 346.7 308.2 306.8 1.4 38.5 36.5 2.0 2,640.2 2,090.5         Sep 2,995.7 2,680.2 356.7 323.8 322.9 0.9 32.9 31.7 1.2 2,639.0 2,088.3
         Oct 2,992.9 2,679.3 353.7 317.2 316.1 1.0 36.6 34.5 2.1 2,639.1 2,087.7
         Nov 3,012.2 2,689.2 360.7 317.5 316.6 0.9 43.2 40.6 2.6 2,651.5 2,097.0         Dec 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004          Jan 2,992.0 2,670.5 346.6 305.7 304.4 1.3 41.0 39.6 1.4 2,645.3 2,097.7
         Feb 2,994.8 2,662.2 339.5 306.0 304.8 1.1 33.6 32.2 1.3 2,655.2 2,091.2         Mar 3,015.7 2,673.6 353.0 306.8 305.9 0.8 46.3 45.0 1.3 2,662.7 2,098.5
         Apr 3,022.9 2,667.5 346.1 304.0 303.3 0.7 42.2 39.9 2.3 2,676.8 2,116.1
         May 3,013.6 2,661.0 335.4 297.1 296.2 0.9 38.3 36.3 2.0 2,678.2 2,113.0         June 3,003.5 2,655.4 331.5 294.9 294.2 0.7 36.7 33.8 2.9 2,672.0 2,102.1
         July 3,007.5 2,659.4 335.7 287.6 287.0 0.6 48.2 42.0 6.2 2,671.7 2,104.4
         Aug 3,001.8 2,651.6 324.8 281.2 280.5 0.6 43.6 38.4 5.2 2,677.0 2,105.5
Changes *
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 276.9 + 185.11996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 282.5 + 219.91998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.31999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2003          Mar + 3.7 − 5.1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 5.9
         Apr + 2.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 − 6.0 − 6.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.2
         May − 3.8 − 8.5 − 10.1 − 5.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 0.6 + 6.3 + 1.8         June − 11.1 + 2.5 + 3.4 + 7.5 + 7.8 − 0.3 − 4.1 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 14.6 − 3.1
         July + 3.8 + 1.7 − 1.9 − 13.2 − 12.7 − 0.5 + 11.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 5.7 + 4.3
         Aug − 9.1 − 4.0 − 10.7 − 7.3 − 7.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 8.7         Sep + 9.6 + 8.3 + 10.0 + 15.6 + 16.1 − 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 2.2
         Oct − 2.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.6
         Nov + 19.3 + 9.9 + 6.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 12.4 + 9.3         Dec − 16.1 − 8.6 − 5.4 − 2.4 − 3.2 + 0.8 − 3.0 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 10.7 − 0.9
2004          Jan − 3.7 − 10.1 − 8.6 − 9.4 − 9.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.0 + 1.7
         Feb + 2.8 − 8.3 − 7.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 − 6.5         Mar + 20.9 + 11.4 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 12.7 + 12.8 − 0.1 + 7.1 + 7.1
         Apr + 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.0 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 + 0.9 + 14.3 + 17.6
         May − 9.4 − 6.5 − 10.4 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 3.4         June − 10.1 − 5.6 − 3.7 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 + 0.9 − 6.4 − 11.2
         July + 4.0 + 4.0 + 4.2 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 11.5 + 8.2 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 2.3
         Aug − 5.7 − 7.9 − 10.9 − 6.4 − 6.5 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 3.6 − 0.9 + 5.3 + 1.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,6 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
2,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,907.1 193.1 1,714.0 164.5 47.2 564.6 409.8 29.9 379.8 151.9 3.0 7.6 2003          Mar 
1,910.3 193.3 1,717.0 168.6 47.0 562.4 408.6 30.9 377.6 150.8 3.0 7.5          Apr 
1,912.9 193.2 1,719.7 167.6 47.0 566.9 407.1 31.5 375.5 156.9 3.0 7.5          May1,912.8 193.5 1,719.3 164.6 47.0 555.4 405.7 31.5 374.2 146.8 3.0 7.4          June
1,916.9 193.9 1,723.0 164.9 46.9 556.8 404.9 31.3 373.6 149.8 2.0 7.3          July
1,924.6 195.5 1,729.1 165.9 47.3 549.7 403.9 32.9 371.1 143.7 2.0 7.2          Aug 1,922.2 195.0 1,727.2 166.1 47.2 550.6 403.3 33.7 369.6 145.3 2.0 7.2          Sep 
1,926.8 195.7 1,731.1 160.9 46.8 551.4 402.0 32.5 369.4 147.5 2.0 7.2          Oct 
1,930.3 195.9 1,734.3 166.7 47.0 554.5 401.7 33.1 368.6 150.8 2.0 7.1          Nov 1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0          Dec 
1,926.0 195.0 1,731.0 171.7 50.1 547.6 400.5 33.9 366.5 145.1 2.0 7.1 2004          Jan 
1,925.4 194.3 1,731.1 165.8 49.6 564.1 399.8 34.8 365.0 162.3 2.0 7.0          Feb 
1,922.9 193.9 1,729.1 175.6 47.9 564.1 399.7 35.4 364.4 162.4 2.0 7.0          Mar 
1,927.1 194.7 1,732.5 189.0 47.4 560.7 397.2 34.9 362.3 161.5 2.0 7.0          Apr 
1,933.6 197.1 1,736.4 179.5 47.4 565.1 394.9 34.6 360.3 168.3 2.0 6.9          May1,935.2 198.2 1,737.0 166.9 48.1 569.9 392.3 34.4 357.9 175.7 2.0 6.8          June
1,938.2 199.0 1,739.2 166.2 49.2 567.3 392.3 34.1 358.2 174.0 1.0 6.7          July
1,941.3 200.2 1,741.1 164.2 49.1 571.5 391.3 33.9 357.4 179.1 1.0 6.7          Aug 
Changes *
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 − 18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
− 4.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 − 4.6 − 1.5 − 3.1 + 9.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 2003          Mar 
+ 3.2 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 4.0 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 2.6 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 6.1 − − 0.0          May− 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          June
+ 4.1 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.1          July
+ 7.8 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 1.5 − 2.5 − 6.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          Aug − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.5 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 4.5 + 0.7 + 3.8 − 5.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 3.3 − − 0.0          Nov − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 9.7 − 0.7 + 1.5 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.1          Dec 
− 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
− 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 0.5 + 16.4 − 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 17.1 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.7 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 9.8 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 13.4 − 0.5 − 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.1 + 2.5 + 3.7 − 9.5 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 6.8 − − 0.0          May+ 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 12.6 + 0.8 + 4.8 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 7.4 − − 0.2          June
+ 3.0 + 0.8 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.0          July
+ 3.1 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 5.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Aug 
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. — 6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. — 9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). — 10Excluding
possible. — 7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). — 11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. — 8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2001 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2003          June 2,240.1 1,011.4 1,070.5 782.5 288.0 1,267.1 338.0 157.8 37.0 62.9 156.9 32.5 52.2 48.7
         Sep 2,245.6 1,106.2 1,077.5 845.7 231.8 1,262.1 338.1 154.4 36.2 61.7 153.3 32.9 53.6 53.9         Dec 2,241.6 1,124.5 1,083.3 867.1 216.2 1,252.2 335.1 151.0 37.2 59.0 152.3 32.1 54.4 54.4
2004          Mar 2,229.2 1,124.8 1,075.2 861.7 213.5 1,242.1 329.3 149.3 37.7 58.4 148.6 31.9 56.3 57.5
         June 2,229.7 1,125.6 1,081.5 865.7 215.9 1,235.2 329.0 145.9 37.8 57.5 147.0 32.3 57.6 53.8
 Short-term lending
2001 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.22002 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2003          June 327.3 − 14.4 − 14.4 278.8 9.3 51.1 4.5 15.9 56.5 4.7 7.9 22.3
         Sep 323.3 − 14.0 − 14.0 274.7 8.7 48.7 4.0 15.1 54.6 4.7 7.8 26.3         Dec 313.9 − 14.1 − 14.1 266.7 8.9 46.6 4.2 13.2 55.9 3.9 8.0 25.8
2004          Mar 306.3 − 13.2 − 13.2 261.4 8.0 47.0 4.0 13.5 53.8 4.1 8.6 27.6
         June 294.6 − 12.4 − 12.4 250.0 7.4 44.8 4.1 13.1 52.8 4.4 6.9 24.0
 Medium-term lending
2001 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.72002 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2003          June 193.5 − 37.4 − 37.4 121.0 11.9 17.6 2.5 6.0 12.7 3.4 9.9 6.4
         Sep 195.0 − 38.0 − 38.0 121.4 12.0 17.6 2.2 6.1 12.6 3.4 10.5 6.4         Dec 195.0 − 38.2 − 38.2 121.2 12.0 17.5 2.3 6.0 11.9 3.4 10.9 6.5
2004          Mar 193.9 − 37.2 − 37.2 121.0 11.5 17.2 3.0 5.8 11.6 3.3 11.3 6.9
         June 198.2 − 38.7 − 38.7 124.0 12.2 17.4 3.0 5.9 11.8 3.3 11.6 7.2
 Long-term lending
2001 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.12002 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2003          June 1,719.3 1,011.4 1,018.7 782.5 236.2 867.2 316.7 89.1 30.0 41.0 87.6 24.4 34.4 20.1
         Sep 1,727.2 1,106.2 1,025.5 845.7 179.8 866.1 317.4 88.1 30.0 40.6 86.1 24.7 35.2 21.2         Dec 1,732.8 1,124.5 1,031.0 867.1 164.0 864.3 314.2 86.9 30.6 39.9 84.5 24.7 35.5 22.1
2004          Mar 1,729.0 1,124.8 1,024.8 861.7 163.0 859.7 309.8 85.0 30.6 39.1 83.3 24.5 36.4 23.0
         June 1,737.0 1,125.6 1,030.4 865.7 164.8 861.2 309.4 83.6 30.8 38.5 82.4 24.6 39.1 22.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2003          Q2 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 5.8 + 2.7 + 3.1 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.0 − 1.6         Q3 + 5.4 + 4.5 + 7.9 + 5.8 + 2.1 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 1.1 − 3.4 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 5.1         Q4 − 4.0 + 1.7 + 5.0 + 4.5 + 0.5 − 9.9 − 2.6 − 3.4 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.5
2004          Q1 − 12.4 − 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.9
         Q2 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 5.2 + 2.0 + 3.2 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 3.6
 Short-term lending
2003          Q2 − 3.4 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 − 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.0         Q3 − 4.0 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.9         Q4 − 9.5 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.9 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6
2004          Q1 − 7.3 − − 0.9 − − 0.9 − 5.1 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.0
         Q2 − 11.3 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 − 10.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.5
 Medium-term lending
2003          Q2 + 0.4 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1         Q3 + 1.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1         Q4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
2004          Q1 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0
         Q2 + 4.2 − + 1.5 − + 1.5 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
 Long-term lending
2003          Q2 + 5.3 + 0.7 + 4.6 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3         Q3 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 7.8 + 5.8 + 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.1         Q4 + 5.5 + 1.7 + 4.7 + 4.5 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 2.7 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0
2004          Q1 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 4.1 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
         Q2 + 7.6 + 1.8 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 2.6 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are 1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001
729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5 2002
719.1 163.2 48.5 206.8 444.5 71.9 958.8 729.1 229.8 114.2 22.7 14.2 3.5 2003          June
716.1 162.3 48.6 205.7 441.8 70.2 969.6 735.9 233.7 116.1 23.2 13.8 3.5          Sep 
711.9 160.7 44.0 207.2 437.0 67.7 975.6 744.7 230.9 118.6 21.6 13.7 3.5          Dec 
702.5 158.7 43.6 206.2 429.5 66.5 973.4 742.6 230.9 119.1 20.1 13.7 3.3 2004          Mar 
703.2 165.6 45.3 200.7 428.4 66.2 981.2 749.2 232.0 120.9 20.1 13.3 3.3          June
Short-term lending
130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001
123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0 2002
115.9 18.7 17.9 33.6 51.8 15.0 46.8 5.0 41.7 2.3 22.7 1.7 0.0 2003          June
113.5 17.9 18.3 32.1 50.6 14.4 47.2 5.2 42.0 2.3 23.2 1.4 0.0          Sep 
109.1 17.9 14.6 31.2 49.4 12.9 45.9 5.1 40.8 2.4 21.6 1.2 0.0          Dec 
102.7 17.2 14.2 29.4 47.2 13.0 43.5 5.2 38.4 2.2 20.1 1.4 0.0 2004          Mar 
99.9 17.2 14.9 27.4 46.5 12.7 43.5 5.0 38.5 2.3 20.1 1.1 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1 2002
62.5 6.1 6.3 17.6 31.0 4.7 72.0 25.4 46.6 36.4 − 0.5 0.1 2003          June
62.5 5.9 6.0 17.7 30.8 4.6 73.1 26.0 47.2 37.3 − 0.5 0.1          Sep 
62.7 5.7 5.6 18.0 30.4 4.5 73.2 26.2 47.0 37.1 − 0.6 0.1          Dec 
61.9 5.5 5.8 18.1 29.6 4.2 72.3 25.6 46.7 37.3 − 0.6 0.1 2004          Mar 
63.7 6.8 6.4 17.5 30.0 4.1 73.7 26.5 47.2 38.1 − 0.5 0.1          June
Long-term lending
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4 2002
540.7 138.4 24.3 155.6 361.8 52.2 840.1 698.6 141.5 75.5 − 12.0 3.4 2003          June
540.1 138.4 24.2 155.9 360.4 51.2 849.2 704.7 144.5 76.5 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
540.0 137.1 23.8 158.0 357.2 50.4 856.5 713.4 143.1 79.1 − 11.9 3.4          Dec 
537.9 136.0 23.6 158.6 352.7 49.3 857.6 711.8 145.8 79.6 − 11.7 3.2 2004          Mar 
539.6 141.5 24.0 155.8 352.0 49.3 864.1 717.8 146.3 80.6 − 11.7 3.2          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.2 − 1.0 + 8.4 + 6.9 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 2003          Q2
− 3.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 10.8 + 8.8 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0          Q3
− 4.2 − 0.5 − 4.6 + 0.4 − 4.8 − 1.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 8.8 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 6.6 − 1.2 − 3.1 + 0.6 − 3.7 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Q1
+ 0.5 + 2.4 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 7.4 + 5.8 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
− 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 2003          Q2
− 2.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Q3
− 4.4 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 2004          Q1
− 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
− 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q2
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
+ 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2004          Q1
+ 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.8 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 7.1 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2003          Q2
− 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 9.2 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 7.3 + 7.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − 0.2 2004          Q1
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
the maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer   
goods. — 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and   
housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.  
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.52003 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.3
2003          Sep 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 240.3 585.1 7.9 577.2 578.3 99.9 41.5 30.1 11.6
         Oct 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 238.7 585.7 8.0 577.7 579.4 100.0 40.7 30.4 14.5
         Nov 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 237.5 586.5 8.3 578.2 580.3 100.1 40.7 30.5 12.7         Dec 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.3
2004          Jan 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 225.0 589.3 8.3 581.0 590.6 100.3 40.3 30.7 9.8
         Feb 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 223.4 591.4 8.3 583.1 591.5 100.1 40.5 30.8 10.4         Mar 2,145.8 635.3 819.2 225.3 594.0 8.6 585.4 591.4 99.8 39.3 31.2 10.9
         Apr 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 220.8 598.8 8.5 590.3 591.2 99.2 39.0 31.3 10.6
         May 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 227.9 602.3 8.4 593.9 590.6 98.9 39.0 31.3 11.4         June 2,158.3 643.5 826.2 220.4 605.8 8.2 597.5 590.0 98.7 38.8 31.4 9.9
         July 2,160.4 637.6 833.6 225.8 607.7 8.2 599.5 590.6 98.6 38.7 31.5 10.3
         Aug 2,161.3 639.1 832.2 224.5 607.7 8.0 599.7 591.3 98.7 38.6 31.9 8.2
Changes *
2002 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 − 10.2 + 14.3 − 1.5 + 15.8 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 1.62003 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 − 20.3 + 15.6 − 0.5 + 16.1 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 + 2.0 + 7.8
2003          Sep + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 − 7.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 − 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Nov + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.8         Dec + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 10.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 − 12.9 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7         Mar + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Apr + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 4.4 + 4.8 − 0.1 + 4.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 + 7.1 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 3.5 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 7.1 + 3.5 − 0.2 + 3.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.5
         July + 2.1 − 5.5 + 7.0 + 5.1 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Aug + 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.2
Domestic government End of year or month *
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −2003 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −
2003          Sep 105.0 15.4 85.9 28.7 57.2 0.5 56.7 2.0 1.7 36.0 1.1 −
         Oct 101.6 15.2 82.7 25.7 57.0 0.5 56.5 2.0 1.7 35.8 1.1 −
         Nov 104.1 15.8 84.6 27.0 57.7 0.5 57.2 2.0 1.7 35.8 1.1 −         Dec 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −
2004          Jan 106.3 16.1 86.6 29.8 56.8 0.5 56.3 2.0 1.7 34.8 1.2 −
         Feb 107.4 16.6 87.2 30.0 57.1 0.5 56.7 2.1 1.6 34.8 1.2 −         Mar 106.4 17.6 85.0 28.6 56.4 0.9 55.6 2.2 1.6 33.5 1.0 −
         Apr 105.8 17.3 84.7 28.6 56.2 0.9 55.3 2.2 1.6 33.3 1.1 −
         May 108.9 18.5 86.6 30.6 56.0 0.9 55.0 2.2 1.6 33.2 1.0 −         June 111.4 20.0 87.5 32.1 55.4 0.9 54.5 2.2 1.6 33.1 1.1 −
         July 109.5 18.5 87.0 31.5 55.5 0.9 54.6 2.4 1.6 33.0 1.0 −
         Aug 108.6 18.7 85.8 31.2 54.7 0.9 53.8 2.4 1.6 33.0 1.0 −
Changes *
2002 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 8.7 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 −2003 − 4.8 + 1.2 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 −
2003          Sep − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Oct − 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Nov + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 − + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Dec + 4.0 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.0 −
2004          Jan − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −         Mar − 1.0 + 1.0 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.1 −
         Apr − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         May + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −         June + 2.6 + 1.6 + 1.0 + 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         July − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.52003 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
2003          Sep 2,007.3 593.4 739.5 211.6 527.9 7.4 520.5 576.2 98.1 5.5 29.0 11.6
         Oct 2,013.1 595.7 741.8 213.0 528.7 7.5 521.2 577.4 98.3 5.0 29.2 14.5
         Nov 2,034.5 618.3 739.4 210.6 528.8 7.8 521.0 578.3 98.4 4.9 29.4 12.7         Dec 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
2004          Jan 2,031.1 616.1 727.7 195.2 532.6 7.8 524.7 588.6 98.7 5.6 29.6 9.8
         Feb 2,034.3 618.8 727.6 193.4 534.3 7.8 526.4 589.4 98.5 5.7 29.6 10.4         Mar 2,039.3 617.7 734.2 196.7 537.6 7.7 529.8 589.2 98.2 5.8 30.1 10.9
         Apr 2,048.2 626.8 734.9 192.3 542.7 7.6 535.0 589.0 97.5 5.8 30.2 10.6
         May 2,053.5 624.2 743.6 197.3 546.3 7.5 538.8 588.3 97.3 5.8 30.2 11.4         June 2,046.8 623.4 738.7 188.3 550.4 7.4 543.0 587.7 97.1 5.7 30.4 9.9
         July 2,050.9 619.0 746.6 194.3 552.2 7.3 545.0 588.3 97.0 5.7 30.5 10.3
         Aug 2,052.8 620.4 746.4 193.4 553.0 7.1 545.9 588.9 97.2 5.6 30.9 8.2
Changes *
2002 + 60.3 + 47.9 + 12.8 − 3.6 + 16.4 − 1.2 + 17.5 + 1.0 − 1.4 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 1.62003 + 58.7 + 47.2 + 1.0 − 18.7 + 19.7 − 0.1 + 19.8 + 15.1 − 4.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 7.8
2003          Sep + 3.5 + 9.6 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 5.9 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Nov + 21.2 + 22.6 − 2.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.8         Dec − 2.3 − 12.1 − 0.3 − 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 10.0 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 1.1 + 9.9 − 11.4 − 13.6 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 3.2 + 3.6 − 1.0 − 2.7 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7         Mar + 5.0 − 1.1 + 6.6 + 3.3 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5
         Apr + 9.1 + 9.0 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 5.0 − 0.1 + 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 5.3 − 2.6 + 8.7 + 5.0 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 6.7 − 1.2 − 4.6 − 8.6 + 4.1 − 0.1 + 4.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
         July + 4.1 − 4.0 + 7.5 + 5.7 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Aug + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.2
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.12002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.52003 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.3
2003          Sep 723.7 200.7 495.9 99.7 396.2 1.5 394.7 4.8 22.3 5.3 17.4 11.6
         Oct 727.9 201.0 500.0 103.2 396.8 1.5 395.3 4.8 22.1 4.7 17.4 14.5
         Nov 733.5 206.0 500.7 102.8 397.9 1.7 396.2 4.7 22.0 4.7 17.4 12.7         Dec 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.3
2004          Jan 726.6 211.6 488.2 90.4 397.9 1.8 396.1 4.9 21.9 5.3 17.4 9.8
         Feb 723.7 207.6 489.3 90.0 399.3 1.8 397.5 5.1 21.7 5.4 17.4 10.4         Mar 730.9 207.4 496.5 94.6 401.9 1.9 400.0 5.1 21.8 5.5 17.8 10.9
         Apr 740.0 213.5 499.5 92.7 406.8 2.0 404.9 5.2 21.8 5.5 17.8 10.6
         May 741.6 205.6 509.0 98.2 410.8 1.9 408.9 5.3 21.8 5.5 17.8 11.4         June 737.6 204.6 506.2 91.6 414.5 1.9 412.7 5.1 21.7 5.5 18.0 9.9
         July 742.9 200.6 515.4 99.0 416.4 1.9 414.5 5.2 21.8 5.4 18.0 10.3
         Aug 746.1 203.8 515.3 98.7 416.6 1.8 414.8 5.2 21.8 5.3 18.1 8.2
Changes *
2002 + 31.1 + 13.4 + 18.3 + 7.4 + 10.9 − 1.3 + 12.2 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 1.6 − 1.62003 + 29.6 + 11.2 + 17.9 + 2.9 + 15.0 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 7.8
2003          Sep + 6.8 + 11.1 − 4.1 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 4.3 + 0.3 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.9
         Nov + 5.4 + 5.0 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.8         Dec − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 4.2 + 5.8 − 9.9 − 11.7 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Feb − 2.9 − 3.1 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.7         Mar + 7.1 − 0.2 + 7.2 + 4.6 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Apr + 9.5 + 6.1 + 3.0 − 1.9 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 1.6 − 7.9 + 9.4 + 5.5 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 4.1 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 6.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
         July + 5.3 − 4.1 + 9.2 + 7.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5
         Aug + 3.4 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.2
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.2
2002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.62003 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.4
2004          Mar 1,308.5 410.3 397.0 67.5 270.8 58.6 13.3 237.8 219.8 28.2 173.7 17.9
         Apr 1,308.1 413.3 400.2 69.4 272.9 58.0 13.0 235.4 218.0 27.5 172.8 17.6
         May 1,311.9 418.6 405.9 69.4 278.2 58.4 12.7 234.7 216.8 26.7 172.6 17.5         June 1,309.3 418.8 405.2 68.0 279.2 58.0 13.5 232.5 214.8 26.2 171.6 17.0
         July 1,308.0 418.5 405.5 70.1 277.9 57.5 13.0 231.2 214.1 26.2 171.4 16.6
         Aug 1,306.7 416.6 403.5 70.6 275.5 57.4 13.1 231.0 214.1 26.3 171.3 16.5
Changes *
2002 + 29.2 + 34.5 + 33.1 + 5.6 + 22.4 + 5.1 + 1.5 − 5.5 − 4.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 2.12003 + 29.2 + 36.0 + 35.3 + 5.6 + 23.7 + 6.0 + 0.6 − 16.9 − 16.2 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 4.2
2004          Mar − 2.1 − 0.9 − 1.4 − 1.7 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Apr − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.3 + 1.9 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.3
         May + 3.7 + 5.4 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.1         June − 2.6 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.5
         July − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.4
         Aug − 1.5 − 1.9 − 2.0 + 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.2
2002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.62003 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 21.9
2004          Mar 106.4 46.2 2.5 7.0 36.7 0.0 12.4 19.6 3.6 2.9 13.0 0.1 20.9
         Apr 105.8 46.2 2.5 7.2 36.5 0.0 12.6 19.6 3.5 3.0 13.0 0.1 20.4
         May 108.9 45.8 2.7 6.6 36.4 0.0 12.6 18.4 2.5 2.7 13.1 0.0 20.3         June 111.4 47.1 2.8 8.2 36.0 0.0 12.6 21.2 4.8 3.4 12.9 0.1 20.2
         July 109.5 47.2 3.0 8.1 36.0 0.0 12.5 19.4 3.2 3.4 12.7 0.1 20.2
         Aug 108.6 47.6 3.0 8.5 36.1 0.0 12.5 16.8 2.5 2.5 11.8 0.1 20.1
Changes *
2002 − 8.6 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.62003 − 4.8 − 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.7
2004          Mar − 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.0
         Apr − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5
         May + 3.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1         June + 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         July − 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 − 2001
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 − 200218.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 − 2003
18.0 102.1 135.7 5.9 129.8 584.1 574.7 9.4 76.3 0.2 12.4 − 2004          Mar 
17.4 99.6 135.8 5.6 130.2 583.8 574.3 9.5 75.7 0.2 12.4 −          Apr 
17.8 99.1 135.5 5.6 129.9 583.1 573.6 9.5 75.5 0.2 12.4 −          May17.7 96.7 135.8 5.5 130.4 582.6 573.1 9.5 75.4 0.2 12.4 −          June
17.0 95.3 135.9 5.4 130.5 583.1 573.6 9.5 75.2 0.3 12.5 −          July
16.9 94.6 136.4 5.3 131.1 583.7 574.1 9.6 75.4 0.3 12.8 −          Aug 
Changes *
− 1.3 − 10.9 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2002− 0.7 − 21.6 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 14.7 + 14.4 + 0.3 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2003
+ 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2004          Mar 
− 0.6 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          May− 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
− 0.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          July
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 −          Aug 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
 
   
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
27.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 2001
27.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 200224.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0 2003
23.0 8.5 9.6 2.0 2.9 0.2 17.6 3.0 9.1 4.7 0.9 0.0 2004          Mar 
22.8 8.8 9.1 2.0 2.9 0.2 17.2 2.5 9.3 4.6 0.9 0.0          Apr 
24.8 10.2 9.7 2.0 2.9 0.2 19.9 3.0 11.5 4.5 0.9 0.0          May23.8 9.4 9.6 2.0 2.9 0.3 19.3 3.0 10.9 4.5 0.9 0.0          June
23.9 9.6 9.3 2.0 3.0 0.2 19.1 2.8 10.6 4.8 0.9 0.0          July
25.5 10.2 10.3 2.0 3.0 0.3 18.6 3.0 9.9 4.8 0.9 0.0          Aug 
Changes *
+ 0.0 + 1.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 2002− 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 2003
− 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.6 + 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2004          Mar 
− 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 2.0 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          May− 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0          June
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 −          July
+ 1.6 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Aug 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.8
2002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.92003 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 16.0 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.0
2004          Apr 601.0 591.2 504.4 383.5 86.8 75.0 9.9 7.8 0.3 106.0 99.2 84.7 6.9
         May 600.4 590.6 504.6 384.3 86.0 74.2 9.8 7.8 0.3 105.7 98.9 84.8 6.8         June 599.7 590.0 504.3 385.1 85.6 73.8 9.7 7.8 0.3 105.4 98.7 84.9 6.8
         July 600.3 590.6 504.9 387.4 85.7 74.0 9.7 7.8 0.3 105.3 98.6 85.1 6.7
         Aug 601.0 591.3 505.6 388.1 85.7 74.0 9.7 7.8 0.3 105.5 98.7 85.4 6.7
Changes *
2002 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 11.0 + 16.4 − 10.2 − 8.7 − 1.1 − 0.7 . − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.12003 + 14.2 + 15.1 + 28.0 + 23.8 − 12.9 − 12.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 . − 4.6 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.1
2004          Apr − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1
         May − 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1         June − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0
         July + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1
         Aug + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.4
2002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.32003 1,490.1 353.4 20.8 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.2
2004          Apr 1,553.0 376.8 21.5 206.5 36.5 69.6 111.2 1,372.2 2.3 0.4 0.5 1.4 40.9 3.3
         May 1,565.4 383.4 20.1 208.0 36.5 67.6 111.8 1,386.1 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.4 40.7 3.3         June 1,560.4 374.6 20.8 210.6 40.0 71.3 100.3 1,388.8 2.4 0.5 0.4 1.5 41.0 3.3
         July 1,566.5 377.8 22.1 218.5 37.5 69.4 100.3 1,396.9 2.3 0.4 0.4 1.5 41.0 3.3
         Aug 1,568.8 382.2 21.3 218.5 42.4 69.9 99.2 1,399.8 2.5 0.6 0.4 1.5 41.4 3.5
Changes *
2002 + 9.1 + 6.3 − 4.5 + 12.1 + 16.2 + 14.2 + 4.6 − 9.7 + 4.8 + 4.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.12003 + 19.6 + 7.0 + 4.7 + 13.2 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 14.9 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.3
2004          Apr + 17.7 + 6.1 − 0.6 + 7.9 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 16.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0
         May + 12.4 + 6.6 − 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 2.0 + 0.5 + 13.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0         June − 5.1 − 8.8 + 0.7 + 2.5 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 11.5 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
         July + 6.2 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 7.9 − 2.5 − 2.0 + 0.0 + 8.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
         Aug + 2.2 + 4.4 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 2.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. — 3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. — 4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. — 5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. — 6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2003 27 172.9 30.1 0.1 10.6 37.3 63.6 8.6 11.3 0.4 29.3 106.8 4.0 7.1 7.2 105.5
2004          June 27 176.0 31.0 0.1 11.8 36.0 64.5 9.0 12.5 0.4 29.3 108.8 4.2 7.0 7.4 7.6
         July 27 177.0 31.2 0.1 12.0 35.9 63.3 9.1 13.0 0.4 28.8 108.7 4.2 7.0 7.4 7.0         Aug 27 177.3 30.7 0.1 12.0 35.6 63.7 9.2 13.6 0.4 28.9 108.9 4.2 7.0 7.4 6.7
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          June 16 127.4 24.7 0.0 5.9 23.0 46.6 8.2 8.4 0.3 21.5 74.0 4.0 7.0 4.7 4.9         July 16 128.6 25.1 0.0 6.0 22.9 45.4 8.3 9.0 0.3 21.4 73.9 4.0 7.0 4.7 4.4         Aug 16 129.0 24.5 0.0 6.1 22.7 45.8 8.4 9.6 0.3 21.6 74.1 4.0 7.0 4.7 4.2
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          June 11 48.6 6.3 0.1 5.9 13.0 17.9 0.8 4.0 0.1 7.7 34.8 0.2 − 2.6 2.7         July 11 48.4 6.0 0.1 6.0 13.0 17.8 0.8 4.0 0.1 7.5 34.8 0.2 − 2.6 2.5         Aug 11 48.3 6.1 0.0 5.9 12.9 17.9 0.8 4.0 0.1 7.3 34.9 0.2 − 2.6 2.5
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2003 27.0 2.9 5.7 48.2 29.7 43.7 17.9 4.0 8.2 3.2 17.5 12.2 8.0 14.8 11.9 0.6
2004          June 2.1 0.0 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.7 1.5 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.5 12.0 8.0 1.1 2.7 0.0
         July 2.0 0.0 0.5 4.0 2.8 4.1 1.7 0.5 0.9 0.4 1.5 11.6 8.0 1.0 0.1         Aug 1.9 0.0 0.4 2.9 2.0 3.0 1.2 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.3 11.2 7.9 1.0 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          June 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.5 2.6 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.2 7.3 4.0 0.8 1.8 0.0         July 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.8 3.0 1.2 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.2 7.0 3.9 0.7 0.0         Aug 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.0 1.2 2.2 0.8 0.2 0.3 0.1 1.0 6.7 3.9 0.7 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          June 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.7 4.1 0.4 0.9 0.0         July 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.6 4.0 0.3 0.0         Aug 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.5 4.0 0.3 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.9
2002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.02003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2003          Oct 55 200 1,368.7 621.8 540.7 168.3 372.5 81.1 680.1 476.0 20.0 16.5 456.0 204.1 66.8
         Nov 55 201 1,356.0 618.6 539.3 173.7 365.6 79.2 670.9 471.2 18.3 15.7 452.8 199.7 66.6         Dec 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2004          Jan 55 202 1,390.3 647.7 566.3 191.5 374.8 81.3 673.5 472.8 19.2 16.9 453.6 200.8 69.1
         Feb 55 203 1,413.6 666.3 587.2 190.0 397.2 79.1 679.6 482.5 19.3 17.1 463.1 197.1 67.8         Mar 55 203 1,466.2 689.6 607.6 198.5 409.1 82.0 708.6 506.9 19.0 16.9 487.9 201.7 67.9
         Apr 55 205 1,493.1 713.2 631.2 207.6 423.6 82.0 711.1 509.6 18.8 16.6 490.8 201.5 68.8
         May 55 206 1,435.9 672.9 591.4 199.1 392.3 81.5 691.9 506.0 18.1 16.0 487.9 185.9 71.2         June 55 205 1,435.5 670.2 588.8 190.3 398.5 81.5 681.9 486.5 18.3 16.7 468.1 195.4 83.3
         July 54 204 1,447.9 675.6 589.2 177.6 411.6 86.4 686.8 500.5 17.1 15.7 483.4 186.3 85.6
Changes *
2002 − 8 − 11 −139.1 −133.4 −139.9 − 15.4 −124.5 + 6.5 − 3.6 − 9.2 − 1.9 − 2.2 − 7.3 + 5.7 − 2.2
2003 − 5 − 3 − 6.8 − 45.3 − 17.4 − 12.7 − 4.7 − 27.9 + 22.5 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.7 + 24.9 + 15.9
2003          Oct + 1 − 1 − 13.6 − 13.7 − 20.8 − 3.0 − 17.8 + 7.1 − 6.4 − 8.9 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 9.8 + 2.5 + 6.5
         Nov − + 1 + 10.8 + 4.9 + 6.0 + 5.5 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 3.8 + 4.6 − 1.7 − 0.8 + 6.3 − 0.8 + 2.1         Dec − + 1 − 28.0 − 8.3 − 6.2 + 11.9 − 18.0 − 2.2 − 19.6 − 19.5 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 20.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
2004          Jan − − + 80.6 + 42.7 + 38.0 + 6.0 + 32.1 + 4.7 + 31.7 + 28.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 28.0 + 3.7 + 6.2
         Feb − + 1 + 24.8 + 19.5 + 21.7 − 1.6 + 23.2 − 2.2 + 6.7 + 9.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 9.5 − 3.0 − 1.3         Mar − − + 36.7 + 16.7 + 14.4 + 8.5 + 5.9 + 2.4 + 20.1 + 18.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 18.6 + 1.8 − 0.2
         Apr − + 2 + 19.9 + 21.1 + 21.4 + 9.1 + 12.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.7
         May − + 1 − 44.9 − 36.0 − 35.8 − 8.5 − 27.4 − 0.1 − 13.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 13.7 + 4.0         June − − 1 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 3.2 − 8.8 + 5.6 − 0.1 − 10.7 − 19.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 20.1 + 9.2 + 12.0
         July − 1 − 1 + 5.9 + 3.3 − 1.4 − 12.7 + 11.2 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 11.2 − 1.3 − 1.0 + 12.4 − 9.8 + 1.3
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.0
2002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.42003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2003          Oct 46 187 652.0 308.5 244.4 128.1 116.3 64.1 272.2 206.3 39.3 36.9 167.0 65.9 71.4
         Nov 46 182 649.9 308.4 244.9 128.7 116.3 63.5 270.2 204.5 39.8 37.0 164.7 65.7 71.3         Dec 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2004          Jan 46 177 618.1 295.8 233.1 115.2 117.9 62.7 263.3 199.1 41.6 37.9 157.5 64.2 59.0
         Feb 46 179 621.3 297.2 235.7 114.8 120.9 61.5 260.4 196.5 38.8 37.1 157.7 63.9 63.7         Mar 46 176 650.7 300.5 238.8 111.7 127.1 61.7 270.0 204.6 41.6 38.0 163.0 65.4 80.3
         Apr 46 176 663.2 298.4 236.6 111.1 125.5 61.8 274.8 207.7 40.9 37.8 166.8 67.1 90.1
         May 46 175 629.3 280.2 218.7 106.5 112.1 61.5 275.1 206.6 39.5 37.9 167.1 68.5 74.0         June 45 173 628.6 283.0 220.9 110.7 110.2 62.1 278.9 210.0 40.3 37.3 169.7 68.9 66.7
         July 45 173 636.3 292.3 229.6 116.4 113.2 62.7 279.0 209.7 39.6 36.7 170.1 69.2 65.0
Changes *
2002 + 1 + 0 − 78.3 + 6.7 + 13.3 + 20.0 − 6.7 − 6.6 − 70.0 − 42.0 − 5.2 − 4.8 − 36.8 − 28.1 − 15.0
2003 − 1 − 21 − 32.8 − 14.0 − 10.7 + 1.6 − 12.3 − 3.3 − 11.9 − 14.2 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 9.0 + 2.3 − 6.9
2003          Oct − 1 − 3 − 10.2 − 3.8 − 4.1 − 3.1 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.6 − 3.6 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.6 + 1.0 − 3.8
         Nov − − 5 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.3         Dec − − 3 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 3.7 − 1.4 + 5.1 − 1.6 + 9.5 + 11.9 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 10.3 − 2.4 − 8.9
2004          Jan − − 2 − 30.7 − 13.1 − 14.4 − 12.1 − 2.3 + 1.4 − 14.9 − 15.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 15.9 + 0.9 − 2.8
         Feb − + 2 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 2.6 − 0.4 + 3.0 − 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 4.7         Mar − − 3 + 26.7 + 1.8 + 2.1 − 3.1 + 5.2 − 0.3 + 8.5 + 7.1 + 2.8 + 0.8 + 4.3 + 1.5 + 16.4
         Apr − − + 10.8 − 3.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.1 + 3.9 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 1.7 + 10.0
         May − − 1 − 32.5 − 17.3 − 17.3 − 4.6 − 12.8 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 16.2         June − 1 − 2 − 0.9 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 4.2 − 2.0 + 0.5 + 3.7 + 3.3 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 2.5 + 0.4 − 7.2
         July − − + 6.9 + 8.9 + 8.5 + 5.7 + 2.8 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.7
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarde da s
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 2001
1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 20021,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 2003
1,136.7 739.5 265.4 474.1 397.2 76.4 70.9 66.7 5.5 5.2 320.9 149.0 24.8 58.2 2003          Oct 
1,124.7 738.8 261.6 477.2 385.9 69.5 64.0 60.6 5.5 5.2 316.4 149.4 26.6 55.3          Nov 
1,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4          Dec 
1,155.0 765.6 281.4 484.3 389.4 74.0 68.0 64.8 6.0 5.7 315.4 149.9 28.9 56.4 2004          Jan 
1,186.4 790.4 267.1 523.2 396.1 72.4 66.3 62.6 6.1 5.7 323.7 144.6 28.9 53.7          Feb 
1,227.8 808.2 273.9 534.3 419.5 71.8 65.6 62.4 6.1 5.7 347.8 155.4 28.1 55.0          Mar 
1,249.4 822.6 275.2 547.4 426.8 69.1 62.9 58.7 6.3 5.9 357.7 157.4 28.1 58.2          Apr 
1,193.8 776.0 268.5 507.5 417.9 65.0 58.3 54.4 6.7 6.3 352.9 155.3 27.8 59.0          May1,187.6 775.6 267.1 508.5 412.0 65.9 59.2 55.8 6.7 6.4 346.1 160.2 28.0 59.7          June
1,199.1 774.5 261.5 513.0 424.6 69.2 62.0 58.9 7.1 6.8 355.4 161.9 28.0 58.9          July
Changes *
− 53.4 − 31.7 + 56.0 − 87.7 − 21.7 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 26.9 −104.8 + 1.8 + 17.2 2002
+ 34.4 + 12.6 + 17.0 − 4.4 + 21.8 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 18.1 − 72.6 + 4.6 + 26.8 2003
− 8.3 − 11.4 − 9.2 − 2.1 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 4.6 2003          Oct 
+ 4.4 + 8.8 − 3.7 + 12.5 − 4.4 − 6.9 − 6.9 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 4.1          Nov 
− 23.4 + 2.8 + 5.5 − 2.7 − 26.2 − 3.3 − 3.5 − 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 22.9 − 10.0 + 3.9 + 1.4          Dec 
+ 66.6 + 31.0 + 14.2 + 16.8 + 35.5 + 7.8 + 7.4 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 27.8 + 10.5 − 1.5 + 5.1 2004          Jan 
+ 31.9 + 25.5 − 14.2 + 39.7 + 6.4 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.0 − 5.3 − 0.0 − 1.7          Feb 
+ 29.7 + 10.0 + 6.8 + 3.2 + 19.6 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 20.3 + 10.8 − 0.8 − 2.9          Mar 
+ 14.8 + 10.7 + 1.3 + 9.5 + 4.1 − 2.7 − 2.8 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 3.0          Apr 
− 47.3 − 41.3 − 6.7 − 34.6 − 6.0 − 4.1 − 4.6 − 4.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 4.7          May− 7.2 − 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 6.0 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 7.0 + 4.9 + 0.2 + 0.0          June
+ 6.4 − 3.9 − 5.7 + 1.8 + 10.2 + 3.2 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 7.0 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 2.2          July
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001
503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003
469.3 288.2 92.9 195.3 181.1 29.6 25.4 23.5 4.3 4.2 151.5 71.0 40.1 71.6 2003          Oct 
469.7 291.3 94.9 196.5 178.3 31.0 26.8 24.4 4.2 4.2 147.3 71.9 39.2 69.1          Nov 
467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4          Dec 
444.3 263.0 86.3 176.7 181.3 30.0 26.0 25.7 4.0 3.9 151.3 67.9 38.3 67.6 2004          Jan 
447.4 263.5 86.0 177.4 183.9 30.1 26.1 25.7 4.0 3.9 153.8 68.3 39.0 66.7          Feb 
470.2 273.7 88.0 185.7 196.5 32.6 28.7 28.3 3.9 3.8 163.9 71.1 39.2 70.2          Mar 
480.6 297.0 75.6 221.4 183.6 30.0 26.2 25.8 3.9 3.8 153.6 70.7 39.4 72.4          Apr 
451.1 271.9 75.7 196.3 179.2 28.5 24.7 24.2 3.8 3.7 150.7 70.6 39.2 68.5          May449.2 273.7 81.0 192.6 175.5 29.4 25.6 25.1 3.8 3.7 146.1 70.3 39.5 69.6          June
457.0 279.0 83.1 195.9 178.0 30.0 26.1 25.3 3.9 3.9 148.0 71.4 39.9 68.0          July
Changes *
− 47.1 − 37.4 + 20.3 − 57.8 − 9.7 − 9.4 − 10.0 − 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 21.4 − 4.4 − 5.4 2002
− 13.8 − 10.3 + 0.3 − 10.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 6.3 − 10.3 − 1.6 − 7.2 2003
− 9.7 − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.9 − 5.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.8 + 1.7 − 0.6 − 1.6 2003          Oct 
+ 4.0 + 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.4 − 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.8          Nov 
+ 4.0 − 4.4 + 4.9 − 9.3 + 8.4 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 9.5 − 3.7 + 2.1 + 0.3          Dec 
− 26.1 − 21.4 − 13.5 − 7.9 − 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 1.4 2004          Jan 
+ 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.6          Feb 
+ 20.8 + 9.0 + 1.9 + 7.1 + 11.9 + 2.6 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.3 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.9          Mar 
+ 8.8 + 22.5 − 12.4 + 34.9 − 13.7 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 2.2          Apr 
− 28.0 − 24.1 + 0.1 − 24.2 − 3.9 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 4.0          May− 2.1 + 1.6 + 5.4 − 3.8 − 3.7 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 1.1          June
+ 7.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 + 2.9 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 1.6          July
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market
securities. — 3Including own debt securities. — 4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2004          Feb  8 −−−−−−−
         Mar 6,756.2 135.1 0.5 134.6 135.3 0.7 0.0
         Apr 6,747.2 134.9 0.5 134.4 135.0 0.6 0.0
         May 6,847.2 136.9 0.5 136.4 137.1 0.7 0.0         June 6,925.3 138.5 0.5 138.0 138.8 0.8 0.0
         July 6,949.1 139.0 0.5 138.5 139.1 0.6 0.0
         Aug 6,963.2 139.3 0.5 138.7 139.3 0.6 0.0         Sep  
p ... ... ... 138.7 139.3 0.6 ...
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2004          Feb  8 −−−−−−−
         Mar 1,885,245 37,705 217 37,488 37,784 296 3
         Apr 1,883,341 37,667 216 37,451 37,681 230 0
         May 1,911,592 38,232 216 38,016 38,331 315 1         June 1,913,668 38,273 216 38,058 38,465 407 4
         July 1,914,325 38,287 214 38,073 38,336 263 1
         Aug 1,890,399 37,808 213 37,595 37,860 265 1         Sep  
p,9 1,875,073 37,501 212 37,290 37,543 253 ...
         Oct  p 1,870,662 37,413 211 37,203 ... ... ...
1Up to December 2003, the Eurosystem’s reserve maintenance periods ratio of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying
began on the 24th day of each month and ended on the 23rd day of the the reserve ratios to the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of
following month (with the first reserve maintenance period lasting from 1 the European Central Bank on the application of minimum reserves. —
January 1999 until 23 February 1999). From March 2004, the reserve 5Average credit balances of the credit institutions at the national central
maintenance period will start on the settlement day of the main refinancing banks. — 6Average credit balances less required reserves after deduction of
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the lump-sum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the
the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary policy stance is lump-sum allowance. — 8Owing to changes in the operational framework
scheduled. For the transitional period, provision has been made for a for the monetary policy, no reserve maintenance period began in Februaryextended reserve maintenance period lasting from 24 January until 9 March 2004. — 9The total number of deficiencies was not available when this
2004. — 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the report went to press. 
application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
         Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.71
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          to
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
 
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2004 Sep                  1 343,768 254,000 − 2.00 2.02 2.02 7
         Sep                  8 326,708 252,500 − 2.00 2.02 2.02 7
         Sep                15 332,636 253,000 − 2.00 2.02 2.02 7
         Sep                22 331,112 262,500 − 2.00 2.02 2.02 7
         Sep                29 327,330 259,000 − 2.00 2.02 2.03 7
         Oct                  5 325,420 255,500 − 2.00 2.02 2.03 7
         Oct                12 338,406 244,500 − 2.00 2.02 2.03 8
Longer-term refinancing operations
2004 July                 1 37,698 25,000 − − 2.06 2.08 91
         July               29 40,354 25,000 − − 2.07 2.08 91
         Aug                26 37,957 25,000 − − 2.06 2.08 91
         Sep                30 37,414 25,000 − − 2.06 2.08 84
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2004          Mar 2.01 1.80 − 2.08 2.01 1.92 − 2.06 2.01 2.05 2.04 2.03 2.02 2.02 2.06
         Apr 2.07 2.00 − 2.80 2.03 1.92 − 2.07 2.08 2.05 2.05 2.05 2.06 2.11 2.16
         May 2.02 1.55 − 2.30 2.07 2.04 − 2.09 2.02 2.05 2.06 2.09 2.14 2.21 2.30         June 2.03 1.70 − 2.20 2.09 2.05 − 2.12 2.03 2.07 2.08 2.11 2.19 2.29 2.40
         July 2.06 2.02 − 2.45 2.10 2.08 − 2.12 2.07 2.07 2.08 2.12 2.19 2.26 2.36
         Aug 2.04 1.85 − 2.12 2.09 2.07 − 2.11 2.04 2.07 2.08 2.11 2.17 2.22 2.30         Sep 2.05 1.95 − 2.50 2.10 2.07 − 2.15 2.05 2.07 2.08 2.12 2.20 2.28 2.38
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2003          Dec 1.97 3.54 2.14 4.25 5.09 4.88 5.14 8.04 7.05 6.00 4.56 4.23 4.66
2004          Jan 1.94 3.36 2.09 4.28 5.05 4.89 5.11 8.15 7.02 5.92 4.58 4.07 4.56
         Feb 1.93 3.42 2.09 4.22 5.01 4.91 5.11 8.13 7.16 5.95 4.62 4.06 4.58         Mar 1.92 3.32 2.08 4.17 4.98 4.82 5.03 8.05 7.17 5.89 4.56 3.96 4.61
         Apr 1.90 3.35 2.09 4.17 4.90 4.75 5.01 8.03 7.08 5.85 4.51 3.91 4.59
         May 1.89 3.28 2.07 4.15 4.89 4.73 4.99 7.99 7.04 5.82 4.50 3.87 4.55         June 1.89 3.27 2.09 4.11 4.87 4.69 4.97 7.93 6.99 5.80 4.47 3.89 4.53
         July 1.89 3.25 2.10 4.10 4.90 4.63 4.94 7.94 6.98 5.76 4.48 3.88 4.50
         Aug 1.89 3.22 2.13 4.02 4.88 4.58 4.91 7.94 6.95 5.77 4.46 3.85 4.48
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2003          Dec 0.69 1.89 2.40 2.41 2.02 2.68 0.86 2.00 2.42 3.35
2004          Jan 0.69 1.91 2.37 2.74 2.03 2.65 0.93 1.99 2.07 3.12
         Feb 0.69 1.88 2.16 2.45 2.02 2.63 0.86 1.98 2.21 3.59         Mar 0.70 1.92 2.15 2.34 2.00 2.59 0.86 1.96 2.11 3.35
         Apr 0.70 1.92 2.14 2.44 2.02 2.57 0.85 1.97 2.00 3.50
         May 0.70 1.85 2.16 2.41 2.00 2.55 0.86 1.96 2.06 3.75         June 0.70 1.88 2.23 2.40 2.00 2.55 0.87 1.99 2.27 3.79
         July 0.70 1.91 2.22 2.53 1.99 2.55 0.86 1.99 2.59 4.00
         Aug 0.71 1.91 2.19 2.66 2.00 2.53 0.87 1.99 2.36 3.99
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2003          Dec 9.69 7.71 7.66 6.43 7.63 4.45 3.63 4.17 5.02 4.95 3.85 5.00 5.08
2004          Jan 9.87 8.32 7.62 7.04 8.49 4.49 3.63 4.30 5.02 4.92 4.05 5.12 5.16
         Feb 9.81 8.16 7.43 6.91 8.44 4.35 3.55 4.23 4.97 4.84 4.10 5.07 5.05         Mar 9.72 8.01 7.34 6.80 8.28 4.28 3.47 4.14 4.86 4.78 3.94 5.06 4.97
         Apr 9.73 7.82 7.31 6.60 8.22 4.27 3.42 4.05 4.78 4.68 3.86 4.89 4.92
         May 9.68 7.92 7.30 6.69 8.17 4.21 3.40 4.04 4.75 4.61 4.11 4.81 4.94         June 9.56 7.94 7.11 6.66 8.34 4.21 3.42 4.12 4.81 4.69 3.93 4.94 5.01
         July 9.57 8.08 7.19 6.86 8.47 4.22 3.47 4.16 4.81 4.69 4.03 4.92 5.02
         Aug 9.62 8.26 7.67 6.89 8.54 4.34 3.50 4.19 4.86 4.65 3.91 5.07 5.02
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2003          Dec 5.58 4.04 4.84 4.81 3.12 3.41 4.32
2004          Jan 5.67 4.06 4.86 4.81 3.01 3.37 4.29
         Feb 5.63 4.02 4.94 4.78 2.97 3.19 4.30         Mar 5.56 3.94 4.79 4.77 2.91 3.25 4.41
         Apr 5.51 3.87 4.71 4.64 2.96 3.28 4.41
         May 5.46 3.98 4.57 4.57 2.94 3.30 4.24         June 5.46 3.96 4.76 4.71 3.02 3.26 4.08
         July 5.36 4.02 4.86 4.65 3.02 3.28 4.25
         Aug 5.36 4.06 4.89 4.73 2.99 3.12 4.30
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Aug 2.04 135,705 3.24 187,639 2.05 80,491 5.03 28,452
         Sep 2.00 133,458 3.23 187,511 2.04 77,051 5.04 29,069
         Oct 1.99 131,553 3.22 187,892 2.02 80,075 5.02 29,052
         Nov 1.98 129,649 3.16 186,957 2.02 80,795 4.99 29,633         Dec 2.00 128,564 3.16 190,465 2.05 74,309 4.98 29,363
2004          Jan 1.97 126,519 3.14 191,301 2.00 65,515 4.97 29,816
         Feb 1.94 124,617 3.13 191,935 1.99 72,633 4.96 29,775         Mar 1.94 122,662 3.11 192,728 1.98 71,568 4.96 29,211
         Apr 1.92 119,413 3.07 192,985 1.97 71,450 4.93 29,591
         May 1.90 118,543 3.05 192,822 1.98 73,261 4.93 29,523         June 1.89 115,574 3.03 193,431 1.98 71,355 4.88 29,376
         July 1.91 113,816 3.03 193,684 1.99 72,644 4.86 29,709
         Aug 1.91 112,858 3.03 194,632 2.00 70,571 4.82 29,782
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2003          Aug 5.54 7,963 5.15 32,709 5.87 877,688 8.91 87,862 6.40 71,011 6.34 333,305
         Sep 5.48 8,022 5.11 32,871 5.85 879,014 8.94 90,945 6.38 70,957 6.34 333,058
         Oct 5.50 7,772 5.07 33,146 5.83 882,447 8.89 89,093 6.36 70,809 6.32 332,152
         Nov 5.44 7,751 5.04 33,167 5.82 884,545 8.74 84,602 6.33 70,975 6.30 331,730         Dec 5.55 7,756 5.01 33,052 5.79 886,159 8.90 88,558 6.35 70,446 6.28 329,925
2004          Jan 5.43 7,641 4.97 32,907 5.78 885,875 8.87 84,977 6.32 69,872 6.27 328,719
         Feb 5.38 7,521 4.96 32,809 5.77 884,820 8.77 83,635 6.29 69,585 6.26 328,977         Mar 5.32 7,690 4.90 32,180 5.75 880,980 8.74 84,319 6.27 69,587 6.25 331,220
         Apr 5.29 7,401 4.87 32,148 5.74 881,832 8.81 82,911 6.19 70,268 6.22 331,533
         May 5.27 7,501 4.84 32,268 5.73 882,795 8.74 81,301 6.15 70,586 6.21 331,611         June 5.23 7,635 4.83 33,008 5.71 886,304 8.88 83,204 6.14 70,479 6.21 331,013
         July 5.24 7,577 4.77 33,072 5.69 888,736 8.80 81,277 6.10 71,134 6.21 331,665
         Aug 5.24 7,478 4.75 33,203 5.68 890,886 8.77 80,999 6.07 71,478 6.20 331,011
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Aug 4.89 188,935 4.54 88,871 5.40 489,036
         Sep 4.88 193,086 4.51 88,151 5.39 486,570
         Oct 4.83 188,707 4.48 88,246 5.37 487,573
         Nov 4.75 190,666 4.48 88,462 5.36 489,132         Dec 4.84 187,742 4.46 87,966 5.33 488,777
2004          Jan 4.82 181,660 4.40 88,474 5.30 487,166
         Feb 4.78 181,186 4.37 87,879 5.29 488,299         Mar 4.76 183,464 4.34 87,519 5.27 487,244
         Apr 4.75 179,606 4.32 87,478 5.25 489,214
         May 4.77 174,716 4.28 89,876 5.23 491,825         June 4.79 176,791 4.32 90,154 5.22 488,805
         July 4.72 171,094 4.26 90,072 5.21 487,135
         Aug 4.68 170,136 4.21 90,723 5.19 487,903
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by the end of the month. — 1The effective interest rates may always be
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments onhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and deposits and loans but not any other related charges which may occur fornon-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarante es and
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. —
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a home improvements; including loans granted by building and loansample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics 4Consumer credits are loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting System / consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these statistics,
Banking statistics / EWU-Zinsstatistik). This information is currently available other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business , debt
in German only. — oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at consolidation, education etc. — 6 Including overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2003          Aug 1.05 394,794 2.07 25,650 2.59 627 2.68 1,378 2.08 490,805 2.92 88,948
         Sep 1.06 393,137 1.88 28,352 2.46 679 2.73 1,891 2.04 491,693 2.88 88,197
         Oct 1.07 394,958 1.94 28,477 2.47 986 2.93 3,332 2.20 492,668 2.76 88,289
         Nov 1.06 412,862 1.89 24,839 2.52 1,065 3.04 3,325 2.15 493,279 2.73 88,529         Dec 1.08 400,936 1.89 29,428 2.84 1,512 2.91 2,519 2.17 502,167 2.72 89,528
2004          Jan 1.10 405,052 1.92 30,791 2.78 1,542 3.15 3,852 2.18 503,431 2.68 88,506
         Feb 1.10 411,617 1.95 23,387 2.41 1,056 2.86 2,340 2.12 504,560 2.66 88,115         Mar 1.12 410,717 2.03 28,021 2.31 840 2.66 2,357 2.10 504,583 2.62 87,863
         Apr 1.13 412,968 2.01 32,020 2.30 1,243 2.76 2,061 2.13 505,420 2.60 86,706
         May 1.13 418,859 1.88 30,506 2.33 1,097 2.74 2,404 2.10 505,649 2.58 85,838         June 1.13 419,073 1.88 25,696 2.46 838 2.71 1,725 2.13 505,366 2.57 85,480
         July 1.14 418,729 1.90 25,693 2.43 1,071 2.86 2,113 2.10 505,800 2.57 85,562
         Aug 1.16 416,992 1.96 24,546 2.50 701 3.12 2,459 2.11 506,415 2.56 85,491
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Aug 1.16 118,994 2.00 40,582 2.52 187 3.68 2,473
         Sep 1.15 124,565 1.94 34,584 2.61 210 3.92 1,179
         Oct 1.15 127,129 1.93 40,008 2.41 156 4.02 4,523
         Nov 1.07 129,086 1.95 35,693 2.56 256 3.26 1,160         Dec 1.05 138,713 1.96 36,247 2.76 360 4.09 1,075
2004          Jan 1.16 136,443 1.92 35,633 2.43 174 3.90 823
         Feb 1.11 128,210 1.95 38,596 2.18 197 4.26 697         Mar 1.11 130,095 1.92 34,914 2.28 201 3.82 1,274
         Apr 1.10 134,285 1.90 30,589 1.85 222 3.93 1,075
         May 1.10 131,703 1.92 32,753 2.44 115 4.24 1,535         June 1.09 134,255 1.92 31,971 2.59 163 4.22 1,273
         July 1.08 131,254 1.95 32,273 3.10 334 4.25 2,601
         Aug 1.08 135,724 1.94 30,356 2.56 102 4.29 1,823
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2003          Aug 7.73 5.57 1,388 6.36 4,844 8.66 3,658 3.84 7,060 4.96 1,461 5.03 2,316
         Sep 7.65 5.41 1,785 6.33 5,374 8.36 4,575 3.69 9,281 4.94 1,693 5.24 2,684
         Oct 7.52 5.26 2,631 6.33 5,096 8.42 4,398 3.73 11,515 5.00 3,368 5.26 2,543
         Nov 7.47 5.24 1,532 6.27 5,631 8.32 3,851 3.93 7,820 5.14 1,440 5.21 2,004         Dec 6.90 5.02 1,541 5.80 5,234 7.81 3,701 3.57 12,315 4.93 2,578 5.13 3,978
2004          Jan 8.01 5.30 1,427 6.62 4,233 9.00 3,746 3.85 8,611 5.08 1,992 5.27 1,998
         Feb 7.98 4.98 1,308 6.50 4,963 9.08 3,539 3.85 5,613 5.04 1,588 5.07 2,112         Mar 7.83 5.28 1,553 6.29 5,806 8.88 4,494 3.69 8,974 5.11 2,037 5.00 3,549
         Apr 7.56 5.05 1,664 6.08 6,345 8.86 4,074 3.50 9,264 4.92 1,658 5.00 2,903
         May 7.77 5.21 1,147 6.21 5,257 8.94 3,147 3.94 5,901 4.85 1,552 5.10 1,725         June 7.87 5.34 1,402 6.21 5,371 9.11 3,794 3.48 8,704 5.00 2,816 5.07 3,278
         July 8.02 5.25 1,492 6.34 5,020 9.27 3,792 3.64 9,119 4.90 1,908 5.15 2,018
         Aug 8.13 5.42 1,090 6.44 5,187 9.16 3,038 3.52 8,837 5.07 1,379 5.17 1,365
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volumeweighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Aug 10.38 63,305 4.79 4.73 1,695 4.25 2,701 4.81 5,441 4.91 3,600
         Sep 10.47 64,592 4.90 4.63 2,033 4.52 3,166 4.96 6,143 5.03 3,584
         Oct 10.41 63,212 4.90 4.44 2,463 4.48 3,292 5.00 6,201 5.08 3,200
         Nov 10.27 59,790 5.00 4.68 1,866 4.62 2,903 5.07 5,368 5.12 3,108         Dec 10.48 62,675 5.06 4.63 2,878 4.75 3,710 5.14 7,473 5.19 3,380
2004          Jan 10.40 59,768 5.02 4.57 2,827 4.65 3,280 5.15 5,978 5.19 3,201
         Feb 10.40 57,555 4.95 4.56 1,999 4.61 2,457 5.06 4,262 5.03 2,628         Mar 10.38 57,884 4.85 4.43 2,504 4.48 3,240 4.99 5,417 4.98 2,983
         Apr 10.36 56,755 4.76 4.26 2,706 4.32 3,127 4.91 5,106 4.95 2,964
         May 10.35 55,144 4.80 4.49 2,079 4.37 2,736 4.91 4,497 4.94 2,865         June 10.38 56,024 4.83 4.49 2,314 4.32 3,479 4.96 5,292 5.09 2,934
         July 10.35 54,012 4.84 4.26 3,233 4.51 3,279 4.92 5,963 5.11 2,873
         Aug 10.33 53,601 4.88 4.37 2,071 4.59 2,291 5.04 3,844 4.99 2,648
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Aug 6.54 86,025 4.36 5,782 4.91 1,626 4.93 1,714
         Sep 6.40 88,489 4.52 7,119 5.00 1,205 5.02 1,671
         Oct 6.47 85,930 4.51 7,345 4.99 1,471 5.08 1,868
         Nov 6.36 88,429 4.47 7,001 5.20 1,146 4.95 1,215         Dec 6.44 87,201 4.55 6,976 5.05 1,613 5.14 1,850
2004          Jan 6.33 84,562 4.52 6,495 5.13 1,152 5.20 1,579
         Feb 6.26 86,480 4.58 6,151 5.12 1,510 5.04 1,068         Mar 6.22 87,095 4.44 7,140 5.00 1,262 5.20 1,385
         Apr 6.11 84,844 4.43 6,733 4.89 1,419 5.04 1,211
         May 6.27 81,810 4.52 6,616 5.00 987 4.93 1,186         June 6.23 84,291 4.54 7,185 4.98 1,268 5.19 1,509
         July 6.21 80,484 4.62 7,193 5.01 1,360 5.05 1,171
         Aug 6.25 77,547 4.42 6,223 5.08 1,030 5.00 1,098
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Aug 3.36 27,749 3.84 2,478 4.50 4,873
         Sep 3.24 34,013 3.84 3,239 4.72 4,921
         Oct 3.25 34,631 4.06 3,284 4.63 5,125
         Nov 3.16 35,610 3.90 3,669 4.73 4,434         Dec 3.32 41,204 3.87 5,084 4.78 7,639
2004          Jan 3.25 32,666 4.33 4,274 4.99 4,169
         Feb 3.24 26,802 3.60 2,681 4.58 3,317         Mar 3.20 35,662 3.85 3,509 4.85 5,627
         Apr 3.25 30,662 3.79 3,034 4.57 5,536
         May 3.26 26,670 3.93 3,403 4.79 4,593         June 3.26 32,704 3.93 3,754 4.63 5,444
         July 3.27 35,348 3.91 4,012 4.89 4,475
         Aug 3.26 28,221 3.60 3,766 4.70 3,971
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,866
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,8871993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,9151994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,1091997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,398 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,572 117,119 35,848 81,271 − 63,1082002 178,057 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 54,021 83,314 13,536 69,778 − 94,7432003 170,154 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 35,699 101,553 35,748 65,805 − 68,601
2004          June 17,742 4,835 − 675 2,211 3,299 12,907 29,832 8,588 21,244 − − 12,090
         July 33,915 20,006 6,888 8,716 4,402 13,909 19,724 11,754 7,970 − 14,191
         Aug 15,638 12,729 4,042 − 467 9,154 2,909 1,046 4,861 − 3,815 − 14,592
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,0551993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,005 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 81,546 17,575 63,971 − 3,371 − 14,714 11,343 84,9182002 39,700 9,232 30,470 19,058 − 23,236 42,294 20,6422003 17,382 16,838 544 − 7,885 7,056 − 14,941 25,268
2004          June 893 1,306 − 413 − 16,699 − 14,792 − 1,907 17,592
         July − 1,844 244 − 2,088 − 5,487 − 4,221 − 1,266 3,643
         Aug − 1,244 312 − 1,556 − 1,277 − 316 − 961 33
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8At issue prices. — 9Net purchases or
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt transaction values. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998,
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and excluding syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also specially marked. 
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,832
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,2821993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004          May 79,506 54,816 3,510 8,013 7,458 35,836 2,315 22,375 3,400
         June 78,494 54,369 3,268 6,264 14,324 30,513 3,566 20,560 −
         July 92,541 55,773 3,399 2,630 14,833 34,912 10,710 26,058 −
         Aug 66,334 43,087 609 3,195 10,518 28,765 1,223 22,024 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,9391993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004          May 43,733 27,078 2,717 5,780 2,931 15,650 2,150 14,505 400
         June 25,868 20,131 2,363 3,101 3,566 11,101 535 5,202 −
         July 41,977 22,990 2,893 1,222 2,377 16,498 5,401 13,586 −
         Aug 31,235 15,418 175 1,712 3,024 10,508 537 15,279 −
Net sales  6 
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,1141993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,7011994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2004          May 29,454 18,525 1,007 1,518 3,122 12,878 1,563 9,367 2,245
         June 2,805 − 1,098 − 549 − 7,676 7,126 1 2,123 1,780 − 1,454
         July 28,213 6,802 554 − 8,127 3,148 11,227 10,577 10,834 − 4,085
         Aug 13,585 4,516 − 1,063 − 5,232 2,934 7,877 868 8,201 − 2,176
*For definitions, see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to Monthly Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Report 2, Capital market statistics. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,760
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004          June 2,729,438 1,675,796 161,005 592,321 300,527 621,943 57,725 995,918 185,037         July 2,757,651 1,682,598 161,559 584,195 303,675 633,170 68,302 1,006,752 180,952
         Aug 2,771,236 1,687,114 160,496 578,963 306,609 641,046 69,170 1,014,952 178,776
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-August 2004 
974,378 648,757 54,183 234,230 94,221 266,122 20,337 305,284 56,466    less than 2
662,567 438,259 51,959 176,761 88,438 121,101 16,837 207,471 58,033 2 to less than 4
457,758 281,612 32,133 98,456 55,015 96,009 9,735 166,410 39,887 4 to less than 6
246,457 113,793 14,930 35,751 23,928 39,184 10,422 122,243 7,999 6 to less than 8
204,685 91,183 7,099 21,850 16,562 45,671 4,956 108,546 7,578 8 to less than 10
78,017 67,709 159 7,209 6,267 54,075 3,003 7,305 4,921 10 to less than 15
24,829 11,244 35 940 6,709 3,560 702 12,883 2,076 15 to less than 20
122,545 34,558 − 3,767 15,466 15,325 3,179 84,808 1,816 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386 .
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .1994
o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .19963 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004          June 163,175 810 420 180 0 17 − 34 294 − 67 873,884
         July 163,742 567 143 199 2 92 287 108 − 264 831,751
         Aug 163,743 1 257 51 4 21 7 − 24 − 312 812,941
oFrom January 1994, including the shares of east German companies market segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM7,771 million). — 1Including shares are traded on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the
on the Official Market, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock Deutsche Börse AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German Germanmore than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.98
1992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004          June 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.3 3.9 4.5 4.0 4.3 116.96 96.84 256.55 4,052.73
         July 3.9 3.9 3.9 4.2 3.8 4.4 3.9 4.2 117.54 97.33 246.85 3,895.61
         Aug 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.6 4.3 3.7 4.0 118.53 98.30 239.67 3,785.21         Sep 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.5 4.0 118.72 98.34 246.50 3,892.90
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
Sales of mutual fund shares Purchases
Domestic mutual funds (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loan associations  1 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total shares Total shares dents  4 
Period
DM million
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 − 3,102 − − 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 41993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,0011994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,3181997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,000
2001 97,032 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,221 96,082 10,251 2,703 85,831 17,518 9512002 66,478 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 6,996 67,150 2,100 3,007 65,050 3,989 − 6732003 48,195 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 4,252 49,726 − 2,658 734 52,384 3,518 − 1,530
2004          June 88 − 432 − 886 − 200 − 1,048 365 453 520 633 − 436 153 1,069 367 − 545
         July 1,609 1,493 3,550 3,834 − 970 677 − 2,056 116 − 2,070 − 1,217 − 630 − 853 746 3,679
         Aug 1,081 − 311 138 1,159 − 1,223 189 − 449 1,392 225 931 971 − 706 421 856
1Book values. — 2Residual. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign end-1988 recorded under shares). — The figures for the most recent date
fund shares by residents; transaction values. — 4Net purchases or net sales are provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
(−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
operat- Fixed Compen-
of ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex- sation
which pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend- of em-
Period Total Taxes Total  3 ployees iture grants Interest tion aid  4 Balance venue  5 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 − 12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 − 14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.11997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 − 94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 − 91.71998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 − 56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 − 53.41999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 − 26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 − 23.4
2000  
p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  6,p 555.8 446.2 599.9 169.9 69.8 213.8 66.6 40.1 39.2 − 44.1 445.0 449.1 − 4.1 923.5 971.7 − 48.2
2002  pe 550.9 441.7 608.0 173.3 69.5 225.9 66.1 38.7 33.5 − 57.1 457.9 466.4 − 8.5 924.1 989.7 − 65.6
2003  pe 546.6 442.2 615.2 174.0 68.8 236.4 65.7 36.3 32.5 − 68.6 466.8 473.3 − 6.5 924.5 999.6 − 75.1
2003          Q1 117.2 96.3 154.5 40.9 15.6 61.8 23.6 5.6 6.5 − 37.3 116.3 116.8 − 0.5 207.7 245.5 − 37.8
         Q2 135.8 108.9 143.8 40.9 15.5 61.3 10.8 7.5 7.5 − 8.0 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 228.2 239.1 − 10.9         Q3 131.2 109.6 155.8 42.4 16.6 58.5 21.6 9.2 7.4 − 24.6 115.1 117.8 − 2.7 225.0 252.3 − 27.4         Q4  
p 160.7 127.4 159.8 48.1 20.5 55.2 9.5 12.9 13.7 + 0.9 119.0 120.4 − 1.5 261.1 261.7 − 0.6
2004          Q1  p 116.1 97.0 157.9 41.7 15.4 62.8 25.3 5.4 6.3 − 41.8 116.4 116.8 − 0.4 206.1 248.3 − 42.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly f igures
Office. — *The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed for some insurance sectors are estimated. — 3Including discrepancies in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the clearing transactions between central, state and local government. —
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — 4Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the interests. — 5Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly Federal Labour Office. — 6Owing to modifications of the system of
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between other operatin g
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, expenditure and current grants. see footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. — 2The annual figures differ from the sum of
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  p 240.6 261.3 184.6 207.1 50.5 52.5 119.0 123.2 24.7 25.2
2002  pe 238.9 271.6 183.5 207.4 47.8 53.2 119.9 124.5 25.1 25.3
2003  pe 239.6 278.8 182.3 208.7 48.3 53.5 117.1 125.0 24.7 25.5
2003          Q1 46.6 71.9 42.2 51.1 9.7 12.6 25.2 29.4 5.3 5.6
         Q2 59.1 64.6 44.4 50.2 12.0 12.0 26.7 29.1 5.6 5.8         Q3 57.6 74.5 45.3 50.5 12.2 13.1 29.3 30.6 6.1 6.3         Q4  
p 76.3 67.8 49.9 56.5 14.1 15.6 35.6 35.3 7.6 7.6
2004          Q1  p 44.8 73.4 42.4 51.5 11.1 12.8 25.8 29.7 5.4 5.5
         Q2  p 56.4 62.3 46.5 51.2 11.3 11.5 . . . .
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. — *See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. — 1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. — 4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Item 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  1 2001 2002 2003  pe 
Revenue 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.2 965.8 951.2 954.2 961.4
of which
Taxes 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3 486.0 489.9Social contributions 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.4 378.4 383.6 389.3 394.8
Expenditure 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 972.6 989.7 1,009.8 1,031.7 1,042.7of which
Intermediate consumption 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.2 78.0 81.0 84.5 83.9Compensation of employees 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.9 165.7 168.0 167.9Interest 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.9 68.4 67.7 66.0 66.7Social benefits  
2 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 532.7 549.2 573.1 587.1
Gross capital formation 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 36.8 35.9 31.9
Net lending/net borrowing − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.4 − 23.9 − 58.6 − 77.5 − 81.3
as a percentage of GDP − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.7 − 3.8
Memo itemDebt as defined in theMaastricht Treaty 2,143.9 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.8 1,283.6 1,366.6
as a percentage of GDP 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.4 60.9 64.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office record such
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include proceeds (
€50.85 billion) under "net increase in non-produced assets", with
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus ( €22.8 billion
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. — 1Adjusted for proceeds from the sale or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. — 2 Including social benefits in kind. 
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 581993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 7141997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 1171998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 122002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 512003 442,235 390,437 214,002 155,510 . 20,925 51,671 4,751 + 127
2004          Q1  
p 97,312 84,148 42,010 36,033 . 6,105 9,679 ... + 3,486
         Q2 . 97,988 53,116 40,298 . 4,574 . . .2004          Apr . 29,375 16,227 12,095 . 1,053 . . .
         May . 29,974 16,246 11,964 . 1,764 . . .         June . 38,640 20,644 16,239 . 1,757 . . .
         July . 28,561 14,927 11,858 . 1,776 . . .
         Aug . 28,209 15,270 11,152 . 1,787 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Including receipts from the 1988. — 4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  — 2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. — 5Difference between the local government’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
remitted to state government. — 3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,1702002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,8462003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,409
2004          Q1 88,802 32,644 29,518 − 5,808 2,177 6,756 34,243 25,919 8,324 133 15,570 5,522 691 4,654
         Q2 103,712 41,892 29,560 3,054 4,481 4,797 33,673 25,023 8,650 1,317 20,979 5,097 755 5,723
2004          Apr 30,961 10,717 9,700 − 955 545 1,427 10,775 7,588 3,187 927 6,616 1,663 262 1,586
         May 31,566 10,305 9,859 − 1,225 46 1,626 12,109 9,289 2,821 384 6,989 1,528 251 1,592         June 41,186 20,870 10,002 5,234 3,891 1,744 10,788 8,146 2,642 5 7,374 1,906 242 2,546
         July 30,246 10,426 10,844 − 1,430 − 350 1,362 10,750 8,329 2,421 943 6,265 1,602 261 1,686
         Aug 29,797 8,720 9,721 − 1,116 − 982 1,098 11,891 9,246 2,645 486 6,887 1,542 272 1,588
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table the statutory pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, to local government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to ce ntral
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% was
central and state government), the real property taxes and other local allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; sincegovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2From 2002 49.6% has been allocated to central government and 50.4% to state
1980, the revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax has been government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedallocated to central, state and local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15, central government share. — 6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
and revenue from corporation tax and investment income tax has been and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beenallocated to central and state government in the ratio of 50:50. — 3From affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —
1996, after deducting child benefit. — 4From February 1993, including 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
revenue from the withholding tax on interest income, in which local government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. — 8For the breakdown, see
government has a share of 12%. — 5In 1998, 3.64% and from 1999, 5.63% Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
was allocated to central government to finance the supplementary grant to
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness tax  2 taxes taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 6962003 43,188 14,094 2,204 8,870 6,531 11,722 7,336 230 3,373 786 6,989 24,146 9,658 671
2004          Q1  
p 4,612 2,376 439 3,834 1,473 2,836 2,091 34 1,197 178 2,021 6,200 2,239 204
         Q2 10,599 3,484 502 1,627 1,861 2,905 2,076 13 1,245 201 1,563 . . .2004          Apr 3,320 1,326 161 524 508 777 717 4 315 62 566 . . .
         May 3,828 1,136 169 604 464 789 652 2 329 69 475 . . .         June 3,452 1,022 172 499 890 1,339 707 6 601 70 522 . . .
         July 3,195 1,130 180 420 584 756 692 9 293 76 533 . . .
         Aug 3,376 1,185 166 919 557 684 591 7 328 73 543 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. — 2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
General government
1998 2,280,154 . 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999 1,199,975 . 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 1052000 1,211,439 . 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 . 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 1082002 1,277,630 . 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 29 7,845 97
2003          June 1,326,312 . 31,165 232,373 150,627 14,284 462,639 401,696 135 25,460 − 4 7,845 92
         Sep 1,346,412 . 33,424 237,449 146,729 13,754 469,120 406,758 317 32,071 − 6 6,706 91         Dec 1,358,121 . 36,022 246,414 153,616 12,810 471,129 396,832 341 34,163 − 1 6,711 86
2004          Mar 
p 1,403,438 . 37,209 260,445 159,735 11,245 485,920 400,897 345 40,890 − 45 6,711 88
Central government 7,8 
1998 957,983 . 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 . 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 1042000 715,819 . 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 . 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 . 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003          June 749,920 . 30,416 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 − 4 7,845 91
         Sep 766,213 . 32,892 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 − 6 6,706 90         Dec 767,697 . 35,235 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2004          Mar 802,690 . 36,463 88,901 150,050 11,245 450,711 49,888 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
         June 803,991 . 35,630 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88
State government (western)
1998 525,380 . 520 83,390 . . . 430,709 43 10,716 . − 21999 274,208 . 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 12000 282,431 . − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 12001 305,788 . 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 12002 328,390 . 250 97,556 . . . 217,333 5 13,246 . . 1
2003          June 345,390 . 322 116,274 . . . 209,820 8 18,966 . . 1
         Sep 348,006 . 322 118,815 . . . 208,313 3 20,552 . . 1         Dec 355,661 . 472 125,356 . . . 207,880 4 21,949 . . 1
2004          Mar 
p 363,202 . 222 136,105 . . . 200,366 4 26,504 . . 1
         June p 368,240 . 900 141,270 . . . 197,032 4 29,033 . . 1
State government (eastern)
1998 98,192 . 445 27,228 . . . 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,200 . 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .2000 55,712 . 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .2001 58,771 . 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .2002 63,782 . 338 23,838 . . . 37,739 − 1,867 . . .
2003          June 66,910 . 427 28,418 . . . 36,204 − 1,861 . . .
         Sep 66,595 . 211 28,260 . . . 36,214 − 1,911 . . .         Dec 68,076 . 315 28,833 . . . 37,022 − 1,906 . . .
2004          Mar 
p 69,661 . 524 30,752 . . . 35,314 − 3,070 . . .
         June p 71,252 . 777 31,897 . . . 35,530 − 3,048 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont’d)
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Local government (western) 9 
1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .
1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .2002 84,097 . . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .
2003          June 88,000 . . 153 . . 578 85,269 20 1,980 . . .
         Sep 89,250 . . 153 . . 578 86,519 20 1,980 . . .         Dec 90,906 . . 77 . . 603 87,868 19 2,339 . . .
2004          Mar 
p 92,400 . . 77 . . 732 89,231 20 2,340 . . .
Local government (eastern) 9 
1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .
1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .2002 16,745 . . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .
2003          June 16,750 . . − . . 284 16,326 100 40 . . .
         Sep 16,850 . . − . . 284 16,426 100 40 . . .         Dec 16,951 . . − . . 131 16,601 87 132 . . .
2004          Mar 
p 16,900 . . − . . 131 16,549 90 130 . . .
German Unity Fund/Indemnification Fund 7 
1998 79,413 . − − − . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .2000 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .2001 39,923 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .2002 39,810 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,685 3,146 − 26 . . .
2003          Mar 40,422 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,420 2,175 − − . . .
         June 39,942 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,443 1,672 − − . . .         Sep 40,099 . . 4,694 10,134 . 24,005 1,266 − − . . .         Dec 39,568 . . 4,610 10,134 . 24,032 793 − − . . .
2004          Mar 40,010 . . 4,610 9,634 . 24,177 1,589 − − . . .
         June 39,500 . . 4,538 9,634 . 24,183 1,144 − − . . .
ERP Special Fund 7 
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . . . − . 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .2000 18,386 . . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .2001 19,161 . . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .2002 19,400 . . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .
2003          Mar 19,369 . . . 51 . 10,138 8,660 8 512 . . .
         June 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .         Sep 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .         Dec 19,261 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,522 8 512 . . .
2004          Mar 18,576 . . . 51 . 10,169 7,960 8 389 . . .
         June 18,525 . . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,8 
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt Processing Fund/Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,8 
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 − 20 79,899 151999          June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 − 9 40,902 4
Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal 7,8 
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 − − . . .
1999          June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 − − . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Predominantly Treasury London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
discount paper (Bubills). — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
securities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
paper. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes. Including loans raised government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from supplementary ratios. — 8Since 1 July 1999 central government has assumed joint
public pension funds and liabilities arising from the investment assistance responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabi lities,
levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabilities the Federal Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the
arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and Use of Coal. From July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded
from housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of under central government. — 9Data other than year-end figures have been
the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to their home country. — estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. 
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2002 2003 2004
2002 2003 Total Total Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1  p Mar 2004  p 
Item € million
Borrowers
Central government  2 725,405 767,697 802,690 + 24,328 + 42,292 + 19,995 + 4,520 + 16,293 + 1,484 + 34,993
German Unity Fund 39,441 39,099 39,620 − 197 − 342 + 588 − 503 + 131 − 558 + 520
ERP Special Fund 19,400 19,261 18,576 + 239 − 139 − 31 + 30 − − 138 − 685Indemnification Fund 369 469 391 + 84 + 100 + 25 + 23 + 26 + 27 − 79
State government (western) 328,390 355,661 363,202 + 22,603 + 27,271 + 11,596 + 5,404 + 2,616 + 7,655 + 7,541
State government (eastern) 63,782 68,076 69,661 + 5,011 + 4,294 + 1,183 + 1,945 − 315 + 1,481 + 1,585Local government (western)  
3 84,097 90,906 92,400 + 2,630 + 7,439 + 2,003 + 1,739 + 1,154 + 2,543 + 1,961
Local government (eastern)  3 16,745 16,951 16,900 − 242 + 249 − 46 + 63 + 111 + 121 − 30
Total 1,277,630 1,358,121 1,403,438 + 54,455 + 81,164 + 35,311 + 13,221 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 45,805
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 30,815 36,022 37,209 + 7,779 + 5,207 − 185 + 535 + 2,258 + 2,598 + 1,187 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 203,951 246,414 260,445 + 52,551 + 42,463 + 16,486 + 11,936 + 5,075 + 8,965 + 14,031
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 137,669 153,616 159,735 + 7,623 + 15,947 + 5,504 + 7,455 − 3,898 + 6,887 + 6,119
Federal savings notes 17,898 12,810 11,245 − 8,497 − 5,088 − 2,464 − 1,150 − 530 − 944 − 1,565Bonds  
5 456,300 471,129 485,920 + 8,152 + 14,829 + 13,266 − 6,927 + 6,481 + 2,008 + 14,792
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 404,046 396,832 400,897 − 17,640 − 6,541 − 945 − 1,554 + 4,977 − 9,019 + 4,553
Loans from social security funds 137 341 345 − 37 + 204 − 2 + 1 + 181 + 24 + 4Other loans  
6 18,803 34,122 40,849 + 5,733 + 15,319 + 3,684 + 2,932 + 6,611 + 2,092 + 6,727
Old debt  7 126 85 43 − 67 − 41 − 33 − 6 − 3 + 0 − 42
Equalisation claims 7,845 6,711 6,711 − 1,142 − 1,134 − + 0 − 1,139 + 5 + 0Investment assistance levy 41 41 41 − 0 − 0 + 0 − 0 − 0 + 0 −
Total 1,277,630 1,358,121 1,403,438 + 54,455 + 81,164 + 35,311 + 13,221 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 45,805
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 4,440 − −−−−−−
Credit institutions 532,600 524,800 550,400 − 746 − 7,127 + 13,319 − 8,968 + 2,215 − 13,693 + 26,088
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 137 341 345 − 37 + 204 − 2 + 1 + 181 + 24 + 4
Other  8 228,653 289,840 292,653 + 1,438 + 61,187 + 2,594 + 9,788 + 17,919 + 30,885 + 2,813
Foreign creditors  pe 511,800 538,700 555,600 + 53,800 + 26,900 + 19,400 + 12,400 − 300 − 4,600 + 16,900
Total 1,277,630 1,358,121 1,403,438 + 54,455 + 81,164 + 35,311 + 13,221 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 45,805
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. — 6Including loans raised abroad. — 7Old liabilities arising
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Net borrowing differs from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer of construction of the former GDR’s armed forces and from housing
debts. — 2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt inassociations. — 4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. — 8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 5Excluding issuers’ holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 − − −2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 − − −2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 − − −2002 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 − − −
2003 Mar 396,685 33,202 1,585 9,180 264,827 87,892 − − −
June 396,008 33,375 1,329 9,180 263,083 89,041 − − −
Sep 398,318 38,309 793 9,180 260,264 89,773 − − −Dec 399,304 38,410 793 9,042 260,046 91,013 − − −
2004 Mar  
p 396,842 38,307 793 8,357 258,808 90,578 − − −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. — 1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. — 2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Schätze)  2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2003          Sep 766,213 32,892 1,229 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 − 6 6,706 90
         Oct 769,146 33,239 1,218 90,274 142,861 12,761 439,993 35,959 186 7,076 2 6,706 89
         Nov 769,493 34,180 1,215 90,637 143,575 12,792 436,109 38,142 186 7,076 2 6,706 87         Dec 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2004          Jan 786,023 35,941 1,229 92,560 143,816 11,830 448,242 39,290 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 86
         Feb 789,107 35,197 1,208 92,768 144,190 11,212 453,213 38,183 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 86         Mar 802,690 36,463 1,178 88,901 150,050 11,245 450,711 49,888 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
         Apr 798,786 35,616 1,128 95,468 150,031 10,786 449,577 41,875 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 88
         May 804,270 36,639 1,096 95,913 152,810 10,575 452,391 40,513 223 8,456 − 46 6,708 88         June 803,991 35,630 1,105 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88
         July 821,291 35,744 1,111 97,599 153,362 10,439 461,338 47,829 223 9,144 − 45 5,572 88
         Aug 824,560 35,362 1,104 98,350 155,852 10,558 468,445 41,013 223 9,144 − 45 5,572 87         Sep 
p 813,992 35,832 1,055 95,224 156,941 10,482 459,305 41,228 223 9,144 − 45 5,572 87
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern
cash bills. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. — Germany to their home country. — 8Commutation and compensation debt
3Including loans raised abroad. — 4Including money market loans. — and old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency. — 9Since 1 July 1999
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government central government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
employees. — 6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and
levy. — 7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. From July 1999, the
former GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection aforementioned special funds are included under central government.  
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,3041998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 9402001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,4952002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 − 10,155 + 2,221 + 222003 + 227,078 + 42,292 + 62,535 + 13,636 + 42,327 + 15,947 + 109,500 + 8,874 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,218
2003          Jan-Sep + 185,033 + 40,808 + 52,803 + 11,526 + 29,475 + 9,061 + 80,799 + 5,463 + 9,692 + 3,673 + 12,265 + 451
2004          Jan-Sep  
p + 183,511 + 46,295 + 46,553 + 23,111 + 27,312 + 13,510 + 99,120 + 5,954 + 5,880 + 254 + 4,646 + 827
2003          Sep + 23,605 + 1,845 + 6,694 + 606 + 1,246 + 1,246 + 13,693 − 1,297 + 977 + 298 + 995 − 73
         Oct + 11,968 + 2,933 + 8,442 + 5,908 + 6,317 + 6,317 + 10,100 + 4,102 + 296 − 214 − 13,187 − 188
         Nov + 17,180 + 347 + 1,205 − 3,883 + 6,680 + 715 + 6,311 + 1,335 + 394 − 408 + 2,590 − 189         Dec + 12,897 − 1,796 + 85 + 85 − 145 − 145 + 12,290 − 2,026 + 1,099 + 723 − 432 + 7,144
2004          Jan + 26,811 + 18,326 + 12,047 + 12,048 + 385 + 385 + 11,926 + 4,748 + 533 − 776 + 1,920 − 321
         Feb + 17,553 + 3,084 + 4,971 + 4,971 + 7,849 + 375 + 5,535 − 1,156 + 760 + 456 − 1,563 − 1,186         Mar + 36,156 + 13,583 + 1,580 − 2,502 + 5,860 + 5,860 + 15,425 − 2,567 + 673 + 217 + 12,619 + 6,423
         Apr + 3,991 − 3,904 − 1,135 − 1,135 − 19 − 19 + 11,797 + 5,262 + 855 − 507 − 7,507 − 5,683
         May + 17,688 + 5,484 + 6,903 + 2,815 + 4,133 + 2,779 + 7,549 + 1,257 + 448 − 17 − 1,345 + 3,254         June + 17,741 − 279 + 1,087 + 1,087 + 146 + 146 + 13,163 − 4,717 + 187 + 44 + 3,157 + 87
         July + 30,551 + 17,300 + 12,942 + 7,859 + 405 + 405 + 11,629 + 5,371 + 1,111 + 340 + 4,464 + 7,072
         Aug + 14,595 + 3,269 + 7,108 + 7,108 + 7,463 + 2,490 + 6,575 + 489 + 335 + 70 − 6,886 + 2,285         Sep 
p + 18,425 − 10,568 + 1,049 − 9,140 + 1,090 + 1,090 + 15,522 − 2,733 + 977 + 428 − 213 − 11,104
1After deduction of repurchases. — 2Federal Treasury notes (Schätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance fund
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Germany
1993 290,393 232,408 52,671 298,065 252,920 15,898 − 7,672 39,786 29,957 8,499 1,100 229 6,297
1994 322,335 256,662 61,891 324,323 273,880 17,751 − 1,988 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,8901995 338,185 270,294 64,387 348,115 294,034 20,285 − 9,930 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,8001996  
8 353,672 282,616 68,388 362,667 305,780 21,660 − 8,995 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 374,853 297,402 74,961 372,955 316,511 23,280 + 1,898 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 389,101 297,827 88,755 385,707 327,823 24,393 + 3,394 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,5731999 208,173 152,206 54,628 203,295 172,919 12,950 + 4,878 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,9042000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,8782003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2003          Q1 55,374 37,289 17,761 57,255 48,883 3,727 − 1,881 8,686 5,649 1,230 1,685 122 4,874
         Q2 56,442 38,349 17,749 57,396 48,763 3,735 − 954 7,698 4,906 980 1,686 126 4,867         Q3 57,241 39,085 17,830 58,256 49,409 3,858 − 1,015 6,348 3,822 727 1,683 116 4,855         Q4 59,796 41,772 17,703 58,269 49,363 3,916 + 1,527 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004          Q1 55,431 37,289 17,846 58,350 49,858 3,873 − 2,919 6,196 3,693 695 1,681 127 4,866
         Q2 56,665 38,446 17,873 57,794 49,437 3,416 − 1,129 3,750 1,914 28 1,682 126 4,892
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of deducted from pension payments. — 4From 1995, including long-term care
German Pension Insurance Funds. — 1The annual figures do not tally with insurance for pensioners. — 5Largely corresponds to fluctuation reserves.
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993, End of year or quarter. From 1992, figures for the whole of Germany. —
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security funds;
and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government including participating interests. — 8Excluding income arising from the
cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance revaluation of participating interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Employment Agency
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
Promo- loans
Unemployment support  3,4 Job promotion  4,5 tion of fromwinter central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction Balance ment
Germany
1993 85,109 79,895 1,829 109,536 48,005 34,149 13,856 36,891 15,895 20,996 1,919 − 24,426 24,419
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 − 10,205 10,1421995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 − 6,892 6,8871996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 − 13,763 13,7561997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 − 9,574 9,5741998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 − 7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 − 3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 8672001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 − 1,931 1,9312002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 − 5,623 5,6232003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 272 − 6,215 6,215
2003          Q1 11,617 11,281 48 14,408 7,647 5,422 2,225 4,785 2,576 2,209 180 − 2,790 5,151
         Q2 12,272 11,487 536 14,667 7,975 5,708 2,267 4,721 2,623 2,098 84 − 2,395 2,408         Q3 12,828 11,797 619 13,645 7,251 5,313 1,938 4,453 2,462 1,991 7 − 817 514         Q4 13,917 12,773 878 14,131 6,863 5,086 1,777 5,196 2,903 2,293 1 − 214 − 1,858
2004          Q1 11,524 11,261 47 14,448 8,200 6,001 2,199 4,389 2,491 1,898 144 − 2,924 5,244
         Q2 12,042 11,419 394 13,949 7,782 5,673 2,109 4,268 2,510 1,758 67 − 1,907 1,946         Q3 12,516 11,709 481 12,818 7,044 5,189 1,855 3,919 2,309 1,610 4 − 303 166
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government recipients of wage substitutes are paid in January instead of in
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- December. — 5Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up,
solvency compensation to employees. — 3Unemployment benefit, rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service
short-time working benefit. — 4Including contributions to the statutory Agencies (PSAs), compensation top-up payments and business start-up
health insurance funds and statutory pension insurance sheme. From 2003, grants. 
the January contributions to the statutory pension insurance scheme for
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
1st half 1st half
  2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2001   2002   2003   2004   2000   2001   2002   2003
Annual Percentage
Item € billion percentage change of total
At  1995  prices
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 450.5 444.6 443.0 445.0 227.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 0.5 4.6 22.9 22.4 22.3 22.4Construction 102.6 96.9 92.3 88.2 41.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 4.4 − 0.3 5.2 4.9 4.6 4.4Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 345.9 359.4 364.5 367.8 183.4 3.9 1.4 0.9 2.5 17.6 18.1 18.3 18.5
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 572.9 594.6 595.2 598.5 299.1 3.8 0.1 0.5 1.3 29.1 29.9 29.9 30.1
Public and private services  3 390.1 390.8 397.1 395.4 197.6 0.2 1.6 − 0.4 0.2 19.8 19.7 20.0 19.9
All economic sectors 1,886.5 1,910.9 1,916.2 1,918.9 960.9 1.3 0.3 0.1 2.0 95.8 96.2 96.4 96.7Memo item: Enterprise sector 1,657.7 1,683.0 1,688.5 1,693.3 848.6 1.5 0.3 0.3 2.4 84.2 84.7 85.0 85.3
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 1,786.2 1,805.9 1,811.3 1,812.7 907.2 1.1 0.3 0.1 2.1 90.7 90.9 91.1 91.3
Gross domestic product 1,969.5 1,986.0 1,987.6 1,985.2 993.2 0.8 0.1 − 0.1 1.8 100 100 100 100
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,121.2 1,140.7 1,132.5 1,132.5 555.2 1.7 − 0.7 0.0 − 0.4 56.9 57.4 57.0 57.0
Government consumption 378.6 382.4 389.8 390.2 192.0 1.0 1.9 0.1 0.1 19.2 19.3 19.6 19.7Machinery and equipment 176.5 167.8 153.4 151.2 70.6 − 4.9 − 8.6 − 1.4 − 1.2 9.0 8.4 7.7 7.6Premises 242.1 230.5 217.2 210.1 98.6 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 3.2 − 0.8 12.3 11.6 10.9 10.6Other investment  
6 25.5 26.9 27.3 27.8 13.8 5.5 1.4 1.7 2.2 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4
Changes in inventories  7 − 7.7 − 26.9 − 35.5 − 18.1 2.2 . . . . − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.9
Domestic use 1,936.3 1,921.6 1,884.5 1,893.7 932.5 − 0.8 − 1.9 0.5 − 0.2 98.3 96.8 94.8 95.4Net exports 33.2 64.5 103.1 91.5 60.8 . . . . 1.7 3.2 5.2 4.6
Exports 660.4 698.1 726.6 740.0 397.7 5.7 4.1 1.8 10.1 33.5 35.2 36.6 37.3Imports 627.3 633.7 623.5 648.5 337.0 1.0 − 1.6 4.0 5.6 31.8 31.9 31.4 32.7
Gross domestic product 1,969.5 1,986.0 1,987.6 1,985.2 993.2 0.8 0.1 − 0.1 1.8 100 100 100 100
At  current  prices
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,196.8 1,237.2 1,242.2 1,255.3 623.7 3.4 0.4 1.1 1.2 59.0 59.7 58.9 59.0
Government consumption 385.8 394.2 405.4 408.5 193.9 2.2 2.8 0.8 − 0.3 19.0 19.0 19.2 19.2Machinery and equipment 176.7 167.4 151.9 146.9 68.5 − 5.3 − 9.3 − 3.2 − 2.2 8.7 8.1 7.2 6.9Premises 240.2 228.9 215.4 208.3 98.7 − 4.7 − 5.9 − 3.3 − 0.0 11.8 11.0 10.2 9.8Other investment  
6 23.2 24.3 24.5 24.5 12.0 5.0 0.6 0.2 0.3 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2
Changes in inventories  7 − 0.6 − 19.3 − 26.9 − 7.6 10.5 . . . . − 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.4
Domestic use 2,022.0 2,032.8 2,012.5 2,036.0 1,007.3 0.5 − 1.0 1.2 0.7 99.6 98.0 95.5 95.7Net exports 8.0 41.2 94.8 92.2 63.4 . . . . 0.4 2.0 4.5 4.3
Exports 685.3 730.7 761.6 769.3 412.7 6.6 4.2 1.0 9.2 33.8 35.2 36.1 36.1Imports 677.3 689.5 666.8 677.1 349.2 1.8 − 3.3 1.5 3.5 33.4 33.2 31.6 31.8
Gross domestic product 2,030.0 2,074.0 2,107.3 2,128.2 1,070.7 2.2 1.6 1.0 2.9 100 100 100 100
IV Prices (1995 = 100)
Private consumption 106.7 108.5 109.7 110.8 112.3 1.6 1.1 1.0 1.6 . . . .Gross domestic product 103.1 104.4 106.0 107.2 107.8 1.3 1.5 1.1 1.1 . . . .Terms of trade 96.1 96.2 98.0 99.6 100.1 0.1 1.9 1.6 1.2 . . . .
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,099.1 1,120.8 1,129.4 1,132.2 537.2 2.0 0.8 0.2 − 0.1 72.8 72.9 72.8 72.1Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 410.4 417.6 422.4 437.1 252.2 1.7 1.2 3.5 14.8 27.2 27.1 27.2 27.9
National income 1,509.5 1,538.4 1,551.9 1,569.3 789.4 1.9 0.9 1.1 4.2 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,021.2 2,062.9 2,088.1 2,114.2 1,064.0 2.1 1.2 1.2 3.3 . . . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2004. — 1In- cluding taxes on products (offset against subsidies on products). — 5Includ-
cluding communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate ing non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangible fixed asset for-
activities, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home servi- mation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment, literary or artistic
ces. — 4Gross value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but ex- originals) and cultivated assets. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-total tion  
2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
1999 95.3 103.7 100.2 94.0 94.5 91.1 96.2 98.5 97.2 92.4 93.3 89.8
2000 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9
2001 99.5 92.4 97.3 100.4 99.4 102.3 100.4 98.8 98.0 101.1 102.1 104.02002 98.3 89.0 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.42003 98.4 85.1 99.8 99.5 99.5 102.0 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.6
 
2002          Dec 92.6 63.4 106.6 93.7 84.5 105.4 83.3 92.8 88.3 81.5 118.5 90.6
2003          Jan 90.3 51.8 110.3 91.7 93.9 89.9 82.0 92.9 102.6 101.0 80.8 101.9
         Feb 92.4 51.5 104.1 94.9 94.2 98.3 87.1 91.7 98.3 100.1 91.4 110.9         Mar 104.6 83.8 109.0 106.0 105.9 110.0 97.1 100.6 112.0 110.4 103.5 121.4
         Apr 98.4 92.1 100.3 98.7 100.4 99.4 85.7 96.7 105.6 102.9 93.3 108.9
         May 96.0 91.2 95.3 96.5 98.9 97.3 79.8 93.9 102.5 101.3 91.9 106.9         June 100.0 98.6 91.6 101.0 102.5 103.4 83.5 97.4 103.4 97.7 101.9 106.8
         July 100.4 102.3 90.5 101.3 102.5 103.1 85.8 98.6 105.1 101.7 98.9 108.7
         Aug 90.0 89.8 90.4 90.0 93.1 86.6 67.2 95.4 98.8 88.2 85.5 80.0         Sep 102.3 100.9 92.2 103.5 103.3 106.6 97.2 99.1 97.6 101.6 104.4 110.8
         Oct 105.1 99.3 102.2 106.0 106.9 106.3 97.9 105.2 104.0 107.3 98.2 112.3
         Nov 106.4 93.1 104.6 107.8 105.3 113.9 100.1 103.2 101.4 103.2 105.9 125.1         Dec 95.0 67.0 107.0 96.2 87.1 108.8 82.9 94.2 92.6 83.0 117.8 97.5
2004          Jan 92.0 49.3 115.8 93.3 96.4 90.7 83.4 94.0 101.4 104.5 82.5 98.8
         Feb 94.1 56.7 105.8 96.3 98.4 97.0 86.4 92.4 101.0 103.0 87.7 111.7         Mar 
7 104.8 7 74.0 109.7 107.2 107.6 111.8 96.0 99.8 107.0 111.7 106.2 123.2
         Apr  r 7 100.5 7 83.2 102.3 101.9 104.2 103.8 88.1 96.3 106.8 104.0 98.2 115.1
         May  r 7 99.6 7 84.1 97.2 101.3 103.3 104.1 86.2 94.8 101.8 105.2 98.3 116.0
         June  r 7 103.2 7 90.2 90.6 105.8 107.0 111.0 87.0 97.2 102.8 111.2 106.2 121.2
         July  + 7 102.6 7 92.6 91.9 104.7 106.7 107.5 86.9 99.1 106.2 106.5 103.9 113.0
         Aug  + 7 93.2 7 82.2 88.7 94.7 98.9 92.8 68.1 95.8 104.5 94.3 88.7 91.5
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.9 + 3.5 − 3.6 − 2.3 + 3.2
2000 + 4.8 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 9.7 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 8.1 + 7.1 + 11.2
2001 − 0.4 − 7.6 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 2.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 4.12002 − 1.2 − 3.7 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.32003 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 5.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 + 2.1
 
2002          Dec + 0.1 − 12.2 − 3.4 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.9 − 8.4 + 0.3 + 8.3 + 6.4 − 1.5 + 5.2
2003          Jan + 0.9 − 9.9 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 2.3 − 8.5 − 0.9 + 3.8 + 3.3 − 3.3 + 6.7
         Feb + 0.4 − 23.0 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 4.7 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 2.1 + 10.0         Mar + 0.8 − 6.6 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 2.0 − 6.6 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.8 − 1.2 + 5.1
         Apr + 0.3 − 4.5 + 3.5 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 4.9 + 1.2 + 3.0 − 1.5 − 3.9 + 2.9
         May + 0.4 − 3.8 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 4.4 − 1.9
+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 5.8
         June − 2.0 − 1.6 + 5.3 − 2.8 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 8.9 − 6.7 − 7.7
         July + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.3 + 6.7
         Aug − 2.6 − 4.5 + 1.2 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 3.8 − 9.2 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 7.3 + 0.4 − 12.8         Sep − 2.3 − 3.4
+ 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 6.4 − 3.0 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.0 − 3.2
         Oct + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.9 + 2.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.8
         Nov + 0.6 − 3.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 2.7 − 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.2 + 4.3         Dec + 2.6 + 5.7 + 0.4 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 3.2 − 0.5 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 7.6
2004          Jan + 1.9 − 4.8 + 5.0 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 1.2 − 1.2 + 3.5 + 2.1 − 3.0
         Feb + 1.8 + 10.1 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 4.5 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 4.0 + 0.7         Mar 
7 + 0.2 7 − 11.7 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 4.5 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 1.5
         Apr  r 7 + 2.1 7 − 9.7 + 2.0 + 3.2 + 3.8 + 4.4 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 5.3 + 5.7
         May  r 7 + 3.8 7 − 7.8 + 2.0 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 7.0 + 8.0 + 1.0 − 0.7 + 3.8 + 7.0 + 8.5
         June  r 7 + 3.2 7 − 8.5 − 1.1 + 4.8 + 4.4 + 7.4 + 4.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 13.8 + 4.2 + 13.5
         July  + 7 + 2.2 7 − 9.5 + 1.5 + 3.4 + 4.1 + 4.3 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 4.7 + 5.1 + 4.0
         Aug  + 7 + 3.6 7 − 8.5 − 1.9 + 5.2 + 6.2 + 7.2 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 5.8 + 6.9 + 3.7 + 14.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — oUsing the quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities related to prin-
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The ting. — 7Provisional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Build- survey in the construction sector. — +Provisional; adjusted in advance by
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in particular, mining of Quarterly Production Survey for the third quarter (industry: on
coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas and manu- average, -2.3%). facture of refined petroleum products. — 4Including mining and
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which of which
 
Industry,
total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
Germany  
  
2000 99.9 + 13.8 99.9 + 8.2 100.0 + 21.8 100.0 + 14.2 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 4.2
2001 98.3 − 1.6 97.6 − 2.3 99.1 − 0.9 95.9 − 4.1 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.52002 98.3
+ 0.0 94.6 − 3.1 102.8 + 3.7 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 99.0 − 2.4
2003 99.0 + 0.7 94.7 + 0.1 104.4 + 1.6 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.1 95.4 − 3.6
 
2003          Aug 89.9 − 2.0 87.3 − 3.5 93.2 + 0.0 89.5 + 0.0 89.5 − 3.1 92.9 − 3.2
         Sep 102.9 + 1.1 98.4 + 0.1 108.5 + 2.2 100.9 + 0.7 104.4 + 2.6 102.8 − 4.3
         Oct 102.7 + 2.4 99.1 + 1.5 107.2 + 3.4 102.5 + 2.8 102.9 + 2.4 102.8 + 0.9
         Nov 102.5 + 0.9 99.2 + 1.8 106.6 − 0.2 102.1 + 2.7 104.4 + 0.8 95.6 − 4.6         Dec 98.0 + 6.8 89.7 + 1.5 108.5 + 12.9 91.1 + 5.3 106.4 + 9.0 86.9 + 1.5
2004          Jan 99.8 + 1.2 93.7 + 1.2 107.4 + 1.1 101.9 + 3.3 99.8 + 0.6 93.0 − 3.5
         Feb 101.2 + 2.4 95.9 + 0.4 107.8 + 4.8 102.2 + 5.6 101.2 + 1.5 98.4 − 3.6         Mar 111.1 + 5.2 105.2 + 5.2 118.6 + 5.4 110.8 + 5.3 113.1 + 6.7 103.7 − 1.1
         Apr 104.1 + 7.1 98.0 + 5.4 111.8 + 9.1 106.3 + 9.1 105.2 + 6.8 92.8 + 1.6
         May 104.0 + 11.7 95.1 + 4.5 115.1 + 20.3 105.0 + 12.4 107.1 + 13.3 88.3 + 2.3         June 105.6 + 4.9 98.4 + 3.5 114.6 + 6.4 107.3 + 8.9 108.3 + 2.8 89.3 + 0.1
         July 105.4 + 8.0 99.5 + 4.8 112.8 + 11.8 107.0 + 9.1 106.6 + 8.8 95.2 + 1.4
         Aug  
p 96.2 + 7.0 92.7 + 6.2 100.6 + 7.9 99.1 + 10.7 94.9 + 6.0 91.9 − 1.1
Western Germany  
  
2000 100.0 + 13.6 99.9 + 7.8 100.0 + 21.4 99.9 + 13.5 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 3.52001 97.8 − 2.2 97.2 − 2.7 98.6 − 1.4 95.1 − 4.8 99.2 − 0.8 101.2 + 1.32002 97.3 − 0.5 93.7 − 3.6 101.6 + 3.0 95.1
+ 0.0 98.9 − 0.3 98.3 − 2.9
2003 97.6 + 0.3 93.2 − 0.5 102.9 + 1.3 95.7 + 0.6 99.9 + 1.0 94.3 − 4.1
 
2003          Aug 88.6 − 1.8 85.6 − 4.0 92.2 + 0.9 86.7 − 1.1 89.2 − 2.0 91.8 − 3.7
         Sep 101.3 + 0.2 96.3 − 1.1 107.4 + 1.8 98.6 − 0.2 103.4 + 2.0 101.8 − 4.9
         Oct 101.1 + 1.7 97.1 + 0.6 106.0 + 3.1 100.1 + 1.9 101.9 + 2.0 101.5 + 0.4
         Nov 100.4 + 0.1 97.4 + 1.0 103.9 − 1.0 100.0 + 1.7 102.2 + 0.1 94.0 − 5.3         Dec 96.0 + 6.1 88.0 + 1.3 105.5 + 11.4 89.7 + 4.9 103.4 + 7.9 85.3 + 0.7
2004          Jan 98.1 + 0.5 92.4 + 0.7 105.0 + 0.4 99.9 + 4.1 98.4 − 1.0 91.9 − 3.8
         Feb 99.8 + 1.9 94.2 − 0.6 106.5 + 4.7 100.2 + 5.1 100.1 + 1.0 97.5 − 4.1         Mar 109.6 + 5.2 103.6 + 4.9 116.9 + 5.6 108.3 + 4.7 112.4 + 7.1 102.6 − 1.3
         Apr 102.8 + 7.2 96.3 + 5.1 110.7 + 9.5 103.9 + 9.1 104.9 + 7.2 91.3 + 1.4
         May 102.3 + 11.3 93.0 + 3.9 113.4 + 19.6 102.2 + 11.8 106.2 + 13.0 86.6 + 1.9         June 103.6 + 3.9 96.3 + 3.3 112.3 + 4.4 104.5 + 8.4 106.8 + 1.5 87.8 − 0.5
         July 104.1 + 7.9 97.9 + 4.5 111.5 + 11.7 104.3 + 8.8 106.4 + 8.8 94.0 + 1.0
         Aug  
p 94.7 + 6.9 90.7 + 6.0 99.4 + 7.8 96.2 + 11.0 94.6 + 6.1 90.3 − 1.6
Eastern Germany  
  
2000 99.9 + 18.1 100.0 + 13.9 99.9 + 29.7 99.9 + 20.7 100.0 + 16.3 100.0 + 15.12001 104.9 + 5.0 102.4 + 2.4 110.9 + 11.0 106.0 + 6.1 103.4 + 3.4 106.1 + 6.12002 111.0 + 5.8 104.0 + 1.6 127.8 + 15.2 111.7 + 5.4 110.7 + 7.1 109.4 + 3.12003 117.9 + 6.2 110.8 + 6.5 135.1 + 5.7 122.8 + 9.9 114.1 + 3.1 112.7 + 3.0
 
2003          Aug 108.3 − 3.7 105.5 + 1.2 115.1 − 13.1 121.1 + 8.4 94.5 − 17.5 109.7 + 2.0         Sep 124.3 + 11.2 121.1 + 12.3 132.1 + 8.7 128.4 + 10.8 121.0 + 13.3 119.9 + 4.4
         Oct 124.9 + 9.8 121.1 + 10.2 133.9 + 8.9 131.0 + 12.7 118.6 + 6.9 123.3 + 7.5
         Nov 132.2 + 11.2 118.4 + 9.8 165.5 + 13.7 127.3 + 13.1 140.1 + 10.8 121.5 + 5.1         Dec 127.3 + 14.6 108.3 + 3.3 173.2 + 37.4 106.9 + 7.9 152.6 + 20.3 112.5 + 13.9
2004          Jan 122.6 + 8.9 107.8 + 6.4 158.4 + 13.3 125.8 − 3.3 122.4 + 29.3 110.0 − 0.2
         Feb 120.7 + 8.7 114.3 + 10.4 136.0 + 5.3 125.4 + 10.1 117.7 + 8.0 112.6 + 5.4         Mar 131.9 + 6.2 122.6 + 8.7 154.2 + 1.6 139.7 + 10.3 126.0 + 2.5 121.9 + 2.7
         Apr 121.9 + 5.9 116.0 + 7.6 136.0 + 2.6 135.1 + 9.6 109.4 + 1.9 116.0 + 4.8
         May 127.3 + 16.7 117.6 + 10.1 150.7 + 31.4 136.6 + 16.4 120.6 + 19.3 114.6 + 7.9         June 133.6 + 17.3 120.7 + 4.5 164.5 + 49.4 139.4 + 13.1 132.0 + 24.6 114.2 + 7.3
         July 123.9 + 10.4 117.1 + 8.9 140.2 + 13.4 138.5 + 11.7 110.6 + 9.2 115.7 + 9.0
         Aug  
p 117.6 + 8.6 113.8 + 7.9 126.7 + 10.1 134.0 + 10.7 100.4 + 6.2 117.3 + 6.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2000 100.0 − 8.5 100.0 99.9 100.0 99.9 − 7.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 − 13.4 100.0 99.9 100.0
2001 94.5 − 5.5 82.8 96.9 99.0 97.4 − 2.5 87.6 99.9 100.7 85.2 − 14.8 68.3 86.4 94.22002 88.7 − 6.1 72.8 91.5 95.6 90.9 − 6.7 79.6 93.1 95.6 81.7 − 4.1 51.9 85.8 95.72003 79.2 − 10.7 67.5 78.5 87.4 80.8 − 11.1 74.5 78.3 87.8 74.2 − 9.2 46.1 79.2 86.2
   
2003          July 90.6 − 3.4 71.2 86.6 107.3 91.1 − 5.5 79.1 85.7 105.1 89.0 + 4.2 46.9 89.9 113.5
         Aug 81.1 − 8.3 67.7 76.1 95.2 81.7 − 6.2 73.8 74.7 94.9 79.2 − 14.3 49.0 81.0 95.7         Sep 91.2 − 10.5 76.3 88.8 103.1 91.2 − 11.8 84.9 85.3 102.3 90.9 − 6.4 50.2 101.3 105.4
         Oct 80.1 − 5.2 70.6 75.8 90.8 83.4 − 3.0 79.8 76.4 93.9 69.6 − 13.0 42.6 73.7 81.9
         Nov 69.2 − 7.5 62.0 73.5 68.7 71.0 − 3.8 69.5 74.0 68.5 63.1 − 19.0 39.1 71.7 69.3         Dec 69.3 − 12.6 66.7 68.4 71.9 71.1 − 14.4 73.9 68.4 72.5 63.4 − 5.8 44.9 68.3 69.8
2004          Jan 53.2 − 6.2 41.5 65.7 46.6 55.3 − 5.5 47.8 67.6 45.4 46.6 − 9.0 22.1 58.6 49.7
         Feb 66.2 + 2.8 58.3 75.3 60.8 67.3 − 0.3 64.7 79.2 54.9 62.6 + 15.3 38.8 61.8 77.7         Mar 81.9 − 7.7 70.7 72.7 99.2 83.4 − 9.1 81.0 70.8 99.8 77.0 − 2.5 39.2 79.3 97.4
         Apr 77.1 − 6.4 62.8 72.4 91.2 78.7 − 7.3 71.6 73.3 89.5 71.9 − 3.5 36.1 69.4 95.9
         May 75.8 − 8.3 66.7 65.2 93.4 77.0 − 5.6 73.8 64.3 94.1 71.9 − 16.6 44.9 68.3 91.5         June 89.6 − 5.1 72.8 82.6 107.9 92.0 − 4.1 82.3 83.7 107.8 82.0 − 8.6 43.9 78.6 108.1
         July 78.9 − 12.9 63.5 71.9 96.5 80.8 − 11.3 70.8 71.9 97.8 72.8 − 18.2 41.1 72.0 92.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oBundesbank calculation. — 1Including the
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications railways and post office. 
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there-
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  By enterprises’ main product range of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco  2 products  2 leather goods  2 ing materials  2 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100
1996 96.8 − 0.2 − 1.1 96.7 − 0.5 81.6 + 3.6 103.0 − 1.2 96.2 − 1.4 95.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 91.0 + 5.7
1997 96.1 − 0.7 − 1.3 96.0 − 0.7 83.4 + 2.2 101.4 − 1.6 95.4 − 0.8 96.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 94.4 + 3.71998 97.0 + 0.9 + 1.0 97.3 + 1.4 88.1 + 5.6 100.2 − 1.2 98.3 + 3.0 97.5 + 1.6 + 1.3 98.9 + 4.81999 97.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 97.8 + 0.5 94.4 + 7.2 99.9 − 0.3 97.3 − 1.0 98.3 + 0.8 + 0.5 102.2 + 3.3
2000 100.0 + 2.6 + 1.4 99.8 + 2.0 100.1 + 6.0 99.9
+ 0.0 99.9 + 2.7 100.0 + 1.7 + 0.4 100.0 − 2.2
2001 101.9 + 1.9 . 104.7 + 4.9 107.4 + 7.3 99.5 − 0.4 96.6 − 3.3 102.0 + 2.0 . 102.9 + 2.9
2002 100.3 − 1.6 − 2.2 107.5 + 2.7 111.2 + 3.5 94.5 − 5.0 89.0 − 7.9 101.3 − 0.7 − 1.4 105.9 + 2.92003 100.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 109.9 + 2.2 114.1 + 2.6 89.7 − 5.1 88.2 − 0.9 101.8 + 0.5 + 0.2 108.8 + 2.7
 
2003          Aug 93.8 − 1.5 − 1.7 108.5 + 3.2 106.6 − 1.8 76.1 − 10.5 80.8 − 3.6 95.5 − 0.2 − 0.7 101.5 + 4.2         Sep 97.5 − 1.9 − 2.3 105.3 + 1.4 109.8 + 0.2 95.4 − 5.8 84.6 − 3.4 99.1 − 0.6 − 1.2 105.6 + 4.1
         Oct 104.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 112.3 + 3.1 115.9 + 2.7 105.8 − 2.3 93.4 + 0.1 106.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 113.2 + 3.3
         Nov 104.5 − 0.5 − 1.1 112.4 + 1.8 116.7 + 3.3 89.9 − 7.6 95.9 − 1.0 105.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 109.6 + 1.4         Dec 122.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 130.2 + 2.0 144.6 + 12.4 110.4 − 6.6 104.4 − 1.2 117.5 − 0.2 − 0.9 101.1 − 1.8
2004          Jan 90.1 − 1.6 − 1.7 100.7 + 1.7 101.0 − 7.8 74.3 − 6.3 79.0 + 1.7 89.1 − 1.8 − 2.0 86.3 − 2.5
         Feb 86.0 − 3.4 − 2.6 97.5 − 1.4 100.3 − 5.2 67.8 − 1.5 77.1 − 0.6 87.1 − 3.3 − 3.1 91.9 − 3.4         Mar 100.4 − 2.1 − 1.5 111.4 − 1.8 112.7 + 1.2 88.0 − 6.8 92.8 − 2.4 103.1 − 3.2 − 3.1 113.9 − 6.3
         Apr 100.1 − 1.8 − 1.9 110.6 − 0.6 112.5 + 0.4 95.5 + 3.4 91.3 − 0.9 103.4 − 1.7 − 2.2 115.9 − 1.6
         May 96.1 − 2.8 − 3.4 108.6
+ 0.0 108.1 − 2.1 85.6 − 6.7 86.5 − 2.4 99.7 − 2.9 − 3.8 113.1 − 2.9
         June 94.2 − 2.3 − 2.7 105.8 − 2.8 110.5 − 0.1 81.4 − 4.7 83.5 + 0.5 97.6 − 3.2 − 3.8 110.4 − 5.7
         July 96.6 − 1.4 − 1.9 108.5 − 1.2 116.3 + 0.0 86.2 − 0.1 84.2 − 0.4 100.2 − 2.1 − 2.8 113.7 − 3.7
         Aug  e 93.9 + 0.1 − 0.3 107.5 − 0.9 108.0 + 1.3 78.2 + 2.8 81.9 + 1.4 94.4 − 1.2 − 1.8 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding ding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of auto-
value-added tax; figures from 2003 provisional, partly revised and, judging motive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor vehicle parts and
by past experience, subject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent accessories.— 4Up to (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices; from 2001, at
months. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Exclu- 2000 prices. 
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed  2 
Persons
Mining employed Persons
and under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- vocationaling Con- time motion further Unem-
Annual change Annual sector  
2 Annual ploy- Vacan- schemes  2,5 training  2 workers  2 struction  4 
percen- change, ment cies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- rate  2,6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands in % sands  2 
Germany  
  
2001 38,923 + 0.4 + 172 34,843 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 352 3,853 − 37 9.4 507
2002 38,698 − 0.6 − 225 34,598 − 0.7 6,217 7 883 207 192 340 4,061 + 209 9.8 452
2003 38,316 − 1.0 − 382 34,146 − 1.3 8 6,136 817 195 140 260 4,377 + 315 10.5 355
2003          Sep 38,589 − 0.8 − 317 6,146 835 169 133 233 4,208 + 265 10.1 330
         Oct 38,715 − 0.7 − 254 6,114 824 163 138 242 4,151 + 220 10.0 297
         Nov 38,690 − 0.5 − 199 34,421 − 0.9 6,096 814 162 140 245 4,184 + 157 10.0 275         Dec 38,517 − 0.4 − 164 6,060 790 149 135 235 4,315 + 89 10.4 258
2004          Jan 
r 37,755 − 0.3 − 106 6,035 737 164 123 217 9 4,597 9 +3 7 9 11.0 277
         Feb r 37,760 − 0.2 − 84 33,519 − 0.7 6,019 711 186 117 203 4,641 + 15 11.1 309
         Mar r 37,984 − 0.0 − 13 6,018 10 728 197 109 200 4,547 + 30 10.9 324
         Apr r 38,258 + 0.2 + 60 6,013 10 745 177 102 199 4,443 + 32 10.7 324
         May r 38,356 + 0.2 + 73 33,888 − 0.7 6,004 10 748 171 103 197 4,293 + 43 11 10.3 319
         June 38,425 + 0.2 + 62 6,006 10 752 162 109 185 4,233 + 62 10.2 305
         July o 38,416 o + 0.2 o + 67 6,018 10 752 138 116 p 165 4,360 + 83 10.5 297
         Aug ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 107 119 p 158 4,347 + 110 10.5 287
         Sep ... ... ... ... ... 115 122 p 165 4,257 + 160 10.3 275
Western Germany 12  
  
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 94 53 202 2,321 − 60 7.2 436
2002 . . . . . 5,593 7 654 162 42 198 2,498 + 178 7.7 378
2003 . . . . . 8 5,503 607 160 30 161 2,753 + 255 8.4 292
2003          Sep . . . . . 5,507 617 139 27 149 2,653 + 213 8.1 261
         Oct . . . . . 5,476 609 136 27 157 2,637 + 187 8.0 237
         Nov . . . . . 5,459 603 135 26 159 2,665 + 144 8.1 222         Dec . . . . . 5,427 587 122 25 152 2,750 + 102 8.4 212
2004          Jan . . . . . 5,401 553 135 22 139
9 2,927 9 +7 1 9 8.9 234
         Feb . . . . . 5,386 535 151 21 131 2,945 + 49 8.9 263
         Mar . . . . . 5,384 10 548 159 21 129 2,871 + 52 8.7 275
         Apr . . . . . 5,377 10 559 143 21 130 2,805 + 50 8.5 274
         May . . . . . 5,368 10 560 139 22 130 2,710 + 58 11 8.2 265
         June . . . . . 5,368 10 562 133 23 123 2,669 + 65 8.1 253
         July . . . . . 5,378 10 561 112 25 p 110 2,760 + 79 8.4 247
         Aug . . . . . ... ... 84 25 p 104 2,764 + 92 8.4 239
         Sep . . . . . ... ... 92 27 p 110 2,700 + 119 8.2 223
Eastern Germany 13  
  
2001 . . . . . 626 262 29 190 150 1,532 + 23 17.3 712002 . . . . . 624
7 229 45 150 142 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2003 . . . . . 8 632 210 35 110 99 1,624 + 61 18.5 63
2003          Sep . . . . . 639 218 30 106 83 1,554 + 52 17.8 69
         Oct . . . . . 638 215 27 112 85 1,514 + 34 17.3 60
         Nov . . . . . 637 211 27 113 86 1,519 + 13 17.4 53         Dec . . . . . 633 203 27 110 83 1,565 − 14 17.9 46
2004          Jan . . . . . 634 183 29 101 78
9 1,670 9 −3 3 9 19.1 43
         Feb . . . . . 633 175 35 96 72 1,696 − 33 19.4 46
         Mar . . . . . 633 10 181 37 89 70 1,676 − 22 19.2 49
         Apr . . . . . 637 10 186 34 81 69 1,639 − 18 18.8 51
         May . . . . . 637 10 188 32 81 67 1,583 − 15 11 18.3 54
         June . . . . . 638 10 190 29 85 62 1,565 − 3 18.1 53
         July . . . . . 641 10 191 26 91 p 55 1,600 + 4 18.5 50
         Aug . . . . . ... ... 24 94 p 54 1,582 + 18 18.3 48
         Sep . . . . . ... ... 23 96 p 54 1,557 + 41 18.0 52
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Monthly included for the first time. — 8The figures from 2003 onwards are positively
figures: end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; short- affected by the fact that firms which are required to report and which have
time workers: mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: averages. — been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are inclu-1Work-place concept.— 2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundesbank; de- ded for the first time. — 9From January 2004, unemployed persons
viations from the official figures are due to rounding. — 3Including active excluding all those participating in occupational aptitude testing and
proprietors. — 4The figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site training schemes. — 10Provisional up to adjustment to the figures of the
preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil annual overall survey. — 11From May 2004, calculated on the basis of new
engineering”. — 5Employees involved in job creation schemes and struc- labour force figures. — 12Excluding western Berlin; for the mining,
tural adjustment measures (SAM). — 6Relative to the total civilian labour manufacturing and construction sectors, including persons employed in
force. — 7The figures from March 2002 onwards are positively affected by western Berlin. — 13 Including western Berlin; for the mining,
the fact that construction firms which are required to report and which manufacturing and construction sectors, excluding persons employed inhave been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are western Berlin. — o First preliminary estimate. 
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index
Indices of Index of world market
of which foreign trade prices prices  of raw materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1999 98.6 100.6 100.3 87.7 99.0 98.8 99.3 2 97.0 89.9 97.0 90.8 57.6 83.1
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 95.4 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.4 101.2 100.3 103.0 100.8 101.0 100.6 91.4 91.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 104.9 102.6 100.2 102.4 94.6 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.12003 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 104.1 94.8 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.9
 
2002          Dec 104.0 104.0 100.9 105.6 107.7 103.0 102.4 94.4 100.7 97.9 87.2 89.6
2003          Jan 104.0 105.3 101.4 110.7 105.1 103.2 103.8 94.8 100.9 98.2 92.2 88.3
         Feb 104.5 105.9 101.6 113.0 105.7 103.4 100.3 104.2 96.4 101.0 98.5 97.3 89.7         Mar 104.6 106.3 101.6 113.8 105.6 103.5 104.4 94.8 101.0 98.0 89.5 88.3
         Apr 104.3 106.6 101.4 110.2 105.8 103.7 104.2 94.6 100.9 96.5 76.0 87.8
         May 104.1 106.8 101.4 108.2 105.6 103.7 100.3 103.9 93.9 100.5 95.2 72.5 83.5         June 104.4 107.1 101.3 108.8 106.1 103.8 103.9 95.4 100.3 95.1 77.0 81.3
         July 104.6 106.3 101.1 109.2 107.4 103.8 104.1 92.4 100.3 95.2 81.5 82.7
         Aug 104.6 105.1 101.0 110.4 107.7 103.9 100.3 104.1 94.0 100.4 95.8 86.4 85.2         Sep 104.5 105.6 101.4 109.7 106.7 103.9 104.2 97.4 100.5 95.7 78.7 87.5
         Oct 104.5 105.7 101.4 110.0 106.4 103.9 104.2 96.2 100.4 95.5 81.0 88.7
         Nov 104.3 105.5 101.4 109.5 105.8 104.1 100.3 104.2 97.6 100.4 95.5 81.7 91.0         Dec 105.1 105.7 101.4 109.4 109.0 104.1 104.2 96.1 100.2 95.1 80.7 89.4
2004          Jan 105.2 106.9 102.1 110.5 107.2 104.4 104.0 96.6 100.2 95.2 82.6 92.8
         Feb 105.4 106.4 101.9 110.2 108.3 104.5 100.5 104.1 97.8 100.3 95.3 82.2 96.2         Mar 105.7 106.1 103.1 111.4 108.0 104.6 104.7 98.2 100.8 96.4 91.2 103.5
         Apr 106.0 106.3 103.3 113.1 108.1 104.7 105.1 96.8 101.1 96.9 94.9 105.1
         May 106.2 106.6 103.1 116.1 108.1 104.7 101.4 105.6 96.0 101.3 97.6 104.5 101.1         June 106.2 106.7 103.1 114.2 108.6 104.8 105.5
p 97.7 101.1 97.0 100.8 99.1
         July 106.5 106.0 102.8 115.5 109.9 104.8 106.1 p 97.2 101.2 97.3 104.7 97.6
         Aug 106.7 104.9 102.8 117.3 110.3 105.0 101.8 106.4 ... 101.5 98.2 114.3 94.6         Sep 106.4 104.3 102.9 116.6 109.2 105.0 ... ... ... ... 112.7 93.5
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 2 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 37.1 − 6.2
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 2 + 3.1 + 6.1 + 3.1 + 10.1 + 73.6 + 20.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.12002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.92003 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.6
 
2002          Dec + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 1.8 + 1.4 + 0.6 − 5.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 23.2 + 2.9
2003          Jan + 1.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 3.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 25.1 − 1.1
         Feb + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 8.5 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 26.0 − 2.1
         Mar + 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 7.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.9 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 6.4
         Apr + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 19.5 − 6.2
         May + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 20.7 − 8.0         June + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 3.1 − 8.7 − 9.6
         July + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 7.5
         Aug + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.1
+ 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 5.2
         Sep + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 15.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 10.5 − 3.7
         Nov + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 4.2 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.2         Dec + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 7.5 − 0.2
2004          Jan + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 10.4 + 5.1
         Feb + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 15.5 + 7.2         Mar + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.5 − 2.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.9 + 17.2
         Apr + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 24.9 + 19.7
         May + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 7.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 2.5 + 44.1 + 21.1         June + 1.7 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 5.0 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.5
p + 2.4 + 0.8 + 2.0 + 30.9 + 21.9
         July + 1.8 − 0.3 + 1.7 + 5.8 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.9 p + 5.2 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 28.5 + 18.0
         Aug + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.2 ... + 1.1 + 2.5 + 32.3 + 11.0         Sep + 1.8 − 1.2 + 1.5 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... + 43.2 + 6.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- index of raw material prices for the euro area based on the euro. — 6Coal
stitute. — 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation and crude oil. — 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw
based on data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Previously: materials. 
Overall construction price level. — 4Excluding value-added tax. — 5HWWA
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999 € billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM / 
€ change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 − 1.8 12.31994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 − 0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 − 2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 − 0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 − 0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 − 1.0 10.81997 1,591.3 − 0.2 1,015.9 − 1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 − 0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 − 1.9 10.41998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.31999 855.4 3.0 549.2 3.4 327.5 3.1 876.7 3.3 1,281.1 3.4 125.1 − 1.9 9.8
2000 884.7 3.4 571.8 4.1 336.8 2.8 908.6 3.6 1,325.8 3.5 129.0 3.1 9.7
2001 904.2 2.2 592.9 3.7 348.1 3.3 941.0 3.6 1,377.6 3.9 140.4 8.8 10.22002 911.2 0.8 595.3 0.4 364.4 4.7 959.7 2.0 1,388.5 0.8 146.3 4.2 10.52003 909.8 − 0.2 590.5 − 0.8 373.9 2.6 964.4 0.5 1,406.4 1.3 151.1 3.3 10.7
2002          Q3 227.5 1.1 152.7 0.6 91.6 5.6 244.3 2.5 342.2 1.0 30.7 4.9 9.0
         Q4 254.3 0.3 164.4 0.1 91.5 4.1 255.8 1.5 357.9 1.2 34.1 6.4 9.5
2003          Q1 211.2 0.3 137.0 − 0.6 94.1 3.1 231.1 0.9 352.4 2.1 50.1 5.6 14.2
         Q2 218.7 − 0.1 138.9 − 1.0 92.7 2.8 231.6 0.5 349.4 1.8 35.3 3.8 10.1         Q3 227.2 − 0.1 151.6 − 0.7 93.1 1.7 244.7 0.2 346.0 1.1 32.0 4.3 9.3         Q4 252.7 − 0.6 163.0 − 0.8 94.0 2.8 257.0 0.5 358.6 0.2 33.7 − 1.1 9.4
2004          Q1 211.5 0.2 138.8 1.3 95.7 1.8 234.5 1.5 356.6 1.2 50.9 1.5 14.3
         Q2 218.5 − 0.1 141.1 1.6 93.4 0.7 234.4 1.2 354.8 1.5 36.9 4.4 10.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2004. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (workplace concept)  2 (workplace concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change change 1995 = 100
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.0 1.9 105.8 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.1 2.9 108.7 2.8 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.3 2.0 110.8 2.0 105.9 1.6 113.2 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.5 2.0 113.0 2.0 107.9 1.9 115.2 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.22002 116.6 2.7 116.0 2.7 109.5 1.5 118.9 3.2 117.3 3.2 116.0 2.02003 118.9 2.0 118.5 2.1 110.8 1.1 122.0 2.6 120.3 2.5 . .
2002          Q3 120.4 2.7 119.9 2.8 109.3 1.9 128.2 3.7 126.4 3.7 112.9 3.4
         Q4 132.0 2.8 131.4 2.8 121.8 1.5 132.0 3.4 130.2 3.4 125.4 2.3
2003          Q1 109.2 2.8 108.8 2.9 104.0 1.9 109.7 3.2 108.2 3.1 . .
         Q2 110.0 2.2 109.7 2.3 106.7 1.5 112.0 2.6 110.5 2.6 . .         Q3 122.8 2.0 122.4 2.1 110.4 1.1 131.1 2.3 129.3 2.3 . .         Q4 133.5 1.1 133.0 1.2 122.1 0.2 135.1 2.3 133.2 2.3 . .
2004          Q1 111.1 1.7 110.9 1.9 104.9 0.9 113.2 3.2 111.7 3.3 . .
         Q2 111.7 1.5 111.4 1.6 107.3 0.6 113.5 1.3 112.0 1.4 . .
2004          Feb 110.8 1.9 110.6 2.1 . . 112.4 2.4 110.9 2.5 . .
         Mar 111.7 1.4 111.5 1.6 . . 115.0 4.8 113.5 4.9 . .
         Apr 111.3 1.1 111.1 1.3 . . 113.1 0.8 111.6 0.8 . .
         May 112.0 1.8 111.7 2.0 . . 114.2 2.2 112.7 2.3 . .         June 111.7 1.4 111.5 1.6 . . 113.3 1.0 111.8 1.1 . .
         July 148.0 0.5 147.7 0.7 . . 169.2 1.1 166.9 1.2 . .
         Aug 112.0 1.5 111.8 1.7 . . 113.3 1.1 111.8 1.2 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. — 2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2004. — 3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
X External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2003 2004
Item 2001  1 2002 2003 Q4 Q1 Q2 May June July
Current account − 16,684 + 54,455 + 24,856 + 17,338 + 13,285 + 9,158 + 3,378 + 5,442 + 3,132A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) incl supplementary items 1,033,862 1,063,218 1,036,195 271,362 265,149 286,235 92,421 99,696 98,309
Imports (fob) incl supplementary items 960,211 929,666 927,716 240,683 237,083 252,119 81,183 87,478 84,571
Balance + 73,651 + 133,551 + 108,481 + 30,680 + 28,066 + 34,115 + 11,237 + 12,218 + 13,738
2 Services
Receipts 321,672 329,844 325,956 84,373 75,027 84,546 28,748 29,825 30,637
Expenditure 322,038 316,728 310,311 80,060 77,615 77,438 25,058 26,946 29,348
Balance − 369 + 13,114 + 15,645 + 4,313 − 2,587 + 7,109 + 3,690 + 2,880 + 1,288
3 Income − 38,582 − 44,110 − 43,418 − 4,954 − 5,232 − 15,064 − 5,801 − 2,567 − 5,563
4 Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 78,798 85,305 80,753 19,375 31,698 14,906 4,987 5,220 4,966
Transfer payments to non-residents 130,182 133,400 136,606 32,076 38,661 31,908 10,736 12,308 11,298
Balance − 51,387 − 48,097 − 55,851 − 12,700 − 6,964 − 17,002 − 5,749 − 7,088 − 6,331
Capital account + 6,574 + 10,977 + 13,434 + 7,373 + 2,940 + 3,802 + 2,313 + 820 + 1,157B
Financial account (net capital exports: −) − 34,165 − 65,808 − 50,462 − 3,558 − 14,033 − 14,832 − 7,137 + 797 − 11,754C
1 Direct investment − 112,440 − 4,718 − 13,125 − 9,650 − 28,862 − 12,337 − 1,601 − 7,814 − 8,271
By resident units abroad − 316,489 − 151,328 − 118,595 − 27,248 − 25,860 − 20,754 − 1,004 − 11,897 − 11,328By non-resident units in the euro area + 204,055 + 146,610 + 105,471 + 17,598 − 3,002 + 8,416 − 598 + 4,083 + 3,057
2 Portfolio investment + 67,948 + 114,633 + 17,608 + 10,500 + 5,196 + 4,245 − 23,965 + 31,222 − 30,476
By resident units abroad − 281,866 − 175,759 − 283,802 − 64,325 − 89,883 − 61,197 − 18,741 − 12,622 − 32,964
Equity − 101,583 − 40,365 − 67,741 − 26,302 − 31,309 − 21,987 − 4,512 − 14,972 − 2,871
Bonds and notes − 155,875 − 89,592 − 172,769 − 25,429 − 46,358 − 30,680 − 16,661 − 5,279 − 12,270
Money market instruments − 24,411 − 45,803 − 43,291 − 12,594 − 12,216 − 8,531 + 2,432 + 7,629 − 17,823
By non-resident units in the euro area + 349,814 + 290,394 + 301,412 + 74,827 + 95,080 + 65,442 − 5,224 + 43,844 + 2,488
Equity + 232,553 + 88,853 + 103,619 + 45,746 + 19,925 + 2,044 − 221 + 15,121 + 9,065
Bonds and notes + 113,135 + 133,670 + 191,829 + 34,639 + 53,431 + 64,376 + 12,569 + 24,656 − 3,156
Money market instruments + 4,129 + 67,869 + 5,965 − 5,559 + 21,725 − 977 − 17,571 + 4,068 − 3,421
3 Financial derivatives − 856 − 10,785 − 13,090 − 4,075 + 6,241 − 1,548 − 1,579 + 57 − 864
4 Other investment − 6,632 − 162,664 − 71,674 − 13,924 − 6,000 − 2,074 + 19,344 − 21,573 + 27,241
Eurosystem + 5,032 + 18,185 + 11,236 − 1,350 − 1,888 + 2,307 − 188 + 1,347 + 1,491
General government + 2,545 − 8,160 − 4,974 − 1,862 − 6,638 − 2,346 + 672 − 1,814 − 869
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 3,256 − 138,175 − 18,946 − 17,625 − 30 + 15,594 + 27,120 − 13,677 + 35,065
Long-term − 24,190 + 19,536 + 1,293 + 1,574 − 17,319 − 5,299 + 4,721 + 372 + 311Short-term + 27,446 − 157,704 − 20,240 − 19,199 + 17,289 + 20,893 + 22,399 − 14,049 + 34,754
Other sectors  
2 − 17,462 − 34,518 − 58,988 + 6,916 + 2,553 − 17,631 − 8,261 − 7,430 − 8,447
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 17,815 − 2,277 + 29,817 + 13,589 + 9,390 − 3,118 + 664 − 1,095 + 616
Errors and omissions + 44,278 + 372 + 12,172 − 21,153 − 2,192 + 1,874 + 1,447 − 7,059 + 7,465D
*Source: European Central Bank. — 1From January 2001, including   
Greece. — 2 Enterprises and households.  
67*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
X External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item Capital trans-
fers and Change in
the Bundes- acquisition/disposal of Change in bank’s net
Supple- non- the foreign external
Balance mentary produced reserves at Balance of assets aton current External trade Factor Current Financial transaction transaction non-financial unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4,5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1,2,3 transactions
DM million
1990  o + 73,021 + 105,382 − 3,833 − 26,118 + 32,859 − 35,269 − 4,975 − 89,497 − 11,611 + 33,062 − 10,976
1991 − 36,298 + 21,899 − 2,804 − 30,724 + 33,144 − 57,812 − 4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 18,643 − 319
1992 − 30,013 + 33,656 − 1,426 − 44,983 + 33,962 − 51,222 − 1,963 + 69,792 − 52,888 + 15,072 − 68,7451993 − 23,062 + 60,304 − 3,038 − 52,549 + 27,373 − 55,151 − 1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 − 19,260 + 35,7661994 − 46,749 + 71,762 − 1,104 − 62,803 + 4,852 − 59,455 − 2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 − 11,332 − 12,242
1995 − 38,642 + 85,303 − 4,722 − 63,985 + 178 − 55,416 − 3,845 + 63,647 − 10,355 − 10,805 − 17,754
1996 − 20,643 + 98,538 − 5,264 − 64,743 + 1,815 − 50,989 − 3,283 + 23,607 + 1,882 − 1,564 + 1,6101997 − 14,916 + 116,467 − 7,360 − 68,696 − 2,588 − 52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 8,193 + 8,4681998 − 20,677 + 126,970 − 5,934 − 75,072 − 13,337 − 53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 − 7,128 − 6,295 − 8,231
1999 − 43,915 + 127,542 − 13,656 − 90,099 − 18,775 − 48,927 − 301 − 44,849 + 24,517 + 64,548 − 72,364
2000 − 54,471 + 115,645 − 13,505 − 95,967 − 5,166 − 55,478 + 13,345 + 55,434 + 11,429 − 25,737 + 94,3292001 + 3,421 + 186,771 − 10,499 − 98,323 − 20,889 − 53,639 − 756 − 51,306 + 11,797 + 36,844 + 63,911
€ million
1999 − 22,454 + 65,211 − 6,982 − 46,067 − 9,599 − 25,016 − 154 − 22,931 + 12,535 + 33,003 − 36,9992000 − 27,851 + 59,128 − 6,905 − 49,067 − 2,641 − 28,366 + 6,823 + 28,343 + 5,844 − 13,159 + 48,2302001 + 1,749 + 95,495 − 5,368 − 50,272 − 10,680 − 27,425 − 387 − 26,233 + 6,032 + 18,838 + 32,6772002 + 45,670 + 132,788 − 5,968 − 36,422 − 16,844 − 27,883 − 212 − 70,724 + 2,065 + 23,201 − 33,2922003  
r + 48,062 + 132,215 − 7,335 − 35,537 − 12,515 − 28,767 + 316 − 69,725 + 445 + 20,902 + 2,658
2001          Q3 − 2,466 + 25,547 − 1,768 − 16,479 − 3,518 − 6,250 − 446 − 2,722 − 2,165 + 7,798 − 13,360         Q4 + 8,737 + 25,303 − 703 − 7,447 − 1,050 − 7,365 − 479 − 46,370 + 2,085 + 36,027 + 36,688
2002          Q1 + 9,445 + 33,328 − 1,028 − 10,633 − 6,722 − 5,500 + 160 + 5,740 − 1,352 − 13,993 − 18,496
         Q2 + 10,420 + 31,721 − 1,383 − 8,605 − 2,682 − 8,631 − 75 − 9,488 + 2,432 − 3,289 + 1,694         Q3 + 9,507 + 35,543 − 1,552 − 12,652 − 5,563 − 6,269 + 62 − 17,554 + 87 + 7,899 − 17,588         Q4 + 16,299 + 32,195 − 2,005 − 4,532 − 1,877 − 7,483 − 359 − 49,422 + 898 + 32,584 + 1,099
2003          Q1  
r + 9,124 + 29,949 − 2,049 − 8,307 − 4,690 − 5,779 − 30 − 12,511 − 1,495 + 4,912 + 3,444
         Q2  r + 8,698 + 30,436 − 1,860 − 8,340 − 3,649 − 7,890 + 149 − 26,220 + 1,505 + 15,868 + 22,123
         Q3  r + 11,377 + 39,533 − 1,582 − 13,275 − 4,479 − 8,820 + 208 − 5,229 − 751 − 5,605 − 15,902
         Q4  r + 18,863 + 32,297 − 1,844 − 5,615 + 303 − 6,278 − 12 − 25,764 + 1,186 + 5,727 − 7,008
2004          Q1 + 21,277 + 41,150 − 1,483 − 8,878 − 3,942 − 5,571 + 430 − 14,387 + 205 − 7,526 − 6,821
         Q2 + 26,209 + 43,042 − 2,223 − 7,566 + 46 − 7,090 + 206 − 67,869 − 339 + 41,793 + 30,993
2002          Mar + 6,441 + 12,245 − 198 − 3,814 + 955 − 2,746 − 162 + 1,044 + 328 − 7,651 − 2,116
         Apr + 2,949 + 10,015 − 910 − 2,509 − 620 − 3,027 − 148 + 330 + 1,657 − 4,788 − 9,839
         May + 3,584 + 10,408 − 565 − 3,230 − 557 − 2,472 + 47 + 492 + 1,379 − 5,501 + 3,826         June + 3,887 + 11,299 + 92 − 2,866 − 1,506 − 3,132 + 26 − 10,310 − 603 + 7,000 + 7,707
         July + 1,110 + 13,224 − 770 − 3,705 − 5,416 − 2,224 − 203 − 11,194 − 548 + 10,836 − 15,567
         Aug + 2,031 + 10,477 − 312 − 5,856 − 921 − 1,359 + 86 − 4,630 + 886 + 1,627 − 5,579         Sep + 6,367 + 11,842 − 471 − 3,092 + 773 − 2,686 + 179 − 1,730 − 252 − 4,564 + 3,559
         Oct + 3,087 + 11,529 − 364 − 3,826 − 966 − 3,287 − 82 − 21,706 + 570 + 18,132 − 5,279
         Nov + 8,450 + 12,283 − 632 − 1,346 + 446 − 2,301 − 137 − 5,800 − 842 − 1,670 + 4,265         Dec + 4,762 + 8,383 − 1,009 + 640 − 1,357 − 1,895 − 139 − 21,916 + 1,171 + 16,122 + 2,112
2003          Jan  
r − 1,449 + 9,184 − 1,024 − 3,327 − 5,184 − 1,098 + 461 − 3,103 − 97 + 4,188 + 6,799
         Feb  r + 4,067 + 10,880 − 635 − 2,974 − 522 − 2,682 − 504 − 22,323 − 320 + 19,080 + 677
         Mar  r + 6,507 + 9,886 − 390 − 2,006 + 1,016 − 2,000 + 13 + 12,915 − 1,078 − 18,356 − 4,032
         Apr  r + 3,320 + 9,425 − 752 − 2,310 − 339 − 2,704 − 126 − 3,639 + 1,449 − 1,005 + 1,477
         May  r + 3,186 + 10,416 − 549 − 2,775 − 1,379 − 2,527 + 156 − 7,694 − 854 + 5,205 + 22,684
         June  r + 2,191 + 10,595 − 559 − 3,255 − 1,931 − 2,659 + 119 − 14,887 + 910 + 11,667 − 2,037
         July  r + 1,677 + 14,374 − 695 − 3,648 − 5,401 − 2,953 + 62 + 308 + 225 − 2,272 − 16,353
         Aug  r + 1,792 + 10,609 − 356 − 5,401 − 74 − 2,987 + 224 − 10,171 − 717 + 8,872 − 3,057
         Sep  r + 7,908 + 14,550 − 531 − 4,227 + 997 − 2,880 − 78 + 4,633 − 259 − 12,204 + 3,508
         Oct  r + 6,595 + 11,061 − 510 − 3,786 + 1,704 − 1,874 − 27 − 6,460 − 255 + 148 − 21,689
         Nov  r + 5,254 + 10,607 − 591 − 1,543 − 320 − 2,899 + 49 − 6,266 + 521 + 442 + 14,870
         Dec  r + 7,015 + 10,629 − 742 − 286 − 1,081 − 1,505 − 35 − 13,038 + 921 + 5,137 − 190
2004          Jan + 1,642 + 12,487 − 640 − 4,140 − 5,528 − 537 + 53 − 1,592 − 206 + 103 + 5,619
         Feb + 6,338 + 12,111 − 369 − 2,318 − 471 − 2,615 − 130 + 4,471 − 26 − 10,652 + 556         Mar + 13,297 + 16,552 − 473 − 2,420 + 2,057 − 2,419 + 507 − 17,265 + 437 + 3,024 − 12,996
         Apr + 9,739 + 14,278 − 524 − 3,105 + 835 − 1,745 + 82 − 37,457 − 628 + 28,264 + 315
         May + 8,762 + 14,084 − 889 − 1,839 − 99 − 2,495 − 29 − 12,412 + 607 + 3,073 + 9,981         June + 7,709 + 14,681 − 810 − 2,622 − 689 − 2,850 + 153 − 18,000 − 318 + 10,457 + 20,697
         July + 1,656 + 13,570 − 1,236 − 3,454 − 4,107 − 3,117 + 169 − 2,652 + 847 − 20 − 1,588
         Aug  
p + 933 + 11,076 − 941 − 6,104 − 757 − 2,341 + 69 − 6,893 + 517 + 5,374 − 15,748
oFrom July 1990, including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. —
1From the beginning of 1993, figures subject to significant uncertainty 4Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
owing to changes in the method of data collection for foreign trade. — goods returned. — 5See footnote 3. — 6Excluding the expenditure on
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, freight and insurance included in the cif import figure. — 7Capital
exports fob. — 3From January 1993, including additional estimates for exports: −. — 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are
68*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
X External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2004  2004
Country / group of countries  2001  2002  2003 Jan / Jul Apr May Jun Jul Aug  p 
All countries  1 Exports 638,268 651,320 664,185 424,981 61,738 60,683 62,903 62,471 56,251
Imports 542,774 518,532 531,970 327,219 47,460 46,599 48,223 48,901 45,175Balance + 95,495 + 132,788 + 132,215 + 97,762 + 14,278 + 14,084 + 14,681 + 13,570 + 11,076
I Exports 461,512 470,873 490,496 314,216 45,539 45,102 46,672 45,345 ...European countries
Imports 384,901 372,955 385,358 236,002 34,036 33,358 34,426 35,043 ...Balance + 76,611 + 97,918 + 105,139 + 78,214 + 11,503 + 11,744 + 12,246 + 10,302 ...
Exports 401,887 408,286 426,298 271,128 39,269 38,850 39,980 38,748 ... 1 EU member states (25)
Imports 325,968 314,981 325,614 199,529 28,583 28,400 28,731 29,450 ...
Balance + 75,919 + 93,304 + 100,684 + 71,598 + 10,686 + 10,450 + 11,249 + 9,297 ...
Memo item
Exports 351,611 354,813 369,763 235,255 33,666 33,483 35,047 34,095 ...  EU member states (15)
Imports 277,034 262,849 268,295 165,415 22,807 24,075 24,840 24,737 ...Balance + 74,577 + 91,964 + 101,468 + 69,840 + 10,859 + 9,409 + 10,206 + 9,358 ...
Euro-area Exports 275,384 276,270 288,458 184,112 26,348 26,306 27,596 26,514 ...countries Imports 221,680 211,642 217,853 135,178 18,778 19,743 20,211 20,225 ...
Balance + 53,704 + 64,628 + 70,605 + 48,934 + 7,570 + 6,563 + 7,385 + 6,289 ...
of which
Austria Exports 33,486 33,863 35,637 22,171 3,220 3,117 3,229 3,345 ...
Imports 20,664 21,047 21,026 13,890 2,197 1,962 1,931 2,149 ...Balance + 12,822 + 12,816 + 14,611 + 8,280 + 1,022 + 1,154 + 1,298 + 1,195 ...
Belgium and Exports 35,187 34,108 38,412 25,273 3,687 3,654 3,914 3,463 ...Luxembourg Imports 28,521 26,505 27,710 17,243 2,440 2,469 2,685 2,474 ...
Balance + 6,666 + 7,603 + 10,702 + 8,030 + 1,247 + 1,186 + 1,229 + 988 ...
France Exports 69,601 68,721 69,413 43,797 6,367 6,179 6,619 6,293 ...
Imports 49,743 48,200 48,832 30,765 4,203 4,749 4,763 4,606 ...Balance + 19,858 + 20,521 + 20,581 + 13,033 + 2,164 + 1,430 + 1,857 + 1,687 ...
Italy Exports 47,119 47,335 48,597 31,178 4,309 4,394 4,621 4,570 ...
Imports 35,280 33,482 33,670 20,316 2,798 2,936 3,077 3,122 ...Balance + 11,839 + 13,853 + 14,927 + 10,861 + 1,511 + 1,459 + 1,544 + 1,448 ...
Netherlands Exports 40,011 40,463 41,711 25,578 3,511 3,660 3,868 3,671 ...
Imports 43,233 40,751 44,404 26,679 3,621 3,735 3,918 4,054 ...Balance − 3,222 − 288 − 2,694 − 1,101 − 109 − 75 − 51 − 382 ...
Spain Exports 27,841 29,436 32,314 21,738 3,156 3,287 3,202 3,178 ...
Imports 15,226 15,532 16,421 10,149 1,365 1,487 1,466 1,566 ...Balance + 12,615 + 13,903 + 15,893 + 11,589 + 1,791 + 1,800 + 1,736 + 1,612 ...
Other EU member Exports 126,503 132,016 137,840 87,016 12,921 12,544 12,384 12,234 ...states Imports 104,288 103,339 107,761 64,351 9,805 8,658 8,520 9,226 ...
Balance + 22,215 + 28,677 + 30,079 + 22,664 + 3,116 + 3,887 + 3,864 + 3,008 ...
of which
United Exports 52,764 53,761 55,580 35,881 5,033 4,949 5,233 5,537 ...Kingdom Imports 37,259 33,075 31,961 19,214 2,597 2,762 2,918 3,082 ...
Balance + 15,505 + 20,685 + 23,619 + 16,667 + 2,436 + 2,187 + 2,315 + 2,455 ...
Exports 59,624 62,588 64,198 43,088 6,271 6,251 6,692 6,597 ... 2 Other European
Imports 58,933 57,974 59,744 36,472 5,454 4,958 5,695 5,592 ... countries
Balance + 692 + 4,614 + 4,454 + 6,616 + 817 + 1,294 + 996 + 1,005 ...
II Exports 175,203 178,818 172,236 110,022 16,097 15,498 16,088 17,042 ...Non-European
Imports 157,199 144,950 145,910 90,850 13,365 13,198 13,751 13,813 ... countries
Balance + 18,003 + 33,869 + 26,326 + 19,171 + 2,732 + 2,300 + 2,338 + 3,229 ...
Exports 12,042 11,797 12,079 7,715 1,247 1,026 1,161 1,299 ... 1 Africa
Imports 11,356 10,248 9,846 5,501 707 691 905 820 ...
Balance + 686 + 1,549 + 2,233 + 2,214 + 540 + 335 + 256 + 479 ...
Exports 89,801 89,081 79,617 49,437 7,451 6,849 7,202 7,572 ... 2 America
Imports 59,575 52,822 51,322 31,231 4,702 4,736 4,967 4,694 ...
Balance + 30,226 + 36,259 + 28,295 + 18,206 + 2,749 + 2,113 + 2,235 + 2,878 ...
of which
Exports 67,824 68,263 61,669 38,081 5,692 5,305 5,574 5,889 ... United States
Imports 45,982 40,376 39,046 23,498 3,669 3,697 3,820 3,334 ...Balance + 21,842 + 27,887 + 22,624 + 14,582 + 2,023 + 1,608 + 1,755 + 2,555 ...
Exports 68,936 72,915 75,539 49,775 6,968 7,202 7,278 7,685 ... 3 Asia
Imports 84,220 79,892 82,991 52,953 7,818 7,641 7,689 8,120 ...
Balance − 15,285 − 6,977 − 7,453 − 3,177 − 849 − 439 − 412 − 435 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 14,130 15,045 15,503 9,848 1,271 1,490 1,438 1,566 ...
Imports 5,434 4,696 4,460 2,413 295 411 384 377 ...Balance + 8,696 + 10,349 + 11,043 + 7,435 + 975 + 1,080 + 1,054 + 1,189 ...
Japan Exports 13,103 12,576 11,838 7,370 952 902 1,020 1,170 ...
Imports 22,910 19,896 19,139 12,258 1,889 1,757 1,715 1,744 ...Balance − 9,807 − 7,320 − 7,301 − 4,888 − 937 − 855 − 695 − 574 ...
Exports 12,118 14,571 18,201 12,707 2,004 1,891 1,927 1,844 ... People‘s Republic
of China  
2 Imports 19,942 21,338 25,024 16,566 2,424 2,382 2,485 2,616 ... of China  2 
Balance − 7,824 − 6,768 − 6,823 − 3,859 − 420 − 491 − 559 − 773 ...
Exports 4,424 5,026 5,001 3,094 431 421 448 485 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,048 1,988 1,751 1,165 139 130 189 178 ... polar regions
Balance + 2,375 + 3,038 + 3,250 + 1,928 + 292 + 290 + 259 + 307 ...
Memo item
Exports 24,735 25,282 24,557 16,000 2,219 2,347 2,349 2,404 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 28,351 26,660 26,581 16,512 2,409 2,379 2,383 2,574 ... South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 3,616 − 1,377 − 2,023 − 512 − 190 − 32 − 35 − 170 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by regi on. —
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 
69*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
X External sector
 
4 Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1999 − 46,067 − 35,468 + 2,882 + 1,005 − 1,896 + 1,997 − 14,588 − 2,245 − 403 − 756 − 8,843
2000 − 49,067 − 37,249 + 3,386 + 1,668 − 3,012 + 2,221 − 16,081 − 2,757 − 753 − 512 − 2,129
2001 − 50,272 − 37,955 + 4,151 + 1,079 − 2,455 + 3,488 − 18,581 − 2,538 − 619 − 257 − 10,4242002 − 36,422 − 35,445 + 2,750 + 1,380 − 1,461 + 5,237 − 8,883 − 2,035 + 403 − 144 − 16,7002003 − 35,537 − 36,869 + 1,825 + 1,529 − 882 + 5,050 − 6,190 − 1,863 + 1,419 − 86 − 12,428
2002          Q4 − 4,532 − 6,677 + 1,072 + 425 + 100 + 1,253 − 704 − 465 + 250 + 24 − 1,901
2003          Q1 − 8,307 − 6,921 + 168 + 449 − 293 + 1,273 − 2,983 − 574 + 473 + 216 − 4,906
         Q2 − 8,340 − 9,127 + 695 + 355 − 193 + 1,203 − 1,272 − 485 + 177 − 85 − 3,565         Q3 − 13,275 − 13,994 + 453 + 339 − 369 + 1,316 − 1,020 − 410 + 439 − 240 − 4,239         Q4 − 5,615 − 6,827 + 509 + 386 − 26 + 1,257 − 915 − 393 + 330 + 22 + 281
2004          Q1 − 8,878 − 7,018 + 517 + 351 − 188 + 1,317 − 3,858 − 342 + 214 + 210 − 4,152
         Q2 − 7,566 − 8,965 + 1,529 + 255 − 344 + 1,438 − 1,478 − 303 − 13 − 57 + 103
2003          Oct − 3,786 − 3,904 + 37 + 85 − 37 + 380 − 347 − 133 + 100 − 0 + 1,704
         Nov − 1,543 − 1,778 + 183 + 176 + 2 + 383 − 509 − 99 + 92 − 8 − 312         Dec − 286 − 1,144 + 289 + 125 + 9 + 494 − 58 − 161 + 139 + 30 − 1,111
2004          Jan − 4,140 − 2,378 + 32 + 103 − 0 + 437 − 2,333 − 143 + 31 + 67 − 5,595
         Feb − 2,318 − 1,907 + 134 + 112 + 7 + 426 − 1,091 − 93 + 114 + 64 − 534         Mar − 2,420 − 2,733 + 351 + 136 − 195 + 455 − 434 − 105 + 68 + 80 + 1,977
         Apr − 3,105 − 2,689 + 578 + 66 − 125 + 470 − 1,405 − 83 − 58 − 20 + 855
         May − 1,839 − 2,557 + 256 + 121 − 24 + 453 − 88 − 107 + 61 − 25 − 74         June − 2,622 − 3,719 + 695 + 68 − 195 + 515 + 14 − 113 − 17 − 12 − 677
         July − 3,454 − 3,387 + 303 + 181 + 86 + 485 − 1,122 − 106 + 99 − 76 − 4,031
         Aug − 6,104 − 6,359 + 356 + 122 − 50 + 443 − 616 − 105 − 14 − 85 − 672
1From January 2002, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Remittances Other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1999 − 25,016 − 17,348 − 15,428 − 13,846 − 1,920 − 7,667 − 3,429 − 4,239 − 154 − 1,351 + 1,197
2000 − 28,366 − 19,094 − 17,100 − 15,398 − 1,995 − 9,271 − 3,458 − 5,814 − 1,599 − 1,189 − 410
2001 − 27,425 − 16,927 − 14,257 − 12,587 − 2,670 − 10,499 − 3,520 − 6,978 − 387 − 1,361 + 9742002 − 27,883 − 16,207 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 3,162 − 11,676 − 3,470 − 8,206 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,2042003 − 28,767 − 18,793 − 15,397 − 13,732 − 3,396 − 9,974 − 3,332 − 6,642 + 316 − 1,235 + 1,551
2002          Q4 − 7,483 − 4,477 − 3,232 − 2,998 − 1,245 − 3,006 − 868 − 2,139 − 359 − 565 + 207
2003          Q1 − 5,779 − 3,317 − 2,297 − 1,628 − 1,020 − 2,463 − 833 − 1,629 − 30 − 253 + 223
         Q2 − 7,890 − 5,403 − 5,375 − 4,790 − 28 − 2,487 − 833 − 1,654 + 149 − 276 + 425         Q3 − 8,820 − 6,017 − 4,896 − 4,650 − 1,121 − 2,803 − 833 − 1,970 + 208 − 249 + 457         Q4 − 6,278 − 4,057 − 2,829 − 2,665 − 1,227 − 2,222 − 833 − 1,389 − 12 − 457 + 445
2004          Q1 − 5,571 − 3,337 − 2,466 − 1,822 − 871 − 2,233 − 795 − 1,438 + 430 − 254 + 684
         Q2 − 7,090 − 4,404 − 4,474 − 4,187 + 70 − 2,687 − 795 − 1,892 + 206 − 239 + 445
2003          Oct − 1,874 − 1,071 − 631 − 514 − 441 − 803 − 278 − 525 − 27 − 87 + 60
         Nov − 2,899 − 2,161 − 1,684 − 1,674 − 477 − 739 − 278 − 461 + 49 − 229 + 278         Dec − 1,505 − 824 − 515 − 477 − 310 − 681 − 278 − 403 − 35 − 141 + 107
2004          Jan − 537 + 278 + 501 + 863 − 223 − 815 − 265 − 550 + 53 − 84 + 137
         Feb − 2,615 − 1,912 − 1,547 − 1,388 − 366 − 702 − 265 − 437 − 130 − 95 − 36         Mar − 2,419 − 1,703 − 1,420 − 1,296 − 282 − 716 − 265 − 451 + 507 − 75 + 582
         Apr − 1,745 − 851 − 941 − 859 + 90 − 894 − 265 − 629 + 82 − 71 + 153
         May − 2,495 − 1,475 − 1,538 − 1,422 + 63 − 1,020 − 265 − 755 − 29 − 91 + 62         June − 2,850 − 2,078 − 1,995 − 1,906 − 82 − 773 − 265 − 508 + 153 − 77 + 230
         July − 3,117 − 2,140 − 1,623 − 1,501 − 518 − 977 − 265 − 712 + 169 − 102 + 271
         Aug − 2,341 − 1,609 − 1,192 − 1,086 − 417 − 732 − 265 − 467 + 69 − 90 + 159
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
X External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2003 2004
Item 2001 2002 2003 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 270,632 − 249,672 − 189,429 − 590 − 24,246 − 77,020 − 10,199 + 7,849 − 11,712 − 25,015
1 Direct investment  1 − 41,185 − 9,161 − 2,268 − 3,041 + 1,085 + 10,210 − 2,503 − 1,229 − 442 + 96
Equity capital − 70,254 − 38,266 − 13,052 − 2,297 − 2,324 + 21,155 − 1,091 + 478 + 676 + 2,468
Reinvested earnings  2 + 17,892 + 16,224 + 1,380 + 345 + 345 + 325 + 149 − 68 + 333 + 283
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors + 16,260 + 20,639 + 18,881 + 939 + 6,329 − 9,760 + 935 − 346 − 607 − 2,238Other capital − 5,083 − 7,759 − 9,477 − 2,029 − 3,265 − 1,511 − 2,496 − 1,294 − 845 − 417
2 Portfolio investment − 124,375 − 65,848 − 32,323 − 1,554 − 10,668 − 25,990 − 31,569 − 13,225 − 12,005 − 4,691
Equity
3 − 10,581 − 4,832 + 7,628 − 734 − 5,969 + 1,230 + 926 + 202 + 2,019 − 389
Mutual fund shares  4 − 20,222 − 6,995 − 4,253 − 240 − 467 − 7,059 − 2,526 − 520 − 116 − 1,392
Bonds and notes  5 − 95,067 − 49,056 − 37,811 − 860 − 6,645 − 26,144 − 25,642 − 10,061 − 11,793 + 231
Money market instruments + 1,495 − 4,965 + 2,112 + 280 + 2,412 + 5,983 − 4,327 − 2,846 − 2,116 − 3,140
3 Financial derivatives  6 + 6,829 − 863 − 493 − 384 − 36 − 1,255 + 2,236 + 538 − 490 − 2,686
4 Credit transactions − 110,515 − 172,208 − 151,755 + 5,066 − 13,957 − 58,969 + 22,456 + 22,227 + 1,437 − 17,582
MFIs  7,8 − 130,648 − 132,536 − 122,307 + 29,417 − 10,941 − 36,597 − 14,365 + 3,599 + 4,411 − 6,619
Long-term − 47,636 − 33,790 − 32,556 − 8,176 − 4,882 + 3,570 + 5,597 + 704 − 2,825 + 2,556
Short-term − 83,012 − 98,746 − 89,750 + 37,593 − 6,059 − 40,167 − 19,962 + 2,895 + 7,236 − 9,176
Enterprises and households − 19,861 − 10,830 − 30,944 − 8,622 + 3,997 − 17,505 + 4,860 − 2,268 − 1,509 + 3,830
Long-term − 2,502 − 1,187 − 2,729 − 565 − 888 − 669 − 480 − 194 − 837 − 27
Short-term  7 − 17,360 − 9,643 − 28,215 − 8,056 + 4,884 − 16,836 + 5,340 − 2,074 − 672 + 3,857
General government + 15,980 + 7,168 + 1,265 − 160 + 1,021 + 1,158 + 64 + 333 + 481 + 695
Long-term + 257 + 218 + 692 + 274 + 115 + 305 + 7 − 6 + 117 + 57Short-term  
7 + 15,723 + 6,950 + 572 − 434 + 906 + 853 + 57 + 339 + 364 + 638
Bundesbank + 24,015 − 36,010 + 230 − 15,569 − 8,033 − 6,025 + 31,896 + 20,563 − 1,946 − 15,487
5 Other investment  9 − 1,385 − 1,592 − 2,590 − 677 − 670 − 1,016 − 819 − 462 − 212 − 152
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 244,399 + 178,948 + 119,704 − 4,640 − 1,518 + 62,633 − 57,670 − 25,849 + 9,060 + 18,122
1 Direct investment  1 + 23,622 + 38,269 + 11,400 + 5,829 − 12,994 − 32,076 − 5,025 − 1,919 − 2,331 − 2,322
Equity capital + 29,702 + 29,311 + 27,956 + 3,906 + 11,409 + 5,014 − 2,515 − 4,152 − 310 − 183Reinvested earnings  
2 − 20,520 − 13,008 − 5,484 − 1,371 − 1,371 − 6,898 − 910 − 45 + 44 − 109
Credit transactions of
foreign direct investors + 14,584 + 22,162 − 10,886 + 3,266 − 22,980 − 30,246 − 1,581 + 2,287 − 2,056 − 2,026Other capital − 143 − 197 − 186 + 27 − 52 + 54 − 19 − 10 − 8 − 4
2 Portfolio investment + 150,870 + 109,783 + 91,276 − 4,798 + 31,075 + 34,063 + 1,523 + 4,952 + 21,507 + 15,480
Equity  
3 + 86,812 + 15,712 + 24,204 + 2,989 + 20,306 + 2,793 − 11,739 + 17,587 + 3,638 + 32
Mutual fund shares + 951 − 673 − 1,530 − 802 + 278 + 835 − 981 − 545 + 3,679 + 856
Bonds and notes  5 + 80,299 + 83,473 + 69,243 + 6,343 + 14,389 + 42,914 + 15,436 − 13,352 + 15,292 + 13,531
Money market instruments − 17,191 + 11,271 − 642 − 13,328 − 3,897 − 12,479 − 1,193 + 1,262 − 1,102 + 1,060
3 Credit transactions + 69,859 + 30,814 + 17,005 − 5,676 − 19,580 + 60,603 − 54,247 − 28,886 − 10,113 + 4,967
MFIs  7,8 + 54,341 + 28,453 + 12,160 − 9,428 − 19,300 + 57,886 − 52,845 − 29,308 − 7,257 + 6,309
Long-term + 4,425 + 18,379 − 4,512 − 7,407 + 6,012 − 8,845 − 1,543 − 63 − 506 + 1,491
Short-term + 49,916 + 10,075 + 16,672 − 2,021 − 25,312 + 66,730 − 51,302 − 29,245 − 6,750 + 4,818
Enterprises and households + 12,008 + 3,332 − 820 + 1,032 + 1,068 + 7,908 − 3,371 − 606 − 1,946 − 1,314
Long-term + 11,743 + 5,250 − 1,901 + 1,345 + 57 + 3,078 + 95 + 560 − 335 − 1,174
Short-term  7 + 265 − 1,918 + 1,081 − 314 + 1,011 + 4,830 − 3,467 − 1,166 − 1,611 − 141
General government + 879 − 1,625 + 3,682 + 2,302 − 1,186 − 4,188 + 2,534 + 576 − 421 + 750
Long-term − 217 − 125 + 4,861 − 158 + 1,178 − 2,208 + 1,359 − 669 + 596 + 476Short-term  
7 + 1,096 − 1,500 − 1,179 + 2,460 − 2,365 − 1,980 + 1,176 + 1,245 − 1,017 + 274
Bundesbank + 2,631 + 653 + 1,983 + 418 − 161 − 1,002 − 564 + 452 − 489 − 777
4 Other investment + 47 + 83 + 24 + 6 − 19 + 43 + 79 + 5 − 4 − 3
III Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) − 26,233 − 70,724 − 69,725 − 5,229 − 25,764 − 14,387 − 67,869 − 18,000 − 2,652 − 6,893
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including accumulated statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9In particular, subscriptions of the Federal
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- Government to international organisations. 
71*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
X External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,4531993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residents Net externalFund and claims on Claims in other position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2003          Apr 93,702 79,453 33,442 8,123 37,888 312 13,496 441 9,126 84,575
         May 70,456 78,904 34,252 7,871 36,781 312 − 9,216 455 9,818 60,638         June 73,550 78,425 33,435 8,292 36,698 312 − 5,663 476 10,537 63,014
         July 90,714 79,218 34,759 8,289 36,170 312 10,710 474 10,375 80,339
         Aug 98,605 84,197 37,546 8,583 38,068 312 13,592 504 11,060 87,545         Sep 91,894 81,206 36,491 8,492 36,223 312 9,902 474 10,879 81,016
         Oct 113,947 81,401 36,595 8,539 36,267 312 31,794 440 11,319 102,628
         Nov 97,130 79,624 36,705 8,374 34,545 312 16,742 452 10,518 86,612         Dec 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004          Jan 89,895 76,992 35,834 7,726 33,432 312 12,135 456 10,522 79,374
         Feb 87,987 76,089 34,930 7,736 33,423 312 11,140 446 10,078 77,910         Mar 104,464 79,717 38,266 7,610 33,841 312 23,981 454 9,545 94,920
         Apr 102,021 78,143 35,849 7,880 34,414 312 23,134 432 9,694 92,327
         May 89,877 76,473 35,705 7,685 33,083 312 12,641 451 8,537 81,340         June 69,837 76,996 35,793 7,390 33,813 312 − 7,951 480 9,003 60,834
         July 70,865 76,076 35,721 7,395 32,960 312 − 6,009 486 8,545 62,320
         Aug 87,570 77,171 37,195 7,395 32,581 312 9,455 632 7,755 79,815         Sep 100,176 75,729 36,680 6,996 32,054 312 23,480 655 7,625 92,552
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Deutsche Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. Fro m
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
72*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
X External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,280
2001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003 357,399 86,627 270,772 154,953 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2004          Mar 383,299 101,332 281,967 162,540 119,427 112,036 7,391 523,358 58,687 464,671 373,242 91,429 60,912 30,517
         Apr 378,176 98,826 279,350 161,096 118,254 110,603 7,651 516,565 57,255 459,310 371,128 88,182 57,028 31,154
         May 375,102 94,057 281,045 161,579 119,466 111,809 7,657 518,986 56,858 462,128 372,372 89,756 57,967 31,789         June 383,333 96,394 286,939 163,660 123,279 115,754 7,525 525,509 54,845 470,664 379,253 91,411 60,242 31,169
         July 384,727 99,250 285,477 164,940 120,537 112,958 7,579 521,160 53,175 467,985 377,346 90,639 58,787 31,852
         Aug 381,232 97,032 284,200 167,632 116,568 109,048 7,520 517,223 52,422 464,801 375,920 88,881 56,170 32,711
Industrial countries 2
 
2000 262,284 42,488 219,796 132,570 87,226 81,391 5,835 407,513 50,184 357,329 294,569 62,760 51,078 11,6822001 298,904 61,403 237,501 151,047 86,454 79,453 7,001 466,206 57,861 408,345 340,344 68,001 54,364 13,6372002  
4 278,074 62,861 215,213 133,509 81,704 75,996 5,708 493,155 55,770 437,385 372,464 64,921 50,731 14,190
2003 305,754 85,390 220,364 140,280 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,220
2004          Mar 331,633 99,757 231,876 147,990 83,886 78,987 4,899 476,713 56,284 420,429 355,947 64,482 48,285 16,197
         Apr 326,684 97,406 229,278 146,701 82,577 77,612 4,965 470,049 54,973 415,076 353,847 61,229 44,745 16,484
         May 333,646 92,672 240,974 151,041 89,933 84,613 5,320 480,255 54,711 425,544 358,690 66,854 48,839 18,015         June 341,730 95,129 246,601 153,095 93,506 88,252 5,254 487,219 52,718 434,501 365,438 69,063 51,545 17,518
         July 342,717 97,853 244,864 154,277 90,587 85,286 5,301 482,661 51,086 431,575 363,602 67,973 50,079 17,894
         Aug 339,570 95,681 243,889 156,974 86,915 81,610 5,305 478,474 50,293 428,181 362,722 65,459 47,726 17,733
EU countries 2
 
2000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,536
2001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003 225,973 81,430 144,543 89,392 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,642
2004          Mar 251,007 93,160 157,847 99,577 58,270 54,521 3,749 384,501 50,947 333,554 290,940 42,614 31,286 11,328
         Apr 247,132 90,875 156,257 99,192 57,065 53,335 3,730 378,851 49,982 328,869 289,006 39,863 28,413 11,450
         May 255,423 86,130 169,293 103,970 65,323 61,205 4,118 391,604 49,732 341,872 295,897 45,975 33,084 12,891         June 259,865 88,680 171,185 103,659 67,526 63,401 4,125 396,192 47,760 348,432 301,273 47,159 34,708 12,451
         July 260,893 90,783 170,110 105,315 64,795 60,688 4,107 393,232 46,239 346,993 300,284 46,709 33,963 12,746
         Aug 260,081 90,553 169,528 107,573 61,955 57,835 4,120 389,107 45,453 343,654 299,277 44,377 32,214 12,163
of which:  Euro-area member states 1
 
2000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,404
2004          Mar 162,182 52,802 109,380 64,168 45,212 42,367 2,845 321,381 33,888 287,493 255,488 32,005 23,105 8,900
         Apr 158,519 50,134 108,385 63,943 44,442 41,615 2,827 316,676 32,987 283,689 253,466 30,223 21,163 9,060
         May 157,317 47,971 109,346 64,396 44,950 42,112 2,838 321,627 32,318 289,309 258,190 31,119 21,768 9,351         June 160,788 49,919 110,869 64,454 46,415 43,462 2,953 327,205 31,976 295,229 263,503 31,726 22,679 9,047
         July 161,410 50,688 110,722 66,161 44,561 41,628 2,933 325,669 30,848 294,821 263,281 31,540 22,224 9,316
         Aug 161,538 51,458 110,080 67,626 42,454 39,493 2,961 321,285 30,154 291,131 261,821 29,310 20,610 8,700
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2000 58,590 974 57,616 20,182 37,434 35,580 1,854 38,547 2,479 36,068 14,455 21,613 12,015 9,5982001 59,216 1,031 58,185 20,892 37,293 35,404 1,889 39,060 2,271 36,789 14,217 22,572 11,624 10,9482002  
4 53,597 956 52,641 15,404 37,237 35,410 1,827 40,268 1,926 38,342 15,386 22,956 11,891 11,065
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,249
2004          Mar 51,666 1,575 50,091 14,550 35,541 33,049 2,492 46,645 2,403 44,242 17,295 26,947 12,627 14,320
         Apr 51,492 1,420 50,072 14,395 35,677 32,991 2,686 46,516 2,282 44,234 17,281 26,953 12,283 14,670
         May 41,456 1,385 40,071 10,538 29,533 27,196 2,337 38,731 2,147 36,584 13,682 22,902 9,128 13,774         June 41,603 1,265 40,338 10,565 29,773 27,502 2,271 38,290 2,127 36,163 13,815 22,348 8,697 13,651
         July 42,010 1,397 40,613 10,663 29,950 27,672 2,278 38,499 2,089 36,410 13,744 22,666 8,708 13,958
         Aug 41,662 1,351 40,311 10,658 29,653 27,438 2,215 38,749 2,129 36,620 13,198 23,422 8,444 14,978
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in January 2001, including Greece. — 2From May 2004, including the new
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in member states: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia ,
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia. — 3All
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. — 4Change in the
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X.7. — 1From reporting population owing to an increase in the exemption limit. 
73*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
X External sector
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 9.1611 0.62883 7.5086 1.4670 1.4838 1.7376 2.03662003 1.1312 130.97 7.4307 9.1242 0.69199 8.0033 1.5212 1.5817 1.7379 1.9438
2003          Jan 1.0622 126.12 7.4324 9.1733 0.65711 7.3328 1.4621 1.6364 1.8218 1.9648
         Feb 1.0773 128.60 7.4317 9.1455 0.66977 7.5439 1.4674 1.6299 1.8112 1.9457         Mar 1.0807 128.16 7.4274 9.2265 0.68255 7.8450 1.4695 1.5943 1.7950 1.9497
         Apr 1.0848 130.12 7.4255 9.1541 0.68902 7.8317 1.4964 1.5851 1.7813 1.9700
         May 1.1582 135.83 7.4246 9.1559 0.71322 7.8715 1.5155 1.6016 1.7866 2.0083         June 1.1663 138.05 7.4250 9.1182 0.70224 8.1619 1.5411 1.5798 1.7552 2.0069
         July 1.1372 134.99 7.4332 9.1856 0.70045 8.2893 1.5476 1.5694 1.7184 1.9386
         Aug 1.1139 132.38 7.4322 9.2378 0.69919 8.2558 1.5400 1.5570 1.7114 1.9137         Sep 1.1222 128.94 7.4273 9.0682 0.69693 8.1952 1.5474 1.5330 1.6967 1.9227
         Oct 1.1692 128.12 7.4301 9.0105 0.69763 8.2274 1.5485 1.5489 1.6867 1.9446
         Nov 1.1702 127.84 7.4370 8.9939 0.69278 8.1969 1.5590 1.5361 1.6337 1.8608         Dec 1.2286 132.43 7.4419 9.0228 0.70196 8.2421 1.5544 1.6131 1.6626 1.8982
2004          Jan 1.2613 134.13 7.4481 9.1368 0.69215 8.5925 1.5657 1.6346 1.6374 1.8751
         Feb 1.2646 134.78 7.4511 9.1763 0.67690 8.7752 1.5734 1.6817 1.6260 1.8262         Mar 1.2262 133.13 7.4493 9.2346 0.67124 8.5407 1.5670 1.6314 1.6370 1.8566
         Apr 1.1985 129.08 7.4436 9.1653 0.66533 8.2976 1.5547 1.6068 1.6142 1.8727
         May 1.2007 134.48 7.4405 9.1277 0.67157 8.2074 1.5400 1.6541 1.7033 1.9484         June 1.2138 132.86 7.4342 9.1430 0.66428 8.2856 1.5192 1.6492 1.7483 1.9301
         July 1.2266 134.08 7.4355 9.1962 0.66576 8.4751 1.5270 1.6220 1.7135 1.8961
         Aug 1.2176 134.54 7.4365 9.1861 0.66942 8.3315 1.5387 1.6007 1.7147 1.8604         Sep 1.2218 134.51 7.4381 9.0920 0.68130 8.3604 1.5431 1.5767 1.7396 1.8538
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 14.15. For additional euro reference exchange rates of the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. — 2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics.
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the euro-area member states, the Deutsche Mark value of
the ECU * and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1As per data from the European exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). — 3Applicable from 1 January
Commission. — 2Up to 1998, reciprocal values of the exchange rates for the 1999. — 4Applicable from 1 January 2001. — 5Deutsche Mark conversion
Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999, euro reference rate. 
74*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
X External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item Effective nominal exchange rates of
Indicators of the German economy’s selected foreign currencies against the
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3,4 currencies of 19 industrial countries  3,5 
EER-23  1 EER-42  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  6 
In real terms
based on the
In real terms unit labour In real termsbased on the In real terms costs of the based on the based
 on the
consumer national consumer Pound Japanese based on the deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices US dollar sterling yen GDP deflator  7 economy  7 total sales  7 based on consumer prices
1999 95.9 95.9 95.8 96.1 96.5 95.8 97.8 98.2 97.7 100.8 102.3 105.1
2000 86.1 86.0 85.6 85.3 87.9 85.8 91.7 92.8 91.2 105.4 105.2 117.9
2001 86.7 86.8 86.7 85.1 90.4 87.0 91.9 93.2 91.5 112.0 103.6 106.72002 89.2 90.3 90.2 88.2 94.8 90.8 93.0 94.2 92.6 110.7 104.2 100.82003 99.9 101.7 101.5 99.3 106.6 101.6
p 96.7 97.9 97.2 97.7 99.2 99.9
1999          Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
         Q2 96.2 96.2 96.2 96.7 96.4 96.0 98.5 98.6 98.0 102.8 102.8 99.0         Q3 94.8 94.8 94.6 94.7 95.5 94.6 97.0 97.8 97.2 101.4 102.3 106.2         Q4 92.9 92.7 92.5 93.0 94.3 92.8 95.6 96.4 95.8 99.1 104.1 115.2
2000          Q1 89.5 89.3 88.9 88.3 91.0 89.1 93.6 94.8 93.4 101.5 106.4 114.9
         Q2 86.5 86.4 86.1 85.9 88.2 86.2 91.9 92.8 91.4 104.3 105.4 118.4         Q3 85.1 85.1 84.6 84.5 87.0 84.8 91.3 92.1 90.3 106.2 103.9 119.2         Q4 83.2 83.3 82.9 82.6 85.5 83.1 90.1 91.5 89.5 109.4 105.0 119.2
2001          Jan 88.9 88.6 . . 91.3 88.2 . 93.9 92.2 107.7 102.4 108.3
         Feb 88.0 87.7 88.1 86.3 90.5 87.6 92.7 93.7 92.0 108.8 102.0 109.9         Mar 87.8 87.8 . . 90.8 87.8 . 93.8 92.0 111.5 102.9 106.0
         Apr 86.9 87.0 . . 90.3 87.2 . 93.4 91.8 113.0 103.7 104.9
         May 85.2 85.3 85.3 83.8 88.6 85.5 91.3 92.7 90.6 113.1 104.3 107.5         June 83.8 83.9 . . 87.3 84.2 . 92.1 89.9 114.1 104.4 108.3
         July 84.6 84.7 . . 88.4 85.1 . 92.4 90.5 114.3 104.9 105.8
         Aug 87.1 87.2 86.4 84.7 91.2 87.6 91.4 93.5 91.8 111.6 103.0 106.4         Sep 87.6 87.9 . . 92.0 88.5 . 93.4 92.2 110.7 103.8 108.2
         Oct 87.4 87.8 . . 92.1 88.5 . 93.5 92.0 111.8 103.7 106.2
         Nov 86.1 86.5 87.2 85.9 90.6 86.9 92.0 92.9 91.1 113.3 104.0 106.3         Dec 86.7 87.4 . . 91.0 87.5 . 93.5 91.6 114.1 104.3 102.1
2002          Jan 86.5 87.4 . . 90.7 87.2 . 93.6 91.2 116.4 104.9 98.3
         Feb 85.7 86.6 86.9 84.9 90.1 86.5 92.2 93.2 90.9 117.3 105.3 98.2         Mar 85.7 86.8 . . 90.3 86.7 . 93.2 90.9 116.1 104.6 99.8
         Apr 86.1 87.1 . . 90.7 87.0 . 93.1 90.6 115.3 105.2 99.4
         May 87.7 88.8 88.6 86.7 92.8 89.0 92.6 93.7 91.6 112.0 103.5 101.2         June 89.8 90.9 . . 95.5 91.5 . 94.6 92.9 109.0 101.9 101.7
         July 91.2 92.4 . . 97.5 93.4 . 95.0 94.0 106.0 103.5 104.3
         Aug 90.7 91.9 92.0 90.0 96.9 92.8 93.4 94.6 93.6 107.3 103.5 104.3         Sep 90.7 92.1 . . 97.2 93.1 . 94.6 93.5 107.6 104.7 102.5
         Oct 91.1 92.5 . . 97.7 93.5 . 94.8 94.0 108.5 105.0 99.8
         Nov 91.9 93.1 93.3 91.2 98.5 94.0 93.9 95.0 94.0 106.8 104.3 100.8         Dec 92.9 94.3 . . 99.6 95.1 . 95.5 94.5 106.0 104.0 99.6
2003          Jan 95.3 96.8 . . 102.3 97.6 . 96.2 95.5 103.0 102.6 100.4
         Feb 96.6 98.2 97.6 95.6 103.7 99.0 95.6 96.8 96.4 102.2 101.2 99.2         Mar 97.4 99.0 . . 104.4 99.5 . 97.0 96.5 101.4 99.3 99.8
         Apr 97.9 99.5 . . 104.6 99.5 . 97.2 96.4 101.4 98.7 98.6
         May 101.8 103.5 102.4 100.2 108.5 103.2 97.3 98.8 98.1 96.7 96.9 97.7         June 102.2 104.2 . . 108.8 103.7 . 99.0 98.3 96.1 98.9 96.3
         July 101.0 102.8 . . 107.2 102.2 . 98.4 97.5 97.8 98.5 97.3
         Aug 99.8 101.8 101.9 100.2 106.0 101.2 96.8 98.0 96.9 99.1 98.1 98.3         Sep 99.6 101.7 . . 105.9 101.1 . 97.6 96.8 97.2 98.2 101.1
         Oct 101.3 103.3 . . 108.0 103.0 . 98.2 97.6 93.3 98.8 103.7
         Nov 101.2 103.3 104.2 101.4 108.0 102.9
p 96.9 98.2 97.7 93.0 99.5 103.9
         Dec 104.2 106.2 . . 111.2 105.9 . 99.2 99.1 90.6 99.5 102.9
2004          Jan 105.4 107.4 . . 112.5 106.9 . 99.7 99.6 88.9 101.6 102.9
         Feb 105.3 107.3 106.8 103.9 112.3 106.8 p 97.9 99.4 99.4 89.3 104.1 102.4
         Mar 103.4 105.5 . . 110.2 104.7 . 98.9 98.5 90.9 104.2 102.1
         Apr 101.6 103.7 . . 108.3 103.0 . 98.5 97.7 91.8 104.3 104.0
         May 102.4 104.4 104.4 101.1 109.5 104.1 p 96.7 98.8 98.4 93.4 103.7 100.0
         June 102.3 104.2 . . 109.6 104.0 . 98.5 98.1 91.9 104.9 101.6
         July 102.8 104.7 . . 110.1 104.3 . 99.0 98.3 90.9 105.0 101.2
         Aug 102.6 104.8 ... ... 109.9 104.4 p 96.8 99.2 98.5 91.3 104.6 100.5
         Sep 103.0 105.2 . . 110.3 104.7 . 99.4 98.4 90.7 102.8 100.8
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of to the EER-23 group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the fo llowing
the currency concerned. — 1ECB calculations based on the weighted countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, India, Indonesia,
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro against the currencies Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Romania,
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. — 3The
Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, method of calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB toNorway, Poland, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Sweden, compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin,
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these November 2001, pp 51−65). In contrast to footnote 1, the weights used arecalculations are based on manufactured goods trade between 1999 and based on the relevant trade in the period from 1995 to 1997. — 4Decline in
2001 and capture third-market effects. Where consumer prices were not yet the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. — 5Euro-area countries
available, estimates have been used. For details of the methodology, see as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, UnitedECB, Monthly Bulletin, September 2004, pp 69−72 and the ECB’s Occasional Kingdom and United States. — 6Euro-area countries and countries
Paper No 2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website belonging to the EER-42 group except Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania and(www.ecb.int). — 2ECB calculations. In addition to the countries belonging Malta. — 7 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X External sector

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the External Communica-tion Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2003 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2004 Monthly Report.
November 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2003
– The monetary constitution under the Consti-
tution for Europe
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004

December 2003
– Report on the stability of the German financial
system
– Stress testing the German banking system
January 2004
– The euro and prices two years on
– Payment system oversight – a contribution to
the stability of the financial system and the effi-ciency of payment operations
– The new MFI interest rate statistics – method-
ology for collecting the German data
February 2004
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2003-04
March 2004
– Public finances in crisis – the causes and the
need for action
– German balance of payments in 2003
April 2004
– Recent developments in the corporate bond
market
– Credit risk transfer instruments: their use by
German banks and aspects of financial stability
– The significance of information and communi-
cation technology
May 2004
– Effects of eastward enlargement of the EU on
the German economy
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2004June 2004
– Monetary policy under uncertainty– Purchasing power parity theory as a concept
for evaluating price competitiveness
– Overall financial flows in 2003
July 2004
– Financial development and outlook of the
statutory health insurance scheme
– Regulation of the European securites markets– Initial experience with the new monetary policy
framework and the Bundesbank’s contributionto liquidity management by the Eurosystem
August 2004
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2004
September 2004
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2003
– Greater flexibility on the German labour
market
– How the Bundesbank analyses enterprises’
creditworthiness
– New capital requirements for credit institutions
(Basel II)
October 2004
– Report on the stability of the German financial
system
– Stress tests at German banks – methods and
results
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20033
European economic and monetary union,February 2004
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200342 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, September 20043,5
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2003,
September 20046
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 1998 and 2000, March 20031, 6
7 Erl/C228uterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20013
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
September 2004
10 International capital links,
May 20041, 6
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2004
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20043
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.6Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
October 2004
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Research Centre
20/2004
Financial constraints for investors and the speed ofadaption: Are innovators special?
21/2004
How effective are automatic stabilisers? Theoryand empirical results for Germany and other OECDcountries
22/2004
Asset Prices in Taylor Rules: Specification, Estima-tion and Policy Implications for the ECB
23/2004
Financial Liberalization and Business Cycles: TheExperience of Countries in the Baltics and Central
Eastern Europe
24/2004
Towards a Joint Characterization of Monetary Pol-
icy and the Dynamics of the Term Structure of
Interest Rates
25/2004
How the Bundesbank really conducted monetarypolicy: An analysis based on real-time data
26/2004
Real-time Data for Norway: Challenges for Mon-etary Policy
27/2004
Do Consumer Confidence Indexes Help ForecastConsumer Spending in Real Time?
28/2004
The use of real-time information in Phillips curverelationships for the euro area
29/2004
The reliability of Canadian output gap estimatesSeries 2
Banking and Financial Supervision
1/2003
Measuring the Discriminative Power of Rating
Systems
2/2003
Credit Risk Factor Modeling and the Basel II IRBApproach
1/2004
Forecasting Credit Portfolio Risk
2/2004
Systematic Risk in Recovery Rates – An Empirical
Analysis of US Corporate Credit Exposures
3/2004
Does capital regulation matter for bank behaviour?Evidence for German savings banks
4/2004
German bank lending during emerging market
crises: A bank level analysis
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Earlier Discussion Papers are available on the internet,
in some cases as abstracts.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

