MONTHLY REPORT
AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER
2005
Vol 57
No 8

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1Fax +49 69 5601071Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 12 August 2005.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on theinternet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-
tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in summer 2005 5
Overview 6
Global and European setting 10
The implications of the increase
in oil prices on consumer pricesin the world’s main economic regions 12
The reform of the Chinese exchangerate regime 20
Excursus: growth differentials in theeuro area 21
Monetary policy, banking business andthe capital market 28
Money market management andliquidity requirement 29
Development of corporate bondspreads 37
New long-term financing andinvestment instruments 38
Economic conditions in Germany 41
Foreign trade and payments 52Public finances 59
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
4Minimum reserves 42*
Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finances in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*External sector 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
5The economic scene
in Germany
in summer 2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
6OverviewFlat path in the second quarter after
strong growth at the start of the year
Following a sharp surge in growth at the start
of 2005, the German economy followed aflat path in the second quarter. According toinitial Federal Statistical Office data, after ad-justment for the usual seasonal and working-day variations, aggregate output in thesecond quarter was just as high as it hadbeen in the first three months of the year.However, the somewhat longer-term ten-dency becomes clearer if the first two quar-ters are viewed together. This shows a
3/C254%
rise in real GDP in the first half of 2005 com-pared with the second half of 2004. Theyear-on-year increase was on the same scale.
After a very strong start to 2005, industrial
output was more subdued in the secondquarter. On an average of April to June, sea-sonally and working day-adjusted output wasup by
1/C252% on the first quarter. In the whole-
sale and retail trade sector, wholesale busi-ness activity recorded a very favourable devel-opment in the second quarter. At all events,sales, which had already seen a slight year-on-year increase in the first quarter, rosesharply in April and May. This is particularlytrue of those wholesale branches related tothe production sector, while the turnover ofcompanies trading in consumer goods laggedwell behind, as did retail sales. Among theremaining service sectors, commercial serviceproviders, in particular, recorded a positivesales trend. In the consumer-oriented servicesectors, such as hotels and restaurants, busi-ness activity contracted vis-/C224-vis the compar-able period in 2004.GDP in the
second quarter
unchanged
from the
preceding
quarter
Disparate
developments
in individual
sectors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
7Aggregate output in the second quarter was
bolstered by a slight improvement in domes-tic demand. However, this was due mainly tostockbuilding of intermediate and consumergoods. The positive trend in investment inmachinery and equipment recorded at thestart of the year continued into the secondquarter. As the period progressed, how-ever, momentum tailed off considerably. Theweather-related fall-off in construction activ-ity showed a slight rebound; however, realexpenditure on new buildings remained sub-dued. It is still too early to speak of a wide-spread revival of investment. According tothe Ifo surveys, the industrial business climatedid not begin to pick up until the middle ofthe year.
German export business continued to gener-
ate expansionary impulses in the secondquarter, although not as strongly as in thefirst few months of the year. Owing to com-paratively high imports of intermediate andconsumer goods, this resulted in a decline innet exports. The increased inflow of ordersfrom abroad, which accelerated towards theend of the period under review, and the on-going optimistic export expectations of indus-try point to a continuation of the favourableenvironment for German exports in the com-ing period.
Private consumption remained subdued. Sea-
sonally adjusted household consumption fellagain slightly in the second quarter. This wasassociated mainly with the weak demand inthe conventional retail trade sector, while sea-sonally adjusted new vehicle registrationsrose sharply in the second quarter from theirvery low level in the first few months of the
year. According to the July survey carriedout by the consumer research institution,Gesellschaft f/C252r Konsumforschung (GfK),consumer sentiment has not deteriorated anyfurther and respondents’ propensity to pur-chase has even picked up slightly of late. Atthe same time, however, households’ eco-nomic and financial situation was again con-sidered to have deteriorated. The high levelof uncertainty regarding employment pro-spects and the sustainability of the social se-curity systems is clearly continuing to cloudhouseholds’ outlook.
The picture presented by the labour market
remains overlaid by the effects of labour mar-ket policy measures which are tending to ob-scure the cyclical changes. For example, thesustained increase in the number of personsin work up to the end of the period underreview was due mainly to the expansion ofgovernment-promoted supplementary formsof employment (“one-euro jobs”). Prior tothis, the rises in subsidised low-paid part-timework (“mini-jobs”) and one-person businessstart-ups had contributed to a decline in un-employment and to higher numbers of per-sons in work. The ongoing job cuts in industryand construction were offset by new jobs cre-ated in the services sector, in particular withcommercial service providers and in thehealth and social work sector. Many of thelatter are likely to be part-time jobs whereasit is largely full-time positions that havebeen lost in the industrial sector. Overall, theseasonally adjusted number of unemployedpersons fell to 4.81 million by mid-July. This
Higher
investment ...
... and exports
Further fall
in private
consumptionStructural
changes on the
labour market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
8is equivalent to an unemployment rate of
11.6%.
Against this backdrop, there was a continuing
trend towards moderate wage rises, increas-ing working hours, and phasing out specialpayments under collective wage agreements.Moreover, an increased number of escapeclauses were incorporated into industry-widecollective labour agreements. As a result, inthe first six months of 2005, negotiated wagerate rises ranged from 0.4% in the construc-tion sector to 3.4% in the iron and steel in-dustry. Across the economy as whole, anaverage increase of around 1
1/C252% is emerging
for this year. The increase in effective wagecosts will, however, be much smaller, whichshould go some way towards reducing theentrenched structural unemployment in Ger-many.
In recent months, price developments have
been shaped largely by rising oil prices, whichhave reached ever new highs. The impact ofincreasing oil prices on the domestic pricelevel was reinforced by temporary depreci-ations of the euro in the foreign exchangemarkets. In line with this, there was a sharperrise in seasonally adjusted consumer prices inJuly. Year-on-year inflation increased from1.7% in the second quarter to 2% in July. Ex-cluding energy, at the end of the periodunder review, the cost of living was less than1% up on the year.
At the euro area-wide level, too, there have
been no signs so far of a build-up of domesticinflationary pressures which would indicate aneed to alter the current, steady interest ratecourse. Consequently, the Governing Councilof the ECB made no changes to the Eurosys-tem’s key interest rates in the past fewmonths. The rise in oil prices during the sum-mer months and the depreciation of the euroup to the middle of the year have, neverthe-less, led to increased inflation risks. Moreover,the ample liquidity in the euro area still callsfor a high degree of monetary policy vigi-lance. At any rate, monetary growth has con-tinued to gain momentum; between Apriland June, euro-area M3 grew by 9
1/C252% in an-
nualised terms. Medium and long-term mar-ket interest rates fell again in recent months,resulting in a further flattening of the yieldcurve. This fostered investors’ pronouncedpreference for liquidity and is boosting de-mand for credit in the euro area, in particularfor real estate and corporate financing. Banksin Germany likewise recorded increases inprivate-sector borrowing in the course of thesecond quarter. In terms of financing, there-fore, there are no obstacles to a stronger eco-nomic recovery in Germany either.
The continuing strained financial situation of
general government is a cause for concern. Itnow appears that the general governmentdeficit ratio (as defined in the national ac-counts) will exceed 3% in 2005, too, and thegovernment debt ratio looks likely to rise fur-ther. The financial plans of central and stategovernment also indicate a substantial needfor consolidation in the medium term. Thiswill make it far harder to achieve structuralcompliance with the limits set by nationalbudgetary law than with the 3% ceiling forthe deficit ratio laid down by European law.Speedy consolidation is not an end in itself,Moderate wage
increases
Consumer
prices and
oil prices
Monetary
policy course
still appropriateStrained public
finance
situation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
9but is urgently needed in order to widen fiscal
policymakers’ constrained radius of actionand to avoid imposing an additional burdenof high government debt on future gener-ations, who will already have to bear a heav-ier load ensuing from demographic changes.Ultimately, strategies are needed which will
also create a long-term sustainable basis forthe social security systems and, by means offurther reforms of the labour market and tax-ation system, lay the foundations for moreemployment and growth.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
10Global and
European settingWorld economic activity
The global economy maintained its strong
growth in the second quarter of 2005. How-ever, the pace of growth moderated some-what. According to preliminary data, second-quarter aggregate output in key economic re-gions (the United States, Japan, the UnitedKingdom and the euro area) was a seasonallyadjusted
1/C252% up on the first three months of
the year, in which the increase was just under1%. According to the early indicators that areavailable, the industrial nations, as a whole,remained on a growth track even after mid-year, however. Consumer prices in the indus-trial countries rose more slowly in the secondquarter than in the two preceding quarters.Inflation was 1.8% in June, as against 2.5%in the fourth quarter of 2004. At 1.5% inJune, inflation in the industrial countries, ex-cluding energy and food, remained virtuallyunchanged from its level at the beginning ofthe year. With the exception of Japan, whereprices went down again in the second quar-ter, core inflation stood at 1.7% as this reportwent to press.
The continuing robustness of the global econ-
omy is remarkable in view of the considerablerise in the prices of oil and industrial raw ma-terials, although some signs of a slowdownare beginning to appear owing to a surge incommodities prices. Oil price quotations didfall by nearly US$10 from their high early-April level of US$57 (Brent). However, theystarted to go back up sharply in mid-Mayand, in the first half of July, overstepped theUS$60 mark on a number of days. Oil pricesthen tended to fall somewhat for a briefGlobal growth
continuing at
slower pace
Oil prices up
once again ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
11period. In mid-August, however, a new re-
cord of US$65 per barrel was hit. On the fu-tures markets, it is expected that oil priceswill remain very high for the foreseeable fu-ture. In terms of the euro, which fell percep-tibly against the US dollar in the second quar-ter, the year-on-year increase amounted toaround 55% at the end of the period underreview. On the industrial commodities mar-kets, by contrast, the situation has easedslightly in the past few months. In early Au-gust, the US dollar-denominated index ofcommodities prices was 5% down on its mid-March 2005 peak. Euro-denominated pricesof industrial commodities, however, con-tinued their climb owing to the euro’s depre-ciation.
The fact that the strains imposed on the con-
sumer countries by higher oil prices have var-ied in intensity is not due solely to exchangerate shifts against the US dollar, the referencecurrency on the oil markets. For US con-sumers, the reduction in purchasing powerowing to the sharp rise in crude oil pricessince their most recent low at the end of2001 has had a stronger impact than forhouseholds in western Europe and Japan –especially on account of the high energy in-tensity of private consumption in the US andthe trend depreciation of the dollar againstthe euro and the yen (see box on pages 12and 13). Against this background, it is re-markable that US consumption has beenmore resilient than has been the case in Eur-ope. The main reason is probably that the realburden on US households caused by higherenergy prices was disguised by relatively fa-vourable nominal income trends and the posi-tive wealth effects emanating from the real
estate market.
Owing to the continuing global political un-
certainty, the downside risks to the globaleconomy stemming from the oil markets stillrequire careful attention. The risks generatedby external imbalances, however, are at leastlikely not to have increased in the springmonths. The main reason for this was theQuarterly, annual percentage change
JapanEuro areaof which
USAIndustrial countries, total
Total
Core rate 1Consumer prices in the
industrial countries
Sources: national statistics, Eurostat and
Bundesbank calculations. — 1Excluding en-
ergy and food; euro area: HICP excluding
energy and unprocessed food; Japan: ex-
cluding fresh food and petroleum products.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−3
2
1
04
3
2
1
04
3
2
1
0
2004 2005... yet differing
levels of burden
among the “Big
Three”
Downside risks
still high

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
12Deutsche BundesbankThe implications of the increase in oil prices on consumer prices in the world’s main economic 
regions
The spot quotations on international crude oil markets, 
which are traditionally denominated in US dollars, have risen sharply worldwide since their last low in late 2001. Even so, the trend in consumer prices for petroleum prod-ucts in the major economic regions – the USA, the euro area and Japan – has varied quite considerably. This trend will be analysed in greater detail below.
The varying impact on prices at the consumer level can partly 
be attributed to the fact that different grades of crude oil are imported and reﬁ  ned. The US dollar prices for these vary 
and, at times, may diverge. The various grades of crude oil are classiﬁ  ed and traded by density (“light” or “heavy”) and 
their sulphur content (“sweet” or “sour”).  The price for a 
particular grade of crude oil is calculated using the price of a benchmark grade and a premium or discount determined mainly on the basis of variations in quality. In North America, 
the extremely “light” and “sweet” West Texas Intermediate 
(WTI) is the primary benchmark; in Europe, the equally high-quality Brent dominates, while Asia uses the comparatively 
“heavy” and “sour” Dubai Fateh.
Because of better local availability as well as relatively 
stringent environmental protection obligations, reﬁ  neries 
in North America and western Europe mainly process crude oil that is light and low in sulphur. By contrast, Japan and 
other Asian countries source a large proportion of their oil from the Middle East. Importing crude oil grades that 
are predominantly heavy and high in sulphur does not per 
se preclude high environmental standards. However, the reﬁ neries require suitable technology to produce petroleum 
products to the required standard while avoiding an exces-sive impact on the environment. This is the primary reason why European and US reﬁ  neries are only able to compen-
sate for supply bottlenecks in light and low-sulphur crude oil grades to a limited extent by using heavier and sourer crude oil.
At the time of going to press, the spot price for a barrel 
of both US benchmark WTI and Brent crude was quoted 
at almost US$66 and Dubai Fateh was trading at US$57. 
Compared to the fourth quarter of 2001, prices for WTI have thus risen by 223% and by 212% for Dubai Fateh. The price for the European benchmark grade Brent has actually increased by 239%.  Despite the broadly parallel trends in 
the US dollar prices of the three benchmark grades, it is striking that in the fourth quarter of 2004 the heavy and sour Dubai Fateh did not quite keep pace with the price rises for the lighter and sweeter WTI and Brent grades. As a result, the price differential between WTI and Dubai Fateh has, at times, increased signiﬁ  cantly. The diverging price gap 
between WTI and Brent on the one hand and Dubai Fateh on the other can probably be attributed to capacity bottle-necks at reﬁ  neries. The situation was aggravated in the 
fourth quarter of 2004 when the oil producing plants and reﬁ neries along the American Gulf Coast suffered hurricane 
damage.  The subsequent narrowing of the price differen-
tial might be a reﬂ  ection of the fact that the situation was 
returning to normal and also of reﬁ  neries’ attempts to use 
more heavy oil because of the cost advantage. 
For west European and Japanese consumers, it is the prices 
in their domestic currency that are relevant. Compared with 
early 2002, the US dollar has tended to lose ground against 
other major currencies. At least part of the rise in oil prices denominated in US dollars is, therefore, a reﬂ  ection of the 
currency’s weakness. The price of Brent crude in euro has only risen by 145% since the last quarter of 2001. Priced in 
yen, the cost of Dubai Fateh has increased by 179% over the 
same period. Conversely, the recent tendency of the euro and the yen to depreciate against the US dollar, and which 
began at the start of the year has accelerated the rise in 
oil prices denominated in euro and yen of late. In addition, the price differential between Dubai Fateh and WTI/Brent 
returned to normal in the last few months.
To track the pass-through between increased oil prices 
and consumer prices in the USA, the euro area and Japan, 
we have used the prices of the benchmark grades in their domestic currency as a base. In the case of the USA, the 
price increase in high-quality crude oil grades was reﬂ  ected 
entirely by higher import costs, which rose by 160%. In the 
euro area, too, the increase in import costs – 79% over the 
same period – corresponded largely to the price increase 
for Brent denominated in euro (91%).
1, 2 In Japan, although 
the price of Dubai Fateh jumped by 128%, import costs cal-
1 Based on German import prices for petroleum products. Only aver-
age import prices are available for the euro area as a whole (and, at 
the current end, only up to April 2005). Generally speaking, both indi-cators depict a similar trend. For consumer prices, a subindex from the euro-area Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for liquid fuels and fuels for personal transport is used. — 2 The price of the benchmark oil 
is not an ideal measure against which to estimate the pass-through of oil price changes via import prices to consumer prices because other oil grades are also imported. Even in the case of a complete pass-through, it is conceivable that there would be a certain gap between price movements in the benchmark grades and those in oil imports. — 3 See 
OECD, Economic Surveys: Japan, vol. 2005/3, p 57 et seq. — 4 The 
change in overall consumer prices is inﬂ  uenced by the rate of mineral 
oil tax only in that demand for energy is less in countries with high volume-based taxes. It should also be noted that the lower percentage rise in mineral oil prices in countries with higher consumer taxes con-

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
13culated in yen only increased by 71%. One reason for the 
discrepancy might be the long-term supply contracts, which mean that changes in the spot quotations are only passed through to Japanese import prices to a lesser degree or after a delay.
3
Consumer prices for petroleum products have risen far more slowly than import prices or the prices of the benchmark crude oil grades in their domestic currency (see adjacent chart). In the United States, seasonally-adjusted ﬁ  gures up 
to the second quarter of the year rose by 74% compared 
to the fourth quarter of 2001, by just 26% in the euro area 
and a mere 14% in Japan. Leaving aside national consump-tion habits, these varying price movements at the consumer 
level can partly be attributed to differing consumer tax 
rates. Conceived as a volume-based tax, the mineral oil tax causes a linear increase in the cost price level. As a result, 
even with a complete pass-through of a rise in import prices 
by a speciﬁ  c amount, the percentage rise in consumer prices 
for petroleum products is therefore lower. Above all, this 
effect applies in Japan and the euro area, where high rates 
of mineral oil tax are the norm.
4 Moreover, in Japan, part of 
the rise in import prices might have been absorbed at the 
expense of oil companies’ proﬁ  t margins.5
So far, the rising oil prices have had a relatively minor effect 
on core inﬂ  ation in the three economic regions. Excluding 
food and energy, consumer prices in the USA rose 2% in 
June compared to the same month last year.6 Again exclud-
ing food and energy, the private consumption deﬂ  ator in 
the United States, which is closely monitored by the US Fed-
eral Reserve, increased by only 1.9% over June 2004. In the 
euro area, too, the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) excluding energy and unprocessed foods showed 
very modest price pressures, rising 1.4% year-on-year in 
June. The corresponding core rate for Japan even signalled a considerable 0.5% drop in prices for June 2005 compared 
to the same month a year ago.
7 In contrast to past periods of 
sharply rising oil prices, there have, as yet, been no marked second-round effects; this has meant that, recently, core 
rates have remained further below the headline rates of 
consumer price inﬂ  ation than was the case during similar 
phases in the past.
trasts with a higher weighting for petroleum products in the basket 
of goods. — 5 See footnote 3. — 6 This moderate pressure on prices 
is a stark contrast to the experience in the 1970s. After the ﬁ  rst oil 
price shock, the core inﬂ  ation rate in the USA leapt from an average 
of 3.4% in 1973 to 8.1% then 9.3% respectively in the two years that followed. In 1980, annual core inﬂ  ation actually reached 12.4% on 
the back of the second oil crisis. — 7 The ofﬁ  cial Japanese core rate is 
calculated from the overall consumer price index excluding fresh food. The subindex including energy, amongst other things, is also included 
in this, but it has tended to decline recently – not least because of deregulation on the electricity market. For this reason, the overall consumer price index excluding fresh food used here is also stripped of the price index for petroleum products, which is shown as a subindex in Japanese price statistics.Quarterly, log scale
Consumer prices for
petroleum products
2001Euro area 1USA
Japanmonthly2001 Q4 = 100
Import prices for
petroleum products2001 Q4 = 100
In the relevant currency
Brent in euroWTI in US dollars
Dubai Fateh
in yenSpot prices for benchmark oil grades
in US dollars
BrentWest Texas Inter-
mediate (WTI)
Dubai FatehPrices for crude and
refined petroleum products
- = As last updated on 11 August 2005.180
160
140
120
100280
260
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100280
260
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
10030032065
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
18 - - 
- - - 
- 
2002 2003 2004 2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
14quite favourable development in US foreign
trade, which, for the second quarter as awhole, gives cause for expecting a slight de-cline in the US current account deficit. Giventhe US dollar’s appreciation against key cur-rencies since early 2005, however, it is doubt-ful whether this development will continue.In some countries, property markets still posean additional risk to the world economy. Asudden slump in property prices in the UnitedStates or several of the other countries couldput the brakes on global economic activity.
Rising oil prices have imposed an especially
heavy strain on the Asian emerging marketeconomies owing to the fact that, in manycases, they have to import all of the crude oilthey need and that their economies are gener-ally highly energy-intensive. Nevertheless, out-put was for the most part still strong in thesecond quarter. Real GDP growth in China inthe second quarter, which was 9
1/C252%u po n
the year, was just as dynamic as at the begin-ning of the year. Despite the rapid pace ofgrowth and the sharp rise in energy prices,price pressure at the consumer level has di-minished. The rate of inflation in China on anaverage of the period from April to July –owing not least to favourable agricultural out-put figures – stood at 1.8%, compared with2.8% in the first quarter. The slight revalu-ation of the Chinese renminbi in July alongwith the decision to abandon the peg of theyuan to the US dollar (see page 20) will prob-ably have no more than a slight impact ontrade flows, growth and price movements.
By contrast, the pace of growth in Latin
America slowed down in the first half of theyear, in some cases noticeably. In Brazil, eco-nomic activity was retarded by the sharpmulti-stage increase in key interest rates. Thiswas accompanied by a 30% appreciation ofthe Brazilian real against the US dollar on theyear. This is likely to make export businessmore and more difficult over the comingmonths, especially in the case of industrialgoods. Overall economic growth in Mexicohas likewise been dampened by higher inter-est rates. In addition, pressure on the textileindustry from Asian competitors has beengrowing since the quota agreement expiredat the beginning of 2005. Both countries,however, along with several other LatinAmerican nations, continue to benefit fromhigh commodity prices. Although the Argen-tinian economy grew sharply throughout thereporting period, upward pressure on priceshas increased so sharply that the upturn inbusiness activity could be jeopardised.
In the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), too, economic growth appears to bemoderating – despite rising revenues from ex-ports of crude oil and industrial commodities.In the first half of 2005, the Russian economygrew by “only” 5
1/C252%, compared with 7% in
2004. The Russian finance ministry has nowdown-revised its preliminary estimates for2005 from 6
1/C252% to just under 6%. At the
same time, the price forecast was revised up-wards from 10% to between 10% and 11%.The downside of the CIS’s high revenues fromcommodities is that the development of amodern services and industry sector is pro-ceeding only at a very slow pace.South and
South-East
Asian emerging
market
economies
Latin AmericaCommon-
wealth of
Independent
States

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
15Initial calculations show that second-quarter
real GDP in the United States was3/C254%u po n
the quarter after adjustment for seasonal andworking-day variations, having increased byjust under 1% in the first quarter. Year-on-year growth was 3
1/C252%. Domestic demand
and external activity each accounted forabout half of this figure. Seasonally adjustedreal private consumption rose in step withGDP . Industrial investment and residentialconstruction expanded even more sharply, at2
1/C254% and 21/C252% respectively. The exception-
ally sharp increase in domestic final demand,however, contrasted with a negative growthcontribution of inventories, which amountedto just over
1/C252percentage point. There was a
concurrent1/C252% decline in real imports. At
the same time, exports rose by a seasonallyadjusted 3%, causing a discernible increasein US real net exports for the first time in twoyears. National accounts figures for the pastfew years have been revised, as is usual in themiddle of the year. According to the re-worked figures, US GDP grew by an averageof 2
3/C254% in the 2002-2004 period, as op-
posed to just over 3% prior to the revision.
One reason for the continued buoyancy of
consumption in the United States lies inwealth effects owing to the continued sharprise in property prices. Another is that dispos-able income grew quite strongly in thesecond quarter (1
1/C254% seasonally adjusted)
and the saving ratio declined by1/C252percent-
age point on the quarter to 0.2%.1The con-
tinued expansion in employment –1/C252%o n
the quarter – also contributed to incomegrowth. In mid-year, the seasonally adjustedunemployment rate, at 5.0%, was lowerthan at any time since the third quarter of
2001. On an average of the second quarter,consumer prices were 3.0% up on the year.Excluding food and energy, US inflation –measured in terms of the private consump-tion deflator, the US Federal Reserve’s keyprice analysis instrument – was significantlylower in the second quarter of 2005, at2.0%. (The latest revision of the national ac-counts added just under
1/C252percentage point
to the rate.)
For the second half of 2005 and for 2006,
the US Federal Reserve is expecting robusteconomic growth and relatively moderateprice movements to continue. According toits June forecast, the year-on-year increase inreal GDP will be 3
1/C252% in the final quarter of
2005 and between 31/C254%t o31/C252% in the
fourth quarter of 2006. The slight downwardrevision from the Fed’s February forecast of+3
3/C254% to +4% and +31/C252% respectively can
be explained by renewed rises in oil pricesand reduced fiscal stimuli. Consumer price in-flation – measured by the private consump-tion deflator excluding energy and food – ispredicted to remain in the 1
3/C254% to 2% range
over the course of this year and the next. Thisrepresents an upward revision of the Februaryprice forecasts by
1/C254percentage point for
each year.
The Japanese economy, which overcame its
temporary low with a sharp rise in real GDP inthe first quarter, remained on a growth track
1In the revision of the national accounts, the saving ratio
for the period 2002 to 2004 was revised upwards. How-
ever, at figures between 2.4% for 2002 and 1.8% in
2004, it is still very low.USA
Japan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
16in the second quarter. At a seasonally adjust-
ed1/C254%, however, aggregate output rose dis-
tinctly more weakly than in the first quarter.The year-on-year increase was 1
1/C252%. Private
consumption, which was3/C254% up on the
quarter and 13/C254% up on the year, proved
once again to be the key pillar. A crucial fac-tor in the buoyancy of household demandwas the decline in the seasonally adjusted un-employment rate from 4.6% in January-February to 4.2% in June and an increase inbonus payments to employees owing to im-proved profitability. Industrial investment like-wise continued to rise in the second quarter,whereas public spending on investment wasstill on a decline. Inventory investment, too,had a dampening impact that amounted to
1/C252% of GDP . Unlike in the preceding three
quarters, real net exports once again provideda positive contribution to growth, whichamounted to
1/C254percentage point in the
second quarter. Export growth, at a seasonal-ly adjusted 2
3/C254%, was visibly stronger than
import growth, at 11/C252%. It is notable that
second-quarter consumer prices remained vir-tually stable on the year despite the sharp risein oil prices and the depreciation of the yen.One explanation for this is the distinct fall inprices for electricity and telecommunicationsservices owing to deregulation measures.
According to initial estimates, real GDP in the
United Kingdom in the spring after seasonaland working-day adjustment was up notquite
1/C252% from its first-quarter level (which
had shown the same pace of growth). Theyear-on-year increase was only 1
3/C254%, the
smallest increase since early 1993. Thegrowth profile, too, has hardly changed incomparison with the winter months. Servicesgrew by just over
1/C252% after seasonal adjust-
ment, and construction activity likewiseshowed an increase. By contrast, industrymade a negative contribution to growth,with production down by
1/C254% in the second
quarter. Private consumption was once againone of the main drivers of aggregate de-mand; measured in terms of real retail turn-over, it was
3/C254% higher in the April-June
period than in the first quarter. Consumptionactivity was supported, in particular, by risinglabour income, whereas the positive wealtheffects previously emanating from propertymarkets are likely to have become less im-portant. At all events, house prices have notshown any further increase in seasonal ad-justed terms in the past few months, and theyear-on-year increase according to the Halifaxindex was no more than just under 2
1/C252%i n
July, after having stood at 22% as recently asmid-2004. Inflation according to the Harmon-ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rosefrom 1.6% in January to 2.0% in June, main-ly on account of higher energy prices, andwas therefore in line with the British govern-ment’s medium-term inflation target. Core in-flation (ie excluding energy and unprocessedfood) was much lower, however, at 1.4%.
The pace of growth in the new EU member
states declined perceptibly after the start of2005. In the first quarter of 2005, overall out-put was “only” 4
1/C254% up on the year, com-
pared with 5% on an average of 2004. Thiswas due mainly to a weaker expansion of in-dustrial output, which decelerated in year-on-year terms from 5
3/C254% in the final quarter of
2004 to 21/C254% in the first three months ofUnited
KingdomNew EUmember states

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
172005. For 2004 as a whole, industrial output
rose by as much as nearly one-tenth. In Apriland May, however, industrial output in-creased somewhat more strongly again; inseasonally adjusted terms, it surpassed itsfirst-quarter level by 2
1/C252%. The fact that in-
vestment activity and the economy in westEuropean countries, which are among themain trading partners, were generally nolonger as buoyant, contributed to the damp-ening of aggregate demand growth. Thestandardised unemployment figure continuedto fall in the second quarter in seasonally ad-justed terms, and, as this report went topress, amounted to 13.1% of the labourforce, the lowest level since the beginning of2000. Owing to weaker economic activity,consumer price inflation showed a furtherslowdown. The aggregate inflation rate ofthe new member states, which stood at4.9% in the third quarter of 2004, had fallento 2.0% by June 2005. At the end of theperiod under review, inflation rates rangedbetween 1.3% in the Czech Republic and6.6% in Latvia.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Euro-area economic growth weakened in the
second quarter. According to initial estimates,real GDP rose by only
1/C254% after seasonal and
working-day adjustment, compared with
1/C252% in the first quarter. The relevant year-on-
year increase was no more than 11/C254%. The
continued weakness of domestic demandwas the key factor in this. In addition, foreigntrade is unlikely to have generated any stimuliin the second quarter. In seasonally adjusted2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
SpainItalyFranceof which
GermanyEuro areathree-month moving average
monthlyIndustrial output *
in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and national statistics. —
*Excluding construction.
Deutsche Bundesbank103
100
97
94103
100
97
94103
100
97
94103
100
97
94106103
100
97
94
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005Weaker growth
in second
quarter

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
18terms, nominal exports of goods rose much
more slowly than imports in April and May,which led to a decline in the trade surplus.The rise in import prices also played a part,causing the picture to look somewhat bright-er in real terms.
The fact that aggregate growth in the euro
area was, on the whole, weak in the secondquarter is due partly to the marginal increasein industrial output. For the two-monthperiod of April and May, this averaged a sea-sonally adjusted
1/C254% on the first quarter. The
key factor behind this was a sharp decline inenergy production from the rather high levelof the first quarter, which had been charac-terised by exceptionally cold winter weather.In addition, the production of intermediateinputs fell somewhat. By contrast, the pro-duction of capital and consumer goodspicked up distinctly in the April-May period.The fact that capacity utilisation in the manu-facturing sector in July was no higher than inApril, and only slightly exceeded the low levelof the first half of 2004, fits in with themeagre increase in industrial output.
Industry confidence improved in June and
July after having been in continuous declinefrom the end of 2004 until May 2005. How-ever, it still remained well below its long-runaverage. A more favourable assessment oforder books and inventories was the mainreason for the improvement in sentiment inJuly. By contrast, output expectations re-mained unchanged. The notable part about itis that industry confidence stabilised aroundmid-year, especially in the three large econ-omies. Euro-area consumer sentiment, how-ever, held firm in July at the low levels of theprevious months.
Seasonally adjusted unemployment in the
euro area went back down in the secondquarter. This more than offset the slight riseduring the winter months caused by the ex-tremely cold weather. However, this still left,on average, 12.8 million persons withoutwork in the second quarter of 2005. The un-employment figure in the second quarter was140,000 down on the year. The seasonallyadjusted, standardised unemployment rateremained at 8.8%. France, Germany, Greeceand Spain were above the euro-area average,whereas the majority of member statesshowed lower figures. It is notable in this con-nection that the number of unemployed per-sons in Italy in the first quarter (more recentinformation is unavailable) was down nearly90,000 on the year, and that the standardisedunemployment rate, at 8.2%, was 0.5 per-centage point lower than in the same periodof 2004, despite the fact that the countrywas still in a general economic trough.
After easing in the first few months of the
year, euro-area consumer prices have beenrising somewhat more sharply again of late.In seasonally adjusted terms, the HICP infla-tion for the April-June period was, on aver-age, 0.7% higher than in the first quarter. Inother words, inflation in the second quarterwas more than twice as high as first-quarterinflation. The main reason for the acceleratedpace of inflationary pressure was the sharp in-crease in energy prices. Excluding the relative-ly volatile components of energy and unpro-cessed foods, consumer prices in the second
Meagre
increase in
industrial
output
More
favourable
business signals
in mid-yearLabour market
Consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
19quarter were up by a seasonally adjusted
0.3% – as in the first quarter. This was due toslight increases in the prices of industriallymanufactured goods (excluding energy),which had even become cheaper in the firstquarter owing to the very marked impact ofend-of-season sales this year. The rate ofprice increase for services remained un-changed and eased in the case of processedfoods. Year-on-year inflation excluding en-ergy and unprocessed foods slowed downfrom 1.6% in the first quarter to 1.5% in thesecond. By contrast, quarterly HICP inflationpersisted at 2.0%. According to the prelimin-ary estimate, the rate of price increase was2.2% in July, compared with 2.1% in Juneand 2.0% in May.
Exchange rates
Developments in the foreign exchange mar-
ket in the early summer of 2005 were markedby continued strong economic growth andrising interest rates in the United States. TheUS dollar was therefore able to pick up onceagain against the euro, the yen and thepound sterling. At the same time, the debateabout the political future of the EuropeanUnion put a strain on the euro’s exchangerate.
The US trade deficit, which was the key factor
in price formation on the foreign exchangemarkets in the first few months of the year,was being given somewhat less attentionby foreign exchange market agents in theperiod under review. This shift in perspectiveis not least also due to the fact that, inMay 2005, the trade deficit was lower thanexpected.
However, the firming-up of the US dollar has
also taken place against the backdrop ofsound US economic growth and an increasein the yield spread of US dollar-denominatedinvestments over their euro-denominatedcounterparts across all maturities. This devel-opment has even been intensified by, atDaily data, log scale
US$
£¥
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.20  1... pound sterling£ 0.7110  1... yen
¥ 133.73  1against the ...
... US dollar
$ 1.1789  1Exchange rate of the euro
1Rate at the beginning of monetary union
on 4 January 1999. — 2As calculated by the
ECB against the currencies of 23 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank109
106
103
1000.72
0.70
0.68
0.66142
139
136
133
1301.39
1.36
1.33
1.30
1.27
1.24
1.21
1.18
JASO N DJF M A MJ JA
2004 2005Current trends
in the foreign
exchange
market
Movement
of the euro’s
exchange rate
against the
US dollar ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
20times, unfavourable economic data for the
euro area and associated market expectationsof an interest rate cut by the ECB.
Moreover, political events such as the rejec-
tion of the EU constitutional treaty in theFrench and Dutch referendums and thebreakdown of the EU budget negotiationshave proved to be major special influences.These political developments in Europe, be-sides isolated cases of speculation on the out-look for monetary union, have contributed tothe euro’s depreciation against the US dollar.During the first few days of July, the eurowas quoted briefly at US$1.19. Following thepositive outcome of the Luxembourg referen-dum and the waning of speculation aboutinterest rate cuts in the euro area, the eurofinally stabilised again at a somewhat higherlevel against the US dollar. As this reportwent to press, the euro was trading atUS$1.24, which was 9% below its US dollarvalue at the end of last year.
In May, the euro-yen rate initially remained al-
most unchanged at just under ¥136 to theeuro. However, the general shift in sentimentplaced a strain on the euro’s exchange rateagainst the yen, too. On the other hand, therevival of domestic economic activity in Japanled to an increase in Japanese imports, thusreducing the trade deficit. This has enabledthe euro to regain some of its value againstthe Japanese yen since the end of June. Thisdevelopment was temporarily interrupted atthe end of July when the yen, in the wake ofthe renminbi’s appreciation, likewise pickedup somewhat against the US dollar (see boxon this page). As this report went to press,The reform of the Chinese exchange
rate regime
On 21 July 2005, the People’s Bank of China
announced that the exchange rate regimefor the renminbi, the Chinese currency, wasto be reformed with immediate effect. Atthe same time as the reform of the currencyregime, the Chinese currency was revaluedby around 2% to 8.11 renminbi yuan(RMB.¥) against the US dollar. Hitherto, therenminbi had been fixed at a de facto rateof RMB.¥8.28 against the US dollar.
1The re-
form of the Chinese currency regime dis-solves the peg to the US dollar as the soleanchor currency. Instead, the renminbi ex-change rate regime has moved to a man-aged float with reference to a basket ofcurrencies. The most important currenciesin the basket are the US dollar, the euro,the yen and the South Korean won. In add-ition, it would also appear to include theSingapore dollar, the pound sterling, theMalaysian ringgit, the Russian rouble, theAustralian dollar, the Thai baht and theCanadian dollar. The precise weighting ofthe individual currencies, which also re-flects China’s trade pattern, was not dis-closed by the authorities. It was an-nounced, however, that fluctuations of therenminbi against the US dollar would be re-stricted to a maximum of €0.3% of theinterbank market closing rate on the previ-ous day. Fluctuations against other curren-cies in the basket are also to remain withina fixed band, although this is wider(€1.5%). The People’s Bank of China has re-served the right to adjust the permittedfluctuation margin if deemed necessary inthe light of market developments or theeconomic and financial situation.
1The currency regime applicable hitherto and the ex-
change rate movement of the renminbi are described in
detail in: Deutsche Bundesbank, The exchange rate andcurrency regime of the People’s Republic of China,Monthly Report , June 2005, p 42.
Deutsche Bundesbank... against
the yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
21the euro was trading at ¥137, which was 2%
lower than at the turn of the year.
The debate on the European Union’s future
following the outcome of the referendum inFrance was likewise reflected in the euro’s ex-change rate against the pound sterling. InJune, the euro initially fell distinctly againstthe pound sterling, much as it did against theUS dollar and the yen. The greater restrainton the part of market players in their assess-ment of the future growth outlook for theUnited Kingdom, however, represented a cer-tain counterweight. Following the publicationof the minutes of the Bank of England’sMonetary Policy Committee meetings at theend of June and end of July, which showedthat a growing group of members favouredan easing of monetary policy (in contrast toprevious months, when, if anything, interestrate hikes were being discussed), speculationthat interest rates would soon be cut becameentrenched, and the pound sterling wentback down again somewhat. In early August,such expectations were then confirmed, asthe Bank of England reduced its interest rateby
1/C254percentage point to 4.5%. Moreover,
the pound sterling was placed under an add-itional strain by the terrorist attacks thatrocked London in July. On balance, the europosted gains in the past few weeks. At£0.69, however, the euro was still 2
1/C252%
lower than at the end of 2004.
On a weighted average against the currencies
of 23 trading partners, the euro, on balance,depreciated in the past few months. The ef-fective exchange rate is now 5% below itsvalue at the turn of 2004-05 and thus – eventaking into account international inflation dif-ferentials – relatively close to its level at thelaunch of monetary union.
Excursus: growth differentials in the
euro area
Since the fourth quarter of 2004 a broader
dispersion has been evident in the quarter-on-quarter rates of real GDP growth in theeuro area. This is mainly due to wider diver-gences amongst the four largest memberstates of Germany, France, Italy and Spain. Inthe third quarter of 2004 growth rates inthese four countries – which generate aroundfour-fifths of euro-area GDP – had still keptwithin a narrow range from -0.1% (Germany)to 0.7% (Spain) (after adjustment for seasonaland working-day effects). In the fourth quar-ter of 2004 the gap between Spain and Italy,which recorded a 0.4% decline in real GDP ,widened to nearly 1
1/C252percentage points.
There was a further widening of the gap inthe first quarter of 2005 between Spain,which recorded a growth rate of 0.9% on thequarter, and Italy, which again recorded adecline in real GDP (-0.5%). In addition, thegrowth rates in France and Germany werefairly volatile during this period.
The stronger dispersion in the quarterly data
during the fourth quarter of 2004 and thefirst quarter of 2005 is, however, largely dueto exceptional factors and should thereforenot be overinterpreted. Particularly in thecase of Germany, for instance, both the weakgrowth in the fourth quarter of 2004, inwhich a decline in seasonally and working-... and against
the pound
sterling
Effective
exchange rate
of the euroWider growth
gap in 2004 Q4
and 2005 Q1 ...
... and its
causes

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
22day adjusted GDP of -0.1% was recorded,
and the recovery in the first quarter of 2005were probably overstated. By contrast, thesharp fall in real GDP in Italy in the final threemonths of 2004 and the first three months of2005 appears to reflect another cyclical set-back. Of the smaller countries, Portugal andthe Netherlands also faced a rather difficultmacroeconomic situation, while Ireland, forexample, remained on a steep growth path.The major impact of the special factors in thefourth quarter of 2004 and the first quarterof 2005 is also suggested by the fact that thegrowth disparity among the large memberstates narrowed again considerably in thesecond quarter of 2005.
The degree of dispersion of the quarterly
rates remained virtually unchanged in 2004as a whole. The differences in the memberstates’ annual growth rates were actuallysomewhat smaller in 2004 than in 2003. Un-adjusted for calendar effects, the disparityin the rates of expansion between Ireland,which headed the GDP growth table with5%, and last-place Portugal amounted toaround 4 percentage points, whereas in 2003growth rates had shown a top-bottom spreadof 5.8 percentage points between Greeceand Portugal. The unweighted standard devi-ation fell by
1/C252percentage point in 2004 to
1.3 percentage points. The standard devi-ation weighted by each country’s respectiveshare in euro-area GDP declined from 1.2percentage points to 0.8 percentage point.
2
The structure of macroeconomic growth inthe euro area in 2004 showed a very unevenpicture, however. Both the unweighted andweighted dispersion of growth in domesticdemand (1.5% and 1.6% respectively) wereclearly above the comparable figures for over-all GDP growth. There were particularly largedifferences in the demand profile betweenPer-
centage
pointsAverage real growth rates
Un-
weighted
dispersionWeighted
dispersion  1Range
1994 - 1998 1999 - 2004
1Standard deviation weighted by the
euro-area states’ shares of total euro-area
GDP.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
20Per-
centage
pointsReal growth rates
Weighted dispersion 1Unweighted dispersion
1994 2004Dispersion of GDP growth
in the euro area
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03
2From an analytical standpoint, the weighted standard
deviation is preferable to the unweighted standard devi-
ation and an analysis of the top-bottom spread of growth
rates as a measure of dispersion because it is the only
method which takes account of the very different sizes of
the economies that make up the euro area.Smaller
dispersion of
GDP growth
in 2004 ...
... but very
uneven
demand
structure

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
23Germany and France. Whereas in Germany,
two-thirds of the GDP growth of just over1
1/C252% (unadjusted for calendar effects) was
generated statistically by higher net exportsand only one-third by greater domestic de-mand, in France the external balance dentedoutput by 1 percentage point. By contrast,domestic demand contributed 3
1/C254percent-
age points to output expansion. France’soverall GDP growth thus totalled 2
1/C254%.
On a longer-term view, in which the import-
ance of cyclical divergences and country-specific developments is naturally muchsmaller, the growth differences across themember states have remained approximatelyconstant and, at all events, have not in-creased. This can be seen by comparing vary-ing measures of dispersion for the period be-tween 1994 and 1998, ie stage two of EMU,with the corresponding figures for the periodafter the start of stage three (between 1999and 2004). At 0.9 percentage point, theweighted standard deviation of the averagegrowth rates for the years 1999 to 2004 wason a par with that recorded during the 1994to 1998 period. The top-bottom growthspread fell from 6.8 to 5.6 percentage pointsand the unweighted standard deviation alsodeclined, albeit only slightly. It should benoted, however, that the “convergence”between the dispersion rates measured in thisway masks the fact that the differences ingrowth have lessened only among the smallermember states, while these differences havetended to widen slightly in the case of thefour largest countries.If, alternatively, the growth rates of potential
output are taken as the measure of dispersionso as to eliminate measurement bias resultingfrom asynchronous cyclical developmentsacross the member states, the picture remainsbroadly the same with merely some small dif-ferences vis-/C224-vis the results based on theactual rates of change of GDP .
The picture of more or less unchanged
growth differentials which emerges from ananalysis of the weighted standard deviationfor the period since 1994 remains much thesame if dispersion is measured by the vari-ation coefficient, which additionally takes ac-count of the possible influence of the levelsof euro area-wide growth rates on the volatil-ity during the observation periods. This ishardly surprising as the average annualPer-
centage
pointsWeighted standard deviation 1
of average real growth rates
Domestic demand
Exports
GDP
1994-1998 1999-2004Dispersion of domestic
demand, exports and growth
in the euro area
1 Weighted by the euro-area states’ shares
of the respective total euro-area amount.
Deutsche Bundesbank3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0Since 1994
largely constant
growth
dispersion
patterns of
real GDP...
... and of
potential
output
Variation
coefficient
as a measure
of dispersion

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
24growth rate of real GDP in the period be-
tween 1999 and 2004 was 2%, or “only”0.4 percentage point lower than in the periodbetween 1994 and 1998. The level effect ofthe annual growth rates on volatility is there-fore likely to have been fairly similar duringboth periods.
The GDP growth differentials can only be par-
tially reconciled with the divergences in thechange in real domestic demand and exportsin the two periods under review. Thus thegrowth differentials in domestic demandand exports were smaller between 1999 and2004 than in the 1994 to 1998 period, bothin terms of the top-bottom spread and theunweighted dispersion. This contrasts, how-ever, with an increase in the weighted disper-sion of domestic demand on an average ofthe years 1999 to 2004 vis-/C224-vis the previousperiod. This suggests that the domestic eco-nomic dynamics have diverged at times, par-ticularly in the larger countries. In the case ofexports, by contrast, the weighted measureof dispersion also indicates that growth rateshave tended to converge.
The low convergence of the relative changes
in GDP in the euro area since the start of thethird stage of EMU has been accompanied bya fairly stable regional growth profile. Since1999, Germany has nearly always been thestraggler in this respect, followed closely byItaly. By contrast, with the exception of 2003when Greece took “first place”, the Irisheconomy was the top performer between1999 and 2004. Growth in real GDP in Irelandduring this period was more than 40 percent-age points higher than in Germany (seechart). The cumulative growth lead of Franceand the euro area as a whole (excluding Ger-many) over Germany amounted to 6 percent-age points in each case. It is also striking that,with the exception of Luxembourg, the coun-tries with an above-average growth disparityvis-/C224-vis Germany are still in the catching-upprocess, or, as in the case of Ireland, haveonly recently completed this process. Con-versely, with the exception of Portugal, thegroup of countries with a below-averagelead is made up exclusively of the highlydeveloped core countries.
In this context, comparisons with growth dif-
ferentials in other currency areas, such aswithin Germany before the start of EMU orwithin the USA, prove informative. With re-spect to monetary policy, however, it should
Real GDP in 2004 compared with 1998
Italy
Portugal
The
Netherlands
Austria
Belgium
France
Euro area
(excluding
Germany)
Finland
Spain
Greece
Luxembourg
Ireland
Percentage
pointsGrowth lead over Germany
Deutsche Bundesbank40 30 20 10 0
Demand
componentsCumulativegrowth gap
vis-/C224-vis
Germany
Comparisons
with other
currency areas

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
25be noted that the ECB operates in a different
institutional and political environment thanthe US Federal Reserve or that in which theBundesbank formerly operated.
Between 1994 and 1998 the growth differen-
tials across the individual German federalstates were of a similar magnitude to those inthe euro area. This was primarily due to thestrong economic catching-up process in theformer east German states following reunifi-cation. This catching-up process has stalled inthe past few years with the result that thegrowth divergences have likewise eroded.The weighted standard deviation of the aver-age annual growth rates in Germany stood ataround 0.5 percentage point between 1999and 2004, or only half that of the euro area.The unweighted standard deviation was actu-ally only one-third of the euro-area level. Ifthe analysis is confined to the dispersionacross the west German states in order tolargely filter out the special effects of reunifi-cation, a markedly lower level of dispersion isevident than in the euro area. One major fac-tor behind this development is that the differ-ences in prosperity, measured in terms of percapita income, are much larger in the euroarea than across the federal states in westernGermany.
Compared with the United States, the growth
differences in the euro area are by no meansextraordinary (see chart on page 26). For in-stance, the weighted standard deviation ofthe growth rates across the US states in bothperiods, at 1.3 and 1.1 percentage points re-spectively, was actually higher than in theeuro area.
3In the case of the USA, too, theweighted measure of dispersion appears to
be more informative (owing to the widelyvarying economic weights of the individualUS states) than the unweighted standard de-viation, although the differences between thetwo measures of dispersion are smaller thanin the euro area. For the period between1994 and 1998 the unweighted measureshows a dispersion of 1.8 percentage pointsfor both the USA and the euro area. Further-more, in terms of the unweighted standarddeviation, the growth differences in the USAfell considerably between 1999 and 2004,Per-
centage
pointsWeighted standard deviation
of average real growth rates
Germany 1
West German states2
Euro area3
1994-1998 1999-2004Dispersion of GDP growth
in the euro area compared
with that in Germany
1 Weighted by the German states’ shares of
total German GDP. — 2 Weighted by the
west German states’ (excluding Berlin)
shares of west German GDP. — 3 Weighted
by the euro-area states’ shares of total
euro-area GDP.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
3If the analysis is based on the geographically defined
eight regions in the USA as included in the official US
statistics, the weighted dispersion in the USA was virtual-
ly the same as in the euro area for the 1994 to 1998
period. By contrast, between 1999 and 2004 the weight-
ed standard deviation was somewhat lower. The un-
weighted standard deviation produces similar results for
both periods as the weighted measure of dispersion.Dispersion
across German
federal states ...
USA and euro
area show
similar growth
differences ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
26by 0.7 percentage point to 1.1 percentage
points, whereas this figure decreased onlymarginally in the euro area.
However, it is questionable whether the US
experience can simply be transposed to theeuro area. The main difference lies in the re-gional integration of the labour markets. Ex-perience shows that, in the USA, pronouncedgrowth differences across states trigger rapidand large migratory movements which, froma macroeconomic standpoint, have a positiveimpact. First, the wage pressure in the pros-pering regions is mitigated and second, thetension in the labour markets in the laggingstates is eased. The growth differences acrossthe US states are therefore not mirrored tothe same extent in the labour market. In theeuro area, by contrast, migratory movementsfrom weak growth countries to high growthcountries are relatively insignificant. Twomajor reasons for this are the language bar-rier and a generally low level of willingness tomove, which is also evident within the mem-ber states. This latter is due in part to the so-cial welfare framework, which is more gener-ous than that in the USA. The consequenceof this is that growth differences in the euroarea are reflected to a greater extent in thenational labour markets.
One measurable indication of the differing
impact of the (similarly sized) growth spreadin the USA and in the euro area on therespective labour markets is the dispersion ofunemployment rates. The weighted andunweighted standard deviation of the aver-age annual unemployment rates of theUS states between 1999 and 2004 stood at0.7 and 0.9 percentage point respectively,which was clearly lower than that of themember states in the euro area, where thecomparable dispersion levels were 2.1 and2.9 percentage points respectively. Calcula-tions of the average dispersion of the annualchanges in unemployment rates point in thesame direction.
Per-
centage
points
Per-
centage
points... average annual    unemployment rates
USA 3Euro area4
1994-1998 1999-2004Weighted standard deviation
of the ...
... average real growth rates
USA 1
Euro area2Dispersion of GDP growth
and the unemployment rate
in the euro areacompared with that in
the United States
1 Weighted by the US states’ shares of total
gross state product. — 2 Weighted by the
euro-area states’ shares of total euro-area
GDP. — 3 Weighted by the US states’ shares
of the labour force in the USA. — 4 Stand-
ardised unemployment rates weighted bythe euro-area states’ shares of the labour
force in the euro area.
Deutsche Bundesbank4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
02.0
1.51.0
0.5
0
... but different
labour market
responsesSmaller
dispersion in
the unemploy-
ment rates in
the USA

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
27Although the current debate is attaching con-
siderable importance to growth differentialsin the euro area, it appears more likely thatthe overall low cyclical momentum, particu-larly in larger member states, is the real rea-son for the widespread dissatisfaction withthe economic development in the euro area.Growth differences are being perceived as ra-ther alarming at the present time presumablybecause some of the countries with low aver-age growth rates have, at times, been in dan-
ger of slipping into recession. Hence, it maybe inferred that the current debate might nothave taken place if the pace of expansion inthe euro area as a whole, given a similargrowth spread, had been between, say, 2 and3 per cent instead of 1 and 2 per cent (andthus below the potential rate) as is currentlythe case.
Weak growth
the key
problem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
28Monetary policy,
banking business and
the capital marketInterest rate policy and
the money market
The Governing Council of the European
Central Bank did not change the Eurosys-tem’s key interest rates in the past fewmonths. The main refinancing operationscontinued to be conducted as variable ratetenders with a minimum bid rate of 2%; arate of 3% was charged for the marginallending facility and a rate of 1% was paid onthe deposit facility. Hence both the nominaland real rates of interest remained at an ex-ceptionally low level, lending continued sup-
port to the economy. The main reason formaintaining the steady interest rate coursewas the fact that, despite the oil-related risein inflation to 2.2% of late, there have beenno signs so far of a build-up of medium-termdomestic inflationary pressure which wouldindicate a need to alter the current course.However, the price risks which are undoubt-edly associated with the rising oil prices andthe concurrent depreciation of the euromust continue to be monitored carefully.Furthermore, the ample liquidity in the euroarea calls for ongoing monetary policy vigi-lance.
Apart from the temporary fluctuations at the
end of the half year and at the end of theminimum reserve periods, the EONIA over-night rate remained largely steady in theperiod under review. The overnight rate wasmostly close to the marginal lending rate,which was consistently 5 basis points abovethe minimum bid rate. Hence the short-termmoney market rates also remained virtuallyunchanged. Between early April and late JulyEurosystem
interest rates
unchanged
Money market
rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
29Money market management and liquidity requirement
During the three reserve maintenance periods between 13 April
and 12 July 2005, the liquidity requirement arising from the au-
tonomous factors determining bank liquidity increased by 517.6
billion (net). The main reason for this development was the con-
tinued strong growth in the volume of banknotes in circulation
(+524 billion). Declines in general government deposits during
the April-May and May-June reserve periods had initially offset
the increase in the volume of banknotes in circulation to a large
extent. However, the customary increase in general government
deposits at the end of the first half of the year by 513.9 billion
led to a rise in the liquidity requirement of 521.9 billion during
the June-July period. Throughout the observation period, the
increase in the liquidity requirement was slowed by the devel-
opment of the other autonomous factors. If the changes in net
foreign reserves and in other factors are taken together, a move
which eliminates valuation effects, 56.4 billion net flowed into
the market via these two items. This essentially occurred as a re-
sult of Eurosystem purchases of euro-denominated financial
assets which were not linked to monetary policy.
In the April-May period, there was an increase in the provision
of liquidity via longer-term refinancing operations of 53.1 bil-
lion after the transaction of 31 March had completed the top-
ping up process started in late January from 575 billion to 590
billion. As the liquidity needs arising from the autonomous fac-
tors rose only slightly during this period, the main refinancing
operations were concurrently reduced by 51.7 billion. In the
wake of a declining need for liquidity arising from the autono-
mous factors, the volume of the main refinancing operations
similarly fell by 53.4 billion during the next period, before a
large increase of 524.5 billion took place in the June-July
period. As a result, the volume of these operations rose by
519.4 billion to 5297.6 billion over the entire observation
period. On balance, credit institutions’ central bank balances
rose to such an extent that the perceptible increase of 54.5 bil-
lion in the required reserves to 5147.2 billion was offset.
In the period under review, the EONIA stood mostly at between
2.06% and 2.08%. Only the increased liquidity preference at
the end of the month and half year temporarily led to slightly
higher overnight rates. Although the terrorist attacks in London
on 7 July drove rates up for several hours, turnover was so low
that EONIA closed the day at 2.11%. Even at the end of
the April-May period EONIA deviated only slightly from the
minimum bid rate. As was the case at the end of the previous
period in April, no fine-tuning operation was necessary thanks
to a very well balanced liquidity situation. However, towards
the end of the May-June period, the EONIA fell to 1.78% des-
pite a liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operation. The reason for
this was the low bidding by the credit institutions. As a result,
only 53.7 billion in liquidity was absorbed instead of the 57.5
billion which had been originally planned. Uncertainty with re-
spect to the individual liquidity situation and the ultimately dis-
appointed hope that interbank rates might rise above the 2%
fixed rate of the operation over the course of the day might
have prompted credit institutions to underbid. Underbidding,
albeit to a much smaller extent, also occurred at the end of the
June-July maintenance period, when the ECB absorbed 59.6 bil-
lion from the market instead of the 510 billion originally target-
ed. Nonetheless, the objective of a balanced liquidity situation
was virtually achieved, which is reflected in the EONIA of
2.06%. In both cases, net recourse to the deposit facility of 53.4
billion and 51.4 billion on the corresponding days shows that
the liquidity forecasts which the ECB used to determine the key
targets of the operations, and which it communicated when it
announced the operations, were very reliable. Hence, any re-
maining imbalances were largely due to underbidding by credit
institutions.
Overall, the overnight rates are currently showing an extraor-
dinarily stable development in the last week before the end of
the respective maintenance period. This was achieved by the
now prevailing market expectation that the ECB will conduct
fine-tuning operations at the end of the maintenance periods
in order to correct any major liquidity imbalances.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods
2005
Item13 Apr
to10 May11 May
to7 June8 June
to12 July
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances by
1 Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) – 6.9 – 7.3 – 9.8
2 Change in general govern-
ment deposits with theEurosystem (increase: –) + 4.5 + 9.4 – 13.9
3 Change in net foreign
reserves
2+ 4.9 – 0.2 + 6.5
4 Other factors2– 3.2 + 3.1 – 4.7
Total – 0.7 + 5.0 – 21.9
II Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations – 1.7 – 3.4 + 24.5
(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations + 3.1 € 0.0 € 0.0
(c) Other operations – – 0.1 – 0.2
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0
Total + 1.3 – 3.6 + 24.3
III Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I + II) + 0.7 + 1.5 + 2.4
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) – 0.4 – 1.5 – 2.6
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of this Monthly Report .— 2Including end-
of-quarter valuation adjustments with no impact on li-quidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
302005, the three-month money market rate
fluctuated by just 4 basis points. By contrast,the money market rates for longer maturitiesdeveloped unevenly. Between the start ofApril and the end of June, their interest ratespread of around 25 basis points over theEONIA eroded completely. In July, however,the longer-term money market rates beganto rise again, standing most recently ataround 2
1/C254%. As a result, the yield curve on
the money market is currently flat but with apositive slope. The three-month forward rate,which also expresses interest rate expect-ations in the money market, underwent a de-velopment similar to the longer-term moneymarket rates. Starting from their interim peakof approximately 2
3/C254% in late March 2005,
the three-month forward rates due in nine totwelve months fell to below 2% in late June,reflecting the expectation of a slight relaxingof interest rate policy. Once market sentimentwith respect to the future interest rate policyof the ECB Governing Council turned againin July, the spread moved back to around20 basis points.
Monetary developments in the euro area
The money stock M3 grew strongly in the
second quarter of 2005. Following a slow-down in monetary expansion in the first quar-ter, when M3 expanded at a seasonally ad-justed annual rate of 5%, money holdingsgrew at a rate of 9
1/C252% between April and
June. Strong lending to the private sector andextensive inflows from abroad were the maindrivers of this development. However, thevery high level of monetary capital formationslowed monetary growth per se. Overall, themoney stock M3 in June was up 7.5% on theyear. Between April and June, the year-on-year growth rate averaged 7.2%, havingaveraged 6.6% in the first quarter.
Of the components of the money stock, it
was again the most liquid categories whichexpanded considerably in the second quarter.In the period under review, money holdingsincreased at a seasonally adjusted annualrate of just under 14
1/C252%. Although growth
slowed perceptibly vis-/C224-vis the previousquarter (+24%), a sustained slowdown inthe volume of currency in circulation doesnot appear to be in sight. Given the lowinterest rates in the euro area and the in-creasing expansion of euro banknotes incountries outside of the euro area, there isSeasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
2005Reference value: 4 ½%Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
87
6
54
3
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Strong
monetary
growth
Components
of the money
stock

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
31likely to be a large demand for additional
euro banknotes and coins in the comingquarters, too. Although there was a slightslowdown in the expansion of overnight de-posits in the second quarter, at 9
1/C252%i tw a s
still very high, particularly since there wasalso a noticeable acceleration in other short-term bank deposits, which in the periodunder review grew at a seasonally adjustedannual rate of 6
1/C252%. This was caused mainly
by a rise in deposits with an agreed maturityof up to two years which, after having de-clined in the previous quarter, expandedstrongly again. The marketable instrumentsincluded in M3 also posted strong growth inthe April-June period. Both repo transactionsand short-term bank debt securities expand-ed sharply. Money market fund shares alsoincreased by a large amount in the periodunder review.
Strong lending to the private sector in the
euro area was the main source of money cre-ation in the second quarter. In particular, therise in loans to the private sector alone, at aseasonally adjusted annual rate of just under9
1/C252%, stimulated monetary growth in the
period under review. In June, unsecuritisedlending posted a year-on-year increase of7.9%. As in the previous quarters, housingloans to households were the main factor be-hind this development. They contributed3
1/C252percentage points to the annual growth
rate of loans. The increase in unsecuritisedlending to non-financial corporations ac-counted for an additional 2
1/C252percentage
points while around 1 percentage point wasattributable to the rise in other loans to€ billion, seasonally adjusted
change over the period indicated
€ billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet counterparts 1
Loans to
enterprises
and households
General
government
borrowing
or saving2
Net externalasset
position
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counterparts
of M3
3Money stock
Jan to Mar 2005
Increase in M3
Apr to June 2005Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts are
shown in terms of whether they expand (+)
or contract (−) the money stock. — 2Bank
loans to general government less euro-area
central government deposits with MFIs and
holdings of securities issued by the MFIsector. — 3Calculated as a residual of the
other items of the consolidated balance
sheet of the MFI sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank250+200+150+100+50+0 50−100−150−200−Balance sheet
counterparts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
32households and an expansion in lending to
financial enterprises.
Above and beyond that, MFIs’ net external
assets rose sharply in the period under review.However, by contrast, there was a clear in-crease in monetary capital formation. In theApril-June period, it was particularly bankdebt securities with a maturity of over twoyears which were again sold outside thebanking sector. Long-term time deposits alsocontinued to grow, although they were nolonger in demand to the same extent as wasthe case in the fourth quarter of 2004 andthe first quarter of 2005.
In the period under review, general govern-
ment borrowing or saving exerted virtuallyno effect on monetary growth. The slight in-crease in loans to the public sector in theeuro area was accompanied by a moderateincrease in bank deposits and short-termbank debt securities held by euro-area cen-tral governments which are not included inM3.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
Private non-banks’ liquid deposits at domestic
banks in Germany, which are included in M3,rose sharply in the second quarter. At a sea-sonally adjusted annual rate of just over6
1/C252%, the rise in this item was only some-
what smaller than the corresponding increasein these deposits in the euro area as a whole(+8%). In the period under review, overnightdeposits and short-term savings deposits inGermany continued to rise. Moreover, as wasthe case in the euro area as a whole, short-term time deposits were in particularly highdemand in the period under review, afterhaving been reduced perceptibly in the previ-ous quarter. In the light of the further de-crease in interest rates on the capital market,short-term bank deposits have become evenmore attractive.
In the second quarter of 2005, domestic in-
vestors’ overnight deposits continued togrow strongly, reaching a seasonally adjustedannual rate of 6
1/C252%. In addition to house-
holds, non-financial corporations made a keycontribution towards the increase in sight de-posits. By contrast, other financial intermedi-aries reduced their overnight money. Instead,these institutions built up deposits with anLending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2005 2004
ItemApr to
JuneApr toJune
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs
1
Overnight + 18.7 + 7.4With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years + 4.0 – 6.2of over 2 years – 0.6 + 13.3
Redeemable at agreed notice
of up to 3 months – 1.0 + 0.9of over 3 months – 1.6 – 2.3
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised + 8.4 + 1.7Securitised + 0.6 – 9.1
to domestic government
Unsecuritised – 4.5 – 18.7Securitised – 13.4 + 14.9
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .—1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche BundesbankSharp rise
in short-term
bank deposits
Sharp rise
in overnight
deposits ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
33agreed maturity of up to two years. As insur-
ance corporations and non-financial corpor-ations also topped up their holdings of short-term time deposits considerably, in the April-June period these deposits grew stronglyoverall at a seasonally adjusted annual rateof 13%. While short-term savings deposits(with an agreed notice of up to threemonths) grew more slowly than short-termtime deposits – recording a seasonally adjust-ed annual rise of 4
1/C252% – their growth rate
accelerated noticeably compared with thepreceding quarters.
In this context, short-term deposits are likely
to have been increased partly at the expenseof longer-term savings deposits (with anagreed notice of over three months). In theperiod under review, these deposits stag-nated after having increased in the two pre-ceding quarters. Time deposits with anagreed maturity of over two years were like-wise not increased in the second quarter. Fol-lowing fairly strong growth in the precedingquarters, it was probably above all themarked fall in interest rates which dampenedinvestors’ interest in long-term time deposits.
German banks’ lending to domestic non-
banks increased in the second quarter. Forthe first time in a year, domestic credit insti-tutions granted loans to general govern-ment in Germany. However, this contrastedwith a sharp reduction in their holdings ofpublic debt securities. In their credit busi-ness with private domestic non-banks,banks increased the volume of both securi-tised and unsecuritised lending. During thesecond quarter, the latter grew at a season-ally adjusted annual rate of 1
1/C252%. In add-
ition to loans to domestic enterprises, suchlending mainly comprised long-term hous-ing loans.
For the first time since the Bank Lending Sur-
vey
1was first conducted in the fourth quarter
of 2002, the German results indicate that,following initial signs in the preceding quar-ter, there was a clearly observable easing ofthe credit standards for loans to enterprises,too. A number of institutions cited increasingcompetitive pressure in this segment of lend-ing as the reason for this. Credit standards forhouseholds, by contrast, remained un-changed in the case of consumer credit, al-Seasonally adjusted
€b n
%
2005Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02300
2250
2200
2150
2100
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, German results of euro-
area bank lending survey, Monthly Report , June 2003,
pp 67-76.... and short-
term deposits
Longer-term
bank deposits
virtually
unchanged
Slight rise
in lendingEasing of credit
standards for
enterprises and
falling margins

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
34though they tended to be somewhat more
restrictive for housing loans. Hence, creditstandards in Germany developed much thesame as in the euro area as a whole, althoughthe more restrictive tendency in the area ofhousing loans in Germany deviated from theoverall trend. According to the respondentbanks, they further lowered the margins onaverage loans to enterprises and households.In Germany, this applied particularly to thearea of private housing construction. A fewof the institutions surveyed provided supple-mentary comments on this developmentwhich refer, inter alia , to the current competi-
tive environment. At the same time, marginscharged on riskier loans were slightlywidened to some extent. German credit insti-tutions expect a further slight easing of creditstandards as well as largely unchanged creditdemand in the third quarter of 2005.
In the second quarter of 2005, German
banks’ long-term new loans to the privatesector became considerably cheaper. De-pending on the credit volume, credit institu-tions charged non-financial enterprises be-tween 4.0% and 4.4% in the period underreview. Interest rates on long-term loans tohouseholds also fell. By the end of the secondquarter, banks were charging 8.7% for con-sumer loans and 4.3% for housing loans withthe interest rate locked in for more than tenyears. By contrast, there was an uneven de-velopment in interest rates on short-termloans. While the rates of interest on both con-sumer loans and small corporate loans re-mained virtually unchanged, banks chargedsomewhat less for large corporate loans and%
%
%%
%
%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q31
2002Consumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in loan margins
Loans to enterprises
Average loansRiskier loansConsumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in credit standards
Loans to enterprisesBank Lending Survey *
*Percentage difference between the num-
bers of respondents reporting ”tightened
considerably” and ”tightened somewhat”
and the numbers of respondents reporting
”eased somewhat” and ”eased consider-
ably”. — 1Expectations for Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−100+
80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−40+
20+
0
20−40+
20+
0
20−60+
40+
20+
0
20−
2003 2004 2005Slight fall in
lending rates
overall

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
35housing loans than they did in the previous
quarter.
The interest rates paid on households’ long-
term deposits at domestic credit institutionslikewise fell in the second quarter of 2005. Bycontrast, the rate of interest paid on short-term deposits remained virtually unchanged.Depending on the maturity, the rate of inter-est paid on households’ time deposits rangedbetween 1.9% and 2.2% of late.
2Savings
deposits with a notice of up to three monthsearned 2.1% while banks offered 2.4% forlonger maturities.
Securities markets
Since April, the German and European bond
markets have been characterised by a world-wide decline in long-term interest rates andextremely buoyant equity markets. Againstthis backdrop, German bond yields, meas-ured here in terms of the yield on ten-yearBunds, fell in line with the movements inlong-term US interest rates by around
1/C252per-
centage point in the second quarter to an his-torical low of just under 3.1% in late June/early July. On balance, the expected real ratesof interest fell to the same extent. Based onlong-term inflation expectations for the euroarea, this figure last stood at 1
1/C254%, which by
historical standards is an exceptionally lowlevel.New business
% per
annum
% per
annum% per
annum
... over €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year... up to €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
... over €1 million with an initial
   rate fixation of over 5 yearsLoans to non-financial
corporations ...Loans to households
Consumer credit 1
2
Housing loans3Households’ deposits...
...overnight...redeemable at notice
   of up to 3 months
...with an agreed maturity
   of up to 1 yearBank interest
rates in Germany
1 With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year
and up to 5 years. — 2 Decline owing to
special effect. — 3 With an initial rate
fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years.
Deutsche Bundesbank5.5
5.2
4.9
4.6
4.3
4.03.7
3.4
3.12.87.06.76.4
6.1
5.85.5
5.2
4.94.6
4.3
4.02.7
2.4
2.11.8
1.5
1.20.9
2003 2004 2005 2The level reported in June 2005 of 2.7% for time de-
posits with an agreed maturity of over one year and up
to two years is based on large-volume special transac-
tions. The rates of interest paid in this category typically
lie between those for short-term time deposits (most re-
cently 1.9%) and those for long-term time deposits
(most recently 2.2%).Similar small
drop in long-
term deposit
rates
Low interest-
rates on the
bond market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
36In the wake of the decline in interest rates in
the Bund market, financing terms in the cor-porate sector have also improved, althoughthe interest rate spreads indicate there werehigher default and liquidity premia than inthe first quarter.
3Together with the rating
agencies’ more favourable assessment of cor-porate creditworthiness, which as in the pre-vious quarter saw more companies being up-graded than downgraded, the yield spreads,however, tend to indicate more of an increasein investors’ risk aversion in the second quar-ter than a more unfavourable risk assess-ment. This development is in line with the de-velopment on the international corporatebond markets.
4
Issuing activity in the German bond markethas not directly reflected the favourable fi-nancing terms. Although gross sales of do-mestic debt securities reached a total of3341
1/C252billion in the second quarter of 2005,
after taking account of redemptions andchanges in issuers’ holdings of their ownbonds, net sales of domestic bonds ( 356
1/C252
billion) were slightly down on the quarter, adevelopment which was particularly driven byincreased redemptions of money marketpaper. Over and above this, domestic invest-ors purchased 346
1/C252billion worth of foreign
debt securities, mostly denominated in euro.In net terms, therefore, 3103 billion was
raised on the German bond market al-together compared with 3114 billion in the
previous quarter.
In the period under review, domestic credit
institutions issued bonds and notes with a netvalue of 346 billion. This was half as much
again as the amount issued in the previousquarter. They were the only group of domes-tic borrowers to show a net increase in sales.Sales mainly comprised other bank debt se-curities ( 331 billion), which, in contrast to
mortgage Pfandbriefe and public-sectorPfandbriefe, do not focus on the funding ofspecific bank credit operations but rather rep-Daily data
%
Per-
cent-
age
pointsSpread of US bond yields
over the German bond market
2003 2004 2005Yield on ten-year governmentbonds outstanding
GermanyUSABonds yields in Germany
and in the USA
Deutsche Bundesbank1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
3Measured here in terms of the yield spread of BBB-
rated European corporate bonds with a maturity of seven
to ten years. Although the spread, at just over 100 basis
points of late, was only a little above the level at the end
of March, a comparison with the previous quarter has to
take account especially of the altered composition of the
BBB index in the course of the second quarter as well as
the associated lower level of spreads. Taking these tech-
nical changes into account, the yield spread and the cor-
responding premia on credit default swaps suggest high-
er default risk and liquidity premia.
4This is indicated by a measure of risk propensity which
is based on the first common factor of a principal com-ponent analysis. The principal component analysis in-
cluded US and European corporate bonds from the junk
bond and investment grade segments.Spreads on
corporate
bonds ...
... suggest
greater risk
aversion on the
bond marketsBond salessomewhat
weaker
Greater
borrowing
by credit
institutions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
37resent a particularly flexible general refinan-
cing instrument. Apart from these instru-ments, only debt securities issued by special-purpose credit institutions were issued on asizeable scale on balance ( 39
1/C252billion). By
contrast, sales of public-sector Pfandbriefetotalled only 35 billion net; just over 3
1/C252bil-
lion was raised through the issuance of mort-gage Pfandbriefe.
In the quarter under review, general govern-
ment raised 311
1/C252billion net in the bond
market. The lion’s share of this was account-ed for by the Federal Government, which is-sued euro-denominated debt securities worth38
1/C252billion net, particularly in the five-year
maturity segment ( 310 billion). In addition,
the Federal Government issued its first for-eign currency bond in the amount of US$5billion and at the same time eliminated thecurrency risk by concluding appropriate hedg-ing transactions. Besides five-year Federalnotes (Bobls), the Federal Government issuedFederal savings notes and two-year FederalTreasury notes (Sch/C228tze) on balance. Stategovernment borrowed 33
1/C252billion on the
capital market.
Non-financial corporations which are capable
of issuing debt securities reduced their capitalmarket liabilities by 31 billion. This mainly
comprised the redemption of money marketpaper, although the level of debt in longer-dated securities increased slightly.
It was primarily foreign investors who fea-
tured as purchasers on the German bondmarket, topping up their holdings by 359
1/C252
billion. They purchased public and private-Deutsche BundesbankDevelopment of corporate bond 
spreads
Between the fourth quarter of 2002 and 
the second quarter of 2005, the yield spread between government and corporate bonds with a BBB rating narrowed by around four-ﬁ fths to less than 60 basis points. Thereafter, a 
countermovement set in: between March and May the yield spread rose to just over 140 basis points. This was triggered by proﬁ  t warnings 
from General Motors and Ford. This can be seen in a comparison with the corresponding data excluding the General Motors bond, which was included in the overall index until the end of May 2005.
1) The comparison shows that in the 
period under review just under one-quarter of the increased spread stems from the deteriora-tion in the credit rating of General Motors. But the adjusted index and the corresponding credit risk premia on credit default swaps (CDS) also show that there has been a sharp general increase in the credit risk and liquidity premia in addition to this spread increase since March of this year.
2)
1 The Merill-Lynch BBB Index for corporate bonds with 
a residual maturity of seven to ten years. The Index was adjusted for the General Motors bond which was included in the index in May 2005 and recalculated accordingly. The gap between the two curves on 30 May 2005 is the result of the other changes in the composition of the index. — 2 The liquidity premium can be obtained 
by calculating the difference between the spreads on corporate bonds and the CDS premia. See Deutsche Bun-desbank, Monthly Report , May 2005, p 32.Daily values
Basis-
points
2004 2005BBB-rated corporate bond spread
Excluding GM
CDS premia
(excluding GM)Corporate bonds spreads
and CDS premia
Sources: Bloomberg, Datastream and Bundes-
bank calculations.140
120
100
80604020
0
JAS O NDJF M A MJJDifference (excluding GM):
bond spread – CDS premiaForeign
currency bond
issued
by Federal
Government
Enterprises
reduce capital
market
liabilities
Purchases of
debt securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
38sector bonds in roughly equal amounts. On
balance, credit institutions added virtuallyonly foreign bonds and notes to their port-folios ( 326 billion). Domestic non-banks in-
vested 316
1/C252billion in the bond market,
which in net terms was used exclusivelyfor purchases of foreign debt securities(320
1/C252billion).
The equity markets in Germany and in Europealso recovered quickly in the second quarterafter stalling briefly. This development wasparticularly dramatic on the German stock ex-changes in June and July. By the end of July,the German share indices had reached thehigh levels of three to four years ago. Meas-ured against the broad CDAX as well as theDow Jones Euro Stoxx indices, German andEuropean share prices rose by around 18%and 14% respectively compared with the endof April. This trend was driven above all byimproved earnings expectations across theboard for large enterprises active in exportbusiness. Furthermore, the appreciation ofthe US dollar and the resulting improvementin the competitiveness of European enter-prises on the global markets generated in-vestors’ interest. Energy and utility stocksbenefited from the global rise in demand inthis segment. By contrast, enterprises whichare dependent on domestic demand per-formed below average. On the whole, thedistinct rise in share prices on the Germanequity market has improved the financingconditions for German enterprises, not onlyin view of the low capital market interestrates, but also in terms of the supply of riskcapital.New long-term financing and
investment instruments
In 2005, bonds with a maturity of 50 years
were issued in Europe for the first time in45 years. France and the United Kingdomsuccessfully placed 50-year governmentbonds and an Italian telecommunicationscompany also drew on this segment of thecapital market.
Such ultra-long bonds were in great
demand on the market. For example, thebid-to-cover ratio of the 50-year Frenchgovernment bond issue was three. It isbeing traded at a yield mark-up of only afew basis points vis-/C224-vis a comparable30-year bond. When comparing the yieldsit should, however, be borne in mind thatinvestors strongly discount payment flowsthat lie in the distant future. These consid-erations are reflected in the average,weighted commitment period of the capi-tal, ie the duration, of the 50-year bond.This is around 22 years and thus only about5 years longer than that of the 30-yearbond.
The current tendency towards long-term
financing instruments is also attested bythe fact that some companies are nowdrawing on the capital market via hybridbonds. These subordinated debt securitiescan have maturities of up to 100 years orbe “undated”. Such debt securities arecounted by rating agencies in particular aspartial capital substitutes. They improvethe debt ratio and other financial ratios ofthe issuing company, which tends to lowerits financing costs. Usually the issuer cancall in a hybrid bond after ten years at thelatest. Until the earliest possible call-in datethese bonds typically have a fixed interestrate, thereafter a floating rate is paid. Theshift to a floating interest rate means thatthese bonds correspond more closely toten-year bonds than actual “ultra-long”bonds.
Deutsche BundesbankEquity markets
buoyant

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
39As there was only one major IPO in the
second quarter, issuing activity on the Ger-man equity market shrank. German enter-prises placed new shares with a market valueof only 31 billion, after having placed 32 bil-
lion in the first quarter. However, share issu-ance is expected to pick up in the second halfof the year, especially as private equity fundsand other venture capitalists are again in-creasingly seeking to sell off existing partici-pating interests via public offerings. In netterms, foreign investors were the sole pur-chasers of German shares ( 326
1/C252billion). Do-
mestic non-banks and credit institutions, bycontrast, reduced their holdings by 321 billion
and 34
1/C252billion respectively. On balance,
there was virtually no change in their hold-ings of foreign equities.
In the period under review, domestic invest-
ment companies attracted funds totalling39
1/C252billion, the same amount as in the first
quarter, after having recorded outflows offunds a year ago. Two-thirds of this amountaccrued to special funds. Of the investmentfunds open to the general public, bond-basedfunds were the most popular, followed bymoney market funds and mixed funds. Share-based funds, by contrast, had to repurchasefund units on balance. At 38 billion, foreign
funds trebled their sales of mutual fundshares compared with the second quarter of2004. The main purchasers were domesticnon-banks, which bought fund units with atotal value of 312
1/C252billion, investing nearly
equal amounts in domestic and foreign mu-tual funds. Credit institutions bought units indomestic and foreign mutual funds with atotal value of 34 billion; by contrast, foreignMonthly data
Lin scale
Price-earnings ratio2
DAX
Share price index
Dow Jones
EuroStoxxAverage expected earnings2
DAX
Share price index 1Dow JonesEuroStoxx
 1Log scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx
share price index 1
DAX share price index 1Price movements and earnings
estimates for European
and German public
limited companies
1March 2000 = 100; source:  Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2Based on year-on-year I / B / E / S
analyst estimates. Source: Thomson Finan-
cial Datastream.
Deutsche Bundesbank30
27
24
21
18
15
12
9130
115
100
85
7014585
70
4085
60
50
45
40
35
30
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005Lower volume
of funds raised
in the equity
market
Mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
40investors increased their holdings of units in
domestic mutual funds only slightly ( 31 bil-
lion).Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5bn
2005 2004
ItemJan to
MarchApr toJuneApr toJune
Bonds and notes
Residents 62.7 43.4 59.1
Credit institutions 46.4 26.8 38.2
of which
Foreign bonds and notes 34.6 26.0 18.8
Non-banks 16.2 16.6 20.9of which
Domestic bonds and notes – 2.3 – 3.7 6.3
Non-residents 51.4 59.3 22.3
Shares
Residents – 1.6 – 25.7 17.1
Credit institutions 1.5 – 4.5 – 5.4
of which
Domestic shares 2.3 – 6.9 – 6.2
Non-banks – 3.1 – 21.1 22.5of which
Domestic shares – 4.0 – 18.4 23.0
Non-residents 3.7 26.5 – 11.8
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 8.9 6.2 0.1
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 0.4 3.2 – 1.3of which: Share-based funds – 1.8 – 0.8 – 1.4
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
41Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
In the second quarter of 2005, the German
economy maintained the level of activityachieved in the first few months of the year.According to initial calculations by the FederalStatistical Office, overall economic output inthe second quarter matched that of the firstquarter after adjustment for seasonal fluctu-ations and variations in the number of work-ing days. However, the somewhat longer-term trend is more apparent if the first twoquarters of 2005 are taken together; grossdomestic product (GDP) rose by
3/C254% com-
pared with the second half of 2004. Theyear-on-year increase was on the same scale.
In the second quarter, overall economic out-
put was bolstered by a slight improvement indomestic demand. The positive developmentin investment in machinery and equipmentcontinued in the second quarter, albeit at aslower pace than in the first few months ofthe year. The restraint in construction activitydue to the cold winter weather, which hadbeen discernable earlier, eased somewhat, al-though real expenditure on new buildings re-mained subdued. Higher imports are likely tohave sharply increased stocks, especially ofintermediate and consumer goods, resultingin inventory investment making a positivecontribution to growth. Export activity alsogenerated expansionary stimuli in the secondquarter, although these were no longer asstrong as in the first few months of the year,leading to a decline in net exports.
Seasonally adjusted private consumption fell
again slightly in spring. This was due mainlyGDP on flat
path in the
second quarter
of 2005
Increase in
investment
and exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
42to weak sales in the traditional retail trade.
After showing signs of a slight upturn in thefirst few months of the year, sales levelled offagain in the second quarter. The year-on-yearincrease, which amounted to around 2% inthe first quarter, went down to 1
1/C252%. On
average, sales of petrol and heating oil be-tween April and June were down on thesame period of 2004. Persistently high pricesare likely to have curbed demand. By con-trast, seasonally adjusted new vehicle regis-trations recovered strongly in the secondquarter from the very low level in the first fewmonths of the year. At the end of the periodunder review, they were also somewhat upon the year again.Output
After a very strong start to 2005, business in
industry was more subdued in the secondquarter. On an average of the period fromApril to June, seasonal and working-day ad-justed output rose
1/C252% compared with the
first few months of the year. However, theyear-on-year increase fell from 3
3/C254% in the
first quarter to 23/C254% in the second quarter.
While the basic and capital goods sectorswere still able to step up their productionsomewhat in the past few months, consumergoods recorded a decline in output. Non-durable consumer goods were particularly af-fected, with both pharmaceuticals manufac-turers and the clothing industry no longerperforming so well.
Activity in major areas of the construction
sector picked up again as winter receded,which had hindered production until well intoMarch of this year. Adjusted for seasonal andworking-day variations, construction outputin the second quarter was around 2
1/C254%u p
on the first three months of the year. Theyear-on-year fall, which had grown to justover 16% in the period from January toMarch, went back down to 6
3/C254%. However,
this was scarcely lower than at the end of lastyear. This clearly illustrates the fact that thestructural adjustment process, which affectsconstruction more than civil engineering, hasnot yet been completed. The development inthe finishing trades is also likely to have im-proved in the second quarter as winter-related restrictions came to an end.Adjusted for seasonal and working-day
variations, quarterly
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
2005Log scale  
Real GDP
2000 = 100Economic growth in Germany
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−104
102
100
98
96
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Private
consumption in
decline againStable industrial
output
Improvement
in the
construction
industry

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
43In the wholesale and retail trade sector,
wholesale business was very favourable in thesecond quarter. First-quarter sales were al-ready somewhat better than in the sameperiod of 2004 and showed a further sharpincrease in April and May. As has been thecase for a while, this was particularly true ofbranches linked to the production sector. Theperformance of suppliers of machinery andequipment was better than average in thiscontext. Firms trading in consumer goods
clearly performed less well. Sales of food,beverages and tobacco, in particular, wereonly modest. Much the same applies to thecorresponding branch in the retail sector. Al-though sales increased year on year, in sea-sonally adjusted terms the second quarter didnot quite match the figures for the previousmonths. This was only partially offset by sub-stantially higher consumer purchases of tex-tiles and clothing and buoyant demand foritems from pharmacies and for medicinal andorthopaedic goods. According to the officialstatistics, which are based on a new index,second-quarter retail sales overall were slight-ly down on the first quarter.
1At constant
prices and after working-day adjustment,there was a year-on-year rise of 1
1/C252%. In the
hotel and restaurant industry, the gradual im-provement in the situation previously indi-cated by a reduction in the falls in year-on-year turnover does not appear to have con-tinued in the second quarter. On the contrary,business has recently been further down onthe comparable figures for 2004. This appliesespecially to accommodation services and, to2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
2005Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank5+
0
5−
10−
15−105
90100
8595
8090
75
7010+
5+
0
5−105
100
95
90
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
1Sometimes, the retail sales figures at the current end
exhibit a relatively large margin of uncertainty. This is due
to the procedure by which substitute data for figures un-
available on the relevant cut-off date are calculated for
individual enterprises and incorporated into the index. In
such cases, for the current month a value is used that is
derived from the annual change over the last three avail-
able periods. This can produce unsatisfactory results if
the pattern of working days and public holidays differs
from that of the previous year. One recent example of
this is that, unlike in 2004, Easter fell in March this year.
Owing to the smaller number of shopping days in the ref-
erence period, the hypothetical annual rate is therefore
understated for April. In addition, the makeshift calcula-
tion is based on a low sales figure last year because of
the Easter holidays. An inaccurate assessment also occurs
if there is a reversal of trend. Over time, as the missing
reports come in, the accuracy of the statistics will
increase.Wholesale
more positive
than retail

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
44a somewhat lesser extent, the restaurant and
catering trade.
In the transport sector, aviation firms, in par-
ticular, were able to expand their output. Al-though data on sales is currently availableonly for the first quarter, it may be assumedthat this positive trend continued in thesecond quarter. For road-based transportfirms, the negative results recorded last yearwere increasingly superseded by a more fa-vourable development. The situation in com-munications remains positive. Although turn-over growth was no longer quite as strong asit had been since the second quarter of 2004,when double-digit growth rates had beenachieved, large increases continued this year.Among commercial service providers, thesituation for providers of IT services and data-bases took a turn for the better in the secondquarter after a difficult phase which persistedinto early 2005. According to data from thesurveys of the Centre for European EconomicResearch, the majority of reports on saleswere positive again for the first time in morethan six months. Tax consultants and auditorsalso recorded brisk business. Furthermore,services from consultancy firms as well asresearch and development companies werealso in strong demand.
Labour market
Throughout the period under review, the la-
bour market was strongly influenced by theeffects of labour market policy measures, rele-gating cyclical changes to the background.The sustained increase in the number of per-sons in work to date has been due mainly tothe expansion of job opportunities. Previously,the increase in both mini-jobs and one-personbusinesses had made substantial contribu-tions. According to the Federal Statistical Of-fice, the total seasonally adjusted figure forthe number of people in work went up to38.92 million.
2This was just over 70,000
more than at the end of the first quarter and45,000, or 0.1 %, more than 12 months earl-ier. Continued job cuts in industry and con-struction were offset by additional jobs cre-ated in the services sector, particularly bycommercial service providers and in the healthand social work sector. In quite a few cases,such employment is likely to be part-time,whereas it is probably mainly full-time jobsthat have been lost in the manufacturing sec-tor. The total number of hours worked (ie thetotal number of hours worked by all em-ployed persons) is therefore likely to be onlyslightly higher than in the previous year afteradjustment for working-day variations.
Labour market policy also had a marked im-
pact on registered unemployment. Over thepast few months, it has promoted a reductionin unemployment, with a large number ofpersons receiving social assistance havingregistered as unemployed at the beginning ofthe year as a result of the introduction of“unemployment benefit II”. According to anestimate by the Federal Employment Agency,new registrations due to labour market policyat around 380,000 have now been followed
2The Federal Statistical Office has made a substantial
downward revision to the existing employment figures,
particularly those since the start of 2005. In January, the
figure was revised downwards by 158,000 and by
111,000 in May.Largely positive
developments
in the services
sector
Marked impact
of labour
market policy
on the
employed ...... and the
registered
unemployed

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
45by some 60,000 departures from the statis-
tics. The total seasonally adjusted number ofunemployed persons had fallen to 4.81 mil-lion by mid-July. This was roughly 410,000more than in the same period last year. Theseasonally adjusted unemployment rate was11.6%, compared with 10.6% in July 2004.
According to a telephone survey by the Fed-
eral Statistical Office, the seasonally adjustednumber of persons out of work, calculatedaccording to ILO
3criteria, stood at 3.92 mil-
lion in June. This was somewhat down on thetwo preceding months. Since administrativeeffects do not have a great impact here, thisis an indication that cyclical unemploymentremained broadly constant in the secondquarter. The seasonally adjusted unemploy-ment rate in June was 9.2%.
Demand
Following a weak performance in April, de-
mand for German industrial goods picked upconsiderably in the course of the secondquarter. As a result, orders received on aver-age over the three-month period were
3/C254%
up on the quarter after adjustment for sea-sonal and working-day variations. However,the year-on-year increase slipped from almost3
1/C252% in the first quarter to somewhat more
than 2% owing to a fall in April.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Millions
Millions
Thou-
sands
Millions
Thou-
sands
%
0
12Unemployment rateJuly
Rate of joblessnessJulyLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed- 
JulyLin scale
Year-on-year change
Employed
Workers subject to social
security contributionsof which
Workers
subject to
social security
contributionsLog scale
EmployedLabour market
1From January 2004, unemployed ex-
cluding participants in aptitude testing and
training measures. The rate of joblessness
cannot be compared with previous figures
because of changes in the way the data are
collected and the figures are calculated. —
2From January 2005, including persons
formerly receiving social assistance but able
to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9
8
7600+
300+
0
300−5.0
4.7
4.4
4.1
3.8500+
0
500−
1000−28.0
27.5
27.0
26.5
26.039.5
39.0
38.5
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
3According to the ILO labour force concept, an un-
employed person is defined as someone between the
ages of 15 and 65 who has not been in work during the
reporting week (not even for one hour), is available to
start work within two weeks and who has actively sought
a job in the past four weeks.Slight increase
in demand for
industrial goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
46Positive demand stimuli came especially from
the domestic market in the second quarter.Orders within the consumer goods sector hadalready been increasing for some time andwere boosted further by a rise in ordersplaced with capital goods producers. As wellas a major order for other transport equip-ment, including aircraft, there was a rise inthe number of orders for machinery andequipment, in particular, in June. Road vehiclemanufacturers also added a large number ofnew orders to their books.
By contrast, export demand did not quite
match its high level at the start of the year,when a series of major orders were received.Year-on-year growth fell from 7
3/C254% in the
first quarter to around 31/C252% in the following
three-month period. Demand was no longeras strong, especially for capital goods. Thiswas due mainly to a fall in orders for machin-ery and equipment. However, manufacturersof office machinery and computers were alsoaffected. By contrast, manufacturers of inter-mediate goods reported a somewhat higherlevel of orders and, in the consumer goodssector, demand even picked up substantiallyon the weak first quarter.
Demand for construction work – which was
affected by the winter weather in the firstfew months of the year – picked up again inearly spring. On an average of April and May,new construction orders were around 5% upon the first quarter in seasonal and working-day adjusted terms. Nevertheless, they werestill 3
3/C254% down on the fourth quarter and
41/C252% down on the same period last year. This
means that the recent more favourable devel-Volume, 2000 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
%
2005Lin scale
Year-on-year changeApril-
MayTotal construction orders
April-MayDomesticLog scale
ForeignLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Total industrial ordersDemand for industrial goods
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−120
100115
95110
90105
85100
80
75
70
65105
100
95
90100115
95110
90105
85100
8015+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−110
105
100
95
90
85
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005- Slightly higher
demand for
construction
work

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
47opment in orders should be seen as a return
to normal after the winter break. This view isalso supported by the fact that the number ofhousing construction permits was fallingagain at the end of the period under review.As a result, the discernible stabilisation oforders in housing in April and May is unlikelyto be sustained. It was only in May that publicsector customers placed a larger number oforders and, for the first time in some while,their volume was no longer down on theyear. Although the increase in orders in com-mercial and industrial construction also result-ed in a year-on-year rise, they were still con-siderably lower than in the final quarter of2004.
Among commercial service providers, tax and
business consultants as well as corporate con-sultants reported sustained strong demandaccording to surveys by the Centre for Euro-pean Economic Research. Research and de-velopment services also met with keen inter-est. The outlook for architects and technicalconsultancy firms as well as in trade in infor-mation and communications technologyproducts was, however, far less positive.
Wages
As several multi-year wage agreements were
concluded in many sectors of the economy in2004, there will only be a small “pay round”this year. There have been no major surprisesso far. The newly negotiated contracts largelyfollow the pattern of last year’s agreements.The trend towards lower wage increases, thephasing-out of special payments under col-lective wage agreements, and longer workinghours has continued. In addition, liberalisa-tion clauses have increasingly been concededin industry-wide collective agreements.
Negotiated pay rate rises in the first six
months of 2005 varied between 0.4% in theconstruction sector and 3.4% in the iron andsteel industry. As an overall average, therehas been an increase of around 1
1/C252% for the
year to date. In real terms, this corresponds toan increase in wage costs of roughly 1%given an expected rise of
1/C252% in the gross
value added deflator.
This year’s wage round was initiated by the
public sector. The focus was on a fundamen-tal restructuring of the 50 year-old legislationon collective pay bargaining in this sector.A key part of the agreement is a standardisedpay table for wage earners and salaried staff,which unifies the existing wage and paygroups. In addition, the current age and seni-ority increments are being replaced by six“experience levels”. During the transition tothe new remuneration structure, which islikely to enter into force on 1 October 2005,compensation payments will ensure thatearnings are not reduced (safeguarding of ac-quired rights). Moreover, a performance-related pay element will be introduced from2007, which will initially amount to 1% oftotal pay and is scheduled to rise to 8% insubsequent years. Additionally, from October2005, working hours can be increased to40 hours at local government level in westernGood demand
for some
service
providers
Only small
“pay round”Sectoral spreadof negotiated
wage rates
Public sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
48Germany and to 39 hours at central govern-
ment level.4
The new rates of pay will remain unchangedfor all central government employees untilthe end of 2007. However, a one-off pay-ment of 3300 per employee is planned for
each year. There will be no such one-off pay-ments for local government employees ineastern Germany. Instead, gradual conver-gence towards west German rates of pay hasbeen agreed. In eastern Germany, 92.5% ofthe level in the west has been achieved. Anincrease to 94% is scheduled as of 1 July2005, which will rise to 97% by July 2007.Taking a representative pay scale for publicsector salaried staff, the pay agreement re-sults in an average increase in earnings in2005 of just under 1%.Higher wage increases were achieved espe-cially in the steel industry. The new wageagreement recognises the high speed of de-velopment in the sector, caused primarily bythe boom in global demand, with monthlyone-off payments of 3100 between April and
August 2005 and a permanent 3.5% wageincrease as of 1 September 2005. The aver-age annual rise in negotiated pay comes to3.4% in 2005 and 2.3% in 2006.
5
A 2.7% pay increase is scheduled as of 1 June2005. There is also to be a one-off paymentof 1.2% of an employee’s monthly salaryeach month for the duration of the wageagreement, to be paid on 28 February 2006.However, there is a liberalisation clause forthis one-off payment stating that it may bepostponed, reduced or withheld altogether instruggling companies by means of in-houseagreements. This clause is intended to reflectthe split development in the chemicals indus-try. Although large, export-oriented com-panies are performing strongly, in many casessmaller companies are suffering from weakdomestic demand. Negotiated rates of paywill increase by 1.6% on average in 2005and, including the one-off payments, by 3%in 2006. Without the special payment, the in-crease will amount to 1.1%. The west Ger-man agreement was adopted in eastern Ger-many and additional wage adjustments from1 October 2006 (+1.5%) and 2007 (+1.6%)were agreed. The latter are designed to fur-ther the convergence of wages between theAnnual percentage change
Projected
macro-economic
growth rateIron and steel
Private banks
Metal-working
Chemicals
Wholesale
Public sector
Printing
ConstructionResults of the 2005
pay round
Deutsche Bundesbank3.53.02.52.01.51.00.50
4This wage agreement applies only at the central and
local government levels. An agreement for the federal
states has not yet been reached.
5These figures and those below are on a monthly basis
and include ancillary agreements.Steel industry
Chemicals
industry

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
49western and eastern parts of Germany. They
mean that, on an annual average, the eastGerman negotiated pay level in 2006 will riseby 5.7% including the one-off payment or by3.8% excluding it – substantially more thanin western Germany.
In mid-June, both sides of the printing indus-
try agreed on one-off payments of 3340 for
the period from 1 April 2005 to 31 March2006 and a permanent 1% pay increase from1 April 2006. For the union, it was especiallyimportant to safeguard a working week of35 hours in western Germany and 38 hoursin eastern Germany in the national collectivepay agreement. For that reason, significantwage concessions and a cut in various bo-nuses (eg for working on Saturdays) were ac-cepted. On an annual average, negotiatedrates of pay will go up by 0.8% in 2005 and0.5% in 2006.
The wage increases agreed in the construc-
tion sector in western Germany were com-paratively small. One-off monthly paymentsof330 will be paid between September 2005
and March 2006. The negotiated pay rate willincrease by 1% from 1 April 2006. At thesame time, the working week will increase to40 hours with no extra pay. Holiday pay andthe minimum wage will both be lowered. Onan annual average, negotiated monthly ratesof pay will rise by 0.4% in 2005 and 1% in2006. The construction industry is thereforeat the lower end of this year’s round of col-lective wage agreements, which is appropri-ate given the ongoing need for structuralreforms.Prices
Price movements in recent months have been
largely driven by the increase in oil prices.With interruptions, quotations have been ris-ing since the autumn of 2003. The last timethere was a temporary stabilisation was inMay this year, which was also reflected inGerman prices at various levels, ranging fromimports to private consumption. The average2000 = 100, log scale
2005Import prices ...
(seasonally adjusted)
... excluding energy
... for energyCommodity prices 1 ...
... for industrial
    raw materials
... for energyCommodity and import prices
1HWWA index “Euroland” on a euro basis.
Deutsche Bundesbank140
120
100
90
80
70
60
50
40160
140
120
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
35 35
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005Printing
industry
Construction
sector
Sharpfluctuations
in oil prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
50spot market price for a barrel of Brent North
Sea Oil in July was US$58.08. The price occa-sionally rose higher, when reports about sup-ply shortfalls in the Gulf of Mexico, Nigeria orIraq created uncertainty. In mid-August, inter-national oil prices hit a new record high ofUS$65, or 352.50.
After dipping slightly for a time, seasonallyadjusted import prices in Germany went upmore sharply again in June. The year-on-yearincrease, which had fallen to 2.2% in May,went up to 4.4%. Energy prices played amajor part in this renewed upward pressureon prices. It was not only the prices of crudeoil and refined oil products that went up –gas prices also continued to rise. Excludingenergy, price movements would have beensignificantly smaller. The year-on-year figurewas no more than +0.3%. In both of the pre-vious months, prices were still 0.3% belowthe corresponding figures for the same periodin 2004. The recent slight price increase islikely to have been, in particular, a reflectionof the euro’s depreciation on the internationalcurrency markets.
After a temporary lull, seasonally adjusted do-
mestic industrial factory gate prices roseagain in June under the impact of rising oilprices. The year-on-year increase, which was4.1% in May, grew to 4.6%. Excluding theenergy component, prices did not rise bymore than 1.9% on the year, which repre-sents a slight decrease compared with theprevious months. Price movements in thecause of capital goods were noticeably small-er, with prices in June no more than 0.9%higher than in the same month of 2004. At1.3%, price increases for consumer goodswere lower than average throughout theperiod under review. Price inflation in theintermediate goods sector continued to becomparatively steep, however. This is essen-tially due to the fact that crude steel andfoundry products were about 13% more ex-pensive than 12 months previously, despite arecent noticeable easing of price pressure.
In July, seasonally adjusted consumer prices
again rose somewhat more sharply than be-fore. Year-on-year price inflation went up to2% from 1.7% in the second quarter. In July,the Harmonised Index annual rate rose from1.6% to 1.9%. Energy sources also played amajor role in consumer prices, as seasonallyadjusted prices of other goods and servicesand of housing rents remained stable. Exclud-
Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2004 2005
I t e m Q 4Q 1Q 2J u l y
Food – 1.0 – 0.3 0.3 – 0.1
Manufactured goods 1.8 1.2 0.4 0.4
of which
Tobacco 16.2 19.4 10.7 10.7
Energy 7.1 6.8 8.3 11.7of which
Refined petroleumproducts 11.2 8.4 9.3 14.6Gas 2.1 7.3 8.4 9.7Electricity 3.8 4.1 4.3 4.4Central heating,district heating 3.1 6.1 12.4 15.8
Services 2.4 2.2 1.9 2.0Rents 1.2 1.0 1.1 1.1
Total 2.0 1.8 1.7 2.0
Total excluding seasonal
products, energy, tobacco 1.3 0.8 0.8 0.8
Memo item
Harmonised Index 2.1 1.7 1.6 1.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
Marked impact
of energy on
import prices ...... at the
industrial
producer
level ...
... and on
consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
51ing energy, the annual rate of price increase
dropped to 0.9%. Manufactured goodsplayed a particular part in this. Seasonally ad-justed food prices were also lower in Julythan in previous months. For some time now,the annual increase in housing rents has beenbarely more than about 1%. It was only in theservices sector that there were some priceincreases.The increase in prices for construction work,
which began last year not least because ofthe sharp rise in the purchase price for steel,petered out in the second quarter. The year-on-year increase, which had totalled 2% inthe first few months of 2005, fell to 1.1% inthe second quarter. In road construction,where steel is not widely used and which hadtherefore seen only small price movementsearlier, the price increase was 0.3%.
Increase in
construction
prices has run
its course

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
52Foreign trade
and paymentsForeign trade and current account
In the second quarter of 2005, German ex-
porters continued to benefit from the per-sistently favourable global economic climateowing to further robust growth in importantpartner countries. However, the risks to thedevelopment of the global economy – whichup to now has shown remarkable resilience– have increased owing to further rises in oilprices. The strains on German enterprises asa result of rising import prices have hithertoremained comparatively modest despitehigh energy prices, however. Continuing op-timistic export expectations as well as thefurther depreciation of the euro in theperiod under review – together with a cor-responding improvement in the Germaneconomy’s competitiveness – are suggestiveof a favourable environment for German ex-porters in the future, too. The persistentlyhigh volume of new orders reinforces thisimpression even though it fell somewhatshort of the strong performance level in thepreceding quarter. In the second quarter, thenew EU member countries provided particu-larly dynamic impulses for German foreigntrade. Germany’s already considerable inter-national economic links with central andeastern European countries were thereforefurther intensified.
As a result, in the second quarter of 2005,
the German export industry managed to in-crease nominal exports of goods by a season-ally adjusted 2% compared with the firstquarter. The rise was also at this level in realterms, as German exporters barely increasedExternal
environment
Exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
53their export prices expressed in euro in this
period.
On an average of April and May compared
with the first quarter of the year – regionaland sectoral breakdowns of statistical infor-mation on foreign trade for June are not yetavailable – German exporters were able toincrease the value of their exports to theeuro area by 2%, somewhat more than thevalue of exports to third countries (+1
1/C252%).
In real terms, exports to non-euro-areacountries – unlike exports to the euro area –were somewhat lower in the two monthsunder review as export prices rose slightlyhere.
At first glance, there are only minor differ-
ences between developments in exports tothe euro area and to non-euro-area countriesin the period under review. However, a morein-depth regional analysis reveals noticeablediscrepancies. The somewhat more dynamicdevelopments within the euro area – in whichthe comparatively favourable price and costdevelopments on the part of German produ-cers are likely to have played no small role –were quite broadly based. By contrast, ex-ports to non-euro-area countries and regionsdeveloped in a markedly heterogeneous man-ner. The rise in exports to the new EU mem-ber states was particularly buoyant (8
1/C252%).
Exports to the EU countries outside the euroarea were also at an above-average level(+2
1/C252%). By contrast, exports of goods to
non-European countries and regions declinedon the whole. This can no doubt be partly ex-plained by the fact that the very strong per-formance of the first quarter – which wasalso influenced by special statistical factors –
was used as a basis of comparison. Further-more, the improvement in price competitive-ness evident since the beginning of the year,which has practically offset the appreciationof the single currency in the second half of2004, is apparently not yet reflected in theregional and sectoral breakdowns availableto date. Experience has shown that a certaindelayed reaction is to be expected. While ex-€b n
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
JulyLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 2000 = 100MonthlyMonthly 1
Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−120
115
110
105
100
95195
190
185
180
175
170
165
160
155
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005Breakdown of
exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
54ports to the Russian Federation stagnated
and those to the United States fell only slight-ly (-1%), exports to South-East Asia declinedby a seasonally adjusted 8%. The demandfor German goods in Japan and China alsodropped perceptibly (-6
1/C252% and -5% respect-
ively).
In the period under review, the overall rise in
export turnover was supported mainly by theconsumer goods segment, which grew at anabove-average rate of 2
1/C252%. By contrast,
intermediate goods recorded only moderategrowth of 1%, while exports of capital goodsstagnated. This is consistent with the some-what surprising evidence of declining exportsto several particularly fast growing regions.Thus, exports of machinery were just over 1%lower in seasonally adjusted terms than at thebeginning of the year. Exports of chemicalsand chemical products were also slightlydown in the period under review (-1%). Ex-ports of information and communicationtechnology (ICT) products fell markedly(-3
1/C252%), although price reductions also
played a role in this area. By contrast, thearea of motor vehicles and motor vehicleparts recorded strong growth of 3
1/C252%. The
increase in exports to China and the USA isnoteworthy following weak developments atthe beginning of the year.
Following a subdued first quarter, German
imports of goods increased sharply by a sea-sonally adjusted 3
1/C252% in the April to June
period. The growth in imported goods wasalso remarkably high in real terms. The rise inimport prices of just under 1
1/C252% can be at-
tributed principally to increases in the pricesof goods from non-euro-area countries. Thiswas partly as a result of higher energy prices(+11%), although the further weakening ofthe euro in the second quarter is also likely tohave had an impact.
In contrast to exports, in the first two months
of the second quarter – regional and sectoralbreakdowns of statistical information areagain not yet available for June – importsshowed positive rates of growth not only inall of the key categories of goods but alsowith regard to Germany’s most importanttrading partners.
Imports of goods from the euro area in-
creased by just under 2
1/C252%, which was less
than the average growth rate of Germany’stotal imports in the period under review. ByTrend in foreign trade by region and
by category of goods
Average of April and May 2005 compared
with the average of January to March 2005;%; seasonally adjusted
ItemEx-
portsIm-ports
Total + 1.6 + 4.6
Selected country/group of countries
Euro-area countries + 2.0 + 2.4
Other EU countries + 4.9 + 12.1United States of America – 0.9 + 5.1Japan – 6.5 + 0.7China – 4.8 + 4.3Russian Federation + 0.1 + 4.1OPEC countries – 2.0 + 13.1Emerging marketsin South-East Asia – 7.8 + 6.1
Categories of goods
Selected main categories
Intermediate goods + 1.0 + 3.2
Capital goods + 0.1 + 3.9Consumer goods + 2.5 + 5.1Energy . + 12.9
Selected categories
Chemicals – 1.2 + 2.0Machinery – 1.2 + 3.0Motor vehicles and motor vehicleparts + 3.5 + 3.3Information technology – 3.3 + 4.2Metals and metal products + 3.5 + 5.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
Imports of
goods
Breakdown of
imports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
55contrast, imports from third countries rose
much more steeply, namely by 6%, which isstill noteworthy even if price developments(+1%) are taken into account. Germany’s de-mand for goods from the new EU membercountries rose most strongly. With an increaseof 13
1/C252%, imports from these EU states even
exceeded the very high, price-related rise inimports from the OPEC countries (13%),which supply Germany mainly with oil. Thefurther increase in the value of imports fromthe Russian Federation (4%) must also beseen in connection with the price rises in thearea of energy and raw materials. In April andMay, imports from China were up by justunder 4
1/C252% on the first quarter in seasonally
adjusted terms. ICT products were of particu-lar importance here. There was a somewhatgreater demand for goods from the UnitedStates (+5%), while imports from Japan wereup only slightly on the previous quarter’s level(just over
1/C252%).
The sectoral breakdown of imports reveals
considerable growth in virtually all categories.Besides the extremely sharp rise in energy im-ports (+13%) owing to price increases, for-eign consumer goods were in particular de-mand (+5%). Imports of capital goods andintermediate goods also increased strongly at+4% and +3% respectively. In April and May,German enterprises increased their purchasesof foreign metal products in particular(+5
1/C252%). By contrast, imports of chemicals
grew by only 2%.
Owing to the somewhat greater increase in
imports than in exports, the seasonally ad-justed trade balance in the second quarter ofMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2004 2005
I t e m Q 2Q 1Q 2
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 184.6 185.5 196.8
Imports (cif) 141.8 142.3 155.2
Balance + 42.8 + 43.2 + 41.6
2 Services (balance) – 5.9 – 6.3 – 6.33 Income (balance) – 2.4 + 1.8 – 2.44 Current transfers (balance) – 7.6 – 7.3 – 6.5
Balance on current account
2 + 24.1 + 27.9 + 23.1
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 41.9 + 41.0 + 39.62 Services – 6.0 – 6.7 – 6.23 Income + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.94 Current transfers – 7.1 – 8.8 – 6.0
Current account
2 + 26.8 + 22.0 + 25.1
II Balance of capital transfers 3 + 0.2 – 1.5 + 0.1
III Balance of financial account 4 – 58.0 – 24.0 – 18.1
IV Change in the reserve assets
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 – 0.3 – 0.2 + 1.2
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 34.0 – 2.2 – 6.3
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 57. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankCurrent
account

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
562005 went down by 311/C252billion quarter on
quarter to 3391/C252billion. At the same time,
however, the deficit on invisible current
transactions fell by 34 billion. This was due
primarily to lower deficits on services andcurrent transfers, and somewhat higher netfactor income. As a result, in the secondquarter, the German current account closedwith a surplus of 325 billion compared with
one of around 322 billion in the preceding
quarter.
Financial transactions
Cross-border financial transactions were af-
fected by countervailing factors in the secondquarter of 2005. Although the interest rateadvantage of US financial market investmentsincreased further – against the backdrop ofpersistent growth differentials and the on-going gradual tightening of monetary policyby the Federal Reserve – in the period underreview, the euro simultaneously weakenedfurther against the US dollar in the secondquarter of 2005 following a sharp appreci-ation at the end of 2004. However, on bal-ance, high levels of capital imports by foreigninvestors were recorded in both Germanbond investments and on the German sharemarket. At the same time, domestic investorsalso increased their exposures on foreign se-curities markets. In net terms, cross-borderportfolio investment in the second quarterled to inflows of 333
1/C252billion following cap-
ital outflows of 312 billion in the preceding
quarter.The inflows with respect to cross-border port-folio transactions were crucially influenced byforeign investors’ activities in Germany. All inall, they invested 386
1/C252billion in German
interest and dividend-bearing paper in theperiod under review, a level last reached inthe second quarter of 2001. Bonds and notesheaded the list of investment items at 358
1/C252
billion (following 342 billion in the first quar-
ter). This was the highest level hitherto ob-served in a quarter. Furthermore, the Germanstock markets also strongly attracted foreigninvestors, who added 326
1/C252billion worth of
paper to their German equity portfolios. First-ly, German equities – with a price-earningsratio for the German blue chips contained inthe DAX of below 12 points on the basis ofexpected year-on-year earnings – were val-ued relatively favourably. Secondly, the profitexpectations, particularly of strongly export-oriented enterprises, were no doubt boostedby the depreciation of the euro.
German investors also stepped up their cross-
border investment in securities, albeit to alesser extent than in the first quarter of 2005(353 billion net following 367 billion in the
period from January to March 2005). Germanglobally active portfolio investors therebyfocused their activities – as in the previousthree-month period – on purchasing bonds(344
1/C252billion following 356 billion in the first
quarter). The overwhelming majority of thesewere not foreign currency issues, however,but rather euro-denominated bonds ( 340 bil-
lion), whose yield advantage over the corres-ponding Federal bonds increased from 7 basispoints at the end of March to 13 basis pointsat the end of June 2005. German saversTrends in
financial
transactionsForeign
investment
in German
securities
German
investment
in foreign
securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
57acquired 38 billion worth of foreign mutual
fund shares and 311/C252billion worth of money
market paper in the second quarter of 2005.By contrast, German residents sold foreignequities on balance ( 31 billion).
In contrast to portfolio investment, direct in-
vestment in the second quarter of 2005 – asin the first quarter already – was character-ised by net capital exports ( 39 billion follow-
ing310
1/C252billion in the previous quarter). This
was due primarily to the activities of Germanfirms (net capital outflow of 312
1/C252billion).
This figure was based mainly on loans, which
German parent companies granted or repaidto their subsidiaries abroad ( 39 billion). In
addition, German firms increased their invest-ment capital abroad ( 35 billion); Austria, in
particular, was one of the favourite invest-ment locations during the period under re-view.
Foreign firms added 33
1/C252billion net to their
direct investment capital in Germany fromApril to June 2005, after having made virtual-ly no changes to it in the preceding three-month period. Interests in Germany resultingfrom mergers and acquisitions were the mainreason for this increase.
In the second quarter, there were higher net
capital imports ( 39 billion) as a result of the
statistically recorded non-securitised credittransactions of non-banks than in the preced-ing quarter. This development was attribut-able mainly to the financial operations of en-terprises and individuals (capital imports ofFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2004 2005
I t e m Q 2Q 1Q 2
1 Direct investment – 7.0 – 10.6 – 9.0
German investment
abroad – 2.7 – 10.5 – 12.6Foreign investmentin Germany – 4.3 – 0.2 + 3.6
2 Portfolio investment – 25.2 – 11.8 + 33.3
German investment
abroad – 35.0 – 66.9 – 53.2
Shares + 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.0
Mutual fund shares – 2.6 – 14.5 – 8.0Bonds and notes – 29.0 – 56.0 – 44.7Money market paper – 4.4 + 2.8 – 1.5
Foreign investment
in Germany + 9.8 + 55.1 + 86.5
Shares – 11.5 + 3.5 + 26.4
Mutual fund shares – 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.8Bonds and notes + 24.6 + 41.9 + 58.6Money market paper – 2.3 + 9.5 + 0.7
3 Financial derivatives
1 + 0.8 – 3.4 – 0.5
4 Credit transactions – 25.8 + 3.1 – 40.8
Monetary financial
institutions 2 – 67.2 + 6.9 – 64.7
Long-term + 4.1 – 13.3 – 16.5
Short-term – 71.3 + 20.2 – 48.3
Enterprises and
individuals + 7.3 – 11.0 + 9.7
Long-term + 0.0 + 2.2 – 2.5
Short-term + 7.3 – 13.3 + 12.2
General government + 2.7 + 13.8 – 0.5
Long-term + 1.5 + 5.2 + 0.7
Short-term + 1.2 + 8.6 – 1.3
Bundesbank + 31.4 – 6.6 + 14.8
5 Other investment – 0.8 – 1.3 – 1.06 Balance of all
statistically recordedcapital flows – 58.0 – 24.0 – 18.1
Memo item
Change in the reserveassets at transaction values(increase: –)
3 – 0.3 – 0.2 + 1.2
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding the Bundesbank. —
3Excluding allocation of SDRs and changes due to
value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDirect
investment
German direct
investment
abroad
Foreign direct
investment in
Germany
Credit trans-
actions of
non-banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
58391/C252billion), while general government ex-
ported small volumes of funds.By contrast, outflows of funds were recorded
in the non-securitised credit transactions ofthe banking system in the second quarter of2005 ( 350 billion). As a result, credit institu-
tions’ net foreign claims increased by 364
1/C252
billion, while the Bundesbank recorded a re-duction in claims – primarily in the large-valuepayment system TARGET – in the amount of315 billion.
The Bundesbank’s reserve assets, which areshown separately from financial transactionsin the balance of payments, declined by 31
billion – at transaction values – from the endof March to the end of June. However, whenvalued at market prices, they rose by 36 bil-
lion up to the end of the quarter under re-view. They therefore amounted to 378
1/C252bil-
lion at the end of June 2005. The appreci-ation of the US dollar and the rise in the priceof gold both played a part in this develop-ment.Quarterly
€b n
Lin scale
German shares purchased
by foreign investorsEnd-1987 = 1000, log scale
DAX Performance Index 1German share market
and share purchases by
foreign investors
1 End-of-quarter data. Source: Deutsche
Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank30+
20+
10+
0
10−4600
4400
4200
4000
3800
2004 2005Credit trans-
actions of the
banking system
The Bundes-
bank’s reserve
assets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
59Public financesBudgetary development of central, state
and local government
The deficit of central and state government
(the results for local government are not yetknown) amounted to 36
1/C252billion in the
second quarter and was thus 321/C252billion
lower than in the second quarter of 2004.Despite a small decline in tax revenue, signifi-cantly higher non-tax receipts caused a con-siderable rise in overall revenue (+5%). Totalspending increased by 2
1/C252%, as in the first
quarter.
Whereas the deficit of central, state and local
government went down only marginally in2004 to 366 billion, a noticeably sharper re-
duction was planned for this year, althoughdue primarily to higher central governmentreceipts from the sale of financial assets.Following the latest tax estimate, revenueexpectations have meanwhile been reviseddownwards by just over 35 billion. The re-
vised figures for labour market-related ex-penditure likewise entail additional budgetaryburdens vis-/C224-vis the original plans. Relief inother areas, such as a stringent implementa-tion of the budget and the favourable devel-opment of interest expenditure, will come no-where near compensating for these factors.This means that the budgetary expectationsof central government and, to a lesser extent,state government are not likely to be fulfilled.Whereas the gap in the Federal budget is ap-parently to be plugged above all by utilisingas yet unused loan authorisations from previ-ous years, several state governments havealready announced supplementary budgets,in which the exception clauses for limitingOverview

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
60new borrowing will have to be invoked again.
Conflicts with the upper limits for new bor-rowing as specified in budgetary law are ex-pected for 2006, too, if no additional meas-ures are taken.
Tax revenue
1declined by 11/C252% on the year in
the second quarter. This was mainly attribut-
able to a considerable decrease in corporationtax revenue as well as wage tax shortfalls,which were induced by the tax cuts atthe start of the year, and a decline inconsumption-related taxes. Of the directtaxes, wage tax revenue fell by just under2%. This was, however, moderate in view ofthe tax cuts at the beginning of the year. Cor-poration tax receipts were down by justunder 32 billion. This was presumably due to
a decline in tax payments in respect of earlieryears from an albeit relatively high level in2004. The favourable trend in profits was re-flected in the 20% increase in non-assessedtaxes on earnings (particularly investment in-come tax on dividends). Besides lower re-funds to employees, this is also likely to havehad a positive influence on assessed incometaxes, the revenue of which increased by10% despite the tax cut. In the case of indir-ect taxes, receipts from turnover tax – whichtend to fluctuate considerably during thecourse of the year – declined by 2%. Receiptsfrom mineral oil tax – the most important ex-cise tax – declined by 6
1/C252%, in part owing to
consumer restraint in response to the highenergy prices. By contrast, revenue from to-bacco tax rose by 3
1/C252%. Despite the con-
tinued decline in sales of taxed cigarettes, thetax increase in December 2004 resulted inadditional revenue.
In the first half of the year, tax revenue (ex-
cluding receipts from local government taxes)remained more or less constant comparedwith the first six months of 2004 and thus de-veloped somewhat more unfavourably thanenvisaged in the official estimate from Mayfor the whole year. Besides corporation taxrevenue, receipts from turnover tax and min-eral oil tax were lower than expected as aresult of subdued private consumption. Onthe other hand, wage tax and assessed in-come tax, in particular, have developed morefavourably to date than anticipated. Overall,the growth rate of taxes on income was thushigher than expected and that of consump-Year-on-year change
%
Tax receipts, total 1
H1 H2 H1 H2 Q1 Q2Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes, which are not yet
known for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−
4−
2003 2004 2005
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the second quarter.Tax revenue
declined in the
second quarterTax revenue
growth still
somewhat
below full-year
target

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
61tion taxes lower than anticipated. Although
the estimated tax revenue target for 2005 asa whole may still be achieved, a risk arises pri-marily from the further course of macroeco-nomic development. There is also uncertaintywith regard to the revenue from profit-relatedtaxes, which are very volatile.
In the second quarter central government re-
corded a deficit of 34
1/C252billion compared with
36 billion in the same period last year. Overall
revenue went up by 9%. Although tax rev-enue declined by
1/C252%, this was more than
offset by loan repayments, holding arrange-ments with the publicly owned bankinggroup KfW and the second payment of thecompensatory amount from the Federal Em-ployment Agency. Expenditure rose by 6% intotal. Spending in connection with theHartz IV labour market reform in the secondquarter was considerably higher than pay-ments for unemployment assistance duringthe same period in 2004. The decline in ex-penditure owing to the cessation of compen-sation payments to cover the deficit of thePost Office pension fund (as a result of sellingoff fund claims) dampened overall spendinggrowth.
In 2005 as a whole it is no longer envisaged
that central government will be able to lowerthe deficit to 322
1/C252billion as planned. Ac-
cording to the tax estimate from May, taxrevenue will be 33
1/C252billion lower than origin-
ally expected. Furthermore, the Bundesbankprofit was just under 31
1/C252billion less than the
budgeted figure. On the expenditure side,the Federal Ministry of Finance is now antici-pating additional burdens of 38 billion in con-nection with the Hartz IV labour market re-
form. Unexpectedly high repayments of loansand the muted development of interest ex-penditure can only partly offset this. In add-ition, even following the holding arrange-ment with the KfW from July amounting to35 billion, it is still uncertain to what extent
the budgeted proceeds from asset disposalsof just over 317 billion will actually material-
ise. Just over 32 billion was raised in the first
half of the year. The Federal Minister ofFinance has already announced that hedoes not intend to present a supplementarybudget. The outstanding loan authorisationsof nearly 320 billion which are still available
could suffice to finance not only the afore-mentioned burdens but also possible revenueshortfalls in connection with asset disposals.Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
H1
Type of tax 2004 2005Annual
percent-agechange
Wage tax 59.1 56.9 – 3.7
Assessed income tax – 2.8 – 0.4 .Corporation tax 6.7 7.1 + 7.1Turnover tax 67.9 67.9 + 0.0
of which Q2
Wage tax 29.6 29.0 – 1.8
Assessed income tax 3.1 3.4 + 10.0
Corporation tax 4.5 2.7 – 39.4Turnover tax 33.7 33.0 – 2.0
Deutsche BundesbankLower central
government
deficit in
second quarter
Deficit targets
likely to be
overshot
considerably
in 2005 as a
whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
62The draft Federal budget for 2006, which
was merely discussed by the Federal Cabinetin mid-July and is to be adopted by the Fed-eral Government only after the next Germanparliamentary elections, envisages expend-iture growth of just under 1% vis-/C224-vis thebudget plans for 2005. However, comparedwith the current estimates for 2005, thiswould mean a decline of just over 2%, with akey factor in this decline being the assumedcessation of the compensation payment tocover the deficit of the Federal EmploymentAgency (2005 budget: 34 billion). According-
ly, net government borrowing would amountto321
1/C252billion, which is almost 31 billion less
than total investment, thus complying withthe borrowing limit pursuant to Article 115 ofthe Basic Law. Not least owing to tax short-falls of 311 billion vis-/C224-vis last year’s financialplan, however, the budgeted figure for pro-ceeds from asset disposals was sharply in-creased again to 323 billion. Including loan
repayments and continuing relief from notneeding to subsidise the Post Office pensionfund, the financial benefit from asset realisa-tions will total over 330 billion. However, sell-
ing off public assets in order to comply withthe constitutional ceiling for government bor-rowing is not consistent with the budgetaryprinciple, which ties new borrowing to newinvestment so as to avert the depletion of thestock of government assets.
2
The planned exceptionally large asset dis-posals are likely to mean that most of cen-tral government’s readily realisable financialassets will have been sold off by the end ofnext year. Such revenue will then no longerbe available in subsequent years to close thetotal annual financial gap of nearly 350 bil-
lion. In accordance with the constitutionalregulations, only around 320 billion at most
(the amount of investment expenditure) maybe financed by running up new debt. Thenew medium-term financial planning of cen-tral government envisages a moderate de-cline in net borrowing vis-/C224-vis 2006 to316 billion by the end of 2009. Although
under the plan new borrowing will be keptbelow the constitutional ceiling in each year,the financial planning for 2007 onwards indi-cates an annual extra requirement of 325 bil-
lion, for the funding of which no concreteproposals have been made. Besides tax short-falls of up to 313 billion compared with theQuarterly
€b nThe Federal Government’s
balance of revenue
and expenditure
Deutsche Bundesbank9+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−
9−
12−
15−
18−
21−
24−
27−
30−
2004 2005
2See Deutsche Bundesbank, Deficit-limiting budgetary
rules and a national stability pact in Germany, Monthly
Report, April 2005, pp 23-37.Federal budget
2006
characterised
by large-scale
asset disposalsMedium-term
financial
planning
contains large
financial gap

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
632004 financial plan, this evidently also reflects
lower revenue in connection with the exten-sive asset disposals which will have been ef-fected by then (and which correspondinglyreduce the government’s investment income).Furthermore, additional spending is likely toarise primarily from the Hartz IV reform.
The special funds recorded a surplus of just
over 31 billion in the second quarter com-
pared with just under 32 billion in the same
period last year. Since the German UnityFund’s debt has been jointly assumed by cen-tral government, its financial balance is nowincluded in the Federal budget. In the sameperiod last year, it generated a surplus of 3
1/C252
billion. The flood disaster fund again recorded
a marginal deficit. Of the resources receivedin 2003, around 32 billion is likely to still be
available. The ERP Special Fund again record-ed a surplus ( 31
1/C252billion) since repayments,
in particular, exceeded lending. For 2005 as awhole, as in 2004, the special funds may re-cord a small surplus.
In the second quarter state government re-
corded a deficit of 33 billion, which was
32 billion less than in the second quarter of
2004. Although tax revenue continued to de-cline (-1%), non-tax revenue rose consider-ably, thus resulting in an increase of 1
1/C252%
in overall revenue. By contrast, expenditurewent down by 1
1/C252%. Since state government
has not yet concluded a new collective payagreement, and extended working hours andstaff cuts have had a dampening effect, ex-penditure on personnel – a key cost factor forstate government – also continued to developmoderately.For 2005 as a whole, the budgetary plans for
state government envisage a deficit reductionof31
1/C252billion to 3231/C252billion compared with
2004. However, tax revenue forecasts havenot yet been adjusted to the last tax estimatefrom May, which predicted 32
1/C252billion in
shortfalls for state government. Although therevenue shortfalls should largely be offset bycost containment, supplementary budgets –which are likely to envisage a significant in-crease in the deficits – have been announcedby some state governments. After thebudgetary plans for Berlin, Bremen, Hesse,Lower Saxony and Saarland had alreadybreached the statutory limit for new borrow-ing – even before taking account of the newtax estimate – Schleswig-Holstein and NorthRhine-Westphalia, following a change of gov-ernment in those two states, likewise an-The Federal Government’s financial
planning over the medium term
5billion
Financial plan
ItemActual
2004Target
2005 3Draft2006
42007 2008 2009
Expenditure 251.6 254.3 256.5 258.7 261.1 263.5
of which
Investment 22.4 22.7 22.4 22.4 21.3 21.3
Revenue 1 212.1 242.3 245.0 238.7 242.1 247.5
of which
Taxes 187.0 190.8 191.5 197.4 203.8 212.1
Net borrow-
ing 39.5 22.0 21.5 20.0 19.0 16.0
Structural
extra require-ment
2 25.0 25.0 25.0
Memo item
Change inexpenditurein % -2.0 +1.1 +0.9 +0.9 +0.9 +0.9
1Including coin seigniorage. — 2The implementation has already
been factored into the values for revenue and expenditure recordedhere. — 3The Federal Ministry of Finance currently anticipates an ad-
ditional financial gap of 512 billion. — 4This contains asset disposals
of just over 530 billion including relief from sales of claims of the Post
Office pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankSpecial funds
Lower state
government
deficit in
second quarterNumerous state
governments
breaching
borrowing limit

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
64nounced that their borrowing plans would
exceed the permissible ceiling more or lessthroughout the legislative term. Followingthe most recent rulings of the State Constitu-tional Court in Mecklenburg-West Pomer-ania, which considered two budget acts to bevoid and requires the state parliament toissue a new 2005 budget that includes retro-spective financing of deficits from 2003, thisstate government may also exceed the bor-rowing ceiling. With regard to the necessaryjustification for claiming exemption from theconstitutional rule pegging borrowing to theinvestment level, the court (in line with a rul-ing by the Federal Constitutional Court) is de-manding a differentiated analysis of thecauses of the alleged macroeconomic disrup-tion and of the strategy to counter it. Thecourt’s ruling means that regular recourse tothe exemption clause must be avoided infavour of structural consolidation.
Local government was able to reduce its
budgetary deficit in the first quarter of 2005(latest available data) compared with thesame period in 2004 by 3
1/C252billion to 331/C252
billion. Revenue rose by just under1/C252%.
Although tax revenue rose by almost 121/C252%
thanks to a jump in local business tax re-ceipts, proceeds from asset disposals wentdown sharply. The important key grants fromstate government were also reduced notice-ably. Expenditure fell again by just over 1%.Minor decreases in expenditure on personneland other operating expenditure were ac-companied by another rise in social benefits(+2%). The impact which the amalgamationof unemployment assistance and social assist-ance will ultimately have on local governmentbudgets cannot be read off the outcome forthe first quarter. Whereas central governmentfinances unemployment benefit II, local gov-ernment initially assumes just over 70% ofthe costs of accommodation and heating forbenefit recipients. Whether this share needsto be changed is an issue that will be con-sidered during a review in the fourth quarter.Finally, relief worth 32
1/C252billion has been
agreed for municipal budgets in respect of so-cial assistance payments compared with thestatus quo. The decrease in local governmentspending in the first quarter was due mainlyto a further fall in real investment by just over10
1/C252%. Another increase in cash advances,
which actually are envisaged solely for cover-ing liquidity shortfalls, to 321
1/C252billion under-
scores the constantly strained situation oflocal government budgets, too.Net borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2003 + 81.2 + 73.4 – 0.8 + 26.9
2004 + 72.3 + 70.7 – 16.8 + 42.9
of which
Q1 + 45.3 + 34.6 + 4.1 + 16.9Q2 + 8.2 + 14.6 – 9.6 – 3.6Q3 + 17.6 + 17.1 – 0.9 + 18.6Q4 + 1.2 + 4.4 – 10.4 + 11.0
2005
Q1
p + 26.7 + 17.3 + 7.5 + 24.7
Q2pe + 7.5 + 13.4 – 7.1 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market loans.
Deutsche BundesbankFinancial
situation
of local
government
still strained

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
65Social security funds
In the second quarter the statutory pension
insurance scheme recorded a deficit of 311/C252
billion, which was just under 31/C252billion more
than in the same period last year. Whereasrevenue grew by barely
1/C252%, expenditure
recorded a marked rise – of almost 1% – forthe first time in twelve months. The main rea-son for this was the fact that the dampeningeffect of the change introduced on 1 April2004 obliging pensioners to pay the full con-tribution to the long-term care insurancescheme has now dropped out. Revenue fromcontributions rose marginally by
1/C252%, after
declining noticeably in the first quarter.
In 2005 as a whole, the deficit will consider-
ably exceed that of last year ( 311/C252billion)
when a one-off influx of 32 billion accrued
from asset disposals. The expenditure of thestatutory pension insurance scheme will,however, be eased by around 3
1/C252billion fol-
lowing the introduction of the special contri-bution to the statutory health insurancescheme – which is paid by insured personsalone – on 1 July 2005. By contrast, neitherthe sustainability factor nor the presumedcontribution to a supplementary private pen-sion scheme
3will be able to curtail the pen-
sion adjustment in the wake of the weakgrowth of wages and salaries last year sincethe statutory safeguard clause prevents an ac-tual reduction of pension payments. In viewof the low level of reserves, financial gaps areto be expected in the fourth quarter; thesewill have to be covered by liquidity assistancefrom the Federal Government. At the end ofthe year, the reserves will fall far short of thestatutory minimum of 0.2 month’s expend-iture.
In order, in particular, to avoid the resultant
need to raise the contribution rate to thestatutory pension insurance scheme on 1 Jan-uary 2006, the deadlines for transferring so-cial contributions have been shortened byhalf a month. In future the payments are tobe made in the same month for which thewages are paid and not, as is now the case,in the subsequent month. This means thatnext year contributions for almost 13 monthswill be recorded.
4The increase in the contri-
bution rate from 19.5% to 20.0% whichwould probably otherwise have been neces-sary would have generated additional rev-enue from contributions to the statutory pen-sion insurance scheme of almost 34
1/C252billion
per year. By contrast, bringing forward thecontribution transfer deadline should yield aone-off revenue windfall of just over 39
1/C252bil-
lion;5across all branches of the social security
system this equates to 320 billion worth of
additional revenue. Assuming that the spend-ing level of the statutory pension insurancescheme remains unchanged, this will burdenmost employers with additional financing
3The presumed contribution to a supplementary private
pension scheme factors the assumed rising burden of
contribution payers for contributions to their private old-
age provision under the Riester pension reform into the
pension adjustment formula. It rises from 0.5% in 2002
in 0.5 percentage point increments to 4.0% from 2009
onwards, resulting in a reduction in the pension increase
of around 0.6 percentage point in each subsequent year.
4The draft “Act Amending the Fourth and Sixth Books
of the Social Security Code” mentions additional revenueof up to 80% of the monthly contribution payments.
5In the national accounts no additional revenue will be
recorded since they are based on accrual accounting. Thisalso means that the general government deficit as de-
fined in the national accounts will increase by the amount
of the additional revenue which would have been collect-
ed if the contribution rate had been raised.Statutory
pension
insurance
scheme
showing larger
deficit in
second quarter
Need for
liquidity
assistance
expected this
yearMeasures
to prevent
a rise in the
contribution
rate next year

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
66costs. By contrast, the initially lower contribu-
tion rates will benefit employees and centralgovernment (via the Federal grant, which ispegged to the contribution rate) as well asthose employers not affected by the changedpayment deadline (mainly the public sector).
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a
deficit of 3
1/C252billion in the second quarter,
which was 311/C252billion lower than in the
same period of last year. While revenue grewby 10
1/C252%, expenditure declined by just under
2%. Revenue from contributions, which roseby less than
1/C252%, barely influenced this un-
usually favourable outcome. The key factorwas that central government has been re-funding administration costs, in particular,since the end of 2004 as part of the latestlabour market reform, and these refundsamounted to over 31 billion in the second
quarter alone. On the expenditure side, 5%less was needed for unemployment benefit.The decline in the number of recipients, atrend which has been observed for sometime, is likely to have continued. With the in-creasing entrenchment of unemployment,the number of recipients of unemploymentbenefit has tended to fall while the numberof recipients of unemployment benefit II hasincreased. In addition, further savings weremade in respect of active labour market pol-icy measures (-28
1/C252%). To a considerable ex-
tent, however, these changes mask a reallo-cation of expenditure to the detriment of theFederal budget, offset by the compensatoryamount paid by the Federal EmploymentAgency. These payments to central govern-ment were, however, considerably lower inthe second quarter ( 31 billion) and in the first
half of 2005 ( 32
1/C252billion) than would have
been expected in the light of the budgetedfigure for the whole of 2005 ( 36
1/C252billion).
Furthermore, in June central government re-funded a lump-sum of just over 3
1/C252billion to
the Federal Employment Agency for outlaysrelating to benefits granted to recipients ofunemployment benefit II. It was originally in-tended that this amount would be paid overthe year in equal monthly instalments.
The relatively favourable year-on-year finan-
cial development in the second quarter can-not be extrapolated for 2005 as a whole, notleast because the compensatory amount mayincrease during the course of the year. More-over, the Federal Employment Agency mustanticipate lower refunds from the FederalGovernment in the second half of 2005. AQuarterly
€b n
€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
Expenditure
RevenueFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−62
60
58
56
54
2003 2004 2005
Federal Employ-
ment Agency
showing far
lower deficit in
second quarter
Deterioration
expected in the
second half of
2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
67sharp rise in revenue from contributions is not
to be expected either. By contrast, no Federalgrant should be necessary to offset a deficitin 2006 thanks, above all, to the shorteneddeadline for transferring social security contri-butions.
The statutory health insurance institutions
were close to balance in the first quarter(more recent data are not yet available) afterachieving a surplus of just over 31 billion in
2004. However, the first quarter of 2004 wasexceptionally favourable as some outlayswere advanced to the last quarter of 2003 inanticipation of the healthcare system reformwhich came into force on 1 January 2004.Revenue declined by
1/C252% owing to the weak
development of contributions. Expendituregrew again by just under 2
1/C252% after record-
ing sharp falls last year. As expected, the in-crease in spending on pharmaceuticals wasparticularly steep (+18
1/C252%), since both a
price moratorium and a temporary rise inmanufacturers’ discounts expired at the endof 2004. By contrast, there was a significantdecrease in denture costs (-16%). The switchfrom percentage-based subsidies to fixedsubsidies for dentures at the beginning of2005 is likely to have contributed to thisdampening effect.
In 2005 as a whole, despite the increase in
the new government grant (which was notyet received in the first quarter) from 31.0 bil-
lion to 32.5 billion, a much smaller surplus is
expected than that recorded in 2004 ( 34 bil-
lion). There is therefore likely to be only littleleeway for lowering contribution rates duringthe year.
6The health insurance institutionshave to generate a surplus so that they can
fulfil their statutory commitment to redeemtheir accumulated debts.Quarterly
€b n
€b n€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefit and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
ures, excluding compensatory amount to
central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−
3−8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.016
15
14
13
12
11
2003 2004 2005
6With the introduction of a special contribution of
0.9%, which is paid solely by members, on 1 July 2005,
most institutions simultaneously reduced the general
contribution rate by the same amount. For the health in-
surance institutions, the associated rebalancing of the fi-
nancing burden will thus have virtually no effect on their
revenue.Statutory
health
insurance
scheme with
lower surplus
Limited scope
to lower
contribution
rate

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
68General government budget trends
The financial position of general government
is likely to improve very little this year. Al-though the general government deficit ratio(as defined in the national accounts) might besomewhat lower than last year’s figure of3.7%,
7it seems unlikely from the present
perspective that the reference value of 3%will be achieved or undershot. By contrast,the general government debt ratio will prob-ably rise again sharply after the referencevalue was already overshot clearly in 2004when it reached 66.1%. Whereas the cyclical-ly induced part of the general governmentdeficit is likely to go up again, other tempor-ary factors may afford a certain relief. In add-ition to the grant repayments from Landes-banks to state governments, the Federal Gov-ernment is also anticipating relief from thesale of claims of the Post Office pension fundon the successor enterprises to the oldDeutsche Post.
Revenue will probably go down again in rela-
tion to GDP . The main reason for this is thefact that income tax rates were loweredagain at the beginning of the year. Further-more, the measurement base for social secur-ity contributions, wage tax and excise taxes isexpected to grow comparatively sluggishly.The expenditure ratio is also likely to be lowerthan in 2004. According to the Federal Gov-ernment’s budget plans, expenditure on old-age provision is actually expected to decline,particularly as the Post Office pension fundwill no longer require grants thanks to thesale of claims. Furthermore, expenditure onpersonnel may be kept at roughly the samelevel as in 2004. Interest expenditure is alsolikely to increase only slightly.
The development of public finances in the
coming years is subject to great uncertaintyand depends to a large degree on the fiscalpolicy decisions taken after the German par-liamentary elections. Without any new meas-ures, the deficit ratio could fall if the fairlymuted expenditure policy of the past fewyears is maintained. On balance, however,there is a large risk that the 3% ceiling will bebreached again. Thus in its recently publishedmedium-term financial planning, the FederalGovernment assumes that the deficit ceilingwill be breached in both 2005 and 2006. For2007 it projects a marked reduction in thedeficit ratio and a significant undershootingof the 3% ceiling. In order to achieve compli-ance with the national constitutional borrow-ing limit, the plans are based on the assump-tion of major structural consolidation in theFederal budget. The exhausted options ofprivatisation proceeds and other financialtransactions (which lower the deficit accord-ing to the budgetary definition but not as de-fined in the national accounts, which is rele-vant at the European level) are to be replacedby structural consolidation measures. Thesehave, however, not yet been specified.
The medium-term financial planning of cen-
tral and state government shows a radical
7Under the European budgetary surveillance procedure,
GDP excluding financial intermedation services indirectly
measured (FISIM) is still being used as the basis for calcu-
lating the deficit and debt ratios for the current year. Ac-
cordingly, the ratios cited here are higher than those cal-
culated based on April 2005 GDP figures published by
the Federal Statistical Office (deficit ratio 3.7% instead of
3.6%; debt ratio 66.1% instead of 65.1%).Reference
values will
probably be
breached again
in 2005Development in
the coming
years uncertain
Constitutional
borrowing
ceilings need to
be heeded

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
69need for consolidation. Given the relatively
low level of investment expenditure, it is actu-ally far harder to achieve structural compli-ance with the limits set by national budgetarylaw than it is to meet the 3% European refer-ence value for the deficit ratio. Since compli-ance with the constitutional provisions is amandatory requirement, this means thatcomprehensive and timely structural consoli-dation is imperative. The objective of bal-anced budgets as stipulated in the BudgetPrinciples Act and also enshrined in the Stabil-ity and Growth Pact is currently a long wayfrom being achieved.
At the European level, Germany (like France)
reaffirmed in January 2005 its pledge to theECOFIN Council to take all necessary meas-ures to bring the general government deficitbelow 3% of GDP in 2005 and to keep itbelow the ceiling in 2006. As this objectivenow seems unlikely to be achieved in 2005,the European Commission has already indi-cated that it will review the excessive deficit
procedure against Germany in autumn. Al-though the amended Stability and GrowthPact allows the deadline to be extendedunder certain conditions without escalatingthe excessive deficit procedure, it is question-able whether a significant breaching of thereference value is justified in Germany’s case.Even if the next stage of the deficit procedureis triggered and Germany is given notice totake remedial measures, the deadline mightstill be extended. However, if the Pact is inter-preted appropriately, the excessive deficitshould – from the present perspective – becorrected by next year at the latest. It shouldalso be noted that speedy consolidation is notan end in itself, but is urgently needed inorder to widen fiscal policymakers’ con-strained radius of action and to avoid impos-ing an additional burden of high governmentdebt on future generations, who will alreadyhave to bear a heavier load ensuing fromdemographic changes.
Compliance
with the 3%
ceiling required
by 2006 at the
latest

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
70

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Public finances in Germany
1 General government budgetary
position 52*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005

2 Budgetary position of central,
state and local government 52*
3 Government fiscal position as
defined in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of central, state and
local government 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*
6 Specific taxes levied by central,
state and local government 54*
7 General government debt 55*8 Change in general government
debt 57*
9 Loans raised by general govern-
ment against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Central government debt 58*11 Central government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets
of the German pension insurancefund 59*
13 Revenue and expenditure of the
Federal Employment Agency 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 60*
2 Output in the production sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*X External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 67*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 69*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the euro-area memberstates, the Deutsche Mark value ofthe ECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2003         Dec 10.6 7.6 7.1 7.0 5.9 5.8 6.0 2.06 2.15 4.4
2004         Jan 11.3 7.5 6.5 6.6 5.8 5.8 6.1 2.02 2.09 4.2
         Feb 10.7 6.8 6.2 6.3 5.7 5.7 6.2 2.03 2.07 4.2         Mar 11.3 6.7 6.2 5.9 5.9 5.8 7.0 2.01 2.03 4.0
         Apr 10.9 6.2 5.4 5.5 5.9 5.9 7.5 2.08 2.05 4.2
         May 9.4 5.5 4.9 5.2 6.0 5.9 7.6 2.02 2.09 4.4         June 9.5 5.6 5.3 5.2 6.4 6.2 7.6 2.03 2.11 4.4
         July 10.0 5.9 5.4 5.4 6.3 6.3 7.5 2.07 2.12 4.3
         Aug 9.2 5.7 5.6 5.7 6.1 6.0 7.5 2.04 2.11 4.1         Sep 9.7 6.2 6.0 5.8 6.1 6.3 7.9 2.05 2.12 4.1
         Oct 8.9 6.3 5.8 6.0 6.1 6.6 7.8 2.11 2.15 4.0
         Nov 9.7 6.6 6.1 6.2 6.0 6.8 7.8 2.09 2.17 3.9         Dec 9.0 6.7 6.6 6.5 6.1 7.1 8.3 2.05 2.17 3.7
2005         Jan 9.6 7.1 6.8 6.7 6.5 7.3 8.0 2.08 2.15 3.6
         Feb 10.2 7.3 6.6 6.6 6.6 7.3 8.7 2.06 2.14 3.6         Mar 9.3 7.1 6.5 6.6 6.3 7.4 8.7 2.06 2.14 3.7
         Apr 9.2 7.4 6.8 6.8 6.7 7.7 8.4 2.08 2.14 3.5
         May 10.1 7.6 7.3 7.2 6.5 7.8 8.4 2.07 2.13 3.4         June 10.5 7.9 7.5 ... 6.5 8.0 9.5 2.06 2.11 3.2
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.07 2.12 3.3
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.5, p 44*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2003         Dec + 6,622 + 8,021 − 23,844 − 8,625 − 33,757 + 11,165 + 7,373 1.2286 104.2 106.3
2004         Jan + 2,206 + 4,768 − 13,360 − 9,502 − 1,692 + 898 − 3,064 1.2613 105.4 107.4
         Feb + 6,037 + 9,504 + 22,375 + 8,896 + 17,095 − 12,212 + 8,596 1.2646 105.3 107.3         Mar + 7,949 + 13,437 − 3,488 − 22,382 + 1,253 + 13,895 + 3,746 1.2262 103.4 105.4
         Apr − 1,790 + 9,702 − 15,587 − 2,003 − 8,496 − 2,441 − 2,647 1.1985 101.6 103.6
         May + 506 + 10,198 + 15,739 + 41 + 811 + 14,204 + 684 1.2007 102.4 104.4         June + 4,658 + 11,479 + 11,118 − 10,140 + 33,431 − 11,349 − 824 1.2138 102.3 104.2
         July + 8,270 + 13,520 − 17,621 − 7,245 − 40,038 + 29,427 + 236 1.2266 102.8 104.8
         Aug + 3,284 + 5,162 + 6,300 + 5,067 − 1,612 − 909 + 3,754 1.2176 102.7 104.8         Sep − 143 + 4,867 + 14,436 + 3,318 + 47,797 − 36,168 − 512 1.2218 103.0 105.1
         Oct + 3,413 + 8,441 − 30,391 − 13,434 − 5,512 − 12,373 + 928 1.2490 104.2 106.3
         Nov + 4,724 + 4,469 + 28,373 − 5,801 − 8,604 + 42,832 − 54 1.2991 105.6 107.7         Dec + 7,646 + 7,161 − 23,370 − 24,880 + 36,623 − 36,603 + 1,489 1.3408 107.1 109.3
2005         Jan − 6,556 + 752 + 24,433 − 9,257 − 19,187 + 54,454 − 1,577 1.3119 105.8 107.9
         Feb + 4,428 + 5,895 + 28,581 + 230 + 22,038 + 1,401 + 4,912 1.3014 105.1 107.1         Mar + 2,893 + 7,895 − 18,601 − 15,111 − 7,656 + 2,654 + 1,512 1.3201 106.0 108.2
         Apr − 10,078 + 4,249 − 17,813 − 4,846 − 11,603 − 601 − 762 1.2938 105.1 107.2
         May − 3,927 + 6,636 + 40,578 + 3,816 + 24,069 + 10,080 + 2,613 1.2694 104.0 106.2         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2165 101.2 103.4
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2037 101.7 104.0
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables X.12 and 13, pp 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-23 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
  
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area
Real gross domestic product 1 
2002 0.9 0.1 2.2 1.2 3.8 6.1 0.4 2.5 0.1 1.0 0.4 2.7 0.9
2003 1.3 − 0.2 2.4 0.8 4.7 3.7 0.3 2.9 − 0.1 1.4 − 1.1 2.9 0.72004 2.9 1.6 3.6 2.3 4.2 4.9 1.2 4.5 0.7 2.4 1.0 3.1 2.0
2004         Q1 3.6 2.0 3.4 2.5 4.3 6.4 0.7 6.1 1.1 1.1 0.7 2.8 2.0
         Q2 2.9 2.1 3.6 3.3 4.1 5.2 2.0 4.7 1.4 1.8 1.8 3.1 2.5         Q3 2.7 1.2 3.6 1.7 4.0 5.2 1.3 3.8 2.0 3.2 0.9 3.4 1.8         Q4 2.4 1.3 3.9 1.8 4.2 2.8 0.9 3.6 2.4 2.6 0.5 3.1 1.8
2005         Q1 1.2 − 0.3 1.3 1.4 3.5 ... − 0.2 3.1 − 0.5 2.0 0.1 3.1 0.7
         Q2 1.2 1.5 ... ... 3.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 1,2 
2002 1.3 − 1.0 2.2 − 1.4 0.8 7.5 − 1.6 2.1 − 0.3 0.8 − 0.5 0.2 − 0.5
2003 0.8 0.4 1.2 − 0.4 0.3 5.0 − 0.6 4.8 − 2.4 2.0 0.1 1.4 0.32004 3.2 3.0 4.2 1.8 1.2 0.5 − 0.7 6.9 2.6 6.0 − 2.7 1.6 2.0
2004         Q1 1.8 1.6 0.7 0.4 2.2 4.5 − 0.4 6.6 1.5 2.3 − 1.4 1.4 1.0
         Q2 2.0 4.0 3.7 3.2 2.3 3.7 1.0 9.0 3.4 5.8 − 1.0 2.4 3.0         Q3 5.5 4.7 6.2 1.9 0.9 0.1 − 1.0 7.0 3.2 7.6 − 3.3 2.2 2.8         Q4 3.6 2.0 6.1 1.8 − 0.7 − 5.8 − 2.1 5.0 2.6 8.1 − 5.0 0.4 1.1
2005         Q1 − 1.1
6p 3.4 0.1 0.8 − 1.8 − 3.0 − 2.5 5.3 − 0.8 ... − 2.1 0.3 0.8
         Q2 ... 7p 2.5 − 6.8 0.0 − 2.6 ... − 1.4 ... ... ... − 0.7 0.1 ...
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 76.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.2
2003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.8 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 79.0 78.9 81.12004 80.4 83.2 84.5 84.1 75.6 75.6 76.4 85.6 82.7 81.3 80.4 79.0 81.6
2004         Q2 79.6 82.6 83.4 83.2 74.6 77.7 75.8 85.6 82.8 80.4 79.3 79.7 81.1
         Q3 81.5 83.4 84.7 84.3 76.3 75.3 76.9 87.4 83.1 82.3 81.4 79.8 82.0         Q4 80.9 83.9 86.9 84.6 74.1 75.0 76.7 86.0 82.7 82.4 80.2 79.3 82.1
2005         Q1 80.9 83.9 85.5 84.0 71.9 72.2 76.4 84.9 82.3 82.2 81.6 80.1 81.9
         Q2 79.4 81.9 87.5 84.6 72.4 69.7 76.4 83.2 82.0 81.8 79.2 80.1 81.2         Q3 78.2 82.7 82.4 84.1 71.9 78.2 75.9 79.8 81.7 81.3 79.9 80.6 81.2
Unemployment rate 4 
2002 7.3 8.7 9.1 8.9 10.3 4.3 8.6 2.8 2.8 4.2 5.0 11.5 8.3
2003 8.0 9.6 9.0 9.5 9.7 4.6 8.4 3.7 3.7 4.3 6.3 11.5 8.72004 7.8
8 9.2 8.8 9.7 10.5 4.5 8.0 4.8 4.6 4.8 6.7 11.0 8.9
2005         Jan 8.0 9.3 8.7 9.7 4.3 7.8 4.9 4.8 5.0 7.2 10.2 8.8
         Feb 8.0 9.4 8.6 9.8 4.3 7.8 4.9 4.9 5.0 7.3 10.1 8.8         Mar 8.0 9.5 8.5 9.8 4.3 7.8 5.0 4.9 5.0 7.2 10.1 8.8
         Apr 8.0 9.5 8.4 9.8 4.3 ... 5.2 4.8 5.0 7.1 10.0 8.8
         May 8.1 9.2 8.3 9.8 4.2 ... 5.4 4.8 5.1 7.1 9.9 8.7         June 8.1 9.2 8.2 9.7 4.3 ... 5.4 4.8 5.1 7.1 9.8 8.7
         July 8.0 ... ... ... 4.3 ... ... ... 5.1 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.3
2003 1.5 1.0 1.3 2.2 3.4 4.0 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.1 2.12004 1.9 1.8 0.1 2.3 3.0 2.3 2.3 3.2 1.4 2.0 2.5 3.1 2.1
2005         Jan 2.0 1.6 − 0.2 1.6 4.2 2.1 2.0 2.8 1.2 2.4 2.0 3.1 1.9
         Feb 2.3 1.8 0.0 1.9 3.2 2.0 2.0 3.2 1.5 2.3 2.1 3.3 2.1         Mar 2.8 1.7 0.9 2.1 2.9 1.9 2.1 3.5 1.5 2.4 2.3 3.4 2.1
         Apr 2.4 1.4 1.1 2.0 3.3 2.2 2.2 3.7 1.3 2.3 2.0 3.5 2.1
         May 2.3 1.6 0.6 1.7 3.2 2.2 2.3 3.7 1.1 2.0 1.8 3.0 2.0         June 2.7 1.8 1.0 1.8 3.2 1.9 2.2 3.2 1.5
p 2.0 0.6 3.2 p 2.1
         July 2.7 p 1.9 ... ... 3.9 ... e 2.4 4.0 p 1.5 ... ... e 3.3 e 2.2
General government financial balance 5 
2002 0.1 − 3.7 4.3 − 3.2 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 2.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 2.5
2003 0.4 − 3.8 2.5 − 4.2 − 5.2 0.2 − 3.2 0.5 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 2.9 0.3 − 2.82004 0.1 − 3.7 2.1 − 3.6 − 6.1 1.3 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 2.9 − 0.3 − 2.7
General government debt 5 
2002 105.4 60.6 42.5 58.8 112.2 32.6 108.3 7.5 52.6 66.8 58.5 53.2 68.8
2003 100.0 64.0 45.3 63.2 109.3 32.0 106.8 7.1 54.3 65.2 60.1 49.4 70.12004 95.6 66.1 45.3 65.0 110.5 29.9 106.6 7.5 55.7 64.4 61.9 46.9 70.6
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank, member states: European
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — Commission. 6  Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece and Portugal is calculated of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey for the first
from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; ad- quarter (industry in Germany: on average − 2.6%). — 7  Adjusted in advance
justed for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally by the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the
adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and October. — Quarterly Production Survey for the second quarter (industry in Germany:4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally on average − 2.6%). — 8  Comparability impaired owing to changeover to
adjusted. — 5  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition; new method of collection and calculation. 
excluding Financial Intermediation Services Indirectly Measured (FISIM);
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2003         Nov 90.8 67.4 14.3 23.4 13.8 17.1 43.1 26.0 28.8 7.9 0.2 16.6 4.1
         Dec 21.7 44.0 4.0 − 22.3 − 32.3 − 8.5 − 11.3 − 2.8 19.4 16.8 1.1 0.7 0.9
2004         Jan 45.1 31.2 5.5 13.9 17.2 20.7 109.6 88.9 18.9 1.6 − 1.1 16.5 1.8
         Feb 45.1 32.2 7.0 12.9 21.2 9.0 24.6 15.7 16.0 7.6 − 0.3 9.3 − 0.7         Mar 77.3 46.4 16.4 30.9 14.2 6.7 76.8 70.1 45.9 7.1 − 0.2 31.0 7.9
         Apr 89.9 85.8 26.8 4.1 11.0 7.1 70.0 62.9 28.3 10.3 − 1.1 16.4 2.7
         May 72.3 47.7 3.9 24.6 30.5 − 21.2 − 11.3 10.0 23.8 5.6 − 0.9 16.3 2.8         June 60.6 46.8 − 8.1 13.8 8.5 14.3 − 26.3 − 40.5 22.0 9.9 − 0.4 8.0 4.4
         July 29.6 27.9 − 9.0 1.8 − 4.6 − 0.6 − 6.3 − 5.7 28.1 6.8 0.1 14.9 6.4
         Aug − 19.1 − 14.0 − 10.2 − 5.0 − 0.1 30.3 45.7 15.4 18.7 6.7 − 0.0 9.2 2.8         Sep 53.3 57.3 − 2.8 − 4.0 2.9 34.9 22.6 − 12.3 45.2 3.5 − 0.3 31.8 10.2
         Oct 55.3 56.2 5.8 − 0.8 − 1.1 20.3 30.7 10.4 25.2 7.3 0.9 15.3 1.8
         Nov 89.6 86.7 17.6 3.0 6.9 10.5 106.1 95.6 29.1 15.4 0.8 7.2 5.8         Dec 27.3 70.3 15.5 − 43.0 − 48.4 26.3 − 7.3 − 33.7 40.9 26.1 1.2 9.0 4.6
2005         Jan 95.6 53.7 15.2 41.9 38.2 − 17.4 82.3 99.7 12.0 1.9 − 0.3 10.7 − 0.4
         Feb 60.0 36.8 10.2 23.2 32.5 13.6 66.0 52.4 46.3 7.5 0.5 32.6 5.7         Mar 48.1 53.7 6.6 − 5.6 − 4.5 − 22.6 37.0 59.6 46.7 15.3 − 0.1 23.7 7.8
         Apr 135.7 119.2 67.7 16.5 11.9 1.8 109.5 107.7 17.2 5.4 − 0.5 15.2 − 2.9
         May 53.7 59.9 0.6 − 6.2 − 3.8 − 39.0 − 6.9 32.1 26.0 0.2 − 0.4 21.5 4.7         June 68.2 66.6 − 21.0 1.6 2.1 93.4 21.1 − 72.3 73.6 5.8 0.2 33.7 33.8
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2003         Nov 24.5 15.5 5.5 8.9 2.4 7.9 12.4 4.6 3.3 0.2 0.2 3.0 − 0.1
         Dec − 10.1 0.0 1.1 − 10.2 − 7.8 14.2 15.2 1.0 − 0.2 1.5 1.0 − 2.9 0.2
2004         Jan − 0.6 − 6.8 1.4 6.2 6.1 20.2 32.1 11.9 2.6 − 0.2 − 1.1 6.5 − 2.7
         Feb 16.6 2.9 − 3.6 13.7 22.4 − 23.5 − 2.7 20.8 − 5.8 0.6 − 0.4 0.5 − 6.5         Mar 28.7 10.4 9.6 18.3 5.8 − 2.0 10.3 12.3 9.4 0.0 − 0.2 9.4 0.2
         Apr 10.8 16.4 13.3 − 5.6 1.1 15.0 22.0 7.0 13.0 4.5 − 1.2 6.2 3.4
         May − 10.4 − 10.6 − 8.3 0.1 6.0 11.1 − 4.9 − 16.0 5.0 4.3 − 0.9 4.9 − 3.3         June − 9.2 − 12.4 − 12.7 3.2 8.5 21.2 − 8.5 − 29.7 7.9 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 6.0
         July 6.4 − 4.1 − 1.5 10.5 1.5 − 3.3 − 9.4 − 6.1 8.0 1.7 0.1 2.3 3.9
         Aug − 7.4 − 8.1 − 5.4 0.8 5.4 12.1 12.3 0.2 2.8 1.9 − 0.0 5.2 − 4.3         Sep 5.3 10.7 0.6 − 5.3 − 0.8 11.1 35.0 23.9 9.9 1.1 − 0.3 9.9 − 0.7
         Oct 11.7 − 0.6 1.5 12.3 7.3 18.7 8.1 − 10.6 3.9 2.7 0.6 − 0.5 1.1
         Nov 6.1 11.8 1.1 − 5.7 − 1.8 3.3 41.4 38.1 0.5 2.6 0.8 − 0.9 − 2.0         Dec − 14.0 − 1.8 9.9 − 12.2 − 8.2 10.3 − 25.6 − 36.0 2.1 3.7 1.1 − 5.2 2.5
2005         Jan 20.9 6.3 6.3 14.6 10.2 − 4.8 26.3 31.1 2.3 0.6 − 0.3 0.7 1.3
         Feb − 2.2 0.6 − 5.1 − 2.8 1.6 1.7 14.0 12.3 4.9 4.1 0.5 4.8 − 4.5         Mar 8.5 − 1.1 6.2 9.6 9.8 − 10.4 4.0 14.3 10.6 2.6 − 0.0 7.8 0.3
         Apr 63.2 50.8 45.3 12.4 7.5 15.6 56.3 40.7 11.8 − 2.8 − 0.5 10.8 4.2
         May − 21.7 − 15.0 − 17.7 − 6.6 − 5.7 − 22.7 − 25.5 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 0.5 2.0 0.7         June − 27.7 − 9.5 − 16.0 − 18.2 − 12.8 49.8 − 6.3 − 56.1 9.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 4.9 5.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturitiesEurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
14.6 17.1 − 47.5 52.1 49.2 7.9 41.3 − 4.1 7.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 0.2 2003          Nov 
− 24.7 − 44.4 − 62.9 93.9 64.8 18.8 46.1 0.4 28.7 − 16.0 − 3.4 − 11.6          Dec 
18.3 35.7 − − 7.2 − 28.3 − 24.7 − 8.8 − 15.9 − 21.1 17.5 6.9 9.6 4.7 2004          Jan 
18.9 − 7.1 − 26.3 2.5 1.7 4.4 − 2.7 − 5.9 6.7 14.0 7.5 2.3          Feb 
− 9.2 20.2 − 27.1 33.7 40.7 6.1 34.6 − 12.3 5.2 − 9.3 5.3 − 2.6          Mar 
− 4.7 20.9 − 52.5 33.3 24.4 9.8 14.6 0.6 8.3 5.8 8.0 5.4          Apr 
15.5 − 15.8 − 27.7 35.8 18.7 7.3 11.5 11.0 6.0 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 2.4          May28.7 − 2.9 − 27.1 30.3 44.2 6.4 37.8 − 26.1 12.2 − 4.2 − 3.7 4.7          June
− 22.2 − 3.4 − 26.6 19.7 1.4 13.3 − 11.9 10.6 7.6 5.2 3.9 − 2.2          July
− 8.5 15.5 − − 14.4 − 29.7 − 38.7 − 2.8 − 35.9 3.4 5.6 3.0 11.0 1.3          Aug 
11.1 − 2.3 − 34.1 56.6 63.1 4.6 58.5 − 8.6 2.2 − 8.3 − 13.3 − 0.9          Sep 
− 6.7 − 3.6 − 60.8 42.0 10.1 6.4 3.8 27.7 4.1 13.1 7.4 − 1.7          Oct 
− 14.6 46.3 − 39.2 43.8 50.5 4.3 46.2 − 13.5 6.7 − 5.5 − 3.2 4.2          Nov − 20.4 − 71.2 − 104.4 109.4 38.7 19.7 19.1 39.1 31.6 4.7 − 8.0 − 1.6          Dec 
18.2 40.5 − 7.6 − 0.3 14.6 − 8.5 23.2 − 27.8 12.8 − 1.1 12.4 − 3.5 2005          Jan 
29.5 − 12.6 − 10.3 4.9 5.0 3.7 1.3 − 5.3 5.2 − 1.7 − 1.9 8.9          Feb 
− 22.7 − 26.3 − 27.8 35.1 26.9 8.2 18.7 4.1 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 6.5          Mar 
− 6.5 43.5 − 83.4 55.9 31.9 9.3 22.6 16.7 7.3 − 0.7 13.7 14.5          Apr 
− 7.4 − 51.9 − 48.0 35.3 31.3 4.8 26.5 − 1.9 5.9 12.8 7.5 − 7.6          May
39.2 − 3.7 − 52.6 60.2 64.0 10.7 53.2 − 7.4 3.7 − 0.8 − 15.1 8.2          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
0.1 3.3 1.0 2.4 25.5 22.8 − 0.3 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 4.1 2003          Nov 
0.2 7.0 0.2 4.5 − 3.0 − 10.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.9 0.2 1.2          Dec 
0.0 19.7 3.5 − 5.0 − 2.7 8.3 − 14.1 1.3 2.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 2004          Jan 
1.3 − 1.8 1.1 0.9 − 0.6 5.7 − 5.2 1.2 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0          Feb 0.6 12.2 1.2 2.3 4.4 1.2 − 0.1 0.1 0.8 − 0.5 3.0          Mar 
− 0.6 13.0 1.9 2.7 0.4 5.8 − 5.0 0.9 − 1.0 0.1 − 0.3          Apr 
1.0 − 10.7 1.0 2.3 5.3 − 2.7 8.7 0.2 − 0.3 0.3 − 1.0          May2.4 10.3 0.6 2.3 − 8.6 3.3 − 9.8 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.8          June
− 1.0 − 0.1 1.7 3.6 − 3.8 − 8.5 3.9 0.5 0.6 3.9 − 4.2          July
2.4 − 2.9 3.0 − 0.8 2.5 1.7 0.7 0.7 − 2.5 1.3 0.7          Aug 
− 3.9 1.5 2.3 1.3 9.0 14.6 − 5.1 0.1 3.9 − 2.3 − 2.1          Sep 
− 2.6 29.4 1.4 1.0 − 0.3 − 3.5 2.3 0.5 3.1 − 1.3 − 1.4          Oct 
− 1.9 − 7.6 0.8 2.1 18.4 29.2 − 9.5 − 0.1 0.8 − 1.9 − 0.2          Nov 
0.1 4.0 0.3 4.8 − 10.0 − 29.5 23.5 9.2 − 7.2 − 3.9 − 2.2          Dec 
1.4 − 4.7 1.1 − 2.0 17.1 23.2 − 15.8 0.9 10.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 2005          Jan 
− 0.8 − 5.6 1.3 1.0 1.0 5.2 − 5.6 0.3 2.2 0.3 − 1.4          Feb − 3.3 − 1.7 2.1 2.5 − 7.4 0.4 − 5.5 − 1.0 1.0 1.6 − 3.9          Mar 
0.8 54.2 0.9 2.3 12.0 2.4 6.9 0.1 0.3 0.4 1.8          Apr 
− 1.3 − 50.1 2.4 1.0 9.0 9.0 3.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.9          May
0.8 6.5 0.7 3.4 5.8 10.0 − 5.7 − 1.2 − 0.1 0.2 2.4          June
euro-area MFIs. — 9Up to end-2002, including national banknotes and German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the
coins still in circulation. — 10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by themonetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
  
 
AssetsLending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Otheryear/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  
2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2003         May 14,302.7 10,088.4 7,914.2 6,907.1 409.7 597.5 2,174.1 818.9 1,355.2 2,881.2 1,333.2
         June 14,382.4 10,102.3 7,945.2 6,942.3 409.2 593.7 2,157.1 817.8 1,339.2 2,961.9 1,318.2
         July 14,374.7 10,159.9 7,986.4 6,963.0 406.9 616.4 2,173.5 825.9 1,347.6 2,947.9 1,267.0
         Aug 14,364.0 10,167.7 8,004.9 6,975.7 410.0 619.3 2,162.8 819.8 1,342.9 2,933.8 1,262.5         Sep 14,410.1 10,213.3 8,026.2 6,996.3 415.2 614.8 2,187.0 821.3 1,365.8 2,892.2 1,304.6
         Oct 14,495.7 10,260.2 8,060.6 7,025.0 422.8 612.7 2,199.6 821.1 1,378.5 2,955.3 1,280.2
         Nov 14,604.7 10,346.8 8,121.2 7,071.6 427.1 622.5 2,225.5 828.9 1,396.6 2,953.2 1,304.7         Dec 14,551.8 10,359.3 8,155.1 7,102.5 429.0 623.6 2,204.3 840.1 1,364.1 2,885.7 1,306.8
2004         Jan 14,763.6 10,409.9 8,181.7 7,120.0 429.0 632.7 2,228.3 836.6 1,391.7 3,014.2 1,339.5
         Feb 14,859.2 10,453.5 8,209.5 7,140.9 434.7 633.9 2,244.1 828.3 1,415.8 3,033.5 1,372.2         Mar 15,060.8 10,532.4 8,258.1 7,172.9 435.7 649.4 2,274.3 843.9 1,430.5 3,151.8 1,376.6
         Apr 15,223.6 10,622.5 8,343.5 7,231.0 440.4 672.1 2,279.0 838.2 1,440.8 3,228.3 1,372.8
         May 15,252.3 10,685.9 8,384.6 7,270.8 444.5 669.3 2,301.3 832.4 1,468.9 3,196.2 1,370.2         June 15,324.8 10,753.4 8,434.7 7,322.8 449.0 662.9 2,318.6 838.1 1,480.6 3,179.1 1,392.3
         July 15,349.2 10,784.7 8,463.4 7,359.0 451.2 653.3 2,321.3 844.4 1,477.0 3,182.6 1,382.0
         Aug 15,382.1 10,763.3 8,444.2 7,350.2 450.7 643.3 2,319.1 839.4 1,479.7 3,222.8 1,396.0         Sep 15,484.0 10,809.8 8,496.5 7,404.1 449.3 643.1 2,313.3 832.3 1,481.1 3,211.4 1,462.8
         Oct 15,581.1 10,863.2 8,550.3 7,451.2 452.1 647.0 2,313.0 832.4 1,480.6 3,216.3 1,501.6
         Nov 15,773.4 10,948.1 8,632.1 7,514.6 457.4 660.1 2,316.0 828.3 1,487.8 3,279.3 1,546.0         Dec 15,720.4 10,965.2 8,691.4 7,558.0 466.9 666.4 2,273.8 833.9 1,439.9 3,234.5 1,520.7
2005         Jan 15,987.7 11,069.0 8,746.9 7,597.5 471.2 678.1 2,322.1 838.7 1,483.4 3,368.5 1,550.2
         Feb 16,099.4 11,128.0 8,784.4 7,623.5 481.1 679.8 2,343.7 829.4 1,514.3 3,416.6 1,554.8         Mar 16,260.4 11,175.2 8,836.7 7,670.0 482.8 683.9 2,338.5 828.1 1,510.4 3,478.9 1,606.3
         Apr 16,564.7 11,312.5 8,954.3 7,720.7 493.2 740.4 2,358.2 832.8 1,525.4 3,598.0 1,654.3
         May 16,751.7 11,379.4 9,023.2 7,784.9 499.0 739.4 2,356.2 830.7 1,525.5 3,656.7 1,715.6         June 17,028.1 11,507.7 9,139.3 7,916.3 507.1 715.9 2,368.4 830.2 1,538.2 3,713.9 1,806.4
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2003         May 4,401.1 3,351.6 2,629.9 2,298.8 67.9 263.2 721.7 470.7 251.1 871.8 177.7
         June 4,411.5 3,334.6 2,629.8 2,301.7 67.0 261.1 704.8 463.7 241.2 906.3 170.6
         July 4,391.1 3,334.6 2,620.8 2,293.4 64.4 263.0 713.9 474.3 239.6 891.4 165.1
         Aug 4,373.2 3,322.7 2,624.8 2,296.4 64.5 263.9 697.9 469.1 228.8 886.0 164.4         Sep 4,384.6 3,337.1 2,634.6 2,309.9 64.2 260.5 702.5 463.0 239.4 877.7 169.8
         Oct 4,387.2 3,333.3 2,624.5 2,303.4 66.5 254.6 708.8 466.1 242.7 882.7 171.3
         Nov 4,409.5 3,355.4 2,637.9 2,311.5 66.9 259.5 717.5 472.5 245.0 884.0 170.2         Dec 4,392.5 3,337.7 2,630.9 2,303.9 69.0 258.0 706.7 469.9 236.8 883.7 171.1
2004         Jan 4,416.6 3,334.2 2,621.1 2,291.7 68.4 260.9 713.2 470.2 242.9 921.4 161.0
         Feb 4,424.0 3,346.3 2,619.5 2,295.4 67.9 256.2 726.7 461.6 265.2 916.1 161.5         Mar 4,479.7 3,374.8 2,629.5 2,295.8 66.6 267.0 745.3 474.2 271.1 939.4 165.5
         Apr 4,514.1 3,385.7 2,646.0 2,299.2 65.4 281.5 739.6 467.5 272.2 962.8 165.7
         May 4,495.6 3,374.2 2,634.5 2,296.1 66.2 272.3 739.7 461.6 278.0 952.1 169.3         June 4,477.8 3,364.6 2,621.6 2,295.8 66.5 259.2 742.9 456.3 286.6 944.6 168.6
         July 4,479.3 3,372.7 2,619.4 2,292.9 70.7 255.8 753.4 465.2 288.2 937.4 169.1
         Aug 4,477.2 3,362.1 2,608.0 2,286.8 69.1 252.1 754.2 460.6 293.6 949.3 165.8         Sep 4,507.8 3,365.6 2,616.9 2,294.9 69.5 252.6 748.6 455.9 292.7 974.8 167.4
         Oct 4,522.7 3,376.3 2,615.4 2,291.9 69.3 254.3 760.9 460.8 300.0 976.6 169.8
         Nov 4,559.3 3,380.9 2,626.0 2,301.2 68.5 256.2 754.9 456.8 298.2 1,005.9 172.4         Dec 4,511.9 3,363.1 2,620.3 2,285.7 68.7 265.9 742.9 453.1 289.7 969.6 179.2
2005         Jan 4,562.3 3,381.7 2,623.9 2,283.1 68.7 272.0 757.7 457.7 300.1 1,009.8 170.8
         Feb 4,569.3 3,376.7 2,622.0 2,286.5 69.6 266.0 754.7 453.2 301.5 1,018.7 173.9         Mar 4,580.5 3,384.2 2,619.8 2,278.0 71.6 270.1 764.4 453.1 311.4 1,029.4 166.9
         Apr 4,706.9 3,446.9 2,670.0 2,283.0 74.7 312.2 776.9 458.0 318.9 1,087.9 172.2
         May 4,682.9 3,426.6 2,656.1 2,286.6 76.1 293.4 770.5 457.3 313.2 1,078.6 177.8         June 4,650.4 3,397.3 2,644.9 2,291.2 80.8 272.9 752.4 451.9 300.5 1,080.5 172.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4From
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to end-2002, also including nationalBank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — banknotes and coins still in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*).
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). From 2002, the German contribution
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
343.8 6,041.4 5,695.7 5,715.4 2,035.9 972.4 73.0 1,185.2 1,352.6 96.4 2003          May
351.0 6,100.7 5,715.9 5,744.9 2,083.6 940.3 72.4 1,188.1 1,365.6 94.8          June
361.5 6,093.3 5,739.0 5,770.2 2,090.1 944.5 72.1 1,194.4 1,376.3 92.8          July
362.7 6,089.2 5,741.0 5,779.2 2,078.5 951.1 72.2 1,203.8 1,382.4 91.2          Aug 364.8 6,118.0 5,754.9 5,789.2 2,117.6 922.4 73.0 1,203.3 1,382.3 90.6          Sep 
371.2 6,118.4 5,769.3 5,806.7 2,112.8 934.7 73.9 1,208.4 1,386.3 90.6          Oct 
379.1 6,179.9 5,818.3 5,851.8 2,151.0 927.4 75.5 1,215.5 1,391.5 90.8          Nov 397.9 6,239.4 5,912.6 5,934.1 2,188.8 921.8 74.9 1,232.2 1,424.6 91.8          Dec 
389.1 6,244.5 5,889.6 5,923.5 2,177.7 904.4 75.1 1,235.3 1,440.2 90.8 2004          Jan 
393.5 6,263.6 5,891.4 5,924.9 2,171.7 899.4 74.6 1,242.6 1,446.1 90.5          Feb 399.6 6,290.5 5,920.7 5,966.5 2,210.4 892.2 73.1 1,250.4 1,450.2 90.3          Mar 
409.4 6,322.1 5,947.9 5,997.9 2,225.0 894.2 71.7 1,261.1 1,456.8 89.2          Apr 
416.6 6,366.8 5,980.0 6,023.2 2,235.3 900.5 71.2 1,266.1 1,461.7 88.3          May423.0 6,433.1 6,021.8 6,060.1 2,275.7 875.9 71.3 1,276.3 1,472.9 88.0          June
436.2 6,417.4 6,028.2 6,069.2 2,260.8 887.0 70.7 1,283.1 1,479.4 88.0          July
433.4 6,384.5 6,000.9 6,045.8 2,223.8 892.2 69.3 1,289.6 1,482.9 88.0          Aug 438.0 6,444.1 6,051.3 6,088.9 2,275.5 881.2 67.8 1,293.0 1,483.7 87.7          Sep 
444.4 6,476.5 6,087.4 6,126.5 2,275.2 906.3 69.7 1,300.1 1,486.6 88.6          Oct 
448.7 6,504.0 6,128.7 6,165.8 2,305.9 893.7 69.4 1,315.4 1,492.0 89.4          Nov 468.4 6,589.6 6,245.0 6,274.3 2,321.0 925.0 71.6 1,344.8 1,521.5 90.5          Dec 
459.9 6,624.1 6,248.9 6,284.3 2,340.9 901.5 71.4 1,347.7 1,532.6 90.2 2005          Jan 
463.6 6,661.4 6,255.0 6,292.4 2,340.9 900.0 70.9 1,354.9 1,534.9 90.8          Feb 471.8 6,684.8 6,295.3 6,344.2 2,367.7 905.4 70.7 1,370.4 1,538.7 91.2          Mar 
481.1 6,730.1 6,346.8 6,396.1 2,391.1 922.5 71.6 1,375.9 1,544.3 90.7          Apr 
485.8 6,759.5 6,372.4 6,427.8 2,418.3 920.4 72.2 1,377.1 1,549.5 90.3          May496.6 6,900.5 6,473.7 6,525.5 2,621.1 917.8 78.5 1,405.8 1,411.8 90.5          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
93.2 2,189.4 2,112.0 2,073.9 585.9 236.9 17.8 653.8 485.3 94.3 2003          May
96.0 2,194.7 2,115.7 2,076.1 600.0 225.8 17.6 653.4 486.3 92.9          June
99.4 2,183.0 2,107.8 2,071.3 591.1 225.3 17.3 658.5 488.3 90.8          July
99.3 2,193.4 2,117.6 2,082.5 593.2 228.9 17.5 662.7 491.0 89.3          Aug 
100.2 2,188.3 2,112.7 2,079.6 603.5 217.2 17.5 661.0 491.8 88.5          Sep 
101.5 2,188.7 2,113.6 2,083.5 606.9 216.1 17.8 661.3 492.8 88.6          Oct 
103.9 2,211.8 2,137.8 2,105.1 628.8 214.6 18.3 661.2 493.4 88.9          Nov 108.5 2,215.1 2,143.0 2,105.2 616.1 216.3 18.5 662.1 502.3 89.9          Dec 
103.5 2,209.9 2,137.7 2,102.7 626.1 202.7 18.5 662.9 503.6 88.8 2004          Jan 
104.4 2,213.0 2,140.9 2,103.8 630.1 198.8 18.3 663.3 504.7 88.5          Feb 106.7 2,215.1 2,142.0 2,106.6 631.3 200.7 18.0 663.6 504.8 88.2          Mar 
109.3 2,219.4 2,145.3 2,112.5 637.8 196.2 17.5 668.3 505.6 87.1          Apr 
111.6 2,229.8 2,154.8 2,118.4 634.1 202.7 16.9 672.6 505.8 86.2          May113.8 2,229.2 2,151.6 2,114.1 636.3 193.0 16.6 676.9 505.5 85.8          June
117.4 2,226.0 2,149.7 2,113.7 629.2 197.9 16.2 678.5 506.0 85.9          July
116.7 2,232.2 2,153.1 2,119.1 630.6 199.7 16.0 680.3 506.6 85.8          Aug 118.0 2,238.1 2,162.0 2,126.3 644.8 191.9 15.9 681.5 506.7 85.5          Sep 
119.0 2,237.6 2,164.0 2,132.6 642.0 197.5 16.0 684.1 507.0 86.1          Oct 
121.1 2,258.0 2,187.6 2,153.3 668.5 188.1 15.7 687.1 507.0 86.9          Nov 125.9 2,264.6 2,193.8 2,158.6 639.4 208.7 15.7 690.9 516.0 88.0          Dec 
123.9 2,275.5 2,203.9 2,167.3 661.1 193.9 15.7 691.8 517.0 87.8 2005          Jan 
124.9 2,278.8 2,208.6 2,170.9 664.8 189.0 15.7 695.8 517.3 88.3          Feb 127.4 2,272.0 2,204.8 2,169.7 666.7 183.6 15.5 698.0 517.2 88.7          Mar 
129.7 2,279.1 2,210.9 2,177.8 669.1 192.2 15.7 695.3 517.3 88.2          Apr 
130.7 2,285.8 2,217.2 2,182.7 677.7 193.6 15.7 691.4 516.7 87.7          May134.1 2,289.0 2,220.7 2,182.9 686.8 186.5 16.1 691.0 515.4 87.1          June
includes the volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim
Bundesbank in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). — 5Excluding
Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The central governments’ deposits. — 6 In Germany, only saving deposits. 
volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can be
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
  
 
Liabilities (cont’d)Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2003         May 170.1 155.9 76.9 50.8 0.9 24.1 2.8 0.3 231.7 228.2 571.7 1,821.2 1,516.4
         June 200.3 155.5 80.1 46.8 0.9 24.6 2.8 0.3 215.0 212.1 570.9 1,835.4 1,517.4
         July 173.0 150.1 75.2 46.4 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 219.9 216.4 584.9 1,852.3 1,519.4
         Aug 163.0 147.0 73.4 45.7 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.3 217.1 214.2 587.1 1,864.5 1,516.1         Sep 183.9 144.9 74.8 42.0 1.0 23.9 2.8 0.3 211.5 207.9 576.9 1,860.0 1,519.5
         Oct 165.8 145.9 78.1 39.9 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.4 224.7 221.1 582.3 1,896.0 1,541.0
         Nov 180.4 147.7 80.0 39.6 0.9 24.0 2.9 0.3 224.7 220.9 585.2 1,904.4 1,554.1         Dec 155.7 149.6 79.7 41.5 0.9 24.3 2.9 0.4 208.7 206.4 581.5 1,878.0 1,537.6
2004         Jan 174.1 146.9 78.4 41.2 0.9 23.2 2.9 0.3 214.6 211.9 591.7 1,903.5 1,551.5
         Feb 193.0 145.7 76.7 41.3 0.9 23.5 3.0 0.4 228.6 225.3 599.2 1,913.6 1,561.0         Mar 183.8 140.3 73.5 39.1 0.9 23.3 3.1 0.4 219.4 215.8 602.6 1,951.3 1,578.4
         Apr 179.6 144.7 77.7 39.2 1.0 23.1 3.2 0.4 225.5 222.5 611.0 1,975.9 1,588.7
         May 195.1 148.5 78.3 42.5 1.0 23.1 3.3 0.4 221.9 218.5 609.0 1,986.4 1,591.7         June 223.7 149.2 81.1 40.6 1.0 22.8 3.3 0.4 217.7 214.3 609.2 1,999.9 1,601.1
         July 201.5 146.8 77.6 41.3 1.0 22.9 3.4 0.4 223.0 219.5 613.0 2,017.2 1,610.1
         Aug 193.0 145.7 78.0 40.7 1.0 22.1 3.5 0.5 226.0 221.9 624.1 2,026.0 1,618.9         Sep 204.1 151.0 81.5 42.8 1.0 21.8 3.5 0.5 217.6 214.2 609.5 2,048.9 1,637.5
         Oct 197.4 152.6 83.7 41.9 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 230.7 227.6 617.1 2,057.4 1,643.1
         Nov 182.8 155.4 89.2 39.2 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 225.1 222.0 613.4 2,059.7 1,646.8         Dec 162.4 152.9 84.8 42.0 1.3 20.3 3.8 0.5 229.7 226.8 604.9 2,060.3 1,654.9
2005         Jan 180.6 159.3 92.4 41.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 228.7 225.5 616.4 2,085.7 1,663.7
         Feb 210.1 158.9 92.4 40.6 1.4 20.2 3.9 0.4 227.0 224.2 615.4 2,122.8 1,693.3         Mar 187.4 153.3 87.4 40.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 227.0 223.3 614.6 2,144.9 1,702.7
         Apr 180.9 153.2 88.2 39.0 1.5 20.3 3.8 0.5 226.3 222.5 627.8 2,176.7 1,713.9
         May 173.5 158.2 90.6 41.3 1.5 20.4 4.0 0.5 239.2 235.2 634.8 2,202.8 1,721.2         June 212.7 162.3 94.3 41.8 1.4 20.3 4.0 0.4 238.5 234.0 620.8 2,247.6 1,749.6
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2003         May 47.7 67.8 14.8 28.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 12.3 12.3 37.7 814.0 698.7
         June 48.1 70.5 17.4 28.4 0.7 22.1 1.6 0.3 10.8 10.8 37.3 819.6 699.7
         July 45.3 66.3 14.0 27.9 0.6 21.9 1.6 0.3 10.9 10.9 36.9 822.7 696.4
         Aug 46.0 65.0 14.0 27.1 0.6 21.2 1.7 0.3 12.4 12.4 36.4 821.8 688.4         Sep 46.3 62.5 13.9 24.7 0.7 21.2 1.7 0.3 15.6 15.6 36.3 825.6 689.8
         Oct 45.5 59.7 13.8 22.1 0.6 21.2 1.6 0.4 21.1 21.1 35.7 829.7 692.4
         Nov 45.7 61.0 14.4 22.6 0.6 21.4 1.6 0.3 20.0 20.0 35.2 833.2 698.6         Dec 45.9 64.0 15.8 23.9 0.6 21.6 1.6 0.4 14.1 14.1 35.4 826.4 693.3
2004         Jan 46.0 61.3 14.4 23.6 0.6 20.7 1.7 0.3 16.6 16.6 34.9 836.4 695.5
         Feb 47.3 62.0 15.2 23.3 0.6 20.9 1.7 0.4 17.5 17.5 34.7 833.7 695.2         Mar 47.9 60.6 15.4 21.7 0.6 20.7 1.8 0.4 18.2 18.2 34.2 851.5 698.5
         Apr 47.3 59.7 14.9 21.4 0.6 20.6 1.8 0.4 17.3 17.3 34.2 858.7 698.9
         May 48.3 63.1 15.7 24.1 0.6 20.5 1.8 0.4 17.0 17.0 34.6 861.5 701.5         June 50.7 64.4 17.3 24.0 0.6 20.3 1.8 0.4 16.1 16.1 34.5 859.1 697.1
         July 49.7 62.6 15.6 23.7 0.6 20.4 1.9 0.4 16.8 16.8 38.4 860.1 692.4
         Aug 52.1 61.0 15.7 22.8 0.6 19.5 2.0 0.5 14.2 14.2 39.6 865.1 696.9         Sep 48.1 63.6 15.8 25.4 0.6 19.3 2.0 0.5 18.1 18.1 37.5 869.5 699.7
         Oct 45.6 59.4 15.0 21.9 0.7 19.2 2.1 0.5 21.2 21.2 36.2 865.5 691.2
         Nov 43.7 61.1 16.7 21.8 0.7 19.3 2.0 0.5 22.0 22.0 34.3 860.8 687.5         Dec 43.8 62.2 16.0 24.8 0.6 18.1 2.2 0.5 14.8 14.8 30.5 850.2 678.1
2005         Jan 45.2 63.0 17.9 23.9 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 25.1 25.1 30.2 854.7 673.7
         Feb 44.3 63.5 19.2 23.2 0.6 18.0 2.1 0.4 27.3 27.3 30.5 856.4 671.1         Mar 41.0 61.2 17.5 22.7 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 862.2 671.6
         Apr 41.8 59.4 17.5 20.9 0.6 18.0 1.9 0.5 28.6 28.6 32.6 875.9 676.5
         May 40.5 62.5 18.4 22.8 0.7 18.1 2.1 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 880.9 676.1         June 41.3 64.9 19.6 23.9 0.7 18.1 2.2 0.4 28.3 28.3 32.4 890.2 681.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building with money market fund shares. — 5Excluding liabilities arising from
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central securities issued. — 6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 7The
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates should on
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with or M3. — 8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution, the difference
January 2002 Monthly Report , they were published in this table together
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
... ... 1,713.3 2,653.4 993.6 − 5.7 1,649.9 − 2,561.5 5,109.4 6,020.7 4,012.9 200.4 2003          May
... ... 1,731.2 2,668.4 997.6 15.3 1,626.3 − 2,605.4 5,130.1 6,020.3 4,036.8 186.6          June
... ... 1,753.4 2,678.5 999.8 5.3 1,577.5 − 2,584.8 5,124.2 6,027.9 4,065.2 154.4          July
... ... 1,767.7 2,677.3 1,014.4 − 3.2 1,553.3 − 2,573.2 5,126.0 6,027.0 4,101.2 156.2          Aug ... ... 1,768.0 2,642.2 1,016.6 5.6 1,612.9 − 2,615.6 5,137.0 6,017.5 4,102.8 156.3          Sep 
... ... 1,791.9 2,690.5 1,014.1 9.6 1,587.5 − 2,620.4 5,157.9 6,069.0 4,129.3 157.3          Oct 
... ... 1,800.7 2,685.2 1,009.3 4.9 1,631.2 − 2,667.8 5,206.0 6,119.7 4,140.7 158.1          Nov ... ... 1,785.4 2,634.0 1,004.7 8.9 1,598.3 − 2,727.1 5,295.8 6,178.7 4,138.7 162.9          Dec 
... ... 1,807.9 2,749.4 1,003.5 17.1 1,649.8 − 2,702.9 5,271.7 6,173.6 4,161.1 161.8 2004          Jan 
... ... 1,816.6 2,765.3 1,002.8 21.6 1,670.5 − 2,703.3 5,273.5 6,198.4 4,176.3 166.4          Feb ... ... 1,856.8 2,856.2 1,020.6 21.1 1,699.3 − 2,745.5 5,310.2 6,226.7 4,241.8 168.2          Mar 
... ... 1,876.4 2,936.8 1,016.5 16.1 1,710.0 − 2,770.7 5,344.5 6,280.5 4,266.8 166.4          Apr 
... ... 1,890.2 2,930.9 1,014.0 17.4 1,689.1 − 2,788.6 5,377.4 6,304.5 4,282.1 167.0          May... ... 1,899.8 2,892.7 1,018.9 16.4 1,713.5 − 2,833.4 5,408.0 6,335.0 4,306.2 163.2          June
... ... 1,919.4 2,897.7 1,026.3 20.0 1,697.9 − 2,834.8 5,428.5 6,362.3 4,340.2 170.8          July
... ... 1,926.8 2,902.7 1,033.0 21.0 1,729.9 − 2,795.7 5,398.0 6,347.3 4,359.8 173.2          Aug ... ... 1,948.7 2,861.6 1,039.4 15.0 1,808.9 − 2,857.1 5,451.1 6,378.4 4,391.0 176.0          Sep 
... ... 1,958.5 2,847.5 1,041.7 20.7 1,843.5 − 2,866.0 5,490.4 6,437.1 4,410.9 177.7          Oct 
... ... 1,956.1 2,904.7 1,050.4 44.3 1,921.4 − 2,913.7 5,528.9 6,470.9 4,433.4 185.9          Nov ... ... 1,958.0 2,842.2 1,047.0 34.0 1,843.0 − 2,948.9 5,632.2 6,569.1 4,461.2 192.8          Dec 
... ... 1,986.4 2,993.3 1,049.8 29.7 1,899.0 − 2,966.0 5,637.3 6,581.7 4,495.0 192.6 2005          Jan 
... ... 2,008.8 3,029.0 1,054.0 22.1 1,903.3 − 2,970.7 5,643.9 6,600.4 4,529.2 195.5          Feb ... ... 2,038.8 3,110.4 1,062.9 0.4 1,943.0 − 2,998.1 5,681.0 6,628.7 4,584.1 194.2          Mar 
... ... 2,055.9 3,224.7 1,063.5 15.5 2,019.1 − 3,030.4 5,737.7 6,712.6 4,606.8 194.8          Apr 
... ... 2,089.4 3,310.2 1,076.1 − 12.0 2,054.5 − 3,064.5 5,778.9 6,766.2 4,653.8 195.3          May... ... 2,127.1 3,259.0 1,140.9 − 18.6 2,141.6 − 3,282.5 5,863.3 6,843.1 4,785.2 196.1          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
32.2 34.1 747.7 666.8 277.5 − 43.6 447.0 36.6 600.7 1,371.8 1,488.0 1,795.1 − 2003          May
33.0 31.6 754.9 661.1 279.0 − 42.6 451.8 37.3 617.5 1,377.9 1,490.5 1,802.6 −          June
30.6 31.7 760.4 668.9 280.4 − 63.1 451.5 38.4 605.0 1,366.0 1,476.0 1,812.5 −          July
25.7 29.5 766.7 640.5 285.5 − 67.4 450.4 40.8 607.2 1,374.0 1,477.8 1,825.8 −          Aug 26.4 29.3 770.0 639.8 279.8 − 60.1 459.3 42.2 617.3 1,370.9 1,478.4 1,820.9 −          Sep 
25.7 30.1 773.9 638.2 279.6 − 63.5 457.6 43.4 620.7 1,371.7 1,484.4 1,825.0 −          Oct 
28.6 31.5 773.1 635.5 279.6 − 70.8 465.2 44.4 643.2 1,394.3 1,509.6 1,824.4 −          Nov 30.0 31.3 765.1 625.4 279.6 − 67.8 464.3 44.6 631.9 1,395.2 1,505.9 1,818.7 −          Dec 
31.2 29.8 775.4 642.8 276.3 − 47.1 446.8 48.1 640.5 1,391.1 1,503.6 1,824.6 − 2004          Jan 
26.7 31.3 775.8 663.0 270.2 − 60.8 452.6 49.2 645.3 1,392.7 1,502.9 1,819.0 −          Feb 29.6 31.4 790.6 680.7 273.8 − 54.5 460.7 50.4 646.8 1,394.2 1,507.6 1,837.3 −          Mar 
29.8 31.1 797.7 690.9 274.2 − 52.8 472.2 52.3 652.7 1,395.8 1,508.3 1,848.3 −          Apr 
27.6 32.3 801.5 671.6 270.6 − 61.3 471.9 53.3 649.8 1,401.8 1,513.4 1,851.8 −          May29.5 29.7 799.9 642.5 276.7 − 54.5 474.3 53.9 653.5 1,395.1 1,504.8 1,860.1 −          June
27.2 27.7 805.2 638.2 280.6 − 59.0 478.3 55.6 644.8 1,391.0 1,501.1 1,871.1 −          July
29.2 26.5 809.4 636.6 278.9 − 69.5 480.2 58.6 646.4 1,394.0 1,503.5 1,874.5 −          Aug 27.5 26.1 815.9 654.3 277.5 − 80.2 493.1 60.9 660.7 1,403.1 1,512.3 1,880.2 −          Sep 
27.2 25.1 813.3 639.6 278.9 − 58.8 502.5 62.3 656.9 1,402.1 1,511.7 1,882.2 −          Oct 
29.5 22.7 808.7 669.7 277.1 − 73.6 510.9 63.1 685.2 1,420.6 1,529.0 1,879.6 −          Nov 27.5 22.5 800.2 627.6 277.6 − 69.5 516.2 63.4 655.4 1,423.3 1,518.6 1,875.2 −          Dec 
27.6 21.2 805.8 667.8 279.2 − 76.0 506.0 64.5 679.0 1,432.3 1,536.4 1,883.1 − 2005          Jan 
27.2 26.5 802.8 676.7 275.0 − 77.0 501.8 65.8 684.0 1,431.9 1,543.3 1,880.3 −          Feb 23.6 26.1 812.6 695.2 276.1 − 95.6 510.3 67.9 684.1 1,425.8 1,535.8 1,893.9 −          Mar 
24.9 26.6 824.5 737.1 281.0 − 43.8 516.5 68.8 686.6 1,435.3 1,547.9 1,907.4 −          Apr 
25.1 24.4 831.5 745.4 282.5 − 89.5 517.3 71.3 696.1 1,447.7 1,557.5 1,911.5 −          May26.9 25.0 838.4 693.3 290.0 − 95.2 522.3 72.0 706.3 1,451.1 1,563.7 1,925.0 −          June
between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central govern-
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen ments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetaryby the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo transactions, money
III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding central governments’ deposits), market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities up to 2
and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments’ years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2003         Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3         June 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         July 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
         Aug 315.8 213.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 391.6 51.5 − 1.6 132.8 524.6         Sep 315.0 214.0 45.0 0.1 − 0.6 − 391.7 54.4 − 4.4 132.0 524.2
         Oct 321.3 208.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 395.5 48.3 − 1.1 131.9 527.5
         Nov 321.8 205.8 45.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 399.4 43.4 − 2.2 131.8 531.4         Dec 320.1 235.5 45.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 416.1 57.0 − 4.5 132.6 548.7
2004         Jan 309.2 232.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 427.6 37.0 − 11.2 133.6 561.4
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 303.3 219.4 56.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 418.0 48.6 − 21.1 134.1 552.3
         Apr 301.4 217.9 67.1 0.4 − 0.4 − 425.3 51.5 − 25.7 135.3 561.0
         May 310.7 213.2 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 436.4 46.0 − 18.9 135.0 571.5         June 311.3 224.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.5 − 442.5 52.2 − 21.1 137.1 580.1
         July 308.2 245.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 449.1 65.0 − 24.1 138.8 588.1
         Aug 300.8 253.6 75.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 460.9 61.1 − 31.8 139.1 600.1         Sep 299.4 251.6 75.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 462.8 56.3 − 32.4 139.3 602.3
         Oct 298.8 256.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 465.1 58.2 − 32.1 139.3 604.4
         Nov 298.3 257.9 75.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 − 469.7 55.1 − 32.1 138.4 608.4         Dec 298.0 265.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.5 475.4 60.2 − 36.0 138.5 614.1
2005         Jan 290.3 272.9 75.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 496.0 45.3 − 41.9 139.1 635.2
         Feb 280.6 276.6 78.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 487.1 63.8 − 55.5 140.0 627.2         Mar 280.2 277.8 82.2 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 489.5 68.5 − 59.2 141.3 630.9
         Apr 282.1 278.2 86.9 0.2 − 0.1 − 498.6 67.4 − 62.1 143.3 642.0
         May 287.0 276.5 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 505.5 62.9 − 58.9 144.0 649.7         June 286.8 273.1 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 512.8 53.5 − 62.0 145.5 658.5
         July 293.3 297.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.3 522.6 67.4 − 57.3 147.9 670.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2003         Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7         June 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         July 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
         Aug 73.7 111.0 29.6 0.2 − 0.1 − 109.6 0.1 66.5 38.2 147.9         Sep 73.9 114.0 29.1 0.1 − 0.4 − 109.8 0.1 69.2 37.7 147.9
         Oct 75.7 106.5 29.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 110.8 0.1 63.4 37.5 148.4
         Nov 76.1 102.3 30.8 0.0 − 0.2 − 111.5 0.1 60.0 37.5 149.1         Dec 76.1 118.3 30.9 0.3 − 0.1 − 115.9 0.1 72.2 37.4 153.4
2004         Jan 73.1 119.5 32.3 0.2 − 0.1 − 116.2 0.1 70.9 37.9 154.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 72.4 109.7 41.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 113.5 0.1 72.0 37.9 151.5
         Apr 72.9 97.9 48.7 0.2 − 0.3 − 115.8 0.1 65.7 37.8 153.9
         May 75.4 100.7 51.8 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 119.3 0.1 70.9 37.7 157.0         June 75.6 115.6 49.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.2 0.1 80.9 38.3 159.9
         July 74.6 127.9 49.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 122.7 0.1 91.1 38.5 161.1
         Aug 72.1 136.9 50.3 0.0 − 0.1 − 126.2 0.1 94.7 38.3 164.6         Sep 72.2 131.7 50.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 127.5 0.1 88.8 37.9 165.4
         Oct 72.1 129.8 48.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 127.7 0.1 84.8 37.5 165.3
         Nov 72.2 136.0 46.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 − 128.3 0.1 88.4 37.5 166.0         Dec 72.2 142.4 46.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 129.9 0.1 93.4 37.6 167.5
2005         Jan 70.2 144.7 46.9 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 135.2 0.1 89.1 37.4 172.7
         Feb 67.7 137.7 49.4 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 133.2 0.1 83.8 37.9 171.1         Mar 67.6 145.3 52.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.0 134.0 0.1 93.5 37.5 171.5
         Apr 68.1 133.3 53.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 136.6 0.0 79.8 38.0 174.7
         May 69.3 140.3 52.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 138.4 0.1 85.9 38.1 176.5         June 69.5 139.3 52.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 141.2 0.1 81.5 38.5 179.7
         July 71.1 149.5 53.0 0.1 − 0.0 0.1 142.6 0.1 92.0 38.9 181.6
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by thecredit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem forof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 10.6 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan 
− 4.5 − 7.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − − 13.2 + 6.5 − 5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb 
− 3.9 + 10.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 − 7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar 
− 15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 − 20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr 
− 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 − 5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 − 2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          June
− 10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 − 10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          July
− 4.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 8.9 − 0.9 − 4.5 + 0.6 + 9.4          Aug − 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 6.3 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.4 − + 3.8 − 6.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.3          Oct 
+ 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 3.9 − 4.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.9          Nov − 1.7 + 29.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − + 16.7 + 13.6 − 2.3 + 0.8 + 17.3          Dec 
− 10.9 − 2.9
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − + 11.5 − 20.0 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 12.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 5.9 − 13.2 + 11.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 9.6 + 11.6 − 9.9 + 0.5 − 9.1          Mar 
− 1.9 − 1.5 + 10.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 7.3 + 2.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.7          Apr 
+ 9.3 − 4.7 + 7.9 − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 5.5 + 6.8 − 0.3 + 10.5          May+ 0.6 + 11.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − 0.4 + 6.1 + 6.2 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 8.6          June
− 3.1 + 20.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 12.8 − 3.0 + 1.7 + 8.0          July
− 7.4 + 8.2
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 11.8 − 3.9 − 7.7 + 0.3 + 12.0          Aug 
− 1.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 − 4.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.2          Sep 
− 0.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.1          Oct 
− 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − + 4.6 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 4.0          Nov − 0.3 + 7.8
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.7 + 5.1 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 5.7          Dec 
− 7.7 + 7.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 20.6 − 14.9 − 5.9 + 0.6 + 21.1 2005          Jan 
− 9.7 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 8.9 + 18.5 − 13.6 + 0.9 − 8.0          Feb − 0.4 + 1.2 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 4.7 − 3.7 + 1.3 + 3.7          Mar 
+ 1.9 + 0.4 + 4.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 − 1.1 − 2.9 + 2.0 + 11.1          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 6.9 − 4.5 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 7.7          May− 0.2 − 3.4
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.3 − 9.4 − 3.1 + 1.5 + 8.8          June
+ 6.5 + 24.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 9.8 + 13.9 + 4.7 + 2.4 + 12.1          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.0 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan 
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − − 2.8 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb + 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar 
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2
+ 0.0 − 3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr 
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          June
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          July
− 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 2.5 + 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.1 + 2.5          Aug + 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.8 − 7.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 − − 0.2 − + 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.2 + 0.6          Oct 
+ 0.4 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.7          Nov + 0.0 + 16.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.1 − + 4.4 + 0.0 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 4.2          Dec 
− 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 0.8 − 9.8 + 9.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 2.6          Mar 
+ 0.5 − 11.8 + 7.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 2.4 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 2.5 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 3.1          May+ 0.2 + 14.9 − 2.4 + 0.1 − + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 2.9          June
− 1.0 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 1.3          July
− 2.5 + 9.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 3.5          Aug + 0.1 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.3 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 + 0.8          Sep 
− 0.1 − 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.7          Nov − 0.0 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 1.6          Dec 
− 2.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 5.1 2005          Jan 
− 2.5 − 6.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 2.0 + 0.0 − 5.3 + 0.4 − 1.6          Feb − 0.0 + 7.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.7 − 0.4 + 0.4          Mar 
+ 0.4 − 12.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 13.7 + 0.5 + 3.2          Apr 
+ 1.3 + 7.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.7 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 0.1 + 1.8          May+ 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 0.4 + 3.3          June
+ 1.7 + 10.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.4 + 1.8          July
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financialpercentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingeuro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
  
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2004 Nov                26 899.1 130.3 164.9 25.6 139.3 18.1 7.4 7.4 −
         Dec                  3 905.5 130.3 165.8 25.6 140.2 18.3 8.0 8.0 −
                              10 914.2 130.3 166.0 25.3 140.6 18.6 7.4 7.4 −
                              17 909.2 129.9 167.8 25.4 142.5 18.3 7.3 7.3 −
                              24 915.7 129.9 167.1 25.1 142.0 17.9 7.5 7.5 −
                              31 3 884.2 3 125.7 3 153.8 3 23.9 3 129.9 3 17.0 6.8 6.8 −
2005 Jan                  7 873.6 125.7 156.5 23.9 132.5 16.4 7.4 7.4 −
                              14 881.0 125.7 156.1 23.7 132.4 17.2 7.1 7.1 −
                              21 896.2 125.6 154.7 23.7 131.0 17.1 7.3 7.3 −
                              28 894.8 125.6 154.4 23.7 130.7 17.6 6.7 6.7 −
         Feb                  4 899.5 125.5 155.2 23.6 131.6 17.1 6.5 6.5 −
                              11 897.1 125.4 151.3 23.7 127.7 18.8 7.7 7.7 −
                              18 900.3 125.3 152.6 23.7 128.9 16.8 8.2 8.2 −
                              25 913.8 125.2 151.1 23.4 127.7 17.2 8.3 8.3 −
         Mar                  4 906.9 125.2 151.8 23.1 128.6 18.2 7.9 7.9 −
                              11 905.4 125.1 151.9 22.9 129.0 18.3 7.6 7.6 −
                              18 912.7 125.0 151.8 22.4 129.4 19.3 8.1 8.1 −
                              24 926.4 124.9 150.1 22.4 127.7 18.8 8.9 8.9 −
2005 Apr                  1 3 927.2 3 128.1 3 155.9 3 22.9 3 133.0 3 19.1 9.3 9.3 −
                                8 927.2 128.0 156.5 22.8 133.7 19.6 8.7 8.7 −
                              15 922.2 128.0 154.9 22.7 132.2 20.0 8.7 8.7 −
                              22 934.5 128.0 154.6 22.6 132.0 20.5 9.1 9.1 −
                              29 934.5 127.4 155.9 22.5 133.4 20.5 9.7 9.7 −
         May                 6 927.1 127.4 155.1 22.2 132.8 21.3 8.9 8.9 −
                              13 922.9 127.4 155.7 22.4 133.3 20.3 8.9 8.9 −
                              20 929.8 127.3 156.2 22.3 133.9 20.1 8.8 8.8 −
                              27 927.8 127.3 155.1 22.3 132.8 20.2 9.0 9.0 −
         June                 3 940.2 127.1 155.6 22.3 133.3 20.1 9.4 9.4 −
                              10 938.0 127.0 155.2 22.2 133.0 20.4 9.0 9.0 −
                              17 940.8 126.8 152.4 21.3 131.0 20.9 9.3 9.3 −
                              24 967.9 126.7 153.0 21.3 131.6 20.3 9.0 9.0 −
         July                 1 3 988.4 3 138.5 3 162.6 3 22.2 3 140.4 3 21.0 9.2 9.2 −
                                8 988.7 138.4 162.5 22.2 140.3 20.9 8.8 8.8 −
                              15 979.5 138.3 161.6 22.0 139.6 21.6 9.6 9.6 −
                              22 989.7 138.1 161.0 20.5 140.5 21.2 10.4 10.4 −
                              29 996.8 138.1 159.6 20.5 139.1 21.5 9.6 9.6 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2003         Sep 3 257.5 3 36.5 3 44.7 8.5 3 36.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 257.6 36.5 45.0 8.5 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 254.4 36.5 44.5 8.5 36.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 267.7 36.5 3 40.1 7.6 3 32.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2004         Jan 258.1 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 258.2 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 256.2 3 38.3 3 41.5 7.6 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 268.0 38.3 42.1 7.9 34.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 276.6 38.3 41.5 7.8 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 290.3 3 35.8 3 41.2 7.4 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 295.9 35.8 40.4 7.4 33.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 284.2 35.8 39.8 7.4 32.4 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 283.6
3 36.7 3 39.1 7.0 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 293.7 36.7 38.2 7.0 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 298.6 36.7 38.4 6.9 31.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 293.5 3 35.5 3 35.8 6.5 3 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
2005         Jan 287.9 35.5 36.2 6.5 29.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 300.1 35.5 35.7 6.4 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 294.6 3 36.4 3 37.4 6.1 3 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 299.0 36.4 37.0 6.1 30.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 304.6 36.4 37.2 6.2 31.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 310.7 3 39.8 3 38.9 5.8 3 33.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 317.5 39.8 38.6 5.0 33.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other
 claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
345.0 270.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 1.7 71.2 42.0 118.5 2004 Nov                26
348.6 273.5 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 1.8 71.2 42.0 119.4          Dec                  3
357.1 282.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.1 2.2 71.0 42.0 119.7                               10
351.3 276.0 75.0 − − 0.3 0.0 3.0 70.1 41.9 119.6                               17
358.7 283.5 75.0 − − 0.2 0.0 3.7 69.8 41.5 119.5                               24
345.1 270.0 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 3.8 70.2 41.3 3 120.4                               31
334.0 259.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.2 70.5 41.3 118.7 2005 Jan                  7
340.0 265.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.4 71.0 41.3 119.2                               14
354.5 279.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.5 71.8 41.3 120.3                               21
353.0 273.0 80.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.6 72.6 41.3 120.0                               28
357.5 277.5 80.0 − − − 0.0 3.4 72.8 41.3 120.1          Feb                  4
355.5 275.5 80.0 − − − 0.0 3.1 73.5 41.3 120.6                               11
356.7 276.5 80.0 − − 0.2 0.0 3.5 74.8 41.3 121.2                               18
369.5 284.5 85.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.3 75.4 41.3 122.6                               25
360.0 275.0 85.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.2 76.4 41.3 123.0          Mar                  4
357.5 272.5 85.0 − − − 0.0 3.2 77.7 41.3 122.9                               11
361.5 276.5 85.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.5 78.8 41.3 123.4                               18
376.1 291.0 85.0 − − 0.1 0.0 2.9 79.7 41.3 123.7                               24
366.8 276.0 90.0 − − 0.7 0.0 2.7 79.7 41.2 3 124.4 2005 Apr                  1
365.0 275.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.0 80.7 41.2 124.5                                 8
360.5 270.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.1 80.7 41.2 125.2                               15
372.0 282.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.0 80.1 41.2 126.0                               22
370.5 280.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.9 79.8 41.2 126.5                               29
363.2 273.0 90.0 − − 0.2 0.0 3.0 80.1 41.2 126.9          May                  6
357.5 267.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.8 81.1 41.2 128.1                               13
362.5 272.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.0 82.4 41.2 128.3                               20
361.2 271.0 90.0 − − 0.2 0.0 2.8 82.9 41.2 128.1                               27
372.0 281.5 90.0 − − 0.5 0.0 2.5 83.2 41.2 129.0          June                  3
369.0 279.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.5 84.0 41.2 129.7                               10
373.6 283.5 90.0 − − 0.1 0.0 2.9 83.4 41.2 130.3                               17
400.1 310.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.1 3.1 84.2 41.2 130.3                               24
398.2 308.0 90.0 − − 0.2 0.0 3.2 85.7 40.7 3 129.3          July                  1
397.5 307.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.9 87.4 40.7 129.6                                 8
388.5 298.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.2 85.6 40.7 130.5                               15
398.5 308.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.4 85.9 40.7 130.4                               22
407.0 317.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.3 85.7 40.8 131.3                               29
 Deutsche Bundesbank
151.4 121.5 29.7 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 3 20.1 2003          Sep 
133.0 101.9 31.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 38.4          Oct 
145.4 115.0 30.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 23.3          Nov 162.3 129.9 32.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Dec 
157.4 117.4 40.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0 2004          Jan 
157.6 109.9 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 141.7 94.1 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 30.1          Mar 
153.7 104.3 49.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.1          Apr 
173.2 123.7 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          May189.4 139.9 49.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          June
196.0 145.1 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
184.8 135.3 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Aug 173.6 127.4 45.6 − − 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.5          Sep 
195.1 148.1 46.9 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0          Oct 
199.8 153.5 46.0 − − 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0          Nov 190.4 143.0 47.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Dec 
185.1 134.3 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.3 2005          Jan 
205.2 151.7 53.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 184.4 129.9 52.1 − − 2.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 31.7          Mar 
201.7 148.2 53.5 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Apr 
190.8 139.3 51.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 35.6          May208.1 151.2 55.6 − − 1.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2          June
215.3 163.4 51.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
  
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2004 Nov                26 899.1 473.6 137.7 137.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 73.7 67.9 5.9
         Dec                  3 905.5 485.2 137.2 137.1 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 66.9 60.1 6.8
                              10 914.2 490.7 135.6 135.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 70.4 64.1 6.3
                              17 909.2 496.2 145.4 145.3 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 48.2 41.7 6.5
                              24 915.7 504.6 140.6 140.4 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 50.5 44.3 6.2
                              31 5 884.2 501.3 138.7 138.6 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 42.2 36.0 6.2
2005 Jan                  7 873.6 497.2 132.5 132.4 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 45.3 38.8 6.4
                              14 881.0 491.0 143.7 143.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 46.4 39.9 6.5
                              21 896.2 486.9 141.1 141.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 70.1 63.4 6.7
                              28 894.8 486.1 139.7 139.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 69.8 63.3 6.5
         Feb                  4 899.5 490.0 138.6 138.6 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 71.8 65.3 6.6
                              11 897.1 489.8 142.2 142.2 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 68.1 61.0 7.1
                              18 900.3 488.2 145.1 145.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 69.9 62.5 7.4
                              25 913.8 488.2 140.9 140.8 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 88.0 81.0 7.0
         Mar                  4 906.9 493.6 142.4 142.3 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 72.4 65.5 6.9
                              11 905.4 494.6 144.6 144.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 67.6 60.8 6.8
                              18 912.7 495.5 147.1 146.7 0.4 − − − 0.1 − 69.8 62.9 6.8
                              24 926.4 501.7 144.0 144.0 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 81.9 74.9 7.1
2005 Apr                  1 5 927.2 500.9 142.2 142.1 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 75.1 68.1 7.0
                                8 927.2 502.9 142.2 142.1 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 72.4 65.4 7.0
                              15 922.2 502.3 143.4 143.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 67.7 60.6 7.0
                              22 934.5 502.1 143.7 143.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 79.6 72.5 7.1
                              29 934.5 507.0 139.3 138.9 0.4 − − 0.0 0.1 − 77.6 70.6 7.0
         May                 6 927.1 512.7 146.5 146.1 0.3 − − − 0.1 − 56.6 49.6 6.9
                              13 922.9 513.5 141.8 141.8 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 57.2 50.2 7.0
                              20 929.8 510.9 148.0 147.9 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 59.3 52.5 6.9
                              27 927.8 511.9 144.3 144.2 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 61.0 54.3 6.6
         June                 3 940.2 517.1 146.0 145.9 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 66.1 59.2 6.9
                              10 938.0 519.1 144.9 144.9 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 62.7 55.7 7.1
                              17 940.8 519.7 147.5 147.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 62.9 55.8 7.1
                              24 967.9 520.4 146.6 146.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 90.8 83.8 6.9
         July                 1 5 988.4 526.0 154.0 154.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 75.7 68.6 7.1
                                8 988.7 530.3 148.1 147.9 0.2 − − − 0.3 − 77.8 70.7 7.0
                              15 979.5 531.4 149.7 149.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 65.6 58.6 7.0
                              22 989.7 530.2 150.8 150.8 0.0 − − − 0.3 − 75.2 68.3 6.9
                              29 996.8 533.8 145.2 145.0 0.2 − − 0.0 0.1 − 84.9 77.9 6.9
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2003         Sep 5 257.5 109.2 41.7 41.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 257.6 110.8 42.0 42.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov 254.4 112.7 36.4 36.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5         Dec 
5 267.7 121.4 44.6 44.5 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.6 0.1 0.5
2004         Jan 258.1 112.4 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Feb 258.2 113.3 36.8 36.7 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Mar 
5 256.2 115.0 31.0 31.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.4 0.4
         Apr 268.0 117.7 38.3 38.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 276.6 120.8 43.4 43.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         June
5 290.3 122.3 36.6 36.6 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 295.9 126.0 39.3 39.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Aug 284.2 125.2 41.4 40.9 0.4 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 283.6 126.5 40.1 40.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 293.7 128.2 35.5 35.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov 298.6 129.5 48.3 48.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Dec 
5 293.5 136.3 41.3 41.2 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2005         Jan 287.9 132.3 40.8 40.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Feb 300.1 133.0 40.2 40.2 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Mar 
5 294.6 136.1 38.1 38.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.3
         Apr 299.0 137.9 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         May 304.6 139.4 41.3 41.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         June
5 310.7 142.6 34.6 33.7 0.8 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         July 317.5 145.2 39.7 39.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of thisfinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
9.6 0.3 9.3 9.3 − 5.8 58.3 − 70.7 59.9 2004 Nov                26
10.4 0.3 10.4 10.4 − 5.8 58.7 − 70.7 59.9          Dec                  3
10.7 0.3 10.9 10.9 − 5.8 59.1 − 70.7 59.9                               10
10.2 0.3 13.2 13.2 − 5.8 59.3 − 70.7 59.9                               17
11.2 0.3 13.2 13.2 − 5.8 58.8 − 70.7 59.9                               24
10.9 0.2 5 10.7 5 10.7 − 5.6 5 51.4 − 5 64.8 5 58.2                               31
8.0 0.2 11.5 11.5 − 5.6 50.4 − 64.8 58.1 2005 Jan                  7
8.1 0.2 12.6 12.6 − 5.6 50.3 . 64.8 58.1                               14
8.3 0.3 10.1 10.1 − 5.6 51.0 − 64.8 57.8                               21
8.3 0.2 11.3 11.3 − 5.6 50.9 − 64.8 57.8                               28
8.0 0.3 11.6 11.6 − 5.6 50.7 − 64.8 57.8          Feb                  4
8.2 0.3 9.3 9.3 − 5.6 50.8 − 64.8 57.8                               11
8.2 0.3 8.4 8.4 − 5.6 51.1 − 64.8 58.6                               18
8.5 0.3 7.5 7.5 − 5.6 51.6 − 64.8 58.3                               25
8.3 0.3 9.4 9.4 − 5.6 51.6 − 64.8 58.3          Mar                  4
8.2 0.4 9.8 9.8 − 5.6 51.3 − 64.8 58.4                               11
8.4 0.4 11.2 11.2 − 5.6 51.6 − 64.8 58.1                               18
9.0 0.4 9.2 9.2 − 5.6 51.5 − 64.8 58.1                               24
8.9 0.2 9.8 9.8 − 5.7 5 54.0 − 5 72.0 58.2 2005 Apr                  1
8.9 0.2 10.9 10.9 − 5.7 53.7 − 72.0 58.2                                 8
8.9 0.3 9.6 9.6 − 5.7 54.0 − 72.0 58.2                               15
8.9 0.3 10.0 10.0 − 5.7 54.0 − 72.0 58.2                               22
9.2 0.4 10.9 10.9 − 5.7 54.2 − 72.0 58.2                               29
9.4 0.4 10.9 10.9 − 5.7 54.7 − 72.0 58.2          May                  6
9.3 0.3 10.4 10.4 − 5.7 54.3 − 72.0 58.2                               13
9.5 0.3 10.7 10.7 − 5.7 55.1 − 72.0 58.2                               20
10.4 0.2 9.8 9.8 − 5.7 54.0 − 72.0 58.3                               27
10.2 0.2 10.3 10.3 − 5.7 54.2 − 72.0 58.3          June                  3
9.8 0.2 10.4 10.4 − 5.7 54.7 − 72.0 58.3                               10
10.1 0.3 8.8 8.8 − 5.7 55.5 − 72.0 58.3                               17
9.9 0.4 8.5 8.5 − 5.7 55.1 − 72.0 58.3                               24
9.7 0.3 5 9.1 5 9.1 − 5.9 5 56.9 − 5 92.3 58.3          July                  1
9.9 0.3 8.9 8.9 − 5.9 56.6 − 92.3 58.3                                 8
10.0 0.4 8.7 8.7 − 5.9 57.0 − 92.3 58.3                               15
10.0 0.2 9.0 9.0 − 5.9 57.4 − 92.3 58.3                               22
10.1 0.2 8.0 8.0 − 5.9 57.9 − 92.3 58.3                               29
 Deutsche Bundesbank
7.3 0.0 3.6 3.6 − 1.5 16.2 42.2 5 30.2 5.0 2003          Sep 
7.4 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.5 12.9 43.4 30.2 5.0          Oct 
7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 12.9 44.4 30.2 5.0          Nov 7.7 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.4
5 10.5 44.6 5 29.1 5.0          Dec 
7.3 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 11.4 48.1 29.1 5.0 2004          Jan 
7.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.4 12.7 49.2 29.1 5.0          Feb 6.5 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.5 10.8 50.4
5 32.2 5.0          Mar 
6.2 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 10.9 52.3 32.2 5.0          Apr 
5.8 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 11.5 53.3 32.2 5.0          May5.6 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 32.2 53.9
5 29.3 5.0          June
5.9 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.5 30.3 55.6 29.3 5.0          July
5.8 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 15.2 58.6 29.3 5.0          Aug 5.6 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4 12.0 60.9 29.6 5.0          Sep 
5.9 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 24.1 62.3 29.6 5.0          Oct 
5.6 0.0 1.5 1.5 − 1.4 13.9 63.1 29.6 5.0          Nov 5.9 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4
5 9.7 63.4 5 27.8 5.0          Dec 
3.5 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 64.5 27.8 5.0 2005          Jan 
3.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.4 21.0 65.8 27.8 5.0          Feb 3.2 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 9.4 67.9
5 30.1 5.0          Mar 
3.4 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 68.8 30.1 5.0          Apr 
3.5 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.4 9.6 71.3 30.1 5.0          May3.3 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.5 13.0 72.0
5 35.9 5.0          June
3.5 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 10.8 72.6 35.9 5.0          July
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotescirculation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.22004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2003         Sep 6,403.1 13.3 2,099.4 1,712.2 1,095.3 616.9 387.2 297.5 89.7 3,332.6 3,089.6 2,504.9 2,245.2
         Oct 6,399.3 13.6 2,092.9 1,715.9 1,096.1 619.9 376.9 285.3 91.7 3,328.9 3,086.1 2,496.9 2,242.9
         Nov 6,456.1 13.1 2,126.2 1,742.4 1,117.5 624.9 383.7 292.5 91.3 3,350.9 3,103.5 2,505.0 2,246.9         Dec 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004         Jan 6,424.2 13.2 2,084.1 1,713.6 1,101.3 612.4 370.4 278.3 92.1 3,329.8 3,078.3 2,489.0 2,230.4
         Feb 6,448.7 13.2 2,100.2 1,722.7 1,101.9 620.8 377.5 282.5 94.9 3,341.8 3,081.9 2,483.5 2,230.2         Mar 6,506.7 12.7 2,106.5 1,725.6 1,098.7 626.9 380.9 282.2 98.7 3,370.4 3,102.9 2,491.9 2,228.9
         Apr 6,568.8 12.9 2,132.5 1,749.7 1,115.1 634.6 382.9 282.4 100.4 3,381.2 3,110.1 2,506.6 2,230.4
         May 6,583.5 13.8 2,163.3 1,771.6 1,127.6 644.0 391.7 289.0 102.7 3,369.7 3,101.0 2,497.0 2,229.7         June 6,551.3 13.1 2,150.2 1,746.3 1,112.7 633.6 404.0 299.5 104.4 3,360.1 3,090.4 2,483.2 2,229.4
         July 6,574.9 13.2 2,171.4 1,765.1 1,130.4 634.7 406.3 303.2 103.0 3,368.3 3,093.3 2,477.1 2,225.1
         Aug 6,567.5 13.2 2,167.2 1,759.6 1,126.4 633.2 407.6 301.7 105.9 3,357.7 3,086.1 2,470.3 2,221.8         Sep 6,597.6 13.2 2,165.1 1,759.6 1,123.8 635.8 405.6 295.9 109.6 3,361.1 3,091.0 2,478.1 2,229.6
         Oct 6,627.7 13.9 2,178.3 1,759.5 1,128.1 631.4 418.7 306.4 112.4 3,371.9 3,094.1 2,475.6 2,226.8
         Nov 6,683.4 13.3 2,197.3 1,771.7 1,137.6 634.1 425.6 310.6 115.1 3,376.5 3,098.8 2,482.9 2,233.7         Dec 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005         Jan 6,672.1 13.2 2,182.9 1,749.0 1,124.6 624.4 433.9 312.6 121.4 3,377.2 3,092.4 2,478.8 2,216.8
         Feb 6,717.4 12.8 2,220.8 1,752.4 1,124.4 628.1 468.3 339.6 128.7 3,372.3 3,080.6 2,474.4 2,219.9         Mar 6,723.0 13.6 2,215.6 1,757.1 1,123.7 633.4 458.5 325.4 133.0 3,379.8 3,084.0 2,475.2 2,216.6
         Apr 6,908.4 13.1 2,275.5 1,814.0 1,174.8 639.1 461.6 325.9 135.6 3,442.4 3,127.8 2,518.2 2,217.5
         May 6,892.0 13.8 2,284.9 1,808.0 1,167.1 640.9 477.0 338.3 138.6 3,422.1 3,107.1 2,500.9 2,220.6         June 6,851.3 13.6 2,279.3 1,788.0 1,141.2 646.8 491.4 348.5 142.8 3,392.9 3,073.3 2,482.3 2,222.8
 Changes 1
1997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 − 0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.21999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.12002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.42004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2003         Oct − 5.0 0.3 − 6.5 4.1 0.8 3.3 − 10.6 − 12.6 2.0 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 1.7
         Nov 67.6 − 0.5 33.6 26.6 21.4 5.1 7.1 7.2 − 0.1 24.5 19.2 9.8 5.6         Dec − 8.6 4.2 − 14.4 − 10.3 − 0.7 − 9.6 − 4.1 − 4.7 0.7 − 10.1 − 13.7 − 1.4 0.3
2004         Jan − 15.4 − 4.1 − 26.5 − 18.1 − 15.5 − 2.6 − 8.5 − 9.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 4.6 − 6.6
         Feb 26.4 0.0 17.3 9.0 0.4 8.6 8.3 4.2 4.1 16.6 8.0 − 1.1 2.5         Mar 47.2 − 0.5 6.2 2.8 − 3.2 6.0 3.4 − 0.3 3.7 28.7 21.7 9.0 − 0.9
         Apr 57.9 0.1 26.1 24.1 16.4 7.7 1.9 0.2 1.7 10.8 7.1 14.6 1.4
         May 19.5 1.0 30.7 21.9 12.5 9.3 8.9 6.5 2.3 − 10.4 − 8.2 − 8.8 0.1         June − 33.2 − 0.7 − 13.0 − 25.2 − 14.9 − 10.3 12.2 10.6 1.7 − 9.2 − 10.1 − 13.2 0.2
         July 21.8 0.1 23.4 18.8 17.7 1.2 4.6 3.7 0.9 6.4 3.3 − 5.7 − 3.8
         Aug − 5.3 − 0.1 − 7.0 − 5.5 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 4.3 2.9 − 7.4 − 6.8 − 6.4 − 2.9         Sep 39.6 0.0 − 1.7 0.3 − 2.6 2.9 − 1.9 − 5.8 3.8 5.3 6.3 9.2 9.4
         Oct 36.3 0.7 13.2 0.0 4.3 − 4.3 13.2 10.4 2.7 11.7 3.9 − 1.8 − 2.0
         Nov 67.8 − 0.6 19.3 12.2 9.5 2.7 7.1 4.2 2.9 6.1 5.7 8.3 7.9         Dec − 55.0 1.9 − 19.2 − 17.8 − 11.2 − 6.6 − 1.4 − 4.2 2.9 − 14.0 − 12.4 0.2 − 6.6
2005         Jan 40.4 − 2.0 8.2 − 1.2 1.7 − 2.9 9.4 6.2 3.2 20.9 11.7 1.9 − 4.1
         Feb 50.7 − 0.4 38.0 3.6 − 0.2 3.8 34.5 27.1 7.4 − 2.2 − 9.4 − 2.0 5.4         Mar − 0.5 0.8 − 4.9 4.9 − 0.6 5.6 − 9.9 − 14.2 4.3 8.5 4.8 2.2 − 1.9
         Apr 183.0 − 0.5 59.4 56.8 51.1 5.7 2.6 0.5 2.1 63.2 44.4 43.7 1.4
         May − 32.5 0.7 9.2 − 6.1 − 7.7 1.6 15.3 12.4 2.9 − 21.7 − 21.4 − 18.0 2.6         June − 40.7 − 0.2 − 5.4 − 19.8 − 25.9 6.1 14.4 10.2 4.2 − 27.2 − 31.9 − 16.6 4.4
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
259.8 584.6 435.2 149.4 243.1 129.7 64.7 113.4 23.4 90.0 795.8 642.4 161.9 2003          Sep 
254.0 589.2 436.6 152.6 242.8 127.6 60.6 115.2 25.1 90.1 800.6 643.9 163.3          Oct 
258.1 598.5 442.5 156.0 247.4 132.9 64.7 114.5 25.6 89.0 803.7 648.2 162.2          Nov 256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6          Dec 
258.6 589.2 440.2 149.0 251.5 132.0 61.2 119.5 25.6 93.9 843.7 683.0 153.4 2004          Jan 
253.3 598.3 432.1 166.2 260.0 136.0 65.2 124.0 25.0 99.0 839.5 680.6 154.0          Feb 263.0 611.0 444.9 166.2 267.4 137.6 67.0 129.8 24.9 104.9 859.1 697.2 158.0          Mar 
276.2 603.5 437.2 166.3 271.1 139.4 68.8 131.7 25.8 105.9 884.1 722.1 158.1          Apr 
267.2 604.1 431.4 172.7 268.7 137.6 66.3 131.1 25.8 105.3 875.0 707.5 161.6          May253.9 607.2 426.2 181.0 269.7 138.4 66.5 131.3 25.7 105.6 867.0 695.6 160.8          June
252.0 616.2 434.4 181.8 275.0 142.3 67.7 132.8 26.4 106.4 860.7 687.7 161.3          July
248.4 615.8 429.9 186.0 271.6 137.7 65.0 133.9 26.2 107.6 871.6 696.5 157.9          Aug 248.5 612.9 425.8 187.1 270.1 138.8 65.3 131.3 25.7 105.6 898.6 725.5 159.6          Sep 
248.7 618.5 430.9 187.7 277.8 139.9 65.1 137.9 25.5 112.4 901.8 727.5 161.9          Oct 
249.1 615.9 426.6 189.3 277.7 143.1 67.5 134.6 25.7 108.9 931.8 756.6 164.6          Nov 255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4          Dec 
262.0 613.6 427.5 186.2 284.9 145.2 66.3 139.7 25.8 113.9 935.8 762.7 163.1 2005          Jan 
254.5 606.2 422.2 184.0 291.7 147.6 66.6 144.1 26.5 117.5 945.4 771.9 166.2          Feb 258.6 608.8 420.7 188.2 295.8 144.6 61.4 151.2 28.0 123.2 955.0 780.7 159.1          Mar 
300.7 609.6 422.8 186.8 314.6 151.8 65.5 162.9 30.7 132.1 1,013.1 835.4 164.2          Apr 
280.3 606.2 421.7 184.5 315.0 155.2 66.0 159.8 31.1 128.7 1,001.3 821.1 169.8          May259.5 591.0 416.2 174.7 319.6 162.6 68.4 157.0 31.2 125.8 1,001.0 815.4 164.5          June
Changes 1
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 − 2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 199830.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 20016.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
− 5.6 5.3 1.4 3.9 0.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 2.2 1.6 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 3.5 2003          Oct 
4.1 9.4 6.0 3.4 5.3 5.7 4.3 − 0.4 0.6 − 1.0 13.0 12.4 − 3.0          Nov 
− 1.7 − 12.4 − 2.9 − 9.5 3.6 1.4 − 1.4 2.2 0.5 1.7 16.2 9.4 − 4.5          Dec 
2.1 3.6 0.6 3.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 2.7 − 0.4 3.1 31.9 32.1 − 16.1 2004          Jan 
− 3.7 9.1 − 8.0 17.2 8.6 4.0 4.0 4.6 − 0.6 5.2 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 4.8          Feb 
9.8 12.7 12.7 − 0.0 7.0 1.4 1.6 5.6 − 0.1 5.8 10.7 8.6 2.1          Mar 
13.2 − 7.5 − 7.6 0.1 3.6 1.8 1.7 1.9 0.9 1.0 21.3 21.2 − 0.4          Apr 
− 8.9 0.6 − 5.9 6.5 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 2.4 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.4 − 10.4 2.6          May− 13.4 3.1 − 5.2 8.3 0.9 0.8 0.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.2 − 8.9 − 14.1 − 1.5          June
− 1.8 9.0 8.2 0.8 3.1 1.6 1.2 1.5 0.8 0.8 − 8.2 − 9.8 0.1          July
− 3.6 − 0.3 − 4.5 4.2 − 0.6 − 1.7 0.1 1.1 − 0.1 1.2 12.6 10.6 − 3.6          Aug − 0.2 − 2.9 − 4.1 1.1 − 0.9 1.5 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 34.9 36.0 0.9          Sep 
0.2 5.7 5.1 0.6 7.9 1.3 − 0.0 6.6 − 0.1 6.7 9.0 7.5 1.7          Oct 
0.4 − 2.6 − 4.2 1.6 0.4 3.5 2.7 − 3.1 0.3 − 3.4 41.1 38.9 1.9          Nov 6.8 − 12.5 − 4.1 − 8.4 − 1.7 − 2.0 − 5.1 0.3 0.0 0.3 − 26.1 − 19.1 2.4          Dec 
6.0 9.8 4.4 5.4 9.1 4.4 4.1 4.8 − 0.0 4.8 25.6 21.0 − 12.4 2005          Jan 
− 7.4 − 7.4 − 5.2 − 2.2 7.2 2.6 0.4 4.6 0.8 3.8 14.6 13.6 0.7          Feb 
4.1 2.6 − 1.6 4.2 3.7 − 3.3 − 5.4 7.0 1.4 5.6 4.1 3.7 − 9.0          Mar 
42.2 0.8 2.2 − 1.4 18.8 7.2 4.1 11.6 2.8 8.9 56.7 53.5 4.2          Apr 
− 20.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 2.3 − 0.3 2.9 0.1 − 3.2 0.3 − 3.5 − 25.7 − 27.2 5.0          May− 21.0 − 15.2 − 5.5 − 9.8 4.6 7.5 2.5 − 2.9 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 7.4          June
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 End of year or month
 
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.32004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2003         Sep 6,403.1 1,451.2 1,188.3 262.9 2,187.8 2,057.4 607.3 871.8 248.1 578.3 490.2 84.2 9.6
         Oct 6,399.3 1,439.5 1,179.5 260.0 2,188.2 2,057.3 609.5 868.5 243.9 579.4 491.2 85.4 10.7
         Nov 6,456.1 1,463.6 1,214.6 249.0 2,211.2 2,082.4 632.7 869.4 244.7 580.3 491.9 83.1 9.9         Dec 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004         Jan 6,424.2 1,461.1 1,212.6 248.5 2,209.5 2,082.6 630.5 861.5 233.5 590.6 502.1 80.9 9.5
         Feb 6,448.7 1,454.4 1,215.7 238.7 2,212.3 2,085.6 633.8 860.3 230.1 591.5 503.3 79.5 10.8         Mar 6,506.7 1,459.9 1,203.6 256.3 2,214.3 2,088.7 632.9 864.4 230.9 591.4 503.5 77.8 13.1
         Apr 6,568.8 1,482.1 1,227.2 254.9 2,219.0 2,097.2 641.7 864.4 225.6 591.2 504.3 74.5 10.6
         May 6,583.5 1,496.5 1,251.2 245.4 2,229.4 2,105.3 640.0 874.8 232.1 590.6 504.6 75.8 9.4         June 6,551.3 1,501.5 1,256.7 244.8 2,228.7 2,101.4 640.7 870.7 224.0 590.0 504.3 76.7 12.4
         July 6,574.9 1,524.1 1,274.6 249.6 2,225.5 2,103.0 634.7 877.7 228.7 590.6 504.9 72.9 9.7
         Aug 6,567.5 1,510.2 1,259.4 250.8 2,231.7 2,105.7 636.2 878.2 228.9 591.3 505.6 74.0 9.8         Sep 6,597.6 1,495.3 1,242.0 253.3 2,237.6 2,113.6 645.8 876.6 225.6 591.2 505.7 76.0 14.4
         Oct 6,627.7 1,534.8 1,277.0 257.7 2,237.1 2,118.1 646.8 879.0 225.7 592.3 506.3 73.5 9.6
         Nov 6,683.4 1,536.2 1,285.2 250.9 2,257.3 2,140.2 672.5 874.6 218.3 593.0 506.2 73.4 11.9         Dec 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005         Jan 6,672.1 1,524.6 1,258.7 265.9 2,275.1 2,155.3 665.1 886.0 225.7 604.1 516.4 74.7 13.5
         Feb 6,717.4 1,552.6 1,282.7 269.8 2,278.4 2,160.3 670.4 885.0 220.6 605.0 516.7 73.7 13.2         Mar 6,723.0 1,524.3 1,255.2 269.1 2,271.6 2,159.7 672.3 882.2 214.5 605.2 516.5 70.9 11.5
         Apr 6,908.4 1,630.5 1,328.3 302.2 2,278.7 2,170.3 675.5 890.0 220.1 604.8 516.6 66.5 10.7
         May 6,892.0 1,593.7 1,303.3 290.5 2,285.4 2,177.0 683.3 889.6 223.2 604.1 516.4 67.9 12.4         June 6,851.3 1,577.0 1,301.3 275.7 2,288.6 2,179.9 691.4 885.8 218.7 602.7 515.6 67.4 14.5
 Changes 1
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 − 3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 − 0.31998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.42004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2003         Oct − 5.0 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 0.3 − 0.1 2.2 − 3.4 − 4.2 1.1 1.0 1.1 1.1
         Nov 67.6 26.1 35.8 − 9.7 23.6 25.4 23.5 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7         Dec − 8.6 10.4 15.9 − 5.5 4.4 5.1 − 10.2 5.3 3.4 10.0 8.9 − 1.0 − 0.5
2004         Jan − 15.4 − 11.1 − 17.2 6.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 8.2 − 13.1 − 14.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 0.2
         Feb 26.4 − 6.3 3.3 − 9.6 3.0 3.1 4.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 0.9 1.2 − 1.4 1.3         Mar 47.2 4.0 − 12.6 16.6 1.6 2.8 − 1.1 4.0 0.7 − 0.1 0.1 − 1.8 2.3
         Apr 57.9 21.5 23.2 − 1.7 4.7 8.7 8.6 0.3 − 5.1 − 0.2 0.9 − 3.5 − 2.6
         May 19.5 15.3 24.2 − 8.9 10.7 8.3 − 1.5 10.4 6.6 − 0.6 0.3 1.4 − 1.2         June − 33.2 4.8 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 4.0 0.3 − 3.7 − 7.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.8 3.0
         July 21.8 22.3 17.8 4.6 − 3.3 1.5 − 5.7 6.6 4.3 0.7 0.5 − 3.9 − 2.7
         Aug − 5.3 − 13.5 − 15.0 1.4 7.3 3.7 1.5 1.5 0.2 0.7 0.7 1.2 0.1         Sep 39.6 − 13.1 − 16.8 3.6 6.5 8.2 9.9 − 1.5 − 3.2 − 0.1 0.1 2.2 4.7
         Oct 36.3 41.0 35.4 5.6 − 0.1 4.8 1.3 2.4 0.1 1.1 0.5 − 2.3 − 4.8
         Nov 67.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.4 20.9 22.6 26.6 − 4.8 − 7.2 0.8 − 0.1 0.2 2.4         Dec − 55.0 − 5.9 − 13.7 7.8 8.5 9.6 − 26.1 25.3 21.7 10.4 9.3 − 1.3 − 3.1
2005         Jan 40.4 − 6.2 − 12.9 6.7 10.0 6.2 18.6 − 13.0 − 14.4 0.7 0.9 2.4 4.6
         Feb 50.7 28.8 24.3 4.5 3.6 5.3 5.4 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.8 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2         Mar − 0.5 − 29.7 − 28.1 − 1.5 − 6.9 − 0.5 2.3 − 1.7 − 5.5 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.8
         Apr 183.0 105.9 73.0 32.9 7.0 10.6 3.2 7.7 5.6 − 0.3 0.1 − 4.4 − 0.8
         May − 32.5 − 39.7 − 26.1 − 13.6 5.8 6.1 7.4 − 0.5 2.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 1.0 1.6         June − 40.7 − 16.8 − 1.9 − 14.8 3.2 2.9 8.1 − 3.8 − 4.5 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 2.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loanthe figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  
7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 200359.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
70.5 12.0 4.1 3.3 46.2 43.4 15.6 38.0 1,485.5 124.4 579.7 341.0 304.3 2003          Sep 
70.6 12.7 4.0 3.3 45.5 43.0 21.1 37.6 1,494.1 126.2 574.2 344.6 299.9          Oct 
69.3 11.4 4.0 3.2 45.7 43.6 20.0 37.1 1,502.7 131.5 574.6 343.0 304.0          Nov 68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8          Dec 
67.5 11.9 3.8 3.1 45.9 45.2 16.6 36.4 1,493.9 128.6 585.4 336.8 284.5 2004          Jan 
64.9 10.9 3.8 3.1 47.3 45.8 17.5 36.2 1,503.7 127.3 604.4 332.1 288.0          Feb 60.9 10.1 3.7 3.1 47.8 46.2 18.2 35.8 1,532.3 134.7 623.1 330.1 292.8          Mar 
60.2 10.2 3.7 3.1 47.2 46.2 17.3 35.7 1,549.0 135.3 632.3 333.7 299.7          Apr 
62.7 12.3 3.7 3.0 48.3 45.8 17.0 36.1 1,559.8 132.3 612.5 336.4 295.8          May60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 50.7 47.1 16.1 36.0 1,554.2 123.6 582.1 337.5 295.2          June
59.6 9.7 3.6 3.0 49.7 47.2 16.8 39.9 1,558.7 120.0 576.6 339.4 293.9          July
60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 52.1 47.6 14.2 41.1 1,562.9 120.7 577.2 336.9 293.3          Aug 58.0 8.2 3.5 2.9 48.1 46.0 18.1 38.7 1,575.0 119.7 595.6 335.1 302.2          Sep 
60.4 10.3 3.5 2.9 45.6 42.6 21.2 37.4 1,569.6 118.0 582.7 335.5 309.3          Oct 
58.1 8.0 3.4 2.8 43.7 41.3 22.0 35.6 1,569.6 116.1 616.1 332.3 314.4          Nov 59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2          Dec 
58.0 8.5 3.2 2.7 45.2 41.8 25.1 31.3 1,559.9 110.2 615.0 333.1 308.1 2005          Jan 
57.3 8.0 3.2 2.7 44.3 41.5 27.3 31.6 1,570.4 117.3 623.3 332.7 301.2          Feb 56.3 8.0 3.1 2.6 41.0 40.5 28.3 34.0 1,585.3 114.8 639.3 334.6 305.7          Mar 
52.8 9.3 3.1 2.5 41.8 39.4 28.6 34.4 1,606.5 117.7 680.0 341.0 308.7          Apr 
52.5 9.5 2.9 2.5 40.5 39.2 28.3 33.9 1,614.2 115.8 686.9 343.8 305.7          May50.4 8.5 2.5 2.1 41.3 39.7 28.3 34.2 1,637.0 118.1 636.2 344.0 306.0          June
Changes 1
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 − 6.2 − 6.2 − − 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 199724.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
0.1 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 5.6 − 0.5 7.8 1.8 − 10.3 3.4 − 1.1 2003          Oct 
− 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 12.3 5.3 6.8 − 1.0 1.3          Nov − 0.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 0.6 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 10.6 − 0.1 3.2 − 1.8 − 7.9          Dec 
− 1.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.9 2.5 − 0.3 4.2 − 2.7 12.7 − 3.9 − 13.9 2004          Jan 
− 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.6 0.9 − 0.2 10.0 − 1.3 19.6 − 4.6 4.1          Feb − 4.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.8 − 0.5 23.2 7.5 14.0 − 2.5 6.7          Mar 
− 0.8 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 15.5 0.3 6.1 3.5 7.7          Apr 
2.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.3 12.0 − 3.0 − 16.7 2.8 − 4.6          May
− 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 8.6 − 31.0 1.1 − 0.6          June
− 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 0.0 0.6 3.9 3.8 − 3.6 − 7.0 1.8 − 0.4          July
1.1 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 0.4 − 2.5 1.2 5.2 0.6 2.1 − 3.3 − 1.8          Aug 
− 2.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.6 3.9 − 2.4 15.6 − 1.0 23.8 − 1.2 6.4          Sep 
2.5 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 3.4 3.1 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 9.2 0.8 5.3          Oct 
− 2.1 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.3 0.8 − 1.8 3.8 − 1.9 40.6 − 2.6 2.6          Nov 
1.9 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 7.2 − 4.1 − 11.3 0.7 − 33.4 − 2.4 0.7          Dec 
− 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.3 10.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.6 29.6 2.9 − 5.9 2005          Jan 
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.2 0.3 12.3 0.9 11.5 − 0.0 − 7.9          Feb − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 1.0 1.0 2.4 12.9 − 2.5 12.2 1.5 6.0          Mar 
− 3.6 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.8 − 1.1 0.3 0.4 20.1 3.0 39.7 5.7 3.9          Apr 
− 0.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 2.4 − 1.9 − 3.1 1.7 1.1          May− 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.8 0.5 − 0.1 0.3 23.2 2.7 − 50.7 − 0.2 0.3          June
footnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than four with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data collected the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published together with money
separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the deposits market fund shares. with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt securities
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
  
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2005         Jan 2,142 6,719.0 57.8 2,590.6 1,859.7 720.3 3,666.2 469.5 2,552.3 3.2 627.8 140.3 264.0
         Feb 2,141 6,764.5 57.0 2,638.5 1,896.5 730.7 3,663.2 472.5 2,547.7 3.1 628.8 137.5 268.3         Mar 2,141 6,767.3 52.9 2,653.6 1,899.4 741.1 3,663.2 460.3 2,546.0 3.1 646.3 137.2 260.5
         Apr 2,140 6,952.1 53.1 2,740.8 1,977.2 748.8 3,749.8 492.7 2,550.2 3.0 694.5 142.8 265.6
         May 2,136 6,935.7 55.2 2,746.7 1,977.1 756.0 3,720.3 480.8 2,555.1 2.9 674.0 142.4 271.1         June 2,129 6,892.6 50.5 2,756.9 1,974.7 767.6 3,678.9 462.6 2,558.7 2.8 648.4 142.6 263.7
Commercial banks 5
2005         May 252 2,030.2 19.1 799.8 659.2 138.4 1,029.7 271.6 547.2 1.6 205.2 76.1 105.6
         June 250 1,944.8 16.0 768.6 626.2 140.1 985.6 257.3 548.9 1.5 174.3 75.5 99.1
   Big banks 6
2005         May 5 1,322.9 11.2 524.6 445.8 76.7 644.8 187.4 308.1 1.1 145.4 63.6 78.6
         June 5 1,241.6 6.2 491.1 411.4 77.6 607.2 171.1 307.5 1.1 125.4 63.0 74.1
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2005         May 164 598.2 7.3 218.3 160.3 57.9 337.8 65.9 220.5 0.4 49.8 12.4 22.4
         June 162 600.3 9.2 220.7 161.6 58.9 336.0 66.3 222.0 0.4 46.0 12.5 21.9
   Branches of foreign banks
2005         May 83 109.2 0.7 56.9 53.1 3.8 47.0 18.4 18.6 0.0 10.0 0.1 4.5
         June 83 102.9 0.7 56.7 53.2 3.6 42.3 19.9 19.4 0.0 2.9 0.1 3.1
Landesbanken
2005         May 12 1,337.7 3.0 740.2 570.5 162.1 526.4 71.4 361.8 0.2 90.6 27.0 41.1
         June 12 1,353.7 4.4 760.6 585.8 166.3 517.5 63.4 361.9 0.3 90.0 27.7 43.5
Savings banks
2005         May 469 992.1 18.2 233.4 78.4 154.6 704.1 67.6 539.1 0.7 96.7 15.4 21.0
         June 469 993.0 16.4 233.4 77.5 155.5 707.1 68.6 539.6 0.7 98.1 15.4 20.7
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2005         May 2 221.1 1.1 151.1 102.7 47.1 49.8 11.8 19.7 0.0 18.1 11.5 7.5
         June 2 228.6 0.5 157.3 107.8 48.3 51.9 12.5 20.7 0.0 18.6 11.5 7.3
Credit cooperatives
2005         May 1,333 576.0 12.1 150.9 63.5 85.7 390.3 39.4 307.6 0.4 42.5 6.1 16.7
         June 1,328 576.7 11.7 150.0 62.4 85.8 391.9 40.0 308.4 0.3 42.8 6.1 17.0
Mortgage banks
2005         May 25 887.3 1.1 243.0 148.3 94.7 623.6 10.8 472.9 − 139.9 0.8 18.8
         June 25 893.7 1.0 248.5 152.1 96.4 625.7 11.8 472.6 − 141.3 0.8 17.7
Building and loan associations
2005         May 27 188.1 0.0 47.6 34.3 13.2 121.7 1.4 103.3 . 17.0 0.4 18.3
         June 27 189.3 0.1 47.6 34.0 13.5 122.7 1.4 103.5 . 17.8 0.4 18.5
Special purpose banks
2005         May 16 703.1 0.6 380.7 320.2 60.3 274.7 6.8 203.5 − 64.1 5.1 42.1
         June 16 712.9 0.4 390.8 328.9 61.7 276.6 7.5 203.1 − 65.6 5.1 40.0
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2005         May 125 456.2 4.7 193.3 141.8 51.4 241.8 39.7 137.5 0.2 64.4 0.9 15.6
         June 125 456.5 5.4 199.1 147.0 52.0 238.2 42.5 140.3 0.2 55.0 0.9 13.0
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2005         May 42 347.1 4.0 136.4 88.7 47.6 194.8 21.3 119.0 0.1 54.4 0.8 11.1
         June 42 353.6 4.7 142.4 93.9 48.4 195.8 22.6 120.9 0.1 52.2 0.8 9.9
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,885.9 285.1 1,600.7 2,555.0 733.0 340.1 763.0 112.8 613.7 524.0 105.2 1,602.6 287.8 387.7 2005          Jan 
1,913.0 261.8 1,651.1 2,569.6 744.1 339.9 766.6 125.0 614.4 524.3 104.6 1,614.3 286.2 381.4          Feb 1,912.7 280.8 1,631.8 2,551.9 741.1 323.5 769.7 110.5 614.6 524.1 102.9 1,631.0 286.4 385.4          Mar 
2,035.5 317.8 1,717.6 2,583.3 749.4 352.2 764.8 132.3 614.2 524.1 102.7 1,653.6 291.4 388.2          Apr 
2,007.7 319.3 1,688.3 2,587.8 754.4 354.7 763.2 121.0 613.3 523.7 102.3 1,662.5 292.8 384.9          May1,962.2 299.6 1,662.4 2,569.0 759.7 329.4 766.3 104.0 611.4 522.5 102.3 1,684.3 294.2 382.9          June
Commercial banks 5
797.7 191.9 605.7 789.7 362.2 183.0 128.3 103.1 107.5 97.9 8.8 212.3 91.8 138.8 2005          May
739.2 169.6 569.5 768.1 361.9 161.7 128.4 84.3 107.4 98.0 8.8 211.5 91.7 134.4          June
Big banks 6
525.6 139.3 386.3 489.8 190.2 139.4 88.5 98.7 71.2 69.2 0.4 161.3 50.7 95.5 2005          May
476.8 120.6 356.2 462.9 183.7 119.5 88.0 78.9 71.2 69.2 0.4 160.2 50.7 91.0          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
187.7 34.1 153.5 282.8 160.4 39.8 38.0 4.3 36.2 28.7 8.3 51.0 38.2 38.5 2005          May
183.4 33.6 149.7 288.0 166.1 38.9 38.6 5.4 36.1 28.8 8.3 51.2 38.1 39.5          June
Branches of foreign banks
84.4 18.5 65.9 17.0 11.6 3.7 1.7 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 2.9 4.8 2005          May
78.9 15.4 63.6 17.2 12.1 3.3 1.7 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 2.9 3.9          June
Landesbanken
445.1 66.7 378.3 314.6 50.0 43.2 205.6 10.6 15.1 14.3 0.6 467.0 56.0 55.1 2005          May
443.2 70.4 372.8 316.5 52.4 39.4 209.1 10.6 15.1 14.3 0.6 481.2 56.2 56.4          June
Savings banks
217.5 4.5 213.0 638.2 202.6 48.3 11.5 − 307.1 254.0 68.7 42.9 48.5 45.0 2005          May
217.9 5.4 212.5 636.5 202.8 47.5 11.7 − 305.9 253.2 68.6 43.0 49.1 46.4          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
134.2 37.8 96.4 35.2 6.4 11.1 16.9 7.2 − − 0.8 31.5 10.2 9.9 2005          May
137.3 37.5 99.9 37.8 7.2 12.6 17.0 9.0 − − 1.0 32.5 10.2 10.8          June
Credit cooperatives
75.9 1.1 74.8 412.4 129.7 51.4 25.3 − 183.2 157.1 22.8 31.6 31.9 24.3 2005          May
76.2 1.7 74.5 412.6 131.0 50.9 25.4 − 182.7 156.6 22.7 31.2 32.3 24.4          June
Mortgage banks
162.5 7.3 155.2 155.0 1.1 6.0 147.7 0.2 − − 0.2 522.2 21.9 25.8 2005          May
166.1 6.2 159.9 154.8 1.6 5.7 147.3 0.2 − − 0.2 525.8 22.0 25.0          June
Building and loan associations
27.8 1.6 26.1 120.4 0.3 0.9 118.6 − 0.4 0.4 0.3 6.3 7.4 26.1 2005          May
28.3 1.5 26.7 120.6 0.3 0.9 118.8 − 0.4 0.4 0.3 6.4 7.5 26.6          June
Special purpose banks
147.0 8.3 138.7 122.3 1.9 10.9 109.3 − − − 0.2 348.7 25.1 59.9 2005          May
154.0 7.3 146.7 122.0 2.4 10.8 108.7 − − − 0.2 352.8 25.2 58.9          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
168.7 34.1 134.5 151.9 96.5 16.0 29.3 0.3 6.7 6.5 3.4 98.1 14.5 23.1 2005          May
161.4 29.9 131.4 157.7 102.3 15.6 29.3 0.3 6.9 6.8 3.5 100.0 14.7 22.8          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
84.3 15.6 68.6 134.8 85.0 12.3 27.6 0.3 6.7 6.5 3.3 98.1 11.7 18.3 2005          May
82.4 14.5 67.8 140.5 90.3 12.3 27.5 0.3 6.9 6.7 3.4 100.0 11.9 18.8          June
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Commercial by foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. —commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank 8Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- included in the categories ”Regional banks and other commercial banks”bank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum of the banks majority-owned and ”Mortgage banks”. 
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills andhand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  
1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.31996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2004         Jan 12.9 39.5 1,632.9 1,055.9 0.0 8.4 568.5 2.3 2,992.0 2,667.0 3.5 2.6 316.8
         Feb 12.9 37.6 1,645.1 1,058.5 0.0 8.5 578.0 2.3 2,994.8 2,658.8 3.4 2.5 328.1         Mar 12.4 31.1 1,656.6 1,062.0 0.0 8.1 586.4 2.4 3,015.7 2,670.4 3.2 2.1 338.0
         Apr 12.6 39.4 1,673.5 1,070.7 0.0 8.6 594.1 2.4 3,022.9 2,664.3 3.2 3.0 350.5
         May 13.5 41.4 1,693.0 1,081.2 0.0 7.7 604.1 2.4 3,013.6 2,657.8 3.2 2.9 347.8         June 12.8 37.3 1,671.7 1,070.0 0.0 7.7 594.0 2.3 3,003.5 2,652.5 3.0 3.6 342.6
         July 12.8 39.9 1,687.1 1,082.3 0.0 6.9 597.9 2.3 3,007.5 2,656.4 3.0 6.8 340.2
         Aug 12.8 41.6 1,679.0 1,075.6 0.0 7.4 596.0 2.3 3,001.8 2,648.6 3.0 5.9 343.3         Sep 12.9 41.4 1,680.5 1,073.4 0.0 7.9 599.2 2.1 3,006.1 2,652.3 2.9 3.9 345.9
         Oct 13.5 37.0 1,686.4 1,083.4 0.0 6.5 596.4 2.2 3,009.8 2,654.8 2.8 4.5 346.7
         Nov 12.8 47.5 1,688.7 1,083.2 0.0 6.7 598.8 2.2 3,014.6 2,657.4 2.8 3.9 349.4         Dec 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005         Jan 12.9 44.6 1,671.9 1,075.0 0.0 7.2 589.7 2.2 3,009.9 2,641.6 2.6 2.6 362.1
         Feb 12.5 44.1 1,676.1 1,075.3 0.0 7.7 593.0 2.2 3,000.5 2,639.5 2.5 2.5 355.0         Mar 13.2 39.3 1,684.2 1,077.9 0.0 8.5 597.7 2.2 3,003.9 2,634.7 2.5 1.4 364.2
         Apr 12.7 39.9 1,739.1 1,127.1 0.1 8.8 603.1 2.2 3,042.4 2,637.8 2.5 1.9 399.2
         May 13.3 41.4 1,732.2 1,118.4 0.1 8.1 605.7 2.1 3,022.1 2,639.8 2.4 2.2 376.7         June 13.1 36.9 1,716.9 1,097.2 0.0 8.3 611.4 2.1 2,988.9 2,636.7 2.3 1.5 347.5
Changes *
1996 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 − 2.0 + 4.7 + 10.61997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 − 1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 36.51998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.11999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2004         Jan − 4.1 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 8.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 7.2
         Feb + 0.1 − 1.9 + 12.0 + 2.4 − + 0.1 + 9.5 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 8.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 11.3         Mar − 0.5 − 6.5 + 11.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.4 + 0.1 + 20.9 + 11.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 9.9
         Apr + 0.1 + 8.3 + 16.9 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 7.7 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.6
         May + 0.9 + 2.0 + 19.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7         June − 0.7 − 4.1 − 21.3 − 11.2 − − 0.1 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 10.1 − 5.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 5.2
         July + 0.1 + 2.5 + 15.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 3.9 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 2.3
         Aug − 0.0 + 1.7 − 8.1 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 3.1         Sep + 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 2.2 − + 0.6 + 3.4 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Oct + 0.7 − 4.5 + 5.9 + 10.0 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.8
         Nov − 0.7 + 10.5 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.7         Dec + 2.1 − 6.3 − 9.0 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 15.4 − 15.5 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.6
2005         Jan − 2.1 + 3.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 − − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.1 + 8.6 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 11.1
         Feb − 0.3 − 0.5 + 4.2 + 0.4 − + 0.5 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 9.3 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 7.1         Mar + 0.7 − 4.8 + 8.1 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 4.6 − 0.0 + 3.3 − 4.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 9.2
         Apr − 0.5 + 0.7 + 54.9 + 49.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 38.5 + 3.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 35.0
         May + 0.6 + 1.5 − 6.9 − 8.7 − − 0.7 + 2.5 − 0.0 − 20.2 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.5         June − 0.2 − 4.5 − 15.2 − 21.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 5.9 − 0.0 − 33.4 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 29.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). — 5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). — 6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. — 7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). — 8Up to December
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). — 4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. — 11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month *
 
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 199581.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 20013.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
2.0 57.2 108.9 1,213.2 142.0 1,071.1 0.1 28.3 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 590.6 100.3 40.3 2004          Jan 
2.0 56.6 108.8 1,215.7 134.0 1,081.6 0.1 28.2 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 591.5 100.1 40.5          Feb 2.0 54.9 107.2 1,204.3 140.0 1,064.2 0.1 27.8 2,145.8 635.3 819.2 591.4 99.8 39.3          Mar 
2.0 54.4 106.6 1,227.8 143.2 1,084.5 0.1 27.7 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 591.2 99.2 39.0          Apr 
2.0 54.3 107.1 1,252.0 134.2 1,117.7 0.1 27.6 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 590.6 98.9 39.0          May2.0 54.9 106.7 1,257.3 129.2 1,128.0 0.1 28.4 2,158.3 643.5 826.2 590.0 98.7 38.8          June
1.0 55.9 103.5 1,275.2 125.7 1,149.4 0.1 29.5 2,160.4 637.6 833.6 590.6 98.6 38.7          July
1.0 55.8 102.2 1,260.2 122.4 1,137.7 0.1 29.4 2,161.3 639.1 832.2 591.3 98.7 38.6          Aug 1.0 57.0 102.6 1,243.1 124.4 1,118.6 0.1 30.7 2,169.7 649.5 830.4 591.2 98.6 38.5          Sep 
1.0 59.9 101.8 1,278.0 129.8 1,148.1 0.1 30.5 2,172.9 647.2 834.6 592.3 98.8 41.8          Oct 
1.0 60.2 101.8 1,286.4 148.4 1,137.9 0.1 30.4 2,195.4 673.0 830.7 593.1 98.7 42.1          Nov 1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7          Dec 
1.0 61.7 100.9 1,259.0 141.3 1,117.6 0.1 30.2 2,209.2 665.9 841.3 604.1 97.8 43.7 2005          Jan 
1.0 61.3 98.3 1,282.7 130.4 1,152.2 0.1 29.7 2,216.1 670.9 843.1 605.0 97.2 43.7          Feb 1.0 60.9 98.0 1,255.8 131.3 1,124.4 0.1 29.6 2,218.8 673.0 845.1 605.2 95.5 43.4          Mar 
1.0 60.7 103.6 1,328.8 163.2 1,165.5 0.1 29.5 2,226.4 675.9 850.4 604.9 95.2 43.3          Apr 
1.0 60.7 103.2 1,303.9 151.6 1,152.3 0.1 29.7 2,232.9 683.9 850.1 604.1 94.8 43.0          May1.0 58.5 102.8 1,301.7 139.3 1,162.3 0.1 27.0 2,238.9 692.5 849.3 602.7 94.5 43.5          June
Changes *
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996− 5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 16.3 + 25.3 − 41.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Jan 
− − 0.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 − 8.0 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.4 + 6.0 − 17.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2          Mar 
− 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 23.2 + 3.2 + 20.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 24.2 − 9.0 + 33.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          May− + 0.6 − 0.4 + 5.3 − 5.0 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2          June
− 0.9 + 1.1 − 3.1 + 17.9 − 3.4 + 21.4 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 5.5 + 7.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1          July
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 3.4 − 11.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1          Aug 
− + 1.2 + 0.4 − 17.1 + 2.0 − 19.1 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 8.3 + 10.4 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− + 3.0 − 0.8 + 34.9 + 5.4 + 29.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 4.2 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 3.3          Oct 
− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 8.4 + 18.6 − 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 22.5 + 26.4 − 4.5 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.3          Nov 
− 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 15.3 − 28.8 + 13.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 26.0 + 21.5 + 10.4 − 0.3 − 0.4          Dec 
− − 0.1 + 1.3 − 12.1 + 21.7 − 33.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.2 + 19.0 − 9.9 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.1 2005          Jan 
− − 0.2 − 2.6 + 23.7 − 10.9 + 34.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 7.0 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 27.1 + 0.9 − 28.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.1 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.3          Mar 
− − 0.2 + 5.6 + 72.9 + 31.8 + 41.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 2.9 + 5.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1          Apr 
− + 0.0 − 0.3 − 24.8 − 11.6 − 13.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 8.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.3          May
− 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 2.2 − 12.3 + 10.0 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 6.1 + 8.6 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. — 17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. — 13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). — 20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer
one month. — 16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.71996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2004         Jan 0.3 788.7 693.8 531.9 161.9 1.2 93.6 1.6 588.4 353.0 118.0 235.0 5.5 229.8
         Feb 0.3 790.5 691.5 530.7 160.8 1.3 97.7 1.6 598.7 360.7 126.1 234.6 6.0 232.0         Mar 0.3 803.2 700.1 538.5 161.6 1.7 101.4 1.7 617.6 370.2 133.9 236.4 4.8 242.5
         Apr 0.3 825.5 720.4 557.5 162.9 2.2 102.8 1.7 625.8 376.7 137.2 239.5 5.0 244.0
         May 0.3 836.2 725.7 570.5 155.2 1.9 108.7 1.7 613.1 361.8 123.6 238.2 5.0 246.3         June 0.4 835.5 722.1 566.9 155.2 2.1 111.3 1.7 618.9 363.8 124.6 239.1 7.3 247.8
         July 0.4 829.1 717.3 557.4 159.9 1.7 110.1 1.6 626.0 366.1 127.6 238.5 9.7 250.2
         Aug 0.4 828.3 714.6 557.9 156.7 1.8 112.0 1.6 635.0 372.4 134.6 237.7 12.1 250.5         Sep 0.3 854.3 735.7 578.0 157.7 2.0 116.6 1.7 634.5 375.5 141.8 233.6 10.6 248.4
         Oct 0.3 873.8 751.8 595.5 156.3 2.0 120.0 1.7 639.0 370.9 139.0 231.8 11.1 257.1
         Nov 0.4 898.7 772.7 619.1 153.7 2.0 124.0 1.6 652.7 386.3 158.1 228.2 11.3 255.2         Dec 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005         Jan 0.3 918.7 784.9 627.9 156.9 3.3 130.5 1.5 656.3 380.8 151.7 229.1 9.8 265.7
         Feb 0.3 962.5 821.3 660.8 160.5 3.5 137.7 1.5 662.7 381.2 152.9 228.3 7.7 273.8         Mar 0.4 969.4 821.6 657.3 164.3 4.5 143.4 1.5 659.3 372.1 139.4 232.7 5.1 282.0
         Apr 0.4 1,001.7 850.2 679.8 170.4 5.8 145.7 1.5 707.4 405.6 168.8 236.8 6.5 295.3
         May 0.4 1,014.5 858.7 681.6 177.1 5.4 150.4 1.5 698.2 396.5 155.0 241.5 4.3 297.3         June 0.5 1,040.0 877.6 693.9 183.7 6.2 156.2 1.5 690.0 385.1 141.2 243.9 4.0 300.9
Changes *
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.41997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 − 0.1 + 10.4 − 1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.91998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.01999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2004         Jan + 0.0 + 16.3 + 14.8 + 14.0 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 5.3 + 6.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 2.9
         Feb − 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 11.1 + 8.0 + 8.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.5         Mar + 0.0 + 6.1 + 2.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 15.6 + 7.4 + 7.0 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 9.4
         Apr − + 20.3 + 18.4 + 17.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 5.6 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.3
         May + 0.0 + 13.0 + 7.5 + 14.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 + 5.8 − 0.0 − 9.7 − 12.7 − 13.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.0         June + 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.7
         July + 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.9 − 10.2 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.8 − 1.6 + 2.4 + 0.1
         Aug − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.5 − 1.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.5         Sep − 0.0 + 30.2 + 25.1 + 23.0 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 4.2 + 6.6 + 8.2 − 1.6 − 1.3 − 1.2
         Oct − 0.0 + 22.7 + 19.3 + 19.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 8.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 9.2
         Nov + 0.1 + 30.6 + 26.3 + 26.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 0.0 + 20.0 + 20.6 + 20.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.0         Dec − 0.2 − 4.9 − 8.3 − 9.4 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 18.6 − 20.1 − 20.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.8
2005         Jan + 0.1 + 21.8 + 17.6 + 16.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 19.7 + 12.6 + 13.5 − 0.9 − 1.3 + 8.4
         Feb − 0.0 + 46.4 + 39.0 + 34.9 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 7.2 − 0.0 + 9.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 8.7         Mar + 0.1 + 4.1 − 2.6 − 5.6 + 3.0 + 1.0 + 5.6 − − 6.5 − 11.7 − 14.2 + 2.5 − 2.5 + 7.7
         Apr − 0.0 + 31.5 + 27.8 + 21.9 + 5.8 + 1.3 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 47.4 + 33.2 + 29.3 + 3.8 + 1.3 + 12.9
         May + 0.1 + 4.7 + 0.7 − 4.1 + 4.8 − 0.5 + 4.4 + 0.0 − 17.7 − 16.0 − 16.0 + 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.5         June + 0.0 + 22.6 + 16.0 + 10.2 + 5.7 + 0.9 + 5.8 − 0.0 − 11.1 − 13.9 − 14.5 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 3.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 199512.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
11.7 40.9 606.8 138.7 468.2 359.1 109.0 0.5 315.6 44.8 270.8 99.6 171.2 3.7 2004          Jan 
12.0 39.7 602.9 122.7 480.2 368.1 112.1 0.5 328.7 55.9 272.8 104.6 168.2 3.4          Feb 
9.5 39.8 640.2 136.3 503.8 389.4 114.4 0.5 326.2 61.8 264.4 103.0 161.4 0.9          Mar 
9.6 39.3 646.0 127.7 518.3 403.7 114.6 0.5 323.8 56.9 266.8 106.6 160.2 0.9          Apr 
9.6 39.4 616.9 114.2 502.7 389.0 113.8 0.5 325.2 62.9 262.4 102.3 160.0 0.9          May9.6 38.9 603.8 129.4 474.4 360.2 114.2 0.5 310.2 60.6 249.6 90.0 159.7 0.9          June
9.7 39.2 598.6 123.8 474.8 359.8 115.1 0.5 309.9 54.1 255.8 96.6 159.1 0.9          July
9.7 39.3 594.3 106.8 487.5 371.5 116.0 0.5 318.7 57.2 261.5 102.7 158.8 0.9          Aug 9.7 38.8 609.9 128.7 481.2 366.3 115.0 0.5 325.3 64.8 260.5 98.6 161.9 0.8          Sep 
9.6 38.8 602.8 118.6 484.2 368.7 115.5 0.5 323.3 55.1 268.2 108.7 159.5 0.8          Oct 
9.7 38.1 617.6 140.9 476.7 363.1 113.6 0.5 333.5 62.3 271.2 114.8 156.4 0.8          Nov 9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8          Dec 
9.9 39.4 626.8 143.8 483.0 367.2 115.8 0.6 345.9 67.1 278.7 124.8 153.9 0.8 2005          Jan 
10.8 39.2 630.3 131.4 498.9 385.2 113.6 0.6 353.5 73.3 280.2 127.3 153.0 1.8          Feb 10.8 39.2 656.8 149.4 507.4 393.9 113.5 0.6 333.1 68.1 264.9 111.9 153.0 1.8          Mar 
10.7 39.3 706.7 154.6 552.1 436.1 116.0 0.6 356.9 73.5 283.4 137.5 145.9 1.7          Apr 
10.6 39.2 703.7 167.7 536.0 419.3 116.7 0.7 354.9 70.5 284.4 136.9 147.5 1.6          May10.5 39.8 660.4 160.3 500.1 373.2 126.9 0.6 330.1 67.2 262.9 112.7 150.2 1.5          June
Changes *
− 2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 − 1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 − 2.0 1996+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 12.9 + 43.2 − 30.2 − 30.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 5.8 + 12.5 − 6.7 − 3.5 − 3.2 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 15.9 + 12.7 + 9.4 + 3.2 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 11.1 + 2.2 + 5.1 − 2.9 − 0.3          Feb + 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.7 + 13.1 + 17.6 + 19.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 5.8 − 7.3 − 2.2 − 5.1 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 − 0.6 + 3.8 − 9.1 + 12.8 + 13.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 5.1 + 1.3 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 26.7 − 13.1 − 13.6 − 13.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 − 3.3 − 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0          May+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 13.5 + 15.2 − 28.7 − 29.1 + 0.3 − − 15.1 − 2.3 − 12.8 − 12.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          June
+ 0.1 + 0.1 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 6.6 + 5.4 + 6.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 16.9 + 13.5 + 12.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 3.1 + 6.4 + 6.2 + 0.2 − 0.0          Aug + 0.0 − 0.2 + 19.5 + 22.5 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 7.9 + 1.4 − 3.3 + 4.7 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 3.8 − 9.5 + 5.6 + 4.0 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 9.4 + 9.0 + 10.5 − 1.4 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 19.8 + 23.2 − 3.4 − 2.6 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 13.6 + 7.6 + 6.0 + 7.2 − 1.2 + 0.0          Nov + 0.2 + 1.5 − 10.2 − 53.1 + 42.8 + 42.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 19.3 − 25.4 + 6.1 + 9.5 − 3.4 + 0.0          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.3 + 17.4 + 55.9 − 38.4 − 40.0 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 30.7 + 30.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 2005          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 11.9 + 17.5 + 19.2 − 1.7 − + 9.0 + 6.3 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.9          Feb − 0.0 − 0.2 + 23.7 + 17.5 + 6.2 + 7.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 22.3 − 5.3 − 16.9 − 15.4 − 1.6 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 49.2 + 5.0 + 44.2 + 41.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 23.4 + 5.4 + 18.0 + 25.5 − 7.5 − 0.0          Apr 
− 0.1 − 0.6 − 10.1 + 12.0 − 22.1 − 21.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 6.9 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.1          May− 0.1 + 0.4 − 46.0 − 8.1 − 37.9 − 47.6 + 9.7 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 3.6 − 22.9 − 24.8 + 1.9 − 0.1          June
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). — 5Up capital supplied to branches abroad. — 8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 9Up to December 1998,
registered debt securities. — 6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). — 7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.51996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2004         Jan 2,992.0 2,670.5 346.6 305.7 304.4 1.3 41.0 39.6 1.4 2,645.3 2,097.7
         Feb 2,994.8 2,662.2 339.5 306.0 304.8 1.1 33.6 32.2 1.3 2,655.2 2,091.2         Mar 3,015.7 2,673.6 353.0 306.8 305.9 0.8 46.3 45.0 1.3 2,662.7 2,098.5
         Apr 3,022.9 2,667.5 346.1 304.0 303.3 0.7 42.2 39.9 2.3 2,676.8 2,116.1
         May 3,013.6 2,661.0 335.4 297.1 296.2 0.9 38.3 36.3 2.0 2,678.2 2,113.0         June 3,003.5 2,655.4 331.5 294.9 294.2 0.7 36.7 33.8 2.9 2,672.0 2,102.1
         July 3,007.5 2,659.4 335.7 287.6 287.0 0.6 48.2 42.0 6.2 2,671.7 2,104.4
         Aug 3,001.8 2,651.6 324.8 281.2 280.5 0.6 43.6 38.4 5.2 2,677.0 2,105.5         Sep 3,006.1 2,655.2 325.1 287.2 286.7 0.5 37.9 34.5 3.4 2,681.0 2,106.8
         Oct 3,009.8 2,657.6 330.2 283.5 282.9 0.6 46.8 42.8 3.9 2,679.6 2,108.6
         Nov 3,014.6 2,660.3 335.0 293.1 292.0 1.1 41.9 39.0 2.8 2,679.6 2,106.4         Dec 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005         Jan 3,009.9 2,644.2 323.6 279.1 278.5 0.6 44.4 42.5 2.0 2,686.3 2,117.7
         Feb 3,000.5 2,642.1 325.2 285.2 284.6 0.6 40.0 38.1 1.9 2,675.3 2,109.7         Mar 3,003.9 2,637.2 325.3 287.8 286.8 1.0 37.5 37.1 0.4 2,678.5 2,107.7
         Apr 3,042.4 2,640.3 328.8 285.7 284.6 1.1 43.1 42.3 0.8 2,713.6 2,147.6
         May 3,022.1 2,642.3 331.0 286.3 285.1 1.2 44.7 43.7 1.0 2,691.2 2,130.1         June 2,988.9 2,639.0 325.7 289.1 288.2 1.0 36.5 36.0 0.5 2,663.3 2,109.2
Changes *
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 282.5 + 219.91998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.31999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.02004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2004         Jan − 3.7 − 10.1 − 8.6 − 9.4 − 9.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.0 + 1.7
         Feb + 2.8 − 8.3 − 7.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 − 6.5         Mar + 20.9 + 11.4 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 12.7 + 12.8 − 0.1 + 7.1 + 7.1
         Apr + 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.0 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 + 0.9 + 14.3 + 17.6
         May − 9.4 − 6.5 − 10.4 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 3.4         June − 10.1 − 5.6 − 3.7 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 + 0.9 − 6.4 − 11.2
         July + 4.0 + 4.0 + 4.2 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 11.5 + 8.2 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 2.3
         Aug − 5.7 − 7.9 − 10.9 − 6.4 − 6.5 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 3.6 − 0.9 + 5.3 + 1.1         Sep + 4.1 + 3.7 + 2.2 + 6.0 + 6.2 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.1
         Oct + 3.8 + 2.3 + 5.2 − 3.7 − 3.8 + 0.1 + 8.9 + 8.3 + 0.6 − 1.4 + 1.9
         Nov + 4.8 + 2.7 + 4.7 + 9.6 + 9.2 + 0.5 − 4.9 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 2.2         Dec − 15.4 − 15.6 − 14.1 − 9.3 − 9.0 − 0.2 − 4.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 1.4 + 6.2
2005         Jan + 8.6 − 2.5 + 2.7 − 4.7 − 4.5 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 7.2 + 0.2 + 5.9 + 3.4
         Feb − 9.3 − 2.2 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 6.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 8.0         Mar + 3.3 − 4.8 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 3.2 − 2.0
         Apr + 38.5 + 3.0 + 3.5 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 5.6 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 35.0 + 39.8
         May − 20.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 22.4 − 17.4         June − 33.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − 8.1 − 7.7 − 0.5 − 28.1 − 21.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising fromprovisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
    
 
lending  2,6 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 19952,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,926.0 195.0 1,731.0 171.7 50.1 547.6 400.5 33.9 366.5 145.1 2.0 7.1 2004          Jan 
1,925.4 194.3 1,731.1 165.8 49.6 564.1 399.8 34.8 365.0 162.3 2.0 7.0          Feb 1,922.9 193.9 1,729.1 175.6 47.9 564.1 399.7 35.4 364.4 162.4 2.0 7.0          Mar 
1,927.1 194.7 1,732.5 189.0 47.4 560.7 397.2 34.9 362.3 161.5 2.0 7.0          Apr 
1,933.6 197.1 1,736.4 179.5 47.4 565.1 394.9 34.6 360.3 168.3 2.0 6.9          May1,935.2 198.2 1,737.0 166.9 48.1 569.9 392.3 34.4 357.9 175.7 2.0 6.8          June
1,938.2 199.0 1,739.2 166.2 49.2 567.3 392.3 34.1 358.2 174.0 1.0 6.7          July
1,941.3 200.2 1,741.1 164.2 49.1 571.5 391.3 33.9 357.4 179.1 1.0 6.7          Aug 1,942.9 199.2 1,743.7 163.9 50.3 574.2 391.2 34.5 356.7 182.0 1.0 6.7          Sep 
1,944.0 198.0 1,746.0 164.7 53.3 571.0 387.9 32.9 354.9 182.0 1.0 6.7          Oct 
1,941.7 195.6 1,746.1 164.7 53.5 573.2 387.5 32.9 354.6 184.7 1.0 6.7          Nov 1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5          Dec 
1,938.3 194.0 1,744.3 179.4 55.3 568.6 385.0 32.1 352.8 182.7 1.0 6.4 2005          Jan 
1,935.3 193.0 1,742.3 174.4 54.9 565.6 384.1 30.9 353.2 180.6 1.0 6.4          Feb 1,929.8 192.3 1,737.5 178.0 54.6 570.8 383.5 31.7 351.8 186.3 1.0 6.3          Mar 
1,932.9 191.0 1,741.8 214.7 54.5 566.0 380.5 31.9 348.7 184.5 1.0 6.2          Apr 
1,935.5 191.0 1,744.5 194.6 54.5 561.1 378.0 31.2 346.8 182.1 1.0 6.2          May1,934.6 190.9 1,743.7 174.6 52.5 554.1 380.2 32.1 348.1 172.9 1.0 6.0          June
Changes *
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 − 18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
− 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
− 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 0.5 + 16.4 − 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 17.1 − − 0.0          Feb − 2.7 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 9.8 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 13.4 − 0.5 − 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.1 + 2.5 + 3.7 − 9.5 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 6.8 − − 0.0          May+ 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 12.6 + 0.8 + 4.8 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 7.4 − − 0.2          June
+ 3.0 + 0.8 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.0          July
+ 3.1 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 5.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Aug + 1.6 − 0.9 + 2.6 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 3.0 − 3.2 − 3.3 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Oct 
− 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.7 − + 0.0          Nov − 2.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 8.8 − 0.1 − 7.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 − 0.2          Dec 
− 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.0 + 2.5 − 2.7 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 5.2 − − 0.1 2005          Jan 
− 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 4.9 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 2.1 − − 0.0          Feb − 5.5 − 0.8 − 4.7 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 5.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 3.1 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 36.7 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 3.1 − 1.8 − − 0.1          Apr 
+ 2.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 − 20.1 + 0.0 − 4.9 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 2.4 − − 0.0          May− 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 20.2 − 2.0 − 7.0 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 1.3 − 9.2 − 0.0 − 0.2          June
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. — 6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. — 9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). — 10Excluding
possible. — 7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). — 11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. — 8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2002 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.52003 2,241.6 1,124.5 1,083.3 867.1 216.2 1,252.2 335.1 151.0 37.2 59.0 152.3 32.1 54.4 54.4
2004         June 2,229.7 1,125.6 1,081.5 865.7 215.9 1,235.2 329.0 145.9 37.8 57.5 147.0 32.3 57.6 53.8
         Sep 2,229.9 1,129.0 1,087.8 869.9 217.9 1,226.6 326.8 142.3 37.7 56.2 144.6 32.7 56.6 56.1         Dec 2,224.2 1,127.7 1,086.0 869.7 216.3 1,211.6 320.4 136.7 37.1 53.0 141.4 31.9 56.1 60.0
2005         Mar 2,216.9 1,120.6 1,081.3 867.0 214.3 1,209.7 316.5 135.7 37.0 53.1 137.9 31.1 57.0 67.3
         June 2,223.0 1,133.4 1,082.5 879.9 202.6 1,210.4 314.3 135.8 36.6 52.0 136.5 31.5 58.2 69.7
 Short-term lending
2002 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2003 313.9 − 14.1 − 14.1 266.7 8.9 46.6 4.2 13.2 55.9 3.9 8.0 25.8
2004         June 294.6 − 12.4 − 12.4 250.0 7.4 44.8 4.1 13.1 52.8 4.4 6.9 24.0
         Sep 287.0 − 12.0 − 12.0 241.9 7.0 43.0 3.8 12.6 52.1 4.4 6.5 23.3         Dec 283.4 − 12.5 − 12.5 239.3 7.6 40.9 3.5 11.1 52.9 3.6 5.9 26.4
2005         Mar 287.1 − 11.9 − 11.9 245.0 7.3 41.7 3.9 12.1 51.0 3.7 5.9 33.3
         June 288.4 − 11.6 − 11.6 246.2 6.9 42.4 3.5 11.4 50.1 3.9 6.4 35.1
 Medium-term lending
2002 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2003 195.0 − 38.2 − 38.2 121.2 12.0 17.5 2.3 6.0 11.9 3.4 10.9 6.5
2004         June 198.2 − 38.7 − 38.7 124.0 12.2 17.4 3.0 5.9 11.8 3.3 11.6 7.2
         Sep 199.2 − 39.2 − 39.2 124.2 12.2 17.6 2.7 5.8 11.7 3.3 11.8 7.2         Dec 194.3 − 38.8 − 38.8 119.9 11.8 16.4 2.5 5.6 11.1 3.2 11.3 7.6
2005         Mar 192.3 − 38.3 − 38.3 118.9 11.7 16.0 2.1 5.4 11.0 3.0 11.4 7.9
         June 190.9 − 36.0 − 36.0 118.4 10.9 16.0 2.0 5.4 11.2 3.1 11.4 8.2
 Long-term lending
2002 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2003 1,732.8 1,124.5 1,031.0 867.1 164.0 864.3 314.2 86.9 30.6 39.9 84.5 24.7 35.5 22.1
2004         June 1,737.0 1,125.6 1,030.4 865.7 164.8 861.2 309.4 83.6 30.8 38.5 82.4 24.6 39.1 22.6
         Sep 1,743.7 1,129.0 1,036.5 869.9 166.7 860.5 307.6 81.6 31.2 37.8 80.8 24.9 38.3 25.7         Dec 1,746.5 1,127.7 1,034.7 869.7 165.0 852.4 301.0 79.4 31.2 36.2 77.3 25.0 38.9 26.0
2005         Mar 1,737.5 1,120.6 1,031.1 867.0 164.1 845.7 297.6 78.0 31.0 35.6 75.9 24.4 39.6 26.0
         June 1,743.7 1,133.4 1,034.9 879.9 155.0 845.8 296.5 77.4 31.1 35.1 75.2 24.6 40.4 26.5
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2004         Q2 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 5.2 + 2.0 + 3.2 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 3.6
         Q3 + 0.2 + 4.5 + 6.1 + 5.2 + 1.0 − 8.6 − 2.3 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.9         Q4 − 7.4 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 1.7 − 1.2 − 10.2 − 4.3 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 2.7 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 3.6
2005         Q1 − 7.3 − 9.2 − 4.6 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.5 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 6.4
         Q2 + 6.2 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 3.5 − 2.3 + 0.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 2.3
 Short-term lending
2004         Q2 − 11.3 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 − 10.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.5
         Q3 − 7.5 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 8.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.8         Q4 − 3.6 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.6 + 3.1
2005         Q1 + 3.7 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 5.7 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 6.9
         Q2 + 1.3 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.8
 Medium-term lending
2004         Q2 + 4.2 − + 1.5 − + 1.5 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
         Q3 + 0.7 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1         Q4 − 4.3 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 3.5 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.5
2005         Q1 − 2.1 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1
         Q2 + 0.2 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
 Long-term lending
2004         Q2 + 7.6 + 1.8 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 2.6 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1
         Q3 + 7.1 + 4.5 + 6.0 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 2.8         Q4 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 4.1 − 3.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
2005         Q1 − 8.9 − 9.2 − 3.5 − 4.4 + 0.9 − 6.7 − 3.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.4
         Q2 + 4.6 + 3.1 + 2.2 + 3.5 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.4
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5 2002711.9 160.7 44.0 207.2 437.0 67.7 975.6 744.7 230.9 118.6 21.6 13.7 3.5 2003
703.2 165.6 45.3 200.7 428.4 66.2 981.2 749.2 232.0 120.9 20.1 13.3 3.3 2004          June
700.4 166.5 43.9 203.0 426.8 64.6 989.9 757.8 232.1 122.5 20.4 13.4 3.2          Sep 695.5 163.7 42.5 204.2 419.0 61.7 999.4 762.4 237.0 129.2 19.9 13.2 3.2          Dec 
690.5 161.6 42.3 201.1 413.7 61.5 994.2 761.7 232.5 129.2 18.7 13.1 3.0 2005          Mar 
690.1 161.2 41.6 201.5 412.7 60.9 999.7 765.1 234.6 132.1 18.9 13.0 3.1          June
Short-term lending
123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0 2002
109.1 17.9 14.6 31.2 49.4 12.9 45.9 5.1 40.8 2.4 21.6 1.2 0.0 2003
99.9 17.2 14.9 27.4 46.5 12.7 43.5 5.0 38.5 2.3 20.1 1.1 0.0 2004          June
96.2 16.8 12.3 27.5 45.8 12.4 43.7 5.0 38.7 2.3 20.4 1.4 0.0          Sep 95.0 15.8 11.5 27.6 44.4 11.4 43.0 4.9 38.0 2.3 19.9 1.1 0.0          Dec 
93.3 15.2 10.9 26.1 43.3 12.0 41.0 4.6 36.4 2.4 18.7 1.1 0.0 2005          Mar 
93.4 15.3 10.7 25.9 42.3 11.4 41.2 4.7 36.5 2.3 18.9 1.0 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1 2002
62.7 5.7 5.6 18.0 30.4 4.5 73.2 26.2 47.0 37.1 − 0.6 0.1 2003
63.7 6.8 6.4 17.5 30.0 4.1 73.7 26.5 47.2 38.1 − 0.5 0.1 2004          June
63.9 6.7 6.7 17.7 30.0 4.0 74.5 26.9 47.6 38.3 − 0.5 0.1          Sep 62.3 6.5 6.5 17.2 29.6 3.9 73.8 26.9 46.9 37.7 − 0.5 0.1          Dec 
62.1 6.3 6.8 16.4 29.2 3.8 72.8 26.6 46.2 37.4 − 0.5 0.1 2005          Mar 
61.2 6.1 6.2 16.1 30.5 3.8 72.0 25.0 46.9 38.6 − 0.5 0.1          June
Long-term lending
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4 2002
540.0 137.1 23.8 158.0 357.2 50.4 856.5 713.4 143.1 79.1 − 11.9 3.4 2003
539.6 141.5 24.0 155.8 352.0 49.3 864.1 717.8 146.3 80.6 − 11.7 3.2 2004          June
540.3 143.0 24.9 157.8 351.1 48.2 871.7 725.8 145.8 82.0 − 11.5 3.1          Sep 538.2 141.5 24.5 159.5 345.0 46.4 882.6 730.6 152.0 89.2 − 11.5 3.1          Dec 
535.2 140.0 24.6 158.6 341.3 45.7 880.4 730.5 149.8 89.4 − 11.5 3.0 2005          Mar 
535.5 139.8 24.6 159.6 340.0 45.6 886.5 735.4 151.1 91.2 − 11.5 3.0          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 0.5 + 2.4 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 7.4 + 5.8 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 2004          Q2
− 2.8 + 1.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 − 1.8 − 1.6 + 8.7 + 8.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1          Q3− 2.4 − 2.2 − 1.3 + 1.8 − 4.8 − 1.6 + 3.1 + 4.9 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1          Q4
− 4.2 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 5.3 − 0.2 − 5.2 − 0.6 − 4.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 2005          Q1
− 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.5 + 5.5 + 3.4 + 2.1 + 3.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1          Q2
Short-term lending
− 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 2004          Q2
− 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0          Q3− 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 −          Q4
− 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 1.1 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2005          Q1
+ 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.8 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2004          Q2
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3− 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2005          Q1
− 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.2 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2004          Q2
+ 0.7 + 2.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 7.8 + 8.1 − 0.3 + 1.5 − − 0.2 − 0.1          Q3− 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.8 − 0.5 + 4.6 + 5.1 − 0.5 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.1          Q4
− 2.7 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2.3 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.1 2005          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 4.6 + 3.3 + 1.3 + 1.9 − + 0.0 + 0.1          Q2
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. — loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.52003 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.32004 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.1
2004         July 2,160.4 637.6 833.6 225.8 607.7 8.2 599.5 590.6 98.6 38.7 31.5 10.3
         Aug 2,161.3 639.1 832.2 224.5 607.7 8.0 599.7 591.3 98.7 38.6 31.9 8.2         Sep 2,169.7 649.5 830.4 222.1 608.3 8.0 600.3 591.2 98.6 38.5 32.0 10.2
         Oct 2,172.9 647.2 834.6 223.8 610.8 8.1 602.6 592.3 98.8 41.8 32.1 12.3
         Nov 2,195.4 673.0 830.7 216.9 613.8 8.1 605.6 593.1 98.7 42.1 32.1 14.0         Dec 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.1
2005         Jan 2,209.2 665.9 841.3 223.1 618.1 8.1 610.1 604.1 97.8 43.7 32.1 12.2
         Feb 2,216.1 670.9 843.1 220.4 622.7 8.1 614.6 605.0 97.2 43.7 32.1 14.4         Mar 2,218.8 673.0 845.1 219.3 625.8 7.5 618.3 605.2 95.5 43.4 31.5 18.7
         Apr 2,226.4 675.9 850.4 222.4 628.0 7.5 620.5 604.9 95.2 43.3 31.5 16.7
         May 2,232.9 683.9 850.1 225.3 624.8 7.5 617.3 604.1 94.8 43.0 31.8 16.7         June 2,238.9 692.5 849.3 223.9 625.4 7.6 617.7 602.7 94.5 43.5 32.2 19.5
Changes *
2003 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 − 20.3 + 15.6 − 0.5 + 16.1 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 + 2.0 + 7.82004 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 − 3.7 + 29.7 − 0.3 + 29.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 0.9
2004         July + 2.1 − 5.5 + 7.0 + 5.1 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Aug + 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.2         Sep + 8.3 + 10.4 − 1.8 − 2.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1
         Oct + 3.2 − 2.3 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 22.5 + 26.4 − 4.5 − 6.9 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec + 5.6 − 26.0 + 21.5 + 18.1 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 10.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 3.8
2005         Jan + 9.2 + 19.0 − 9.9 − 11.9 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.1
         Feb + 7.0 + 5.0 + 1.8 − 2.7 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2         Mar + 3.1 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 0.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 4.3
         Apr + 7.6 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 3.1 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.0
         May + 6.5 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 2.9 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0         June + 6.1 + 8.6 − 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 2.8
Domestic government End of year or month *
2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −2003 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −2004 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −
2004         July 109.5 18.5 87.0 31.5 55.5 0.9 54.6 2.4 1.6 33.0 1.0 −
         Aug 108.6 18.7 85.8 31.2 54.7 0.9 53.8 2.4 1.6 33.0 1.0 −         Sep 109.5 19.6 85.8 32.5 53.4 0.9 52.5 2.5 1.6 33.0 1.1 −
         Oct 101.9 15.4 82.4 28.7 53.7 1.0 52.7 2.6 1.5 32.9 1.0 −
         Nov 102.1 17.0 81.0 27.4 53.6 1.0 52.6 2.6 1.6 33.1 1.1 −         Dec 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −
2005         Jan 104.7 18.7 81.9 30.0 51.9 0.9 51.0 2.6 1.5 34.5 1.1 −
         Feb 105.0 19.7 81.2 29.4 51.8 0.9 50.8 2.5 1.5 34.5 1.1 −         Mar 101.7 18.2 79.5 29.4 50.2 0.5 49.6 2.4 1.5 34.2 1.1 −
         Apr 98.8 18.0 76.9 27.1 49.8 0.5 49.2 2.4 1.5 34.1 1.1 −
         May 101.7 19.0 78.5 28.8 49.7 0.5 49.1 2.6 1.6 33.8 1.1 −         June 104.5 20.7 79.6 30.4 49.2 0.5 48.6 2.7 1.6 34.0 1.1 −
Changes *
2003 − 4.8 + 1.2 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 −2004 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.4 − 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.1 −
2004         July − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −         Sep + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Oct − 7.6 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Nov + 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −         Dec + 2.9 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 −
2005         Jan + 1.1 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 0.3 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −         Mar − 3.3 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 −
         Apr − 2.9 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         May + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −         June + 2.8 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.52003 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.32004 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.1
2004         July 2,050.9 619.0 746.6 194.3 552.2 7.3 545.0 588.3 97.0 5.7 30.5 10.3
         Aug 2,052.8 620.4 746.4 193.4 553.0 7.1 545.9 588.9 97.2 5.6 30.9 8.2         Sep 2,060.2 629.9 744.6 189.6 555.0 7.1 547.9 588.7 97.0 5.5 30.9 10.2
         Oct 2,070.9 631.8 752.2 195.1 557.1 7.2 550.0 589.6 97.3 8.9 31.0 12.3
         Nov 2,093.4 656.0 749.7 189.5 560.2 7.1 553.1 590.5 97.1 9.0 31.1 14.0         Dec 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.1
2005         Jan 2,104.5 647.2 759.4 193.1 566.2 7.1 559.1 601.6 96.3 9.2 31.0 12.2
         Feb 2,111.2 651.2 761.9 191.0 570.9 7.2 563.7 602.4 95.7 9.3 31.0 14.4         Mar 2,117.1 654.8 765.6 190.0 575.6 6.9 568.7 602.8 94.0 9.2 30.4 18.7
         Apr 2,127.6 658.0 773.5 195.3 578.2 7.0 571.2 602.4 93.7 9.2 30.4 16.7
         May 2,131.2 664.9 771.6 196.5 575.1 7.0 568.1 601.5 93.2 9.2 30.7 16.7         June 2,134.4 671.8 769.7 193.5 576.2 7.1 569.1 600.0 92.9 9.5 31.1 19.5
Changes *
2003 + 58.7 + 47.2 + 1.0 − 18.7 + 19.7 − 0.1 + 19.8 + 15.1 − 4.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 7.82004 + 63.9 + 25.3 + 27.4 − 5.1 + 32.5 − 0.7 + 33.1 + 12.5 − 1.3 + 3.4 + 1.8 + 0.9
2004         July + 4.1 − 4.0 + 7.5 + 5.7 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Aug + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.2         Sep + 7.1 + 9.6 − 2.1 − 3.7 + 1.6 − + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1
         Oct + 10.8 + 1.9 + 7.6 + 5.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 22.4 + 24.8 − 3.1 − 5.6 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec + 2.7 − 25.9 + 18.6 + 15.0 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 10.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.8
2005         Jan + 8.0 + 17.1 − 9.3 − 11.4 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 2.1
         Feb + 6.7 + 3.9 + 2.5 − 2.2 + 4.7 + 0.0 + 4.6 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2         Mar + 6.3 + 4.1 + 3.7 − 0.7 + 4.4 + 0.1 + 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.3
         Apr + 10.5 + 3.2 + 7.9 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.0
         May + 3.6 + 6.9 − 1.9 + 1.2 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0         June + 3.3 + 7.0 − 1.9 − 3.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.8
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.5
2003 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.32004 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.1
2004         July 742.9 200.6 515.4 99.0 416.4 1.9 414.5 5.2 21.8 5.4 18.0 10.3
         Aug 746.1 203.8 515.3 98.7 416.6 1.8 414.8 5.2 21.8 5.3 18.1 8.2         Sep 753.0 212.1 513.9 95.7 418.2 1.9 416.4 5.2 21.8 5.3 18.1 10.2
         Oct 759.4 210.3 522.0 101.9 420.1 1.8 418.3 5.2 21.9 8.6 18.2 12.3
         Nov 769.4 221.5 520.9 97.3 423.6 1.7 421.9 5.1 21.9 8.7 18.3 14.0         Dec 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.1
2005         Jan 771.2 218.2 525.9 101.4 424.5 1.8 422.8 5.2 21.9 8.8 18.3 12.2
         Feb 772.7 217.3 528.5 99.6 428.9 1.9 427.0 5.2 21.8 8.8 18.3 14.4         Mar 778.8 218.4 533.3 100.2 433.2 1.9 431.2 5.3 21.8 8.8 18.9 18.7
         Apr 787.2 218.7 541.4 106.0 435.5 2.0 433.4 5.4 21.7 8.8 18.9 16.7
         May 791.5 222.4 541.8 107.3 434.5 2.0 432.5 5.4 21.9 8.8 19.2 16.7         June 792.6 224.5 541.0 105.6 435.3 2.0 433.3 5.2 22.0 9.0 19.6 19.5
Changes *
2003 + 29.6 + 11.2 + 17.9 + 2.9 + 15.0 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 7.82004 + 31.1 − 2.3 + 33.0 + 7.3 + 25.7 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 1.0 + 0.9
2004         July + 5.3 − 4.1 + 9.2 + 7.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5
         Aug + 3.4 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.2         Sep + 6.6 + 8.3 − 1.8 − 3.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1
         Oct + 6.2 − 1.8 + 7.9 + 6.2 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 10.0 + 11.7 − 1.7 − 4.6 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec − 7.4 − 19.4 + 12.1 + 12.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.8
2005         Jan + 9.0 + 16.2 − 7.4 − 8.8 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.1
         Feb + 1.5 − 1.0 + 2.5 − 1.8 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.2         Mar + 5.3 + 1.1 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.3
         Apr + 8.4 + 0.3 + 8.1 + 5.8 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.0
         May + 4.4 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0         June + 1.1 + 2.0 − 0.8 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.8
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
  
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.62003 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.42004 1,334.2 428.1 414.8 71.7 283.5 59.6 13.2 235.3 216.9 25.7 175.1 16.2
2005         Jan 1,333.2 429.0 415.2 73.3 283.3 58.6 13.8 233.4 216.2 25.6 174.7 15.8
         Feb 1,338.4 433.9 419.5 73.4 286.9 59.3 14.4 233.4 216.1 25.4 175.0 15.7         Mar 1,338.3 436.4 421.6 71.8 289.9 59.8 14.8 232.3 215.3 25.1 174.8 15.4
         Apr 1,340.4 439.3 425.3 73.9 291.8 59.6 14.0 232.1 215.0 24.7 174.9 15.4
         May 1,339.6 442.4 427.7 74.5 293.3 59.9 14.7 229.8 212.6 23.8 174.4 14.4         June 1,341.8 447.3 432.0 75.1 296.3 60.7 15.3 228.7 211.7 23.2 174.2 14.3
Changes *
2003 + 29.2 + 36.0 + 35.3 + 5.6 + 23.7 + 6.0 + 0.6 − 16.9 − 16.2 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 4.22004 + 32.8 + 27.6 + 26.7 + 4.8 + 19.2 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 5.6 − 5.1 − 3.5 + 0.6 − 2.2
2005         Jan − 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3
         Feb + 5.2 + 4.9 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2         Mar + 1.0 + 3.0 + 2.5 − 1.5 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2
         Apr + 2.1 + 2.9 + 3.7 + 2.1 + 0.9 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0
         May − 0.8 + 3.1 + 2.4 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 1.0         June + 2.2 + 4.9 + 4.3 + 0.6 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.62003 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 21.92004 103.6 41.4 0.8 5.8 34.8 0.0 12.9 15.1 2.7 2.2 10.2 0.1 21.5
2005         Jan 104.7 41.8 0.8 6.2 34.7 0.0 12.8 18.9 5.4 3.2 10.2 0.1 21.4
         Feb 105.0 41.5 0.6 6.4 34.6 0.0 12.8 18.4 4.8 3.5 10.1 0.1 21.4         Mar 101.7 40.5 0.8 6.8 33.0 0.0 12.8 18.5 4.4 4.0 10.1 0.1 21.1
         Apr 98.8 39.4 0.5 6.4 32.6 0.0 12.8 17.8 4.2 3.5 10.0 0.1 21.0
         May 101.7 39.2 0.6 6.1 32.4 0.0 12.7 16.3 3.4 2.8 10.1 0.1 20.7         June 104.5 39.7 1.1 6.6 31.9 0.0 12.8 19.8 4.8 4.9 10.0 0.1 21.0
Changes *
2003 − 4.8 − 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.72004 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 2.4
2005         Jan + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 2.8 + 1.0 − 0.0 − − 0.1
         Feb + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0         Mar − 3.3 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Apr − 2.9 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 − − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − − 0.1
         May + 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3         June + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.5 − + 0.0 + 3.4 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regardedand Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 − 200218.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 − 200318.4 94.3 141.0 5.5 135.6 595.7 586.3 9.5 75.1 0.3 12.8 − 2004
17.3 91.7 141.7 5.4 136.3 596.4 586.9 9.5 74.4 0.4 12.7 − 2005          Jan 
17.4 91.4 142.1 5.3 136.7 597.3 587.5 9.7 73.9 0.4 12.7 −          Feb 17.0 89.8 142.5 5.0 137.5 597.5 587.7 9.8 72.2 0.4 11.5 −          Mar 
17.1 89.3 142.8 4.9 137.8 597.1 587.3 9.8 72.0 0.4 11.5 −          Apr 
17.2 89.2 140.6 5.0 135.6 596.1 586.2 9.9 71.3 0.4 11.5 −          May17.0 87.9 140.9 5.1 135.8 594.8 584.9 9.9 71.0 0.4 11.5 −          June
Changes *
− 0.7 − 21.6 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 14.7 + 14.4 + 0.3 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2003− 0.5 − 12.3 + 6.7 − 0.7 + 7.4 + 12.2 + 12.0 + 0.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 2004
− 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 2005          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Feb − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar 
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          May− 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
 
   
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
27.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 200224.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0 200325.7 10.5 9.6 2.3 3.3 0.3 21.4 2.9 12.9 4.8 0.8 0.0 2004
23.3 8.9 8.8 2.3 3.2 0.3 20.8 3.5 11.8 4.7 0.8 0.0 2005          Jan 
25.1 10.3 9.1 2.4 3.3 0.3 19.9 4.0 10.5 4.8 0.7 0.0          Feb 24.4 9.5 9.3 2.4 3.2 0.3 18.3 3.5 9.3 4.8 0.7 0.0          Mar 
24.3 9.8 8.8 2.4 3.2 0.3 17.3 3.4 8.5 4.8 0.7 0.0          Apr 
26.5 11.1 9.7 2.4 3.3 0.3 19.6 3.9 10.2 4.8 0.8 0.0          May25.3 10.6 9.0 2.4 3.3 0.3 19.7 4.1 9.9 4.9 0.8 0.0          June
Changes *
− 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 2003+ 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 2004
− 2.4 − 1.5 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2005          Jan 
+ 1.8 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          Feb − 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          May− 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          June
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.92003 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 16.0 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.02004 613.0 603.5 515.5 397.9 88.0 76.7 9.6 7.7 14.2 105.8 98.4 85.2 7.4
2005         Feb 614.4 605.0 516.7 398.5 88.2 77.7 9.5 7.6 0.4 104.6 97.2 84.1 7.3
         Mar 614.6 605.2 516.5 401.1 88.7 78.2 9.4 7.6 0.3 102.9 95.5 82.4 7.4
         Apr 614.2 604.9 516.7 402.2 88.2 77.8 9.3 7.5 0.3 102.7 95.2 82.0 7.5
         May 613.3 604.1 516.4 402.2 87.7 77.3 9.2 7.4 0.3 102.3 94.8 81.7 7.5         June 611.4 602.7 515.6 401.7 87.1 76.6 8.7 6.9 0.3 102.3 94.5 81.3 7.8
Changes *
2003 + 14.2 + 15.1 + 28.0 + 23.8 − 12.9 − 12.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 . − 4.6 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.12004 + 12.6 + 13.1 + 14.7 + 20.1 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.4
2005         Feb + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0
         Mar − 1.1 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1
         Apr − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1
         May − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0         June − 1.9 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.4 . − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate ofprovisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.32003 1,490.1 353.4 20.8 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.22004 1,550.0 382.6 22.9 214.6 36.5 62.1 94.2 1,393.7 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.7
2005         Feb 1,570.9 385.4 23.5 233.9 41.5 69.3 92.7 1,408.9 2.4 0.4 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.7
         Mar 1,587.3 391.0 24.6 241.4 41.2 68.3 93.0 1,426.0 2.4 0.4 0.5 1.5 43.6 2.5
         Apr 1,608.5 402.3 24.5 251.5 44.0 70.7 95.0 1,442.8 2.3 0.4 0.4 1.4 45.1 2.5
         May 1,617.2 403.9 24.3 258.7 42.3 69.5 95.5 1,452.3 2.5 0.6 0.4 1.5 45.3 2.5         June 1,638.2 410.8 24.8 261.8 42.4 71.1 95.3 1,471.8 2.4 0.4 0.5 1.6 46.1 2.5
Changes *
2003 + 19.6 + 7.0 + 4.7 + 13.2 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 14.9 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.32004 + 57.4 + 27.9 + 1.8 + 34.7 − 7.9 − 8.0 − 11.0 + 76.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.5
2005         Feb + 11.8 + 8.3 + 0.8 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 9.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Mar + 16.4 + 5.8 + 1.1 + 7.6 − 0.6 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 17.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
         Apr + 21.2 + 11.4 − 0.1 + 10.1 + 2.8 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 16.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 −
         May + 9.0 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0         June + 21.0 + 6.9 + 0.5 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 19.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. — 3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. — 4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. — 5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. — 6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2004 27 183.9 32.9 0.1 11.6 34.5 63.8 9.3 14.2 0.4 27.5 113.2 4.6 6.8 7.4 96.4
2005         Apr 27 187.9 35.3 0.1 13.0 33.3 62.4 9.2 15.9 0.4 27.5 115.5 4.7 6.1 7.4 7.5
         May 27 188.1 34.3 0.1 13.3 32.8 62.6 9.3 17.0 0.4 27.3 115.7 4.7 6.3 7.4 7.2         June 27 189.3 34.0 0.1 13.7 32.5 63.0 9.4 17.8 0.4 27.8 115.9 4.8 6.4 7.5 7.8
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005         Apr 16 137.2 27.2 0.0 6.2 21.1 44.6 8.5 11.5 0.3 20.1 78.1 4.5 6.1 4.8 4.7
         May 16 137.3 26.5 0.0 6.3 20.8 44.9 8.5 12.2 0.3 20.0 78.3 4.5 6.3 4.8 4.5         June 16 138.5 26.4 0.0 6.4 20.5 45.3 8.6 13.0 0.3 20.4 78.4 4.6 6.4 4.8 4.9
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005         Apr 11 50.7 8.1 0.0 6.8 12.2 17.7 0.8 4.4 0.1 7.4 37.4 0.2 − 2.7 2.8
         May 11 50.8 7.7 0.0 7.0 12.0 17.7 0.8 4.8 0.1 7.4 37.4 0.2 − 2.7 2.7         June 11 50.8 7.6 0.0 7.3 11.9 17.7 0.8 4.8 0.1 7.4 37.4 0.2 − 2.7 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2004 26.0 3.1 5.4 42.0 28.3 40.3 17.1 4.2 7.8 3.5 15.4 10.4 7.7 13.3 11.0 0.6
2005         Apr 2.5 0.0 0.5 4.1 2.9 3.6 1.7 0.5 0.8 0.4 1.2 10.8 7.9 1.1 0.1
         May 2.0 0.0 0.5 3.3 2.2 2.9 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.1 10.9 7.8 1.1 0.1         June 2.1 0.1 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.3 1.4 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.3 10.9 7.8 1.2 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005         Apr 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.9 2.0 2.6 1.2 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.0 6.4 3.9 0.7 0.0
         May 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.3 1.3 2.1 0.9 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.9 6.5 3.8 0.7 0.0         June 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.4 1.4 2.3 0.9 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.0 6.5 3.8 0.8 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005         Apr 1.0 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.0 0.4 0.0
         May 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.0 0.4 0.0         June 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.1 0.4 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contractedSubsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
    
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.02003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.52004 52 203 1,452.7 681.0 595.7 170.2 425.6 85.2 671.0 477.3 17.1 15.8 460.2 193.7 100.7
2004         Aug 54 206 1,451.9 676.3 588.8 174.4 414.3 87.6 686.5 492.2 17.6 16.3 474.7 194.3 89.1
         Sep 53 205 1,452.0 684.1 597.8 179.7 418.0 86.3 680.6 484.4 17.7 16.3 466.8 196.2 87.3
         Oct 53 206 1,454.2 667.4 577.6 171.6 405.9 89.9 693.2 492.1 16.5 15.1 475.6 201.1 93.6
         Nov 53 205 1,483.9 691.7 602.1 176.7 425.4 89.6 692.1 492.1 16.9 15.6 475.1 200.1 100.1         Dec 52 203 1,452.7 681.0 595.7 170.2 425.6 85.2 671.0 477.3 17.1 15.8 460.2 193.7 100.7
2005         Jan 52 203 1,499.6 692.2 607.9 174.9 433.0 84.3 698.6 501.7 18.9 17.5 482.8 196.9 108.9
         Feb 52 203 1,512.5 690.2 609.9 171.0 438.9 80.3 713.4 510.9 18.9 17.6 492.0 202.5 108.8         Mar 52 202 1,522.7 701.4 623.9 181.3 442.6 77.5 709.6 503.3 18.4 17.3 485.0 206.2 111.7
         Apr 52 202 1,568.7 709.0 633.2 191.0 442.1 75.8 744.9 532.5 20.1 18.8 512.4 212.5 114.8
         May 54 204 1,613.0 722.6 646.7 194.8 452.0 75.9 772.9 556.7 21.4 20.0 535.3 216.3 117.4
Changes *
2003 − 5 − 3 − 6.8 − 45.3 − 17.4 − 12.7 − 4.7 − 27.9 + 22.5 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.7 + 24.9 + 15.92004 − 3 + 1 +207.5 +100.7 + 90.1 − 15.4 +105.5 + 10.6 + 64.2 + 57.8 − 1.9 − 1.0 + 59.7 + 6.4 + 42.7
2004         Aug − + 2 + 9.3 + 2.8 + 1.4 − 3.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 5.7 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 6.2 + 8.4 + 3.8
         Sep − 1 − 1 + 20.3 + 15.0 + 15.7 + 5.3 + 10.4 − 0.6 + 4.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 4.8 + 0.8
         Oct − + 1 + 16.5 − 11.0 − 15.0 − 8.1 − 6.9 + 4.0 + 20.7 + 14.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 15.2 + 6.7 + 6.8
         Nov − − 1 + 53.8 + 33.4 + 32.9 + 5.1 + 27.8 + 0.5 + 13.1 + 10.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 9.6 + 3.0 + 7.3         Dec − 1 − 2 − 13.4 − 3.6 + 0.2 − 6.5 + 6.7 − 3.8 − 11.1 − 7.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 7.7 − 3.6 + 1.3
2005         Jan − − + 16.2 − 0.9 + 0.9 + 4.7 − 3.8 − 1.8 + 10.5 + 12.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 10.4 − 1.7 + 6.7
         Feb − − + 23.7 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 3.9 + 9.8 − 3.7 + 21.2 + 13.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 13.6 + 7.5 + 0.4         Mar − − 1 − 3.0 + 6.1 + 9.3 + 10.3 − 1.0 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 12.6 + 1.7 + 2.3
         Apr − − + 42.1 + 6.2 + 8.0 + 9.7 − 1.8 − 1.8 + 33.1 + 27.4 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 25.7 + 5.7 + 2.8
         May + 2 + 2 + 7.3 + 1.3 + 2.0 + 3.7 − 1.8 − 0.6 + 8.7 + 10.1 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 8.8 − 1.5 − 2.7
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.42003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.62004 45 170 647.7 304.4 236.1 117.1 119.0 68.3 282.1 211.9 38.6 35.0 173.3 70.2 61.2
2004         Aug 45 173 627.9 289.0 224.3 115.2 109.1 64.7 278.1 208.5 38.1 36.2 170.3 69.6 60.8
         Sep 45 171 634.1 292.8 226.3 114.0 112.4 66.5 279.9 210.6 37.9 35.5 172.8 69.2 61.4
         Oct 45 170 636.6 294.8 228.1 116.1 112.0 66.7 280.4 210.4 36.5 34.9 173.9 70.0 61.4
         Nov 45 170 644.4 297.7 230.2 114.9 115.3 67.5 284.4 212.6 37.8 35.0 174.8 71.8 62.3         Dec 45 170 647.7 304.4 236.1 117.1 119.0 68.3 282.1 211.9 38.6 35.0 173.3 70.2 61.2
2005         Jan 45 170 648.0 299.9 229.9 110.3 119.6 70.0 284.9 211.1 37.4 34.7 173.7 73.9 63.2
         Feb 45 171 658.3 305.7 233.5 112.6 120.9 72.1 285.2 207.3 37.0 35.2 170.3 78.0 67.4         Mar 45 174 667.6 312.1 238.8 113.7 125.1 73.3 288.4 207.0 37.3 35.5 169.7 81.4 67.1
         Apr 44 172 664.9 306.6 234.1 112.5 121.6 72.6 289.6 206.7 37.5 35.8 169.2 82.9 68.7
         May 44 168 679.1 305.3 233.2 118.4 114.8 72.2 302.0 213.3 38.1 35.5 175.2 88.7 71.8
Changes *
2003 − 1 − 21 − 32.8 − 14.0 − 10.7 + 1.6 − 12.3 − 3.3 − 11.9 − 14.2 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 9.0 + 2.3 − 6.92004 − 1 − 9 + 9.3 + 0.8 − 8.1 − 10.2 + 2.0 + 9.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 2.8 + 4.2 + 7.0 + 0.1
2004         Aug − − − 7.6 − 2.8 − 5.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 + 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 4.2
         Sep − − 2 + 9.3 + 5.5 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 4.3 + 2.4 + 3.1 + 3.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 3.7 − 0.4 + 0.8
         Oct − − 1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.2
         Nov − − + 11.9 + 5.1 + 3.5 − 1.2 + 4.7 + 1.6 + 5.7 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.8 + 1.1         Dec − − + 6.8 + 8.5 + 7.1 + 2.2 + 4.9 + 1.4 − 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.0
2005         Jan − − − 4.8 − 7.4 − 8.1 − 6.8 − 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 1.6 + 3.6 + 1.7
         Feb − + 1 + 12.1 + 6.8 + 4.3 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 3.2 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 2.8 + 4.1 + 4.4         Mar − + 3 + 6.9 + 5.1 + 4.4 + 1.1 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 2.4 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 3.4 − 0.5
         Apr − 1 − 2 − 3.3 − 5.9 − 5.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 1.5 + 1.6
         May − − 4 + 8.5 − 4.6 − 2.9 + 5.9 − 8.9 − 1.7 + 10.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 4.1 + 5.8 + 2.7
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarde da s
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IV  Banks
        
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 20021,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 20031,226.9 798.4 295.2 503.2 428.4 61.8 55.7 52.4 6.1 5.8 366.6 139.9 21.7 64.3 2004
1,209.8 785.8 266.7 519.0 424.1 70.0 62.8 59.7 7.2 6.8 354.1 153.6 27.0 61.5 2004          Aug 
1,212.4 803.1 280.4 522.7 409.4 69.0 61.8 59.1 7.1 6.8 340.4 147.6 27.1 64.8          Sep 
1,217.4 797.9 280.9 516.9 419.6 71.8 64.9 62.1 6.9 6.6 347.8 144.6 27.2 65.0          Oct 
1,251.2 804.4 280.2 524.3 446.8 64.4 58.2 55.2 6.2 5.9 382.3 139.4 27.2 66.2          Nov 1,226.9 798.4 295.2 503.2 428.4 61.8 55.7 52.4 6.1 5.8 366.6 139.9 21.7 64.3          Dec 
1,266.5 814.2 293.4 520.8 452.3 70.0 63.8 60.6 6.3 5.9 382.3 143.6 21.8 67.7 2005          Jan 
1,288.0 815.9 294.8 521.1 472.2 70.6 64.5 61.3 6.2 5.9 401.5 136.5 22.9 65.1          Feb 1,300.8 828.8 311.2 517.6 472.0 71.8 66.2 63.0 5.6 5.3 400.2 135.3 22.2 64.4          Mar 
1,339.7 848.9 331.7 517.2 490.8 69.8 64.2 60.9 5.6 5.3 421.0 137.9 22.3 68.8          Apr 
1,375.9 866.6 333.4 533.1 509.3 69.3 63.7 60.1 5.6 5.3 440.0 145.8 22.5 68.8          May
Changes *
+ 34.4 + 12.6 + 17.0 − 4.4 + 21.8 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 18.1 − 72.6 + 4.6 + 26.8 2003+ 186.4 + 93.2 + 28.1 + 65.1 + 93.3 − 4.4 − 4.8 − 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 97.7 + 0.4 − 8.7 + 29.4 2004
+ 15.0 + 13.5 + 5.3 + 8.2 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 8.3 − 1.0 + 3.5 2004          Aug 
+ 16.6 + 25.8 + 13.6 + 12.2 − 9.2 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.2 − 6.0 + 0.1 + 9.6          Sep 
+ 17.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 15.1 + 2.9 + 3.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 12.2 − 3.0 + 0.1 + 2.4          Oct 
+ 53.0 + 18.4 − 0.8 + 19.2 + 34.6 − 7.4 − 6.7 − 7.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 42.0 − 5.3 − 0.0 + 6.1          Nov − 10.1 + 2.6 + 15.0 − 12.4 − 12.7 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.1 + 0.5 − 5.4 + 1.6          Dec 
+ 15.8 + 1.5 − 1.8 + 3.3 + 14.3 + 8.2 + 8.1 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.0 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 3.4 2005          Jan 
+ 29.7 + 6.7 + 1.4 + 5.3 + 23.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 22.4 − 7.1 + 1.0 + 0.0          Feb + 1.9 + 6.5 + 16.4 − 9.9 − 4.7 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 5.8 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 3.0          Mar 
+ 35.9 + 18.7 + 20.5 − 1.8 + 17.3 − 2.0 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 19.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 3.6          Apr 
+ 10.4 + 3.1 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 7.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.9 + 8.0 + 0.2 − 11.3          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003462.3 277.5 83.4 194.1 184.9 31.8 27.3 26.5 4.5 4.3 153.1 73.5 39.1 72.7 2004
447.8 273.3 80.9 192.3 174.5 28.5 24.2 23.3 4.3 4.2 146.0 72.0 39.7 68.4 2004          Aug 
454.1 279.6 84.1 195.5 174.5 28.0 23.6 23.4 4.3 4.3 146.5 71.6 39.4 69.0          Sep 
455.8 276.8 82.8 194.1 179.0 26.6 22.2 21.3 4.4 4.4 152.3 71.2 39.5 70.1          Oct 
458.7 279.8 83.1 196.7 178.9 26.3 21.9 21.0 4.4 4.3 152.6 72.5 39.0 74.2          Nov 462.3 277.5 83.4 194.1 184.9 31.8 27.3 26.5 4.5 4.3 153.1 73.5 39.1 72.7          Dec 
460.0 272.0 74.9 197.1 188.0 28.9 24.4 23.0 4.6 4.4 159.0 73.8 39.5 74.7 2005          Jan 
470.1 283.8 79.7 204.1 186.3 28.7 24.1 22.5 4.6 4.4 157.6 73.7 40.3 74.2          Feb 477.1 289.7 79.8 209.9 187.4 29.5 24.8 23.4 4.7 4.5 157.9 74.8 40.7 74.9          Mar 
479.4 292.8 80.7 212.1 186.6 28.7 23.0 21.0 5.6 5.5 157.9 72.2 40.7 72.6          Apr 
489.8 298.0 89.1 209.0 191.8 28.3 22.6 20.7 5.6 5.5 163.5 74.3 40.8 74.2          May
Changes *
− 13.8 − 10.3 + 0.3 − 10.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 6.3 − 10.3 − 1.6 − 7.2 2003+ 1.4 − 0.7 − 16.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 5.4 − 2.2 + 4.7 2004
− 8.3 − 5.2 − 2.2 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.4 2004          Aug 
+ 9.0 + 8.0 + 3.1 + 4.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.1          Sep 
+ 3.9 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.2 + 5.3 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.7 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.2          Oct 
+ 6.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 − 0.5 + 4.6          Nov + 6.6 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 7.0 + 5.5 + 5.4 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1          Dec 
− 6.7 − 8.1 − 8.4 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 2.9 − 3.0 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.4 2005          Jan 
+ 11.6 + 12.8 + 4.8 + 8.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.3          Feb + 5.0 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 4.6 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.5          Mar 
+ 1.9 + 2.9 + 0.9 + 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.8 − 2.3 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 2.6          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 1.9 + 8.4 − 6.5 + 3.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.8 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.1          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money marketsecurities. — 3Including own debt securities. — 4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
    
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995         Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996         Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997         Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998         Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2004         Dec 6,945.1 138.9 0.5 138.4 139.1 0.7 0.0
2005         Jan 6,988.4 139.8 0.5 139.3 140.0 0.8 0.0
         Feb 7,051.8 141.0 0.5 140.5 141.3 0.8 0.0         Mar 7,157.8 143.2 0.5 142.6 143.3 0.6 0.0
         Apr 7,180.2 143.6 0.5 143.1 144.0 0.9 0.0
         May  
r 7,255.5 145.1 0.5 144.6 145.5 0.9 0.0
         June 7,385.1 147.7 0.5 147.2 147.9 0.7 0.0
         July  p ... ... ... 149.2 ... ... ...
         Aug ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2004         Dec 1,864,666 37,293 210 37,084 37,436 352 20
2005         Jan 1,886,330 37,727 209 37,517 37,850 333 2
         Feb 1,870,260 37,405 209 37,196 37,467 271 0         Mar 1,896,128 37,923 209 37,713 37,981 268 6
         Apr 1,894,850 37,897 209 37,688 38,059 371 0
         May 1,914,823 38,296 209 38,088 38,463 375 2         June 1,938,803 38,776 209 38,567 38,897 330 2
         July  
p 1,969,869 39,397 208 39,190 ... ... ...
         Aug  p 1,951,162 39,023 205 38,818 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
  
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
         Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.71 2005 Jan                  1 1.21
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          to          July                  1 1.17
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
 
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2005 July                 6 389,743 307,500 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
         July               13 388,642 298,500 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
         July               20 406,178 308,500 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
         July               27 391,489 317,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.06 7
         Aug                  3 414,656 314,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.06 7
         Aug                10 432,277 308,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2005 Apr                28 47,958 30,000 − − 2.08 2.09 91
         May               26 48,282 30,000 − − 2.08 2.08 98
         June               30 47,181 30,000 − − 2.06 2.07 91
         July               28 46,758 30,000 − − 2.07 2.08 92
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2005         Jan 2.07 1.92 − 2.20 2.12 2.10 − 2.15 2.08 2.10 2.11 2.15 2.19 2.25 2.31
         Feb 2.06 1.98 − 2.11 2.12 2.10 − 2.14 2.06 2.09 2.10 2.14 2.18 2.24 2.31         Mar 2.06 1.97 − 2.15 2.12 2.10 − 2.14 2.06 2.09 2.10 2.14 2.19 2.26 2.33
         Apr 2.08 2.05 − 2.45 2.12 2.09 − 2.14 2.08 2.09 2.10 2.14 2.17 2.21 2.27
         May 2.07 1.98 − 2.12 2.11 2.09 − 2.12 2.07 2.10 2.10 2.13 2.14 2.16 2.19         June 2.07 1.70 − 2.20 2.09 2.06 − 2.12 2.06 2.10 2.10 2.11 2.11 2.10 2.10
         July 2.07 1.92 − 2.12 2.10 2.07 − 2.12 2.07 2.10 2.11 2.12 2.13 2.15 2.17
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according tocalculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to overmonth 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2004         Sep 1.90 3.22 2.12 3.97 4.82 4.58 4.90 8.06 7.13 5.85 4.45 3.99 4.52
         Oct 1.90 3.27 2.10 3.89 4.69 4.54 4.88 8.05 7.07 5.80 4.41 3.97 4.48
         Nov 1.90 3.26 2.12 3.86 4.67 4.52 4.86 7.94 6.98 5.82 4.40 3.96 4.48         Dec 1.92 3.24 2.16 3.77 4.72 4.50 4.83 7.95 7.01 5.80 4.34 3.97 4.44
2005         Jan 1.90 3.23 2.13 3.72 4.69 4.45 4.79 8.07 6.97 5.77 4.42 3.90 4.41
         Feb 1.91 3.25 2.13 3.69 4.65 4.45 4.76 8.08 7.03 5.76 4.40 3.92 4.46         Mar 1.91 3.22 2.09 3.75 4.74 4.41 4.78 8.09 6.97 5.77 4.38 3.91 4.40
         Apr 1.92 3.22 2.10 3.61 4.70 4.38 4.74 8.03 6.94 5.76 4.34 3.86 4.37
         May 1.92 3.19 2.11 3.50 4.66 4.36 4.71 8.03 6.86 5.74 4.32 3.85 4.35
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to overperiod Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2004         Sep 0.72 1.90 2.20 2.48 2.00 2.52 0.90 2.00 2.32 3.68
         Oct 0.72 1.92 2.29 2.48 2.00 2.52 0.89 2.04 2.34 3.56
         Nov 0.73 1.94 2.20 2.50 2.01 2.51 0.90 2.04 2.23 3.39         Dec 0.73 1.95 2.19 2.32 2.00 2.52 0.90 2.08 2.70 3.51
2005         Jan 0.74 1.95 2.29 2.54 1.98 2.49 0.92 2.04 2.25 3.26
         Feb 0.74 1.95 2.19 2.33 1.97 2.49 0.92 2.03 2.25 3.47         Mar 0.74 1.93 2.16 2.40 1.97 2.47 0.94 2.00 2.35 3.15
         Apr 0.74 2.01 2.09 2.32 1.95 2.45 0.95 2.01 2.23 2.92
         May 0.75 1.93 2.01 2.21 1.98 2.43 0.95 2.01 2.12 3.31
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixationfloating floating floating
over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2004         Sep 9.60 8.07 6.92 6.96 8.45 4.24 3.49 4.14 4.82 4.66 3.90 4.98 5.00
         Oct 9.53 7.87 6.80 6.87 8.34 4.18 3.50 4.12 4.77 4.64 4.08 4.87 4.92
         Nov 9.48 7.85 6.89 6.84 8.23 4.09 3.45 4.07 4.66 4.58 3.96 4.89 4.82         Dec 9.53 7.59 6.73 6.60 7.67 4.07 3.43 3.95 4.49 4.41 3.82 4.59 4.65
2005         Jan 9.61 8.01 6.97 6.81 8.32 4.07 3.44 3.97 4.43 4.45 3.96 4.64 4.62
         Feb 9.66 7.77 6.20 6.83 8.18 3.98 3.40 3.94 4.39 4.33 3.99 4.73 4.49         Mar 9.62 7.83 6.62 6.72 8.12 3.97 3.40 3.89 4.35 4.27 3.84 4.60 4.57
         Apr 9.62 7.81 6.60 6.64 8.19 3.95 3.40 3.89 4.36 4.28 3.97 4.71 4.62
         May 9.64 7.78 6.83 6.55 8.00 3.93 3.38 3.85 4.28 4.20 3.87 4.68 4.61
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2004         Sep 5.37 4.00 4.85 4.68 2.99 3.41 4.46
         Oct 5.39 4.02 4.87 4.64 2.99 3.30 4.27
         Nov 5.37 4.02 4.79 4.55 2.95 3.41 4.31         Dec 5.26 3.97 4.67 4.46 3.05 3.55 4.10
2005         Jan 5.40 3.97 4.69 4.47 3.02 3.30 4.10
         Feb 5.32 3.91 4.76 4.36 3.02 3.34 3.81         Mar 5.28 3.89 4.51 4.32 3.02 3.48 4.11
         Apr 5.22 3.88 4.51 4.34 3.00 3.54 3.99
         May 5.14 3.91 4.45 4.24 2.99 3.61 3.80
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ depositswith an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004         June 1.89 115,574 3.03 193,431 1.98 71,355 4.88 29,376
         July 1.91 113,816 3.03 193,684 1.99 72,644 4.86 29,709
         Aug 1.91 112,858 3.03 194,631 2.00 70,573 4.82 29,760         Sep 1.90 111,909 2.97 194,950 2.00 69,114 4.81 29,936
         Oct 1.91 111,286 2.96 195,397 2.01 72,291 4.74 28,853
         Nov 1.90 110,334 2.95 194,704 2.01 69,413 4.71 29,239         Dec 1.94 112,266 2.92 199,018 2.07 73,428 4.62 29,684
2005         Jan 1.94 109,623 2.91 198,936 2.05 71,982 4.61 28,809
         Feb 1.92 109,099 2.89 198,918 2.01 70,218 4.56 28,550         Mar 1.98 107,152 2.88 198,059 2.03 69,433 4.57 28,190
         Apr 1.98 106,627 2.87 198,127 2.03 71,680 4.42 23,890
         May 1.99 106,379 2.83 195,384 2.03 71,741 4.42 23,881         June 1.98 105,140 2.83 195,069 2.03 69,719 4.33 24,559
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2004         June 5.23 7,635 4.83 33,008 5.71 886,304 8.88 83,204 6.14 70,479 6.21 331,013
         July 5.24 7,577 4.77 33,072 5.69 888,736 8.80 81,277 6.10 71,134 6.21 331,665
         Aug 5.24 7,478 4.75 33,203 5.68 890,887 8.77 80,999 6.07 71,478 6.20 331,010         Sep 5.27 7,597 4.72 33,360 5.67 894,787 8.83 83,016 6.04 70,960 6.20 329,461
         Oct 5.14 7,649 4.67 33,775 5.66 895,414 8.79 80,415 5.95 71,660 6.18 330,628
         Nov 5.12 7,586 4.65 33,278 5.65 896,510 8.72 77,971 5.94 70,561 6.17 328,982         Dec 5.25 7,637 4.63 33,190 5.63 897,826 8.72 80,598 5.91 70,109 6.23 331,682
2005         Jan 5.20 7,201 4.60 32,930 5.61 896,162 8.72 79,153 5.88 69,565 6.21 330,629
         Feb 5.14 7,107 4.58 32,852 5.60 895,869 8.77 77,215 5.91 69,138 6.20 329,691         Mar 5.14 7,152 4.56 33,789 5.59 894,877 8.80 77,975 5.89 69,157 6.20 327,558
         Apr 5.07 7,116 4.58 31,177 5.56 897,746 8.70 76,047 5.86 70,598 6.19 329,222
         May 4.99 6,983 4.56 30,996 5.54 898,416 8.76 75,999 5.83 71,128 6.19 328,707         June 4.99 7,119 4.53 30,948 5.52 899,576 8.77 77,155 5.83 71,356 6.18 328,310
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004         June 4.79 176,791 4.32 90,154 5.22 488,805
         July 4.72 171,094 4.26 90,072 5.21 487,135
         Aug 4.68 170,136 4.21 90,723 5.19 487,903         Sep 4.75 171,070 4.25 89,980 5.25 485,483
         Oct 4.68 169,423 4.18 87,915 5.23 485,720
         Nov 4.61 174,233 4.14 87,256 5.20 486,256         Dec 4.64 166,976 4.15 87,044 5.19 483,878
2005         Jan 4.65 163,146 4.12 86,960 5.15 483,211
         Feb 4.69 164,658 4.09 86,165 5.14 483,024         Mar 4.66 164,367 4.06 85,401 5.12 480,353
         Apr 4.59 163,098 4.04 84,101 5.09 481,216
         May 4.61 162,342 4.06 83,456 5.07 481,891         June 4.63 164,192 4.02 83,350 5.05 478,638
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by the end of the month. — 1The effective interest rates may always be
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly definedhouseholds and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments onhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and deposits and loans but not any other related charges which may occur fornon-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarante es and
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. —
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a home improvements; including loans granted by building and loansample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for the purpose of personal
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / use in the consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these
Banking statistics / EWU-Zinsstatistik). This information is currently available statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes suc h as business,
in German only. — oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at debt consolidation, education etc. — 6 Including overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2004         June 1.13 419,073 1.88 25,696 2.46 838 2.71 1,725 2.13 505,366 2.57 85,480
         July 1.14 418,729 1.90 25,693 2.43 1,071 2.86 2,113 2.10 505,800 2.57 85,562
         Aug 1.16 416,996 1.96 24,546 2.50 701 3.12 2,459 2.11 506,415 2.56 85,491         Sep 1.17 418,189 1.89 23,981 2.50 913 2.78 2,724 2.13 506,492 2.55 85,177
         Oct 1.17 421,839 1.92 22,905 2.67 960 3.03 2,649 2.13 506,856 2.54 85,738
         Nov 1.15 434,898 1.92 23,384 2.41 856 3.04 2,839 2.16 506,807 2.54 86,549         Dec 1.17 428,606 1.90 25,470 2.39 929 2.59 2,791 2.13 515,840 2.55 87,804
2005         Jan 1.19 429,342 1.93 26,734 2.72 1,647 2.89 4,284 2.09 516,803 2.51 87,540
         Feb 1.20 434,050 1.93 22,719 2.52 1,089 2.69 1,796 2.11 517,068 2.51 88,103         Mar 1.21 436,542 1.91 24,402 2.53 958 2.76 4,236 2.06 516,937 2.49 88,481
         Apr 1.21 439,717 1.88 21,835 2.31 743 2.61 4,268 2.05 517,005 2.47 88,013
         May 1.23 442,889 1.89 22,796 2.20 1,067 2.49 1,225 2.12 516,455 2.45 87,517         June 1.22 448,210 1.89 25,647 2.72 994 2.25 1,031 2.10 515,200 2.40 86,665
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004         June 1.09 134,255 1.92 31,971 2.59 163 4.22 1,273
         July 1.08 131,254 1.95 32,273 3.10 334 4.25 2,601
         Aug 1.08 135,739 1.94 30,356 2.56 102 4.29 1,823         Sep 1.11 138,157 1.95 30,538 2.51 274 3.94 2,033
         Oct 1.13 137,992 1.97 29,266 2.56 258 4.13 1,151
         Nov 1.13 142,752 1.95 29,259 2.24 176 4.04 2,678         Dec 1.14 144,569 2.02 51,843 2.39 211 3.81 2,215
2005         Jan 1.19 140,648 2.03 39,113 2.50 181 3.50 1,526
         Feb 1.20 140,178 1.97 33,053 2.24 134 3.93 1,055         Mar 1.22 140,864 1.96 36,334 2.57 236 3.58 996
         Apr 1.24 144,016 1.97 35,595 2.35 314 3.56 907
         May 1.24 144,622 1.98 35,025 2.27 194 3.87 636         June 1.24 148,202 1.97 48,862 2.08 235 4.10 1,211
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2004         June 7.87 5.34 1,402 6.21 5,371 9.11 3,794 3.48 8,704 5.00 2,816 5.07 3,278
         July 8.02 5.25 1,492 6.34 5,020 9.27 3,792 3.64 9,119 4.90 1,908 5.15 2,018
         Aug 8.13 5.42 1,090 6.44 5,187 9.16 3,038 3.52 8,837 5.07 1,379 5.17 1,365         Sep 8.03 5.09 1,365 6.41 4,878 9.19 3,058 3.42 9,097 4.88 1,474 5.07 2,577
         Oct 7.95 4.77 1,210 6.30 4,579 9.17 2,927 3.74 7,395 4.80 1,590 4.90 1,415
         Nov 7.70 4.86 1,251 6.20 4,159 8.88 3,133 3.46 8,436 4.84 1,164 4.75 1,989         Dec 7.18 4.90 1,550 5.95 4,551 8.04 2,846 3.44 10,026 4.54 2,853 4.68 2,967
2005         Jan 7.94 4.98 1,347 6.38 4,289 9.05 2,847 3.68 9,059 4.64 1,578 4.67 2,251
         Feb 7.92 4.85 1,531 6.35 3,720 8.98 2,743 3.66 4,633 4.68 1,182 4.38 1,653         Mar 7.82 4.73 1,648 6.26 4,173 8.90 3,353 3.71 7,213 4.72 1,700 4.58 2,224
         Apr 7.84 4.90 1,405 6.15 4,809 8.94 3,627 3.70 7,385 4.79 1,415 4.61 2,157
         May 7.87 5.47 1,324 6.04 3,972 8.93 3,085 3.61 8,078 4.75 1,488 4.58 1,620         June 7.86 5.35 1,515 6.09 4,723 8.73 3,782 3.65 8,098 4.69 2,178 4.60 2,598
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees andsake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004         June 10.38 56,024 4.83 4.49 2,314 4.32 3,479 4.96 5,292 5.09 2,934
         July 10.35 54,012 4.84 4.26 3,233 4.51 3,279 4.92 5,963 5.11 2,873
         Aug 10.33 53,601 4.88 4.37 2,071 4.59 2,291 5.04 3,844 4.99 2,648         Sep 10.33 55,219 4.87 4.44 2,058 4.53 2,371 4.96 4,139 4.97 2,551
         Oct 10.26 53,107 4.78 4.30 3,091 4.48 2,343 4.89 4,077 4.88 2,730
         Nov 10.22 50,788 4.72 4.45 1,887 4.40 2,131 4.78 3,961 4.76 3,164         Dec 10.30 52,435 4.61 4.37 2,292 4.29 2,682 4.63 5,217 4.67 3,598
2005         Jan 10.32 50,978 4.55 4.37 2,467 4.20 2,321 4.56 4,631 4.62 3,507
         Feb 10.30 50,158 4.49 4.35 1,668 4.20 1,962 4.51 3,504 4.48 2,816         Mar 10.36 50,933 4.49 4.34 2,078 4.13 2,210 4.47 4,901 4.52 3,655
         Apr 10.37 48,690 4.50 4.28 2,786 4.13 2,376 4.50 5,023 4.58 3,484
         May 10.46 48,565 4.40 4.33 2,075 4.08 2,204 4.39 4,412 4.40 3,324         June 10.38 49,872 4.27 4.25 2,197 4.01 2,450 4.22 5,528 4.26 4,265
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004         June 6.23 84,291 4.54 7,185 4.98 1,268 5.19 1,509
         July 6.21 80,484 4.62 7,193 5.01 1,360 5.05 1,171
         Aug 6.25 77,547 4.42 6,177 5.08 1,030 5.00 1,098         Sep 6.25 81,220 4.51 7,522 4.92 1,207 4.97 1,216
         Oct 6.11 79,457 4.55 7,213 4.96 1,238 4.92 1,200
         Nov 5.96 80,969 4.61 6,218 4.83 1,336 4.62 1,141         Dec 6.01 76,804 4.50 6,458 4.75 1,520 4.64 2,147
2005         Jan 5.89 74,567 4.44 5,388 4.82 1,205 4.59 1,497
         Feb 5.88 78,066 4.34 5,232 4.84 1,094 4.58 1,160         Mar 5.99 74,692 4.36 7,033 4.67 1,298 4.71 1,341
         Apr 5.92 71,303 4.44 6,588 4.64 1,121 4.68 1,329
         May 5.95 71,559 4.38 6,289 4.56 1,065 4.38 1,835         June 5.97 72,936 4.41 7,080 4.50 1,346 4.43 1,308
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004         June 3.26 32,704 3.93 3,754 4.63 5,444
         July 3.27 35,348 3.91 4,012 4.89 4,475
         Aug 3.26 28,221 3.60 3,766 4.70 3,971         Sep 3.31 31,752 3.65 4,204 4.41 5,135
         Oct 3.26 30,755 3.85 3,246 4.51 4,502
         Nov 3.16 30,886 3.68 3,855 4.46 4,913         Dec 3.34 43,091 3.95 7,061 4.33 8,560
2005         Jan 3.35 34,508 3.75 4,041 4.27 4,889
         Feb 3.40 26,543 3.66 3,928 3.99 5,083         Mar 3.23 44,390 3.59 5,771 4.28 6,314
         Apr 3.12 49,798 3.76 4,657 4.28 5,827
         May 3.11 42,311 3.68 5,578 3.94 5,733         June 3.15 45,169 3.67 5,302 4.05 6,020
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
  
 
Debt securities
Sales PurchasesDomestic debt securities  
1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including opentotal Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,9151994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,1091997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,9462002 175,219 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,184 63,734 13,536 50,198 − 111,4852003 185,193 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,738 95,252 35,748 59,504 − 89,9412004 240,861 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 107,150 107,071 121,841 − 14,770 − 133,790
2005         Apr 59,440 37,818 20,815 1,314 15,689 21,622 35,679 21,100 14,579 − 23,761
         May − 896 − 6,147 1,235 2,175 − 9,557 5,251 − 1,346 − 1,967 621 − 450         June 44,309 24,791 23,869 − 4,621 5,542 19,518 8,812 7,670 1,142 − 35,497
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,932
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6781998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,728 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,193
2001 82,665 17,575 65,090 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,9172002 37,404 9,232 28,172 16,472 − 23,236 39,708 20,9322003 14,046 16,838 − 2,791 − 14,631 7,056 − 21,687 28,6782004 3,157 10,157 − 7,002 7,783 5,045 2,738 − 4,627
2005         Apr − 2,726 318 − 3,044 41,897 36,515 5,382 − 44,623
         May 3,513 217 3,296 − 33,222 − 17,558 − 15,664 36,735         June 94 702 − 608 − 34,331 − 23,504 − 10,827 34,425
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005         Mar 85,097 65,104 3,181 7,335 16,753 37,834 1,933 18,060 −
         Apr 87,422 62,426 1,574 9,116 9,914 41,823 1,107 23,890 −
         May 76,638 53,580 2,050 4,609 11,778 35,143 3,062 19,996 400         June 116,419 85,669 1,667 15,010 19,458 49,535 1,673 29,077 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005         Mar 31,316 26,765 2,126 3,720 5,619 15,300 1,300 3,251 −
         Apr 41,635 30,629 664 7,351 4,126 18,488 913 10,093 −
         May 34,771 19,220 1,473 1,593 2,609 13,545 2,272 13,278 400         June 57,114 41,201 1,055 10,085 6,736 23,326 935 14,978 −
Net sales  6 
1992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,7011994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005         Mar 16,543 17,680 1,894 − 1,255 6,818 10,224 1,737 − 2,874 − 4,134
         Apr 43,136 26,125 47 3,609 3,881 18,588 881 16,130 − 5,321
         May 3,985 5,996 573 − 2,724 697 7,450 2,095 − 4,105 − 1,013         June 31,033 26,231 − 496 1,815 4,381 20,531 − 2,178 6,980 − 5,887
*For definitions, see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to Monthly Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Report 2, Capital market statistics. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,873
1993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005         Apr 2,869,693 1,748,949 162,354 543,657 345,030 697,908 77,207 1,043,537 153,107
         May 2,873,679 1,754,945 162,927 540,933 345,727 705,358 79,302 1,039,431 152,094         June 2,904,711 1,781,176 162,431 542,748 350,108 725,889 77,124 1,046,411 146,207
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-June 2005 
981,448 655,673 61,108 215,279 115,076 264,208 21,940 303,835 38,288    less than 2
681,353 458,583 52,231 163,029 98,894 144,427 12,283 210,487 65,193 2 to less than 4
460,137 276,375 22,877 100,949 55,948 96,602 12,875 170,887 25,540 4 to less than 6
265,991 130,387 21,016 35,110 20,364 53,896 10,331 125,272 4,549 6 to less than 8
226,640 99,763 5,066 13,536 20,397 60,763 13,308 113,570 5,200 8 to less than 10
126,749 107,552 46 9,683 12,135 85,688 1,140 18,056 3,923 10 to less than 15
27,443 13,523 85 1,236 9,161 3,040 656 13,264 1,768 15 to less than 20
134,952 39,321 − 3,925 18,132 17,264 4,591 91,041 1,747 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 364,548
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 533,9201994o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 519,280
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 553,110
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 723,077
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 1,040,7691998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005         Apr 164,479 92 212 120 13 9 − 1 − 173 − 88 879,633
         May 164,566 87 66 167 16 12 3 − 75 − 102 916,865         June 164,702 136 186 72 64 1 − 134 167 − 221 943,114
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — oFrom January was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose shares are traded
1994, including the shares of east German companies (resultant increase in on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of theshare circulation: DM7,771 million). — 1Including shares issued out of Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse
company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on the Official Mar- AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
ket, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock market segment
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/eurobonds With a 
residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German German
more than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.05
1993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005         Apr 3.2 3.3 3.3 3.5 3.1 3.6 3.9 3.3 121.89 101.36 261.90 4,184.84
         May 3.1 3.1 3.1 3.3 3.0 3.5 3.8 3.2 122.43 102.18 277.14 4,460.63         June 2.9 2.9 2.9 3.1 2.8 3.3 3.6 3.0 123.30 103.01 286.15 4,586.28
         July 2.9 3.0 3.0 3.2 2.8 3.3 3.5 3.0 122.52 102.14 304.73 4,886.50
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweightedtible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1992 81,514 20,474 − 3,102 − − 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,0011994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,3181997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 48,016 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 4,073 49,860 − 2,658 734 52,518 3,339 − 1,8442004 13,404 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 11,951 8,340 8,446 3,796 − 106 8,155 5,064
2005         Apr 4,221 2,377 1,463 1,037 147 − 60 914 1,844 3,417 1,485 − 259 1,932 2,103 804
         May 3,475 1,298 135 − 537 641 − 61 1,163 2,177 3,686 1,343 471 2,343 1,706 − 211         June 9,692 5,714 1,635 108 1,179 291 4,079 3,978 9,460 1,261 1,060 8,199 2,918 232
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
    
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
operat- Fixed Compen-
of ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex- sation
which pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend- of em-
Period Total Taxes Total  3 ployees iture grants Interest tion aid  4 Balance venue  5 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 − 12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 − 14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.11997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 − 94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 − 91.71998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 − 56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 − 53.41999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 − 26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 − 23.4
2000  
p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  6,p 554.0 446.2 598.2 169.9 69.8 212.5 66.6 40.1 39.2 − 44.2 445.1 449.1 − 4.0 921.9 970.1 − 48.2
2002  pe 550.7 441.7 607.8 173.3 69.5 225.7 66.1 38.7 33.5 − 57.0 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 923.7 989.1 − 65.4
2003  pe 547.5 442.2 615.0 174.0 68.8 236.2 65.7 36.3 34.8 − 67.5 467.8 474.4 − 6.6 925.9 1,000.0 − 74.1
2004  pe 543.7 443.0 610.1 173.5 68.5 237.9 64.8 34.4 29.9 − 66.4 470.1 468.7 + 1.4 925.1 990.1 − 65.0
2003         Q1 117.2 96.3 154.5 40.9 15.6 61.8 23.6 5.6 6.5 − 37.3 116.3 116.8 − 0.5 207.7 245.5 − 37.8
         Q2 135.8 108.9 143.8 40.9 15.5 61.3 10.8 7.5 7.5 − 8.0 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 228.2 239.1 − 10.9         Q3 131.2 109.6 155.8 42.4 16.6 58.5 21.6 9.2 7.4 − 24.6 115.1 117.8 − 2.7 225.0 252.3 − 27.4         Q4  
p 161.8 127.4 159.8 48.1 20.5 55.2 9.5 12.9 13.7 + 2.0 119.0 120.4 − 1.5 262.2 261.7 + 0.5
2004         Q1  p 116.0 97.0 157.9 41.7 15.4 62.8 25.3 5.4 6.3 − 41.9 116.4 116.8 − 0.4 206.0 248.3 − 42.3
         Q2  p 133.2 112.8 141.8 41.3 15.7 59.6 10.0 6.8 6.4 − 8.6 115.8 116.4 − 0.6 226.2 235.5 − 9.2
         Q3  p 133.5 107.9 152.7 41.9 16.1 57.5 20.4 8.5 6.9 − 19.2 114.0 116.0 − 2.1 226.5 247.7 − 21.2
         Q4  p 159.8 125.3 157.1 46.8 20.8 56.1 8.7 12.6 10.1 + 2.7 121.6 118.7 + 2.9 263.7 258.1 + 5.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly f igures
Office. — *The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed for some insurance sectors are estimated. — 3Including discrepancies in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the clearing transactions between central, state and local government. —quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — 4Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the interests. — 5Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly Federal Labour Office. — 6Owing to modifications of the system of
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between other operatin g
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, expenditure and current grants. see footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. — 2The annual figures differ from the sum of
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  p 240.6 261.3 184.6 207.1 50.4 52.6 119.5 123.2 24.8 25.2
2002  pe 238.9 271.6 183.5 207.5 48.0 53.3 119.9 124.5 25.1 25.3
2003  pe 239.6 278.8 182.9 208.8 49.1 53.5 117.1 125.0 24.7 25.5
2004  pe 233.8 273.6 186.4 207.8 48.4 52.1 120.8 124.7 25.0 25.1
2003         Q1 46.6 71.9 42.2 51.1 9.7 12.6 25.2 29.4 5.3 5.6
         Q2 59.1 64.6 44.4 50.2 12.0 12.0 26.7 29.1 5.6 5.8         Q3 57.6 74.5 45.3 50.5 12.2 13.1 29.3 30.6 6.1 6.3         Q4  
p 76.3 67.8 50.5 56.5 14.7 15.6 35.6 35.3 7.6 7.6
2004         Q1  p 44.8 73.4 42.4 51.5 11.1 12.8 25.8 29.7 5.4 5.5
         Q2  p 56.4 62.3 46.5 51.2 11.3 11.5 28.8 29.0 5.7 5.8
         Q3  p 58.3 71.2 45.1 50.5 12.5 12.5 29.9 30.5 6.2 6.2
         Q4  p 74.4 66.7 51.8 54.1 13.1 15.0 35.9 34.9 7.6 7.5
2005         Q1  p 46.0 74.9 45.8 52.9 10.8 12.5 ... ... ... ...
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. — *See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. — 1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do notDM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. — 4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
    
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Item 1997 1998 1999 2000  1 2001 2002 2003 2004  pe 
Revenue 1,731.7 1,779.3 945.0 967.0 952.3 955.7 963.3 958.1
of which
Taxes 857.2 897.3 490.5 511.7 488.3 486.0 489.8 488.0Social contributions 720.2 727.8 375.4 378.4 383.6 389.2 394.8 396.5
Expenditure 1,830.7 1,862.9 974.3 990.7 1,011.0 1,033.1 1,044.8 1,038.2
of which
Intermediate consumption 150.6 154.3 83.5 82.4 85.2 89.2 88.4 89.4Compensation of employees 319.4 319.8 165.6 166.1 165.9 168.2 168.2 166.6Interest 126.7 129.0 63.2 65.1 64.5 62.6 63.8 63.5Social benefits  
2 984.7 998.4 523.1 532.7 549.2 573.1 587.1 588.5
Gross capital formation 69.0 69.4 37.6 36.8 36.8 35.8 31.9 30.5
Net lending/net borrowing − 99.0 − 83.6 − 29.3 − 23.7 − 58.7 − 77.5 − 81.4 − 80.1
as a percentage of GDP  3 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.7 − 3.8 − 3.7
Memo item
Debt as defined in theMaastricht Treaty 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.5 1,283.6 1,366.4 1,437.2
as a percentage of GDP  
3 60.6 60.6 61.2 59.9 59.1 60.6 64.0 66.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In European budgetary surveillance procedure, GDP excluding financial
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include intermediation services indirectly measured (FISIM) is still being used as the
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share basis for calculating the deficit and debt ratios for the current year.in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. — 1Adjusted for proceeds from the sale Accordingly, the ratios listed here are therefore higher than those
of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office record such calculated based on April 2005 GDP figures published by the Federalproceeds (
€50.85 billion) under "net increase in non-produced assets", with Statistical Office (deficit ratio: up to 0.1 percentage point higher, debt ratio:
the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus ( €22.8 billion up to 1 percentage point higher). 
or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. — 2Including social benefits in kind. — 3In the
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
    
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 581993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 7141997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 1171998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 122002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 512003 442,235 390,437 214,002 155,510 . 20,925 51,671 4,751 + 1272004 442,966 386,459 208,920 157,899 . 19,641 56,365 5,243 + 142
2005         Q1 ... 85,690 42,005 35,976 . 7,708 ... ... ...
         Q2 ... 96,535 52,716 39,438 . 4,381 ... ... ...
2005         Feb . 29,621 16,459 11,726 . 1,436 . . .
         Mar . 29,529 16,275 11,681 . 1,573 . . .
         Apr . 27,255 15,040 10,963 . 1,253 . . .
         May . 31,333 16,961 12,805 . 1,566 . . .         June . 37,947 20,715 15,671 . 1,562 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Including receipts from the 1988. — 4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  — 2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. — 5Difference between the local government’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period inremitted to state government. — 3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
    
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Local
govern-
As- Invest- Central State ment Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,1702002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,8462003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,4092004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005         Q1 90,403 34,325 27,867 − 3,761 4,416 5,804 34,909 28,031 6,878 222 15,206 5,005 736 4,713
         Q2 102,224 40,747 29,030 3,359 2,715 5,643 33,009 25,180 7,829 1,454 20,556 5,673 786 5,689
2005         Feb 31,229 9,713 9,123 − 677 4 1,263 13,082 10,798 2,284 141 6,474 1,576 243 1,608
         Mar 30,671 11,969 8,689 − 2,792 4,595 1,477 9,884 7,580 2,304 14 6,814 1,724 266 1,142
         Apr 28,803 9,432 9,485 − 924 − 810 1,681 9,902 7,434 2,468 987 6,503 1,706 272 1,547
         May 32,980 11,304 9,777 − 779 − 440 2,747 12,070 9,108 2,962 462 6,765 2,121 259 1,648         June 40,441 20,011 9,769 5,062 3,965 1,216 11,037 8,638 2,399 5 7,288 1,846 255 2,494
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table the statutory pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, to local government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to ce ntral
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% wascentral and state government), the real property taxes and other local allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; sincegovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2From 2002 49.6% has been allocated to central government and 50.4% to state
1980, the revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax has been government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedallocated to central, state and local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15, central government share. — 6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
and revenue from corporation tax and investment income tax has been and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beenallocated to central and state government in the ratio of 50:50. — 3From affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —
1996, after deducting child benefit. — 4From February 1993, including 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
revenue from the withholding tax on interest income, in which local government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. — 8For the breakdown, see
government has a share of 12%. — 5In 1998, 3.64% and from 1999, 5.63% Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
was allocated to central government to finance the supplementary grant to
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
    
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness tax  2 taxes taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 6962003 43,188 14,094 2,204 8,870 6,531 11,722 7,336 230 3,373 786 6,989 24,146 9,658 6712004 41,782 13,630 2,195 8,750 6,597 11,601 7,740 80 4,284 788 6,883 28,373 9,939 797
2005         Q1 4,407 2,499 335 3,854 1,200 2,912 2,149 6 905 168 1,777 ... ... ...
         Q2 9,916 3,610 562 1,627 2,010 2,832 2,342 80 1,413 202 1,635 ... ... ...
2005         Feb 1,460 1,099 83 2,882 198 752 612 12 236 52 665 . . .
         Mar 3,169 1,066 222 523 515 1,320 805 2 301 51 566 . . .
         Apr 3,156 1,246 207 504 679 712 787 7 288 62 561 . . .
         May 3,447 1,220 165 637 468 828 776 5 744 67 529 . . .         June 3,313 1,143 191 486 863 1,292 779 68 381 73 545 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. — 2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
    
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
General government
1999 1,199,975 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 105
2000 1,211,439 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 1082002 1,277,630 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 29 7,845 972003 1,358,121 36,022 246,414 153,616 12,810 471,129 396,832 341 34,163 − 1 6,711 86
2004         Mar 1,403,438 37,209 260,445 159,735 11,245 485,920 400,897 371 40,863 − 45 6,711 88
         June 1,411,658 37,307 269,972 162,642 10,590 488,668 391,296 371 44,057 − 45 6,711 88         Sep 1,429,216 37,494 276,918 166,711 10,568 494,621 390,436 413 46,434 − 38 5,572 87         Dec 1,430,413 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,418 379,984 430 53,672 − 38 5,572 82
Central government 7,8,9 
1999 714,069 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2004         Mar 802,690 36,463 88,901 150,050 11,245 450,711 49,888 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
         June 803,991 35,630 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88         Sep 814,356 35,866 95,200 157,026 10,568 459,482 39,864 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86         Dec 812,083 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 81
2005         Mar 870,368 36,393 102,959 162,592 11,037 495,478 45,119 373 10,798 − 36 5,572 83
         June 874,015 36,021 105,227 170,338 11,180 495,879 38,778 408 10,562 − 36 5,572 86
State government (western)
1999 274,208 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 12000 282,431 − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 12001 305,788 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 12002 328,390 250 97,556 . . . 217,333 5 13,246 . . 12003 355,661 472 125,356 . . . 207,880 4 21,949 . . 1
2004         Mar 363,202 222 136,105 . . . 200,366 4 26,504 . . 1
         June 368,240 900 141,270 . . . 197,032 4 29,033 . . 1         Sep 374,415 900 145,136 . . . 198,760 0 29,618 . . 1         Dec 376,697 750 148,219 . . . 193,216 3 34,508 . . 1
2005         Mar 
p 382,341 250 154,965 . . . 190,360 3 36,762 . . 1
State government (eastern)
1999 53,200 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000 55,712 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .2001 58,771 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .2002 63,782 338 23,838 . . . 37,739 − 1,867 . . .2003 68,076 315 28,833 . . . 37,022 − 1,906 . . .
2004         Mar 69,661 524 30,752 . . . 35,314 27 3,044 . . .
         June 71,252 777 31,897 . . . 35,530 27 3,021 . . .         Sep 71,512 729 31,967 . . . 35,295 27 3,495 . . .         Dec 71,975 533 31,400 . . . 35,428 − 4,614 . . .
2005         Mar 
p 73,190 846 32,251 . . . 35,866 − 4,227 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont’d)
    
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Local government (western) 10 
1999 81,511 . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .
2000 81,414 . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .2002 84,097 . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .2003 90,906 . 77 . . 603 87,868 19 2,339 . . .
2004         Mar 92,400 . 77 . . 732 89,231 20 2,340 . . .
         June 93,250 . 77 . . 707 90,106 20 2,340 . . .         Sep 93,800 . 77 . . 656 90,707 20 2,340 . . .         Dec 95,057 . − . . 552 91,317 13 3,174 . . .
Local government (eastern) 10 
1999 20,726 . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .
2000 17,048 . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .2002 16,745 . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .2003 16,951 . − . . 131 16,601 87 132 . . .
2004         Mar 16,900 . − . . 131 16,549 90 130 . . .
         June 16,900 . − . . 131 16,549 90 130 . . .         Sep 17,000 . − . . 131 16,649 90 130 . . .         Dec 17,353 . − . . 131 16,914 73 235 . . .
ERP Special Fund 7 
1999 16,028 . . − . 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000 18,386 . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .2001 19,161 . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .2002 19,400 . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .2003 19,261 . . 51 . 10,169 8,522 8 512 . . .
2004         Mar 18,576 . . 51 . 10,169 7,960 8 389 . . .
         June 18,525 . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .         Sep 18,525 . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .         Dec 18,200 . . 51 . 10,169 7,584 8 389 . . .
2005         Mar 18,098 . . 51 . 10,169 7,482 8 389 . . .
         June 17,270 . . 51 . 10,169 6,812 − 238 . . .
Indemnification Fund 
1999 132 .... 1 3 2 ......
2000 204 .... 2 0 4 ......
2001 285 .... 2 8 5 ......
2002 369 .... 3 6 9 ......
2003 469 .... 4 6 9 ......
2004         Mar 391 .... 3 9 1 ......
         June 396 .... 3 9 6 ......
         Sep 398 .... 3 9 8 ......
         Dec 400 .... 4 0 0 ......
2005         Mar 302 .... 3 0 2 ......
German Unity Fund 7,9 
1999 40,102 − 275 500 . 28,846 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000 40,425 − 275 2,634 . 29,593 7,790 − 133 . . .2001 39,638 − 3,748 10,134 . 21,292 4,315 − 149 . . .2002 39,441 − 3,820 10,134 . 22,315 3,146 − 26 . . .2003 39,099 − 4,610 10,134 . 23,563 793 − − . . .
2004         Mar 39,620 . 4,610 9,634 . 23,787 1,589 − − . . .
         June 39,103 . 4,538 9,634 . 23,787 1,144 − − . . .         Sep 39,210 . 4,538 9,634 . 23,787 1,251 − − . . .         Dec 38,650 . 4,538 9,634 . 23,787 690 − − . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Predominantly Treasury joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
discount paper (Bubills). — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
securities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term ratios. — 8On 1 July 1999 central government assumed joint responsibility
paper. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes. Including loans raised for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal
abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from supplementary Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal.public pension funds and liabilities arising from the investment assistance As from July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded under centr al
levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabilities government. — 9On 1 January 2005 central government assumed joint
arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and responsibility for the debts of the German Unity Fund. As from January, thefrom housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of aforementioned special fund is recorded under central government. —the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to their home country. — 10Data other than year-end figures have been estimated. Including debt of
6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the municipal special purpose associations. 
London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
    
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2003 20042003 2004 Total 1st hf Q3 Q4 Total 1st hf Q3 Q4
Item
€ million
Borrowers
Central government  2 767,697 812,083 + 42,292 + 24,515 + 16,293 + 1,484 + 44,386 + 36,294 + 10,365 − 2,273
German Unity Fund 39,099 38,650 − 342 + 85 + 131 − 558 − 450 + 4 + 107 − 561
ERP Special Fund 19,261 18,200 − 139 − 1 − − 138 − 1,061 − 736 − − 325Indemnification Fund 469 400 + 100 + 47 + 26 + 27 − 69 − 73 + 1 + 2
State government (western) 355,661 376,697 + 27,271 + 17,000 + 2,616 + 7,655 + 21,036 + 12,579 + 6,175 + 2,282
State government (eastern) 68,076 71,975 + 4,294 + 3,128 − 315 + 1,481 + 3,899 + 3,176 + 260 + 462Local government (western)  
3 90,906 95,057 + 7,439 + 3,742 + 1,154 + 2,543 + 4,805 + 3,075 + 491 + 1,239
Local government (eastern)  3 16,951 17,353 + 249 + 17 + 111 + 121 + 373 − 26 + 110 + 289
Total 1,358,121 1,430,413 + 81,164 + 48,533 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 72,917 + 54,293 + 17,509 + 1,115
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 36,022 35,722 + 5,207 + 350 + 2,258 + 2,598 − 299 + 1,286 + 187 − 1,772 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 246,414 279,796 + 42,463 + 28,422 + 5,075 + 8,965 + 33,382 + 23,558 + 6,946 + 2,878
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 153,616 168,958 + 15,947 + 12,958 − 3,898 + 6,887 + 15,342 + 9,026 + 4,070 + 2,246
Federal savings notes 12,810 10,817 − 5,088 − 3,614 − 530 − 944 − 1,993 − 2,220 − 22 + 249Bonds  
5 471,129 495,418 + 14,829 + 6,339 + 6,481 + 2,008 + 24,289 + 17,540 + 5,953 + 796
Direct lending by
credit institutions  6 396,832 379,984 − 6,541 − 2,499 + 4,977 − 9,019 − 16,223 − 4,780 − 910 − 10,534
Loans from social security funds 341 430 + 204 − 1 + 181 + 24 + 89 + 31 + 42 + 17Other loans  
6 34,122 53,632 + 15,319 + 6,616 + 6,611 + 2,092 + 19,509 + 9,894 + 2,377 + 7,238
Old debt  7 85 44 − 41 − 39 − 3 + 0 − 41 − 42 + 6 − 4
Equalisation claims 6,711 5,572 − 1,134 + 0 − 1,139 + 5 − 1,138 − − 1,139 + 1Investment assistance levy 41 41 − 0 + 0 − 0 + 0 − − − −
Total 1,358,121 1,430,413 + 81,164 + 48,533 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 72,917 + 54,293 + 17,509 + 1,115
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 − − −−−−−−
Credit institutions 524,800 542,600 − 7,127 + 4,351 + 2,215 − 13,693 + 18,637 + 29,856 + 3,451 − 14,670
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 341 430 + 204 − 1 + 181 + 24 + 89 + 31 + 42 + 17
Other  8 289,840 301,343 + 61,187 + 12,382 + 17,919 + 30,885 + 11,291 + 11,106 − 4,584 + 4,768
Foreign creditors  pe 538,700 581,600 + 26,900 + 31,800 − 300 − 4,600 + 42,900 + 13,300 + 18,600 + 11,000
Total 1,358,121 1,430,413 + 81,164 + 48,533 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 72,917 + 54,293 + 17,509 + 1,115
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. — 6Including loans raised abroad. — 7Old liabilities arising
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Net borrowing differs from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer of construction of the former GDR’s armed forces and from housingdebts. — 2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt inassociations. — 4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. — 8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 5Excluding issuers’ holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers’ notes
    
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 − − −2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 − − −2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 − − −2002 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 − − −
2003 Dec 399,304 38,410 793 9,042 260,046 91,013 − − −2004 Mar 396,842 38,307 793 8,357 258,808 90,578 − − −
June 397,237 37,827 690 8,305 259,854 90,560 − − −Sep 399,706 38,664 690 8,305 261,515 90,531 − − −Dec 399,251 36,791 690 7,981 262,070 91,719 − − −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. — 1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. — 2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
    
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Schätze)  2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 852004 812,083 34,440 1,074 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 81
2004         July 821,291 35,744 1,111 97,599 153,362 10,439 461,338 47,829 223 9,144 − 45 5,572 88
         Aug 824,560 35,362 1,104 98,350 155,852 10,558 468,445 41,013 223 9,144 − 45 5,572 87         Sep 814,356 35,866 1,091 95,200 157,026 10,568 459,482 39,864 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86
         Oct 827,013 35,341 1,087 102,894 161,759 10,570 460,206 39,892 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86
         Nov 820,571 34,819 1,085 104,060 160,102 10,731 460,112 34,399 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 83         Dec 812,083 34,440 1,074 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 81
2005         Jan  
10 874,505 34,968 1,090 106,345 169,269 10,895 490,938 45,389 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
         Feb 876,329 34,936 1,099 107,310 162,504 10,951 495,304 48,593 363 10,751 − 38 5,572 83         Mar 870,368 36,393 1,113 102,959 162,592 11,037 495,478 45,119 373 10,798 − 36 5,572 83
         Apr 878,471 36,543 1,122 109,471 168,826 11,067 496,610 39,139 398 10,798 − 36 5,572 84
         May 875,543 36,089 1,121 110,280 166,045 11,119 492,031 43,152 408 10,798 − 36 5,572 85         June 874,015 36,021 1,111 105,227 170,338 11,180 495,879 38,778 408 10,562 − 36 5,572 86
         July
p 889,758 36,125 1,087 110,360 171,152 11,162 506,391 39,106 408 10,562 − 36 4,442 86
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including Germany to their home country. — 8Commutation and compensation debt
cash bills. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. — and old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency. — 9On 1 July 1999
3Including loans raised abroad. — 4Including money market loans. — central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and
employees. — 6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. — 10On 1 January
levy. — 7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
former GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection German Unity Fund. with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern
11 Central government borrowing in the market
    
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 9402001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,4952002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 − 10,155 + 2,221 + 222003 + 227,078 + 42,292 + 62,535 + 13,636 + 42,327 + 15,947 + 109,500 + 8,874 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,2182004 + 228,122 + 44,389 + 52,701 + 24,185 + 35,589 + 15,842 + 130,801 + 5,313 + 7,186 − 1,620 + 1,844 + 802
2004         Jan-July + 150,491 + 53,594 + 38,396 + 25,144 + 18,760 + 9,931 + 77,023 + 8,198 + 4,568 − 244 + 11,745 + 9,645
2005         Jan-July
p + 143,198 + 39,021 + 38,554 + 22,225 + 15,210 + 2,246 + 78,581 + 12,213 + 1,318 − 6,073 + 9,536 + 11,008
2004         July + 30,551 + 17,300 + 12,942 + 7,859 + 405 + 405 + 11,629 + 5,371 + 1,111 + 340 + 4,464 + 7,072
         Aug + 14,595 + 3,269 + 7,108 + 7,108 + 7,463 + 2,490 + 6,575 + 489 + 335 + 70 − 6,886 + 2,285         Sep + 18,757 − 10,204 + 1,200 − 8,964 + 1,175 + 1,175 + 15,619 − 2,637 + 977 + 428 − 213 − 11,104
         Oct + 20,064 + 12,657 + 724 + 724 + 4,733 + 4,733 + 13,443 + 7,172 + 303 − 834 + 861 + 8,203
         Nov + 11,485 − 6,442 + 5,004 − 94 + 4,289 − 1,657 + 6,808 + 804 + 640 − 237 − 5,256 − 8,455         Dec + 12,730 − 8,485 + 269 + 268 − 830 − 830 + 11,333 − 8,714 + 365 − 803 + 1,593 + 226
2005         Jan + 37,004 + 23,768 + 13,043 + 6,772 + 362 + 362 + 12,951 + 6,774 + 285 − 502 + 10,362 + 4,588
         Feb + 14,998 + 1,824 + 4,366 + 4,366 + 213 − 6,765 + 7,107 + 990 + 177 + 100 + 3,134 − 1,756         Mar + 13,233 − 5,961 + 174 + 174 + 89 + 89 + 15,149 − 2,809 + 224 − 1,014 − 2,404 − 7,798
         Apr + 16,692 + 8,103 + 1,132 + 1,131 + 6,233 + 6,233 + 12,766 + 6,693 + 95 − 2,422 − 3,533 + 5,598
         May + 20,117 − 2,928 + 5,478 − 4,579 + 3,205 − 2,780 + 6,442 + 406 + 250 − 718 + 4,742 − 4,800         June + 17,505 − 1,528 + 3,848 + 3,848 + 4,292 + 4,292 + 12,895 − 5,059 + 50 − 1,031 − 3,579 + 694
         July
p + 23,649 + 15,744 + 10,513 + 10,513 + 815 + 815 + 11,271 + 5,219 + 236 − 487 + 814 + 14,482
1After deduction of repurchases. — 2Federal Treasury notes (Schätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the German
pension insurance fund *
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Germany
1993 290,393 232,408 52,671 298,065 252,920 15,898 − 7,672 39,786 29,957 8,499 1,100 229 6,297
1994 322,335 256,662 61,891 324,323 273,880 17,751 − 1,988 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,8901995 338,185 270,294 64,387 348,115 294,034 20,285 − 9,930 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,8001996  
8 353,672 282,616 68,388 362,667 305,780 21,660 − 8,995 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 374,853 297,402 74,961 372,955 316,511 23,280 + 1,898 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 389,101 297,827 88,755 385,707 327,823 24,393 + 3,394 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,5731999 208,173 152,206 54,628 203,295 172,919 12,950 + 4,878 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,9042000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,8782003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,8622004  
9,p 231,199 156,524 71,304 232,602 198,838 14,228 − 1,403 5,171 4,984 19 41 127 4,904
2004         Q1 55,431 37,289 17,846 58,350 49,858 3,873 − 2,919 5,879 3,375 696 1,681 127 4,862
         Q2 56,665 38,446 17,873 57,794 49,437 3,416 − 1,129 3,752 1,914 28 1,682 128 4,877         Q3 56,766 38,664 17,779 58,107 49,719 3,456 − 1,341 2,561 731 22 1,681 127 4,889         Q4  
9 62,336 42,126 17,807 58,350 49,824 3,484 + 3,986 5,171 4,984 19 41 127 4,904
2005         Q1 55,160 36,897 17,996 58,001 50,031 3,390 − 2,841 2,607 2,432 16 41 118 4,827
         Q2 56,873 38,647 17,911 58,286 49,929 3,413 − 1,413 1,195 1,019 16 42 118 4,874
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of Social Security Code V have been deducted from pension payments. —
German Pension Insurance Funds. — *Excluding German pension insurance 4From 1995, including long-term care insurance for pensioners. — 5Largely
for the mining, railroad and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. —
not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security funds;
provisional. From 1993, including financial compensation payments. including participating interests. — 8Excluding income arising from the
Excluding investment spending and proceeds. — 2Including contributions revaluation of participating interests. — 9Revenue includes proceeds from
for recipients of government cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension the disposal of equity interests. 
insurance funds to health insurance institutions under section 50 of the
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Employment Agency
    
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
Promo- loans
Unemployment support  4,5 Job promotion  5,6 tion of from
winter central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction Balance ment
Germany
1993 85,109 79,895 1,829 109,536 48,005 34,149 13,856 36,891 15,895 20,996 1,919 − 24,426 24,419
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 − 10,205 10,1421995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 − 6,892 6,8871996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 − 13,763 13,7561997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 − 9,574 9,5741998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 − 7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 − 3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 8672001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 − 1,931 1,9312002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 − 5,623 5,6232003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 272 − 6,215 6,2152004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 217 − 4,176 4,175
2004         Q1 11,524 11,261 47 14,448 8,200 6,001 2,199 4,389 2,491 1,898 144 − 2,924 5,244
         Q2 12,042 11,419 394 13,949 7,782 5,673 2,109 4,268 2,510 1,758 67 − 1,907 1,946         Q3 12,516 11,709 481 12,818 7,044 5,189 1,855 3,919 2,309 1,610 4 − 303 166         Q4 14,233 12,821 753 13,275 6,721 4,958 1,762 4,267 2,522 1,745 3 + 958 − 3,181
2005         Q1 11,934 11,072 40 14,775 7,983 5,805 2,178 3,332 2,083 1,249 139 − 2,842 5,532
         Q2 13,283 11,449 324 13,697 7,394 5,376 2,018 3,062 1,956 1,105 97 − 414 223
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government the January contributions to the statutory pension insurance scheme for
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- recipients of wage substitutes are paid in January instead of in
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a December. — 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up,
compensatory amount to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit, rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service
short-time working benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory Agencies (PSAs), compensation top-up payments and business start-up
health insurance funds and statutory pension insurance sheme. From 2003, grants. 
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
  2003   2004   2005
  2002   2003   2004   2002   2003   2004   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector(excluding construction) 99.8 99.9 104.1 − 1.3 0.0 4.3 − 1.0 0.3 3.3 6.1 4.4 3.4 0.6Construction 90.6 86.2 83.8 − 4.3 − 4.9 − 2.7 − 3.0 − 3.4 0.4 − 2.0 − 5.2 − 3.6 − 12.9Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 101.7 100.9 102.5 0.0 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 1.7 1.9 0.9 1.6 0.7
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 105.1 106.3 108.8 1.5 1.2 2.4 1.4 0.9 2.0 3.1 1.9 2.5 1.7
Public and private services  3 103.3 103.8 104.1 2.8 0.5 0.3 0.1 2.6 0.5 0.4 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.1
Gross value added 101.9 102.0 104.0 0.4 0.1 2.0 0.0 0.6 1.8 2.8 1.5 1.8 0.3Gross domestic product  
4 101.4 101.4 102.9 0.2 0.0 1.6 − 0.4 0.4 1.8 1.9 1.2 1.3 0.0
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 101.4 101.7 101.6 − 0.4 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 0.5 − 0.8
Government consumption 102.6 102.1 101.4 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.5 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.9 0.4Machinery and equipment 89.1 88.9 91.0 − 7.5 − 0.2 2.3 − 0.3 1.4 − 2.6 2.0 4.9 4.2 3.9Premises 89.8 86.8 84.6 − 5.8 − 3.3 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 0.6 0.6 − 2.2 − 4.6 − 3.5 − 10.7Other investment  
6 107.7 111.5 112.7 1.4 3.6 1.0 3.5 4.3 1.7 1.6 1.3 − 0.4 2.6
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . − 0.6 0.9 0.8 − 0.1 0.9 0.3 0.2 2.1 0.5 0.0
Domestic use 97.7 98.4 98.9 − 1.8 0.7 0.5 − 0.5 1.2 0.2 − 0.6 1.7 0.7 − 1.1
Net exports  8 . . . 1.9 − 0.7 1.1 0.1 − 0.8 1.6 2.4 − 0.5 0.6 1.0
Exports 111.2 113.2 123.4 4.6 1.8 9.0 2.0 1.4 7.1 13.3 6.6 8.9 4.6Imports 100.2 104.5 111.5 − 1.0 4.2 6.7 1.9 4.0 2.8 7.1 8.9 8.0 2.3
Gross domestic product  
4 101.4 101.4 102.9 0.2 0.0 1.6 − 0.4 0.4 1.8 1.9 1.2 1.3 0.0
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,266.7 1,286.3 1,304.2 0.7 1.5 1.4 1.2 1.1 1.2 1.0 1.2 2.1 0.5
Government consumption 411.8 414.6 412.9 2.9 0.7 − 0.4 2.3 − 0.9 0.0 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.6 0.6Machinery and equipment 151.9 146.9 148.4 − 9.3 − 3.2 1.0 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 3.9 0.2 3.6 3.5 1.8Premises 216.5 209.2 206.3 − 6.1 − 3.4 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 0.5 0.8 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 8.9Other investment  
6 24.6 24.6 24.7 − 1.4 0.0 0.8 0.7 0.2 0.3 0.7 1.1 0.9 1.8
Changes in inventories  7 − 18.8 − 3.4 1.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,052.6 2,078.2 2,098.4 − 0.9 1.2 1.0 0.6 1.4 0.2 0.1 1.9 1.6 − 0.0
Net exports 96.2 86.6 108.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 767.3 768.8 838.6 4.4 0.2 9.1 0.2 − 0.8 6.1 13.3 7.2 9.8 5.0Imports 671.1 682.2 729.7 − 3.2 1.6 7.0 − 0.7 0.7 − 0.3 6.7 10.4 11.0 4.4
Gross domestic product  
4 2,148.8 2,164.9 2,207.2 1.7 0.7 2.0 0.9 0.8 2.5 2.7 1.2 1.6 0.5
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 102.9 104.2 105.8 1.2 1.2 1.5 1.3 1.3 1.0 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.3Gross domestic product 102.8 103.6 104.0 1.5 0.7 0.4 1.2 0.3 0.7 0.8 − 0.1 0.2 0.4Terms of trade 101.9 102.9 102.8 2.0 1.0 − 0.1 0.8 0.9 2.1 0.3 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 1.7
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,129.3 1,131.8 1,134.3 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.3 − 0.2 0.6 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 452.0 469.0 501.8 3.1 3.8 7.0 5.0 5.6 6.3 14.1 2.4 5.8 4.8
National income 1,581.4 1,600.9 1,636.1 1.4 1.2 2.2 1.7 1.2 2.4 4.6 0.6 1.4 1.3
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,123.1 2,150.3 2,196.7 1.6 1.3 2.2 0.9 1.4 2.4 3.5 1.2 1.7 1.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2005. — 1Includ- ucts). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangi-
ing communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- ble fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment,
ties, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home services. — literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net increase
4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on prod- in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailerssector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-
Period total tion  
2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
2000 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9
2001 99.5 92.5 97.3 100.4 99.4 102.3 100.4 98.8 98.0 101.1 102.1 104.02002 98.3 89.0 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.42003 98.4 85.1 99.8 99.5 99.5 101.9 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.62004 100.8 80.4 102.6 102.5 103.4 105.7 87.4 97.9 104.5 103.7 101.2 111.9
 
2003         Oct 105.1 99.3 102.2 106.0 106.9 106.3 97.9 105.2 104.0 107.2 98.2 112.4
         Nov 106.4 93.2 104.6 107.8 105.3 113.8 100.1 103.1 101.4 103.3 105.8 125.0         Dec 95.0 67.1 107.0 96.2 87.1 108.8 82.9 94.2 92.7 83.0 117.8 97.5
2004         Jan 92.0 49.3 116.2 93.3 96.6 90.6 83.4 93.6 101.9 104.6 82.5 97.4
         Feb 94.1 56.7 106.4 96.2 98.7 96.9 86.5 92.0 101.6 103.1 87.7 110.1         Mar 105.1 76.2 110.2 107.2 107.9 111.7 96.0 99.5 107.3 111.6 106.2 121.6
         Apr 100.6 85.9 101.0 101.9 104.4 103.8 88.1 96.3 107.6 104.1 98.5 114.3
         May 99.8 86.8 97.6 101.3 103.5 104.0 86.2 94.8 102.5 105.4 98.5 115.3         June 103.5 93.0 91.0 105.9 107.2 111.0 87.0 97.2 103.4 111.3 106.4 120.6
         July 103.3 95.5 92.6 105.2 107.1 108.3 87.0 99.1 105.7 106.6 105.4 112.1
         Aug 93.8 85.5 90.7 94.9 98.6 93.5 68.1 95.8 103.6 94.0 89.5 90.6         Sep 106.8 95.0 95.3 109.1 109.1 114.6 96.8 101.3 105.9 107.3 112.8 120.7
         Oct 108.2 93.3 104.9 109.9 109.9 113.8 96.6 105.4 108.0 106.8 104.0 127.0
         Nov 106.7 85.7 110.0 108.3 107.7 112.2 94.4 104.9 107.5 105.2 104.2 120.4         Dec 95.9 61.9 115.5 96.9 89.5 107.9 78.8 95.4 99.0 84.3 118.3 92.9
2005         Jan  
+ 95.5 49.3 112.8 97.8 102.3 95.0 83.5 96.9 112.7 105.1 86.4 103.0
         Feb  + 95.7 43.5 108.4 99.1 100.7 100.1 87.3 96.2 111.1 101.9 92.9 108.6
         Mar  + 7 107.3 7 60.0 112.3 111.1 109.9 117.3 97.8 104.3 117.8 109.7 113.7 122.4
         Apr  x 7 102.7 7 79.7 100.6 105.0 107.0 108.3 88.0 98.4 110.8 106.1 100.5 118.3
         May  x 7 100.6 7 79.6 97.9 102.8 106.2 103.7 80.5 99.1 111.7 102.1 98.2 108.2
         June  x 7 106.5 7 88.6 91.8 109.7 110.5 115.9 91.2 99.9 111.4 106.2 115.0 117.9
Annual percentage change  
  
2000 + 4.8 − 3.5 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 9.7 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 8.2 + 7.1 + 11.2
2001 − 0.4 − 7.5 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 2.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.1 + 2.2 + 4.12002 − 1.2 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.32003 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 5.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 + 2.12004 + 2.4 − 5.5 + 2.8 + 3.0 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 3.5 + 4.0
 
2003         Oct + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.9 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.9
         Nov + 0.7 − 3.1 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 2.7 − 3.3 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 4.3         Dec + 2.7 + 5.3 + 0.4 + 2.8 + 3.2 + 3.3 − 0.5 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 7.7
2004         Jan + 1.9 − 4.8 + 5.3 + 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 3.7 + 2.1 − 4.4
         Feb + 1.8 + 10.1 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 4.8 − 1.4 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 + 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.7         Mar + 0.5 − 9.2 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 2.7 + 0.2
         Apr + 2.2 − 6.7 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 4.0 + 4.4 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 5.6 + 5.0
         May + 4.0 − 4.7 + 2.4 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 6.9 + 8.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 7.2 + 7.9         June + 3.5 − 5.8 − 0.7 + 4.9 + 4.7 + 7.5 + 4.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 13.8 + 4.4 + 13.0
         July + 2.9 − 6.6 + 2.3 + 3.8 + 4.5 + 5.0 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 4.8 + 6.6 + 3.1
         Aug + 4.2 − 5.0 + 0.3 + 5.4 + 5.9 + 8.1 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 6.6 + 4.7 + 13.3         Sep + 4.4 − 5.8 + 3.4 + 5.4 + 5.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 + 8.5 + 5.7 + 7.9 + 8.9
         Oct + 2.9 − 6.0 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 2.8 + 7.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 + 3.8 − 0.4 + 5.9 + 13.0
         Nov + 0.3 − 8.0 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 2.3 − 1.4 − 5.7 + 1.7 + 6.0 + 1.8 − 1.5 − 3.7         Dec + 0.9 − 7.7 + 7.9 + 0.7 + 2.8 − 0.8 − 4.9 + 1.3 + 6.8 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 4.7
2005         Jan  
+ + 3.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 4.8 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 10.6 + 0.5 + 4.7 + 5.7
         Feb  + + 1.7 − 23.3 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 0.9 + 4.6 + 9.4 − 1.2 + 5.9 − 1.4
         Mar  + 7 + 2.1 7 − 21.3 + 1.9 + 3.6 + 1.9 + 5.0 + 1.9 + 4.8 + 9.8 − 1.7 + 7.1 + 0.7
         Apr  x 7 + 2.1 7 − 7.2 − 0.4 + 3.0 + 2.5 + 4.3 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 2.0 + 3.5
         May  x 7 + 0.8 7 − 8.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 + 2.6 − 0.3 − 6.6 + 4.5 + 9.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 6.2
         June  x 7 + 2.9 7 − 4.7 + 0.9 + 3.6 + 3.1 + 4.4 + 4.8 + 2.8 + 7.7 − 4.6 + 8.1 − 2.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — oUsing the semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities related to prin-
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless ting. — 7Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of es-
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The timates, to the results of the annual overall survey in the construction sector
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Build- (average +3%). — +Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statis-
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — tical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in particular, mining of Survey for the first quarter (industry: on average -2.6%). — xProvision-
coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas and manu- al; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimate s,
facture of refined petroleum products. — 4Including mining and to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey for the second quarter
quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and (industry: on average -2.6%). 
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 Durable goods Non-durable goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
total  
  
2001 98.3 − 1.7 95.9 − 4.0 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.5 99.8 − 0.1 102.4 + 2.5
2002 98.3 + 0.0 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 99.0 − 2.4 95.7 − 4.1 101.0 − 1.4
2003 99.0 + 0.7 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.1 95.4 − 3.6 89.9 − 6.1 98.9 − 2.12004 104.8 + 5.9 104.9 + 7.3 107.2 + 6.5 94.7 − 0.7 89.1 − 0.9 98.2 − 0.7
 
2004         June 105.6 + 4.9 107.4 + 9.0 108.4 + 3.0 89.3 + 0.1 89.6 + 3.7 89.1 − 2.1
         July 105.4 + 8.0 107.0 + 9.1 106.7 + 8.9 95.2 + 1.4 88.2 + 0.6 99.6 + 1.8
         Aug 95.9 + 6.7 98.9 + 10.6 94.5 + 5.6 91.8 − 1.2 73.8 + 1.0 102.9 − 2.1         Sep 108.4 + 5.3 108.1 + 7.1 110.4 + 5.7 100.8 − 1.9 94.0 − 4.3 105.0 − 0.8
         Oct 108.2 + 5.4 109.0 + 6.3 109.7 + 6.6 99.4 − 3.4 96.4 − 4.6 101.4 − 2.5
         Nov 105.3 + 2.8 106.8 + 4.6 106.1 + 1.6 97.2 + 1.7 95.2 − 2.2 98.5 + 4.2         Dec 108.2 + 10.4 95.0 + 4.3 124.0 + 16.5 86.5 − 0.5 78.0 − 4.3 91.8 + 1.8
2005         Jan 106.7 + 6.9 109.3 + 7.3 107.1 + 7.3 96.5 + 3.8 88.1 − 2.5 101.6 + 7.4
         Feb 105.0 + 3.8 104.4 + 2.3 106.1 + 4.8 102.3 + 4.1 87.8 − 1.8 111.1 + 6.8         Mar 116.9 + 5.1 114.5 + 3.2 120.9 + 6.8 108.2 + 4.3 97.3 − 0.2 114.9 + 6.8
         Apr 105.1 + 0.9 105.6 − 0.7 107.1 + 1.8 95.4 + 2.9 90.7 + 1.7 98.3 + 3.5
         May 105.5 + 1.4 106.6 + 1.5 108.1 + 0.9 91.3 + 3.4 85.8 − 2.3 94.7 + 6.9         June  
p 113.4 + 7.4 110.6 + 3.0 119.9 + 10.6 95.5 + 6.9 93.4 + 4.2 97.0 + 8.9
from the domestic market  
  
2001 97.6 − 2.3 96.4 − 3.5 98.0 − 2.0 99.9 + 0.0 99.5 − 0.4 100.2 + 0.4
2002 94.6 − 3.1 94.6 − 1.9 94.6 − 3.5 94.6 − 5.3 92.0 − 7.5 96.3 − 3.92003 94.7 + 0.1 95.0 + 0.4 95.9 + 1.4 90.0 − 4.9 86.7 − 5.8 92.1 − 4.42004 98.3 + 3.8 100.5 + 5.8 100.0 + 4.3 86.9 − 3.4 83.3 − 3.9 89.2 − 3.1
 
2004         June 98.4 + 3.5 101.9 + 6.7 100.9 + 2.0 81.8 − 2.2 81.9 + 0.5 81.7 − 3.8
         July 99.5 + 4.8 104.5 + 7.6 99.7 + 4.7 85.0 − 2.7 80.0 − 3.6 88.2 − 2.2
         Aug 92.3 + 5.7 97.1 + 9.6 90.1 + 4.9 85.1 − 2.6 70.4 + 0.3 94.2 − 4.0         Sep 99.9 + 1.5 102.7 + 6.4 99.9 − 0.7 92.2 − 5.1 86.1 − 7.2 96.0 − 4.1
         Oct 102.4 + 3.3 105.1 + 4.7 103.2 + 4.6 92.3 − 4.7 89.7 − 7.6 94.0 − 2.8
         Nov 99.9 + 0.7 104.0 + 3.8 99.4 − 1.4 89.6 − 2.5 89.2 − 4.9 89.9 − 0.8         Dec 98.9 + 10.3 89.5 + 5.0 115.3 + 19.0 79.3 − 3.8 72.5 − 6.2 83.6 − 2.3
2005         Jan 96.9 + 3.3 103.0 + 6.4 94.1 + 1.0 87.4 + 1.0 82.5 − 5.6 90.4 + 5.2
         Feb 95.8 − 0.1 97.6 + 1.2 95.2 − 2.7 92.3 + 3.7 83.1 − 1.9 97.9 + 6.6         Mar 106.6 + 1.2 107.1 + 0.3 108.4 + 1.3 99.7 + 3.9 92.3 − 1.5 104.2 + 6.9
         Apr 98.0
+ 0.0 99.7 − 1.8 99.7 + 0.7 88.0 + 3.4 85.6 + 3.1 89.5 + 3.3
         May 96.0 + 0.9 100.2 + 0.0 96.1 + 1.2 83.8 + 3.6 80.3 − 1.1 86.0 + 6.6
         June  p 104.0 + 5.7 103.6 + 1.7 110.5 + 9.5 87.1 + 6.5 86.4 + 5.5 87.7 + 7.3
from abroad  
  
2001 99.1 − 0.9 95.1 − 4.9 100.7 + 0.7 104.8 + 4.8 100.5 + 0.5 107.5 + 7.6
2002 102.8 + 3.7 99.1 + 4.2 104.1 + 3.4 108.6 + 3.6 103.9 + 3.4 111.5 + 3.72003 104.4 + 1.6 102.3 + 3.2 105.1 + 1.0 107.5 − 1.0 97.2 − 6.4 113.9 + 2.22004 112.9 + 8.1 111.6 + 9.1 113.8 + 8.3 112.2 + 4.4 102.3 + 5.2 118.1 + 3.7
 
2004         June 114.7 + 6.6 115.9 + 12.2 115.3 + 3.8 106.2 + 4.2 107.2 + 9.7 105.5 + 1.0
         July 112.8 + 11.8 111.0 + 11.3 113.1 + 12.5 118.0 + 8.8 106.8 + 8.6 124.8 + 8.9
         Aug 100.4 + 7.7 101.8 + 12.4 98.6 + 6.1 106.9 + 1.6 81.6 + 2.3 122.2 + 1.2         Sep 119.0 + 9.7 116.6 + 8.2 120.1 + 11.3 120.1 + 4.1 111.9 + 1.4 125.1 + 5.6
         Oct 115.4 + 7.6 115.0 + 8.6 115.7 + 8.4 115.5 − 0.7 111.7 + 1.4 117.9 − 1.8
         Nov 112.0 + 5.2 111.2 + 5.8 112.2 + 4.1 114.2 + 9.8 108.8 + 3.2 117.5 + 13.9         Dec 119.9 + 10.5 103.6 + 3.3 132.1 + 14.8 102.6 + 5.9 90.5 − 0.8 110.0 + 9.6
2005         Jan 118.9 + 10.8 119.1 + 8.4 119.0 + 12.5 116.9 + 8.7 101.0 + 3.9 126.4 + 11.1
         Feb 116.5 + 8.1 115.0 + 3.6 116.1 + 11.3 124.6 + 4.4 98.6 − 1.5 140.5 + 7.3         Mar 129.8 + 9.5 126.0 + 7.4 132.5 + 11.3 127.2 + 5.1 108.6 + 2.4 138.6 + 6.7
         Apr 114.0 + 1.9 114.7 + 0.7 114.0 + 2.8 112.0 + 2.0 102.3 − 1.1 117.9 + 3.7
         May 117.3 + 1.9 116.6 + 3.6 119.1 + 0.8 108.0 + 3.0 98.3 − 4.4 113.9 + 7.3         June  
p 125.1 + 9.1 121.6 + 4.9 128.6 + 11.5 114.5 + 7.8 109.3 + 2.0 117.6 + 11.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany  1 Eastern Germany  2 
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2001 94.6 − 5.4 82.9 97.0 99.0 98.9 − 1.1 88.6 102.2 101.6 82.6 − 17.3 67.2 81.9 92.4
2002 88.8 − 6.1 72.8 91.5 95.7 92.1 − 6.9 80.5 94.8 96.4 79.6 − 3.6 51.6 82.0 94.02003 79.3 − 10.7 67.5 78.6 87.5 82.0 − 11.0 75.6 79.6 88.7 72.0 − 9.5 45.2 75.4 84.32004 74.3 − 6.3 61.3 72.8 84.2 77.0 − 6.1 70.5 74.6 83.8 67.1 − 6.8 35.7 67.7 85.2
   
2004         May 75.9 − 8.3 66.6 65.1 93.8 78.9 − 4.9 75.1 66.6 95.6 67.6 − 17.9 43.2 60.9 89.2
         June 89.9 − 5.3 73.3 83.2 107.9 94.5 − 4.0 83.4 87.2 109.9 77.5 − 9.0 45.3 71.6 102.8
         July 78.9 − 12.9 63.5 71.8 96.6 82.1 − 10.1 71.6 73.6 98.8 70.2 − 20.8 41.0 66.8 91.1
         Aug 77.5 − 4.3 60.5 74.2 91.8 78.1 − 5.3 69.9 73.9 88.2 75.8 − 1.6 34.7 74.9 101.2         Sep 85.9 − 5.8 71.3 80.2 101.4 89.2 − 3.7 84.0 81.9 100.9 76.8 − 12.0 36.2 75.3 102.6
         Oct 74.5 − 6.5 59.0 72.0 86.9 78.8 − 7.0 70.1 75.0 88.8 62.5 − 5.0 28.4 63.4 82.0
         Nov 61.8 − 11.5 51.3 62.4 67.7 64.3 − 11.9 59.2 64.8 66.9 55.0 − 10.1 29.6 55.6 69.5         Dec 69.5 + 0.3 56.1 78.7 67.3 71.8 − 0.7 64.1 79.8 67.4 63.0 + 3.3 33.9 75.8 67.1
2005         Jan 46.6 − 12.6 39.7 50.4 46.8 50.0 − 7.9 46.8 54.7 46.6 37.2 − 26.6 20.2 37.6 47.1
         Feb 52.1 − 21.3 45.3 54.3 53.7 55.2 − 18.2 54.6 53.8 57.3 43.4 − 30.4 19.7 55.8 44.5         Mar 78.9 − 3.3 64.6 82.1 84.2 83.2 − 1.3 74.7 86.7 84.6 67.1 − 9.6 36.9 68.9 83.1
         Apr 71.0 − 7.9 56.3 70.3 80.8 74.4 − 7.0 65.8 74.4 79.9 61.5 − 11.4 30.2 58.7 83.1
         May 77.8 + 2.5 62.3 70.6 95.6 81.8 + 3.7 71.0 73.7 98.2 66.8 − 1.2 38.4 61.7 89.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications 0.2.8. — 1Excluding West Berlin. — 2Including West Berlin. — 3Including
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there- the railways and post office. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  By enterprises’ main product range of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retailpharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco  
2 products  2 leather goods  2 ing materials  2 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2003 = 100
1997 96.3 − 0.6 − 1.3 87.8 − 0.7 73.2 + 2.2 113.4 − 1.6 108.2 − 0.9 94.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 87.4 + 3.7
1998 97.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 89.1 + 1.5 77.3 + 5.6 112.1 − 1.1 111.7 + 3.2 96.3 + 1.7 + 1.5 91.6 + 4.81999 97.8 + 0.5 + 0.3 89.7 + 0.7 82.9 + 7.2 111.8 − 0.3 110.6 − 1.0 97.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 94.6 + 3.3
2000 100.2 + 2.5 + 1.3 91.5 + 2.0 87.8 + 5.9 111.8
+ 0.0 113.4 + 2.5 98.7 + 1.5 + 0.3 92.6 − 2.1
2001 102.1 + 1.9 . 95.7 + 4.6 94.3 + 7.4 111.3 − 0.4 109.6 − 3.4 100.7 + 2.0 . 95.3 + 2.92002 100.5 − 1.6 − 1.3 98.3 + 2.7 97.6 + 3.5 105.7 − 5.0 100.9 − 7.9 99.9 − 0.8 − 0.8 98.1 + 2.92003  
5 100.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 100.2 + 1.9 100.1 + 2.6 100.1 − 5.3 100.2 − 0.7 100.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 100.5 + 2.4
2004 100.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 102.2 + 2.0 99.0 − 1.1 101.2 + 1.1 101.2 + 1.0 100.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 101.8 + 1.3
 
2004         June 96.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 98.9 + 0.4 98.4 + 0.8 94.3 − 0.7 97.1 + 3.3 98.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 108.3 + 0.1
         July 99.1 + 0.8 + 0.6 103.5 + 3.1 102.2 + 0.0 100.2 + 3.4 97.6 + 1.1 101.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 107.0 − 1.1
         Aug 96.0 + 1.6 + 1.2 100.6 + 2.0 96.4 + 0.4 91.7 + 5.9 94.8 + 0.7 95.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 91.7 − 2.4         Sep 98.2
+ 0.0 + 0.0 97.4 + 0.9 97.8 + 0.5 104.6 − 1.4 98.1 + 0.2 98.0 − 0.4 − 0.7 96.7 − 2.2
         Oct 105.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 103.4 + 0.3 105.0 + 1.9 118.9 + 0.4 108.3 + 2.8 105.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 104.7 + 0.9
         Nov 106.6 + 0.4 + 0.6 105.5 + 0.9 102.9 − 1.2 109.0 + 7.4 108.8 + 0.5 107.0 + 1.8 + 1.7 109.7 + 7.7         Dec 123.1 + 1.4 + 1.1 122.2 + 3.3 119.3 − 1.2 128.0 + 3.1 119.2 + 2.0 117.1 + 1.6 + 1.3 97.1 + 3.1
2005         Jan 95.0 + 4.4 + 4.4 97.4 + 4.1 95.7 + 10.8 88.2 + 3.5 93.9 + 4.9 92.5 + 3.1 + 2.9 83.5 − 2.0
         Feb 89.2 + 2.2 + 1.6 96.1 + 5.1 95.4 + 8.9 72.5 − 6.2 87.0 − 1.4 88.5 + 0.7 + 0.1 86.0 − 4.8         Mar 103.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 107.7 + 3.0 105.5 + 6.1 101.0
+ 0.0 107.2 − 0.5 106.0 + 1.4 + 1.0 113.8 + 2.4
         Apr 100.9 − 0.6 − 0.9 103.7 + 0.0 100.0 + 1.8 114.4 + 6.0 101.1 − 4.2 103.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 112.5 + 0.5
         May 101.4 + 4.4 + 3.9 107.0 + 5.6 102.5 + 8.5 101.3 + 4.9 100.5 + 1.0 103.2 + 3.5 + 3.1 109.1 + 1.3         June  
e 97.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 102.7 + 3.8 99.8 + 1.4 95.2 + 1.0 95.4 − 1.8 99.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding vehicle parts and accessories.— 4Up to (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices;
value-added tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version from 2001, at 2000 prices. — 5Unadjusted figures partly revised, from
0.2.8. — 1Excluding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding January 2003 provisional as Lower Saxony is excluded and, judging by past
the sale of automotive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor experience, subject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent months. 
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
  
 
Persons in
Employed  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployed  7 
employed
Mining under Personsand employ- under-manu- ment pro-
going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cationaling Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  
3 6  7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percen- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7  8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2002 39,092 − 0.6 − 224 35,090 − 0.7 6,217 883 207 193 340 4,061 + 209 9.8 452
2003 38,723 − 0.9 − 369 34,650 − 1.3 9 6,136 817 195 143 260 4,377 + 315 10.5 355
2004 r 38,868 r + 0.4 r + 145 34,630 − 0.1 6,019 769 151 117 184 10 4,381 10 +9 3 10 10.5 286
2004         July r 38,883 r + 0.4 r + 156 6,015 786 138 118 165 4,360 + 83 10.5 297
         Aug r 38,918 r + 0.5 r + 193 34,716 + 0.0 6,040 788 107 122 158 4,347 + 110 10.5 287
         Sep r 39,211 r + 0.6 r + 252 6,049 788 115 124 166 4,257 + 160 10.3 269
         Oct r 39,359 r + 0.6 r + 254 6,024 778 125 122 167 4,207 + 187 10.1 245
         Nov r 39,338 r + 0.6 r + 236 34,958 + 0.1 6,008 768 133 114 163 4,257 + 208 10.3 229
         Dec r 39,100 r + 0.5 r + 186 5,978 744 133 100 149 4,464 + 244 10.8 225
2005         Jan r 38,356 r + 0.1 r + 49 5,949 684 p 148 p 85p 135 11 5,039 11 + 442 11 12.1 p 268
         Feb r 38,391 r + 0.1 r + 46 34,243 + 0.0 5,930 660 p 168 p 77p 122 11 5,216 11 + 575 11 12.6 p 333
         Mar r 38,512 r + 0.1 r + 21 5,925 12 668 p 174 p 67p 116 11 5,176 11 + 628 11 12.5 p 394
         Apr r 38,721 r + 0.1 r + 24 5,919 12 696 p 159 p 59p 113 11 4,968 11 + 524 11 12.0 p 434
         May r 38,867 r + 0.1 r + 31 ... ... 5,915 12 703 p 142 13 5313 112 11 4,807 11 + 513 11 11.6 p 442
         June 14 38,972 14 + 0.1 14 + 47 ... ... p 137 13 5013 109 11 4,704 11 + 471 11 15  11.3 p 439
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 4713 9911 4,772 11 + 412 11 11.5 p 447
Western Germany o 
  
2002 . . . . . 5,593 639 162 45 198 2,498 + 178 7.7 378
2003 . . . . . 9 5,503 594 160 31 161 2,753 + 255 8.4 292
2004 . . . . . 5,380 562 122 24 121 10 2,781 10 +8 7 10 8.5 239
2004         July . . . . . 5,375 572 112 26 110 2,760 + 79 8.4 247
         Aug . . . . . 5,395 573 84 26 105 2,764 + 92 8.4 239         Sep . . . . . 5,402 574 92 27 111 2,700 + 119 8.2 222
         Oct . . . . . 5,378 567 102 26 112 2,692 + 140 8.2 204
         Nov . . . . . 5,362 560 105 25 109 2,727 + 149 8.3 191         Dec . . . . . 5,337 546 105 23 99 2,860 + 173 8.7 192
2005         Jan . . . . . 5,234 505
p 118 p 19p 8911 3,267 11 + 340 11 9.9 p 228
         Feb . . . . . 5,215 490 p 133 p 18p 8011 3,421 11 + 476 11 10.4 p 279
         Mar . . . . . 5,210 12 496 p 137 p 16p 7811 3,396 11 + 524 11 10.3 p 320
         Apr . . . . . 5,202 12 514 p 128 p 14p 7611 3,262 11 + 458 11 9.9 p 345
         May . . . . . 5,199 12 518 p 113 13 1213 7511 3,170 11 + 460 11 9.7 p 344
         June . . . . . ... ... p 110 13 1113 7311 3,117 11 + 448 11 15  9.5 p 344
         July . . . . . ... ... ... 13 1013 6711 3,173 11 + 413 11 9.6 p 346
Eastern Germany +  
  
2002 . . . . . 624 244 45 148 142 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2003 . . . . . 9 632 223 35 112 99 1,624 + 61 18.5 63
2004 . . . . . 639 207 29 93 63 10 1,600 10 +6 10 18.4 47
2004         July . . . . . 640 213 26 93 55 1,600 + 4 18.5 50
         Aug . . . . . 645 214 24 96 54 1,582 + 18 18.3 48         Sep . . . . . 647 215 24 98 55 1,557 + 41 18.0 47
         Oct . . . . . 647 211 23 96 55 1,514 + 47 17.5 42
         Nov . . . . . 645 208 27 89 54 1,530 + 59 17.7 38         Dec . . . . . 641 199 28 77 50 1,604 + 71 18.5 33
2005         Jan . . . . . 715 179
p 30p 65p 4611 1,772 11 + 102 11 20.5 p 40
         Feb . . . . . 715 170 p 35p 59p 4111 1,795 11 + 100 11 20.7 p 54
         Mar . . . . . 715 12 172 p 36p 51p 3811 1,780 11 + 104 11 20.6 p 74
         Apr . . . . . 717 12 182 p 31p 45p 3711 1,705 11 +6 7 11 19.7 p 89
         May . . . . . 717 12 185 p 2913 4113 3711 1,637 11 +5 3 11 18.9 p 98
         June . . . . . ... ... p 2713 3813 3511 1,587 11 +2 3 11 15  18.5 p 96
         July . . . . . ... ... ... 13 3713 3211 1,599 11 −1 11 18.6 p 101
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual 9The figures from 2003 onwards are positively affected by the first-time in-
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- clusion of firms which are required to report and which have been iden-bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- tified in the course of drawing up the corporate register. — 10From
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Work-place concept; aver- January 2004, unemployed persons excluding all those participating in
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — occupational aptitude testing and training schemes. — 11Provisional;
3Up to December 2004, western Germany including West Berlin and east- increase relative to the previous year affected by the inclusion of persons
ern Germany excluding West Berlin. — 4The figures refer to the economic receiving social assistance but able to work who were not previously
classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or registered as unemployed. — 12Provisional up to adjustment to the figures
parts thereof; civil engineering”. — 5Mid-month level. — 6Employees in- of the annual overall survey. — 13Annualised data from the Federal
volved in job creation schemes and structural adjustment measures (SAM); Employment Agency based on information received so far. — 14Initial pre-
provisional and partly revised data. — 7Mid-month level; end of month fig- liminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. — 15From June 2005, cal-
ures up to December 2004. — 8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — culated on the basis of new labour force figures. 
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index HWWA
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Period Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
2000 = 100  
  
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.4 101.2 100.3 103.0 107.3 101.0 100.6 91.4 91.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 104.9 102.6 100.2 102.4 100.4 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.12003 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 104.1 101.4 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.92004 106.2 105.7 102.9 114.8 108.9 104.8 101.4 105.8 99.9 101.1 97.2 101.4 96.3
 
2003         Oct 104.5 105.7 101.4 110.0 106.4 103.9 104.2 103.2 100.4 95.5 81.0 88.7
         Nov 104.3 105.5 101.4 109.5 105.8 104.1 100.3 104.2 104.9 100.4 95.5 81.7 91.0         Dec 105.1 105.7 101.4 109.4 109.0 104.1 104.2 103.2 100.2 95.1 80.7 89.4
2004         Jan 105.2 106.9 102.1 110.5 107.2 104.4 104.0 103.8 100.2 95.2 82.6 92.8
         Feb 105.4 106.4 101.9 110.2 108.3 104.5 100.5 104.1 105.3 100.3 95.3 82.2 96.2         Mar 105.7 106.1 103.1 111.4 108.0 104.6 104.7 105.3 100.8 96.4 91.2 103.5
         Apr 106.0 106.3 103.3 113.1 108.1 104.7 105.1 104.6 101.1 96.9 94.9 105.1
         May 106.2 106.6 103.1 116.1 108.1 104.7 101.4 105.6 104.3 101.3 97.6 104.5 101.1         June 106.2 106.7 103.1 114.2 108.6 104.8 105.5 107.4 101.1 97.0 100.8 99.1
         July 106.5 106.0 102.8 115.5 109.9 104.8 106.1 105.1 101.2 97.3 104.7 97.6
         Aug 106.7 104.9 102.8 117.3 110.3 105.0 101.8 106.4 99.9 101.5 98.2 114.3 94.6         Sep 106.4 104.3 102.9 116.6 109.2 105.0 106.6 99.4 101.5 98.3 112.7 93.5
         Oct 106.6 104.2 102.9 120.4 108.9 105.1 107.6 97.6 101.7 99.4 123.0 92.0
         Nov 106.2 104.1 103.0 117.2 108.4 105.2 102.0 107.1 98.9 101.6 98.1 108.1 91.4         Dec 107.3 105.3 103.7 114.5 111.7 105.2 107.2 99.0 101.2 97.2 96.8 89.2
2005         Jan 106.9 105.7 103.5 116.4 109.8 105.4 108.1 97.9 101.5 98.0 107.5 95.7
         Feb 107.3 106.3 103.6 117.5 110.5 105.6 102.5 108.5 99.0 101.8 98.8 111.4 99.2         Mar 107.6 106.6 103.7 120.7 110.3 105.6 109.1 100.3 102.1 100.1 125.3 103.1
         Apr 107.7 106.4 103.7 123.3 109.7 105.7 109.9 98.7 102.1 100.1 128.2 103.1
         May 108.0 107.1 103.6 123.0 110.9 105.8 102.5 109.9
p 98.7 102.0 99.7 124.3 102.3
         June 108.1 107.0 103.5 125.8 110.6 105.9 110.4 ... 102.2 101.3 144.6 106.6
         July 108.6 105.9 103.2 129.0 112.1 106.0 ... ... ... ... 151.8 107.0
Annual percentage change  
  
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 2 + 3.1 + 5.9 + 3.1 + 10.1 + 73.6 + 20.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 7.3 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.12002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 6.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.92003 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.62004 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.5 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 22.3 + 10.8
 
2003         Oct + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 3.9 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 10.5 − 3.7
         Nov + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 4.2 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 4.9 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.2         Dec + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 7.5 − 0.2
2004         Jan + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 4.0 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 10.4 + 5.1
         Feb + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 15.5 + 7.2         Mar + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.5 − 2.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.9 + 17.2
         Apr + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 4.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 24.9 + 19.7
         May + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 7.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 6.0 + 0.8 + 2.5 + 44.1 + 21.1         June + 1.7 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 5.0 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.5 + 5.7 + 0.8 + 2.0 + 30.9 + 21.9
         July + 1.8 − 0.3 + 1.7 + 5.8 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 28.5 + 18.0
         Aug + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 32.3 + 11.0         Sep + 1.8 − 1.2 + 1.5 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 2.3 − 5.2 + 1.0 + 2.7 + 43.2 + 6.9
         Oct + 2.0 − 1.4 + 1.5 + 9.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 3.3 − 5.4 + 1.3 + 4.1 + 51.9 + 3.7
         Nov + 1.8 − 1.3 + 1.6 + 7.0 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 2.8 − 5.7 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 32.3 + 0.4         Dec + 2.1 − 0.4 + 2.3 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 2.9 − 4.1 + 1.0 + 2.2 + 20.0 − 0.2
2005         Jan + 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.4 + 5.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.9 − 5.7 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 30.1 + 3.1
         Feb + 1.8 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 6.6 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 4.2 − 6.0 + 1.5 + 3.7 + 35.5 + 3.1         Mar + 1.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 8.3 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 4.2 − 4.7 + 1.3 + 3.8 + 37.4 − 0.4
         Apr + 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 9.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 4.6 − 5.6 + 1.0 + 3.3 + 35.1 − 1.9
         May + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 2.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 4.1
p − 5.4 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 18.9 + 1.2
         June + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 10.2 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 4.6 ... + 1.1 + 4.4 + 43.5 + 7.6
         July + 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 2.0 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... + 45.0 + 9.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWA Index of World Market Prices. — tion price level. — 4Excluding value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Previously: Overall construc- industrial raw materials. 
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999 € billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM / 
€ change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change %
1991 1,355.4 . 940.9 . 426.1 . 1,367.0 . 1,975.5 . 254.7 . 12.9
1992 1,466.6 8.2 1,001.9 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,475.8 8.0 2,120.2 7.3 268.8 5.6 12.71993 1,504.2 2.6 1,030.5 2.9 511.2 7.9 1,541.7 4.5 2,194.0 3.5 264.5 − 1.6 12.11994 1,526.0 1.4 1,026.6 − 0.4 529.3 3.5 1,555.9 0.9 2,275.7 3.7 259.1 − 2.1 11.4
1995 1,575.1 3.2 1,034.9 0.8 553.5 4.6 1,588.4 2.1 2,344.9 3.0 257.6 − 0.6 11.0
1996 1,592.5 1.1 1,029.9 − 0.5 599.0 8.2 1,629.0 2.6 2,386.5 1.8 251.7 − 2.3 10.51997 1,589.7 − 0.2 1,012.9 − 1.7 613.2 2.4 1,626.1 − 0.2 2,427.6 1.7 245.4 − 2.5 10.11998 1,623.0 2.1 1,036.3 2.3 625.0 1.9 1,661.3 2.2 2,474.2 1.9 249.4 1.7 10.11999 854.6 3.0 547.5 3.3 330.5 3.4 878.0 3.4 1,297.7 2.6 122.7 − 3.8 9.5
2000 883.4 3.4 569.6 4.0 339.9 2.8 909.5 3.6 1,337.4 3.1 123.2 0.4 9.2
2001 902.2 2.1 590.1 3.6 351.6 3.4 941.7 3.5 1,388.0 3.8 130.5 5.9 9.42002 909.0 0.8 592.1 0.3 367.5 4.5 959.6 1.9 1,406.9 1.4 140.2 7.4 10.02003 909.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 377.0 2.6 966.0 0.7 1,440.3 2.4 154.1 9.9 10.72004 912.3 0.3 600.7 2.0 377.8 0.2 978.5 1.3 1,459.5 1.3 155.3 0.8 10.6
2003         Q2 218.3 0.1 138.2 − 0.8 93.5 2.8 231.7 0.6 355.8 2.6 36.1 10.2 10.2
         Q3 226.7 0.1 150.8 − 0.4 93.9 1.7 244.8 0.4 355.5 1.7 32.6 6.7 9.2         Q4 252.2 − 0.4 162.2 − 0.5 94.8 2.8 257.0 0.7 367.1 1.3 33.7 3.3 9.2
2004         Q1 213.7 0.8 140.5 2.0 96.2 1.4 236.7 1.8 365.3 0.9 51.2 − 0.7 14.0
         Q2 220.1 0.9 142.7 3.2 93.5 0.0 236.2 1.9 359.2 0.9 36.3 0.6 10.1         Q3 226.6 − 0.1 153.2 1.6 93.5 − 0.4 246.7 0.8 359.4 1.1 32.6 − 0.2 9.1         Q4 251.9 − 0.1 164.3 1.3 94.6 − 0.2 258.9 0.8 375.6 2.3 35.2 4.2 9.4
2005         Q1 213.3 − 0.2 141.4 0.6 95.8 − 0.4 237.1 0.2 368.3 0.8 52.6 2.7 14.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2005. — *House- plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
holds including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Residence surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — 3Social cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state and fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 6In-
local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), private cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (workplace concept)  2 (workplace concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change change 2000 = 100
1995 89.8 4.9 90.2 4.6 94.8 3.1 88.3 6.1 89.5 5.5 89.9 4.1
1996 92.1 2.6 92.3 2.4 96.2 1.4 91.6 3.8 92.0 2.9 92.5 2.91997 93.4 1.5 93.7 1.5 96.3 0.2 93.4 1.9 93.6 1.7 94.2 1.71998 95.2 1.9 95.3 1.8 97.2 0.9 95.1 1.8 95.1 1.7 95.7 1.61999 98.0 2.9 98.0 2.8 98.6 1.4 98.0 3.1 98.0 3.0 97.4 1.8
2000 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 1.5 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.7
2001 101.9 1.9 101.9 1.9 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.7 1.7 102.2 2.22002 104.7 2.7 104.6 2.7 103.3 1.4 105.0 3.2 104.9 3.1 104.3 2.02003 106.7 2.0 106.7 2.0 104.6 1.3 107.6 2.5 107.4 2.4 . .2004 108.0 1.2 108.3 1.4 105.0 0.4 109.6 1.8 109.4 1.9 . .
2003         Q3 110.2 1.9 110.2 2.0 104.3 1.2 115.6 2.2 115.3 2.1 . .
         Q4 119.9 1.1 120.0 1.2 115.1 0.4 119.5 2.3 119.1 2.2 . .
2004         Q1 99.8 1.8 100.0 1.9 99.3 1.1 99.9 3.2 99.7 3.2 . .
         Q2 100.2 1.5 100.4 1.6 101.5 0.8 100.2 1.5 100.0 1.6 . .         Q3 111.3 1.0 111.5 1.2 104.2 − 0.1 116.6 0.9 116.4 1.0 . .         Q4 120.9 0.8 121.3 1.1 114.8 − 0.2 121.9 2.0 121.7 2.1 . .
2005         Q1 101.1 1.3 101.4 1.5 99.1 − 0.2 101.5 1.6 101.3 1.6 . .
         Q2 101.2 1.0 101.6 1.2 . . 101.4 1.2 101.2 1.2 . .
2004         Dec 100.9 1.5 101.2 1.8 . . 100.2 1.3 100.0 1.3 . .
2005         Jan 100.7 1.2 101.0 1.3 . . 100.2 1.2 100.1 1.3 . .
         Feb 100.7 1.2 101.1 1.4 . . 100.4 1.3 100.2 1.3 . .         Mar 101.9 1.5 102.2 1.7 . . 103.8 2.3 103.6 2.3 . .
         Apr 101.6 1.7 101.9 1.9 . . 101.3 1.6 101.1 1.6 . .
         May 101.1 0.6 101.4 0.7 . . 101.4 0.5 101.2 0.5 . .         June 101.1 0.8 101.4 1.0 . . 101.4 1.5 101.2 1.4 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. — 2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2005. — 3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
X External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2004 2005
Item 2002 2003 2004 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May
Current account + 64,483 + 20,409 + 46,760 + 11,411 + 15,783 + 765 + 2,893 − 10,078 − 3,927A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,062,129 1,039,689 1,129,631 279,642 298,848 278,291 101,781 99,243 100,860
Imports (fob) 933,580 936,951 1,026,923 256,093 278,777 263,751 93,887 94,994 94,224
Balance + 128,548 + 102,736 + 102,708 + 23,549 + 20,071 + 14,542 + 7,895 + 4,249 + 6,636
2 Services
Receipts 332,095 329,269 355,467 96,357 92,126 82,953 29,315 28,436 28,318
Expenditure 315,711 309,619 327,777 87,517 85,476 80,187 28,003 26,091 26,414
Balance + 16,381 + 19,653 + 27,689 + 8,840 + 6,651 + 2,766 + 1,312 + 2,344 + 1,904
3 Income − 31,876 − 45,833 − 27,955 − 2,971 + 3,068 − 4,362 − 391 − 12,517 − 7,147
4 Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 85,358 80,830 79,989 15,382 18,018 32,366 7,339 5,537 5,463
Transfer payments to non-residents 133,930 136,978 135,669 33,388 32,025 44,546 13,262 9,691 10,783
Balance − 48,571 − 56,146 − 55,682 − 18,007 − 14,007 − 12,181 − 5,923 − 4,154 − 5,320
Capital account + 10,166 + 13,110 + 17,425 + 4,065 + 5,949 + 1,222 + 877 + 325 + 1,648B
Financial account (net capital exports: −) − 43,935 − 5,942 − 5,476 + 3,115 − 25,388 + 34,413 − 18,601 − 17,813 + 40,578C
1 Direct investment + 618 + 5,398 − 78,065 + 1,140 − 44,115 − 24,138 − 15,111 − 4,846 + 3,816
By resident units abroad − 179,948 − 136,003 − 155,391 − 16,438 − 82,662 − 36,427 − 21,767 − 12,262 + 5,624
By non-resident units in the euro area + 180,568 + 141,400 + 77,328 + 17,579 + 38,548 + 12,289 + 6,656 + 7,416 − 1,808
2 Portfolio investment + 127,765 + 43,396 + 72,780 + 7,188 + 27,262 + 2,640 − 2,525 − 10,960 + 24,040
By resident units abroad − 176,158 − 276,701 − 283,535 − 64,315 − 71,032 − 123,487 − 42,455 − 26,101 − 35,696
Equity − 38,795 − 67,002 − 74,104 − 6,434 − 20,817 − 48,338 − 11,390 + 8,282 − 4,207
Bonds and notes − 88,690 − 182,318 − 151,874 − 37,339 − 42,408 − 74,922 − 25,140 − 24,320 − 22,580
Money market instruments − 48,671 − 27,382 − 57,557 − 20,541 − 7,808 − 227 − 5,925 − 10,063 − 8,909
By non-resident units in the euro area + 303,924 + 320,099 + 356,314 + 71,503 + 98,293 + 126,128 + 39,931 + 15,141 + 59,736
Equity + 86,237 + 117,235 + 123,106 + 38,507 + 68,105 + 35,983 + 16,940 − 46,745 + 26,636
Bonds and notes + 157,873 + 170,415 + 211,412 + 39,920 + 31,991 + 45,566 + 3,267 + 57,046 + 29,817
Money market instruments + 59,815 + 32,451 + 21,799 − 6,925 − 1,802 + 44,579 + 19,725 + 4,840 + 3,283
3 Financial derivatives − 10,954 − 12,175 − 1,724 − 1,041 − 4,755 − 7,445 − 5,131 − 643 + 29
4 Other investment − 159,089 − 72,521 − 10,799 − 7,650 − 6,144 + 58,509 + 2,654 − 601 + 10,080
Eurosystem + 18,443 + 9,145 + 7,448 + 1,668 + 5,131 + 5,220 + 4,025 + 132 + 1,797
General government − 8,203 − 4,469 − 4,548 + 2,468 + 1,756 + 4,769 + 7,706 − 7,830 + 205
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 142,185 − 18,536 − 13,100 − 17,741 − 14,692 + 67,208 + 6,350 − 5,498 + 37,894
Long-term + 17,128 + 4,559 − 19,342 − 13,487 − 139 − 12,950 − 11,629 − 10,201 + 6,216
Short-term − 159,316 − 23,094 + 6,242 − 4,253 − 14,554 + 80,158 + 17,979 + 4,703 + 31,679
Other sectors  1 − 27,143 − 58,662 − 598 + 5,954 + 1,662 − 18,688 − 15,428 + 12,596 − 29,817
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 2,277 + 29,957 + 12,332 + 3,478 + 2,363 + 4,847 + 1,512 − 762 + 2,613
Errors and omissions − 30,714 − 27,576 − 58,707 − 18,590 + 3,657 − 36,400 + 14,831 + 27,565 − 38,299D
* Source: European Central Bank. — 1 Enterprises and households.  
  
67*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
X External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item Capital trans-
fers and Change in
the Bundes- acquisition/
disposal of Change in bank’s net
Supple- non- the foreign external
Balance mentary produced reserves at Balance of assets aton current External trade Current Financial transaction transaction non-financial unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4,5 Services  6 Income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1,2,3 transactions
DM million
1991 − 40,182 + 21,899 − 2,804 − 30,724 + 29,260 − 57,812 − 4,565 + 12,715 + 9,605 + 22,427 − 319
1992 − 35,363 + 33,656 − 1,426 − 44,983 + 28,611 − 51,222 − 1,963 + 69,462 − 52,888 + 20,753 − 68,7451993 − 31,162 + 60,304 − 3,038 − 52,549 + 19,272 − 55,151 − 1,915 + 20,652 + 22,795 − 10,370 + 35,7661994 − 49,143 + 71,762 − 1,104 − 62,803 + 2,457 − 59,455 − 2,637 + 57,861 + 2,846 − 8,927 − 12,242
1995 − 42,682 + 85,303 − 4,722 − 63,985 − 3,863 − 55,416 − 3,845 + 60,472 − 10,355 − 3,590 − 17,754
1996 − 21,263 + 98,538 − 5,264 − 64,743 + 1,195 − 50,989 − 3,283 + 22,407 + 1,882 + 256 + 1,6101997 − 16,463 + 116,467 − 7,360 − 68,692 − 4,139 − 52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 9,740 + 8,4681998 − 26,738 + 126,970 − 7,315 − 75,053 − 18,036 − 53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 − 7,128 − 234 − 8,231
1999 − 46,941 + 127,542 − 14,355 − 90,036 − 21,215 − 48,877 − 301 − 44,849 + 24,517 + 67,574 − 72,364
2000 − 63,909 + 115,645 − 14,019 − 95,848 − 14,232 − 55,456 + 13,345 + 55,434 + 11,429 − 16,299 + 94,3292001 + 6,486 + 186,771 − 10,615 − 97,521 − 18,529 − 53,621 − 756 − 34,865 + 11,797 + 17,338 + 63,911
€ million
1999 − 24,001 + 65,211 − 7,340 − 46,035 − 10,847 − 24,990 − 154 − 22,931 + 12,535 + 34,550 − 36,999
2000 − 32,676 + 59,128 − 7,168 − 49,006 − 7,276 − 28,354 + 6,823 + 28,343 + 5,844 − 8,333 + 48,2302001 + 3,316 + 95,495 − 5,427 − 49,862 − 9,474 − 27,416 − 387 − 17,826 + 6,032 + 8,865 + 32,6772002 + 48,155 + 132,788 − 6,357 − 35,473 − 14,742 − 28,061 − 212 − 42,825 + 2,065 − 7,184 − 33,2922003 + 45,172 + 129,921 − 8,310 − 33,970 − 13,784 − 28,684 + 312 − 46,207 + 445 + 279 + 2,6582004 + 83,510 + 155,119 − 12,340 − 30,964 + 117 − 28,423 + 430 − 96,769 + 1,470 + 11,359 − 3,906
2002         Q3 + 11,552 + 35,543 − 1,780 − 12,417 − 3,523 − 6,271 + 62 − 13,331 + 87 + 1,630 − 17,588
         Q4 + 15,536 + 32,195 − 2,126 − 4,296 − 2,737 − 7,501 − 359 − 35,738 + 898 + 19,662 + 1,099
2003         Q1 + 10,971 + 29,835 − 2,170 − 8,008 − 2,933 − 5,752 − 30 − 4,626 − 1,495 − 4,820 + 3,444
         Q2 + 5,598 + 29,841 − 2,001 − 8,008 − 6,452 − 7,782 + 149 − 25,579 + 1,505 + 18,327 + 22,123         Q3 + 12,208 + 38,430 − 1,671 − 13,364 − 2,388 − 8,800 + 208 + 3,006 − 751 − 14,671 − 15,902         Q4 + 16,395 + 31,815 − 2,469 − 4,590 − 2,010 − 6,351 − 16 − 19,007 + 1,186 + 1,442 − 7,008
2004         Q1 + 25,142 + 40,955 − 2,552 − 7,088 − 463 − 5,711 + 280 + 6,175 + 205 − 31,803 − 6,821
         Q2 + 24,112 + 42,847 − 2,835 − 5,945 − 2,401 − 7,553 + 177 − 57,979 − 339 + 34,029 + 30,993         Q3 + 14,356 + 36,458 − 3,567 − 11,400 + 1,471 − 8,605 + 191 − 21,556 + 1,568 + 5,441 − 31,266         Q4 + 19,899 + 34,859 − 3,387 − 6,531 + 1,511 − 6,554 − 218 − 23,409 + 37 + 3,692 + 3,189
2005         Q1 + 27,946 + 43,229 − 3,414 − 6,322 + 1,781 − 7,328 − 1,493 − 24,033 − 181 − 2,238 − 6,813
         Q2 + 23,074 + 41,639 − 3,364 − 6,299 − 2,410 − 6,493 + 110 − 18,073 + 1,230 − 6,341 + 15,846
2003         Jan + 2,662 + 9,269 − 1,140 − 3,167 − 1,208 − 1,093 + 461 − 3,036 − 97 + 10 + 6,799
         Feb + 3,153 + 10,667 − 605 − 2,880 − 1,365 − 2,665 − 504 − 21,750 − 320 + 19,420 + 677         Mar + 5,155 + 9,898 − 426 − 1,962 − 361 − 1,995 + 13 + 20,159 − 1,078 − 24,250 − 4,032
         Apr + 1,000 + 9,111 − 830 − 2,178 − 2,484 − 2,620 − 126 − 4,367 + 1,449 + 2,044 + 1,477
         May + 2,130 + 10,400 − 560 − 2,644 − 2,541 − 2,524 + 156 − 7,732 − 854 + 6,301 + 22,684         June + 2,469 + 10,330 − 610 − 3,186 − 1,427 − 2,638 + 119 − 13,480 + 910 + 9,982 − 2,037
         July + 5,712 + 13,844 − 762 − 3,796 − 631 − 2,943 + 62 + 5,113 + 225 − 11,113 − 16,353
         Aug + 418 + 10,170 − 341 − 5,423 − 1,005 − 2,983 + 224 − 8,318 − 717 + 8,393 − 3,057         Sep + 6,078 + 14,416 − 568 − 4,144 − 753 − 2,873 − 78 + 6,211 − 259 − 11,951 + 3,508
         Oct + 4,415 + 10,996 − 581 − 3,529 − 619 − 1,853 − 27 − 4,414 − 255 + 281 − 21,689
         Nov + 4,499 + 10,235 − 702 − 1,150 − 986 − 2,898 + 49 − 3,866 + 521 − 1,204 + 14,870         Dec + 7,480 + 10,584 − 1,187 + 88 − 406 − 1,600 − 38 − 10,728 + 921 + 2,365 − 190
2004         Jan + 6,295 + 12,424 − 1,089 − 3,842 − 639 − 560 + 13 + 5,677 − 206 − 11,779 + 5,619
         Feb + 6,630 + 12,051 − 729 − 1,939 − 76 − 2,677 − 179 + 8,179 − 26 − 14,603 + 556         Mar + 12,217 + 16,480 − 734 − 1,307 + 251 − 2,474 + 447 − 7,680 + 437 − 5,421 − 12,996
         Apr + 8,204 + 14,231 − 737 − 2,183 − 1,252 − 1,855 + 84 − 34,669 − 628 + 27,008 + 315
         May + 7,812 + 14,012 − 991 − 1,419 − 1,091 − 2,699 − 30 − 9,159 + 607 + 770 + 9,981         June + 8,096 + 14,604 − 1,107 − 2,343 − 59 − 2,999 + 123 − 14,152 − 318 + 6,251 + 20,697
         July + 6,587 + 13,504 − 1,398 − 2,439 + 277 − 3,356 + 164 + 5,603 + 847 − 13,201 − 1,588
         Aug + 2,844 + 10,977 − 1,249 − 4,731 + 314 − 2,467 + 80 − 4,982 + 517 + 1,541 − 15,748         Sep + 4,924 + 11,977 − 920 − 4,230 + 880 − 2,782 − 53 − 22,177 + 204 + 17,101 − 13,931
         Oct + 6,513 + 12,502 − 1,164 − 2,643 + 342 − 2,524 − 22 + 2,553 + 839 − 9,884 + 23,124
         Nov + 7,164 + 11,821 − 1,231 − 1,498 + 453 − 2,380 − 186 − 17,862 − 182 + 11,066 − 10,787         Dec + 6,221 + 10,537 − 992 − 2,389 + 716 − 1,650 − 10 − 8,100 − 621 + 2,510 − 9,147
2005         Jan + 6,812 + 13,333 − 1,464 − 2,652 + 215 − 2,621 − 1,218 + 11,994 − 353 − 17,234 − 1,641
         Feb + 9,086 + 13,571 − 944 − 1,796 + 618 − 2,363 − 106 − 9,437 + 494 − 37 + 18,279         Mar + 12,049 + 16,324 − 1,006 − 1,873 + 947 − 2,344 − 169 − 26,590 − 322 + 15,032 − 23,451
         Apr + 7,176 + 12,719 − 1,073 − 936 − 2,055 − 1,479 − 199 − 20,838 + 404 + 13,457 + 13,005
         May + 5,541 + 12,079 − 993 − 2,460 − 1,021 − 2,063 + 273 + 10,620 − 141 − 16,293 − 16,881         June  
p + 10,357 + 16,841 − 1,297 − 2,903 + 666 − 2,950 + 37 − 7,856 + 967 − 3,505 + 19,723
1From the beginning of 1993, figures subject to significant uncertainty included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. —
owing to changes in the method of data collection for foreign trade. — 4Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, goods returned. — 5See footnote 3. — 6Excluding the expenditure on
exports fob. — 3From January 1993, including additional estimates for freight and insurance included in the cif import figure. — 7Capital
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are exports: −. — 8 Increase: −. 
68*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
X External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2005
Country / group of countries  2002  2003  2004 1 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun  p 
All countries  2 Exports 651,320 664,455 731,092 60,557 59,720 65,206 64,496 63,546 68,789
Imports 518,532 534,534 575,973 47,224 46,149 48,882 51,777 51,468 51,948Balance + 132,788 + 129,921 + 155,119 + 13,333 + 13,571 + 16,324 + 12,719 + 12,079 + 16,841
I Exports 470,873 490,672 541,391 44,716 44,857 48,875 48,296 47,710 ...European countries
Imports 372,955 384,939 409,245 33,545 33,617 35,691 37,112 37,252 ...Balance + 97,918 + 105,733 + 132,146 + 11,171 + 11,240 + 13,183 + 11,184 + 10,458 ...
Exports 408,286 426,342 466,280 38,477 38,958 42,183 41,849 41,007 ... 1 EU member states (25)
Imports 314,981 324,043 342,694 27,706 27,893 29,877 30,738 31,108 ...Balance + 93,304 + 102,299 + 123,587 + 10,771 + 11,065 + 12,306 + 11,111 + 9,899 ...
Memo item
Exports 354,813 369,776 404,796 33,627 34,080 36,887 36,370 35,423 ...  EU member states (15)
Imports 262,849 266,404 284,564 23,355 23,491 25,271 25,983 26,205 ...Balance + 91,964 + 103,372 + 120,232 + 10,272 + 10,589 + 11,616 + 10,388 + 9,218 ...
Euro-area Exports 276,270 288,668 317,672 26,446 26,633 29,148 28,777 27,935 ...
countries Imports 211,642 215,705 231,020 18,696 18,985 20,794 20,992 20,987 ...
Balance + 64,628 + 72,963 + 86,652 + 7,750 + 7,648 + 8,355 + 7,785 + 6,948 ...
of which
Austria Exports 33,863 35,857 39,972 3,197 3,130 3,457 3,427 3,484 ...
Imports 21,047 21,453 24,397 1,804 1,952 1,989 2,114 2,049 ...Balance + 12,816 + 14,404 + 15,575 + 1,393 + 1,178 + 1,468 + 1,313 + 1,435 ...
Belgium and Exports 34,108 38,413 44,169 3,619 3,938 4,286 4,080 3,850 ...
Luxembourg Imports 26,505 26,132 29,332 2,456 2,758 2,805 2,985 2,910 ...
Balance + 7,603 + 12,282 + 14,837 + 1,163 + 1,181 + 1,481 + 1,095 + 941 ...
France Exports 68,721 69,025 74,493 6,450 6,239 7,183 6,945 6,665 ...
Imports 48,200 48,545 51,451 4,205 4,071 4,307 4,903 4,571 ...Balance + 20,521 + 20,480 + 23,042 + 2,245 + 2,167 + 2,876 + 2,042 + 2,093 ...
Italy Exports 47,335 48,414 51,934 4,241 4,314 4,671 4,564 4,441 ...
Imports 33,482 34,259 35,178 2,764 2,798 2,911 3,146 3,121 ...Balance + 13,853 + 14,156 + 16,756 + 1,476 + 1,516 + 1,760 + 1,418 + 1,319 ...
Netherlands Exports 40,463 42,219 46,126 3,699 3,635 3,936 3,910 3,938 ...
Imports 40,751 42,301 46,602 4,009 3,904 4,908 3,845 4,528 ...Balance − 288 − 83 − 476 − 310 − 269 − 972 + 65 − 590 ...
Spain Exports 29,436 32,364 36,309 3,115 3,153 3,397 3,476 3,473 ...
Imports 15,532 16,518 17,108 1,479 1,433 1,615 1,613 1,664 ...Balance + 13,903 + 15,846 + 19,202 + 1,636 + 1,721 + 1,782 + 1,864 + 1,809 ...
Other EU member Exports 132,016 137,674 148,608 12,031 12,325 13,034 13,072 13,072 ...
states Imports 103,339 108,337 111,673 9,010 8,908 9,083 9,746 10,121 ...
Balance + 28,677 + 29,336 + 36,935 + 3,021 + 3,417 + 3,952 + 3,326 + 2,951 ...
of which
United Exports 53,761 55,597 60,025 4,985 5,173 5,270 5,153 4,973 ...Kingdom Imports 33,075 31,712 33,768 3,055 3,047 2,741 3,250 3,268 ...
Balance + 20,685 + 23,885 + 26,257 + 1,930 + 2,126 + 2,529 + 1,903 + 1,705 ...
Exports 62,588 64,331 75,111 6,239 5,899 6,692 6,447 6,703 ... 2 Other European
Imports 57,974 60,897 66,551 5,839 5,723 5,815 6,374 6,144 ... countries
Balance + 4,614 + 3,434 + 8,560 + 400 + 176 + 877 + 73 + 559 ...
II Exports 178,818 172,329 188,334 15,748 14,789 16,198 16,119 15,755 ...Non-European
Imports 144,950 148,895 163,688 13,631 12,486 13,143 14,611 14,158 ... countries
Balance + 33,869 + 23,434 + 24,646 + 2,117 + 2,303 + 3,055 + 1,509 + 1,597 ...
Exports 11,797 12,072 13,603 1,148 1,044 1,194 1,197 1,210 ... 1 Africa
Imports 10,248 10,239 10,498 890 769 1,120 1,140 1,055 ...Balance + 1,549 + 1,832 + 3,104 + 258 + 274 + 74 + 57 + 155 ...
Exports 89,081 79,629 84,514 6,756 6,794 7,347 7,403 7,079 ... 2 America
Imports 52,822 51,948 53,965 4,204 4,193 4,086 5,026 4,654 ...Balance + 36,259 + 27,681 + 30,549 + 2,552 + 2,601 + 3,261 + 2,377 + 2,425 ...
of which
Exports 68,263 61,654 64,802 5,082 5,159 5,558 5,562 5,418 ... United States
Imports 40,376 39,231 40,265 3,117 3,146 2,995 3,712 3,357 ...Balance + 27,887 + 22,423 + 24,538 + 1,965 + 2,013 + 2,562 + 1,850 + 2,061 ...
Exports 72,915 75,620 84,727 7,372 6,492 7,194 7,078 6,998 ... 3 Asia
Imports 79,892 84,783 97,190 8,383 7,403 7,772 8,297 8,279 ...Balance − 6,977 − 9,162 − 12,462 − 1,011 − 911 − 577 − 1,219 − 1,281 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 15,045 15,511 17,351 1,746 1,420 1,549 1,498 1,649 ...
Imports 4,696 4,469 4,382 375 304 357 357 391 ...Balance + 10,349 + 11,043 + 12,969 + 1,372 + 1,116 + 1,192 + 1,141 + 1,258 ...
Japan Exports 12,576 11,889 12,693 1,146 1,105 1,228 1,147 940 ...
Imports 19,896 19,684 21,094 1,684 1,489 1,685 1,853 1,663 ...Balance − 7,320 − 7,795 − 8,401 − 539 − 384 − 457 − 706 − 722 ...
Exports 14,571 18,265 20,995 1,590 1,412 1,581 1,596 1,624 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 21,338 25,681 32,455 2,971 2,761 2,835 2,855 3,027 ... of China  
3 
Balance − 6,768 − 7,417 − 11,460 − 1,382 − 1,349 − 1,255 − 1,259 − 1,403 ...
Exports 5,026 5,008 5,490 472 460 462 442 468 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 1,988 1,925 2,035 154 121 165 147 170 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,038 + 3,083 + 3,454 + 318 + 339 + 298 + 294 + 298 ...
Memo item
Exports 25,282 24,515 26,814 2,228 2,028 2,217 2,202 2,159 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 26,660 27,119 29,989 2,614 2,086 2,192 2,398 2,353 ... South-East Asia  4 
Balance − 1,377 − 2,603 − 3,175 − 386 − 58 + 25 − 197 − 194 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, broken down by region for non-EU countries. — 2Including fuel and other
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. —countries according to the current position. — 1The figures on “All 3Excluding Hong Kong. — 4Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
countries” include revisions for the year 2004 which have not yet been Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thai land. 
69*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
X External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2000 − 49,006 − 37,188 + 3,386 + 1,668 − 3,012 + 2,221 − 16,081 − 2,757 − 753 − 651 − 6,625
2001 − 49,862 − 37,821 + 4,254 + 1,080 − 2,431 + 3,488 − 18,433 − 2,544 − 591 − 359 − 9,1152002 − 35,473 − 35,154 + 2,771 + 1,418 − 1,556 + 5,237 − 8,188 − 2,028 + 497 − 30 − 14,7122003 − 33,970 − 36,761 + 1,719 + 1,624 − 755 + 5,086 − 4,884 − 1,814 + 1,440 − 155 − 13,6282004 − 30,964 − 34,822 + 4,318 + 1,626 − 531 + 5,316 − 6,870 − 1,342 + 819 + 262 − 145
2003         Q4 − 4,590 − 6,823 + 582 + 443 + 23 + 1,266 − 81 − 344 + 374 − 1 − 2,009
2004         Q1 − 7,088 − 6,493 + 590 + 389 − 167 + 1,275 − 2,681 − 336 + 267 + 308 − 771
         Q2 − 5,945 − 8,722 + 1,532 + 306 − 291 + 1,442 − 213 − 368 + 71 − 11 − 2,390         Q3 − 11,400 − 13,584 + 1,011 + 464 + 21 + 1,425 − 738 − 294 + 220 − 161 + 1,632         Q4 − 6,531 − 6,023 + 1,184 + 466 − 94 + 1,174 − 3,238 − 344 + 261 + 127 + 1,384
2005         Q1 − 6,322 − 6,924 + 1,202 + 404 + 1,010 + 1,104 − 3,117 − 341 + 91 + 246 + 1,534
         Q2 − 6,299 − 8,330 + 1,403 + 461 − 299 + 953 − 487 − 361 + 37 − 134 − 2,276
2004         Aug − 4,731 − 5,591 + 518 + 142 − 8 + 441 − 233 − 85 + 47 − 62 + 376
         Sep − 4,230 − 4,945 + 173 + 168 − 59 + 501 − 68 − 109 − 7 − 48 + 927
         Oct − 2,643 − 3,290 + 410 + 124 − 2 + 381 − 266 − 77 + 111 + 37 + 304
         Nov − 1,498 − 1,852 + 381 + 128 − 38 + 371 − 489 − 119 + 5 + 36 + 417         Dec − 2,389 − 882 + 394 + 214 − 55 + 421 − 2,483 − 148 + 144 + 54 + 662
2005         Jan − 2,652 − 2,346 + 252 + 140 + 1,175 + 379 − 2,253 − 136 − 5 + 87 + 129
         Feb − 1,796 − 2,104 + 476 + 74 + 22 + 343 − 608 − 89 − 76 + 74 + 544         Mar − 1,873 − 2,474 + 473 + 190 − 187 + 382 − 257 − 116 + 172 + 85 + 862
         Apr − 936 − 1,692 + 435 + 204 − 249 + 325 + 42 − 101 + 102 − 47 − 2,008
         May − 2,460 − 2,830 + 511 + 138 + 2 + 303 − 584 − 118 − 13 − 48 − 973         June − 2,903 − 3,808 + 457 + 119 − 51 + 325 + 56 − 142 − 53 − 39 + 705
1From January 2002, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Remittances Other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2000 − 28,354 − 19,094 − 17,100 − 15,398 − 1,995 − 9,260 − 3,458 − 5,802 − 1,599 − 1,189 − 410
2001 − 27,416 − 16,927 − 14,257 − 12,587 − 2,670 − 10,489 − 3,520 − 6,969 − 387 − 1,361 + 9742002 − 28,061 − 16,286 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 3,241 − 11,776 − 3,470 − 8,305 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,2042003 − 28,684 − 18,730 − 15,426 − 13,730 − 3,304 − 9,954 − 3,332 − 6,622 + 312 − 1,238 + 1,5502004 − 28,423 − 17,570 − 14,216 − 12,739 − 3,354 − 10,853 − 3,180 − 7,673 + 430 − 1,094 + 1,524
2003         Q4 − 6,351 − 4,099 − 2,859 − 2,662 − 1,240 − 2,251 − 833 − 1,418 − 16 − 461 + 445
2004         Q1 − 5,711 − 3,169 − 2,316 − 1,672 − 853 − 2,541 − 795 − 1,747 + 280 − 254 + 535
         Q2 − 7,553 − 4,457 − 4,469 − 4,162 + 12 − 3,096 − 795 − 2,301 + 177 − 239 + 416         Q3 − 8,605 − 5,714 − 4,434 − 4,142 − 1,280 − 2,891 − 795 − 2,096 + 191 − 261 + 451         Q4 − 6,554 − 4,229 − 2,996 − 2,763 − 1,233 − 2,324 − 795 − 1,529 − 218 − 340 + 122
2005         Q1 − 7,328 − 4,720 − 3,734 − 3,189 − 986 − 2,608 − 732 − 1,877 − 1,493 − 2,040 + 547
         Q2 − 6,493 − 3,564 − 3,771 − 3,322 + 206 − 2,928 − 732 − 2,197 + 110 − 317 + 427
2004         Aug − 2,467 − 1,634 − 1,193 − 1,086 − 441 − 833 − 265 − 568 + 80 − 80 + 160
         Sep − 2,782 − 1,879 − 1,624 − 1,561 − 255 − 903 − 265 − 638 − 53 − 79 + 26
         Oct − 2,524 − 1,739 − 1,285 − 1,224 − 454 − 785 − 265 − 520 − 22 − 95 + 73
         Nov − 2,380 − 1,666 − 1,213 − 1,126 − 453 − 715 − 265 − 450 − 186 − 117 − 69         Dec − 1,650 − 825 − 498 − 413 − 327 − 825 − 265 − 560 − 10 − 128 + 118
2005         Jan − 2,621 − 1,739 − 1,456 − 1,156 − 283 − 881 − 244 − 638 − 1,218 − 1,896 + 678
         Feb − 2,363 − 1,484 − 1,059 − 901 − 426 − 879 − 244 − 635 − 106 − 63 − 43         Mar − 2,344 − 1,496 − 1,219 − 1,132 − 277 − 848 − 244 − 604 − 169 − 81 − 88
         Apr − 1,479 − 591 − 1,043 − 987 + 452 − 888 − 244 − 644 − 199 − 101 − 98
         May − 2,063 − 922 − 1,014 − 949 + 91 − 1,141 − 244 − 897 + 273 − 114 + 387         June − 2,950 − 2,051 − 1,714 − 1,386 − 337 − 899 − 244 − 655 + 37 − 101 + 138
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
X External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
  
€ million
2004 2005
Item 2002 2003 2004 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Apr May June
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 254,047 − 199,019 − 238,065 − 100,738 − 44,435 − 150,091 − 90,038 − 70,972 − 9,068 − 9,999
1 Direct investment  1 − 16,120 + 3,556 + 5,853 − 9,741 + 8,734 − 10,463 − 12,622 − 2,295 + 600 − 10,927
Equity capital − 38,612 − 14,801 + 25,938 + 4,075 + 1,188 − 2,741 − 4,881 − 2,153 − 1,053 − 1,675
Reinvested earnings  2 + 9,740 + 4,251 + 899 + 145 + 925 − 220 + 2,706 + 946 + 1,158 + 602
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors + 21,345 + 24,060 − 13,415 − 12,044 + 8,209 − 6,713 − 8,825 − 591 + 592 − 8,826Other capital − 8,594 − 9,954 − 7,570 − 1,917 − 1,587 − 789 − 1,622 − 497 − 97 − 1,027
2 Portfolio investment − 62,944 − 47,377 − 112,900 − 25,620 − 19,534 − 66,878 − 53,175 − 20,286 − 10,679 − 22,210
Equity
3 − 4,674 + 7,434 + 6,199 + 6,014 − 2,127 + 794 + 1,042 + 3,179 − 3,250 + 1,113
Mutual fund shares  4 − 7,088 − 4,073 − 11,951 − 3,133 + 780 − 14,506 − 7,999 − 1,844 − 2,177 − 3,978
Bonds and notes  5 − 47,456 − 54,045 − 99,938 − 20,990 − 20,222 − 55,973 − 44,705 − 18,651 − 7,199 − 18,855
Money market instruments − 3,726 + 3,307 − 7,210 − 7,510 + 2,035 + 2,808 − 1,512 − 2,971 + 1,948 − 490
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 942 − 63 − 4,193 + 426 − 3,427 − 3,437 − 531 + 241 − 1,023 + 252
4 Credit transactions − 172,354 − 152,053 − 123,240 − 65,090 − 29,211 − 68,134 − 22,683 − 48,105 + 2,260 + 23,163
MFIs  7,8 − 132,536 − 122,305 − 121,390 − 33,208 − 37,222 − 57,496 − 46,925 − 60,960 + 15,575 − 1,541
Long-term − 33,790 − 32,555 + 6,297 − 1,007 − 1,864 − 11,076 − 20,999 − 9,865 − 4,834 − 6,301Short-term − 98,746 − 89,750 − 127,687 − 32,201 − 35,358 − 46,420 − 25,926 − 51,095 + 20,409 + 4,760
Enterprises and households − 10,976 − 31,245 − 1,577 − 1,642 + 5,159 − 14,492 + 10,282 + 5,857 − 1,078 + 5,503
Long-term − 1,396 − 2,880 − 3,363 − 1,040 − 845 − 1,091 − 1,396 − 643 − 127 − 626Short-term  
7 − 9,580 − 28,365 + 1,787 − 602 + 6,004 − 13,401 + 11,678 + 6,500 − 952 + 6,129
General government + 7,168 + 1,267 + 2,578 + 1,191 + 165 + 8,686 − 1,488 − 5,848 + 4,469 − 109
Long-term + 218 + 694 + 781 + 183 + 285 + 2,200 + 1,144 + 1,156 − 26 + 14Short-term  
7 + 6,950 + 572 + 1,798 + 1,008 − 120 + 6,486 − 2,633 − 7,005 + 4,495 − 123
Bundesbank − 36,010 + 230 − 2,851 − 31,431 + 2,687 − 4,833 + 15,449 + 12,845 − 16,707 + 19,310
5 Other investment  9 − 1,686 − 3,083 − 3,586 − 713 − 996 − 1,180 − 1,028 − 526 − 225 − 277
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 211,222 + 152,812 + 141,296 + 79,182 + 21,026 + 126,058 + 71,965 + 50,134 + 19,688 + 2,143
1 Direct investment  1 + 53,679 + 23,841 − 28,054 + 2,460 + 1,042 − 181 + 3,577 + 245 − 533 + 3,865
Equity capital + 35,874 + 40,475 + 21,585 + 7,235 + 11,385 + 941 + 4,984 + 7,688 − 2,478 − 226
Reinvested earnings  2 − 7,080 − 7,668 − 6,415 − 264 − 1,152 − 621 − 2,274 − 380 − 982 − 912
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 25,081 − 8,780 − 43,242 − 4,498 − 9,155 − 502 + 848 − 7,089 + 2,935 + 5,002Other capital − 197 − 186 + 19 − 13 − 37 + 2 + 20 + 25 − 8 + 2
2 Portfolio investment + 126,710 + 112,285 + 133,656 + 48,341 + 24,233 + 55,080 + 86,515 − 20,154 + 36,918 + 69,751
Equity  
3 + 15,907 + 24,188 − 5,198 + 6,557 + 491 + 3,534 + 26,396 − 44,720 + 36,679 + 34,436
Mutual fund shares − 682 − 1,844 + 5,064 + 4,035 + 1,181 + 128 + 826 + 804 − 211 + 232Bonds and notes  
5 + 82,880 + 67,141 + 147,724 + 44,516 + 22,575 + 41,947 + 58,607 + 19,175 + 3,983 + 35,450
Money market instruments + 28,605 + 22,799 − 13,934 − 6,766 − 13 + 9,472 + 686 + 4,586 − 3,533 − 367
3 Credit transactions + 30,751 + 16,647 + 35,476 + 28,360 − 4,314 + 71,229 − 18,123 + 70,035 − 16,689 − 71,469
MFIs  7,8 + 28,453 + 10,701 + 32,357 + 28,076 − 749 + 64,383 − 17,797 + 72,224 − 16,976 − 73,046
Long-term + 18,379 − 5,972 − 10,060 + 5,492 − 5,154 − 2,253 + 4,527 − 5,132 − 1,734 + 11,393Short-term + 10,075 + 16,672 + 42,417 + 22,584 + 4,405 + 66,636 − 22,324 + 77,357 − 15,242 − 84,439
Enterprises and households + 3,270 + 283 + 7,188 − 312 − 1,990 + 3,463 − 594 − 600 − 456 + 463
Long-term + 5,188 − 545 + 3,919 − 490 − 325 + 3,318 − 1,126 − 1,508 − 361 + 743Short-term  
7 − 1,918 + 828 + 3,269 + 177 − 1,665 + 145 + 532 + 908 − 95 − 280
General government − 1,625 + 3,680 − 1,619 + 1,950 − 2,044 + 5,152 + 958 − 1,386 + 701 + 1,643
Long-term − 125 + 4,859 − 385 + 1,180 − 845 + 3,015 − 416 + 778 + 89 − 1,283Short-term  
7 − 1,500 − 1,179 − 1,233 + 770 − 1,199 + 2,137 + 1,374 − 2,164 + 612 + 2,926
Bundesbank + 653 + 1,983 − 2,451 − 1,354 + 469 − 1,769 − 690 − 203 + 41 − 528
4 Other investment + 83 + 40 + 218 + 21 + 65 − 71 − 4 + 8 − 8 − 4
III Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) − 42,825 − 46,207 − 96,769 − 21,556 − 23,409 − 24,033 − 18,073 − 20,838 + 10,620 − 7,856
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including accumulated statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9In particular, subscriptions of the Federal
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- Government to international organisations. 
71*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
X External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
  
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold tovaluation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
 
 
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-
national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999         Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,9512004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2004         Feb 87,987 76,089 34,930 7,736 33,423 312 11,140 446 10,078 77,910
         Mar 104,464 79,717 38,266 7,610 33,841 312 23,981 454 9,545 94,920
         Apr 102,021 78,143 35,849 7,880 34,414 312 23,134 432 9,694 92,327
         May 89,877 76,473 35,705 7,685 33,083 312 12,641 451 8,537 81,340         June 69,837 76,996 35,793 7,390 33,813 312 − 7,951 480 9,003 60,834
         July 70,865 76,076 35,721 7,395 32,960 312 − 6,009 486 8,545 62,320
         Aug 87,570 77,171 37,195 7,395 32,581 312 9,455 632 7,755 79,815         Sep 100,176 75,729 36,680 6,996 32,054 312 23,480 655 7,625 92,552
         Oct 76,043 74,334 36,935 6,889 30,510 312 740 656 7,128 68,915
         Nov 85,702 73,506 37,527 6,685 29,294 312 11,233 651 6,937 78,765         Dec 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005         Jan 94,895 73,556 35,888 6,634 31,034 312 20,327 699 6,315 88,580
         Feb 75,603 72,794 36,348 6,538 29,908 312 1,809 687 5,542 70,061         Mar 100,452 73,813 36,399 6,143 31,271 312 25,627 699 6,322 94,131
         Apr 87,967 74,123 36,905 6,096 31,123 312 12,782 750 6,123 81,845
         May 107,063 76,431 37,282 6,340 32,809 350 29,451 831 6,292 100,771         June 90,055 78,700 39,816 5,830 33,054 350 10,141 864 5,822 84,232
         July 90,752 77,205 38,927 5,007 33,270 350 12,291 907 6,491 84,261
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previouslyowing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
72*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
X External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
2001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003  r 362,099 86,627 275,472 159,653 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2004  r 377,540 98,632 278,908 159,764 119,144 112,342 6,802 506,434 50,211 456,223 361,111 95,112 63,762 31,350
2005         Jan  r 382,505 104,285 278,220 160,839 117,381 110,265 7,116 496,674 51,400 445,274 354,672 90,602 58,810 31,792
         Feb  r 387,089 102,739 284,350 165,939 118,411 111,224 7,187 501,113 53,974 447,139 356,171 90,968 58,674 32,294
         Mar  r 404,137 110,865 293,272 169,376 123,896 116,685 7,211 506,424 53,104 453,320 358,183 95,137 62,334 32,803
         Apr  r 399,412 104,042 295,370 171,970 123,400 116,057 7,343 501,290 53,088 448,202 352,952 95,250 61,957 33,293
         May  r 399,568 105,101 294,467 170,833 123,634 116,096 7,538 506,017 54,474 451,543 357,126 94,417 60,741 33,676
         June 401,408 97,545 303,863 175,661 128,202 120,921 7,281 512,106 55,859 456,247 357,804 98,443 65,458 32,985
Industrial countries 2
 
2001 298,904 61,403 237,501 151,047 86,454 79,453 7,001 466,206 57,861 408,345 340,344 68,001 54,364 13,6372002  
4 278,074 62,861 215,213 133,509 81,704 75,996 5,708 493,155 55,770 437,385 372,464 64,921 50,731 14,190
2003  r 310,454 85,390 225,064 144,980 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,220
2004  r 335,809 97,485 238,324 148,649 89,675 84,903 4,772 468,592 48,304 420,288 349,293 70,995 53,480 17,515
2005         Jan  r 341,733 103,044 238,689 149,816 88,873 83,868 5,005 460,164 49,485 410,679 343,771 66,908 48,880 18,028
         Feb  r 345,360 101,484 243,876 154,337 89,539 84,497 5,042 464,670 52,100 412,570 345,421 67,149 48,875 18,274
         Mar  r 361,254 109,428 251,826 157,854 93,972 88,895 5,077 469,315 51,298 418,017 347,601 70,416 52,030 18,386
         Apr  r 355,423 102,200 253,223 160,200 93,023 87,849 5,174 463,858 51,281 412,577 342,393 70,184 51,408 18,776
         May  r 354,773 103,422 251,351 158,681 92,670 87,342 5,328 468,917 52,550 416,367 347,184 69,183 50,327 18,856
         June 355,614 95,769 259,845 163,385 96,460 91,296 5,164 474,721 53,958 420,763 348,047 72,716 54,489 18,227
EU member states 2
 
2001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003  r 230,673 81,430 149,243 94,092 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,642
2004  r 259,480 92,867 166,613 101,254 65,359 61,563 3,796 376,461 43,838 332,623 284,173 48,450 36,494 11,956
2005         Jan  r 266,065 98,539 167,526 102,530 64,996 61,056 3,940 373,837 45,051 328,786 283,179 45,607 33,293 12,314
         Feb  r 269,638 98,394 171,244 106,037 65,207 61,256 3,951 378,635 47,769 330,866 284,655 46,211 33,724 12,487
         Mar  r 281,139 105,827 175,312 106,885 68,427 64,450 3,977 380,898 46,856 334,042 285,647 48,395 35,454 12,941
         Apr  r 276,963 98,407 178,556 110,469 68,087 64,003 4,084 376,009 46,967 329,042 280,347 48,695 35,580 13,115
         May  r 273,517 99,525 173,992 106,378 67,614 63,415 4,199 379,894 48,221 331,673 283,799 47,874 34,771 13,103
         June 271,534 92,213 179,321 109,810 69,511 65,428 4,083 383,723 49,519 334,204 283,937 50,267 37,484 12,783
of which:  Euro-area member states 1
 
2001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,4042004 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 305,864 28,295 277,569 244,860 32,709 24,258 8,451
2005         Jan 165,116 56,084 109,032 64,130 44,902 42,203 2,699 307,084 29,126 277,958 247,197 30,761 22,135 8,626
         Feb 166,587 55,628 110,959 65,954 45,005 42,277 2,728 309,669 30,129 279,540 248,658 30,882 22,141 8,741         Mar 175,685 60,865 114,820 68,111 46,709 43,953 2,756 312,147 29,092 283,055 250,656 32,399 23,270 9,129
         Apr 173,153 58,239 114,914 68,253 46,661 43,833 2,828 311,548 28,801 282,747 250,293 32,454 23,288 9,166
         May 170,024 59,185 110,839 64,818 46,021 43,081 2,940 314,259 29,796 284,463 253,106 31,357 22,314 9,043         June 169,344 53,639 115,705 68,377 47,328 44,490 2,838 315,953 29,801 286,152 253,133 33,019 24,049 8,970
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2001 59,216 1,031 58,185 20,892 37,293 35,404 1,889 39,060 2,271 36,789 14,217 22,572 11,624 10,9482002  
4 53,597 956 52,641 15,404 37,237 35,410 1,827 40,268 1,926 38,342 15,386 22,956 11,891 11,065
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,2492004 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,835
2005         Jan 40,772 1,241 39,531 11,023 28,508 26,397 2,111 36,510 1,915 34,595 10,901 23,694 9,930 13,764
         Feb 41,729 1,255 40,474 11,602 28,872 26,727 2,145 36,443 1,874 34,569 10,750 23,819 9,799 14,020         Mar 42,883 1,437 41,446 11,522 29,924 27,790 2,134 37,109 1,806 35,303 10,582 24,721 10,304 14,417
         Apr 43,989 1,842 42,147 11,770 30,377 28,208 2,169 37,432 1,807 35,625 10,559 25,066 10,549 14,517
         May 44,795 1,679 43,116 12,152 30,964 28,754 2,210 37,100 1,924 35,176 9,942 25,234 10,414 14,820         June 45,794 1,776 44,018 12,276 31,742 29,625 2,117 37,385 1,901 35,484 9,757 25,727 10,969 14,758
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in January 2001, including Greece. — 2From May 2004, including the new
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in member states: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia ,
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia. — 3All
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. — 4Change in the
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X.7. — 1From reporting population owing to an increase in the exemption limit. 
73*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
X External sector
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Switzerland Norway Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK GBP SEK CHF NOK CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 2.926  27.421 115.740 25.580 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 2.753  26.912 111.198 25.143 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 2.483  21.248 111.949 23.303 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 2.4816 21.013 118.712 22.982 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 2.2620 20.116 121.240 22.614 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 2.3478 22.434 121.891 23.292 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 2.8410 22.718 119.508 24.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 2.9142 22.128 121.414 23.297 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 0.65874 8.8075 1.6003 8.3104 1.5840 1.6523 2.0145
2000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 0.60948 8.4452 1.5579 8.1129 1.3706 1.5889 2.0288
2001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 0.62187 9.2551 1.5105 8.0484 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 0.62883 9.1611 1.4670 7.5086 1.4838 1.7376 2.03662003 1.1312 130.97 7.4307 0.69199 9.1242 1.5212 8.0033 1.5817 1.7379 1.94382004 1.2439 134.44 7.4399 0.67866 9.1243 1.5438 8.3697 1.6167 1.6905 1.8731
2003         Dec 1.2286 132.43 7.4419 0.70196 9.0228 1.5544 8.2421 1.6131 1.6626 1.8982
2004         Jan 1.2613 134.13 7.4481 0.69215 9.1368 1.5657 8.5925 1.6346 1.6374 1.8751
         Feb 1.2646 134.78 7.4511 0.67690 9.1763 1.5734 8.7752 1.6817 1.6260 1.8262         Mar 1.2262 133.13 7.4493 0.67124 9.2346 1.5670 8.5407 1.6314 1.6370 1.8566
         Apr 1.1985 129.08 7.4436 0.66533 9.1653 1.5547 8.2976 1.6068 1.6142 1.8727
         May 1.2007 134.48 7.4405 0.67157 9.1277 1.5400 8.2074 1.6541 1.7033 1.9484         June 1.2138 132.86 7.4342 0.66428 9.1430 1.5192 8.2856 1.6492 1.7483 1.9301
         July 1.2266 134.08 7.4355 0.66576 9.1962 1.5270 8.4751 1.6220 1.7135 1.8961
         Aug 1.2176 134.54 7.4365 0.66942 9.1861 1.5387 8.3315 1.6007 1.7147 1.8604         Sep 1.2218 134.51 7.4381 0.68130 9.0920 1.5431 8.3604 1.5767 1.7396 1.8538
         Oct 1.2490 135.97 7.4379 0.69144 9.0620 1.5426 8.2349 1.5600 1.7049 1.8280
         Nov 1.2991 136.09 7.4313 0.69862 8.9981 1.5216 8.1412 1.5540 1.6867 1.8540         Dec 1.3408 139.14 7.4338 0.69500 8.9819 1.5364 8.2207 1.6333 1.7462 1.8737
2005         Jan 1.3119 135.63 7.4405 0.69867 9.0476 1.5469 8.2125 1.6060 1.7147 1.8620
         Feb 1.3014 136.55 7.4427 0.68968 9.0852 1.5501 8.3199 1.6128 1.6670 1.8192         Mar 1.3201 138.83 7.4466 0.69233 9.0884 1.5494 8.1880 1.6064 1.6806 1.8081
         Apr 1.2938 138.84 7.4499 0.68293 9.1670 1.5475 8.1763 1.5991 1.6738 1.7967
         May 1.2694 135.37 7.4443 0.68399 9.1931 1.5449 8.0814 1.5942 1.6571 1.7665         June 1.2165 132.22 7.4448 0.66895 9.2628 1.5391 7.8932 1.5111 1.5875 1.7175
         July 1.2037 134.75 7.4584 0.68756 9.4276 1.5578 7.9200 1.4730 1.6002 1.7732
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 14.15. For additional euro reference exchange rates of the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. — 2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics.
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the euro-area member states, the Deutsche Mark value of
the ECU * and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1As per data from the European exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). — 3Applicable from 1 January
Commission. — 2Up to 1998, reciprocal values of the exchange rates for the 1999. — 4Applicable from 1 January 2001. — 5Deutsche Mark conversion
Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999, euro reference rate. 
74*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
X External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
  
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item Effective nominal exchange rates of
Indicators of the German economy’s selected foreign currencies against the
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  1,2 currencies of 19 industrial countries  1,3 
EER-23  4 EER-42  5 19 industrial countries  3 49 countries  6 
In real terms
based on the
In real terms unit labour In real terms
based on the In real terms costs of the based on the based  on the
consumer national consumer Pound Japanese based on the deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices US dollar sterling yen GDP deflator  7 economy  7 total sales  7 based on consumer prices
1999 95.9 95.9 95.8 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.7 98.2 97.7 100.8 102.3 105.1
2000 86.1 86.0 85.9 85.3 87.9 85.8 91.4 92.8 91.1 105.4 105.2 117.9
2001 86.7 86.8 86.9 85.1 90.4 87.0 91.5 93.2 91.4 112.0 103.6 106.72002 89.2 90.3 90.3 88.4 94.8 90.8 92.4 94.2 92.6 110.7 104.2 100.82003 99.9 101.7 101.6 99.6 106.6 101.5 95.6 97.8 97.2 97.7 99.2 99.92004 103.8 105.8 105.5 104.0 111.0 105.4
p 95.6 99.3 98.8 89.8 103.4 101.7
1999         Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
         Q2 96.2 96.2 96.1 97.3 96.4 95.9 98.3 98.6 98.0 102.8 102.8 99.0         Q3 94.8 94.7 94.5 95.1 95.5 94.6 97.0 97.7 97.1 101.4 102.3 106.2         Q4 92.9 92.7 92.5 93.3 94.3 92.7 95.4 96.3 95.8 99.1 104.1 115.2
2000         Q1 89.5 89.4 89.2 88.3 91.0 89.2 93.4 94.8 93.4 101.5 106.4 114.9
         Q2 86.5 86.3 86.3 86.0 88.2 86.2 91.4 92.7 91.4 104.3 105.4 118.4         Q3 85.1 85.0 85.0 84.5 87.0 84.8 90.9 92.1 90.3 106.2 103.9 119.2         Q4 83.2 83.2 83.2 82.6 85.5 83.0 89.8 91.4 89.5 109.4 105.0 119.2
2001         Q1 88.3 88.0 88.3 86.3 90.9 87.8 92.2 93.8 92.0 109.3 102.4 108.1
         Q2 85.3 85.4 85.4 83.6 88.8 85.6 90.9 92.7 90.7 113.4 104.1 106.9         Q3 86.4 86.6 86.8 84.6 90.5 87.0 91.1 93.1 91.5 112.2 103.9 106.8         Q4 86.8 87.2 87.3 85.9 91.2 87.6 91.6 93.2 91.5 113.1 104.0 104.9
2002         Q1 86.0 86.9 87.0 85.0 90.4 86.8 91.6 93.3 91.0 116.6 104.9 98.8
         Q2 87.8 88.9 88.7 87.0 93.0 89.2 91.9 93.7 91.7 112.1 103.5 100.8
2002         July 91.2 92.4 . . 97.5 93.4 . 95.0 94.0 106.0 103.5 104.3
         Aug 90.7 91.8 92.2 90.3 96.9 92.8 92.7 94.3 93.3 107.3 103.5 104.3         Sep 90.7 92.0 . . 97.2 93.0 . 94.5 93.4 107.6 104.7 102.5
         Oct 91.1 92.5 . . 97.7 93.5 . 94.7 93.8 108.5 105.0 99.8
         Nov 91.9 93.1 93.4 91.2 98.5 93.9 93.2 94.7 93.6 106.8 104.3 100.8         Dec 92.9 94.4 . . 99.6 95.1 . 95.5 94.5 106.0 104.0 99.6
2003         Jan 95.3 96.8 . . 102.3 97.6 . 96.2 95.5 103.0 102.6 100.4
         Feb 96.6 98.1 97.7 95.9 103.7 98.9 94.6 96.8 96.3 102.2 101.2 99.2         Mar 97.4 98.9 . . 104.4 99.4 . 97.0 96.5 101.4 99.3 99.8
         Apr 97.9 99.6 . . 104.6 99.6 . 97.3 96.5 101.4 98.7 98.6
         May 101.8 103.5 102.5 100.4 108.5 103.3 96.1 98.7 98.0 96.7 96.9 97.7         June 102.2 104.1 . . 108.8 103.7 . 99.0 98.3 96.1 98.9 96.3
         July 101.0 102.9 . . 107.2 102.2 . 98.4 97.5 97.8 98.5 97.3
         Aug 99.8 101.7 102.0 100.4 106.0 101.1 96.0 97.9 96.8 99.1 98.1 98.3         Sep 99.6 101.6 . . 105.9 101.1 . 97.5 96.7 97.2 98.2 101.1
         Oct 101.3 103.3 . . 108.0 103.0 . 98.1 97.6 93.3 98.8 103.7
         Nov 101.2 103.2 104.2 101.8 108.0 102.9 95.8 97.9 97.4 93.0 99.5 103.9         Dec 104.2 106.3 . . 111.2 106.0 . 99.2 99.1 90.6 99.5 102.9
2004         Jan 105.4 107.4 . . 112.5 106.9 . 99.8 99.6 88.9 101.6 102.9
         Feb 105.3 107.3 106.5 105.1 112.3 106.8 96.4 99.5 99.5 89.3 104.1 102.4         Mar 103.4 105.4 . . 110.2 104.7 . 99.0 98.6 90.9 104.2 102.1
         Apr 101.6 103.6 . . 108.3 103.0 . 98.5 97.7 91.8 104.3 104.0
         May 102.4 104.4 104.1 102.4 109.5 104.1 95.1 98.7 98.3 93.4 103.7 100.0         June 102.3 104.2 . . 109.6 104.0 . 98.4 98.0 91.9 104.9 101.6
         July 102.8 104.8 . . 110.1 104.4 . 98.9 98.3 90.9 105.0 101.2
         Aug 102.7 104.8 104.5 103.1 109.9 104.4
p 95.1 99.0 98.4 91.3 104.6 100.5
         Sep 103.0 105.1 . . 110.3 104.6 . 99.2 98.4 90.7 102.8 100.8
         Oct 104.2 106.3 . . 111.5 105.8 . 99.6 99.0 88.9 101.8 100.8
         Nov 105.6 107.7 107.0 105.5 113.1 107.1 p 95.9 99.9 99.3 85.4 101.4 102.6
         Dec 107.1 109.3 . . 114.4 108.5 . 100.9 100.2 84.3 102.8 102.0
2005         Jan 105.8 107.9 . . 112.9 106.9 . 100.3 99.2 85.3 101.7 103.6
         Feb 105.1 107.1 107.3 105.3 111.9 105.8 p 95.8 100.1 98.8 86.1 102.9 102.4
         Mar 106.0 108.2 . . 112.9 106.8 . 100.4 98.9 85.3 103.0 101.4
         Apr 105.1 107.2 . . 111.9 105.8 . 99.9 98.5 86.8 104.0 100.4
         May 104.0 106.2 ... ... 110.6 104.6 p 94.9 99.6 97.9 87.8 103.2 102.0
         June 101.2 103.4 . . 107.6 101.8 . 98.6 96.6 89.6 104.4 102.0
         July 101.7 104.0 . . 108.0 102.0 . 98.9 96.6 90.7 101.6 99.8
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of United States. The weights used in these calculations are based on
the currency concerned. — 1The method of calculation is consistent with manufactured goods trade between 1999 and 2001 and capture
the procedure used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of third-market effects. Where consumer prices were not yet available,the euro (see Monthly Bulletin, November 2001, pp 51−65). In contrast to estimates have been used. For details of the methodology, see
footnote 4, the weights used are based on the relevant trade in the period ECB, Monthly Bulletin, September 2004, pp 69−72 and the ECB’s Occasional
from 1995 to 1997. — 2Decline in the figures implies an increase in Paper No 2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website
competitiveness. — 3Euro-area countries as well as Canada, Denmark, (www.ecb.int). — 5ECB calculations. In addition to the countries belonging
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. — to the EER-23 group (see footnote 4), this group also includes the following4ECB calculations based on the weighted averages of the effective countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, India, Indonesia,
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Romania ,
Australia, Canada, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Hong Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Norway, Poland, Singapore, 6Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-42 group except
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania and Malta. — 7 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X External sector

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the External Communica-tion Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or CD-ROM from the Div-ision Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2004 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2005 Monthly Report.
September 2004
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2003
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005

– Greater flexibility on the German labour
market
– How the Bundesbank analyses enterprises’
creditworthiness
– New capital requirements for credit institutions
(Basel II)
October 2004
– Report on the stability of the German financial
system
– Stress tests at German banks – methods and
results
November 2004
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2004
December 2004
– Demographic burdens on growth and wealth
in Germany
– The insurance sector as a financial intermediary
– Credit default swaps – functions, importance
and information content
January 2005
– The relationship between money and prices– German banks’ foreign direct investment and
cross-border services
– Comments on reforming the Stability and
Growth Pact
February 2005
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2004-05March 2005
– Credit growth, bank capital and economic
activity
– German balance of payments in 2004
April 2005
– The changes to the Stability and Growth Pact
– Deficit-limiting budgetary rules and a national
stability pact in Germany
– Supervision of financial conglomerates in Ger-
many
May 2005
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2005
June 2005
– Investment and financing in 2004
– Germany’s external relations with the People’s
Republic of China
July 2005
– Rapid change in paid employment
– Exchange rates and interest rate differentials:
recent developments since the introduction of
the euro
August 2005
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2005
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20033
European economic and monetary union,February 2004
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200542 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, June 20053,5
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2003,
September 20046
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 2000 and 2002, Novem-ber 2004
6
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, February 20053
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 International capital links,
April 20051, 6
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2004
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20043
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Solely available on the internet, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Stat-istics”, “External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.6Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2005
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
15/2005
Discriminatory auctions with seller discretion: evi-
dence from German treasury auctions
16/2005
Consumption, wealth and business cycles: why isGermany different?
17/2005
Tax incentives and the location of FDI: evidence
from a panel of German multinationals
18/2005
Monetary disequilibria and the Euro/Dollar ex-change rate
19/2005
Berechnung trendbereinigter Indikatoren f/C252r
Deutschland mit Hilfe von Filterverfahren
20/2005
How synchronized are central and east Europeaneconomies with the euro area? Evidence from a
structural factor model
21/2005
Asymptotic distribution of linear unbiased estima-tors in the presence of heavy-tailed stochastic re-gressors and residuals
22/2005
The role of contracting schemes for the welfare
costs of nominal rigidities over the business cycle
23/2005
The cross-sectional dynamics of German businesscycles: a bird’s eye view
24/2005
Forecasting German GDP using alternative factormodels based on large datasetsSeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
3/2005
Do banks diversity loan portfolios? A tentative
answer based on individual bank loan portfolios
4/2005
Banks, markets, and efficiency
5/2005
The forecast ability of risk-neutral densities of for-
eign exchange
6/2005
Cyclical implications of minimum capital require-
ments
7/2005
Banks’ regulatory capital buffer and the businesscycle: evidence for German savings and coopera-tive banks
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the internet.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

