MONTHLY REPORT
FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE
2005
Vol 57
No 2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1Fax +49 69 5601071Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 18 February 2005.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on theinternet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
around the turn of 2004-05 5
Overview 6Global and European setting 10Monetary policy, banking business and
the capital market 19
Money market management andliquidity needs 20
An indicator to measure the liquiditypremium in the bond market 29
Economic conditions in Germany 33
Sharp increase in low-paid part-timejobs 38
Foreign trade and payments 46Public finances 53
The level of pension adjustmentsfollowing the introduction of the“sustainability factor” 60
The current status of the excessivedeficit procedure against Germany 63
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
4Capital market 48*
Public finances in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*External sector 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
5The economic scene
in Germany
around the turn
of 2004-05

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
6OverviewStill no upswing
The German economy has been stagnating
since the third quarter of 2004. Until then,German economic activity had been fuelledmainly by strong global economic growthand the ensuing buoyant foreign demand.Since those external impulses lost some oftheir initial momentum, the dynamics of theGerman economy have once again beenshaped by persistently weak domestic de-mand. This was compounded by burdens re-sulting from the sharp increase in oil pricesand the appreciation of the euro. Accordingto provisional figures from the Federal Statis-tical Office, in the final quarter of 2004 realGDP actually declined by 0.2% on the quarterafter adjustment for the usual seasonal vari-ations and extra working days. Thus, the cur-rent figures are less favourable than had beenexpected in the light of the Federal StatisticalOffice’s flash estimate a few weeks ago.
It should, however, be borne in mind when
interpreting the first release of the nationalaccounts data for the fourth quarter of 2004that the working-day adjustment for thisperiod had a strong downward impact on therecorded rate of change. Owing to the quirksof the calendar, there were more workingdays in the final quarter of 2004 comparedwith the average in previous years. If this fac-tor is discounted, the figures show an in-crease of 0.4% instead of a decrease of ap-proximately 0.2%. In so far as the additionalworking hours were not exploited for produc-tion to the usual extent, the adjusted outputfigure, although absolutely correct in terms ofthe number of working days, would under-GDP in 2004
Q4
Marked effects
of working-day
variations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
7state the true cyclical position. The fact that
the additional working days were concen-trated in the last two weeks of the year, ie inthe traditional holiday period around Christ-mas, supports this hypothesis. Quite apartfrom the uncertainties associated with this,however, there is no doubt that, after stag-nating in the third quarter of 2004, the eco-nomic recovery again failed to make any pro-gress in the final quarter of the year. Enter-prises’ investment demand appears to haveweakened again following a sharp rise in thethird quarter. Although there was a slight in-crease in private consumption, it is too earlyto conclude that this indicates a sustained in-crease in the propensity to consume.
Nonetheless, there is no reason to be pessim-
istic about the outlook for the current year.Evidently, many consumers and investors sub-scribe to the view that the current flat move-ment will give way to renewed growth. Enter-prises, in any case, began the new year withmore favourable business expectations. Thisis particularly so in the case of the wholesale/retail trade sector. This may be due partly tothe fact that, according to consumer surveys,there was a marked improvement in themood among households in January. Individ-uals’ expectations concerning their incomeand the economy turned positive and thepropensity to purchase rose considerably. Al-though industry is somewhat more cautiousabout its export prospects than it has previ-ously been, business expectations remainfavourable.
Despite the burdens resulting from the appre-
ciation of the euro, the upward trend is clear-ly expected to continue in this area, too. The
German economy is benefiting from its pres-ence in the most important growth regions inthe world and from the restructuring and di-versification of its production sites. The moreintensive utilisation of the international div-ision of labour through relocating certain pro-duction processes abroad is boosting Germa-ny’s competitive position, while simultaneous-ly rendering it less susceptible to temporaryexchange-rate fluctuations. In addition, theGerman economy has improved its competi-tiveness vis-/C224-vis the economies of the othereuro-area countries by exercising cost discip-line on the wage front. Measures to creategreater flexibility in labour utilisation andmore efficient production processes have alsoplayed a significant role. Measured by the de-velopment of relative unit labour costs in the
1998 Q4 = 100, quarterly, log scale 1
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
...the other euro-area countries...19 industrial countriesIndicator based on unit labour
costs in the enterprise sector
vis-à-vis...
1998 2005German price competitiveness
1 Scale inverted: rising curve (decline in
values) denotes an increase in competitive-
ness. — -  = Latest position: estimate as per
17 February 2005.
Deutsche Bundesbank- 
- 
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Improved
sentiment and
expectations
since the turn
of the year
External
competitiveness

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
8enterprise sector, since the start of monetary
union German suppliers have improved theircompetitiveness by 7% compared with theother euro-area countries.
This is also reflected in the favourable price
trend of recent years. The price climate hasremained essentially relaxed in the past fewmonths, too. In particular, external influences,especially the appreciation of the euro, havehelped to ease inflationary pressures. The sta-bilising of oil price developments and the eas-ing of prices on some commodity marketshave been key factors in the decline, on aver-age, of German import prices since October.At the consumer level, however, this declinewas eclipsed up to the end of the year by thefurther increase in tobacco tax in Decemberand the other tax measures which came intoforce beforehand as well as the effects of thehealth service reform. However, at 1.6% therise in the consumer price index in Januarywas down considerably on the year. Thus,price developments are bolstering the pur-chasing power of households’ disposable in-come.
In view of the very subdued development to-
wards the end of the year, there was littlechange in the labour market situation either.Rising unemployment was once again accom-panied by an increase in employment, how-ever the latter consisted mainly of “mini-jobs”, subsidised start-ups (“Me-PLCs”) or“one-euro jobs” that allow benefit recipientsto earn a little extra income. By contrast, thenumber of full-time employees subject to fullsocial security contributions continued to fallup to the end of the period under review. Atfirst glance, this might appear to indicate a
trend towards the substitution of “normal”jobs with publicly subsidised forms of employ-ment. However, a closer examination of theunderlying changes shows that there is nobasis for such a sweeping assumption. In gen-eral, jobs subject to social security contribu-tions are not being eroded in the same areasin which government subsidised jobs or low-paid part-time work are simultaneously beingcreated. These new forms of employmenthave provided a greater degree of flexibilityon the labour market which has, in turn,created additional jobs (see p 37-40).
The sharp rise in the official unemployment
figure at the start of the year to more thanfive million has led to a debate on the truescale of the unemployment problem in Ger-many. It certainly needs to be borne in mindthat the (seasonally-adjusted) rise of 225,000in the number of people unemployed be-tween the end of last year and the end ofJanuary 2005 is due mainly to the first-timeregistration of persons previously receivingsocial assistance, even though they werewithout work beforehand, too. Thus, the risein the official unemployment figure is purelyof a statistical nature. On the other hand, itshould not be overlooked that the shortageof competitive jobs in Germany is greaterthan the official unemployment figure imme-diately implies. The macroeconomic costswhich this causes year after year are one ofmain reasons behind the current strainedpublic finance situation.
Last year, the general government deficit re-
mained virtually unchanged from its level in
Relaxed price
climate
New forms of
employmentRise in
unemployment
in January...
...of a statistical
nature

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
92003 (3.8% of GDP). The lack of improve-
ment was due primarily to a decline in rev-enue. Two key factors behind this were theextensive tax cuts made at the beginning of2004 and the structure of macroeconomicgrowth, biased as it was towards exports,which yield less tax revenue than domesticeconomic activity. By contrast, expenditurewas actually reduced, even in absolute terms.
The general government deficit could go
down significantly this year. The target ofkeeping within the 3% ceiling for the firsttime since 2001 seems feasible from today’sperspective. However, major uncertainties,especially surrounding the macroeconomicdevelopment and the financial impact of thenumerous fiscal policy measures, entail sig-nificant risks. The success of the consolidationefforts this year will hinge on expendituregrowth remaining contained. This will requireefforts from all levels of government. In themedium term, further consolidation measuresare needed to reduce the government def-icits, observe the national deficit ceilings andbring the debt ratio back down again. This ismade more difficult by the fact that a largepart of the planned deficit reduction for thisyear is intended to be achieved through one-off relief measures. The reduction of the def-icit ratio to 1
1/C252% in 2008 envisaged in theupdated stability programme of Decem-
ber 2004 does not appear ambitious enoughgiven the relatively optimistic assessment ofmacroeconomic development in that pro-gramme.
Monetary policy has maintained its expan-
sionary stance in the last few months. In thefourth quarter of 2004, the money stock M3grew at a (seasonally-adjusted) annual rate ofjust under 7
1/C252%, ie almost as strongly as it
had done in the preceding three-monthperiod. The main driving force behind this de-velopment is the strong growth in privatecredit which is, however, emanating less fromthe German economy than from the othereuro-area countries. Given the ample provi-sion of liquidity and the ensuing investmentpressure, the tendency towards an easing ofcapital market conditions continued with littleinterruption. Thus, in the fourth quarter of2004, long-term interest rates in the euroarea clearly decoupled from the US dollarinterest rate trend and fell to 3
1/C252%. They
have almost gone down to their historical lowreached in the third quarter of 2003. Thus,from a financing perspective, the conditionsfor private investors and consumers have be-come slightly more favourable still. Thepresent monetary policy stance is thus not im-peding an ongoing economic recovery.Large general
government
deficit in 2004
Need for
consolidationExpansionary
monetary policy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
10Global and
European settingWorld economic activity
In the autumn of 2004, the global economy
remained on the somewhat flatter growthtrack on which it had embarked in the sum-mer. The fact that crude oil prices, which hadreached a new all-time high at the end ofOctober, receded noticeably in the ensuingperiod (at the end of December, the price ofNorth Sea Brent was a quarter down on theprice two months earlier) is likely to haveplayed a key role in stabilising the pace ofexpansion. Since then, prices have againshown a slight rising trend, however; in mid-February, the price of crude oil (US$45) wasjust under 50% up on the year comparedwith 70% in October 2004. The way in whichthe oil price increases have been dealt withreaffirms that the upswing is very robust andtherefore able to absorb such disruptionsquite well. Bearing this in mind, the need tosupport driving forces by means of an expan-sionary economic policy also appears to beincreasingly unnecessary or associated withgreater risks. The Fed therefore continued onits course of gradually tightening monetarypolicy in the fourth quarter with two furtherinterest rate increases totalling
1/C252percentage
point in November and December and thedecision at the beginning of February for afurther rise of 25 basis points to 2.5%.
All in all, 2004 was a very successful year for
the world economy. According to IMF esti-mates, at 5%, output growth was the highestit had been since the mid-1970s. It was alsowell above the long-term average of 3
1/C252%.
Moreover, unemployment fell somewhat.However, the global imbalances increasedStable global
economy
2004:
impressive
growth
performance,
but with flaws

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
11further. This was reflected in exchange rate
movements towards the end of 2004. Theeuro, which appreciated sharply against theUS dollar, thus had to bear further adjustmentburdens (following the upward surges in2002 and 2003). Although, if viewed in isol-ation, the resulting deterioration in the pricecompetitiveness of the export sector damp-ened growth in the euro area, it was offset bybetter sales prospects on the part of produ-cers in the dollar area.
The outlook for the global economy with re-
gard to above-average growth remains fa-vourable for 2005; this was suggested notleast by the altogether good start to the newyear. The cyclical normalisation which oc-curred in the course of 2004 means that theconditions for sustained growth have tendedto improve even further. However, the risk ofpotential setbacks is still considerable. Forone thing, the oil markets are likely to remainvolatile and prone to disruptions owing to thelimited spare capacity in crude oil productionworldwide and continuing geopolitical ten-sions in the Middle East. The major externalimbalances are a further significant potentialrisk factor.
In 2004, the US current account deficit
reached a new high of an estimated 5
3/C254%o f
gross domestic product (GDP). Furthermore,it is being financed less and less through pri-vate investment and increasingly through for-eign currency purchases by central banks inemerging market economies. The East Asiancentral banks, which are thereby trying toprevent their currencies from appreciating,have a particular role in this. It is not yet cer-tain how long these central banks will con-
tinue to pursue their policy of supporting thedollar in view of the dollar holdings whichthey have accumulated up to now. A sharpreduction in or the discontinuance of theexchange rate-motivated purchases of USdollars would probably lead to a substantialdepreciation of the US currency and, at thesame time, to an interest rate rise on theinternational capital markets, which arecurrently exhibiting historically low rates ofreturn.
From a regional point of view, global eco-
nomic activity in the fourth quarter was char-acterised by a somewhat slower but still fairlystrong rise in output in the USA and con-tinued dynamic growth in the new EU mem-ber states. In the autumn, the UK economyagain expanded somewhat more stronglythan before. By contrast, euro-area growthcontinued to weaken. In Japan, overall eco-nomic output fell slightly in the autumn forthe third time in succession. Overall output inthe major industrial countries and regions(the USA, Japan, the United Kingdom andthe euro area), which reflects the weaker eco-nomic developments in the euro area andJapan more precisely than the global picture,exceeded the third-quarter level by “only”just under
1/C252% after seasonal adjustment in
the October-December period. Growth in thesecond half of the year as a whole, at 1%,was markedly weaker than in the first halfof the year (+1
3/C254%). The rise in consumer
prices in the industrial countries acceleratedto 2.5% – from 2.1% in the third quarter –above all as a result of the sharp increase inenergy prices in the autumn. The average riseOutlook and
risks for 2005
Global upswing
with distinct
regional
differences

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
12for 2004 was 2.0%. Excluding Japan, which
in the autumn again reported slight price in-creases following a long period of fallingprices, consumer prices in the fourth quarterwere 2.8% up on the year compared with anincrease of 1.7% in the first quarter of 2004.
The Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) and the majority of Latin Americaneconomies benefited from the high prices onthe commodity markets up to the end of the
period under review. Furthermore, the im-provements in the underlying economic con-ditions of the past few years now increasinglyappear to be bearing fruit in several LatinAmerican countries. The list is headed by Bra-zil which, in 2004, posted a sizeable currentaccount surplus and was able to attract ex-tensive net foreign direct investment. Growthin East Asia continued to be buoyed by theeconomic boom in China. According to esti-mates from China’s statistical office, overalloutput rose by 9
1/C252% in the fourth quarter of
2004 compared with the level at the end of2003; this increase also corresponds to theannual average growth rate. The tsunamicaused an enormous loss of human lives andmajor damage to property in the countriesbordering the Indian Ocean. However, thereis much evidence to suggest that the highlevel of growth in the countries concernedwill not be permanently dampened. Coastalfishing and the tourist industry are of ratherminor economic significance (apart from inthe Maldives and Sri Lanka). In addition, itwill probably be possible to quickly rectify theworst damage caused, for example, to the in-frastructure, thanks to extensive internationalaid.
Initial calculations show that fourth-quarter
aggregate output in the USA was up by
3/C254%
on the quarter after adjustment for seasonaland working-day variations. Year on year, itrose by 3
3/C254%. On average over the past year,
GDP growth amounted to 41/C252%; this was the
highest rate of expansion since 1999. Accord-ing to IMF estimates, with potential outputgrowth at 3
1/C254%, the output gap was consid-Seasonally adjusted
%
%
%
%
Euro areaUnited KingdomJapanUSAQuarter-on-quarter changeGrowth trends in
selected industrial countries
Deutsche Bundesbank1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
02.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−2.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Emerging
market
economiesUSA

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
13erably reduced in 2004, although it has not
yet been completely eliminated. The strong-est fourth-quarter expansionary stimuli againcame from private consumption, which roseby just over 1% in seasonally adjusted terms.Owing to a marked increase in disposable in-come on account of exceptionally large divi-dend payments in December, the saving ratiorose quarter-on-quarter from
1/C252%t o11/C254%.
Commercial investment also continued to risesubstantially. By contrast, real expenditure onnew residential buildings hardly grew any fur-ther. After adjustment for price and seasonalvariations, exports fell by 1%.
1With the con-
tinuing strong expansion of imports (+21/C254%),
the deficit in the real foreign balance reacheda new high, amounting to 5
3/C254% of GDP .
All in all, 2005 got off to a good start for the
US economy. According to a survey conduct-ed by the Conference Board, consumer senti-ment improved further in January owing toan improved situation assessment; however,expectations were no longer quite as optimis-tic as in December. The intake of orders fordurable goods increased by a seasonally ad-justed 1
1/C254% in the autumn and was thus
71/C252% up on the year. According to the most
recent reports from the Federal Reserve’s dis-tricts, private consumption and corporate in-vestment continued to expand at the turn of2004-05. The moderate level of employmentgrowth also carried over into January; thenumber of employed people outside the agri-cultural sector was 1
1/C252% up on the year. The
unemployment rate fell to 5.2% after season-al adjustment.The economic picture in the USA is being
clouded by stronger inflationary pressures,however. In the fourth quarter of 2004, con-sumer prices were 3.3% higher than one yearearlier, compared with 1.8% in the first threemonths of the year and 2.7% on an annualaverage. Excluding energy and food, the rateof price increase rose from 1.4% in the firstquarter to 2.1% in the fourth quarter. How-ever, this contrasts to a certain extent withthe core rate of the personal consumption ex-penditure deflator, which is taken into par-ticular account in the Fed’s price analyses; at1.6%, it was significantly lower in the fourthquarter and, moreover, only marginally higherQuarterly
%
Percent-
age
points
DifferenceCore CPI rate
Core rate of the personal
consumption expenditure deflatorCore inflation *in the USA
* Consumer prices and the personal con-
sumption expenditure deflator excluding
energy and food; annual rate of change.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5
1.0
0.5
03.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
2001 2002 2003 2004
1According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, which is
responsible for the US national accounts, an upward ad-
justment of the export figures is becoming apparent. If
viewed in isolation, this is also likely to lead to a slight up-
ward revision of GDP growth data.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
14than at the beginning of the year. The in-
creasing divergence between the two corerates is attributable, amongst other things, tothe fact that the national accounts-based de-flator, in accordance with the consumptionconcept applied in the US national accounts– and in contrast to the expenditure conceptof the consumer price statistics –, also in-cludes the government-funded health careservices (Medicare and Medicaid), the pricepressures on which diminished noticeably inthe course of 2004.
Real GDP in Japan declined slightly again in
the autumn of 2004, denoting a fall of
1/C252%
since the last peak at the beginning of 2004.It was up by only just over
1/C252% on the year in
the fourth quarter. Average growth for theyear was 2
1/C252% owing to the strong growth
overhang from 2003 and the rapid rate of ex-pansion at the start of 2004. Measured interms of the IMF and OECD autumn forecastsof 4.4% and 4.0% respectively, the annualresult was certainly disappointing. Apart fromthe economic downturn which has persistedsince the spring, it must also be borne inmind that strongly revised national accountsfigures were published in early Decem-ber 2004 showing, for example, growth ratesfor 2003 and the first three quarters of 2004which, respectively, were 1 and 1
1/C252percent-
age points lower. These corrections were re-corded – so to speak – as a counterentry inthe GDP deflator, meaning that a lower levelof macroeconomic deflation is shown afterrevision, which seems plausible on the whole.The available economic indicators suggest anupturn in production at the beginning of2005. On an average of the fourth quarter,consumer prices were 0.5% up on the year.
This was the first quarterly rise in consumerprices since the end of 1998. The main rea-sons for this were the surge in energy pricesand the sharp rise in the price of seasonalfood products owing to the extensive cropdamage caused by typhoons in the late sum-mer of 2004.
According to initial estimates, in the fourth
quarter, the UK economy expanded by
3/C254%
after adjustment for seasonal and working-day variations, ie somewhat more stronglythan in the summer (+
1/C252%). The figure was
23/C254% up on the end of 2003 compared with
an increase of 3% for 2004 as a whole. Themost important mainstay of growth in the au-tumn was once again the services sector; asin the summer already, the real value addedof this sector rose by a seasonally adjusted1%. In addition, construction output in-creased significantly. Although the valueadded in the production sector (excludingconstruction) declined again at the end of2004, at
1/C252%, the fall was no longer as pro-
nounced as in the preceding period. This con-tributed materially to the slight rise in GDPgrowth in comparison with the summermonths. All in all, however, the UK economyslowed down noticeably after mid-year. Thedistinct slowdown in price movements on theproperty markets was particularly note-worthy. According to the Halifax House PriceIndex, fourth-quarter seasonally adjustedhouse prices were barely higher than in thepreceding period. However, the year-on-yearincrease was still 15%. Consumer prices,affected by the sharp increase in energyprices, picked up distinctly on an average ofJapanUnited
Kingdom

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
15the October-January period. The year-on-year
rise in the Harmonised Index of ConsumerPrices (HICP) remained fairly moderate at1.5%, however. According to the Retail PriceIndex excluding Mortgage Interest Payments– which is methodologically different fromthe HICP – prices went up by 2.2%.
The new EU member states were among the
fastest growing economies in the world in2004. The expansionary process in this regionwas driven by both burgeoning foreign tradeand strong domestic demand. Although eco-nomic activity initially lost momentum aftermid-year – like in most industrial countries –,aggregate industrial production was up by aseasonally adjusted 1
1/C254% in the fourth quar-
ter – following a decline in the precedingperiod. The year-on-year rise was 5
3/C254%. In-
dustrial production rose by an average of9
1/C252% over the past year. The altogether ro-
bust expansionary process is also helping toimprove the situation on the labour market.After adjustment for seasonal variations,the standardised unemployment rate in thisgroup of countries fell by
1/C252percentage point
to 13.8% between January and Decem-ber 2004. The rate of consumer price in-crease, which had accelerated significantly inthe second and third quarters, was moremoderate again in the autumn. Fourth-quarter prices were 4.4% up on the yearcompared with 4.9% in the July-Septemberperiod. The annual average rate of price in-crease was 4.0% compared with only 1.9%in 2003. This increased upward pressure onprices was attributable primarily to the devel-opment of economic activity, the sharp rise infood and energy prices and increases in indir-ect taxes in connection with EU accession on
1 May 2004.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
The pace of economic growth in the euro
area, which had already eased noticeably inthe summer, slowed down even further in thefourth quarter. According to the Flash Esti-mate, real GDP grew by a seasonally adjusted
1/C254% on the preceding period. Year-on-year
growth was 11/C252%. At 13/C254%, the average
growth rate for the whole of 2004 fell some-what short of the potential rate, however. Al-though more detailed information on the in-dividual expenditure components is not yetavailable, data from the balance of paymentsstatistics concerning nominal foreign tradewith non-EEA countries in October and No-vember suggest that exports picked up againin the autumn. The same is true for imports,which means that the contribution of real netexports to growth was probably limited.Fourth-quarter real retail sales stagnated atthe same low level as in the previous quarter.According to the European Commission’sindicator-based short-run forecast, in sea-sonally adjusted terms, economic growth inthe first two quarters of 2005 may rangebetween 0.2% and 0.6%.
The modest expansion in overall output in the
fourth quarter, if viewed from the value-added side, is largely attributable to the de-cline in industrial production, which amount-ed to
1/C252% in seasonally adjusted terms. The
previous year’s level was therefore exceededby only
3/C254%. The production of durable con-New EU
member statesLow GDP
growth in the
fourth quarter
Weak industrial
activity in
the autumn

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
16sumer goods, capital goods and energy was
particularly weak. Non-durable consumergoods production also showed a downwardtrend, albeit a less pronounced one. Themanufacture of intermediate goods stag-nated. The fact that capacity utilisation in themanufacturing sector, after adjustment forseasonal variations, was no higher in Janu-ary 2005 than it had been in October 2004 isin keeping with these developments.
The leading economic indicators available to
date still present a mixed picture with regardto industrial production in the first fewmonths of 2005. The intake of orders in theorder-based manufacturing industry was ex-ceptionally buoyant in October and Novem-ber. Major orders for the aviation industrywere a key factor in this development, how-ever. The Purchasing Managers’ Index con-tinued its upward trend in January. By con-trast, industrial confidence deteriorated againto a level only a little above its long-termaverage. At the start of the year, the indicatorof consumer sentiment held firm at its lowlevel of the preceding months.
According to preliminary data released by
Eurostat, unemployment in the euro area ap-pears to have reached its lower cyclical turn-ing point. In the fourth quarter of 2004, theseasonally adjusted number of unemployeddid not rise further in comparison with thepreceding quarter. Moreover, the figure wasbarely higher than in the same period of2003. The standardised unemployment ratestood at 8.9% in December. Labour marketdevelopments within the euro area were veryuneven in 2004. While, for example, the levelof underemployment increased even further
in Germany and the Netherlands, it fell – insome cases quite sharply – in several othercountries. In Spain – traditionally the countrywith the biggest labour market problem inthe euro area – the unemployment rate was10.4% at the end of 2004 and thus onlyslightly higher than the rate in Germany(10.0%).
Euro-area consumer prices in the October-
December period were up by a seasonally ad-justed 0.5% on the preceding quarter. Therise in prices was therefore just as strong as inthe summer months. This was due to the fur-ther hike in the cost of energy. Although en-ergy prices already peaked in October andthen fell again, on an average of the quarter,energy was 1.8% more expensive than in thepreceding three months. Excluding the par-ticularly volatile components of energy andunprocessed food, consumer prices rose by aseasonally adjusted 0.4%. This correspondsto an annualised rate of 1.6%. In the au-tumn, the year-on-year rise in the overallHICP increased from 2.2% to 2.3%; coreinflation fell from 2.1% to 2.0%, however. Atthe start of 2005, the upward pressure onprices in the euro area weakened, above allas a result of baseline effects.
Exchange rates
There was a fairly distinct shift in sentiment
on the international foreign exchange mar-kets at the turn of 2004-05. The euro appre-ciated noticeably in the autumn of 2004 andreached new all-time highs against the US
Mixed signals
for the
beginning
of 2005
Labour market
at a turning
pointPrice develop-
ments marked
by higher
energy prices
Shift in
sentiment on
the foreign
exchange
markets at the
turn of the year

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
17dollar and the yen at the end of December;
the trend started to reverse at the beginningof 2005, however. The single currency hasshown a tendency to depreciate as a result.
Market participants’ concerns about the
USA’s external imbalance were initially thedriving force behind the developments in theeuro-US dollar exchange rate. The euro con-sequently made significant gains against theUS dollar. The single currency continued toappreciate into December, boosted by the be-lief that several central banks could switchtheir foreign currency reserves – hitherto heldpredominantly in US dollars – to euro. At theend of December, the euro reached a new re-cord high against the US dollar of more thanUS$1.36. As a result of the Christmas andNew Year public holidays, however, onlysmall volumes were traded in the foreign ex-change markets, which meant that compara-tively minor orders not necessarily alignedwith fundamental data may have caused thismovement. This assessment is supported bythe fact that the euro depreciated again im-mediately after the start of the year.
The Fed’s decisions in December and February
to raise the federal funds rate by a further25 basis points in each case were generallyexpected and thus of no direct relevance tothe exchange rate. The money market inter-est rates in the USA rose steadily followingthe Fed’s transition to a policy of gradual in-creases in the key interest rate in the summerof 2004; they are now higher than the short-term interest rates in the euro area. The yieldadvantage enjoyed by US government bondsover similar euro-area instruments also tend-ed to increase in the winter months. The
USA’s interest rate spread over other countries– viewed in isolation – is making US invest-ments more attractive and thus facilitatingthe financing of the US current account def-icit. However, this interest rate advantagemay not necessarily be reflected immediatelyin exchange rate developments as a largenumber of different factors have an effect onDaily data, log scale
US$
£¥
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.20  1... pound sterling£ 0.7110  1... Japanese yen
¥ 133.73  1The euro’s exchange rate
against the ...
... US dollar
$ 1.1789  1Exchange rate of the euro
1Level at the start of monetary union on
4 January 1999. — 2As calculated by the
ECB against the currencies of 23 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank109
106
103
1000.72
0.70
0.68
0.66142
139
136
133
130
1271.36
1.33
1.30
1.27
1.24
1.21
1.18
FMAMJ J A SOND J F
2004 2005Development
of the euro’s
exchange rate
against the
US dollar, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
18the exchange rate. It undoubtedly gave the
US dollar a certain degree of support though.
Speculations on the foreign exchange market
that the Federal Reserve might increase thespeed at which it tightens its monetary policyprobably also contributed to the euro’s depre-ciation since the beginning of the year. Thisimpression was reinforced by positive eco-nomic data from the USA. Against this back-drop, even reports about a new record deficitin the US balance of trade in November 2004were able to suspend the euro’s fall only tem-porarily. As this report went to press, the eurowas trading at US$1.30, almost 4
1/C252% below
its level at the end of 2004.
The euro initially also tended to appreciate
against the yen. This development was ac-companied by negative economic data fromJapan. Reports that the Japanese trade sur-plus had declined in November apparentlyalso put downward pressure on the yen. To-wards the end of 2004, the single currencyreached a new record level of ¥141. However,at the beginning of 2005, the euro also start-ed to depreciate noticeably against the Jap-anese currency. In this respect, the euro-yenexchange rate essentially appears to havemirrored the movements in the euro-US dol-lar exchange rate. The supposition of marketparticipants that the Japanese monetary au-thorities might intervene in the foreign ex-change market in favour of the US dollar mayhave been of relevance here. As this reportwent to press, the euro was again trading at
a somewhat higher level of ¥138, but wasstill around 1
1/C252% below its value at the turn
of 2004-05.
The exchange rate of the euro against the
pound sterling fluctuated without a cleartrend between £0.68 and £0.71 in the report-ing period. The short-term exchange ratemovements in both directions were, as a rule,due to market participants’ rapidly changingassessments of the Bank of England’s interestrate policy. In the autumn, reports about aslowdown in the UK economy and deflatedexpectations of interest rate increases stillcontributed to the euro’s virtually continuousappreciation against the pound sterling. Thegeneral weakening of the euro since the turnof 2004-05 has caused the single currency tolose around 2% of its value against thepound sterling. As this report went to press,the euro was trading at £0.69.
The effective nominal exchange rate of the
euro showed similar movements to those ofthe bilateral exchange rates of the euroagainst the US dollar and the yen. For ex-ample, on average, the euro appreciated no-ticeably against the currencies of 23 import-ant euro-area trading partners up to the endof 2004 and reached new all-time highs.Since then, the single currency has lost 2
1/C252%
of its value in trade-weighted terms. It wasthus 2% higher than its level at the start ofmonetary union.... against the
yen ...... and against
the pound
sterling
Effective
exchange rate
of the euro

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
19Monetary policy,
banking business
and the capital marketInterest rate policy and the
money market
The Governing Council of the European Cen-
tral Bank did not change the Eurosystem’s his-torically low key interest rates in the past fewmonths. The main refinancing operationscontinued to be conducted as variable ratetenders with a minimum bid rate of 2% whilethe interest rates on the marginal refinancingfacility and the deposit facility remained at3% and 1% respectively. The interest ratepolicy decisions were based on the GoverningCouncil’s position that there are currently noclear signs of increasing inflationary pressurein the euro area. Owing to the high price ofoil, however, second-round effects in thewage and price setting process cannot be en-tirely ruled out. In addition, the ample liquid-ity in the euro area, which is already reflectedin an increase of some asset prices, could alsolead to price effects in the product markets inthe medium term. Hence, there are still up-ward risks to price stability. Some of thesehave become more acute in the period underreview.
As market participants had expected interest
rate policy to hold steady, the overnight rate(EONIA), with the exception of short-termfluctuations at the end of the reserve main-tenance period and at the end of the year,remained virtually unchanged in the periodunder review. The overnight interest rate(EONIA) was mostly close to the marginallending rate, which was only a few basispoints above the minimum bid rate. Theother money market rates also remainedfairly steady. At just over 20 basis points, theEurosystem
interest rates
unchanged
Money market
rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
20Money market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods from 12 Oc-
tober 2004 to 18 January 2005, euro-area credit insitutions’need for central bank money arising from the autonomousfactors determining liquidity increased by 516.7 billion in
net terms. This was mainly due to the further seasonally-induced increase in banknote circulation of 530.9 billion,
which rose sharply in the pre-Christmas period, in particu-lar, although the rise was lower than in the same year-earlier period. On 22 December, the volume of banknotesin circulation exceeded 5500 billion for the first time. By
contrast, seasonally-induced liquidity needs arising fromgeneral government deposits declined markedly by 512.9
billion net. If, in order to eliminate valuation effects, thechanges in net reserve assets and other factors are takentogether, these two items resulted in a slightly lowerliquidity provision of 51.3 billion. The required level of
minimum reserves went down by 50.4 billion, resulting in
waning demand for central bank liquidity.
The greater need for liquidity was covered primarily by the
main refinancing operations (MROs) being topped up by516.5 billion. The volume of longer-term refinancing oper-
ations remained unchanged. In the period under review,the ECB carried out a fine-tuning operation on the last dayof each reserve maintenance period.
In the period under review, the EONIA rate was mostly at a
slightly higher level, following to a large extent the sametrend as the slightly higher marginal rates of allotmentuntil the end of the year. The EONIA rates rose from2.05%/2.06% to 2.08%/2.09%. The period was character-ised by rises in the EONIA rate at the end of each monthand deviations following the allotment of the last MRO ineach reserve period.
During the reserve maintenance period starting on 12 Oc-
tober, the market apparently assumed greater liquidityscarcity following the allotment of the last MRO. Followingthe rise in the EONIA rate to 2.24% on 4 November, theECB carried out a liquidity providing fine-tuning operationon the last day of the reserve maintenance period totalling56.5 billion. On 8 November, the EONIA rate was set at
2.02%.
During the reserve maintenance period starting on 9 No-
vember, the ECB began allotting liquidity above the bench-mark. The EONIA rate remained, however, at a slightlyhigher level. The days following the allotment of the lastMRO were the exception, when the market had antici-pated excess liquidity. After a liquidity absorbing fine-tuning operation was carried out with a volume of 515 bil-
lion on the last day of the reserve period, the EONIA ratestood at 1.98%.
8 December was the start of an extended (by 42 days) re-
serve maintenance period, during which the ECB also allot-ted liquidity above the benchmark in each MRO. The devi-ation from the benchmark was the greatest during theMRO of 30 December, when it amounted to 55 billion.
Owing to the generous allocation policy and the extendedreserve period, things went relatively smoothly at the turnof the year. At the end of the year, the EONIA rate stood at2.21 %. The ECB conducted a liquidity-providing fine-tuningoperation on the last day of the reserve period, after a smallliquidity deficit had become apparent on the preceding day.Nevertheless, on 18 January, the EONIA rate stood at 2.14%;this was due to a temporary interruption in the RTGSpluspayment system and an unexpected outflow caused by anincrease in the autonomous factors on this day. At the startof the new January/February reserve period, the EONIA ratefell to a still somewhat higher level of 2.08%.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods
2004/2005
Item12 Oct
to
8 Nov9 Nov
to
7 Dec8 Dec
to
18 Jan
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances by
1 Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) – 4.6 – 5.7 – 20.6
2 Change in general govern-
ment deposits with the
Eurosystem (increase: –) + 3.1 – 5.1 + 14.9
3 Change in net foreign
reserves2–0 . 5 –0 . 3 –7 . 7
4 Other factors2,3+ 0.0 + 3.9 + 5.9
Total – 2.0 – 7.2 – 7.5
II Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations + 1.5 + 7.8 + 7.2
(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations + 0.0 € 0.0 € 0.0
(c) Other operations + 0.2 – 0.7 + 0.7
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.2 € 0.0 + 1.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0
Total + 1.2 + 7.3 + 8.0
III Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I + II) – 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.6
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) + 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.4
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of this Monthly Report .— 2Including end-
of-quarter valuation adjustments with no impact onliquidity. — 3Including monetary policy operations con-
cluded in the second stage and still outstanding in thethird stage of monetary union (outright transactions andthe issuance of debt certificates) as well as financial assetsnot connected with monetary policy.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
21yield spread between twelve-month funds
and EONIA, for example, changed very littleover the period under review. Similarly, thethree-month forward rate, which also ex-presses interest rate expectations, hardlychanged on balance in the period under re-view. A
1/C254percentage point increase in inter-
est rates is currently not expected until thefourth quarter of 2005.
Monetary developments in the euro area
The money stock M3 grew strongly again in
the fourth quarter of 2004. In seasonally ad-justed terms, this aggregate grew by justunder 7
1/C252% from October to December,
quite similar to the development in the previ-ous quarter (8
1/C252%) when monetary expan-
sion, following a phase of gradual weaken-ing, had picked up the pace considerably.The three-month moving average of annualrates of change for the period from Octo-ber to December was 6.1%. Hence, thisfigure was again nearly a percentage pointhigher than the figure for the period fromMay to July 2004 when this rate (5.2%)had dropped to the lowest level since June2001.
Among the components of the money stock,
cash holdings grew very strongly at a season-ally adjusted annual rate of 13% in the periodunder review; this was, however, markedlyslower than in the previous quarters. Stagna-tion in December was the sole cause for thelower increase in currency in circulation. Sinceseasonally adjusted overnight deposits at thesame time grew relatively slowly in the periodfrom October to December, the money stock
M1 also grew only moderately in this periodat an annualised rate of just under 4
1/C252%.
Moreover, the increase in deposits with a
three-month period of notice, which in thepreceding quarters had grown strongly,weakened considerably in the last quarter of2004. These may have been invested in short-term time deposits, which were particularly indemand from domestic investors at the endof the period under review. In the periodfrom October to December 2004, depositswith an agreed maturity of up to two yearsgrew by an annualised rate of over 17%. Thiswas the strongest growth since late 2000,when short-term interest rates reached theirhighest level (5%) since the mid-1990s andthe interest rate disadvantage vis-/C224-vis long-Seasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
Reference value: 4½%Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
87
6
54
3
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Monetary
expansion
accelerates
Components
of the money
stock

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
22term fixed-interest securities was particularly
low at1/C254percentage point. True, the quarter-
ly average of this interest rate discount wasaround 1
3/C254percentage points. However, in
the light of low capital market rates, whichdeclined further over the quarter, liquid andsafe short-term time deposits were apparent-ly viewed as being an attractive investmentalternative. This is also evidenced by a largeincrease in repo transactions, which in eco-nomic terms represent time deposits backedby securities. Over and above that, amongthe marketable financial instruments, short-term bank debt securities were also in heavydemand. By contrast, money market fundshares experienced only moderate growth inthe fourth quarter.
The sharp increase in M3 in the quarter under
review was again accompanied by a markedincrease in credit to the domestic private sec-tor. First, banks added large amounts of se-curities issued by domestic private borrowersto their portfolios. Second, they provided alarge volume of loans – as in the precedingquarter – to enterprises and households. Inthe period from October to December, theseloans increased at an annualised rate of8
1/C252%. Continuing the development wit-
nessed in the first half of 2004, these loansagain grew faster than M3 in the periodunder review. Above all, housing loans ex-panded sharply again, contributing around3
1/C254percentage points to the 7.0% year-on-
year rate of loans to the private sector inDecember 2004. The demand for consumerand corporate loans also appears to beintensifying.€ billion, seasonally adjusted,
change over the period indicated
€ billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet counterparts 1
Loans to
enterprises
and households
General
government
borrowing2
Net external
asset
position
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counterparts
of M33Money stock
July to Sep 2004
Increase in M3
Oct to Dec 2004Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts are
shown in terms of whether they expand (+)
or contract (−) the money stock. — 2Bank
loans to general government less euro-area
central government deposits with MFIs and
holdings of securities issued by the MFIsector. — 3Calculated as errors and omis-
sions from the remaining items of the con-
solidated balance sheet of the MFI sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank200+160+120+80+40+0 40−80−120−160−Balance sheet
counterparts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
23Furthermore, extensive inflows of funds from
foreign payment transactions stimulatedmonetary growth in the euro area in thefourth quarter. The net external assets of theMFI sector, which reflects payment transac-tions between domestic non-banks and non-euro-area residents, rose by 356
1/C252billion in
the fourth quarter. Inflows of merely 3201/C252
billion were recorded in the same year-earlier
period.
By contrast, the decline in credit to govern-
ment in the euro area itself dampened mon-etary expansion in the quarter under review.In net terms, this was due exclusively to thedecline in securitised lending. This contrastedwith a reduction in central government de-posits at domestic banks, meaning that therepeated strong growth of monetary capitalformation represented an essential counter-balance to the increase in banks’ asset-sidebusiness. Alongside the marked increase inlonger-term time deposits, bank debt secur-ities with a maturity of over two years madestrong gains for the second quarter in a row.By contrast, savings deposits redeemable atnotice of over three months rose negligibly.
Deposit and lending business of
German banks with domestic customers
In contrast to the euro area, private non-
banks’ liquid bank deposits rose only slightlyin the fourth quarter in Germany. In the previ-ous quarter, short-term deposits of domesticenterprises and households were topped upstrongly on a broad front. The reasons for thelow preference for liquidity in the quarterunder review are to be found mainly in the
corporate sector. Whereas households invest-ed their funds in the domestic banking sectoracross the whole range of maturities to an ex-tent which is typical for that time of the year,enterprises began to shift their liquidity hold-ings in the fourth quarter to higher-yieldingbank deposits with longer maturities or touse them to repay their outstanding loans.
Turning to short-term bank deposits, over-
night deposits declined slightly in the periodunder review. In the period from July to Sep-tember 2004, by contrast, these deposits rosesharply by an annualised rate of 8
1/C252%. Apart
from insurance corporations, which normallytop up their liquid bank deposits towards theend of the year, especially other financial in-stitutions, such as investment companies orLending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2004 2003
ItemOct to
DecOct to
Dec
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 1.8 + 15.5
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years + 14.6 + 0.0of over 2 years + 8.4 + 2.8
Redeemable at agreed notice
of up to 3 months + 9.7 + 10.6of over 3 months + 2.6 + 1.4
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised – 0.6 + 4.2Securitised + 7.3 – 3.2
to domestic government
Unsecuritised – 3.2 + 4.5Securitised – 5.8 – 2.1
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .— 1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Liquidity
holding in
German rises
only slightlySlight decrease
in overnight
deposits...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
24financing subsidiaries of larger enterprises, re-
duced their overnight money to a larger ex-tent than usual in the fourth quarter. Con-versely, the short-term time deposits of thisgroup of investors and non-financial corpor-ations increased stongly. By contrast, house-holds again preferred to invest their cash inovernight money, a fact which is seen in a re-duction in their short-term savings deposits.
Unlike the short-term deposits, the longer-
term bank deposits of domestic householdsand enterprises rose sharply in the quarterunder review. Time deposits with a maturityof over two years increased considerablyagain. Besides insurance corporations, wageand salary earners, in particular, topped uptheir longer-term time deposits. Furthermore,in the period from October to December, thelonger-term savings deposits (with an agreed
maturity of over three months) rose slightlyfor the first time since the first quarter of2001.
Lending by German banks to domestic non-
banks declined substantially in the fourthquarter. The decline was attributed solely toloans; domestic banks’ holdings of securitiesissued by public and private domestic borrow-ers remained practically unchanged. In par-ticular, unsecuritised lending by Germanbanks to general government in Germany de-clined markedly. In the period from Octoberto December, these loans decreased at an an-nualised rate of over 8%. Over and abovethat, loans to domestic enterprises andhouseholds fell, after rising somewhat in theprevious quarter. The decline in unsecuritisedlending to domestic private non-banks in thequarter under review was not limited to onlyshorter-term maturities. Medium to long-term loans to domestic enterprises andhouseholds also declined perceptibly in theperiod from October to December. In contrastto the development in the rest of the euroarea, the subdued increase in housing loansto households was not strong enough to off-set the noticeable reduction in other loans tohouseholds and unsecuritised lending toenterprises.
According to the January results of the Euro-
system’s bank lending survey
1, the reason be-
hind the low volume of lending continues toSeasonally adjusted
€b n
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02250
2200
2150
2100
2050
2000
1950
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, German results of euro-
area bank lending survey, Monthly Report, June 2003,
pp 67-76. The aggregate survey results for Germany can
be viewed under http://www.bundesbank.de/volks-
wirtschaft/vo_veroeffentlichungen.en.php....but a sharp
rise in short-
term time
deposits
Sharp increase
in longer-term
bank depositsCredit declines
substantially
Reason for low
volume of
lending more
on the demand
side

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
25be more on the demand side. According to
the survey, participating banks did not funda-mentally tighten their lending standards anyfurther. For the third quarter in a row, creditinstitutions left their credit standards for cor-porate loans, housing loans and householdconsumer credit largely unchanged in thefourth quarter of 2004.
For the first time since the launch of the Bank
Lending Survey, margins on corporate loanswith average risk remained steady, while mar-gins on loans to households with average riskexposure actually declined somewhat. Fur-ther, albeit weaker widening of the marginspersisted only in the case of riskier loansacross all credit categories. At the same time,the respondent banks also recorded a fairlymarked decline in demand for both corporateloans and loans to households. According tocredit institutions participating in the survey,this was mainly due to a repeated decline inthe financing needs for fixed investment andthe low level of consumer confidence.
As in the preceding quarters, the results for
Germany largely match those for Europe.
2
However, credit demand remained weaker inGermany than in the euro area.
With regard to new business, German banks,
in line with the declining interest rates in thecapital market, offered long-term loans atcheaper rates in the fourth quarter of 2004.For example, in the period under review, Ger-man banks charged non-financial enterprisesbetween 4.3% and 4.6% for new long-term%
%
%%
%
%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3. Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q11
2002 2005Consumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in loan margins
Loans to enterprises
Average loansRiskier loansConsumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in credit standards
Loans to enterprisesBank Lending Survey *
*Difference between the sum of the per-
centages for ”tightened considerably” and
”tightened somewhat” and the sum of the
percentages for ”eased somewhat” and
”eased considerably”. — 1Expectations for
Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−100+
80+
60+
40+
20+
040+
20+
0
20−40+
20+
0
20−60+
40+
20+
0
20−
2003 2004
2See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, Febru-
ary 2005, pp 16 ff.Spreads
continue to rise
on riskier loans
Demand for
credit again
weaker than in
the euro area
as a whole
Long-term
lending rates
declining

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
26lending depending on the loan amount. They
charged 4.7% for loans for house purchasewith an interest rate fixation of over ten yearsand 8.0% for long-term consumer loans inthe period under review. Developments inshort-term lending were, by contrast, mixedin the fourth quarter of 2004. Whereas bankschanged their interest rates very little in thearea of short-term corporate lending in theperiod from October to December, the corres-ponding rates for housing loans and con-sumer credit dropped.
The interest rates on deposits at domestic
credit institutions remained virtually un-changed in the fourth quarter. At the end ofthe quarter, banks were paying 2.1% for sav-ings deposits with a notice period of up tothree months and 2.5% for longer maturities.Only interest rates on time deposits of house-holds and non-financial enterprises droppedsomewhat in the longer maturity range. To-wards the end of the period – depending onthe maturity – the rates on households’ timedeposits were between 1.9% and 2.6%,while those for enterprises were between2.0% and 3.8%.
Securities markets
The tendency towards relaxation in the cap-
ital markets which began last summer has,with only a few interruptions, continued.Against this backdrop, European bond yieldsclearly decoupled from the dollar interest ratetrend in the fourth quarter of 2004. Whereasyields on ten-year euro-area bonds declinedby a half a percentage point to just underNew business
% per
annum
% per
annum% per
annum
... over €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year... up to €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
... over €1 million with an initial
   rate fixation of over 5 yearsLoans to non-financial
corporations ...Loans to households
Consumer credit 1
2
Housing loans3Households’ deposits...
...overnight...redeemable at notice
   of up to 3 months
...with an agreed maturity
   of up to 1 yearBank interest
rates in Germany
1 With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year
and up to 5 years. — 2 Decline owing to
special effect. — 3 With an initial rate
fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years.
Deutsche Bundesbank5.5
5.24.94.64.3
4.0
3.73.43.1
2.87.0
6.76.46.15.8
5.5
5.24.9
4.62.7
2.42.1
1.8
1.5
1.2
0.9
2003 2004Again little
change in
deposit rates
Capital market
rates near
historical low

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
273.5% since last October, comparable dollar
yields increased temporarily by approximately
1/C254percentage point. The long-term interest
rates in the euro area are thus at the lowestlevel in over a hundred years. A number ofdeterminants contributed to this develop-ment, such as large excess liquidity in theeuro area and the associated investment pres-sure. A certain strategic shift on the part ofinternationally operating investors in favourof euro-denominated investments may havealso had an influence. This was compoundedby the fact that economic growth in the euroarea in the fourth quarter of 2004 was weak-er than had been originally expected and,subsequently, the assessment of the outlookfor domestic economic growth in the marketswas also somewhat more subdued.
The importance of economic expectations is
also reflected in the fact that the decline inthe nominal yields in the euro area has beenaccompanied by lower real interest rates. Ten-year French inflation-linked bonds are cur-rently yielding just over 1%, the lowestamount since they were introduced in thelate 1990s. Other measures of real interestrates have also fallen to their lowest level inyears. By contrast, euro-area market partici-pants’ long-term inflation expectations havepersisted around the 2% mark for severalmonths, ie the figure which the Eurosystemhas defined as the upper ceiling for price sta-bility.
3This feature also differentiates the
scenario of the fourth quarter of 2004 andthe summer of 2003, when market partici-pants had been expecting lower interestrates. In the light of unchanged price expect-ations, the lower growth expectations led tofalling longer-term nominal rates of interest.
This – together with the widely steady short-Daily data
%
Per-
cent-
age
points%
Per-
cent-
age
points
Yield spreads of European
corporate bonds2
2003 2004 2005Spread of US bond yields
over the euro-area averageYield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area
average 1
USABond yields in the
euro area and the USA
1Weighted average of the yields on ten-
year government bonds of all euro-area
countries; GDP-weighted. — 2Spread of
seven to ten-year BBB-rated European cor-
porate bonds over euro-area governmentbonds with a comparable maturity. Source:
Merrill Lynch Indices.
Deutsche Bundesbank2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.50.5+
0
0.5−5.5
4.55.0
4.04.5
3.5
3.0
3According to the results of a survey conducted by Con-
sensus Economics, bank economists expect inflation to
rise by an average of just under 2% annually over the
next ten years. The corresponding break-even inflation
rate – approximately the difference between the nominal
yield of French government bonds and the real rate of
interest on index-linked bonds of the same issuer – is
somewhat higher at just under 21/C254% per annum. How-
ever, owing to the inflation risk premium component of
the yield on nominal bonds, it is likely to overstate some-
what the expected rate of inflation.Subdued
economic
expectations
depress real
rate of interest

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
28term rates of interest – contributed to a flat-
tening of the yield curve.
Given the overall favourable earnings outlook
for many enterprises, share prices in the Euro-pean equity markets have risen in line withthose in the US and Japan. In the fourth quar-ter of 2004 German equity prices – as meas-ured by the broad CDAX index – rose by justunder 10%, comparable to a rise in theequity prices of the enterprises listed in theDow Jones EuroStoxx index. Since the begin-ning of the year, the shares of European en-terprises have continued to rise by 5%. Theshare prices of German enterprises rosesomewhat slower. As was the case in thespring of 2003, in the fourth quarter of 2004,the sharp reduction in the real interest rateprobably exerted a positive influence onequity prices. One indicator of this influence
is the fact that equity prices rose in all sectorsrepresented in the EuroStoxx index, even inthose sectors which are susceptible to cyclicalswings, such as the chemical and capitalgoods industry. In contrast to 2003, theequity markets now appear to be rewardingthe intensified rationalisation and consolida-tion efforts of many enterprises, which are re-flected in another rise in expected earningsfor the year 2005.
4
Analysts now expect corporate earnings to behigher than during the equity boom five yearsago, and the range of their forecasts is at arather average level by historical standards.Despite recent share price gains, the under-lying price-to-earnings ratio of German andEuropean equities increased only marginallyto around 13 in the fourth quarter. This sug-gests a comparatively large risk premium im-plicit in the current market prices, as investorsdemand compensation for the risks associ-ated with investing in equities. This stands incontrast to the low interest rate premia oncorporate bonds and to the low share priceuncertainty in the equity market, which is re-flected in a reduction in the implied volatilityof DAX future options. Investors are appar-ently expecting more of a tendency towardsless share price fluctuations than in the previ-ous years. It is also possible that they do notassess the earnings outlook of enterprisesquite as positively as equity analysts do.
Despite the favourable financing conditions,
more bonds were repaid in the German bondWeekly averages
%
Nominal yields on 10-year
euro-area government bonds 1
Real yields
on 10-year inflation-indexed
French government bonds2
2005Nominal and real
bond yields
1Weighted average of the yields on
ten-year euro-area government bonds; GDP
weighted. — 2Calculated from the 2001
inflation-indexed French government bond
OAT€i yielding 3%; maturity date: 25 July
2012.
Deutsche Bundesbank6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.52.0
1.5
1.0
2002 2003 2004
4I/B/E/S forecasts.Rising equity
prices in
Germany and
Europe......against the
backdrop of
lower real
interest rates
and more
favourable
earnings
forecasts
Continued low
equity
valuations...
...reflect low
appetite for risk
in the equity
markets
Fewer funds
raised in the
German bond
market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
29Deutsche BundesbankAn indicator to measure the liquidity premium in the bond market
Bond yields consist of a benchmark rate corre-
sponding to usual market rates, a default risk pre-mium and usually a liquidity premium. The latter compensates the investor for the risk that a pur-chase or sale at any time is either not possible or is possible only with considerable price effects. Bond investors are therefore generally willing to pay a premium for bonds which have a large trading volume and hence, high liquidity. The premium on such bonds, which include German Federal Bonds, is reﬂ  ected in lower yields. However, the sitze of 
the liquidity premium is not directly observable, but must be estimated. Longstaff (2004) presented 
a method for doing this in the case of the United 
States.
1 He compares the yields on US Treasuries 
with bonds of a government agency whose repay-ments are explicitly guaranteed by the US govern-ment and hence have an identical default risk. The 
difference in the yields of these two bonds should 
thus be merely a result of liquidity differences and can therefore be interpreted as the price of liquidity.
This analysis can also be applied to German Fed-
eral bonds. For instance, a comparison with bonds issued by the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) makes it possible to estimate the liquidity 
bonus contained in the prices of Federal bonds.
2 
The higher the yield spread is on KfW bonds vis-
à-vis Bunds, the higher the value is which inves-tors place on the liquidity of Bunds in the form of 
higher prices and lower yields.
 The adjacent chart 
shows the liquidity premium calculated this way for bonds with various maturities. The size of the premium rises commensurate with the residual maturity; the average premium has been 17 basis 
points for two-year securities and 26 basis points 
for ten-year securities (since 1999). There has been a clearly recognisable ﬂ  uctuation in the liquidity 
premium over time. The higher ﬁ  gures in 2000 — particularly in the case of ten-year bonds — might 
be a result of the large proceeds from the auction of the UMTS licenses. In this vein, in the expecta-tion that the supply of Bunds, and hence, their liquidity could drop in future, investors were apparently prepared to temporarily pay a higher price for liquidity. Since that time, however, the premium has fallen steadily. For several months now, it has been very low compared with the long-term average. An empirical determination of possible explanatory factors shows that ﬂ  uctua-
tions in the liquidity premium show a positive cor-relation in particular with changes in the implied 
volatility in the equity market (measured by the 
VDAX). This indicates that investors prefer liquid forms of investment especially in times of height-ened uncertainty in the equity market. Therefore, in the current environment of low uncertainty, the 
price which market participants are willing to pay 
for liquidity is accordingly small.
1 F Longstaff (2004): The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. 
Treasury Bond Prices, Journal of Business , vol 77, no 3, pp 511-
526. — 2 Owing to the Federal government’s explicit liability 
for the bonds issued by the KfW (section 1 (a) “Guarantee of the Federal Republic”, Law Concerning KfW), the default risk of both bonds should be virtually identical. The volume of ten-year Bunds outstanding is €52 billion, compared with €10 billion at the KfW. Bunds and KfW bonds are both traded on the bonds trading system MTS, meaning that a constant minimum amount of liquidity is ensured. It is 
therefore assumed that the relative liquidity of KfW bonds and Bunds is fairly stable over time. — 3 Liquidity premia are 
calculated as the difference between the constant maturity curves for different maturities provided by Bloomberg for Bunds and KfW bonds. To calculate the yield curve for KfW bonds, Bloomberg also uses a number of bonds issued by the Rentenbank, for which the Federal government has assumed a guarantee for ensuring solvency.Basis
pointsBasis
points
Ten-year residual maturity
Two-year residual maturity
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005Liquidity premia for
various residual maturities3
60 60
50 50
40 4030 30
20 20
10 10
00

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
30market in the fourth quarter of 2004 than
were issued. Although gross issuance of do-mestic debt securities amounted to 3279
1/C252
billion, redemptions and changes in issuers’
holdings were even higher, totalling 3293 bil-
lion. Hence, the amount outstanding of do-mestic bonds fell by 314 billion between Oc-
tober and December, having grown by 333
billion in the preceding quarter. In the periodunder review, foreign bonds raised 315
1/C252bil-
lion in Germany. As a result, total funds raisedthrough the sale of domestic and foreignbonds amounted to 31
1/C252billion compared
with 3561/C252billion in the preceding quarter.
The drop in funds raised in the German bond
market is essentially due to net redemptionsby domestic credit institutions, which reducedtheir bonded debt by 20
1/C252billion in the
fourth quarter. In the third quarter they hadissued 323 billion (net) worth of own bonds.
In particular, public Pfandbriefe were re-deemed on balance (- 324
1/C252billion), whereas
other bank debt securities and debt securitiesissued by specialised credit institutions record-ed net sales of 32
1/C252billion and 11/C252billion re-
spectively.
In the fourth quarter, general government
tapped the bond market to a lesser extent(33
1/C252billion) than was the case in the preced-
ing quarter ( 35 billion). The decline was main-
ly the result of lower net issuance of Federalsecurities ( 33
1/C252billion; third quarter: 3111/C252
billion). Central government was mainly ac-
tive in the longer-term maturity range in thefourth quarter. It sold ten-year Federal bonds(Bund) worth 33 billion and five-year Federal
notes (Bobl) worth 32
1/C252billion (net). This con-Monthly data
2005Lin scale
Price-earnings ratio2
DAX
Dow Jones
EuroStoxxAverage expected earnings
per share2
DAXDow Jones
EuroStoxxLog scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx
share price index 1
DAX share price
index 1Price movements and earnings
estimates for European
and German public
limited companies
1March 2000 = 100; source:  Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2Based on I / B / E / S forecasts of
12-month forward earnings per share.
Source: Thomson Financial Datastream.
Deutsche Bundesbank30
27
24
21
18
15
12
9130
115
100
85
7085
70
4085
60
50
45
40
35
30
2001 2002 2003 2004Credit
institutions
reduced
bonded debt
Fewer funds
raised by the
public sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
31trasted with redemptions of Federal Treasury
notes (“Sch/C228tze”) amounting to 311/C252billion.
In addition, a bond issued by the former Fed-eral Post Office was redeemed for 33
1/C252bil-
lion. Consequently, the volume outstandingof bonds issued by the various special fundsdropped to 32
1/C252billion. Five years ago the
volume outstanding of this kind of paper was3163 billion. However, the special funds have
ceased using their own debt securities to gen-erate resources but, owing to the morefavourable financing terms, are now issuingdebt jointly with the Federal Government. At34 billion, state government borrowed more
funds than in the preceding period ( 32
1/C252bil-
lion).
Compared with the third quarter of 2004,
falling long-term interest rates, continuedlow interest rate premia on corporate bonds
5
and rising equity prices have further improvedthe financing conditions for those enterpriseswhich are able to tap the capital markets. Atthe same time, the more favourable earningssituation has also improved the possibilities ofinternal financing. Altogether, at 33 billion,
German enterprises tapped the bond marketto a lesser extent than in the previous period(34
1/C252billion). As in the past quarter, they
used the low long-term interest rates to issuepaper with longer maturities in particular andreduced the outstanding volume of moneymarket paper.
In the fourth quarter of 2004, foreign invest-
ors were the main purchasers in the Germanbond market, topping up their holdings ofGerman bonds by 316 billion. By contrast,
domestic investors sold domestic bondsworth 330 billion (net), buying foreign bonds
instead worth 315
1/C252billion.
Although issuing activity in the German
equity market increased somewhat the fourthquarter of 2004, it was still subdued. Germanenterprises placed new shares to a marketvalue of 33 billion, having placed only 31 bil-
lion in the third quarter. A capital injection ofa large enterprise in the retail industry in De-cember contributed to this result. In addition,sales of foreign equities in the German mar-ket raised 32 billion. On the buy side, be-
tween October and December there weremajor portfolio shifts between credit institu-Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2004 2003
ItemJuly to
SepOct to
DecOct to
Dec
Bonds and notes
Residents 28.5 – 14.5 18.6
Credit institutions 25.9 2.5 8.6of which
Foreign bonds and notes 13.4 17.3 13.4
Non-banks 2.7 – 17.0 10.0of which
Domestic bonds and notes – 7.2 – 15.2 19.2
Non-residents 27.8 15.9 10.5
Shares
Residents – 16.1 4.3 – 9.4
Credit institutions – 7.3 11.0 9.2of which
Domestic shares – 3.5 8.8 7.0
Non-banks – 8.9 – 6.7 – 18.6of which
Domestic shares – 2.5 – 6.6 – 21.9
Non-residents 6.8 0.7 21.2
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds – 4.9 7.4 5.2
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 1.0 – 6.5 – 0.4of which: Share-based funds – 1.8 1.1 0.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
5At the time this article went to press, the spreads on
corporate bonds with a BBB rating (the lowest investment
grade rating) over government bonds with the same ma-
turities was at 60 basis points and therefore close to the
long-standing lows.Enterprises
Purchases of
domestic bondsFew funds
raised in the
equity market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
32tions which topped up their holdings of do-
mestic equities by 39 billion, and non-banks,
which sold domestic equities worth 361/C252bil-
lion. Foreign investors invested 31/C252billion in
German equities.
The demand for mutual fund shares re-
covered only slightly in the fourth quarter.After experiencing outflows of funds in thethird quarter, German investment companieswere able to again attract new funds in theOctober to December period ( 31 billion), al-
though on balance, these accrued solely tothe special funds which manage institutionalinvestors’ monies ( 37
1/C252billion). By compari-
son, investment funds open to the generalpublic were redeemed for 36
1/C252billion, whichwas primarily due to strong withdrawals from
money market funds (- 37 billion). Among the
other categories of funds, mainly open-endreal estate funds recorded outflows (- 3
1/C252bil-
lion), while share-based funds recorded in-flows of 31 billion, in line with positive share
price movements. For the first time in a while,foreign funds redeemed shares in net terms(-31 billion). Both credit institutions and for-
eign investors topped up their holdings ofGerman funds shares by 33 billion and 31 bil-
lion respectively. In addition, banks purchasedforeign mutual funds shares for 32 billion. By
contrast, domestic non-banks reduced theirholdings in domestic and foreign investmentfunds by 33
1/C252billion and 33 billion respective-
ly.Mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
33Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
In cyclical terms, the German economy failed
to make ground in the last few months of2004. This means that it has been on a virtu-ally flat path of growth since the summer oflast year. According to the latest calculationsof the Federal Statistical Office, real gross do-mestic product (GDP) in the fourth quarterwas 0.2% down on the preceding three-month period after adjustment for seasonalvariations and the comparatively large num-ber of working days in the year. This takes ac-count of the impact of additional workingdays on output, which is calculated on amulti-year average. It is conceivable, how-ever, that the actual working-day effect(which is not directly measurable) was smallerin the fourth quarter of 2004 than mighthave been expected on the basis of the multi-year mean value. This could be due to theadditional working days falling in the Christ-mas holiday period.
The year-on-year increase was 0.6%, com-
pared with +1.2% in the third quarter. Takinginto account the fact that there were twoand a half more working days in the reportingperiod than in the same period of 2003 and acorresponding increase in the number ofhours worked, the figure was +1.5%. The na-tional accounts figures for 2004 that are nowavailable are therefore somewhat less positivethan those initially reported by the FederalStatistical Office in mid-January of this year.Average annual GDP growth is now put at1.0% in working-day-adjusted terms and1.6% according to the unadjusted figures.Flat cyclical
movement

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
34The faltering of the cyclical recovery process
is undoubtedly due, first and foremost, to thegrowth path of the world economy havingbecome flatter since mid-2004 and thedampening effect of the deterioration in pricecompetitiveness caused by the appreciationof the euro. Exports, which had been themain driving force behind the increase inoverall economic output, were now turningout to be a vulnerable flank in terms of busi-ness activity. Moreover, energy price inflationstemming from the international crude oilmarkets placed a strain on domestic demand,especially on private consumption. In add-ition, the combination of oil price and appre-ciation effects has left a clear mark on theoverall economic production process since,up to now, there has been no breakthroughin domestic business activity. Seen in thatlight, even after one and a half years, the
German economy is still in the initial phase ofan economic upturn. Despite external disrup-tive influences, however, sentiment in tradeand industry as well as the consumer climateamong households have improved somewhatrecently. Evidently, many investors and con-sumers subscribe to the view that the currentflat movement of the economy will lead intoan economic upturn again as the year pro-gresses.
Nevertheless, developments in the fourth
quarter also reveal that the economy enteredthe new year without momentum. That holdstrue for all the major demand aggregates andeconomic sectors. As industrial activity wasinclining to weakness in the last few monthsof 2004, a large part of the somewhat higherlevel of exports is likely to have come fromexisting stocks. Expenditure on machineryand other equipment, following the sharp in-crease in the third quarter, may have beensomewhat lower again recently. With regardto construction, a large amount of unoccu-pied real estate (with an increasing number ofvacant premises in some regions) had a per-sistently dampening impact. Weather-relatedcutbacks in production, which are usual inthe fourth quarter, are likely to have beencomparatively minor in 2004, however.Households’ retail purchases continued to berestrained in the last few months of 2004. Agood start in October was nullified by amarked decline in November, and even theChristmas trading period failed to produce aturnaround. Nevertheless, in autumn therewas no continuation of the reluctance to buymotor vehicles that had been clearly felt in
Adjusted for seasonal and working-day
variations, quarterly
%DM bn € bn
Lin scale
Year-on-year change9009209409609801000
oLog scale
                                    
Real GDP 1Economic growth in Germany
1At 1995 prices. — oFrom 1999, in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−510
500490
480
470460
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
External
disruptive
factorsWeak demand
profile

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
35the third quarter. On an average of the fourth
quarter, in fact, registrations of new motorvehicles went up by no less than 21
1/C252%i n
seasonally adjusted terms hitting a multi-yearpeak. In addition, purchases of refined petrol-eum products – especially heating oil – in-creased, having previously been deferred inmany cases owing to rising prices. Overall,there was a slight increase in private con-sumption in the last few months of 2004, al-though it is not possible to conclude from thisthat there was a sustained growth in the pro-pensity to consume.
Output and labour market
In cyclical terms, the business situation in in-
dustry deteriorated somewhat in the last fewmonths of 2004. After adjustment for sea-sonal variations and the quite large numberof working days, average output in the fourthquarter was
1/C252% down on the summer
months. The year-on-year increase in output,which had been 5% in the third quarter,went down to 1
1/C252%. Taking sales as a yard-
stick, domestic deliveries and exports were al-most equally affected.
The slow pace of economic growth affected
both the capital goods sector and the con-sumer goods sector. In the case of capitalgoods, the cutbacks in the production ofmachinery, equipment and motor vehiclesas well as in telecommunications systemshad an impact. In the case of durable con-sumer goods, developments in the majorbranches of consumer electronics and furni-ture manufacturing were rather unfavour-Seasonally adjusted, monthly
Balance
Balance
Propensity to purchase
1998 99 00 01 02 03 04 2005Households’ assessment of the
economic situation2
MonthlyCurrent situationBusiness
expectations2000 = 100
Business climate in the
industrial sector 1Sentiment in the industrial
sector and among households
1 Source: Ifo Institute. — 2  According to
GfK data. Moving five-month averages.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−40+
20+
0
20−
40−105
100
95
90
85
80110
105
100
95
9085
Deterioration
in industry

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
36able. By contrast, production of intermediate
goods held up well. Comparatively slowgrowth, say, in the glass and ceramics sectoras well in the manufacture of electricalmachinery and apparatus was more than off-set by the continuing expansion in output inthe chemicals industry and in steel produc-tion.In the construction sector, there was no fur-
ther deterioration in business activity in thelast few months of 2004. In seasonally adjust-ed terms, construction output in the fourthquarter was largely at the same level as in theprevious months. Given the persistent declinein demand, however, this is not yet a sign aconsolidation. It is rather the case that thecomparatively mild weather in early Decem-ber, in particular, allowed work to continueon quite a large scale. The even larger year-on-year fall of 7
1/C254% in the fourth quarter of
2004 shows how unfavourable the situationin the construction sector still is. The appliesparticularly to the building industry, whereseasonally adjusted output in the last threemonths of 2004 continued to decline. To alarge extent, this is likely to be due to a fur-ther reduction in housing construction activ-ity, although the increasing amount of un-occupied real estate, including vacant officepremises, has doubtless also contributed to areduction in the volume of construction. Civilengineering work, which is sustained pre-dominantly by public sector contracts, bene-fited more from the quite mild temperatures.In this subsector, output increased somewhatin the fourth quarter, in fact. Owing to itsclose link with the building industry, businessactivity in the finishing trades is more likely tohave been negative. In the third quarter, thenumber of hours worked, at -8%, was al-ready further down on the year than before.However, much the same is to be expectedfor the fourth quarter, for which no statisticsare available yet.
The situation in trade remained unfavourable
towards the end of 2004. The price-adjusted2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−105
90100
8595
8090
7510+
5+
0
5−105
100
95
90
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Construction
output still
weak

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
37level of sales was again clearly down on the
year. At least, there was no further acceler-ation of the decline in the wholesale trade.The main reasons for this were that trade inagricultural products has improved recentlyand that sales of fuels and refined petroleumproducts showed an increase. This largely off-set the weak development in food, drink andtobacco and the deterioration in the machin-ery and equipment sector, which is probablyconnected to the faltering growth in industry.In the retail trade (excluding motor vehiclesand sales of automotive fuel), the year-on-year decline in sales was tending to increaseat the end of the period under review. In par-ticular, sales of consumer electronics and ofbooks and magazines remained weak. Ac-cording to the latest consumer surveys, therehas been some increase in the propensity tomake major purchases, but, overall, house-holds tended to remain cautious as before.The situation in the hotel and restauranttrade, where the earlier identifiable gradualrecovery had been interrupted in the autumnof 2004, was brightening up again somewhattowards the end of the year. This applies par-ticularly to the accommodation businesses,where the volume of turnover was again upon the year at the end of the period under re-view. Restaurant businesses were still show-ing a minus figure, however.
In the case of the commercial service pro-
viders, the cyclical flattening in the produc-tion sector meant that many expectations forthe last few months of 2004 were not ful-filled. Indeed, according to the surveys of theCentre for European Economic Research, themarked preponderance of firms that had stillbeen reporting a positive development in
sales in summer disappeared almost entirely.Pessimistic reports were in a clear majority,not least in the IT and telecoms sectors. In thecase of firms of architects, hope of the situ-ation improving has largely faded. This wasnot offset by more positive developments inthe case of management consultancy and ad-vertising firms.
Towards the end of 2004, the labour market
was still marked by a rising level of employ-ment as well as by unemployment. Accordingto Federal Statistical Office data, the season-ally adjusted number of persons in work hadgone up to almost 38.6 million by Decem-ber 2004. This signifies an increase of roughly80,000 on the third quarter and around290,000, or 0.8%, on the year. While em-ployment in industry and construction wasdeclining up to the end of the period underreview – albeit at what tended to be a slowerpace – employment in the services sector wasshowing an accelerated rise. This was focusedon commercial service providers and workersemployed in households, ie persons who arelikely, for the most part, to be low-paid part-time workers. The numbers of these haveprobably increased again in the past fewmonths. At the end of 2004, a total ofaround 8
1/C252million jobs of this kind were
registered with the Miners’ Federal StatutoryHealth Insurance Scheme. The rise in employ-ment was also supported by formerly un-employed persons who have become self-employed – for example, as one-person busi-nesses – with financial assistance from the la-bour exchanges. Business start-up grantswere paid to nearly 225,000 persons, withUnfavourable
development
in trade
Slowdown
in the case
of commercial
service
providersContinuous rise
employment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
38Deutsche BundesbankSharp increase in low-paid part-time jobs
With effect from 1 April 2003, new regulations for low-
paid part-time (and short-term) jobs were introduced as part of the Hartz II Act. The ceiling for monthly earnings was raised from €325 to €400, for example. At the same time, the restriction to 15 hours worked per week was abolished. The compensation of employees is exempted from taxes and social security contributions. The employ-ers pay a ﬂ  at rate of 25% of the earnings for the social 
security contributions and income tax. Every employed person subject to social security contributions can work in a second job exempt from social security contributions. For persons employed in households, there is a reduced contribution rate of 12%; the employers receive an additional tax allowance amounting to 10% of the costs incurred up to a maximum tax savings of €510. A simple reporting procedure to the Miners’ Federal Statutory Health Insurance Scheme (Bundesknappschaft)  facilitates 
the establishment of jobs of this kind.
The new arrangements for “mini-jobs“ has considerably 
enhanced the attractiveness of low-paid part-time jobs. In particular, demand has been stimulated by the large degree of ﬂ  exibility with regard to working hours as well 
as the scope available with regard to pay and straightfor-ward administrative reporting processes. Added to this is a broad regional availability. In the nine months up to the end of 2003, the number of low-paid part-time work-ers had increased by around 700,000 to about six million. 
Approximately a further 900,000 persons were added to 
this ﬁ  gure during 2004. This means that the total number 
has risen to nearly seven million. Roughly one-quarter of these persons already had a main job fully subject to social security contributions. In other words, their low-paid employment was a second job. Roughly 1½% were employed in a household.
As the sharp increase in low-paid part-time employ-
ment coincided with a marked reduction in employment 
fully subject to social security contributions, it is often assumed that, in many cases, full-time jobs have been 
split up and reclassiﬁ  ed. At all events, the number of per-
sons subject to regular social security contributions fell by 450,000 between March and the end of 2003. In 2004, the decline amounted to roughly 300,000. Looking at these developments in terms of the sectors of the economy, the changes in employment in hotels and restaurants as well 
as in the retail trade, in particular, support this substitu-
tion theory. In both economic sectors, the sharp expan-sion of low-paid part-time employment was accompanied by marked reductions in “normal” employment. On the other hand, the level of both categories of employment was increased noticeably not least in the case of commer-cial service providers and in the healthcare sector. A simi-lar parallel situation is identiﬁ  able in a Federal Labour 
Agency study
 1 based on business data. In around 180,000 
ﬁ rms, a decline of just over half a million in the number 
of persons subject to social security contributions in the 
1 See Mini- und Midijobs in Deutschland , special report 2004. —Year-on-year changes in thousands
Mid-year level
Self-employed
Low-paid part-time employees
Employees subject to social
security contributionsComponents of the
shift in employment
400+
200+
0
200–
400–
600–
2001 2002 2003 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
39period from March 2003 to March 2004 was accompanied 
by an increase of almost 400,000 in the case of mini-jobs. There are not a few cases, however, where both types of employment increased or where the rise in the number of employees fully subject to social security contributions was accompanied by a fall in the number of low-paid part-time employees. Based on the group of employees, at just under 450,000, almost exactly the same number of persons switched from a low-paid part-time job to “nor-mal” employment as vice versa. The cited study concludes that there have been some exchange processes between the two types of employment. Nevertheless, there is likely to have been a greater number of cases in which new job opportunities have been created.
A study by the Rheinisch-Westfälisches Institut (RWI)
 2 
investigated the question of unemployed persons being integrated into a low-paid part-time job. According to 
this study, around 15% of persons employed in mini-
jobs had been unemployed before taking up a low-paid part-time job. Nevertheless, as the number of 15 hours worked per week, which is needed for no longer being counted in the unemployment statistics, is not achieved in most cases, these persons generally remain registered as unemployed. No more than 3% of all persons in low-paid part-time employment exceed the statistical thresh-old. While there are major differences in speciﬁ  c cases, 
weekly working hours average somewhat less than ten 
hours. The quite small percentage of persons in mini-jobs 
who used to be unemployed is explained by the fact that two-ﬁ  fths of the persons surveyed by RWI had previously 
been housewives or “house-husbands” and roughly another quarter was drawing a pension or in training. The vast majority of low-paid part-time workers there-fore come from what is known as the “hidden reserve” or an expanded labour force potential.
The reorganisation of low-paid part-time employment 
has probably contributed to a reduction in illicit working. This is suggested, at least, by the reports from house-
holds. At the end of the third quarter of 2004, just under 90,000 “mini-jobbers” were involved in the household cheque procedure, ie around 60,000 more than in June 2003 when the statistical recording began.
The ﬁ  gures available so far allow no more than an initial 
assessment of part of the overall reform package. Gener-
ally speaking, the ﬁ  ndings are quite varied and can by 
no means be interpreted as a failure of the approach to reform. Rather, the boom in mini-jobs can be understood as a call to make the core areas of the labour market more ﬂ  exible as well. Moreover, it is important that 
mini-jobs play a greater part in the integration of the unemployed. A less restrictive practice in offsetting earn-ings against beneﬁ  ts, which would increase the incentive 
for recipients of “unemployment beneﬁ  t II” to take up 
a mini-job – especially when compared with “one euro jobs” – would therefore seem appropriate.
2 See Aspekte der Entwicklung der Minijobs , Gutachten im Auftrag 
der Minijob-Zentrale der Bundesknappschaft 2004. — 3 Also contains the cases where there has been no change. — 4 Firms which had no 
employees either in March 2003 or in March 2004.Shiftsin emp loyment su bject to soc ialsecur ity
contributions and low-paid part-timeemployment
March 2003 to March 2004, in thousands
Category ChangeNumber
of firmsPersons sub-
ject to socialsecurity con-tributions ALow-paid
part-timeemployeesB
A
B–
+182 – 558 + 379
A
B+
3
+278 + 532 + 538
A
B+3
–31,283 + 937 – 320
A
B–
–3404 – 1,829 – 281
Cannot be allocated 4 646 + 354 + 207
Total 2,793 – 564 + 523

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
4090,000 persons received bridging payments
in December. Furthermore, more job oppor-tunities with a work-related benefit bonus(known as one-euro jobs) have been created.The number of full-time workers subject tofull social security contributions – which is af-fected more by cyclical developments – wasfalling up to the end of the period under re-view, however. This decline has, nevertheless,become slower. The figure for November(more recent statistics are unavailable at
present) was still more than 1% down on theyear, which was more than 300,000 persons.In mid-2004, the decrease had been 1.6%, or430,000 persons.
The cyclically unfavourable labour market
situation, which is evident from the develop-ment of employment subject to social securitycontributions, may have contributed to un-employment rising in the autumn of last year,too. According to the Federal EmploymentAgency, at the end of December the season-ally adjusted number of persons affected wasa good 40,000 higher than in September. Thesharp seasonally adjusted rise of 225,000 inJanuary 2005 was due mainly to persons ableto work who had previously been receivingsocial assistance now registering as un-employed. For these persons, registration wasnecessary in order draw unemployment bene-fit II. By the end of January, the number ofpersons officially registered as unemployedhad risen to a 5.04 million (unadjusted fig-ure). In cyclical terms, unemployment has re-mained largely unchanged. The seasonallyadjusted unemployment rate, as calculatedby the Federal Employment Agency, was11.4%.
The sharp increase in registered unemploy-
ment at the start of the year has led to a de-bate on how the headline unemploymentrate is to be interpreted correctly. Accordingto the method currently employed by theFederal Employment Agency, persons arecounted as unemployed who do not work, orwho work fewer than 15 hours a week, whoare seeking work with a greater number ofQuarterly, seasonally adjusted
Millions
Millions
%Thou-
sands
Thou-
sands
0
12Unemployment rateJan
1998 99 00 01 02 03 04 2005JanLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed - JanLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
EmployedLabour market
1From January 2004, unemployed exclud-
ing participants in aptitude testing and
training measures. — 2From January 2005,
including persons formerly receiving social
assistance but able to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9400+
0
400−5.0
4.6
4.2
3.8800+
400+
0
400−38.8
38.4
38.0
37.6
37.2Steady rise in
unemployment
Informative
value of the
unemployment
rate

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
41working hours, who are available for job
placement, and who are personally registeredat a labour exchange. However, statistical ef-fects were already playing a considerable rolein 2003. Since January 2004, participants intraining and aptitude-testing schemes haveno longer been registered as unemployed. Onbalance, the informative value of the un-employment statistics has been improved bythe administrative measures and the revisionsof the methodology undertaken in the pastfew years, even though they disrupt timecomparisons for a while. Nevertheless, forquite a number of reasons, the unemploy-ment rate is still an imperfect measure of thescale and severity of the chronic under-employment in Germany. Moreover, theproblems on the German labour market aretoo complex to be captured by a single indi-cator. The lack of competitive jobs is likely tobe a more important factor.
Demand
Demand for German industrial goods became
perceptibly more buoyant again in December.In the fourth quarter as a whole, it was notquite 2% up on the preceding three months.Even so, the fact that the year-on-year in-crease went down to 4
1/C254%f r o m53/C254% in the
third quarter shows that the pace of growthwas still restrained. This is all the more thecase given that there was an exceptional ac-cumulation of major orders in December. Thisapplied, in particular, to parts of the mechan-ical engineering and other transport equip-ment sectors, the latter including buildingand repairing of ships and boats as well as
construction of air transport equipment.
The major domestic orders were concen-
trated on these sectors. Overall, the seasonal-ly adjusted average intake of domestic ordersin the last three months of the year was 3%up on the quarter. The stronger flow of orderswas largely sustained by capital goods. Notonly producers of other transport equipment,Volume, 2000 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
DomesticLog scale
ForeignLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
New orders totalDemand for industrial goods
Deutsche Bundesbank105
100
95
90100115
95110
90105
85100
80
7515+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−110
105
100
95
90
85
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Orders received
by industry ...
... from
domestic
firms ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
42but also manufacturers of road vehicles re-
corded a marked increase in orders. In theconsumer goods sector, the lull in orders dur-ing the summer was offset, with the figuresnearly matching those of the second quarter.By contrast, orders placed with producers ofintermediate goods were no higher in thefourth quarter than they had been in thesummer.In seasonally adjusted terms, foreign demand
for German industrial products was likewisehigher in the fourth quarter than it had beenin the July to September period, which wasalso due to a large number of major orders inDecember. In the capital goods sector, in par-ticular, this resulted in an overall quarter-on-quarter increase in orders in the final threemonths of the year. There was also a markedimprovement in the order situation in theconsumer goods sector, where a seasonallyadjusted 5
1/C252% increase in the last three
months of 2004 brought the best quarterlyresult of the entire year. This helped to com-pensate for the declining orders in the case ofintermediate goods. In this sector, steel pro-ducers, in particular, suffered a decline fromthe high level of orders in the summer, whilethere was a further increase in demand in thechemicals industry.
The situation in the construction sector re-
mained unfavourable throughout the report-ing period. Whereas demand for constructionwork during the summer had been pointingto a gradual stabilisation of the situation,there was a further setback in November. Inseasonally adjusted terms, the average figuretaking October and November together wasaround 1
1/C252% down on the third quarter,
when the level had already been low. Theyear-on-year figure was down by more thanone-tenth. The decline was far sharper in resi-dential construction, where orders fell byroughly 18% on the year. In seasonally ad-justed terms, in October and Novemberperiod they were 4% lower than in the thirdquarter. With a seasonally adjusted figure ofno more than 11,800 units, construction per-Volume, 2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted,
quarterly, log scale
... in housing construction... from the public sectorConstruction orders ...
... from industrial
    enterprisesTotal construction orders
Oct/
NovDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60120
100110
90100
80110
90100
8090
70120
110
100
90
80
7070
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004- - - - Restrained
export business
Persistently
weak
construction
demand

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
43mits for single-family housing were nearly
halved compared with the most recent peakin 1999. In apartment house construction,compared with 1994 – the first year forwhich statistics are available for Germany as awhole – orders have now fallen to less thanone-fifth. In seasonally adjusted terms, publicsector construction orders in the two monthsof October and November were 2
3/C254% down
on the third quarter. It was only industrialconstruction that held up. After adjustmentfor seasonal and working-day variations,there was a slight increase in incomingorders. Even though this means that the levelof orders had remained largely unchangedsince spring 2004, the year-on-year fall of10% shows that there have been sharp cut-backs in this sector, too.
In the case of commercial service providers,
the outlook for demand is brighter. Accordingto the European Centre for Economic Re-search survey in the fourth quarter of 2004,the enterprises in this sector take quite a posi-tive view of the orders situation. Even so,there are greater differences between the in-dividual sectors than in the past. The mostpositive assessment comes from the tele-coms, closely followed by tax consultants andauditors. This contrasts with the stronglynegative expectations of firms of architects aswell those of firms working in technical con-sultancy and planning. This is likely to be con-nected with the restrained investment activityin industry, especially with regard to construc-tion projects.Prices
The overall rate of price increase remained
within limits in the last few months of 2004.While tax factors again had a marked impactdomestically, there tended to be more damp-ening effects from the external side. In sea-sonally adjusted terms, German import priceswere declining slightly from their most recentpeak in October. In December, they werescarcely higher than they had been in thesecond quarter of 2004. The year-on-yearrate of increase went down from 4.1% to2.2%. Cheaper imports of crude oil and re-fined petroleum products, which had risen byone-half on the year in early autumn, werethe crucial factor behind this. At all events,the decline in prices was so sharp that it morethan offset the contrasting movement in gas,Consumer prices
Annual percentage change
2004
I t e m Q 2Q 3Q 4J a n
Food – 0.3 – 0.6 – 1.0 – 1.1
Industrial goods 1.8 1.6 1.8 1.4
of which
Tobacco 12.2 12.2 16.2 24.3Pharmaceuticals andtherapeutic appliances 23.2 23.2 23.1 5.4
Energy 4.9 6.1 7.1 5.3
of which
Refined petroleumproducts 7.7 10.3 11.2 5.9
Services 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.4
of which
Outpatient and inpatientmedical services 17.0 18.7 18.5 2.6
Rents 1.0 1.0 1.2 1.0
Total 1.7 1.8 2.0 1.6
Total excluding seasonal
products, energy, tobacco,healthcare 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.7
Memo item
Harmonised Index 1.8 2.0 2.1 1.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
Positive
demand
outlook in the
case of some
service
providers Import prices
declining
slightly

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
44which traditionally follows oil prices with a
time-lag of roughly half a year. Added to thiswas an initial easing of upward price pressureon steel products. This meant that raw mater-ials and semi-finished became somewhatcheaper on the whole. Probably not leastowing to the depreciation of the euro, theprice level of finished products, which hasbeen down on the year for quite some while,fell back again slightly.
In the case of German domestic industrial
producer prices, cheaper energy coincidedwith the second increase in tobacco tax. Theoutcome of this was that there was no con-tinuation of the decline in factory gate pricesin December. In seasonally adjusted terms, infact, there was a slight increase. The year-on-year rate of increase, which had fallen to2.8% in November, went up to 2.9%. Exclud-
ing tobacco, the figure went down from2.6% to 2.4%. One factor in this was theeasing of steel prices, which meant that therewas no further rise in the prices of intermedi-ate goods. Price changes in the case of otherindustrial goods were moderate up to theend of the period under review. In December,capital goods and consumer goods (excludingtobacco) were no more than 0.6% and 0.5%more expensive respectively than in the samemonth of 2003.
Construction prices, after a lengthy standstill,
had started moving upwards in the spring of2004, and showed a further slight rise againin the fourth quarter. The year-on-year figurefor construction prices went up to +1.7%.The building industry was especially affected.Commercial and industrial buildings were2.6% more expensive. Office buildings andhousebuilding cost 2.0% and 1.7% morerespectively. The perceptibly higher steelprices were a main cost factor. As steel ismuch less important in road construction,there were hardly any price changes in thissubsector.
According to the regional data supplied by
BulwienGesa AG, which has been aggregatedby the Bundesbank, in 2004 there was a fur-ther decline in prices for residential buildings(terraced houses and owner-occupied apart-ment housing). In the case of newly builthousing, price reductions (as in 2003) werearound 1%. In the case of resale, the figurewas as much as just over 2%. This meantthat used property was no more expensivelast year than it had been in 1993. Purchase
2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
Enlarged scale
Import prices
1998 99 00 01 02 03 04 2005Commodity prices 1Commodity and import prices
1HWWA index “Euroland” on a euro basis;
not seasonally adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank105
100
95
9095120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
Tobacco tax
driving
industrial
producer pricesHigher
construction
prices
Falling house
prices in 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
45prices for newly constructed houses and
apartments, including land, were similar tothose at the end of the 1990s.
According to both the national price index
and the (EMU) euro area Harmonised Indexof Consumer Prices (HICP), the prices ofgoods and services purchased by householdswere 1.6% up on the year in January. The de-cline on December 2004, when the rate ofchange had been 2.1% and 2.2% respective-ly, was due, to a large extent, to a base effectof the health system reform, which had start-ed to affect prices at the beginning of lastyear. Added to this were comparatively minorprice increases for food as well as quite sharpfalls in the prices of clothing and shoes inconnection with special sales. By contrast,services became more expensive. The in-creases in motor vehicle tax for older vehicleswith a higher pollutant emission and in motorvehicle insurance had a particular impact inthis sector. Moreover, the price reductions forpackage holidays and in accommodation ser-
vices were smaller than had been the case inearlier years.2000 = 100, annual averages, log scale
House prices2
Newly built
Resale
1995 2004Construction prices 1Construction and house prices
in Germany
1Bundesbank calculations based on
Federal Statistical Office data. — 2Terraced
houses and owner-occupied dwellings;
Bundesbank calculations based on raw data
of BulwienGesa AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank104
102
100
98
96
94102
100
98
96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03Lower rate
of consumer
inflation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
46Foreign trade
and paymentsForeign trade and current account
The external conditions for German exporters
were no longer quite as favourable in thefourth quarter of 2004 as in the precedingmonths. One reason for this was that theglobal economy lost momentum comparedwith the first half of 2004, not least as a re-sult of the rise in oil prices; all the same, eco-nomic growth proved to be so robust that theexpansion of the global economy continuedon a somewhat flatter path. The other reasonwas that German suppliers appeared to havebeen burdened by the temporary appreci-ation of the euro last year, especially in theirtrade relations with the dollar area. Overall,German exports stagnated as a result in thefinal quarter of 2004. In respect of future de-velopments in foreign trade, however, indus-try appears fairly optimistic, even though ex-port expectations were somewhat more cau-tious at the start of this year than in the pre-ceding months, according to a survey by theIfo institute. The latest easing on the foreignexchange markets is likely to lend additionalsupport to this optimism.
Compared with the previous quarter, nominal
exports of goods went up by merely justunder
1/C252% in the fourth quarter of 2004 after
seasonal and working-day adjustment, aftergoing up by almost 1% in the third quarter.Exports therefore remained almost un-changed on the quarter in real terms, ie afterallowing for the slight rise in export prices.The seasonally and working-day-adjusted De-cember figure, which was decidedly low, de-termined the quarterly result. It is possiblethat German exporters did not fully exploitExternal
environment
Exports
of goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
47the potential of the additional working days
in the month.1In any case, external develop-
ments were noticeably more favourable untilNovember. This is also reflected in the figuresfor individual countries.
A comparison of the average of October and
November 2004 – statistics on foreign tradeby region and sector are not yet available forDecember – with the third quarter shows thatGerman exporters managed to increase thevalue of exports to both the euro area andthird countries (+1
1/C252% in each case). In par-
ticular, trade with the Netherlands and Francecontributed towards the growth in exports toother euro-area countries. In France’s case,exports of aircraft were a major factor. Over-all, German suppliers are likely to have con-tinued to benefit from the comparatively ad-vantageous price and cost developments inGermany in terms of sales within the euroarea.
In view of the further appreciation of the
euro up to the end of 2004, however, Ger-man exporters have been less able to com-pete on price with third countries in recentmonths. The shifts in exchange rate paritiesand the economic differences between re-gions have led to sales of German products inthe individual non-euro-area countries turn-ing out very differently. In the period underreview, turnover from exports by German in-dustry to the rapidly growing ten new EUmember states went up particularly dynamic-ally (+10
1/C252%). Owing to the great import-
ance of these countries to German exports –9% of Germany’s total exports and 16% ofGerman exports to third countries are cur-rently to these countries – this strong growth
was due primarily to the increase in sales out-side the euro area. The value of exports to€b n
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
2005JanLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 2000 = 100MonthlyMonthly 1Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−120
115
110
105
100
95190
185
180
175
170
165
160
155
2001 2002 2003 2004
1December 2004 had two more working days than De-
cember 2003, for example. As working-day adjustment is
based on the monthly average number of working days,
not making full use of the additional working days – for
example, when company holidays take place between
Christmas and New Year independently of the number of
working days in that period – would lead to relatively
fewer exports in (seasonally and) working-day-adjusted
terms.Breakdown
of exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
48China (+3%) and the OPEC countries
(+11/C252%) also rose somewhat in the period
under review. By contrast, export turnover inmost of the other important German salesareas was, in some cases, considerably lowerthan in the previous period, presumably due,not least, to exchange rate movements. Thisparticularly affected Japan (-10
1/C252%) and the
emerging markets in South-East Asia (-7%)whereas the decline in exports to the UnitedStates was smaller (-1
1/C252%).
The greater foreign demand in October and
November as a whole was directed primarilyat the German consumer goods sector,whose export turnover rose by just over2
1/C252%. However, it also gave rise to a nominal
increase of just under 2% in exports of capitalgoods, the focal point of German exports,and of 1% in intermediate goods. The in-
crease in products of the German chemicalindustry and the information and communi-cation sector was particularly noticeable(+2
1/C252% in each case). In addition, metal
products were in greater demand abroad.However, exports of motor vehicle equipmentfell (-2%).
The value of German imports of goods in-
creased by just over
1/C252% in seasonally adjust-
ed terms in the fourth quarter of 2004; theytherefore went up much more slowly than inthe previous quarter (+4%). Like exports,they stagnated in real terms as import pricesrose by just under
1/C252% in the three-month
period under review. Goods imported fromthird countries actually became
1/C252% cheaper.
The 6% average appreciation of the euroagainst the dollar in the fourth quarter vis-/C224-vis the previous quarter was one contributoryfactor. The other factor that had a consider-able effect on the moderate price develop-ments was the sharp fall in oil prices in thelast two months of 2004.
Although there is not yet any information
available on the regional and product struc-ture, imports, like exports, fell sharply in De-cember. On an average of October and No-vember compared with the average of thethird quarter, there was still an increase of2
1/C252%. This increase can be attributed exclu-
sively to increased imports from third coun-tries (+4% in nominal terms). The value ofimports from the Russian Federation went upby 12%. Imports, mainly of crude oil, fromthe OPEC countries also showed a high nom-inal rate of increase (+13%). In both cases,Trend in foreign trade by region and
by category of goods
Average of October and November 2004 compared
with the average of July to September 2004%; seasonally adjusted
ItemEx-
portsIm-
ports
Total + 1.3 + 2.1Selected country/group of countries
Euro-area countries + 1.3 – 0.6
Other EU countries + 6.8 + 5.6United States – 1.4 + 1.2Japan – 10.6 – 3.7China + 3.2 + 10.9Russian Federation – 2.2 + 11.8OPEC countries + 1.7 + 13.2Emerging marketsin South-East Asia – 6.8 – 2.5
Categories of goods
Selected main categories
Intermediate goods + 1.2 + 0.4Capital goods + 1.8 + 3.2Consumer goods + 2.7 + 3.3Energy . – 0.6
Selected categories
Chemicals + 2.5 + 13.7Machinery – 0.4 + 1.1Motor vehicles and motor vehicleparts – 1.9 – 3.9Information technology + 2.4 + 0.6Metals and metal products + 2.1 + 2.0
Deutsche BundesbankImports
of goods
Breakdown
of imports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
49however, price effects are likely to have
played a significant role.2Nevertheless, it was
not energy imports that led to the rise in im-ports; these declined in value overall as Ger-man energy importers were evidently reluc-tant to place orders in view of the sharp pricefluctuations on the oil market. The decisivefactor was the greater domestic demand forforeign capital and consumer goods as wellas for chemical engineering goods, althoughit must be said here that exports, which weremore robust up until November anyway,could also have triggered a greater need forimports. Imports from China and the ten newEU member states rose particularly sharply(+11% and +8
1/C252% respectively); these coun-
tries positioned themselves as, among otherthings, important suppliers of informationand communications technology goods. Bycontrast, imports from both Japan (-3
1/C252%)
and South-East Asia (-21/C252%) fell in value com-
pared with the preceding three-monthperiod. The same was true of imports fromthe other euro-area countries (-
1/C252%), in
which there may have been substitution ef-fects in view of the fact that imported prod-ucts became 1
1/C252% more expensive on an
average of October and November.
The seasonally adjusted trade surplus fell by
31/C252billion in the fourth quarter of 2004 com-
pared with the previous quarter to 3361/C252bil-
lion. The cause of this was the somewhatsharper increase in nominal imports of goodsin comparison with exports. At the sameMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2003 2004
I t e m Q 4Q 3Q 4
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 172.0 179.7 190.1
Imports (cif) 140.2 142.8 154.7
Balance + 31.8 + 36.9 + 35.4
2 Services (balance) – 5.6 – 13.4 – 7.93 Income (balance) + 0.3 – 3.8 + 3.54 Current transfers (balance) – 6.3 – 8.0 – 6.2
Balance on current account
2 + 18.4 + 8.5 + 21.6
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 34.2 + 37.1 + 36.72 Services – 8.8 – 9.3 – 10.73 Income – 0.5 – 3.2 + 2.94 Current transfers – 6.2 – 7.2 – 6.1
Current account
2 + 16.7 + 14.5 + 19.4
II Balance of capital transfers 3 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.3
III Balance of financial account 4 – 25.8 – 30.6 – 29.6
IV Change in the reserve assets
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 0.0
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 6.2 + 20.3 + 8.3
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 51. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2The greatest relief in import prices arising from declin-
ing crude oil prices did not occur until December 2004
and therefore cannot yet be reflected in these regional
data, which only cover the period until November.Current
account

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
50time, the deficit on invisible current transac-
tions fell by 36 billion to 314 billion. This fall
is attributable mainly to a sharp rise in netcross-border income, which led to a surpluson income of 33 billion. Besides this, slightly
smaller net current transfers were paid tonon-residents. The deficit on services was31
1/C252billion up on the quarter. The German
current account therefore closed with a sea-sonally adjusted surplus of 319
1/C252billion in the
final quarter of 2004 following one of around314
1/C252billion in the previous quarter.
Financial transactions
Relatively favourable stock and bond markets
as well as exchange rate movements in fa-vour of the euro determined events on theinternational financial markets in the finalquarter of last year. The interest rate advan-tage that dollar paper had on the capital mar-ket increased further. At the short end, the in-crease in the federal funds rate played a role.On balance, some of the aforementioned in-fluences cancelled each other out in Germanfinancial transactions. If portfolio investmentand direct investment are taken together,there were net inflows into Germany of39 billion in the fourth quarter of 2004.
In portfolio investment alone, there were
slight (net) inflows of funds amounting to31 billion; in the previous quarter, there had
been net capital imports of 318 billion.
Foreign investors played a crucial part in this
fall. They showed far less interest in Germansecurities in the final quarter than in late sum-mer ( 318 billion compared with 338
1/C252billion).
The main reason for this was the drop in de-mand for German bonds and notes, whichevidently seemed less attractive to them inview of the changed interest rate situation.On balance, they added just 315 billion worth
of German bonds to their portfolios com-pared with 333
1/C252billion in the previous three-
month period. Public bonds accounted formost of this figure ( 311 billion). By contrast,
bank bonds, which had been in high demandbetween July and September, played a lesserrole in foreign investors’ portfolio decisions inthe period under review ( 33
1/C252billion).
There was also less foreign interest in the Ger-
man equity market in the final quarter of theyear. On balance, foreign investors acquiredjust31 billion worth of German equities com-
pared with 36
1/C252billion worth in the previous
three-month period. Owing to the compara-tively strong performance of the DAX and thesimultaneous peaking of the euro, profit-taking, especially by investors from outsidethe euro area, could have reduced net acqui-sitions.
German investors likewise reduced their new
investment in the international securities mar-kets ( 317 billion compared with 320
1/C252billion
before), albeit not to the same extent as for-eign investors in Germany. In particular, theybought foreign bonds and notes in the finalthree months of last year ( 317
1/C252billion).
Euro-denominated foreign long-term debt in-struments accounted for the overwhelmingmajority of these ( 315 billion), as has been
the case since the beginning of monetaryunion. These instruments usually carry some-Trends
in financial
transactions
Portfolio
investment
Foreign
investment in ...... German
bonds and
notes ...
... and German
shares
German
investment in ...
... foreign
bonds and
notes

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
51what higher yields than comparable Federal
securities (11 basis points on an average ofthe fourth quarter).
German investors again showed limited inter-
est in foreign shares, too, in the period underreview. They added foreign equities to theirportfolios from October to December ( 32
1/C252
billion) after having sold this type of paper on
balance in the previous quarter. By contrast,they sold foreign money market paper ( 32 bil-
lion) and mutual fund certificates of foreignfunds ( 31 billion), notably money market
funds. As yields declined, short-dated paperoffered fewer opportunities to make gainsthan longer-term debt securities.
As with portfolio investment, direct invest-
ment resulted in net capital imports amount-ing to 38 billion in the period under review.
Foreign enterprises invested 32 billion in Ger-
many from October to December. Of majorimportance was the fact that they providedtheir branches domiciled in Germany withadditional equity capital ( 311 billion). At the
same time, however, intra-group credit trans-actions, which likewise come under the cat-egory of direct investment, led to a net with-drawal of funds: for example, German subsid-iaries repaid substantial loans to their foreignproprietors.
By contrast, German enterprises withdrew
around 36 billion net from their branches
abroad between October and December. Thiscan also be attributed mainly to credit trans-actions within groups, which led to net cap-ital imports of 38
1/C252billion. Of these, short-
term financial loans played a particularly im-Financial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2003 2004
I t e m Q 4Q 3Q 4
1 Direct investment – 11.9 – 8.2 + 7.9
German investment
abroad + 1.1 – 8.0 + 5.8Foreign investmentin Germany – 13.0 – 0.2 + 2.1
2 Portfolio investment + 20.4 + 18.2 + 0.8
German investment
abroad – 10.7 – 20.4 – 17.0
Shares – 6.0 + 6.1 – 2.3
Mutual fund shares – 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.8Bonds and notes – 6.6 – 17.7 – 17.5Money market paper + 2.4 – 5.6 + 2.0
Foreign investment
in Germany + 31.1 + 38.6 + 17.8
Shares + 20.3 + 6.7 + 0.8
Mutual fund shares + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.2Bonds and notes + 14.4 + 33.7 + 14.8Money market paper – 3.9 – 5.9 + 1.1
3 Financial derivatives
1 –0 . 0 –2 . 6 –3 . 5
4 Credit transactions – 33.5 – 37.3 – 34.0
Monetary financial
institutions 2 – 30.2 – 5.1 – 38.0
Long-term + 1.1 + 4.5 – 7.1
Short-term – 31.4 – 9.6 – 30.9
Enterprises and
individuals + 5.1 – 2.5 + 3.3
Long-term – 0.8 – 1.8 – 0.6
Short-term + 5.9 – 0.7 + 3.9
General government – 0.2 + 3.1 – 2.5
Long-term + 1.3 + 1.4 – 1.1
Short-term – 1.5 + 1.8 – 1.3
Bundesbank – 8.2 – 32.8 + 3.2
5 Other investment – 0.7 – 0.7 – 0.96 Balance of all
statistically recordedcapital flows – 25.8 – 30.6 – 29.6
Memo item
Change in the reserveassets at transaction values(increase: –)
3 +1 . 2 +1 . 6 +0 . 0
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding the Bundesbank. —
3Excluding allocation of SDRs and changes due to
value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank... shares and
money market
paper
Foreign direct
investment
in Germany
German direct
investment
abroad

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
52portant role. At the same time, German pro-
prietors provided their foreign branches andsubsidiaries with 31 billion worth of equity
capital.
The non-securitised credit transactions of
non-banks led to net capital imports of 31 bil-
lion in the fourth quarter of 2004. Enterprisesand individuals repatriated funds amountingto just under 33
1/C252billion net. As is usual at
the end of the year, the repatriation of bankdeposits held abroad played a decisive role inthis respect. Overall, however, the operationsof non-banks appear to have been less exten-
sive in the final month of 2004 than in previ-ous years. Cross-border transactions by gen-eral government resulted in net capital ex-ports of 32
1/C252billion.
The non-securitised credit transactions of the
banks (including the Bundesbank), which es-sentially reflect all other external transactions,resulted in net capital exports amounting to335 billion in the period under review com-
pared with 338 billion in the previous quarter.
This figure was due mainly to credit insti-tutions’ external payments, which aloneaccounted for outflows of 338 billion. By
contrast, the Bundesbank’s external assets fellby33 billion, primarily as a result of trans-
actions within the gross settlement systemTARGET.
The Bundesbank’s reserve assets, which are
shown separately from cross-border credittransactions in the balance of payments, re-mained broadly unchanged at transaction val-ues between October and December. How-ever, there was a 34
1/C252billion fall after revalu-
ation at current market prices. This was duemainly to the depreciation of foreign ex-change reserves as well as the reduction inthe price of gold. On balance, the reserveassets stood at 371
1/C252billion at the end of
2004 compared with 3761/C252billion at the end
of 2003.Net capital exports: −
€b n
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4German investment in
foreign securitiesForeign investment in
German securities
Balance of
portfolio
investmentPortfolio investment
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−
40−
2003 2004
Credit
transactions of
non-banksCredit
transactions of
the banking
system
The
Bundesbank’s
reserve assets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
53Public financesCentral, state and local government
In the fourth quarter of 2004 central, state
and local government appear to have record-ed a small surplus, thus improving somewhaton the comparable position in the final quar-ter of 2003. In 2004 as a whole the deficitwill probably be on a par with that run up in2003, when a new record high of almost 370
billion was reached. On the revenue side taxreceipts stagnated owing above all to thecuts in income tax, while non-tax receipts de-clined, chiefly on account of the sharp drop inthe Bundesbank profit. Expenditure declinedslightly over twelve months amid countervail-ing effects such as higher spending on socialbenefits and a further fall in investment. It islikely that interest expenditure, too, decreaseddespite the high new borrowing during thepast few years thanks to the favourable finan-cing terms. Personnel expenditure and otheroperating expenditure were very muted.
For the current year the budget plans envis-
age a reduction in the deficits, not least inview of the national budgetary ceilings fornew borrowing. To this end increased re-course will be taken – especially by centralgovernment – to asset disposals. Tax revenuewill remain subdued, in particular because ofthe final stage of the income tax reform. Incontrast to the situation in the previous years,however, it is expected to increase (albeit onlymoderately). Tight curbs on spending remainessential if the budget targets are to be met.Overview

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
54Tax revenue decreased by 3.5% in the fourth
quarter compared with the same period in2003.
1The main reason for this was the
sharp fall in wage tax receipts due above allto the extensive income tax cuts. Receiptsfrom mineral oil tax and tobacco tax likewisereceded further.
2By contrast, revenue from
profit-related taxes was far more buoyantoverall. However, the positive basic tendencyweakened somewhat in comparison with thepreceding quarters, especially given that theincrease was strongly boosted by the surge inreceipts from the tax amnesty towards theend of the year.
According to the preliminary outturn – which
includes only an estimate for local govern-ment taxes – tax revenue in 2004 as a wholelargely matched the 2003 level, despite therelatively robust overall economic growth.
The overall tax ratio (as defined in the govern-ment’s financial statistics) consequently de-creased by 0.5 percentage point to 20.3%.This was principally attributable to the lower-ing of income tax rates in 2004. In addition,the overall structure of economic develop-ment yielded disproportionately low tax rev-enue since the growth of domestic demandand gross wages and salaries remained sub-dued, so that the assessment base for turn-over tax and wage tax – the two biggest gen-erators of tax revenue – likewise failed toexpand. Receipts from Federal taxes alsodeclined perceptibly in the wake of consumerresistance to the increased prices of mineraloil and the higher tobacco taxes. One offset-ting factor was the positive development ofprofit-related taxes which, given firms’ overallimproved profitability, yielded 16
1/C252% more in
the aggregate. Corporation tax receipts, inparticular, grew sharply (by nearly 35 billion
or 58
1/C252%). This was due in part to the mora-
torium on mobilising accrued corporation taxcredits imposed by the Act to Reduce TaxSubsidies and to the limitation of the tax losscarryforward facility. Furthermore, receiptsfrom assessed income tax grew appreciablyby 18%, primarily because of income fromthe tax amnesty amounting to 30.9 billion.
Local business tax receipts (the outturn ofwhich for the fourth quarter is estimated)likewise went up substantially.Year-on-year change
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes, which are not yet
known for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−
4−
5−
2002 2003 2004
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the fourth quarter.
2The decrease in the fourth quarter was especially large
owing to the change in booking techniques made in
2004 in respect of certain Federal taxes.Tax revenue
in fourth
quarter...
...and in 2004
as a whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
55While the deviations vis-/C224-vis the estimates in
the forecast from autumn 2003 (on a com-parable basis, ie adjusted for changes in taxlaw since then) were still considerable – at 36
billion – they were far smaller than in pastyears. Besides revenue shortfalls in the caseof mineral oil tax and tobacco tax, the gapbetween that forecast and the outturn is duemainly to revisions of the pattern of macro-economic growth, whereas the overall rise innominal GDP was merely 0.3 percentagepoint lower than expected. In addition,changes in tax legislation adopted in themeantime caused revenue shortfalls ofaround 35
1/C252billion. The result forecast in the
last official estimate from November 2004was more or less matched.
It is expected that tax revenue in the current
year will be boosted above all by strongergrowth of domestic demand and of grosswages and salaries. These positive influenceswill be partly offset, however, by shortfalls en-suing in particular from the entry into force ofthe last stage of the income tax reform,which lowers the bottom tax rate to 15%and the top rate to 42%. It is especially diffi-cult to gauge the likely evolution of profit-related taxes. Although their momentumwaned somewhat in the fourth quarter of2004, it seems probable that they will con-tinue to grow significantly. According to theofficial tax estimate of November 2004, over-all tax revenue is expected to increase by1
1/C252% in 2005. The overall tax ratio would
then fall again marginally to 20.1%.
Central government recorded a surplus of
over 371/C252billion in the fourth quarter thanksto large privatisation proceeds. In 2004 as a
whole the deficit exceeded the correspondingfigure in 2003 by just over 3
1/C252billion to reach
almost 340 billion and thus massively over-
shot the budget target of spring 2004 ( 3291/C252
billion). However, it was 34 billion smaller
than the amount estimated in the supple-mentary budget.
Revenue decreased in 2004 by just over 35
1/C252
billion or 21/C252% on the year despite higher
proceeds from asset disposals (+ 331/C252billion).
This was due mainly to a 21/C252% fall in tax re-
ceipts caused notably by the weak momen-tum of Federal taxes and a temporary changein the allocation of turnover tax to the detri-ment of central government. This was partlyoffset, however, by the fact that the pay-ments to the EU out of tax revenue unexpect-Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
Full year
Type of tax 2003 2004Annual
percent-agechange
Wage tax 133.1 123.9 – 6.9
Assessed income tax 4.6 5.4 + 18.1Corporation tax 8.3 13.1 + 58.6Turnover tax 137.0 137.4 + 0.3
of which Q4
Wage tax 38.7 35.5 – 8.3
Assessed income tax 4.4 5.0 + 12.6
Corporation tax 3.4 3.7 + 8.6Turnover tax 35.8 35.5 – 0.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
Outlook
for 2005
Federal budget
in 2004...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
56edly declined a little. Compared with the ori-
ginal plans, the Federal budget was addition-ally burdened by the small size of the Bun-desbank profit and the delay in introducingmotorway tolls for heavy goods vehicles.
Expenditure was reduced appreciably (-2%).
This owed much to the fact that no moregrants were paid in 2004 to the flood disasterfund. Personnel and other operating expend-iture, grants to enterprises and interest ex-pense also decreased. By contrast, spendingon unemployment assistance rose substan-tially (by 32
1/C252billion), although this was al-
most completely offset by the lower top-upgrant required by the Federal EmploymentAgency.The Federal Government’s net borrowing re-
quirement for 2005, as defined in the BudgetAct, amounts to 322 billion. This is less than
the figure budgeted for government invest-ment and is thus in keeping with the Consti-tution. However, the year-on-year reductionin new borrowing is to be principally achievedby doubling privatisation proceeds to 317 bil-
lion. In addition, the Federal grant to the PostOffice pension funds is to be cut by around35 billion by the sale of pension claims. How-
ever, these measures merely paper over theurgent need for structural consolidation inthe Federal budget.
The financial situation of the special funds de-
teriorated significantly in 2004. They closedwith a surplus of just 31
1/C252billion compared
with a positive balance of over 310 billion in
2003. The flood disaster fund recorded a def-icit of 31
1/C252billion in the wake of disburse-
ments as opposed to a prior-year surplus of33
1/C252billion. The surplus of the ERP Special
Fund fell from 34 billion to just over 32 billion
owing to smaller loan repayments. Finally, thepositive outcome of the Redemption Fund forInherited Liabilities declined by almost 32 bil-
lion compared with 2003 as no portion of theBundesbank profit accrued to it in 2004. Asthings stand today, the special funds maybe expected to record a largely unchangedbudgetary position in the current year.
In the final quarter of 2004 the deficit of
state government amounted to 35 billion,
which is 33
1/C252billion less than the fourth-
quarter figure in 2003. Overall revenue grewby 2% despite a slight decline in tax receipts.This was evidently due above all to the repay-€b n
€b n
Cumulative
20042003
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
2003
2004The Federal Government’s
balance of revenue and
expenditure in 2003 and 2004
Deutsche Bundesbank20−
25−
30−
35−
40−
45−
50−10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
30−...and in 2005
Special funds
State
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
57ment of grants by certain Landesbanks as de-
manded by a decision of the European Com-mission in October 2004. In addition, expend-iture was lowered by nearly 3
1/C252%. This was
attributable not least to the fact that somestates cut their traditional bonus payments tostaff, or switched to paying monthly bonuses.In 2004 as a whole the deficit run up by stategovernment decreased from the record levelof more than 330 billion in 2003 to just over
325 billion. The improvement vis-/C224-vis the
budgeted figure ( 326 billion) was ultimately
caused by the grant repayments, which so fardo not appear to have been neutralised bycommitments to return an equivalent amountof funds to the Landesbanks in the form ofcapital injections.
For the current year the budget plans envis-
age only a slight decline in the deficits to323
1/C252billion. Besides shortfalls resulting from
the final stage of the income tax reform,state government budgets must also bear thefiscal burden of returning to central govern-ment turnover tax shares which it had as-signed last year in exchange for the partialadvancement of the tax cuts. Based on thecurrent position, Berlin, Bremen, Lower Sax-ony, Saarland and also Hesse (owing to itsmore stringent state budget rules) will allbreach the statutory ceiling for new borrow-ing – in some cases by a large margin. Thelargest state, North Rhine-Westphalia, willavoid this principally by raising the ceiling toinclude the grant of almost 31
1/C252billion repaid
by WestLB and returned by the state to thebank in the form of a capital injection. Eventhe financially relatively robust state of Baden-W/C252rttemberg is having to sell interest claimson a major scale in order to keep its budget in
line with the constitution. The breaching ofthe constitutional ceilings for new borrowingis problematic, especially in the light of thefavourable macroeconomic assumptions onwhich the budget plans are based. Further ex-tensive consolidation measures are crucial.
For local government only the outturn for the
first three quarters of 2004 is currently avail-able. It shows a deficit of 35 billion, which is
34 billion smaller on the year. Overall revenue
grew by 4%, with tax receipts expanding byas much as 10%. The weak momentum ofreceipts from income tax, in which local gov-ernment shares, was outweighed by thegrowth of local business tax receipts, only asmaller part of which now has to be passedon by local government to state and centralgovernment. Overall spending was marginallyreduced, although spending on social bene-fits exceeded the equivalent level in 2003 byalmost 6%. Cost relief was afforded by adrop of 1
1/C252% in personnel expenditure. The
marked downward trend in capital formationlikewise continued with a fall of 8%. Thetight budgetary borrowing limits appear tohave substantially curbed municipal invest-ment. Consequently, the outstanding long-term debt of local government has barely in-creased since the end of 2000, whereas cashadvances, which are used to pre-finance cur-rent expenditure, have been rising noticeably.
In 2004 as a whole the aggregate deficit of
local government may have halved comparedwith the admittedly very high 2003 level of38
1/C252billion. However, given the continuing
growth of bridging loans, this should not beLocal
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
58interpreted as a sign that the financial prob-
lems of local government are easing. In thecurrent year local government budgets willreceive additional relief, which is secured by acontractual revision clause, from the amal-gamation of unemployment assistance andsocial assistance. Even so, the financial situ-ation of many municipalities will remaintense.
In the fourth quarter the indebtedness of cen-
tral, state and local government showed littlechange. State government increased its liabil-ities by 32
1/C252billion, while central government
reduced its debt by just under 321/C252billion.
Once again net borrowing mainly took theform of issuing long and medium-term secur-ities. They yielded 36
1/C252billion net, whereas
the stock of money market loans and cashadvances was run down by 331/C252billion al-
together. Short-term securities and otherloans were likewise redeemed on balance.
Social security funds
In the fourth quarter the statutory pension in-
surance scheme recorded a large surplus ofalmost 34 billion compared with 31
1/C252billion
in the same quarter of 2003. A contributoryfactor in this was that the disposal of theGAGFAH equity stake yielded revenue of justover 32 billion.
3Additional income accrued
from the fact that both the final payments ofthe old unemployment assistance and thefirst payments of the new unemploymentbenefit II due at the beginning of Januarywere booked in December 2004. Moreover,many public sector employers had failed toforward any pension contributions in Decem-ber 2003.
4Expenditure was further curbed
by the fact that in 2004 there was no mid-year adjustment of state pensions and thatsince April 2004 pensioners have had to paythe full contribution rate to the statutorylong-term care insurance scheme themselves.Total revenue grew by just over 4%, whereasexpenditure remained largely unchanged.
In 2004 as a whole the deficit amounted to
just under 31
1/C252billion as against almost 321/C252Net borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecur-
ities 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2003 + 81.2 + 73.4 – 0.8 + 26.9
of which
Q1 + 35.3 + 32.6 + 2.7 + 19.4Q2 + 13.2 + 11.8 + 0.5 + 12.4Q3 + 20.0 + 9.4 + 5.0 – 0.3Q4 + 12.6 + 19.5 – 9.0 – 4.6
2004
pe + 71.7 + 71.0 – 16.4 ...
Q1 + 45.3 + 34.6 + 4.1 + 16.9Q2 + 8.2 + 14.6 – 9.6 – 3.6Q3 + 17.9 + 17.2 – 0.6 + 18.6Q4
pe + 0.2 + 4.7 – 10.3 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market loans.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3In the records of the pension insurance funds, by con-
trast, only the balance of the proceeds in excess of the
book value of 31.6 billion was posted as revenue.
4As part of the latest public sector collective labour
agreement employers were given the option, effective
from December 2003, of shifting wage and salary pay-
ments from the middle to the end of the month. In these
cases the associated social insurance contributions were
only due one month later in January.DebtStatutory
pension
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
59billion in 2003. The reserves of the statutory
pension insurance fund at the end of the yearstood at 0.32 of a month’s expenditure. Thismeans that the expected value of 0.28 of amonth’s expenditure envisaged in the PensionInsurance Report 2004 was exceeded by justover 3
1/C252billion. Consequently, the danger of
liquidity shortages in the current year is nowless acute. Furthermore, following the sale ofthe GAGFAH equity stake the reserves are ineffect fully liquid. However, this does not ruleout a possible need to resort prematurely togovernment grants in the course of the year.This applies all the more in that the sustain-ability factor is unlikely to have an impact thisyear. Given last year’s weak wage growth, anegative pension adjustment would be war-ranted on 1 July under the new pension for-mula. This is prevented, however, by thepension-cutting constraint contained in theformula. The consequence of this is that thedifferential between the growth of wagesand the increase in pensions envisaged inorder to stabilise the contribution rate will failto materialise whenever per capita wages riseonly marginally or fall (see box on page 60).
In the fourth quarter of 2004 the Federal Em-
ployment Agency recorded an unexpectedsurplus of 31 billion. This compares with a
small deficit a year earlier. This improvementwas mainly brought about, however, by ex-ceptional factors in December 2004. As in thecase of the statutory pension insurance fund,a baseline effect arose from the delayed pay-ment of public sector wages and salaries. Asa result, revenue from contributions grew by
1/C252%, whereas it had fallen during each of the
first three quarters. Another factor was extraincome in the form of refunds from the Fed-
eral Government of administrative costs inconnection with the labour market reforms.Overall revenue increased by nearly 2
1/C252%. Ex-
penditure was lowered by 6%. Despite an in-crease in the number of unemployed persons,2% less was spent on unemployment benefit.Spending on active labour market policymeasures dropped further by 18%.
In 2004 as a whole the Agency’s deficit, and
hence its need for transfers from the Federalbudget, totalled 34.2 billion; this was 31 bil-
lion less than forecast owing mainly to the ex-tensive curbing of active labour market policy.The budget envisages a deficit of 34.0 billion
for 2005. The increases in revenue (over 7%)and expenditure (6
1/C252%) compared with the
actual outturn for 2004 are particularly highQuarterly
€b n
€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
Expenditure
RevenueFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−62
60
58
56
54
52
2002 2003 2004
Federal
Employment
Agency

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
60Deutsche BundesbankThe level of pension adjustments following the introduction
of the “sustainability factor”
In general, statutory pensions are adjusted annually in 
line with the growth of average gross wages and sala-ries of insured persons in the previous year. However, the adjustment is smaller whenever the contribution rate to the statutory pension insurance scheme or the imputed contribution to a supplementary private pension plan (“Riester pension”) increases. In addition, pensions increase more slowly whenever the ratio of (equivalent) pensioners to (equivalent) contribution payers rises (pensioner quotient as part of the sustain-ability factor). Conversely, a pension increase in excess of wage growth is possible if the contribution rate or the pensioner quotient falls. Given the looming democ-raphic changes, this formula implies that in future pen-
sions will increase more slowly than the incomes of 
insured persons on average so as to limit the rise in the contribution rate.
On the other hand, pensions may only be lowered 
if this is based on a decline in the income of insured 
persons. The other elements of the adjustment for-
mula cannot trigger a pension cut in the event of only marginally growing or stagnating average incomes and cannot trigger a larger pension cut in the event of falling income levels. This pension-cutting constraint means that the adjustment mechanism will have its full 
dampening effect on the contribution rate only when 
wages and salaries grow by at least ½% to 1%. In the current year the combination of practically stagnant incomes and an increased ratio of pensioners to contri-bution payers in 2004 would imply a negative pension adjustment. Owing to the aforementioned constraint, however, pensions will “merely” be frozen this year. 
Other things being equal, this will lead to a higher 
pension level which in turn will necessitate a higher contribution rate.
he constraint of coupling pension cuts exclusively 
to falling wages could also affect the longer-term 
forecasts concerning the contribution rate and the 
pension level on which the introduction of the sustain-ability factor was based if wages and salaries do not, as assumed, grow by 3% annually from 2009 but instead grow much more slowly or display a very volatile pat-tern. Whenever the pension-cutting constraint applies, 
the expected gap between income growth and pen-
sion growth will fail to materialise. This will result in a permanently higher pension level and a corresponding increase in the contribution rate. In turn, this could mean that the ofﬁ  cially stated objective of preventing 
the contribution rate from rising above 22% up to 2030 
will not be achieved.If incomes do not grow at a constant annual rate of 
3% in the long term but instead, for example, oscillate around this median between 0% and 6%, the pen-sion-cutting constraint will apply in those years when wages do not increase and in each case will necessitate a higher contribution rate. These effects will cumulate across the low-income years and by 2030 could make a contribution rate well above 22% necessary (see chart). The crucial factor is that every time the pension-cutting constraint applies, this has a positive baseline effect on the pension level that will not be reversed and so will necessitate a permanently higher contribution rate.
The risk of a steeper overall rise in the contribution 
rate stemming from coupling pension reductions 
exclusively to wage developments could be avoided if offsetting pension cuts were made in subsequent years of stronger wage growth. Pensions would have to be increased at a correspondingly slower rate in such years. In this way pension cuts not based on falling 
incomes of insured persons could be avoided without 
permanently increasing the contribution burden.
%
%
Gross pension level
Path given fluctuating
income growth
Expected
path
2000 05 10 15 20 25 2030Contribution rate
Path given fluctuating
income growth
Expected
pathKey indicators of the German
statutory pension insurance scheme
50
48
46
44424024
22
2018

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
61because the Federal Government will make
considerable refunds of administrative coststo the Agency which will then have an impacton its expenditure.
Only data for the first three quarters of 2004
are available at the moment on the financialdevelopment of the statutory health insur-ance funds. These show that between Janu-ary and September the statutory health insur-ance funds accumulated a surplus of just over32
1/C252billion owing to the healthcare reform,
whereas in the same period of 2003 they hadsustained a deficit of a similar size. Most ofthe surplus was presumably used to repaydebt.
5The financial result in the fourth quar-
ter, too, should show an improvement. Thespending level in the fourth quarter of 2003was particularly high as patients sought treat-ment ahead of the less generous terms intro-duced at the start of 2004, and in Novem-ber 2004 the second tranche of the new Fed-eral grant amounting to 30.5 billion was
transferred. Furthermore, the contributiontrends of the statutory pension and un-employment insurance funds indicate that amore favourable revenue outcome may beexpected for the end ot the year.
In the current year the surplus is likely to be
markedly smaller. Although the Federal granthas been raised from 31.0 billion to 32.5 bil-
lion, expenditure on pharmaceuticals is ex-pected to rise again as the increase in themanufacturers’ rebate only applied to 2004and a price moratorium has expired. On theone hand, the introduction of unemploymentbenefit II will boost the income of the healthinsurance institutions for previous recipientsof unemployment assistance as the contribu-
tion assessment base will be higher on aver-Quarterly
€b n
€b n€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefit and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2 Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−
3−8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.016
15
14
13
12
11
2002 2003 2004
5According to figures supplied by the Federal Ministry of
Health and Social Security, net indebtedness up to the
end of September was reduced by 32.7 billion to 33.3 bil-
lion. The gross liabilities of 38.3 billion outstanding at the
end of 2003 may therefore have been cut by a similar
margin. The health institutions are legally bound to repay
each year at least one-quarter of their debt accumulated
up to end-2003.Statutory
health
insurance funds

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
62age.6On the other hand, previous recipients
of social assistance who are able to worknow have to be insured on the basis of contri-butions that do not cover costs.
7
Development of the general governmentsector as a whole
According to initial provisional figures from
the Federal Statistical Office published inJanuary, the general government deficit asdefined in the Maastricht Treaty came to3.9% of GDP last year after reaching 3.8% in2003.
8Based on present knowledge, how-
ever, the cyclically adjusted balance seems tohave improved somewhat. The expansion ofGDP was well above the medium-term trend.But taking account of the composition ofGDP growth, which led to a relatively lowlevel of taxes and social security contribu-tions, cyclical developments probably ham-pered public finances on balance.
The development of pubic finances was
marked, on the one hand, by a decline in therevenue ratio by 1
1/C252percentage points to
around 44%. This was caused mainly by theextensive tax cuts and the structure of macro-economic developments. Gross wages andsalaries and private consumption grew moreslowly than GDP as a whole, which dampen-ed receipts from wage tax, social securitycontributions and turnover tax. Moreover, re-ceipts from excise taxes fell sharply. Therewas also a steep decline in non-tax receipts,which was principally attributable to the farlower Bundesbank profit.On the other hand, expenditure was reduced
in absolute terms and the expenditure ratiofell likewise by around 1
1/C252percentage points
to just over 471/C252%. Whereas in the previous
years growth in spending had been driven es-pecially by the increase in pension payments,the associated rise in 2004 was moderateowing above all to the cost relief measurestaken. The healthcare reform – alongsideadditional revenue – and also the greater re-striction of labour market policy measureshad a noticeable dampening effect on spend-ing. The precarious budgetary position ofcentral, state and local government led to arestrained expenditure course in which invest-ment spending and personnel expenditure, inparticular, decreased. Despite the sharp rise inindebtedness, interest expenditure remainedflat since the relatively low level of interestrates continued to facilitate refinancing ofmaturing debt securities on favourable terms.
The general government deficits could de-
cline substantially in 2005. From the presentperspective the goal of complying with the3% deficit limit for the first time since 2001appears achievable. However, there are majoruncertainties concerning especially the pathof macroeconomic development and the fi-
6Until 2004 the amount of unemployment assistance
paid (on average around 3500 per month) was the basis
for assessing the contribution due. As from 2005 the
contribution base is defined as 36.2% of the monthly ref-
erence value (average pay of insured persons in the previ-
ous year), which currently amounts to 3874 per month in
western Germany and 3735 in eastern Germany.
7By contrast, the social assistance funds pay for the
health services provided at the appropriate rate charged
by the statutory health insurance scheme.
8In view of the better-than-expected budgetary outturns
of central and state government, which have since be-
come known, the deficit ratio may well be revised down-
wards a little.General
government
deficit virtually
unchanged
in 2004
Falling
revenue......and
expenditure
ratios
3% ceiling
must be
adhered
to in 2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
63The current status of the excessive deficit procedure against Germany
Last year Germany exceeded the 3% refer-
ence value for the general government deficitratio for the third year in succession withoutbeing able to invoke any of the exemptionclauses specified in the Stability and GrowthPact. This means that Germany also failed tocomply with the recommendation made byECOFIN in January 2003. In establishing thatGermany had run up an excessive deficit,ECOFIN had urged Germany to bring the def-icit back down to the reference value by 2004at the latest. In November 2003 the Councilhad, it is true, adopted conclusions in whichthe deadline for correcting the excessive def-icit for Germany (and France) was extendedto 2005.
1The Council’s conclusions deviated,
however, from the normal sequence of theexcessive deficit procedure. They were there-fore annulled by the European Court of Just-ice on 13 July 2004. In effect the excessive def-icit procedures continue to be suspended.From a legal point of view they are at thestage of the Council’s recommendations pur-suant to Article 104 (7) of the EC Treaty ofJanuary and June 2003 which, however, havesince been overtaken by events.
2
The European Commission did not respond tothis unsatisfactory situation until 14 Decem-ber 2004 when it addressed a communicationon the status of the excessive deficit proced-ures to the Council. In it the Commission ex-pressed the view that the two countries con-cerned had the right to assume that theCouncil’s conclusions of November 2003 werevalid pending the judgement of the EuropeanCourt of Justice. It stated that, in the light ofthese unique circumstances, the assessment ofthe actions taken to correct the excessive def-icit situation within the framework of the Sta-bility and Growth Pact should refer to 2005.The Commission deemed the measures an-nounced by the two countries to be ad-equate. It concluded that no further stepswere necessary at this point under the exces-sive deficit procedure. Should failure in imple-menting the envisaged correction emerge ata later stage, however, the Commission would
have to recommend to the Council to en-hance the budgetary surveillance and to takethe necessary action within the provisions ofthe EC Treaty and the Stability and GrowthPact.
On 18 January 2005 the Council noted the
Commission’s communication and declaredthat it, too, considers no further steps withinthe excessive deficit procedures to be neces-sary at present. At the same time Germany(and France) reaffirmed their commitment totake all measures necessary to bring their def-icits back under 3% of GDP in 2005 and tokeep them below that level in 2006.
However, the logical course of action, in keep-
ing with the spirit of the Stability and GrowthPact, would have been to initiate the nextstage in the excessive deficit procedures andto give notice to the two countries to takemeasures to remedy the situation. In Germa-ny’s case the aim of not exceeding the 3% ref-erence value in 2005 and 2006 appears achiev-able if the planned relief measures have thefull envisaged impact. At the moment, how-ever, there is no prospect of attaining a safetymargin below the 3% ceiling. Given theconsiderable uncertainty about the furthercourse of macroeconomic development andthe effect of the fiscal measures, there is thusa substantial risk that the reference value forthe deficit ratio will be breached in 2005 forthe fourth year in succession.
Owing to the unsatisfactory implementation
of the Stability and Growth Pact and the con-tinuing discussion about changing its param-eters, public trust in the fiscal framework ofmonetary union has already been severelydamaged. To ensure that the credibility of arule-bound fiscal framework is not under-mined further, Germany must honour its com-mitments to the other member states. This ne-cessitates strict budgetary discipline at alllevels of government.
1See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report,
February 2004, p 67 in particular. — 2See also DeutscheBundesbank, Monthly Report, August 2004, p 64 in
particular.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
64nancial impact of the numerous fiscal meas-
ures, so that the goal is subject to consider-able risks. The Financial Planning Council andthe Federal Government have committedthemselves unambiguously to achieving thisgoal – irrespective of the debate surroundingthe reform of the Stability and Growth Pact.
9
The European Commission and ECOFIN havedeclared that, if necessary, further steps inthe excessive deficit procedure will be initi-ated if Germany fails to meet its obligationsand an infringement of the Maastricht ceilingfor the fourth year in a row seems likely (seebox on page 63).
The revenue ratio is expected to fall further
owing, above all, to the entry into force ofthe final stage of the income tax reform, al-though as things stand today this is likely tobe smaller than last year – inter alia because
the pattern of macroeconomic growth is like-ly to stimulate greater inflows of taxes andsocial security contributions. On top of this,non-tax receipts may pick up appreciably, par-ticularly on account of the motorway toll forheavy goods vehicles introduced at the startof this year and the repayment of subsidies bythe Landesbanks.
The success of the consolidation efforts this
year will hinge on further containing expend-iture growth and further lowering the ex-penditure ratio. This will require savings at alllevels of government so as to counterfinancethe commonly agreed tax cuts and the veryKey data of the Federal Government’s updated stability programme
in %
Item 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Real GDP growth
Stability programme 2004 – 0,1 1,8 1,7 13/C254 22
Stability programme 2003 – 0,1 11/C252–2 21/C254 21/C254 21/C254 –
Deficit ratio (–)
Stability programme 2004 – 3,8 – 33/C254 –3 –21/C252 –2 –11/C252
Stability programme 2003 – 4 – 31/C254 –21/C252 –2 –11/C252 –
Debt ratio
Stability programme 2004 64,2 651/C252 66 66 651/C252 65
Stability programme 2003 64 65 651/C252 651/C252 65 –
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance.
Deutsche Bundesbank
9In connection with the reform debate see Deutsche
Bundesbank’ s Comments on reforming the Stability and
Growth Pact, Monthly Report, January 2005, pp 37 to 43.Muted revenue
trendFurther
lowering
of expenditure
ratio crucial

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
65large deficits. A tight budgetary stance by all
tiers of government (which should be reflect-ed not least in personnel expenditure, otheroperating expenditure and subsidies), re-strained spending on pensions and – in viewof the low interest rate level – on interest pay-ments, plus savings in connection with labourmarket-related outlays could all contribute tothis.
In the medium term, further consolidation
measures are needed to reduce the govern-ment deficits, observe the national deficitceilings and bring the debt ratio back downagain. This is being hampered by the fact thata sizeable part of the planned deficit reduc-tion in the current year is to be achieved bynon-recurrent relief measures (non-paymentof the Federal transfers thanks to the sale ofclaims of the Post Office pension funds, re-payment of interest rate subsidies by theLandesbanks). This partly involves easing
present-day budgets at the cost of futurebudgets. According to the updated stabilityprogramme of December, the deficit ratio isto be trimmed to 1
1/C252% by 2008 (see table on
page 64). The debt ratio is to rise to 66% in2005 and 2006 and then decline only mar-ginally to 65% in 2008. These plans arebased on the assumption of a largely con-stant revenue ratio, with consolidation to beachieved by containing expenditure growth.Although this strategy is to be welcomed assuch, a more ambitious target definitionpermitting the achievement of a close-to-balance budget position would have been amore appropriate approach to tackling thefiscal problems. This applies all the more sincethe programme is based on a relatively opti-mistic assessment of the likely course ofmacroeconomic development.
Stability
programme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
66

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and resident
individuals, housing loans, sectorsof economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of resident individuals and
domestic non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public
authorities at banks (MFIs) inGermany, by creditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the euro area 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Public finances in Germany
1 General government budgetary
position 52*
2 Budgetary position of central,
state and local government 52*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005

3 Government fiscal position as
defined in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of central, state and
local government 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*
6 Specific taxes levied by central,
state and local government 54*
7 General government debt 55*8 Change in general government
debt 57*
9 Loans raised by general govern-
ment against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Central government debt 58*11 Central government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets
of the wage and salary earners’pension insurance fund 59*
13 Revenue and expenditure of the
Federal Employment Agency 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 60*
2 Output in the production sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*X External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 67*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the euro-area memberstates, the Deutsche Mark value ofthe ECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2003          June 11.3 8.4 8.5 8.6 4.8 5.1 5.3 2.21 2.15 3.7
         July 11.3 8.6 8.7 8.5 5.4 5.5 5.5 2.08 2.13 4.0
         Aug 11.7 8.7 8.3 8.2 5.5 5.6 5.5 2.10 2.14 4.2         Sep 11.1 8.2 7.5 7.9 5.5 5.4 5.6 2.02 2.15 4.2
         Oct 11.6 8.1 7.9 7.6 5.7 5.4 6.0 2.01 2.14 4.3
         Nov 10.5 7.6 7.3 7.4 6.2 6.0 6.2 1.97 2.16 4.4         Dec 10.6 7.6 7.1 7.0 5.9 5.8 6.0 2.06 2.15 4.4
2004          Jan 11.5 7.5 6.5 6.6 5.7 5.7 6.0 2.02 2.09 4.2
         Feb 10.7 6.8 6.1 6.3 5.7 5.7 6.1 2.03 2.07 4.2         Mar 11.4 6.7 6.2 5.9 5.9 5.7 7.0 2.01 2.03 4.0
         Apr 10.9 6.2 5.4 5.5 5.9 5.9 7.5 2.08 2.05 4.2
         May 9.4 5.5 4.9 5.2 6.0 5.9 7.5 2.02 2.09 4.4         June 9.5 5.6 5.3 5.2 6.4 6.2 7.6 2.03 2.11 4.4
         July 10.1 5.9 5.5 5.4 6.3 6.3 7.5 2.07 2.12 4.3
         Aug 9.2 5.7 5.5 5.7 6.1 6.0 7.5 2.04 2.11 4.1         Sep 9.7 6.3 6.0 5.8 6.1 6.3 7.9 2.05 2.12 4.1
         Oct 9.0 6.3 5.8 5.9 6.1 6.5 7.8 2.11 2.15 4.0
         Nov 9.8 6.5 6.0 6.1 6.0 6.7 7.8 2.09 2.17 3.9         Dec 8.4 6.5 6.4 ... 6.0 7.0 8.1 2.05 2.17 3.7
2005          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.08 2.15 3.6
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.5, p 44*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2003          June + 1,651 + 9,705 − 14,066 + 12,208 + 34,255 − 61,288 + 760 1.1663 102.2 104.2
         July + 2,518 + 15,732 − 4,440 − 4,113 − 36,583 + 34,417 + 1,838 1.1372 101.0 102.9
         Aug + 3,302 + 10,226 − 3,086 − 7,696 − 41,384 + 45,740 + 254 1.1139 99.8 101.8         Sep + 5,680 + 10,904 − 5,025 − 10,297 + 13,192 − 7,869 − 51 1.1222 99.6 101.7
         Oct + 6,977 + 13,092 + 3,354 − 4,302 + 36,681 − 29,782 + 757 1.1692 101.3 103.3
         Nov + 2,802 + 8,329 + 11,705 + 4,577 + 2,424 − 822 + 5,526 1.1702 101.2 103.3         Dec + 6,146 + 8,445 − 22,586 − 8,926 − 33,587 + 12,599 + 7,328 1.2286 104.2 106.2
2004          Jan − 2,689 + 5,254 − 18,686 − 7,187 − 7,352 − 1,145 − 3,002 1.2613 105.4 107.4
         Feb + 5,376 + 9,796 + 18,216 + 9,131 + 14,588 − 14,140 + 8,637 1.2646 105.3 107.3         Mar + 10,957 + 13,580 − 11,736 − 25,539 − 3,718 + 13,798 + 3,722 1.2262 103.4 105.4
         Apr − 198 + 9,772 − 17,529 − 1,899 − 8,701 − 4,275 − 2,655 1.1985 101.6 103.7
         May + 1,649 + 10,154 + 11,360 − 20 − 1,370 + 12,074 + 677 1.2007 102.4 104.4         June + 4,381 + 11,587 + 5,979 − 11,022 + 31,342 − 13,503 − 837 1.2138 102.3 104.2
         July + 4,618 + 13,780 − 18,071 − 4,543 − 42,210 + 28,455 + 226 1.2266 102.8 104.8
         Aug + 3,768 + 5,758 + 5,141 + 7,325 − 5,301 − 627 + 3,744 1.2176 102.7 104.8         Sep + 1,500 + 5,021 + 8,854 + 2,473 + 46,657 − 39,751 − 525 1.2218 103.0 105.2
         Oct + 1,192 + 7,672 − 21,500 − 11,593 + 2,929 − 13,786 + 948 1.2490 104.2 106.3
         Nov + 3,247 + 6,076 + 30,454 − 119 − 9,240 + 39,947 − 134 1.2991 105.6 107.6         Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3408 107.1 109.3
2005          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3119 105.8 108.1
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables X.12 and 13, pp 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-23 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area
Real gross domestic product 1 
2002 0.9 0.1 2.3 1.2 3.6 6.1 0.4 2.5 0.6 1.4 0.4 2.2 0.9
2003 1.3 − 0.1 2.0 0.5 4.5 3.7 0.3 2.9 − 0.9 0.7 − 1.1 2.5 0.52004 ... 1.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3 ... ... 2.6 ...
2003          Q3 1.0 − 0.3 2.4 0.3 4.6 0.5 0.1 − 1.4 0.7 − 1.0 2.3 0.3
         Q4 1.6 0.2 1.7 1.4 4.5 5.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 0.6 − 0.1 3.0 0.8
2004          Q1 3.2 1.6 2.9 2.5 4.0 6.1 0.9 1.2 0.8 0.5 2.7 1.9
         Q2 2.8 1.9 3.2 3.6 3.9 4.1 1.6 1.3 1.9 1.8 2.5 2.4         Q3 2.7 1.2 3.2 1.7 3.8 5.8 1.4 1.5 ... 0.8 2.5 1.7         Q4 ... 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... 1.3 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 1,2 
2002 1.3 − 1.0 2.1 − 1.5 0.8 7.5 − 1.6 2.1 − 0.3 0.8 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.52003 0.8 0.4 0.7 − 0.5 0.3 5.0 − 0.6 5.2 − 2.4 2.0 − 0.1 1.4 0.22004 3.0
6 2.9 4.6 1.7 ... ... ... 6.6 ... ... − 3.2 1.6 ...
2003          Q3 0.5 − 1.0 1.6 − 0.7 1.6 4.2 − 0.5 7.6 − 4.0 2.2 1.1 1.0 − 0.4         Q4 1.5 1.6 0.7 1.1 0.1 14.7 0.0 3.4 − 1.2 2.3 1.0 1.1 1.4
2004          Q1 1.8 1.6 − 0.5 0.4 1.5 4.1 − 0.2 6.4 1.1 2.3 − 2.9 1.3 1.0
         Q2 2.0 4.1 4.6 3.2 2.1 3.1 1.4 8.4 3.1 5.8 − 1.8 2.5 3.1         Q3 5.6 4.6 6.4 1.9 0.9 1.7 − 0.8 6.9 2.8 7.6 − 3.9 2.2 2.8         Q4 2.7
6 1.4 7.3 1.4 ... ... ... 4.9 ... ... − 4.2 0.5 ...
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 76.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.22003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.8 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 79.0 78.9 81.12004 80.4 83.2 84.5 82.7 75.6 75.6 76.4 85.6 82.7 81.3 80.4 79.0 81.3
2003          Q4 79.0 82.9 82.0 84.4 76.1 73.6 76.1 83.9 81.4 80.3 84.3 79.3 81.4
2004          Q1 79.4 82.8 82.8
7 81.4 77.5 74.4 76.3 83.5 82.1 80.0 80.6 77.0 80.6
         Q2 79.6 82.6 83.4 81.8 74.6 77.7 75.8 85.6 82.8 80.4 79.3 79.7 80.8
         Q3 81.5 83.4 84.7 83.2 76.3 75.3 76.9 87.4 83.1 82.3 81.4 79.8 81.6         Q4 80.9 83.9 86.9 84.4 74.1 75.0 76.7 86.0 82.7 82.4 80.2 79.3 82.0
2005          Q1 80.9 83.9 85.5 84.0 71.9 72.2 76.4 84.9 82.3 82.2 81.6 80.1 82.0
Unemployment rate 4 
2002 7.3 8.7 9.1 8.9 10.3 4.3 9.0 2.8 2.7 4.2 5.0 11.3 8.4
2003 8.0 9.6 9.0 9.5 9.7 4.6 8.6 3.7 3.8 4.3 6.3 11.3 8.92004 7.8 9.8 8.8 9.6 ... 4.5 ... 4.2 ... 4.5 6.6 10.8 8.9
2004          July 7.7 9.8 8.9 9.6 4.5 ... 4.2 4.7 4.5 6.8 10.7 8.8
         Aug 7.7 9.9 8.9 9.7 4.5 ... 4.3 4.6 4.5 6.8 10.7 8.9         Sep 7.8 9.9 8.8 9.7 4.4 ... 4.3 4.6 4.5 6.8 10.6 8.9
         Oct 7.9 9.9 8.7 9.6 4.4 ... 4.3 4.6 4.5 6.7 10.5 8.8
         Nov 8.0 9.9 8.7 9.6 4.4 ... 4.4 4.7 4.5 6.7 10.4 8.8         Dec 8.0 10.0 8.6 9.7 4.3 ... 4.4 ... 4.5 6.7 10.4 8.9
2005          Jan 8.0 ... ... ... 4.3 ... ... ... 4.5 ... 10.3 ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.3
2003 1.5 1.0 1.3 2.2 3.4 4.0 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.1 2.12004 1.9 1.8 0.1 2.3 3.0 2.3 2.3 3.2 1.4 2.0 2.5 3.1
p 2.1
2004          July 2.1 2.0 0.2 2.6 3.1 2.5 2.2 3.8 1.2 2.1 2.9 3.3 2.3         Aug 2.0 2.1 0.3 2.5 2.8 2.5 2.4 3.6 1.2 2.2 2.4 3.3 2.3         Sep 1.8 1.9 0.2 2.2 2.9 2.4 2.1 3.1 1.1 1.8 2.1 3.2 2.1
         Oct 2.7 2.2 0.6 2.3 3.3 2.5 2.1 4.1 1.5 2.4 2.4 3.6 2.4
         Nov 2.3 2.0 0.2 2.2 3.2 2.8 2.0 4.0 1.5 2.4 2.6 3.5 2.2         Dec 1.9 2.2 0.1 2.3 3.1 2.4 2.4 3.5 1.2 2.5 2.6 3.3
p 2.4
2005          Jan 2.0 e 1.6 − 0.2 ... ... 2.1 ... 2.8 p 1.3 ... 2.0 3.1 e 2.1
General government financial balance 5 
2001 0.6 − 2.8 5.2 − 1.5 − 3.7 0.9 − 2.6 6.4 − 0.1 0.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 1.72002 0.1 − 3.7 4.3 − 3.2 − 3.7 − 0.2 − 2.3 2.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 2.42003 0.4 − 3.8 2.3 − 4.1 − 4.6 0.1 − 2.4 0.8 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 2.8 0.4 − 2.7
General government debt 5 
2001 108.0 59.4 43.8 56.5 114.7 35.9 110.6 5.5 52.9 66.1 55.8 57.5 69.42002 105.4 60.9 42.6 58.8 112.5 32.7 107.9 5.7 52.6 65.7 58.4 54.4 69.42003 100.0 64.2 45.6 63.7 109.9 32.1 106.2 5.3 54.1 64.5 60.3 50.7 70.7
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central adjusted. — 5  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — including proceeds from sales of UMTS licences. — 6  Adjusted in advance by
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece and Portugal is calculated the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the
from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; ad- Quarterly Production Survey for the fourth quarter (industry in Germany: on
justed for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally average − 1.9%). — 7  France from first quarter 2004 not seasonally
adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and October. — adjusted.
4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2003          May 64.7 42.8 14.3 21.9 25.9 40.0 43.1 3.1 19.2 6.6 − 1.3 20.1 − 6.1
         June 12.1 25.1 − 7.1 − 13.0 − 13.7 61.3 38.9 − 22.5 17.6 2.9 − 1.6 8.9 7.3
         July 38.6 15.4 − 4.7 23.2 15.3 − 37.5 − 30.5 7.0 32.4 5.2 − 2.1 19.4 9.8
         Aug 0.5 10.6 4.1 − 10.1 − 3.7 − 32.9 − 71.7 − 38.8 16.8 7.7 − 1.6 3.5 7.2         Sep 57.3 32.3 1.4 25.1 23.3 13.8 31.5 17.6 26.1 0.6 − 0.6 19.3 6.8
         Oct 51.3 32.7 3.5 18.6 18.7 11.5 49.8 38.4 27.5 4.9 0.1 20.7 1.8
         Nov 91.3 67.7 14.6 23.6 13.9 18.3 44.3 25.9 28.9 7.9 0.2 16.6 4.2         Dec 21.7 44.4 4.4 − 22.7 − 32.7 − 9.5 − 12.5 − 3.0 20.1 16.7 1.1 0.2 2.1
2004          Jan 43.3 28.4 5.1 14.9 17.6 22.2 111.3 89.1 18.2 1.7 − 1.1 16.9 0.8
         Feb 45.3 32.0 6.6 13.3 21.5 8.5 24.1 15.7 16.1 7.6 − 0.3 9.4 − 0.7         Mar 77.3 46.1 16.1 31.2 14.4 6.9 77.0 70.1 46.4 7.1 − 0.2 31.3 8.1
         Apr 90.1 85.4 26.5 4.7 11.6 6.2 69.1 62.9 28.3 10.4 − 1.1 16.6 2.5
         May 72.5 47.8 3.9 24.8 30.7 − 20.0 − 10.1 9.9 23.5 5.6 − 0.9 16.3 2.5         June 61.1 46.8 − 7.7 14.4 8.7 14.3 − 26.3 − 40.6 22.6 9.9 − 0.4 8.7 4.3
         July 29.6 27.7 − 9.1 1.9 − 4.4 − 0.8 − 7.7 − 6.8 28.5 6.8 0.1 15.0 6.6
         Aug − 18.8 − 13.5 − 10.1 − 5.3 − 0.0 30.1 45.6 15.5 18.5 6.6 − 0.0 9.3 2.5         Sep 53.7 57.4 − 2.8 − 3.7 3.1 34.7 22.4 − 12.3 44.9 3.7 − 0.3 31.6 10.0
         Oct 54.5 55.1 5.7 − 0.7 − 0.9 19.6 30.5 10.9 24.8 7.3 0.9 15.7 1.0
         Nov 89.9 87.0 17.8 2.9 6.8 9.5 106.3 96.8 29.0 14.8 0.8 7.3 6.1         Dec 21.1 66.9 16.7 − 45.8 − 51.0 27.4 − 12.3 − 39.7 37.4 23.5 1.2 11.7 1.0
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2003          May 1.9 4.0 3.0 − 2.1 2.4 27.6 22.6 − 5.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.5 4.8 − 4.4
         June − 18.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 17.1 − 10.0 38.5 24.6 − 13.9 4.8 0.1 − 1.4 3.7 2.4
         July 0.6 − 8.4 − 0.5 9.0 − 1.6 − 24.6 − 18.6 6.0 8.7 4.9 − 2.1 4.9 1.0
         Aug − 13.6 2.7 0.9 − 16.3 − 11.0 16.7 − 20.6 − 37.3 5.7 3.2 − 1.5 2.2 1.8         Sep 17.7 12.8 − 3.6 4.9 10.8 − 1.8 10.5 12.3 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 9.1 − 4.8
         Oct − 1.8 − 9.3 − 3.4 7.5 4.5 6.4 − 0.2 − 6.6 3.1 0.3 0.1 2.6 0.2
         Nov 24.5 15.5 5.5 8.9 2.4 7.9 12.4 4.6 3.3 0.2 0.2 3.0 − 0.1         Dec − 10.1 0.0 1.1 − 10.2 − 7.8 11.4 12.4 1.1 − 0.2 1.5 1.0 − 2.9 0.2
2004          Jan − 0.6 − 6.8 1.4 6.2 6.1 23.0 34.9 11.9 2.6 − 0.2 − 1.1 6.5 − 2.7
         Feb 16.6 2.9 − 3.6 13.7 22.4 − 23.5 − 2.7 20.8 − 5.8 0.6 − 0.4 0.5 − 6.5         Mar 28.7 10.4 9.6 18.3 5.8 − 2.0 10.3 12.3 9.4 0.0 − 0.2 9.4 0.2
         Apr 10.8 16.4 13.3 − 5.6 1.1 14.8 22.0 7.2 13.0 4.5 − 1.2 6.2 3.4
         May − 10.4 − 10.6 − 8.3 0.1 6.0 11.3 − 4.9 − 16.2 5.0 4.3 − 0.9 4.9 − 3.3         June − 9.2 − 12.4 − 12.7 3.2 8.5 21.1 − 8.6 − 29.7 7.9 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 6.0
         July 6.4 − 4.1 − 1.5 10.5 1.5 − 3.3 − 9.4 − 6.1 7.8 1.7 0.1 2.2 3.9
         Aug − 7.3 − 8.1 − 5.4 0.8 5.4 12.1 12.3 0.2 3.0 1.9 − 0.0 5.4 − 4.3         Sep 5.5 10.8 0.6 − 5.3 − 0.8 11.1 35.0 23.9 10.7 1.1 − 0.3 10.6 − 0.7
         Oct 11.7 − 0.6 1.5 12.3 7.3 18.7 8.1 − 10.6 3.9 2.7 0.6 − 0.5 1.1
         Nov 6.1 11.8 1.1 − 5.7 − 1.8 3.3 41.4 38.1 0.5 2.6 0.8 − 0.9 − 2.0         Dec − 13.6 − 1.8 9.9 − 11.8 − 7.7 10.4 − 25.6 − 35.9 2.0 3.7 1.1 − 5.2 2.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
10.4 23.2 − 52.0 64.2 37.5 7.4 30.0 19.1 7.7 1.3 7.0 − 20.6 2003          May
30.2 17.0 − 8.7 29.8 55.3 7.3 48.0 − 38.9 13.4 − 16.7 − 1.4 − 3.0          June
− 24.6 − 12.6 − 5.8 − 4.5 − 18.9 11.1 − 30.0 3.1 11.3 5.2 9.6 − 4.5          July
− 10.0 − 34.2 − − 5.1 − 2.7 − 13.8 1.2 − 15.0 3.9 7.2 − 2.9 2.2 − 1.7          Aug 
20.9 26.0 − − 1.9 16.5 45.8 2.1 43.7 − 29.6 0.3 − 4.5 − 8.3 − 5.7          Sep 
− 18.0 2.7 − 50.6 19.9 4.3 6.4 − 2.1 10.5 5.1 13.2 5.7 11.8          Oct 
14.6 18.7 − 47.5 52.1 49.2 7.9 41.3 − 4.1 7.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 0.2          Nov 
− 26.8 − 46.1 − 65.0 96.0 67.1 18.8 48.3 0.3 28.7 − 16.0 − 3.5 − 11.6          Dec 
20.5 36.5 − − 9.7 − 30.4 − 26.7 − 8.8 − 18.0 − 21.2 17.5 6.9 9.6 4.4 2004          Jan 
18.9 − 7.4 − 26.2 2.5 1.7 4.3 − 2.7 − 5.9 6.7 14.0 7.5 2.2          Feb 
− 9.2 19.8 − 27.2 33.7 40.7 6.1 34.6 − 12.2 5.2 − 9.3 5.4 − 2.6          Mar 
− 4.7 20.4 − 52.4 33.3 24.5 9.8 14.7 0.5 8.3 5.8 8.0 5.3          Apr 
15.5 − 13.9 − 27.5 35.8 18.8 7.3 11.5 11.0 6.0 − 3.6 − 2.0 − 2.7          May
28.7 − 2.4 − 26.6 30.2 44.0 6.4 37.6 − 26.1 12.3 − 4.2 − 3.8 4.3          June
− 22.2 − 3.7 − 26.3 19.4 1.1 13.3 − 12.1 10.6 7.6 5.2 3.9 − 2.2          July
− 8.5 15.2 − − 13.9 − 28.9 − 38.1 − 2.8 − 35.3 3.5 5.7 3.0 11.0 1.0          Aug 
11.1 − 2.6 − 35.0 57.2 63.9 4.6 59.2 − 8.7 2.0 − 8.3 − 13.3 − 0.6          Sep 
− 6.7 − 4.1 − 60.0 42.0 10.1 6.4 3.7 27.8 4.1 13.1 7.4 − 2.4          Oct − 14.6 47.3 − 37.7 42.5 49.2 4.4 44.9 − 13.5 6.7 − 5.5 − 3.1 3.9          Nov − 20.2 − 67.7 − 99.1 102.5 30.6 19.8 10.8 41.8 30.1 2.6 − 9.2 3.2          Dec 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
2.2 14.8 2.4 1.3 15.3 6.8 7.4 0.7 1.0 0.4 − 1.0 2003          May
0.4 13.3 0.6 2.8 1.9 16.4 − 11.8 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 1.6          June
− 2.8 − 15.7 1.1 3.4 − 14.2 − 12.5 − 1.3 2.0 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.2          July
0.6 − 4.5 2.5 − 0.1 1.2 1.7 2.9 2.7 1.5 − 0.4 − 7.2          Aug 
0.3 11.8 1.3 0.9 1.5 10.8 − 13.8 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 0.5          Sep 
− 0.7 − 3.6 1.2 1.3 5.9 3.3 − 3.5 0.9 5.6 − 0.7 0.2          Oct 
0.1 3.3 1.0 2.4 25.5 22.8 − 0.3 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 4.1          Nov 0.2 4.2 0.2 4.5 − 3.0 − 10.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.9 0.2 1.2          Dec 
0.0 22.5 3.5 − 5.0 − 2.7 8.3 − 14.1 1.3 2.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 2004          Jan 
1.3 − 1.8 1.1 0.9 − 0.6 5.7 − 5.2 1.2 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0          Feb 
0.6 12.2 1.2 2.3 4.4 1.2 − 0.1 0.1 0.8 − 0.5 3.0          Mar 
− 0.6 12.7 1.9 2.7 0.5 5.8 − 5.0 0.9 − 1.0 0.1 − 0.3          Apr 
1.0 − 10.7 1.0 2.3 5.5 − 2.7 8.7 0.2 − 0.3 0.3 − 0.8          May2.4 10.3 0.6 2.3 − 8.7 3.3 − 9.8 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.8          June
− 1.0 0.1 1.7 3.6 − 3.9 − 8.5 3.8 0.5 0.6 3.9 − 4.2          July
2.4 − 3.2 3.0 − 0.8 2.6 1.7 0.7 0.7 − 2.5 1.3 0.8          Aug 
− 3.9 0.6 2.3 1.3 9.2 14.6 − 5.1 0.1 3.9 − 2.3 − 2.0          Sep 
− 2.6 29.4 1.4 1.0 − 0.3 − 3.5 2.3 0.5 3.1 − 1.3 − 1.4          Oct 
− 1.9 − 7.6 0.8 2.1 18.4 29.2 − 9.5 − 0.1 0.8 − 1.9 − 0.2          Nov 
0.1 4.6 0.3 4.8 − 9.9 − 29.5 23.5 9.2 − 7.2 − 3.9 − 2.1          Dec 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Up to end-2002, including national banknotes and German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the
coins still in circulation. — 10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2002          Nov 14,010.9 9,761.8 7,678.2 6,754.5 356.8 566.9 2,083.6 829.2 1,254.4 2,936.5 1,312.6
         Dec 13,931.2 9,779.2 7,721.0 6,781.2 367.1 572.7 2,058.2 837.2 1,221.0 2,839.5 1,312.4
2003          Jan 13,976.1 9,854.8 7,748.4 6,804.6 375.1 568.7 2,106.4 829.2 1,277.2 2,852.9 1,268.3
         Feb 14,112.1 9,905.0 7,778.0 6,831.3 381.4 565.3 2,127.0 828.6 1,298.5 2,909.0 1,298.0         Mar 14,124.4 9,945.4 7,807.7 6,854.7 386.4 566.5 2,137.8 829.1 1,308.7 2,892.2 1,286.7
         Apr 14,229.6 10,030.5 7,880.2 6,891.0 403.8 585.5 2,150.3 823.3 1,327.0 2,904.5 1,294.6
         May 14,300.4 10,088.9 7,911.7 6,907.1 407.2 597.5 2,177.1 818.9 1,358.2 2,878.4 1,333.2         June 14,379.8 10,102.9 7,942.5 6,942.3 406.5 593.7 2,160.4 817.8 1,342.5 2,958.8 1,318.2
         July 14,372.1 10,160.5 7,983.6 6,963.0 404.1 616.4 2,176.9 825.9 1,351.0 2,944.6 1,266.9
         Aug 14,361.5 10,168.5 8,002.3 6,975.6 407.4 619.3 2,166.2 819.8 1,346.4 2,930.6 1,262.4         Sep 14,407.6 10,214.4 8,023.9 6,996.3 412.8 614.8 2,190.5 821.3 1,369.2 2,888.7 1,304.5
         Oct 14,493.3 10,261.3 8,058.2 7,025.0 420.4 612.7 2,203.2 821.1 1,382.1 2,951.8 1,280.1
         Nov 14,607.6 10,349.9 8,119.1 7,071.5 425.1 622.5 2,230.7 830.5 1,400.2 2,954.7 1,303.1         Dec 14,555.3 10,362.3 8,153.2 7,102.5 427.0 623.8 2,209.1 841.7 1,367.4 2,884.5 1,308.5
2004          Jan 14,766.4 10,411.2 8,177.1 7,117.8 426.5 632.8 2,234.1 838.7 1,395.4 3,015.6 1,339.7
         Feb 14,861.9 10,455.1 8,205.0 7,138.8 432.2 634.0 2,250.1 830.4 1,419.7 3,034.5 1,372.3         Mar 15,063.8 10,533.9 8,253.4 7,170.8 433.2 649.4 2,280.5 846.0 1,434.5 3,152.9 1,377.0
         Apr 15,226.0 10,623.9 8,338.5 7,228.9 437.5 672.1 2,285.5 840.3 1,445.2 3,229.6 1,372.5
         May 15,254.4 10,687.6 8,379.8 7,268.7 441.8 669.3 2,307.7 834.4 1,473.4 3,197.2 1,369.6         June 15,331.2 10,755.4 8,429.7 7,320.4 446.3 662.9 2,325.7 840.5 1,485.2 3,181.1 1,394.7
         July 15,354.5 10,786.7 8,458.1 7,356.5 448.4 653.3 2,328.6 846.8 1,481.8 3,183.3 1,384.5
         Aug 15,385.1 10,765.5 8,439.4 7,348.1 448.0 643.3 2,326.1 841.5 1,484.6 3,223.4 1,396.2         Sep 15,486.9 10,812.2 8,491.5 7,401.9 446.6 643.1 2,320.6 834.5 1,486.2 3,211.8 1,463.0
         Oct 15,578.8 10,864.7 8,544.2 7,448.0 449.2 647.0 2,320.4 834.5 1,486.0 3,216.3 1,497.9
         Nov 15,775.6 10,949.8 8,626.3 7,511.3 454.8 660.2 2,323.5 830.4 1,493.1 3,279.2 1,546.6         Dec 15,715.2 10,959.0 8,681.5 7,550.2 464.4 666.9 2,277.4 835.9 1,441.5 3,228.5 1,527.7
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2002          Nov 4,413.9 3,341.1 2,615.3 2,299.5 69.6 246.2 725.8 481.7 244.1 879.3 193.5         Dec 4,359.5 3,344.6 2,630.8 2,304.4 66.6 259.8 713.8 478.4 235.4 823.8 191.1
2003          Jan 4,360.7 3,353.2 2,623.2 2,298.5 66.1 258.7 730.0 484.0 246.1 823.2 184.3
         Feb 4,383.3 3,351.8 2,627.3 2,303.8 66.5 257.0 724.6 477.9 246.6 841.2 190.2         Mar 4,395.2 3,351.2 2,624.8 2,302.6 67.2 255.0 726.4 474.6 251.7 861.1 182.9
         Apr 4,400.8 3,353.3 2,629.0 2,300.8 67.3 260.9 724.3 475.4 248.9 867.3 180.3
         May 4,401.1 3,351.6 2,629.9 2,298.8 67.9 263.2 721.7 470.7 251.1 871.8 177.7         June 4,411.5 3,334.6 2,629.8 2,301.7 67.0 261.1 704.8 463.7 241.2 906.3 170.6
         July 4,391.1 3,334.6 2,620.8 2,293.4 64.4 263.0 713.9 474.3 239.6 891.4 165.1
         Aug 4,373.2 3,322.7 2,624.8 2,296.4 64.5 263.9 697.9 469.1 228.8 886.0 164.4         Sep 4,384.6 3,337.1 2,634.6 2,309.9 64.2 260.5 702.5 463.0 239.4 877.7 169.8
         Oct 4,387.2 3,333.3 2,624.5 2,303.4 66.5 254.6 708.8 466.1 242.7 882.7 171.3
         Nov 4,409.5 3,355.4 2,637.9 2,311.5 66.9 259.5 717.5 472.5 245.0 884.0 170.2         Dec 4,392.5 3,337.7 2,630.9 2,303.9 69.0 258.0 706.7 469.9 236.8 880.9 173.9
2004          Jan 4,416.6 3,334.2 2,621.1 2,291.7 68.4 260.9 713.2 470.2 242.9 921.4 161.0
         Feb 4,424.0 3,346.3 2,619.5 2,295.4 67.9 256.2 726.7 461.6 265.2 916.1 161.5         Mar 4,479.7 3,374.8 2,629.5 2,295.8 66.6 267.0 745.3 474.2 271.1 939.4 165.5
         Apr 4,514.1 3,385.7 2,646.0 2,299.2 65.4 281.5 739.6 467.5 272.2 962.8 165.7
         May 4,495.6 3,374.2 2,634.5 2,296.1 66.2 272.3 739.7 461.6 278.0 952.1 169.3         June 4,477.8 3,364.6 2,621.6 2,295.8 66.5 259.2 742.9 456.3 286.6 944.6 168.6
         July 4,479.3 3,372.7 2,619.4 2,292.9 70.7 255.8 753.4 465.2 288.2 937.4 169.1
         Aug 4,477.2 3,362.1 2,608.0 2,286.8 69.1 252.1 754.2 460.6 293.6 949.3 165.8         Sep 4,507.8 3,365.6 2,616.9 2,294.9 69.5 252.6 748.6 455.9 292.7 974.8 167.4
         Oct 4,522.7 3,376.3 2,615.4 2,291.9 69.3 254.3 760.9 460.8 300.0 976.6 169.8
         Nov 4,559.3 3,380.9 2,626.0 2,301.2 68.5 256.2 754.9 456.8 298.2 1,005.9 172.4         Dec 4,512.2 3,363.6 2,620.3 2,285.7 68.7 265.9 743.3 453.1 290.2 969.6 179.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4From
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to end-2002, also including national
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — banknotes and coins still in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*).
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). From 2002, the German contribution
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
321.4 5,799.5 5,467.0 5,504.7 1,927.1 956.8 82.4 1,148.4 1,284.7 105.3 2002          Nov 
341.2 5,879.5 5,566.7 5,592.2 1,980.7 947.8 81.2 1,163.9 1,313.4 105.2          Dec 
312.1 5,869.9 5,536.6 5,569.3 1,956.3 953.1 76.7 1,168.3 1,311.7 103.1 2003          Jan 
319.3 5,913.0 5,560.3 5,586.5 1,956.1 952.7 75.4 1,175.6 1,324.8 101.9          Feb 
327.2 5,963.8 5,610.4 5,640.1 1,995.3 948.3 75.9 1,182.7 1,337.5 100.4          Mar 
336.3 5,979.6 5,640.1 5,671.4 2,012.8 961.3 74.1 1,179.6 1,345.8 97.7          Apr 
343.8 6,041.4 5,695.7 5,715.4 2,035.9 972.4 73.0 1,185.2 1,352.6 96.4          May351.0 6,100.7 5,715.9 5,744.9 2,083.6 940.3 72.4 1,188.1 1,365.6 94.8          June
361.5 6,093.3 5,739.0 5,770.2 2,090.1 944.5 72.1 1,194.4 1,376.3 92.8          July
362.7 6,089.2 5,741.0 5,779.2 2,078.5 951.1 72.2 1,203.8 1,382.4 91.2          Aug 364.8 6,118.0 5,754.9 5,789.2 2,117.6 922.4 73.0 1,203.3 1,382.3 90.6          Sep 
371.2 6,118.4 5,769.3 5,806.7 2,112.8 934.7 73.9 1,208.4 1,386.3 90.6          Oct 
379.2 6,179.9 5,818.3 5,851.8 2,151.0 927.4 75.5 1,215.5 1,391.5 90.8          Nov 397.9 6,239.3 5,916.5 5,936.2 2,191.0 921.6 74.9 1,232.2 1,424.6 91.8          Dec 
389.1 6,244.5 5,891.5 5,923.5 2,177.9 904.2 75.1 1,235.3 1,440.3 90.8 2004          Jan 
393.5 6,263.6 5,893.3 5,924.9 2,171.9 899.2 74.6 1,242.6 1,446.1 90.5          Feb 
399.6 6,290.5 5,922.5 5,966.5 2,210.6 891.9 73.2 1,250.4 1,450.2 90.3          Mar 
409.4 6,322.1 5,949.8 5,997.9 2,225.2 893.8 71.7 1,261.1 1,456.8 89.2          Apr 
416.6 6,366.8 5,981.9 6,023.2 2,235.6 900.2 71.3 1,266.1 1,461.7 88.3          May423.0 6,432.9 6,023.5 6,060.0 2,275.8 875.4 71.6 1,276.2 1,473.0 88.0          June
436.2 6,417.2 6,029.9 6,068.8 2,260.9 886.6 70.8 1,283.0 1,479.5 88.0          July
433.4 6,384.4 6,002.7 6,045.6 2,224.0 891.8 69.3 1,289.4 1,483.1 88.0          Aug 438.0 6,444.1 6,053.2 6,088.9 2,275.8 880.8 67.9 1,293.0 1,483.7 87.7          Sep 
444.4 6,476.5 6,089.2 6,126.4 2,275.5 905.8 69.9 1,300.1 1,486.6 88.6          Oct 
448.7 6,503.5 6,129.9 6,165.2 2,306.1 893.4 69.5 1,314.9 1,492.0 89.4          Nov 468.5 6,587.0 6,243.8 6,271.3 2,322.0 927.9 71.4 1,338.2 1,521.2 90.5          Dec 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
89.9 2,147.3 2,066.9 2,035.6 569.5 237.6 17.9 645.7 462.0 102.9 2002          Nov 
94.2 2,170.7 2,092.1 2,054.2 567.8 242.4 18.2 648.0 474.8 103.1          Dec 
84.9 2,159.7 2,082.0 2,048.3 561.2 238.7 18.6 649.7 478.9 101.2 2003          Jan 
86.6 2,173.9 2,094.9 2,058.5 564.8 237.3 18.5 656.1 481.8 100.0          Feb 
89.0 2,175.8 2,098.2 2,063.3 572.0 232.8 18.6 657.9 483.5 98.4          Mar 
91.9 2,176.7 2,100.4 2,068.2 580.4 233.5 18.1 655.8 484.6 95.8          Apr 
93.2 2,189.4 2,112.0 2,073.9 585.9 236.9 17.8 653.8 485.3 94.3          May96.0 2,194.7 2,115.7 2,076.1 600.0 225.8 17.6 653.4 486.3 92.9          June
99.4 2,183.0 2,107.8 2,071.3 591.1 225.3 17.3 658.5 488.3 90.8          July
99.3 2,193.4 2,117.6 2,082.5 593.2 228.9 17.5 662.7 491.0 89.3          Aug 
100.2 2,188.3 2,112.7 2,079.6 603.5 217.2 17.5 661.0 491.8 88.5          Sep 
101.5 2,188.7 2,113.6 2,083.5 606.9 216.1 17.8 661.3 492.8 88.6          Oct 
103.9 2,211.8 2,137.8 2,105.1 628.8 214.6 18.3 661.2 493.4 88.9          Nov 108.5 2,215.1 2,143.0 2,105.2 616.1 216.3 18.5 662.1 502.3 89.9          Dec 
103.5 2,209.9 2,137.7 2,102.7 626.1 202.7 18.5 662.9 503.6 88.8 2004          Jan 
104.4 2,213.0 2,140.9 2,103.8 630.1 198.8 18.3 663.3 504.7 88.5          Feb 
106.7 2,215.1 2,142.0 2,106.6 631.3 200.7 18.0 663.6 504.8 88.2          Mar 
109.3 2,219.4 2,145.3 2,112.5 637.8 196.2 17.5 668.3 505.6 87.1          Apr 
111.6 2,229.8 2,154.8 2,118.4 634.1 202.7 16.9 672.6 505.8 86.2          May113.8 2,229.2 2,151.6 2,114.1 636.3 193.0 16.6 676.9 505.5 85.8          June
117.4 2,226.0 2,149.7 2,113.7 629.2 197.9 16.2 678.5 506.0 85.9          July
116.7 2,232.2 2,153.1 2,119.1 630.6 199.7 16.0 680.3 506.6 85.8          Aug 118.0 2,238.1 2,162.0 2,126.3 644.8 191.9 15.9 681.5 506.7 85.5          Sep 
119.0 2,237.6 2,164.0 2,132.6 642.0 197.5 16.0 684.1 507.0 86.1          Oct 
121.1 2,258.0 2,187.6 2,153.3 668.5 188.1 15.7 687.1 507.0 86.9          Nov 125.9 2,264.6 2,193.8 2,158.6 639.4 208.7 15.7 690.9 516.0 88.0          Dec 
includes the volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim
Bundesbank in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). — 5Excluding
Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The central governments’ deposits. — 6 In Germany, only saving deposits. 
volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can be
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2002          Nov 147.5 147.4 71.9 45.6 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 229.6 225.8 477.6 1,829.5 1,494.1
         Dec 136.4 150.9 75.6 45.1 1.4 25.6 2.8 0.4 226.9 224.4 470.5 1,816.9 1,490.3
2003          Jan 154.7 145.9 71.0 45.9 1.2 24.8 2.6 0.4 232.8 229.6 535.4 1,794.7 1,482.9
         Feb 175.8 150.6 72.2 49.9 1.0 24.4 2.7 0.4 233.3 229.7 547.3 1,802.1 1,485.6         Mar 176.2 147.5 71.8 47.1 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 224.0 220.8 555.7 1,802.0 1,484.5
         Apr 159.7 148.4 75.0 45.2 1.0 24.2 2.8 0.3 230.5 227.0 565.3 1,834.2 1,516.6
         May 170.1 155.9 76.9 50.8 0.9 24.1 2.8 0.3 231.7 228.2 571.7 1,817.8 1,514.1         June 200.3 155.5 80.1 46.8 0.9 24.6 2.8 0.3 215.0 212.1 571.0 1,831.8 1,514.8
         July 173.0 150.1 75.2 46.4 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 219.9 216.4 584.9 1,848.5 1,516.8
         Aug 163.0 147.0 73.4 45.7 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.3 217.1 214.2 587.2 1,860.9 1,513.6         Sep 183.9 144.9 74.8 42.0 1.0 23.9 2.8 0.3 211.5 207.9 576.9 1,856.5 1,517.2
         Oct 165.8 145.9 78.1 39.9 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.4 224.7 221.1 582.3 1,892.5 1,538.6
         Nov 180.4 147.7 80.0 39.6 0.9 24.0 2.9 0.3 224.7 220.9 585.2 1,901.1 1,552.0         Dec 153.6 149.6 79.7 41.5 0.9 24.3 2.9 0.4 208.7 206.4 581.4 1,874.8 1,535.4
2004          Jan 174.1 146.9 78.4 41.2 0.9 23.2 2.9 0.3 214.6 211.9 591.6 1,899.9 1,549.1
         Feb 193.0 145.7 76.7 41.3 0.9 23.5 3.0 0.4 228.6 225.3 599.2 1,909.9 1,558.5         Mar 183.8 140.3 73.5 39.1 0.9 23.3 3.1 0.4 219.4 215.8 602.6 1,947.7 1,576.0
         Apr 179.6 144.7 77.7 39.2 1.0 23.1 3.2 0.4 225.5 222.5 610.9 1,972.2 1,586.3
         May 195.1 148.5 78.3 42.5 1.0 23.1 3.3 0.4 221.9 218.5 609.0 1,982.7 1,589.2         June 223.7 149.2 81.1 40.6 1.0 22.8 3.3 0.4 217.7 214.3 609.2 1,996.4 1,598.9
         July 201.5 146.9 77.6 41.5 1.0 22.9 3.4 0.4 223.0 219.5 613.1 2,013.7 1,607.8
         Aug 193.0 145.8 78.0 40.8 1.0 22.1 3.5 0.5 226.0 221.9 624.1 2,022.3 1,616.6         Sep 204.1 151.1 81.4 42.9 1.0 21.8 3.5 0.5 217.6 214.2 609.5 2,045.2 1,635.2
         Oct 197.4 152.7 83.7 42.0 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 230.7 227.6 617.1 2,053.5 1,640.6
         Nov 182.8 155.4 89.2 39.2 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 225.1 222.0 613.4 2,055.6 1,644.6         Dec 162.6 153.1 84.8 42.3 1.3 20.3 3.8 0.5 227.5 224.7 603.8 2,062.3 1,654.3
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2002          Nov 47.7 64.1 13.1 26.2 0.9 21.9 1.6 0.4 6.4 6.4 33.9 844.9 728.7         Dec 47.7 68.7 15.7 27.7 1.0 22.2 1.6 0.4 3.3 3.3 32.9 826.4 716.6
2003          Jan 46.9 64.5 12.7 26.9 1.0 21.8 1.7 0.4 8.6 8.6 35.5 817.6 702.1
         Feb 48.3 67.2 14.8 28.0 0.7 21.7 1.7 0.4 10.9 10.9 36.7 825.8 710.3         Mar 46.6 65.9 14.5 27.1 0.7 21.6 1.6 0.3 11.2 11.2 37.3 819.4 701.0
         Apr 45.5 63.1 14.1 24.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 11.3 11.3 37.2 818.7 699.8
         May 47.7 67.8 14.8 28.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 12.3 12.3 37.7 814.0 698.7         June 48.1 70.5 17.4 28.4 0.7 22.1 1.6 0.3 10.8 10.8 37.2 819.6 699.7
         July 45.3 66.3 14.0 27.9 0.6 21.9 1.6 0.3 10.9 10.9 36.8 822.7 696.4
         Aug 46.0 65.0 14.0 27.1 0.6 21.2 1.7 0.3 12.4 12.4 36.4 821.8 688.4         Sep 46.3 62.5 13.9 24.7 0.7 21.2 1.7 0.3 15.6 15.6 36.3 825.6 689.8
         Oct 45.5 59.7 13.8 22.1 0.6 21.2 1.6 0.4 21.1 21.1 35.7 829.7 692.4
         Nov 45.7 61.0 14.4 22.6 0.6 21.4 1.6 0.3 20.0 20.0 35.2 833.2 698.6         Dec 45.9 64.0 15.8 23.9 0.6 21.6 1.6 0.4 14.1 14.1 35.3 826.4 693.3
2004          Jan 46.0 61.3 14.4 23.6 0.6 20.7 1.7 0.3 16.6 16.6 34.9 836.4 695.5
         Feb 47.3 62.0 15.2 23.3 0.6 20.9 1.7 0.4 17.5 17.5 34.7 833.7 695.2         Mar 47.9 60.6 15.4 21.7 0.6 20.7 1.8 0.4 18.2 18.2 34.2 851.5 698.5
         Apr 47.3 59.7 14.9 21.4 0.6 20.6 1.8 0.4 17.3 17.3 34.2 858.7 698.9
         May 48.3 63.1 15.7 24.1 0.6 20.5 1.8 0.4 17.0 17.0 34.6 861.5 701.5         June 50.7 64.4 17.3 24.0 0.6 20.3 1.8 0.4 16.1 16.1 34.4 859.1 697.1
         July 49.7 62.6 15.6 23.7 0.6 20.4 1.9 0.4 16.8 16.8 38.2 860.1 692.4
         Aug 52.1 61.0 15.7 22.8 0.6 19.5 2.0 0.5 14.2 14.2 39.5 865.1 696.9         Sep 48.1 63.6 15.8 25.4 0.6 19.3 2.0 0.5 18.1 18.1 37.4 869.5 699.7
         Oct 45.6 59.4 15.0 21.9 0.7 19.2 2.1 0.5 21.2 21.2 36.1 865.5 691.2
         Nov 43.7 61.1 16.7 21.8 0.7 19.3 2.0 0.5 22.0 22.0 34.2 860.8 687.5         Dec 43.8 62.2 16.0 24.8 0.6 18.1 2.2 0.5 14.8 14.8 30.4 850.2 678.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building with money market fund shares. — 5Excluding liabilities arising from
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central securities issued. — 6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 7The
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates should on
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with or M3. — 8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution, the difference
January 2002 Monthly Report , they were published in this table together
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
... ... 1,698.5 2,737.3 1,016.2 − 3.4 1,601.5 − 2,414.6 4,875.5 5,713.8 3,994.4 181.8 2002          Nov 
... ... 1,689.3 2,627.1 1,006.4 10.8 1,550.9 − 2,499.4 4,981.4 5,806.4 3,990.8 192.4          Dec 
... ... 1,684.1 2,662.2 1,016.9 9.2 1,541.9 − 2,440.9 4,923.6 5,802.5 3,997.6 192.8 2003          Jan 
... ... 1,692.6 2,714.0 1,010.3 11.8 1,560.4 − 2,451.2 4,951.5 5,841.7 4,005.2 197.4          Feb 
... ... 1,702.4 2,691.3 999.6 13.1 1,546.6 − 2,497.5 5,006.4 5,885.7 4,009.9 199.3          Mar 
... ... 1,709.1 2,714.0 997.0 − 21.4 1,593.4 − 2,527.2 5,052.4 5,973.2 4,008.0 198.1          Apr 
... ... 1,714.2 2,654.5 993.6 − 5.7 1,649.9 − 2,561.5 5,109.4 6,016.4 4,013.8 200.4          May... ... 1,732.1 2,669.3 997.6 15.5 1,626.1 − 2,605.4 5,130.1 6,015.8 4,037.6 186.6          June
... ... 1,754.3 2,679.5 999.8 5.4 1,577.4 − 2,584.8 5,124.3 6,023.3 4,066.1 154.4          July
... ... 1,768.6 2,678.3 1,014.4 − 3.1 1,553.2 − 2,573.2 5,126.0 6,022.6 4,102.1 156.2          Aug ... ... 1,768.9 2,643.4 1,016.6 5.8 1,612.6 − 2,615.6 5,137.0 6,013.0 4,103.7 156.3          Sep 
... ... 1,792.9 2,691.7 1,014.1 9.7 1,587.3 − 2,620.4 5,157.9 6,064.5 4,130.3 157.3          Oct 
... ... 1,801.8 2,686.4 1,014.3 5.0 1,631.2 − 2,667.8 5,206.0 6,115.3 4,146.7 158.1          Nov ... ... 1,786.3 2,635.1 1,010.7 9.1 1,597.8 − 2,729.3 5,297.9 6,176.5 4,145.6 162.9          Dec 
... ... 1,809.0 2,750.6 1,008.7 17.3 1,649.7 − 2,703.1 5,271.7 6,168.8 4,167.3 161.8 2004          Jan 
... ... 1,817.7 2,766.5 1,008.0 21.8 1,670.4 − 2,703.6 5,273.5 6,193.5 4,182.6 166.4          Feb 
... ... 1,858.1 2,857.4 1,025.8 21.5 1,699.1 − 2,745.8 5,310.2 6,221.8 4,248.3 168.2          Mar 
... ... 1,877.8 2,938.0 1,021.8 16.2 1,709.6 − 2,771.0 5,344.5 6,275.4 4,273.4 166.4          Apr 
... ... 1,891.6 2,932.0 1,019.1 17.5 1,688.4 − 2,788.9 5,377.4 6,299.4 4,288.7 167.0          May... ... 1,901.4 2,895.0 1,024.1 16.4 1,716.0 − 2,833.5 5,407.9 6,329.9 4,312.9 163.2          June
... ... 1,921.0 2,898.9 1,031.6 19.9 1,700.3 − 2,834.7 5,428.2 6,356.9 4,347.0 170.6          July
... ... 1,928.5 2,904.1 1,038.3 21.2 1,729.8 − 2,796.2 5,398.4 6,342.3 4,366.7 173.5          Aug ... ... 1,950.2 2,862.9 1,044.7 15.2 1,808.6 − 2,858.4 5,452.1 6,374.2 4,397.9 177.0          Sep 
... ... 1,960.4 2,849.0 1,047.0 15.8 1,843.2 − 2,867.2 5,491.4 6,432.3 4,418.2 178.7          Oct 
... ... 1,958.2 2,907.0 1,055.8 43.4 1,921.2 − 2,913.7 5,528.7 6,464.6 4,440.4 185.7          Nov ... ... 1,961.5 2,839.4 1,050.8 23.5 1,851.0 − 2,942.7 5,627.9 6,560.0 4,462.0 184.5          Dec 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
32.1 38.1 774.7 716.9 274.2 − 47.5 437.8 27.6 582.6 1,328.8 1,438.8 1,819.8 − 2002          Nov 
32.1 39.0 755.3 661.0 277.7 − 56.9 444.3 29.1 583.5 1,349.2 1,456.6 1,806.8 −          Dec 
26.9 37.4 753.4 670.1 283.0 − 50.3 436.6 29.6 574.0 1,339.7 1,448.0 1,809.5 − 2003          Jan 
34.6 37.7 753.4 679.1 279.5 − 63.2 440.5 31.9 579.5 1,347.5 1,467.5 1,811.1 −          Feb 
31.9 36.5 751.0 682.6 280.3 − 48.9 437.6 33.3 586.5 1,350.9 1,467.7 1,809.6 −          Mar 
33.5 36.3 748.9 686.4 281.1 − 55.5 444.9 34.2 594.5 1,357.8 1,476.1 1,803.5 −          Apr 
32.2 34.1 747.7 666.8 277.5 − 43.6 447.0 36.6 600.7 1,371.8 1,488.0 1,795.1 −          May33.0 31.6 754.9 661.1 279.0 − 42.6 451.8 37.3 617.5 1,377.9 1,490.5 1,802.6 −          June
30.6 31.7 760.4 668.9 280.4 − 63.1 451.5 38.4 605.0 1,366.0 1,476.0 1,812.5 −          July
25.7 29.5 766.7 640.5 285.5 − 67.4 450.4 40.8 607.2 1,374.0 1,477.8 1,825.8 −          Aug 26.4 29.3 770.0 639.8 279.8 − 60.1 459.3 42.2 617.3 1,370.9 1,478.4 1,820.9 −          Sep 
25.7 30.1 773.9 638.2 279.6 − 63.5 457.6 43.4 620.7 1,371.7 1,484.4 1,825.0 −          Oct 
28.6 31.5 773.1 635.5 279.6 − 70.8 465.2 44.4 643.2 1,394.3 1,509.6 1,824.4 −          Nov 30.0 31.3 765.1 625.5 279.6 − 67.8 464.3 44.6 631.9 1,395.2 1,505.9 1,818.7 −          Dec 
31.2 29.8 775.4 642.8 276.3 − 47.1 446.8 48.1 640.5 1,391.1 1,503.6 1,824.6 − 2004          Jan 
26.7 31.3 775.8 663.0 270.2 − 60.8 452.6 49.2 645.3 1,392.7 1,502.8 1,819.0 −          Feb 
29.6 31.4 790.6 680.7 273.8 − 54.5 460.7 50.4 646.8 1,394.2 1,507.6 1,837.3 −          Mar 
29.8 31.1 797.7 690.9 274.2 − 52.8 472.2 52.3 652.7 1,395.8 1,508.3 1,848.3 −          Apr 
27.6 32.3 801.5 671.6 270.6 − 61.3 471.9 53.3 649.8 1,401.8 1,513.4 1,851.8 −          May29.5 29.7 799.9 642.5 276.7 − 54.5 474.3 53.9 653.5 1,395.1 1,504.7 1,860.1 −          June
27.2 27.7 805.2 638.2 280.6 − 59.0 478.3 55.6 644.8 1,391.0 1,501.0 1,871.1 −          July
29.2 26.5 809.4 636.6 278.9 − 69.5 480.2 58.6 646.4 1,394.0 1,503.4 1,874.5 −          Aug 27.5 26.1 815.9 654.3 277.5 − 80.2 493.1 60.9 660.7 1,403.1 1,512.2 1,880.2 −          Sep 
27.2 25.1 813.3 639.6 278.9 − 58.8 502.5 62.3 656.9 1,402.1 1,511.6 1,882.2 −          Oct 
29.5 22.7 808.7 669.7 277.1 − 73.6 510.9 63.1 685.2 1,420.6 1,528.9 1,879.6 −          Nov 27.5 22.5 800.2 627.6 277.4 − 69.6 516.8 63.4 655.4 1,423.3 1,518.5 1,875.0 −          Dec 
between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central govern-
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen ments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetaryby the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo transactions, money
III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding central governments’ deposits), market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities up to 2
and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments’ years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2002          Oct 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
         Nov 372.1 147.5 45.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 334.0 42.8 58.6 129.3 463.4         Dec 371.5 168.1 45.0 1.1 2.0 0.2 − 350.7 51.7 55.5 129.5 480.5
2003          Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3         June 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         July 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
         Aug 315.8 213.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 391.6 51.5 − 1.6 132.8 524.6         Sep 315.0 214.0 45.0 0.1 − 0.6 − 391.7 54.4 − 4.4 132.0 524.2
         Oct 321.3 208.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 395.5 48.3 − 1.1 131.9 527.5
         Nov 321.8 205.8 45.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 399.4 43.4 − 2.2 131.8 531.4         Dec 320.1 235.5 45.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 416.1 57.0 − 4.5 132.6 548.7
2004          Jan 309.2 232.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 427.6 37.0 − 11.2 133.6 561.4
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 303.3 219.4 56.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 418.0 48.6 − 21.1 134.1 552.3
         Apr 301.4 217.9 67.1 0.4 − 0.4 − 425.3 51.5 − 25.7 135.3 561.0
         May 310.7 213.2 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 436.4 46.0 − 18.9 135.0 571.5         June 311.3 224.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.5 − 442.5 52.2 − 21.1 137.1 580.1
         July 308.2 245.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 449.1 65.0 − 24.1 138.8 588.1
         Aug 300.8 253.6 75.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 460.9 61.1 − 31.8 139.1 600.1         Sep 299.4 251.6 75.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 462.8 56.3 − 32.4 139.3 602.3
         Oct 298.8 256.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 465.1 58.2 − 32.1 139.3 604.4
         Nov 298.3 257.9 75.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 − 469.7 55.1 − 32.1 138.4 608.4         Dec 298.0 265.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.5 475.4 60.2 − 36.0 138.5 614.1
2005          Jan 290.3 272.9 75.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 496.0 45.3 − 41.9 139.1 635.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Oct 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
         Nov 84.3 73.2 31.6 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.6 0.1 56.5 37.9 132.6         Dec 84.4 91.1 33.8 0.9 0.7 0.2 − 99.3 0.1 73.5 37.8 137.3
2003          Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7         June 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         July 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
         Aug 73.7 111.0 29.6 0.2 − 0.1 − 109.6 0.1 66.5 38.2 147.9         Sep 73.9 114.0 29.1 0.1 − 0.4 − 109.8 0.1 69.2 37.7 147.9
         Oct 75.7 106.5 29.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 110.8 0.1 63.4 37.5 148.4
         Nov 76.1 102.3 30.8 0.0 − 0.2 − 111.5 0.1 60.0 37.5 149.1         Dec 76.1 118.3 30.9 0.3 − 0.1 − 115.9 0.1 72.2 37.4 153.4
2004          Jan 73.1 119.5 32.3 0.2 − 0.1 − 116.2 0.1 70.9 37.9 154.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 72.4 109.7 41.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 113.5 0.1 72.0 37.9 151.5
         Apr 72.9 97.9 48.7 0.2 − 0.3 − 115.8 0.1 65.7 37.8 153.9
         May 75.4 100.7 51.8 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 119.3 0.1 70.9 37.7 157.0         June 75.6 115.6 49.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.2 0.1 80.9 38.3 159.9
         July 74.6 127.9 49.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 122.7 0.1 91.1 38.5 161.1
         Aug 72.1 136.9 50.3 0.0 − 0.1 − 126.2 0.1 94.7 38.3 164.6         Sep 72.2 131.7 50.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 127.5 0.1 88.8 37.9 165.4
         Oct 72.1 129.8 48.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 127.7 0.1 84.8 37.5 165.3
         Nov 72.2 136.0 46.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 − 128.3 0.1 88.4 37.5 166.0         Dec 72.2 142.4 46.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 129.9 0.1 93.4 37.6 167.5
2005          Jan 70.2 144.7 46.9 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 135.2 0.1 89.1 37.4 172.7
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem forof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2 2002          Oct 
+ 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 4.8 − 2.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 5.8          Nov 
− 0.6 + 20.6 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 − + 16.7 + 8.9 − 3.1 + 0.2 + 17.1          Dec 
− 10.6 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan 
− 4.5 − 7.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − − 13.2 + 6.5 − 5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb 
− 3.9 + 10.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 − 7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar 
− 15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 − 20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr 
− 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 − 5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 − 2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          June
− 10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 − 10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          July
− 4.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 8.9 − 0.9 − 4.5 + 0.6 + 9.4          Aug − 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 6.3 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.4 − + 3.8 − 6.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.3          Oct 
+ 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 3.9 − 4.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.9          Nov − 1.7 + 29.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − + 16.7 + 13.6 − 2.3 + 0.8 + 17.3          Dec 
− 10.9 − 2.9
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − + 11.5 − 20.0 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 12.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 5.9 − 13.2 + 11.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 9.6 + 11.6 − 9.9 + 0.5 − 9.1          Mar 
− 1.9 − 1.5 + 10.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 7.3 + 2.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.7          Apr 
+ 9.3 − 4.7 + 7.9 − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 5.5 + 6.8 − 0.3 + 10.5          May+ 0.6 + 11.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − 0.4 + 6.1 + 6.2 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 8.6          June
− 3.1 + 20.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 12.8 − 3.0 + 1.7 + 8.0          July
− 7.4 + 8.2
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 11.8 − 3.9 − 7.7 + 0.3 + 12.0          Aug 
− 1.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 − 4.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.2          Sep 
− 0.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.1          Oct 
− 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − + 4.6 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 4.0          Nov − 0.3 + 7.8
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.7 + 5.1 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 5.7          Dec 
− 7.7 + 7.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 20.6 − 14.9 − 5.9 + 0.6 + 21.1 2005          Jan 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2 2002          Oct 
+ 0.4 + 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.0          Nov + 0.1 + 17.8 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − + 4.7
+ 0.0 + 17.1 − 0.2 + 4.6          Dec 
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.0 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan 
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − − 2.8 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb + 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar 
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2
+ 0.0 − 3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr 
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May
− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          June
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          July
− 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 2.5 + 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.1 + 2.5          Aug + 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.8 − 7.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 − − 0.2 − + 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.2 + 0.6          Oct 
+ 0.4 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.7          Nov + 0.0 + 16.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.1 − + 4.4 + 0.0 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 4.2          Dec 
− 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 0.8 − 9.8 + 9.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 2.6          Mar + 0.5 − 11.8 + 7.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 2.4 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 2.5 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 3.1          May+ 0.2 + 14.9 − 2.4 + 0.1 − + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 2.9          June
− 1.0 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 1.3          July
− 2.5 + 9.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 3.5          Aug + 0.1 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.3 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 + 0.8          Sep 
− 0.1 − 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.7          Nov − 0.0 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 1.6          Dec 
− 2.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 5.1 2005          Jan 
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingeuro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2004 June                 4 870.1 136.2 173.3 29.5 143.8 16.2 7.7 7.7 −
                              11 869.1 136.1 174.7 29.5 145.2 16.0 7.2 7.2 −
                              18 867.8 136.1 174.8 29.2 145.5 16.0 7.0 7.0 −
                              25 895.8 136.1 173.9 28.6 145.4 16.5 7.1 7.1 −
         July                 2 3 882.4 3 127.4 3 174.1 28.4 3 145.7 16.6 6.9 6.9 −
                                9 881.0 127.4 175.6 28.4 147.2 16.4 6.7 6.7 −
                              16 868.8 127.4 173.7 28.2 145.6 16.9 7.0 7.0 −
                              23 887.6 127.4 174.8 28.1 146.7 17.0 7.7 7.7 −
                              30 883.7 127.4 172.1 28.0 144.1 17.3 7.9 7.9 −
         Aug                  6 880.2 127.4 170.7 28.1 142.7 17.8 7.7 7.7 −
                              13 871.6 127.4 170.1 28.1 142.0 18.2 7.7 7.7 −
                              20 872.0 127.4 173.0 27.8 145.2 17.1 7.3 7.3 −
                              27 881.9 127.4 170.0 27.8 142.3 16.8 7.8 7.8 −
         Sep                  3 876.6 127.4 168.8 27.6 141.2 17.9 7.7 7.7 −
                              10 874.6 127.4 167.5 27.4 140.1 17.6 7.9 7.9 −
                              17 875.2 127.4 167.7 27.5 140.2 17.5 7.6 7.6 −
                              24 885.8 127.4 168.8 27.2 141.6 17.3 8.1 8.1 −
2004 Oct                  1 3 882.3 3 130.7 3 165.3 26.5 3 138.8 17.1 7.6 7.6 −
                                8 880.6 130.6 166.4 26.4 139.9 17.4 6.9 6.9 −
                              15 868.4 130.6 163.4 26.3 137.2 19.2 7.5 7.5 −
                              22 875.4 130.6 162.3 26.1 136.2 18.5 7.5 7.5 −
                              29 893.8 130.6 164.9 26.0 138.9 17.6 7.7 7.7 −
         Nov                  5 893.2 130.4 166.1 25.9 140.2 17.9 7.4 7.4 −
                              12 887.1 130.4 165.9 25.9 140.0 17.6 7.6 7.6 −
                              19 893.8 130.4 167.7 25.8 142.0 17.5 7.7 7.7 −
                              26 899.1 130.3 164.9 25.6 139.3 18.1 7.4 7.4 −
         Dec                  3 905.5 130.3 165.8 25.6 140.2 18.3 8.0 8.0 −
                              10 914.2 130.3 166.0 25.3 140.6 18.6 7.4 7.4 −
                              17 909.2 129.9 167.8 25.4 142.5 18.3 7.3 7.3 −
                              24 915.7 129.9 167.1 25.1 142.0 17.9 7.5 7.5 −
                              31 3 884.2 3 125.7 3 153.8 3 23.9 3 129.9 3 17.0 6.8 6.8 −
2005 Jan                  7 873.6 125.7 156.5 23.9 132.5 16.4 7.4 7.4 −
                              14 881.0 125.7 156.1 23.7 132.4 17.2 7.1 7.1 −
                              21 896.2 125.6 154.7 23.7 131.0 17.1 7.3 7.3 −
                              28 894.8 125.6 154.4 23.7 130.7 17.6 6.7 6.7 −
         Feb                  4 899.5 125.5 155.2 23.6 131.6 17.1 6.5 6.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2003          Mar 3 239.2 3 34.1 3 48.4 8.3 3 40.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 230.5 34.1 47.0 8.2 38.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 258.1 34.1 47.8 8.3 39.6 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 258.2 3 33.4 3 45.0 8.3 3 36.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 246.9 33.4 44.8 8.3 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 248.9 33.4 45.5 8.3 37.1 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 257.5 3 36.5 3 44.7 8.5 3 36.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 257.6 36.5 45.0 8.5 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 254.4 36.5 44.5 8.5 36.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 267.7 36.5 3 40.1 7.6 3 32.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2004          Jan 258.1 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 258.2 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 256.2 3 38.3 3 41.5 7.6 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 268.0 38.3 42.1 7.9 34.2 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 276.6 38.3 41.5 7.8 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 290.3 3 35.8 3 41.2 7.4 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 295.9 35.8 40.4 7.4 33.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 284.2 35.8 39.8 7.4 32.4 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 283.6
3 36.7 3 39.1 7.0 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 293.7 36.7 38.2 7.0 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 298.6 36.7 38.4 6.9 31.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 293.5 3 35.5 3 35.8 6.5 3 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
2005          Jan 287.9 35.5 36.2 6.5 29.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
311.1 236.0 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 0.7 72.9 42.6 109.4 2004 June                  4
308.6 233.5 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 0.9 73.6 42.6 109.4                               11
307.0 232.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 73.8 42.6 109.6                               18
335.2 260.0 75.0 − − 0.2 0.0 0.8 73.7 42.6 109.9                               25
331.0 256.0 75.0 − − 0.0 − 0.7 3 73.4 42.1 3 110.2          July                  2
328.0 253.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.5 73.8 42.1 110.5                                 9
317.5 242.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.8 73.2 42.1 110.2                               16
334.5 259.5 75.0 − − − 0.0 0.9 72.9 42.1 110.5                               23
333.0 258.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.9 67.5 42.1 115.5                               30
330.0 255.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 0.8 68.0 42.1 115.7          Aug                  6
322.5 247.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 68.0 42.1 114.7                               13
321.0 246.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 1.4 67.9 42.1 114.9                               20
334.0 259.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 67.9 42.1 114.6                               27
329.0 254.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.5 67.9 42.1 114.3          Sep                  3
327.6 252.5 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 1.5 67.9 42.1 115.2                               10
328.0 253.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.6 68.0 42.1 115.4                               17
337.5 262.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.6 67.6 42.1 115.4                               24
334.0 259.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.8 67.4 42.1 3 116.3 2004 Oct                  1
330.5 255.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.0 68.0 42.1 116.7                                 8
319.5 244.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.8 67.5 42.1 116.8                               15
328.0 253.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.8 67.6 42.1 117.1                               22
343.0 268.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 1.9 68.5 42.1 117.6                               29
339.5 264.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.2 69.5 42.1 118.1          Nov                  5
333.1 258.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.9 70.3 42.0 118.3                               12
337.5 262.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.6 71.0 42.0 118.3                               19
345.0 270.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 1.7 71.2 42.0 118.5                               26
348.6 273.5 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 1.8 71.2 42.0 119.4          Dec                  3
357.1 282.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.1 2.2 71.0 42.0 119.7                               10
351.3 276.0 75.0 − − 0.3 0.0 3.0 70.1 41.9 119.6                               17
358.7 283.5 75.0 − − 0.2 0.0 3.7 69.8 41.5 119.5                               24
345.1 270.0 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 3.8 70.2 41.3 3 120.4                               31
334.0 259.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.2 70.5 41.3 118.7 2005 Jan                  7
340.0 265.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.4 71.0 41.3 119.2                               14
354.5 279.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.5 71.8 41.3 120.3                               21
353.0 273.0 80.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.6 72.6 41.3 120.0                               28
357.5 277.5 80.0 − − − 0.0 3.4 72.8 41.3 120.1          Feb                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
130.9 98.4 32.1 − − 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.1 2003          Mar 
125.0 92.5 32.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Apr 
151.8 118.7 32.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          May155.0 122.5 32.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          June
144.0 115.1 28.8 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.9          July
145.2 116.0 29.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Aug 151.4 121.5 29.7 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4
3 20.1          Sep 
133.0 101.9 31.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 38.4          Oct 145.4 115.0 30.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 23.3          Nov 162.3 129.9 32.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Dec 
157.4 117.4 40.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0 2004          Jan 
157.6 109.9 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 
141.7 94.1 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 30.1          Mar 
153.7 104.3 49.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.1          Apr 
173.2 123.7 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          May189.4 139.9 49.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          June
196.0 145.1 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
184.8 135.3 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Aug 173.6 127.4 45.6 − − 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.5          Sep 
195.1 148.1 46.9 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0          Oct 
199.8 153.5 46.0 − − 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0          Nov 190.4 143.0 47.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Dec 
185.1 134.3 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.3 2005          Jan 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2004 June                 4 870.1 447.4 139.3 139.1 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 63.6 57.5 6.1
                              11 869.1 448.4 141.1 141.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 59.0 53.0 6.0
                              18 867.8 447.6 140.4 140.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 57.7 51.5 6.2
                              25 895.8 448.1 136.8 136.7 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 88.0 82.4 5.6
         July                 2 5 882.4 454.5 140.8 140.3 0.5 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 73.1 67.2 5.9
                                9 881.0 458.2 137.6 137.5 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 70.7 65.0 5.7
                              16 868.8 459.2 140.1 140.1 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 56.1 50.4 5.6
                              23 887.6 458.7 136.8 136.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 78.2 72.5 5.6
                              30 883.7 463.1 131.3 131.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 77.1 71.2 5.9
         Aug                  6 880.2 467.9 140.1 140.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 59.7 53.7 6.0
                              13 871.6 466.7 138.7 138.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 55.9 49.9 5.9
                              20 872.0 462.2 140.4 140.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 56.1 50.2 5.9
                              27 881.9 460.0 137.9 137.9 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 74.0 68.4 5.6
         Sep                  3 876.6 464.3 137.7 137.6 0.1 − − − 0.1 1.1 64.1 58.3 5.8
                              10 874.6 465.3 137.4 137.4 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 62.9 57.1 5.8
                              17 875.2 463.9 138.5 138.4 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 61.6 55.7 5.9
                              24 885.8 462.6 137.2 137.2 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 73.9 68.0 5.9
2004 Oct                  1 5 882.3 466.8 142.5 142.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 60.9 54.9 6.0
                                8 880.6 469.9 137.5 137.3 0.2 − − − 0.1 1.1 59.8 53.7 6.1
                              15 868.4 469.1 138.8 138.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 47.6 41.7 5.9
                              22 875.4 467.3 137.8 137.8 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 58.7 52.5 6.2
                              29 893.8 471.3 122.0 122.0 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 84.3 78.1 6.3
         Nov                  5 893.2 474.0 142.5 141.3 1.2 − − − 0.1 − 62.5 56.8 5.7
                              12 887.1 473.4 138.3 138.2 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 61.9 55.5 6.4
                              19 893.8 472.0 137.0 136.9 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 68.9 62.9 6.0
                              26 899.1 473.6 137.7 137.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 73.7 67.9 5.9
         Dec                  3 905.5 485.2 137.2 137.1 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 66.9 60.1 6.8
                              10 914.2 490.7 135.6 135.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 70.4 64.1 6.3
                              17 909.2 496.2 145.4 145.3 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 48.2 41.7 6.5
                              24 915.7 504.6 140.6 140.4 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 50.5 44.3 6.2
                              31 5 884.2 501.3 138.7 138.6 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 42.2 36.0 6.2
2005 Jan                  7 873.6 497.2 132.5 132.4 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 45.3 38.8 6.4
                              14 881.0 491.0 143.7 143.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 46.4 39.9 6.5
                              21 896.2 486.9 141.1 141.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 70.1 63.4 6.7
                              28 894.8 486.1 139.7 139.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 69.8 63.3 6.5
         Feb                  4 899.5 490.0 138.6 138.6 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 71.8 65.3 6.6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2003          Mar 5 239.2 98.1 48.1 48.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Apr 230.5 101.8 36.4 36.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 258.1 103.2 36.3 36.2 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         June
5 258.2 105.2 38.8 38.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 246.9 108.5 39.6 39.5 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Aug 248.9 108.6 41.0 41.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 
5 257.5 109.2 41.7 41.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 257.6 110.8 42.0 42.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         Nov 254.4 112.7 36.4 36.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5         Dec 
5 267.7 121.4 44.6 44.5 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.6 0.1 0.5
2004          Jan 258.1 112.4 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Feb 258.2 113.3 36.8 36.7 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Mar 
5 256.2 115.0 31.0 31.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.4 0.4
         Apr 268.0 117.7 38.3 38.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         May 276.6 120.8 43.4 43.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         June
5 290.3 122.3 36.6 36.6 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 295.9 126.0 39.3 39.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Aug 284.2 125.2 41.4 40.9 0.4 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 283.6 126.5 40.1 40.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 293.7 128.2 35.5 35.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov 298.6 129.5 48.3 48.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Dec 
5 293.5 136.3 41.3 41.2 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2005          Jan 287.9 132.3 40.8 40.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of thisfinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
7.8 0.3 8.2 8.2 − 5.9 55.9 − 80.6 59.8 2004 June                  4
7.9 0.3 9.3 9.3 − 5.9 55.6 − 80.6 59.8                               11
7.8 0.3 9.9 9.9 − 5.9 56.5 − 80.6 59.8                               18
8.0 0.2 10.3 10.3 − 5.9 56.8 − 80.6 59.8                               25
9.0 0.2 11.5 11.5 − 5.9 5 56.0 − 5 70.2 59.8          July                  2
8.2 0.2 13.1 13.1 − 5.9 55.8 − 70.2 59.8                                 9
8.2 0.2 11.3 11.3 − 5.9 56.6 − 70.2 59.8                               16
8.6 0.2 11.5 11.5 − 5.9 56.6 − 70.2 59.8                               23
8.8 0.2 9.4 9.4 − 5.9 56.8 − 70.2 59.8                               30
8.5 0.2 9.8 9.8 − 5.9 56.8 − 70.2 59.8          Aug                  6
8.7 0.2 9.9 9.9 − 5.9 54.5 − 70.2 59.8                               13
9.0 0.2 11.9 11.9 − 5.9 55.1 − 70.2 59.8                               20
9.0 0.2 8.8 8.8 − 5.9 55.0 − 70.2 59.8                               27
9.3 0.3 8.9 8.9 − 5.9 55.1 − 70.2 59.8          Sep                  3
9.1 0.3 7.4 7.4 − 5.9 55.2 − 70.2 59.8                               10
9.1 0.4 7.4 7.4 − 5.9 57.3 − 70.2 59.8                               17
9.3 0.4 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 56.9 − 70.2 59.8                               24
9.2 0.3 8.2 8.2 − 5.8 5 56.9 − 70.7 59.9 2004 Oct                  1
9.2 0.3 9.6 9.6 − 5.8 56.8 − 70.7 59.9                                 8
9.1 0.3 8.6 8.6 − 5.8 57.3 − 70.7 59.9                               15
9.0 0.2 6.9 6.9 − 5.8 57.9 − 70.7 59.9                               22
9.4 0.3 8.8 8.8 − 5.8 60.2 − 70.7 59.9                               29
9.4 0.3 10.3 10.3 − 5.8 57.7 − 70.7 59.9          Nov                  5
9.3 0.3 9.9 9.9 − 5.8 57.5 − 70.7 59.9                               12
9.4 0.3 11.4 11.4 − 5.8 58.4 − 70.7 59.9                               19
9.6 0.3 9.3 9.3 − 5.8 58.3 − 70.7 59.9                               26
10.4 0.3 10.4 10.4 − 5.8 58.7 − 70.7 59.9          Dec                  3
10.7 0.3 10.9 10.9 − 5.8 59.1 − 70.7 59.9                               10
10.2 0.3 13.2 13.2 − 5.8 59.3 − 70.7 59.9                               17
11.2 0.3 13.2 13.2 − 5.8 58.8 − 70.7 59.9                               24
10.9 0.2 5 10.7 5 10.7 − 5.6 5 51.4 − 5 64.8 5 58.2                               31
8.0 0.2 11.5 11.5 − 5.6 50.4 − 64.8 58.1 2005 Jan                  7
8.1 0.2 12.6 12.6 − 5.6 50.3 . 64.8 58.1                               14
8.3 0.3 10.1 10.1 − 5.6 51.0 − 64.8 57.8                               21
8.3 0.2 11.3 11.3 − 5.6 50.9 − 64.8 57.8                               28
8.0 0.3 11.6 11.6 − 5.6 50.7 − 64.8 57.8          Feb                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
7.1 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 5 11.7 33.3 5 30.4 5.0 2003          Mar 
7.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 11.6 34.2 30.4 5.0          Apr 
7.3 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 34.5 36.6 30.4 5.0          May7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 31.3 37.3
5 28.2 5.0          June
7.3 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 14.9 38.4 28.2 5.0          July7.4 0.0 3.5 3.5 − 1.5 12.4 40.8 28.2 5.0          Aug 7.3 0.0 3.6 3.6 − 1.5 16.2 42.2
5 30.2 5.0          Sep 
7.4 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.5 12.9 43.4 30.2 5.0          Oct 7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 12.9 44.4 30.2 5.0          Nov 7.7 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.4
5 10.5 44.6 5 29.1 5.0          Dec 
7.3 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 11.4 48.1 29.1 5.0 2004          Jan 
7.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.4 12.7 49.2 29.1 5.0          Feb 6.5 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.5 10.8 50.4
5 32.2 5.0          Mar 
6.2 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 10.9 52.3 32.2 5.0          Apr 5.8 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 11.5 53.3 32.2 5.0          May5.6 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 32.2 53.9
5 29.3 5.0          June
5.9 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.5 30.3 55.6 29.3 5.0          July5.8 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 15.2 58.6 29.3 5.0          Aug 5.6 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4 12.0 60.9 29.6 5.0          Sep 
5.9 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 24.1 62.3 29.6 5.0          Oct 
5.6 0.0 1.5 1.5 − 1.4 13.9 63.1 29.6 5.0          Nov 5.9 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4
5 9.7 63.4 5 27.8 5.0          Dec 
3.5 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 64.5 27.8 5.0 2005          Jan 
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.0
1997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.22004 6,617.7 15.1 2,174.4 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,359.1 3,083.8 2,479.7 2,223.8
2003          Mar 6,434.8 12.9 2,121.5 1,747.2 1,135.0 614.4 371.9 288.9 83.1 3,346.7 3,100.4 2,498.0 2,238.1
         Apr 6,430.3 13.8 2,107.6 1,732.2 1,118.6 613.6 375.4 291.6 83.8 3,348.8 3,102.2 2,499.1 2,234.6
         May 6,467.7 14.0 2,144.0 1,756.9 1,143.6 613.2 387.1 303.3 83.8 3,347.2 3,101.9 2,499.2 2,232.0         June 6,472.9 13.3 2,139.0 1,748.0 1,137.1 610.9 390.9 305.4 85.5 3,330.2 3,089.9 2,502.9 2,239.7
         July 6,425.7 13.3 2,113.5 1,728.1 1,109.7 618.4 385.3 297.4 88.0 3,330.2 3,093.7 2,494.1 2,231.1
         Aug 6,395.1 13.5 2,105.5 1,720.3 1,104.5 615.8 385.2 296.8 88.3 3,318.3 3,084.7 2,495.6 2,231.4         Sep 6,403.1 13.3 2,099.4 1,712.2 1,095.3 616.9 387.2 297.5 89.7 3,332.6 3,089.6 2,504.9 2,245.2
         Oct 6,399.3 13.6 2,092.9 1,715.9 1,096.1 619.9 376.9 285.3 91.7 3,328.9 3,086.1 2,496.9 2,242.9
         Nov 6,456.1 13.1 2,126.2 1,742.4 1,117.5 624.9 383.7 292.5 91.3 3,350.9 3,103.5 2,505.0 2,246.9         Dec 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004          Jan 6,424.2 13.2 2,084.1 1,713.6 1,101.3 612.4 370.4 278.3 92.1 3,329.8 3,078.3 2,489.0 2,230.4
         Feb 6,448.7 13.2 2,100.2 1,722.7 1,101.9 620.8 377.5 282.5 94.9 3,341.8 3,081.9 2,483.5 2,230.2         Mar 6,506.7 12.7 2,106.5 1,725.6 1,098.7 626.9 380.9 282.2 98.7 3,370.4 3,102.9 2,491.9 2,228.9
         Apr 6,568.8 12.9 2,132.5 1,749.7 1,115.1 634.6 382.9 282.4 100.4 3,381.2 3,110.1 2,506.6 2,230.4
         May 6,583.5 13.8 2,163.3 1,771.6 1,127.6 644.0 391.7 289.0 102.7 3,369.7 3,101.0 2,497.0 2,229.7         June 6,551.3 13.1 2,150.2 1,746.3 1,112.7 633.6 404.0 299.5 104.4 3,360.1 3,090.4 2,483.2 2,229.4
         July 6,574.9 13.2 2,171.4 1,765.1 1,130.4 634.7 406.3 303.2 103.0 3,368.3 3,093.3 2,477.1 2,225.1
         Aug 6,567.5 13.2 2,167.2 1,759.6 1,126.4 633.2 407.6 301.7 105.9 3,357.7 3,086.1 2,470.3 2,221.8         Sep 6,597.6 13.2 2,165.1 1,759.6 1,123.8 635.8 405.6 295.9 109.6 3,361.1 3,091.0 2,478.1 2,229.6
         Oct 6,627.7 13.9 2,178.3 1,759.5 1,128.1 631.4 418.7 306.4 112.4 3,371.9 3,094.1 2,475.6 2,226.8
         Nov 6,683.4 13.3 2,197.3 1,771.7 1,137.6 634.1 425.6 310.6 115.1 3,376.5 3,098.8 2,482.9 2,233.7         Dec 6,617.7 15.1 2,174.4 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,359.1 3,083.8 2,479.7 2,223.8
 Changes 1
1997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 − 0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.21999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.12002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.42004 208.1 − 2.1 68.9 22.6 9.5 13.1 46.4 15.8 30.5 44.7 18.0 − 0.3 − 1.1
2003          Apr 4.5 1.0 − 13.7 − 17.2 − 16.5 − 0.8 3.5 2.7 0.8 4.9 4.2 3.2 − 1.2
         May 57.3 0.2 36.6 24.8 25.1 − 0.3 11.9 11.8 0.1 1.9 2.5 2.9 − 0.0         June − 5.9 − 0.7 − 5.2 − 8.9 − 6.5 − 2.4 3.8 2.0 1.7 − 18.0 − 12.5 3.2 7.2
         July − 49.6 − 0.1 − 25.7 − 20.1 − 27.4 7.3 − 5.6 − 8.0 2.4 0.6 4.5 − 8.1 − 8.1
         Aug − 43.7 0.3 − 8.1 − 7.9 − 5.2 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 − 13.6 − 10.0 0.5 − 0.6         Sep 26.2 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 8.1 − 9.2 1.2 2.1 0.7 1.4 17.7 7.4 11.8 16.2
         Oct − 5.0 0.3 − 6.5 4.1 0.8 3.3 − 10.6 − 12.6 2.0 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 1.7
         Nov 67.6 − 0.5 33.6 26.6 21.4 5.1 7.1 7.2 − 0.1 24.5 19.2 9.8 5.6         Dec − 8.6 4.2 − 14.4 − 10.3 − 0.7 − 9.6 − 4.1 − 4.7 0.7 − 10.1 − 13.7 − 1.4 0.3
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 4.1 − 26.5 − 18.1 − 15.5 − 2.6 − 8.5 − 9.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 4.6 − 6.6
         Feb 26.4 0.0 17.3 9.0 0.4 8.6 8.3 4.2 4.1 16.6 8.0 − 1.1 2.5         Mar 47.2 − 0.5 6.2 2.8 − 3.2 6.0 3.4 − 0.3 3.7 28.7 21.7 9.0 − 0.9
         Apr 57.9 0.1 26.1 24.1 16.4 7.7 1.9 0.2 1.7 10.8 7.1 14.6 1.4
         May 19.5 1.0 30.7 21.9 12.5 9.3 8.9 6.5 2.3 − 10.4 − 8.2 − 8.8 0.1         June − 33.2 − 0.7 − 13.0 − 25.2 − 14.9 − 10.4 12.2 10.6 1.7 − 9.2 − 10.1 − 13.2 0.2
         July 21.8 0.1 23.4 18.8 17.7 1.2 4.6 3.7 0.9 6.4 3.3 − 5.6 − 3.8
         Aug − 5.3 − 0.1 − 7.0 − 5.5 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 4.3 2.9 − 7.3 − 6.8 − 6.4 − 2.9         Sep 39.7 0.0 − 1.6 0.3 − 2.6 2.9 − 1.9 − 5.8 3.8 5.5 6.3 9.3 9.5
         Oct 36.3 0.7 13.2 0.0 4.3 − 4.3 13.2 10.4 2.7 11.7 3.9 − 1.8 − 2.0
         Nov 67.8 − 0.6 19.3 12.2 9.5 2.7 7.1 4.2 2.9 6.1 5.7 8.3 7.9         Dec − 54.6 1.9 − 19.2 − 17.8 − 11.2 − 6.6 − 1.4 − 4.2 2.9 − 13.6 − 11.9 0.2 − 6.6
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996
300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.7 645.6 166.4 2003255.9 604.2 423.0 181.2 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.3 2004
259.9 602.4 444.0 158.4 246.3 126.8 64.5 119.5 26.2 93.3 778.6 630.9 175.1 2003          Mar 
264.5 603.1 445.8 157.4 246.6 129.9 66.2 116.7 25.2 91.5 787.6 641.1 172.5          Apr 
267.2 602.7 439.8 162.9 245.3 130.7 66.7 114.6 26.5 88.2 792.4 644.3 170.2          May263.2 587.0 434.6 152.4 240.2 126.9 61.9 113.4 24.6 88.7 827.6 668.9 162.8          June
263.0 599.6 444.9 154.7 236.5 126.7 62.3 109.8 24.9 84.9 811.5 651.6 157.3          July
264.1 589.1 440.6 148.5 233.6 129.2 65.0 104.4 24.1 80.3 801.2 642.0 156.6          Aug 259.8 584.6 435.2 149.4 243.1 129.7 64.7 113.4 23.4 90.0 795.8 642.4 161.9          Sep 
254.0 589.2 436.6 152.6 242.8 127.6 60.6 115.2 25.1 90.1 800.6 643.9 163.3          Oct 
258.1 598.5 442.5 156.0 247.4 132.9 64.7 114.5 25.6 89.0 803.7 648.2 162.2          Nov 256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.7 645.6 166.4          Dec 
258.6 589.2 440.2 149.0 251.5 132.0 61.2 119.5 25.6 93.9 843.7 683.0 153.4 2004          Jan 
253.3 598.3 432.1 166.2 260.0 136.0 65.2 124.0 25.0 99.0 839.5 680.6 154.0          Feb 
263.0 611.0 444.9 166.2 267.4 137.6 67.0 129.8 24.9 104.9 859.1 697.2 158.0          Mar 
276.2 603.5 437.2 166.3 271.1 139.4 68.8 131.7 25.8 105.9 884.1 722.1 158.1          Apr 
267.2 604.1 431.4 172.7 268.7 137.6 66.3 131.1 25.8 105.3 875.0 707.5 161.6          May253.9 607.2 426.2 181.0 269.7 138.4 66.5 131.3 25.7 105.6 867.0 695.6 160.8          June
252.0 616.2 434.4 181.8 275.0 142.3 67.7 132.8 26.4 106.4 860.7 687.7 161.3          July
248.4 615.8 429.9 186.0 271.6 137.7 65.0 133.9 26.2 107.6 871.6 696.5 157.9          Aug 248.5 612.9 425.8 187.1 270.1 138.8 65.3 131.3 25.7 105.6 898.6 725.5 159.6          Sep 
248.7 618.5 430.9 187.7 277.8 139.9 65.1 137.9 25.5 112.4 901.8 727.5 161.9          Oct 
249.1 615.9 426.6 189.3 277.7 143.1 67.5 134.6 25.7 108.9 931.8 756.6 164.6          Nov 255.9 604.2 423.0 181.2 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.3          Dec 
Changes 1
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 − 2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 199830.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 113.4 98.5 − 38.7 2003
0.9 18.3 − 17.0 35.3 26.7 8.2 3.2 18.5 0.0 18.4 114.3 100.6 − 17.6 2004
4.4 1.0 1.8 − 0.9 0.7 3.4 1.9 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.7 16.1 16.3 − 3.8 2003          Apr 
2.9 − 0.4 − 5.9 5.5 − 0.6 1.1 1.0 − 1.7 1.5 − 3.1 21.8 18.8 − 3.2          May
− 4.0 − 15.7 − 5.2 − 10.5 − 5.6 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.9 0.5 25.4 16.1 − 7.5          June
0.0 12.6 10.3 2.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 0.3 − 3.6 0.3 − 3.9 − 18.6 − 19.0 − 5.9          July
1.1 − 10.5 − 4.3 − 6.2 − 3.6 2.2 2.4 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 4.8 − 21.0 − 19.0 − 1.2          Aug 
− 4.3 − 4.4 − 5.4 0.9 10.3 1.0 0.3 9.3 − 0.5 9.9 10.2 14.5 4.4          Sep 
− 5.6 5.3 1.4 3.9 0.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 2.2 1.6 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 3.5          Oct 
4.1 9.4 6.0 3.4 5.3 5.7 4.3 − 0.4 0.6 − 1.0 13.0 12.4 − 3.0          Nov 
− 1.7 − 12.4 − 2.9 − 9.5 3.6 1.4 − 1.4 2.2 0.5 1.7 13.4 9.4 − 1.7          Dec 
2.1 3.6 0.6 3.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 2.7 − 0.4 3.1 34.7 32.1 − 18.8 2004          Jan 
− 3.7 9.1 − 8.0 17.2 8.6 4.0 4.0 4.6 − 0.6 5.2 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 4.8          Feb 
9.8 12.7 12.7 − 0.0 7.0 1.4 1.6 5.6 − 0.1 5.8 10.7 8.6 2.1          Mar 
13.2 − 7.5 − 7.6 0.1 3.6 1.8 1.7 1.9 0.9 1.0 21.3 21.2 − 0.4          Apr 
− 8.9 0.6 − 5.9 6.5 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 2.4 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.4 − 10.4 2.6          May
− 13.4 3.1 − 5.2 8.3 0.9 0.8 0.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.2 − 8.9 − 14.1 − 1.5          June
− 1.8 9.0 8.2 0.8 3.1 1.5 1.2 1.5 0.8 0.8 − 8.2 − 9.8 0.1          July
− 3.6 − 0.3 − 4.5 4.2 − 0.6 − 1.7 0.2 1.1 − 0.1 1.2 12.6 10.6 − 3.6          Aug − 0.2 − 2.9 − 4.1 1.1 − 0.9 1.5 0.7 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 34.9 36.0 0.9          Sep 
0.2 5.7 5.1 0.6 7.9 1.3 − 0.0 6.6 − 0.1 6.7 9.0 7.5 1.7          Oct 0.4 − 2.6 − 4.2 1.6 0.4 3.5 2.7 − 3.1 0.3 − 3.4 41.1 38.9 1.9          Nov 6.8 − 12.1 − 4.1 − 8.0 − 1.7 − 2.0 − 5.1 0.3 0.0 0.3 − 26.0 − 19.0 2.3          Dec 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 End of year or month
 
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.5
1997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.32004 6,617.7 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2003          Mar 6,434.8 1,471.5 1,218.2 253.2 2,175.3 2,040.7 578.3 883.1 266.2 579.3 481.6 88.0 7.7
         Apr 6,430.3 1,455.5 1,200.9 254.6 2,176.2 2,044.3 585.8 880.6 264.8 577.9 482.7 86.5 8.2
         May 6,467.7 1,508.5 1,253.9 254.6 2,188.9 2,053.8 591.4 885.3 270.9 577.1 483.4 87.4 8.8         June 6,472.9 1,509.2 1,252.8 256.4 2,194.2 2,059.3 608.2 874.5 260.2 576.7 484.4 86.7 9.0
         July 6,425.7 1,457.9 1,207.6 250.3 2,182.5 2,051.4 595.2 879.5 259.0 576.8 486.5 85.7 9.3
         Aug 6,395.1 1,450.5 1,198.0 252.5 2,193.0 2,061.5 597.8 885.7 261.3 578.0 489.3 85.5 8.9         Sep 6,403.1 1,451.2 1,188.3 262.9 2,187.8 2,057.4 607.3 871.8 248.1 578.3 490.2 84.2 9.6
         Oct 6,399.3 1,439.5 1,179.5 260.0 2,188.2 2,057.3 609.5 868.5 243.9 579.4 491.2 85.4 10.7
         Nov 6,456.1 1,463.6 1,214.6 249.0 2,211.2 2,082.4 632.7 869.4 244.7 580.3 491.9 83.1 9.9         Dec 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004          Jan 6,424.2 1,461.1 1,212.6 248.5 2,209.5 2,082.6 630.5 861.5 233.5 590.6 502.1 80.9 9.5
         Feb 6,448.7 1,454.4 1,215.7 238.7 2,212.3 2,085.6 633.8 860.3 230.1 591.5 503.3 79.5 10.8         Mar 6,506.7 1,459.9 1,203.6 256.3 2,214.3 2,088.7 632.9 864.4 230.9 591.4 503.5 77.8 13.1
         Apr 6,568.8 1,482.1 1,227.2 254.9 2,219.0 2,097.2 641.7 864.4 225.6 591.2 504.3 74.5 10.6
         May 6,583.5 1,496.5 1,251.2 245.4 2,229.4 2,105.3 640.0 874.8 232.1 590.6 504.6 75.8 9.4         June 6,551.3 1,501.5 1,256.7 244.8 2,228.7 2,101.4 640.7 870.7 224.0 590.0 504.3 76.7 12.4
         July 6,574.9 1,524.1 1,274.6 249.6 2,225.5 2,103.0 634.7 877.7 228.7 590.6 504.9 72.9 9.7
         Aug 6,567.5 1,510.2 1,259.4 250.8 2,231.7 2,105.7 636.2 878.2 228.9 591.3 505.6 74.0 9.8         Sep 6,597.6 1,495.3 1,242.0 253.3 2,237.6 2,113.6 645.8 876.6 225.6 591.2 505.7 76.0 14.4
         Oct 6,627.7 1,534.8 1,277.0 257.7 2,237.1 2,118.1 646.8 879.0 225.7 592.3 506.3 73.5 9.6
         Nov 6,683.4 1,536.2 1,285.2 250.9 2,257.3 2,140.2 672.5 874.6 218.3 593.0 506.2 73.4 11.9         Dec 6,617.7 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
 Changes 1
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 − 3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 − 0.31998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.42004 208.1 62.3 43.0 19.3 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2003          Apr 4.5 − 14.0 − 16.5 2.5 1.6 3.9 7.7 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 1.4 1.1 − 1.2 0.5
         May 57.3 54.5 52.0 2.5 13.9 10.2 6.1 4.9 6.3 − 0.8 0.7 1.5 0.7         June − 5.9 − 1.2 − 1.7 0.6 4.6 5.1 16.4 − 10.9 − 10.8 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.0
         July − 49.6 − 52.1 − 45.6 − 6.4 − 11.8 − 7.9 − 13.0 5.1 − 1.1 0.1 2.1 − 1.1 0.5
         Aug − 43.7 − 10.0 − 10.5 0.5 9.7 9.6 2.3 6.1 2.3 1.3 2.8 − 0.5 − 0.5         Sep 26.2 4.5 − 8.4 12.9 − 4.0 − 3.5 10.0 − 13.7 − 13.1 0.2 0.9 − 0.8 0.8
         Oct − 5.0 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 0.3 − 0.1 2.2 − 3.4 − 4.2 1.1 1.0 1.1 1.1
         Nov 67.6 26.1 35.8 − 9.7 23.6 25.4 23.5 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7         Dec − 8.6 10.4 15.9 − 5.5 4.4 5.1 − 10.2 5.3 3.4 10.0 8.9 − 1.0 − 0.5
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 11.1 − 17.2 6.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 8.2 − 13.1 − 14.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 0.2
         Feb 26.4 − 6.3 3.3 − 9.6 3.0 3.1 4.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 0.9 1.2 − 1.4 1.3         Mar 47.2 4.0 − 12.6 16.6 1.6 2.8 − 1.1 4.0 0.7 − 0.1 0.1 − 1.8 2.3
         Apr 57.9 21.3 23.2 − 1.9 4.7 8.7 8.6 0.3 − 5.1 − 0.2 0.9 − 3.5 − 2.6
         May 19.5 15.3 24.2 − 8.9 10.7 8.3 − 1.5 10.4 6.6 − 0.6 0.3 1.4 − 1.2         June − 33.2 4.7 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 4.0 0.3 − 3.7 − 7.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.8 3.0
         July 21.8 22.3 17.8 4.6 − 3.3 1.5 − 5.8 6.6 4.3 0.7 0.5 − 3.9 − 2.8
         Aug − 5.3 − 13.5 − 14.9 1.5 7.3 3.7 1.6 1.5 0.2 0.7 0.7 1.2 0.1         Sep 39.7 − 12.9 − 16.7 3.8 6.5 8.3 9.9 − 1.5 − 3.2 − 0.1 0.1 2.2 4.7
         Oct 36.3 41.0 35.4 5.6 − 0.1 4.8 1.3 2.4 0.1 1.1 0.5 − 2.3 − 4.8
         Nov 67.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.4 20.9 22.6 26.6 − 4.8 − 7.2 0.8 − 0.1 0.2 2.4         Dec − 54.6 − 6.0 − 13.7 7.7 8.5 9.6 − 26.1 25.3 21.7 10.4 9.3 − 1.3 − 3.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  
7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 200359.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.8 577.1 329.1 317.8 2004
75.7 13.0 4.6 3.6 46.6 45.2 11.2 40.2 1,467.9 143.5 612.1 353.1 303.6 2003          Mar 
73.8 12.3 4.5 3.5 45.5 44.9 11.3 39.6 1,468.6 142.6 620.2 351.6 307.2          Apr 
74.1 13.3 4.4 3.5 47.7 44.4 12.3 39.4 1,463.3 133.3 599.0 351.0 305.4          May73.4 12.2 4.4 3.5 48.1 44.6 10.8 38.7 1,470.0 128.7 594.8 348.2 307.0          June
72.1 12.1 4.3 3.4 45.3 43.8 10.9 38.4 1,482.8 133.0 603.6 348.1 301.6          July
72.4 12.8 4.2 3.4 45.9 43.8 12.4 38.1 1,480.0 122.1 579.2 344.0 298.0          Aug 70.5 12.0 4.1 3.3 46.2 43.4 15.6 38.0 1,485.5 124.4 579.7 341.0 304.3          Sep 
70.6 12.7 4.0 3.3 45.5 43.0 21.1 37.6 1,494.1 126.2 574.2 344.6 299.9          Oct 
69.3 11.4 4.0 3.2 45.7 43.6 20.0 37.1 1,502.7 131.5 574.6 343.0 304.0          Nov 68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8          Dec 
67.5 11.9 3.8 3.1 45.9 45.2 16.6 36.4 1,493.9 128.6 585.4 336.8 284.5 2004          Jan 
64.9 10.9 3.8 3.1 47.3 45.8 17.5 36.2 1,503.7 127.3 604.4 332.2 288.0          Feb 
60.9 10.1 3.7 3.1 47.8 46.2 18.2 35.8 1,532.3 134.7 623.1 330.1 292.8          Mar 
60.2 10.2 3.7 3.1 47.2 46.2 17.3 35.7 1,549.0 135.3 632.3 333.7 299.7          Apr 
62.7 12.3 3.7 3.0 48.3 45.8 17.0 36.1 1,559.8 132.3 612.5 336.4 295.8          May60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 50.7 47.1 16.1 36.0 1,554.2 123.6 582.1 337.5 295.2          June
59.6 9.7 3.6 3.0 49.7 47.2 16.8 39.9 1,558.7 120.0 576.6 339.4 293.9          July
60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 52.1 47.6 14.2 41.1 1,562.9 120.7 577.2 336.9 293.3          Aug 58.0 8.2 3.5 2.9 48.1 46.0 18.1 38.7 1,575.0 119.7 595.6 335.1 302.2          Sep 
60.4 10.3 3.5 2.9 45.6 42.6 21.2 37.4 1,569.6 118.0 582.7 335.5 309.3          Oct 
58.1 8.0 3.4 2.8 43.7 41.3 22.0 35.6 1,569.6 116.1 616.1 332.3 314.4          Nov 59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.8 577.1 329.1 317.8          Dec 
Changes 1
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 − 6.2 − 6.2 − − 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 199724.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.0 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 74.1 − 14.5 21.8 − 10.9 11.8 2004
− 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.5 3.5 − 0.8 13.7 − 0.9 1.2 2003          Apr 
0.9 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.5 1.0 − 0.2 3.4 − 6.9 − 8.2 0.7 − 7.8          May
− 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.4 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 3.1 − 4.5 − 11.4 − 3.6 4.7          June
− 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.8 0.2 − 0.4 12.1 4.3 7.0 − 0.2 − 4.6          July
0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.0 1.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 − 10.9 − 32.4 − 4.9 − 0.2          Aug 
− 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.4 3.2 − 0.1 11.6 2.4 12.3 − 1.9 0.7          Sep 
0.1 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 5.6 − 0.5 7.8 1.8 − 10.3 3.4 − 1.1          Oct 
− 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 12.3 5.3 6.8 − 1.0 1.3          Nov 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 0.6 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 10.6 − 0.1 3.2 − 1.8 − 7.9          Dec 
− 1.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.9 2.5 − 0.3 4.2 − 2.7 12.7 − 3.9 − 13.9 2004          Jan 
− 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.6 0.9 − 0.2 10.0 − 1.3 19.6 − 4.6 4.1          Feb 
− 4.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.8 − 0.5 23.2 7.5 14.0 − 2.5 6.7          Mar 
− 0.8 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 15.5 0.3 6.4 3.4 7.7          Apr 
2.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.3 12.2 − 2.8 − 16.7 2.6 − 4.6          May
− 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.9 − 8.6 − 31.0 1.1 − 0.5          June
− 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 0.0 0.6 3.9 3.6 − 3.6 − 7.0 1.8 − 0.1          July
1.1 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 0.4 − 2.5 1.2 5.4 0.7 2.1 − 3.3 − 2.0          Aug 
− 2.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.6 3.9 − 2.4 16.5 − 0.9 23.8 − 1.2 5.4          Sep 
2.5 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 3.4 3.1 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 9.2 0.8 5.3          Oct 
− 2.1 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.3 0.8 − 1.8 3.8 − 1.9 40.6 − 2.6 2.6          Nov 
1.9 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 7.2 − 4.1 − 11.2 0.8 − 33.3 − 2.6 1.3          Dec 
footnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than four with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data collected the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published together with money
separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the deposits market fund shares. 
with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt securities
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2004          July 2,184 6,608.2 53.1 2,516.2 1,799.5 708.0 3,633.5 453.0 2,568.9 3.6 590.5 142.7 262.7
         Aug 2,178 6,599.5 54.8 2,507.3 1,790.0 708.0 3,636.8 450.0 2,570.3 3.5 593.9 141.4 259.2         Sep 2,166 6,633.1 54.6 2,534.8 1,808.9 715.8 3,640.5 459.6 2,567.7 3.5 594.2 141.4 261.8
         Oct 2,150 6,667.4 50.8 2,560.2 1,835.1 716.4 3,648.9 461.4 2,563.7 3.4 603.8 140.6 266.9
         Nov 2,148 6,725.3 60.9 2,587.5 1,855.9 722.7 3,667.3 485.7 2,557.4 3.4 604.6 139.9 269.7         Dec 2,147 6,663.8 56.4 2,565.7 1,836.0 719.3 3,630.8 451.5 2,554.4 3.3 607.1 138.9 272.0
Commercial banks 5
2004          Nov 253 1,915.8 25.8 710.9 573.7 134.0 1,008.4 274.3 543.6 1.8 176.7 74.2 96.5         Dec 252 1,878.8 16.8 720.3 583.6 134.0 973.6 250.1 541.0 1.8 170.2 73.9 94.1
   Big banks 6
2004          Nov 4 1,122.2 15.2 416.4 356.8 58.3 561.4 184.0 261.5 1.2 104.3 64.7 64.7         Dec 5 1,217.5 8.0 464.1 388.0 74.9 611.1 169.0 309.6 1.3 121.9 65.2 69.0
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2004          Nov 164 702.6 9.5 245.3 170.9 73.2 409.6 72.6 264.8 0.6 70.3 9.5 28.7         Dec 163 568.0 8.1 202.1 145.4 55.7 327.1 65.0 214.4 0.4 46.3 8.7 22.0
   Branches of foreign banks
2004          Nov 85 91.0 1.1 49.2 46.0 2.5 37.4 17.7 17.3 0.0 2.2 0.1 3.1         Dec 84 93.3 0.7 54.1 50.2 3.3 35.4 16.0 17.0 0.0 2.0 0.0 3.1
Landesbanken
2004          Nov 13 1,397.4 2.6 734.3 575.6 155.6 578.1 70.4 391.4 0.3 113.2 29.3 53.1         Dec 12 1,282.2 5.1 692.7 537.5 150.0 513.1 61.1 360.6 0.3 88.1 25.9 45.3
Savings banks
2004          Nov 477 997.3 18.4 240.0 84.6 155.0 701.8 67.6 541.1 0.8 92.1 15.4 21.7         Dec 477 1,002.0 19.3 241.1 86.7 154.1 702.8 68.4 540.6 0.8 92.7 15.4 23.4
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2004          Nov 2 204.9 1.3 141.3 96.9 43.7 43.7 11.8 19.6 0.1 12.2 11.4 7.2         Dec 2 200.5 1.1 138.1 92.7 44.6 42.7 9.6 19.3 0.0 13.7 11.4 7.2
Credit cooperatives
2004          Nov 1,336 575.8 11.5 154.3 69.1 84.1 386.9 41.0 304.2 0.5 41.0 6.0 17.1         Dec 1,336 576.4 12.2 151.3 67.8 82.3 389.3 40.8 306.7 0.4 41.2 6.1 17.4
Mortgage banks
2004          Nov 25 866.8 0.9 229.3 138.3 90.8 616.1 12.1 480.6 − 122.8 0.8 19.6         Dec 25 865.8 1.1 226.1 137.7 88.2 615.4 11.6 479.4 − 124.4 0.8 22.4
Building and loan associations
2004          Nov 27 183.0 0.1 45.1 33.1 11.9 120.7 1.5 106.1 . 13.1 0.4 16.7         Dec 27 183.9 0.1 44.5 32.9 11.6 121.8 1.5 106.1 . 14.2 0.4 17.1
Special purpose banks
2004          Nov 15 584.4 0.3 332.3 284.6 47.5 211.7 7.0 170.9 − 33.5 2.2 37.9         Dec 16 674.2 0.6 351.5 297.0 54.4 272.1 8.5 200.7 − 62.6 4.9 45.2
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2004          Nov 127 415.6 4.8 183.1 131.8 50.6 213.4 38.1 127.8 0.2 46.9 0.8 13.5         Dec 126 414.3 3.6 182.6 131.3 50.6 213.2 35.3 128.8 0.2 48.6 0.7 14.1
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2004          Nov 42 324.6 3.7 134.0 85.7 48.1 176.0 20.4 110.6 0.2 44.8 0.7 10.4         Dec 42 320.9 2.9 128.5 81.2 47.3 177.8 19.2 111.8 0.2 46.7 0.7 11.0
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,873.9 249.5 1,624.2 2,470.3 691.7 314.6 758.3 72.1 600.3 512.6 105.3 1,607.5 287.9 368.7 2004          July
1,854.6 229.2 1,625.3 2,480.0 696.3 319.3 758.0 76.3 601.0 513.4 105.5 1,610.2 286.7 368.0          Aug 
1,853.0 253.1 1,599.8 2,495.0 714.3 312.8 761.7 81.6 600.8 513.5 105.3 1,621.8 285.4 377.9          Sep 
1,880.9 248.4 1,632.3 2,496.2 702.3 324.6 761.7 85.7 601.9 514.0 105.7 1,615.1 287.1 388.1          Oct 
1,904.1 289.3 1,614.6 2,528.9 735.3 323.9 761.1 99.3 602.6 513.9 106.0 1,611.8 287.0 393.5          Nov 1,874.5 206.7 1,667.7 2,511.2 683.5 350.6 758.3 87.6 613.0 523.1 105.8 1,593.3 288.1 396.6          Dec 
Commercial banks 5
742.3 155.6 586.5 746.7 340.0 164.4 128.9 87.4 104.0 94.6 9.4 209.9 89.5 127.4 2004          Nov 
726.8 114.5 612.1 727.0 306.1 178.3 126.8 74.8 106.3 96.8 9.4 209.8 91.0 124.3          Dec 
Big banks 6
463.4 111.6 351.8 387.6 158.3 121.6 74.7 86.2 32.5 30.7 0.5 146.9 49.9 74.5 2004          Nov 
473.1 77.9 395.1 449.6 153.0 135.2 88.3 72.3 71.4 69.2 1.7 158.9 53.7 82.3          Dec 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
211.4 30.2 181.1 342.5 170.1 39.7 52.4 1.2 71.5 63.9 8.9 63.1 37.2 48.4 2004          Nov 
184.1 26.0 158.0 260.9 144.5 36.9 36.9 2.5 34.9 27.6 7.6 50.9 34.7 37.4          Dec 
Branches of foreign banks
67.5 13.8 53.7 16.6 11.6 3.1 1.8 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 4.5 2004          Nov 
69.6 10.6 59.0 16.5 8.6 6.3 1.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 2.6 4.6          Dec 
Landesbanken
468.2 73.9 394.3 318.2 50.2 36.4 215.8 8.1 15.0 14.2 0.8 490.8 60.2 59.9 2004          Nov 
430.2 46.3 383.9 301.9 42.1 45.2 198.9 7.7 15.2 14.3 0.6 433.8 55.1 61.1          Dec 
Savings banks
216.1 5.3 210.8 639.0 204.3 50.8 11.4 − 302.2 249.7 70.3 44.4 47.6 50.2 2004          Nov 
223.5 8.0 215.5 642.1 200.6 52.3 11.5 − 307.3 254.1 70.3 43.9 47.6 45.0          Dec 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
123.9 40.5 83.4 30.4 6.6 7.5 15.6 3.6 − − 0.7 30.6 10.1 10.0 2004          Nov 
121.4 30.4 90.9 30.5 4.0 10.1 15.7 5.0 − − 0.7 28.9 10.0 9.8          Dec 
Credit cooperatives
74.3 1.2 73.0 412.4 130.9 51.2 24.8 − 181.0 155.0 24.4 32.7 31.3 25.1 2004          Nov 
74.9 1.8 73.1 413.4 127.1 53.2 25.2 − 183.8 157.6 24.2 32.0 31.5 24.5          Dec 
Mortgage banks
138.9 5.3 133.6 150.5 1.2 4.1 145.1 0.1 − − 0.2 530.4 21.8 25.2 2004          Nov 
138.1 2.9 135.2 150.9 1.2 3.7 145.8 0.1 − − 0.2 525.6 22.0 29.2          Dec 
Building and loan associations
28.9 1.5 27.4 114.2 0.3 0.9 112.4 − 0.4 0.4 0.2 6.8 7.4 25.7 2004          Nov 
27.9 0.8 27.1 117.8 0.4 0.9 115.9 − 0.4 0.4 0.3 6.8 7.4 24.1          Dec 
Special purpose banks
111.5 5.9 105.6 117.5 1.8 8.6 107.1 − − − − 266.2 19.2 70.0 2004          Nov 
131.6 1.9 129.8 127.7 2.0 7.0 118.5 − − − 0.2 312.6 23.6 78.8          Dec 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
146.9 25.7 121.1 134.9 85.1 13.1 27.0 0.3 6.7 6.6 3.1 98.2 13.1 22.5 2004          Nov 
147.6 22.3 125.3 134.7 82.6 14.8 27.5 0.1 6.8 6.6 3.0 96.1 13.4 22.4          Dec 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
79.4 11.9 67.5 118.4 73.4 9.9 25.2 0.3 6.7 6.6 3.1 98.2 10.6 18.0 2004          Nov 
78.0 11.7 66.3 118.2 74.1 8.5 25.9 0.1 6.8 6.6 2.9 96.1 10.9 17.8          Dec 
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Commercial included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Mortgage banks”. 
bank AG. — 7Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2003          July 12.9 40.5 1,645.6 1,063.8 0.0 10.9 571.0 2.4 2,996.0 2,671.8 4.0 3.4 314.7
         Aug 13.2 42.5 1,636.2 1,056.4 0.0 9.3 570.5 2.4 2,986.9 2,667.9 4.0 3.4 309.6         Sep 12.9 42.1 1,627.9 1,047.0 0.0 9.7 571.2 2.4 2,995.7 2,676.3 3.9 2.1 311.4
         Oct 13.3 44.3 1,630.0 1,046.2 0.0 9.7 574.1 2.4 2,992.9 2,675.4 3.9 3.1 308.4
         Nov 12.8 38.2 1,663.1 1,073.8 0.0 10.5 578.8 2.3 3,012.2 2,685.5 3.7 3.4 317.5         Dec 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004          Jan 12.9 39.5 1,632.9 1,055.9 0.0 8.4 568.5 2.3 2,992.0 2,667.0 3.5 2.6 316.8
         Feb 12.9 37.6 1,645.1 1,058.5 0.0 8.5 578.0 2.3 2,994.8 2,658.8 3.4 2.5 328.1         Mar 12.4 31.1 1,656.6 1,062.0 0.0 8.1 586.4 2.4 3,015.7 2,670.4 3.2 2.1 338.0
         Apr 12.6 39.4 1,673.5 1,070.7 0.0 8.6 594.1 2.4 3,022.9 2,664.3 3.2 3.0 350.5
         May 13.5 41.4 1,693.0 1,081.2 0.0 7.7 604.1 2.4 3,013.6 2,657.8 3.2 2.9 347.8         June 12.8 37.3 1,671.7 1,070.0 0.0 7.7 594.0 2.3 3,003.5 2,652.5 3.0 3.6 342.6
         July 12.8 39.9 1,687.1 1,082.3 0.0 6.9 597.9 2.3 3,007.5 2,656.4 3.0 6.8 340.2
         Aug 12.8 41.6 1,679.0 1,075.6 0.0 7.4 596.0 2.3 3,001.8 2,648.6 3.0 5.9 343.3         Sep 12.9 41.4 1,680.5 1,073.4 0.0 7.9 599.2 2.1 3,006.1 2,652.3 2.9 3.9 345.9
         Oct 13.5 37.0 1,686.4 1,083.4 0.0 6.5 596.4 2.2 3,009.8 2,654.8 2.8 4.5 346.7
         Nov 12.8 47.5 1,688.7 1,083.2 0.0 6.7 598.8 2.2 3,014.6 2,657.4 2.8 3.9 349.4         Dec 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
Changes *
1996 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 − 2.0 + 4.7 + 10.61997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 − 1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 36.51998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.11999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2003          July − 0.0 − 0.4 − 20.1 − 27.2 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.4
         Aug + 0.2 + 2.0 − 9.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.1         Sep − 0.2 − 0.3 − 7.8 − 9.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 8.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 2.6
         Oct + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.5 − 6.1 + 33.1 + 27.6 − + 1.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 + 19.3 + 10.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 9.1         Dec + 4.2 + 8.5 − 19.3 − 9.8 − − 1.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 16.1 − 8.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 7.4
2004          Jan − 4.1 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 8.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 7.2
         Feb + 0.1 − 1.9 + 12.0 + 2.4 − + 0.1 + 9.5 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 8.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 11.3         Mar − 0.5 − 6.5 + 11.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.4 + 0.1 + 20.9 + 11.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 9.9
         Apr + 0.1 + 8.3 + 16.9 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 7.7 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.6
         May + 0.9 + 2.0 + 19.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7         June − 0.7 − 4.1 − 21.3 − 11.2 − − 0.1 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 10.1 − 5.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 5.2
         July + 0.1 + 2.5 + 15.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 3.9 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 2.3
         Aug − 0.0 + 1.7 − 8.1 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 3.1         Sep + 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 2.2 − + 0.6 + 3.4 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Oct + 0.7 − 4.5 + 5.9 + 10.0 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.8
         Nov − 0.7 + 10.5 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.7         Dec + 2.1 − 6.3 − 9.0 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 15.4 − 15.5 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). — 5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). — 6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. — 7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). — 8Up to December
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). — 4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. — 11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month *
 
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
2.0 54.2 119.1 1,207.7 123.6 1,084.0 0.1 25.3 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 576.8 100.9 41.7 2003          July
2.0 54.6 118.8 1,198.2 120.9 1,077.2 0.1 25.7 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 578.0 100.4 41.7          Aug 
2.0 54.4 115.1 1,188.2 116.0 1,072.0 0.1 25.5 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 578.3 99.9 41.5          Sep 
2.0 53.9 115.0 1,179.6 122.1 1,057.4 0.1 25.3 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 579.4 100.0 40.7          Oct 
2.0 54.1 113.3 1,214.5 135.3 1,079.1 0.1 25.5 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 580.3 100.1 40.7          Nov 2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5          Dec 
2.0 57.2 108.9 1,213.2 142.0 1,071.1 0.1 28.3 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 590.6 100.3 40.3 2004          Jan 
2.0 56.6 108.8 1,215.7 134.0 1,081.6 0.1 28.2 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 591.5 100.1 40.5          Feb 
2.0 54.9 107.2 1,204.3 140.0 1,064.2 0.1 27.8 2,145.8 635.3 819.2 591.4 99.8 39.3          Mar 
2.0 54.4 106.6 1,227.8 143.2 1,084.5 0.1 27.7 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 591.2 99.2 39.0          Apr 
2.0 54.3 107.1 1,252.0 134.2 1,117.7 0.1 27.6 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 590.6 98.9 39.0          May2.0 54.9 106.7 1,257.3 129.2 1,128.0 0.1 28.4 2,158.3 643.5 826.2 590.0 98.7 38.8          June
1.0 55.9 103.5 1,275.2 125.7 1,149.4 0.1 29.5 2,160.4 637.6 833.6 590.6 98.6 38.7          July
1.0 55.8 102.2 1,260.2 122.4 1,137.7 0.1 29.4 2,161.3 639.1 832.2 591.3 98.7 38.6          Aug 1.0 57.0 102.6 1,243.1 124.4 1,118.6 0.1 30.7 2,169.7 649.5 830.4 591.2 98.6 38.5          Sep 
1.0 59.9 101.8 1,278.0 129.8 1,148.1 0.1 30.5 2,172.9 647.2 834.6 592.3 98.8 41.8          Oct 
1.0 60.2 101.8 1,286.4 148.4 1,137.9 0.1 30.4 2,195.4 673.0 830.7 593.1 98.7 42.1          Nov 1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7          Dec 
Changes *
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996− 5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 44.9 − 27.0 − 18.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 2003          July
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.5 − 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.1          Aug 
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 8.7 − 3.5 − 5.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 8.6 + 6.1 − 14.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3          Oct 
− + 0.2 − 1.7 + 34.9 + 13.2 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 2.7 − 4.1 + 15.1 − 18.6 + 33.6 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 10.0 + 0.1 − 0.2          Dec − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 16.3 + 25.3 − 41.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Jan 
− − 0.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 − 8.0 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.4 + 6.0 − 17.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2          Mar − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 23.2 + 3.2 + 20.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 24.2 − 9.0 + 33.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          May
− + 0.6 − 0.4 + 5.3 − 5.0 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2          June
− 0.9 + 1.1 − 3.1 + 17.9 − 3.4 + 21.4 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 5.5 + 7.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1          July+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 3.4 − 11.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1          Aug 
− + 1.2 + 0.4 − 17.1 + 2.0 − 19.1 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 8.3 + 10.4 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− + 3.0 − 0.8 + 34.9 + 5.4 + 29.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 4.2 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 3.3          Oct 
− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 8.4 + 18.6 − 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 22.5 + 26.4 − 4.5 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.3          Nov 
− 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 15.2 − 28.8 + 13.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 26.1 + 21.5 + 10.4 − 0.3 − 0.4          Dec 
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. — 17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. — 13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). — 20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer
one month. — 16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.4 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2003          July 0.3 779.1 689.4 533.9 155.5 1.4 88.3 2.6 567.4 345.3 106.5 238.8 6.8 215.3
         Aug 0.3 771.9 682.3 522.9 159.4 1.3 88.3 2.6 561.3 344.3 101.3 243.0 7.4 209.5         Sep 0.4 769.8 680.3 520.2 160.1 1.3 88.2 2.3 569.4 346.6 110.3 236.3 7.2 215.6
         Oct 0.4 757.0 664.9 502.0 162.9 0.9 91.2 1.6 576.6 348.6 106.0 242.6 8.0 219.9
         Nov 0.3 764.6 672.3 512.8 159.5 1.3 91.1 1.6 583.8 357.5 118.0 239.6 6.4 219.8         Dec 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004          Jan 0.3 788.7 693.8 531.9 161.9 1.2 93.6 1.6 588.4 353.0 118.0 235.0 5.5 229.8
         Feb 0.3 790.5 691.5 530.7 160.8 1.3 97.7 1.6 598.7 360.7 126.1 234.6 6.0 232.0         Mar 0.3 803.2 700.1 538.5 161.6 1.7 101.4 1.7 617.6 370.2 133.9 236.4 4.8 242.5
         Apr 0.3 825.5 720.4 557.5 162.9 2.2 102.8 1.7 625.8 376.7 137.2 239.5 5.0 244.0
         May 0.3 836.2 725.7 570.5 155.2 1.9 108.7 1.7 613.1 361.8 123.6 238.2 5.0 246.3         June 0.4 835.5 722.1 566.9 155.2 2.1 111.3 1.7 618.9 363.8 124.6 239.1 7.3 247.8
         July 0.4 829.1 717.3 557.4 159.9 1.7 110.1 1.6 626.0 366.1 127.6 238.5 9.7 250.2
         Aug 0.4 828.3 714.6 557.9 156.7 1.8 112.0 1.6 635.0 372.4 134.6 237.7 12.1 250.5         Sep 0.3 854.3 735.7 578.0 157.7 2.0 116.6 1.7 634.5 375.5 141.8 233.6 10.6 248.4
         Oct 0.3 873.8 751.8 595.5 156.3 2.0 120.0 1.7 639.0 370.9 139.0 231.8 11.1 257.1
         Nov 0.4 898.7 772.7 619.1 153.7 2.0 124.0 1.6 652.7 386.3 158.1 228.2 11.3 255.2         Dec 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.4 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
Changes *
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.41997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 − 0.1 + 10.4 − 1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.91998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.01999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2003          July − 0.1 − 16.5 − 19.1 − 20.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 12.3 − 7.5 − 9.0 + 1.5 − 0.3 − 4.6
         Aug + 0.0 − 13.2 − 12.8 − 15.3 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 13.0 − 6.1 − 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 7.3         Sep + 0.0 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 19.1 + 10.6 + 10.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 8.5
         Oct − 0.0 − 14.4 − 17.0 − 18.8 + 1.8 − 0.4 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 4.2
         Nov − 0.0 + 12.5 + 12.1 + 14.3 − 2.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 13.3 + 12.9 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.0         Dec − 0.0 + 11.7 + 9.9 + 7.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 6.0 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.8
2004          Jan + 0.0 + 16.3 + 14.8 + 14.0 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 5.3 + 6.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 2.9
         Feb − 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 11.1 + 8.0 + 8.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.5         Mar + 0.0 + 6.1 + 2.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 15.6 + 7.4 + 7.0 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 9.4
         Apr − + 20.3 + 18.4 + 17.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 5.6 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.3
         May + 0.0 + 13.0 + 7.5 + 14.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 + 5.8 − 0.0 − 9.7 − 12.7 − 13.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.0         June + 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.7
         July + 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.9 − 10.2 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.8 − 1.6 + 2.4 + 0.1
         Aug − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.5 − 1.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.5         Sep − 0.0 + 30.2 + 25.1 + 23.0 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 4.2 + 6.6 + 8.2 − 1.6 − 1.3 − 1.2
         Oct − 0.0 + 22.7 + 19.3 + 19.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 8.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 9.2
         Nov + 0.1 + 30.6 + 26.3 + 26.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 0.0 + 20.0 + 20.6 + 20.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.0         Dec − 0.2 − 4.9 − 8.3 − 9.4 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 18.6 − 20.1 − 20.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
15.2 43.1 617.2 123.6 493.7 384.1 109.6 0.9 328.0 40.3 287.7 108.5 179.2 3.9 2003          July
15.3 43.1 601.1 108.0 493.1 386.3 106.8 0.3 324.7 39.5 285.2 103.5 181.7 4.7          Aug 15.0 43.7 607.5 144.2 463.3 361.2 102.1 0.3 326.6 40.0 286.6 109.5 177.1 6.8          Sep 
11.7 43.0 597.1 129.1 468.0 360.1 107.9 0.3 332.0 38.2 293.8 116.4 177.5 3.4          Oct 
11.7 41.3 583.1 113.9 469.2 361.3 107.9 0.3 333.5 38.8 294.7 121.6 173.1 3.3          Nov 11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6          Dec 
11.7 40.9 606.8 138.7 468.2 359.1 109.0 0.5 315.6 44.8 270.8 99.6 171.2 3.7 2004          Jan 
12.0 39.7 602.9 122.7 480.2 368.1 112.1 0.5 328.7 55.9 272.8 104.6 168.2 3.4          Feb 
9.5 39.8 640.2 136.3 503.8 389.4 114.4 0.5 326.2 61.8 264.4 103.0 161.4 0.9          Mar 9.6 39.3 646.0 127.7 518.3 403.7 114.6 0.5 323.8 56.9 266.8 106.6 160.2 0.9          Apr 
9.6 39.4 616.9 114.2 502.7 389.0 113.8 0.5 325.2 62.9 262.4 102.3 160.0 0.9          May9.6 38.9 603.8 129.4 474.4 360.2 114.2 0.5 310.2 60.6 249.6 90.0 159.7 0.9          June
9.7 39.2 598.6 123.8 474.8 359.8 115.1 0.5 309.9 54.1 255.8 96.6 159.1 0.9          July
9.7 39.3 594.3 106.8 487.5 371.5 116.0 0.5 318.7 57.2 261.5 102.7 158.8 0.9          Aug 9.7 38.8 609.9 128.7 481.2 366.3 115.0 0.5 325.3 64.8 260.5 98.6 161.9 0.8          Sep 
9.6 38.8 602.8 118.6 484.2 368.7 115.5 0.5 323.3 55.1 268.2 108.7 159.5 0.8          Oct 
9.7 38.1 617.6 140.9 476.7 363.1 113.6 0.5 333.5 62.3 271.2 114.8 156.4 0.8          Nov 9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8          Dec 
Changes *
− 2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 − 1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 − 2.0 1996+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 6.9 − 19.8 + 12.8 + 10.4 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 3.6 + 6.4 + 8.5 − 2.1 − 0.0 2003          July
+ 0.2 − 0.5 − 22.3 − 16.7 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 1.1 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.2 + 0.1          Aug 
− 0.3 + 1.2 + 16.1 + 37.6 − 21.5 − 18.4 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 7.8 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 7.5 − 0.8 + 2.1          Sep 
+ 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.8 − 15.4 + 3.6 − 1.5 + 5.1 − + 1.4 − 1.8 + 3.2 + 6.7 − 3.6 + 0.0          Oct 
− 0.0 − 1.3 − 9.2 − 14.2 + 5.1 + 4.0 + 1.0 − + 4.9 + 0.9 + 4.0 + 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.1          Nov − 0.1 + 0.6 + 14.9 − 17.7 + 32.6 + 31.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 − 21.2 − 6.2 − 15.0 − 17.7 + 2.7 + 0.3          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 12.9 + 43.2 − 30.2 − 30.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 5.8 + 12.5 − 6.7 − 3.5 − 3.2 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 15.9 + 12.7 + 9.4 + 3.2 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 11.1 + 2.2 + 5.1 − 2.9 − 0.3          Feb 
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.7 + 13.1 + 17.6 + 19.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 5.8 − 7.3 − 2.2 − 5.1 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 − 0.6 + 3.8 − 9.1 + 12.8 + 13.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 5.1 + 1.3 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 26.7 − 13.1 − 13.6 − 13.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 − 3.3 − 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0          May+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 13.5 + 15.2 − 28.7 − 29.1 + 0.3 − − 15.1 − 2.3 − 12.8 − 12.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          June
+ 0.1 + 0.1 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 6.6 + 5.4 + 6.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 16.9 + 13.5 + 12.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 3.1 + 6.4 + 6.2 + 0.2 − 0.0          Aug + 0.0 − 0.2 + 19.5 + 22.5 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 7.9 + 1.4 − 3.3 + 4.7 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 3.8 − 9.5 + 5.6 + 4.0 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 9.4 + 9.0 + 10.5 − 1.4 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 19.8 + 23.2 − 3.4 − 2.6 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 13.6 + 7.6 + 6.0 + 7.2 − 1.2 + 0.0          Nov + 0.2 + 1.5 − 10.2 − 53.1 + 42.8 + 42.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 19.3 − 25.4 + 6.1 + 9.5 − 3.4 + 0.0          Dec 
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). — 5Up capital supplied to branches abroad. — 8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 9Up to December 1998,
registered debt securities. — 6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). — 7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2003          July 2,996.0 2,675.8 357.5 315.5 314.2 1.3 42.0 39.8 2.2 2,638.6 2,081.8
         Aug 2,986.9 2,671.9 346.7 308.2 306.8 1.4 38.5 36.5 2.0 2,640.2 2,090.5         Sep 2,995.7 2,680.2 356.7 323.8 322.9 0.9 32.9 31.7 1.2 2,639.0 2,088.3
         Oct 2,992.9 2,679.3 353.7 317.2 316.1 1.0 36.6 34.5 2.1 2,639.1 2,087.7
         Nov 3,012.2 2,689.2 360.7 317.5 316.6 0.9 43.2 40.6 2.6 2,651.5 2,097.0         Dec 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004          Jan 2,992.0 2,670.5 346.6 305.7 304.4 1.3 41.0 39.6 1.4 2,645.3 2,097.7
         Feb 2,994.8 2,662.2 339.5 306.0 304.8 1.1 33.6 32.2 1.3 2,655.2 2,091.2         Mar 3,015.7 2,673.6 353.0 306.8 305.9 0.8 46.3 45.0 1.3 2,662.7 2,098.5
         Apr 3,022.9 2,667.5 346.1 304.0 303.3 0.7 42.2 39.9 2.3 2,676.8 2,116.1
         May 3,013.6 2,661.0 335.4 297.1 296.2 0.9 38.3 36.3 2.0 2,678.2 2,113.0         June 3,003.5 2,655.4 331.5 294.9 294.2 0.7 36.7 33.8 2.9 2,672.0 2,102.1
         July 3,007.5 2,659.4 335.7 287.6 287.0 0.6 48.2 42.0 6.2 2,671.7 2,104.4
         Aug 3,001.8 2,651.6 324.8 281.2 280.5 0.6 43.6 38.4 5.2 2,677.0 2,105.5         Sep 3,006.1 2,655.2 325.1 287.2 286.7 0.5 37.9 34.5 3.4 2,681.0 2,106.8
         Oct 3,009.8 2,657.6 330.2 283.5 282.9 0.6 46.8 42.8 3.9 2,679.6 2,108.6
         Nov 3,014.6 2,660.3 335.0 293.1 292.0 1.1 41.9 39.0 2.8 2,679.6 2,106.4         Dec 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
Changes *
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 282.5 + 219.91998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.31999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.02004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2003          July + 3.8 + 1.7 − 1.9 − 13.2 − 12.7 − 0.5 + 11.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 5.7 + 4.3
         Aug − 9.1 − 4.0 − 10.7 − 7.3 − 7.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 8.7         Sep + 9.6 + 8.3 + 10.0 + 15.6 + 16.1 − 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 2.2
         Oct − 2.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.6
         Nov + 19.3 + 9.9 + 6.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 12.4 + 9.3         Dec − 16.1 − 8.6 − 5.4 − 2.4 − 3.2 + 0.8 − 3.0 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 10.7 − 0.9
2004          Jan − 3.7 − 10.1 − 8.6 − 9.4 − 9.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.0 + 1.7
         Feb + 2.8 − 8.3 − 7.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 − 6.5         Mar + 20.9 + 11.4 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 12.7 + 12.8 − 0.1 + 7.1 + 7.1
         Apr + 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.0 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 + 0.9 + 14.3 + 17.6
         May − 9.4 − 6.5 − 10.4 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 3.4         June − 10.1 − 5.6 − 3.7 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 + 0.9 − 6.4 − 11.2
         July + 4.0 + 4.0 + 4.2 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 11.5 + 8.2 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 2.3
         Aug − 5.7 − 7.9 − 10.9 − 6.4 − 6.5 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 3.6 − 0.9 + 5.3 + 1.1         Sep + 4.1 + 3.7 + 2.2 + 6.0 + 6.2 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.1
         Oct + 3.8 + 2.3 + 5.2 − 3.7 − 3.8 + 0.1 + 8.9 + 8.3 + 0.6 − 1.4 + 1.9
         Nov + 4.8 + 2.7 + 4.7 + 9.6 + 9.2 + 0.5 − 4.9 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 2.2         Dec − 15.4 − 15.6 − 14.1 − 9.3 − 9.0 − 0.2 − 4.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 1.4 + 6.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,6 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,916.9 193.9 1,723.0 164.9 46.9 556.8 404.9 31.3 373.6 149.8 2.0 7.3 2003          July
1,924.6 195.5 1,729.1 165.9 47.3 549.7 403.9 32.9 371.1 143.7 2.0 7.2          Aug 
1,922.2 195.0 1,727.2 166.1 47.2 550.6 403.3 33.7 369.6 145.3 2.0 7.2          Sep 
1,926.8 195.7 1,731.1 160.9 46.8 551.4 402.0 32.5 369.4 147.5 2.0 7.2          Oct 
1,930.3 195.9 1,734.3 166.7 47.0 554.5 401.7 33.1 368.6 150.8 2.0 7.1          Nov 1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0          Dec 
1,926.0 195.0 1,731.0 171.7 50.1 547.6 400.5 33.9 366.5 145.1 2.0 7.1 2004          Jan 
1,925.4 194.3 1,731.1 165.8 49.6 564.1 399.8 34.8 365.0 162.3 2.0 7.0          Feb 
1,922.9 193.9 1,729.1 175.6 47.9 564.1 399.7 35.4 364.4 162.4 2.0 7.0          Mar 
1,927.1 194.7 1,732.5 189.0 47.4 560.7 397.2 34.9 362.3 161.5 2.0 7.0          Apr 
1,933.6 197.1 1,736.4 179.5 47.4 565.1 394.9 34.6 360.3 168.3 2.0 6.9          May1,935.2 198.2 1,737.0 166.9 48.1 569.9 392.3 34.4 357.9 175.7 2.0 6.8          June
1,938.2 199.0 1,739.2 166.2 49.2 567.3 392.3 34.1 358.2 174.0 1.0 6.7          July
1,941.3 200.2 1,741.1 164.2 49.1 571.5 391.3 33.9 357.4 179.1 1.0 6.7          Aug 1,942.9 199.2 1,743.7 163.9 50.3 574.2 391.2 34.5 356.7 182.0 1.0 6.7          Sep 
1,944.0 198.0 1,746.0 164.7 53.3 571.0 387.9 32.9 354.9 182.0 1.0 6.7          Oct 
1,941.7 195.6 1,746.1 164.7 53.5 573.2 387.5 32.9 354.6 184.7 1.0 6.7          Nov 1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5          Dec 
Changes *
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 − 18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 4.1 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 2003          July
+ 7.8 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 1.5 − 2.5 − 6.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          Aug 
− 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.5 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 4.5 + 0.7 + 3.8 − 5.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 3.3 − − 0.0          Nov − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 9.7 − 0.7 + 1.5 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.1          Dec 
− 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
− 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 0.5 + 16.4 − 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 17.1 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.7 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 9.8 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 13.4 − 0.5 − 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.1 + 2.5 + 3.7 − 9.5 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 6.8 − − 0.0          May+ 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 12.6 + 0.8 + 4.8 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 7.4 − − 0.2          June
+ 3.0 + 0.8 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.0          July
+ 3.1 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 5.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Aug + 1.6 − 0.9 + 2.6 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 3.0 − 3.2 − 3.3 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Oct 
− 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.7 − + 0.0          Nov − 2.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 8.8 − 0.1 − 7.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 − 0.2          Dec 
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. — 6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. — 9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). — 10Excluding
possible. — 7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). — 11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. — 8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2001 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2003          Dec 2,241.6 1,124.5 1,083.3 867.1 216.2 1,252.2 335.1 151.0 37.2 59.0 152.3 32.1 54.4 54.4
2004          Mar 2,229.2 1,124.8 1,075.2 861.7 213.5 1,242.1 329.3 149.3 37.7 58.4 148.6 31.9 56.3 57.5
         June 2,229.7 1,125.6 1,081.5 865.7 215.9 1,235.2 329.0 145.9 37.8 57.5 147.0 32.3 57.6 53.8         Sep 2,229.9 1,129.0 1,087.8 869.9 217.9 1,226.6 326.8 142.3 37.7 56.2 144.6 32.7 56.6 56.1         Dec 2,224.2 1,127.7 1,086.0 869.7 216.3 1,211.6 320.4 136.7 37.1 53.0 141.4 31.9 56.1 60.0
 Short-term lending
2001 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.22002 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2003          Dec 313.9 − 14.1 − 14.1 266.7 8.9 46.6 4.2 13.2 55.9 3.9 8.0 25.8
2004          Mar 306.3 − 13.2 − 13.2 261.4 8.0 47.0 4.0 13.5 53.8 4.1 8.6 27.6
         June 294.6 − 12.4 − 12.4 250.0 7.4 44.8 4.1 13.1 52.8 4.4 6.9 24.0         Sep 287.0 − 12.0 − 12.0 241.9 7.0 43.0 3.8 12.6 52.1 4.4 6.5 23.3         Dec 283.4 − 12.5 − 12.5 239.3 7.6 40.9 3.5 11.1 52.9 3.6 5.9 26.4
 Medium-term lending
2001 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.72002 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2003          Dec 195.0 − 38.2 − 38.2 121.2 12.0 17.5 2.3 6.0 11.9 3.4 10.9 6.5
2004          Mar 193.9 − 37.2 − 37.2 121.0 11.5 17.2 3.0 5.8 11.6 3.3 11.3 6.9
         June 198.2 − 38.7 − 38.7 124.0 12.2 17.4 3.0 5.9 11.8 3.3 11.6 7.2         Sep 199.2 − 39.2 − 39.2 124.2 12.2 17.6 2.7 5.8 11.7 3.3 11.8 7.2         Dec 194.3 − 38.8 − 38.8 119.9 11.8 16.4 2.5 5.6 11.1 3.2 11.3 7.6
 Long-term lending
2001 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.12002 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2003          Dec 1,732.8 1,124.5 1,031.0 867.1 164.0 864.3 314.2 86.9 30.6 39.9 84.5 24.7 35.5 22.1
2004          Mar 1,729.0 1,124.8 1,024.8 861.7 163.0 859.7 309.8 85.0 30.6 39.1 83.3 24.5 36.4 23.0
         June 1,737.0 1,125.6 1,030.4 865.7 164.8 861.2 309.4 83.6 30.8 38.5 82.4 24.6 39.1 22.6         Sep 1,743.7 1,129.0 1,036.5 869.9 166.7 860.5 307.6 81.6 31.2 37.8 80.8 24.9 38.3 25.7         Dec 1,746.5 1,127.7 1,034.7 869.7 165.0 852.4 301.0 79.4 31.2 36.2 77.3 25.0 38.9 26.0
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2003          Q4 − 4.0 + 1.7 + 5.0 + 4.5 + 0.5 − 9.9 − 2.6 − 3.4 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.5
2004          Q1 − 12.4 − 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.9
         Q2 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 5.2 + 2.0 + 3.2 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 3.6         Q3 + 0.2 + 4.5 + 6.1 + 5.2 + 1.0 − 8.6 − 2.3 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.9         Q4 − 7.4 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 1.7 − 1.2 − 10.2 − 4.3 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 2.7 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 3.6
 Short-term lending
2003          Q4 − 9.5 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.9 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6
2004          Q1 − 7.3 − − 0.9 − − 0.9 − 5.1 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.0
         Q2 − 11.3 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 − 10.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.5         Q3 − 7.5 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 8.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.8         Q4 − 3.6 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.6 + 3.1
 Medium-term lending
2003          Q4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
2004          Q1 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0
         Q2 + 4.2 − + 1.5 − + 1.5 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0         Q3 + 0.7 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1         Q4 − 4.3 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 3.5 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.5
 Long-term lending
2003          Q4 + 5.5 + 1.7 + 4.7 + 4.5 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 2.7 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0
2004          Q1 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 4.1 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
         Q2 + 7.6 + 1.8 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 2.6 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1         Q3 + 7.1 + 4.5 + 6.0 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 2.8         Q4 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 4.1 − 3.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001
729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5 2002
711.9 160.7 44.0 207.2 437.0 67.7 975.6 744.7 230.9 118.6 21.6 13.7 3.5 2003          Dec 
702.5 158.7 43.6 206.2 429.5 66.5 973.4 742.6 230.9 119.1 20.1 13.7 3.3 2004          Mar 
703.2 165.6 45.3 200.7 428.4 66.2 981.2 749.2 232.0 120.9 20.1 13.3 3.3          June
700.4 166.5 43.9 203.0 426.8 64.6 989.9 757.8 232.1 122.5 20.4 13.4 3.2          Sep 695.5 163.7 42.5 204.2 419.0 61.7 999.4 762.4 237.0 129.2 19.9 13.2 3.2          Dec 
Short-term lending
130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0 2002
109.1 17.9 14.6 31.2 49.4 12.9 45.9 5.1 40.8 2.4 21.6 1.2 0.0 2003          Dec 
102.7 17.2 14.2 29.4 47.2 13.0 43.5 5.2 38.4 2.2 20.1 1.4 0.0 2004          Mar 
99.9 17.2 14.9 27.4 46.5 12.7 43.5 5.0 38.5 2.3 20.1 1.1 0.0          June
96.2 16.8 12.3 27.5 45.8 12.4 43.7 5.0 38.7 2.3 20.4 1.4 0.0          Sep 95.0 15.8 11.5 27.6 44.4 11.4 43.0 4.9 38.0 2.3 19.9 1.1 0.0          Dec 
Medium-term lending
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 200163.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1 2002
62.7 5.7 5.6 18.0 30.4 4.5 73.2 26.2 47.0 37.1 − 0.6 0.1 2003          Dec 
61.9 5.5 5.8 18.1 29.6 4.2 72.3 25.6 46.7 37.3 − 0.6 0.1 2004          Mar 
63.7 6.8 6.4 17.5 30.0 4.1 73.7 26.5 47.2 38.1 − 0.5 0.1          June
63.9 6.7 6.7 17.7 30.0 4.0 74.5 26.9 47.6 38.3 − 0.5 0.1          Sep 62.3 6.5 6.5 17.2 29.6 3.9 73.8 26.9 46.9 37.7 − 0.5 0.1          Dec 
Long-term lending
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4 2002
540.0 137.1 23.8 158.0 357.2 50.4 856.5 713.4 143.1 79.1 − 11.9 3.4 2003          Dec 
537.9 136.0 23.6 158.6 352.7 49.3 857.6 711.8 145.8 79.6 − 11.7 3.2 2004          Mar 
539.6 141.5 24.0 155.8 352.0 49.3 864.1 717.8 146.3 80.6 − 11.7 3.2          June
540.3 143.0 24.9 157.8 351.1 48.2 871.7 725.8 145.8 82.0 − 11.5 3.1          Sep 538.2 141.5 24.5 159.5 345.0 46.4 882.6 730.6 152.0 89.2 − 11.5 3.1          Dec 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 4.2 − 0.5 − 4.6 + 0.4 − 4.8 − 1.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 2003          Q4
− 8.8 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 6.6 − 1.2 − 3.1 + 0.6 − 3.7 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Q1
+ 0.5 + 2.4 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 7.4 + 5.8 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          Q2− 2.8 + 1.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 − 1.8 − 1.6 + 8.7 + 8.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1          Q3− 2.4 − 2.2 − 1.3 + 1.8 − 4.8 − 1.6 + 3.1 + 4.9 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1          Q4
Short-term lending
− 4.4 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 2003          Q4
− 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 2004          Q1
− 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0          Q2− 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0          Q3− 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 −          Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q4
− 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2004          Q1
+ 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.8 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3− 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
− 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 7.3 + 7.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2003          Q4
− 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − 0.2 2004          Q1
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 0.7 + 2.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 7.8 + 8.1 − 0.3 + 1.5 − − 0.2 − 0.1          Q3− 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.8 − 0.5 + 4.6 + 5.1 − 0.5 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.1          Q4
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. — loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2003 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.32004 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.1
2004          Jan 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 225.0 589.3 8.3 581.0 590.6 100.3 40.3 30.7 9.8
         Feb 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 223.4 591.4 8.3 583.1 591.5 100.1 40.5 30.8 10.4         Mar 2,145.8 635.3 819.2 225.3 594.0 8.6 585.4 591.4 99.8 39.3 31.2 10.9
         Apr 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 220.8 598.8 8.5 590.3 591.2 99.2 39.0 31.3 10.6
         May 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 227.9 602.3 8.4 593.9 590.6 98.9 39.0 31.3 11.4         June 2,158.3 643.5 826.2 220.4 605.8 8.2 597.5 590.0 98.7 38.8 31.4 9.9
         July 2,160.4 637.6 833.6 225.8 607.7 8.2 599.5 590.6 98.6 38.7 31.5 10.3
         Aug 2,161.3 639.1 832.2 224.5 607.7 8.0 599.7 591.3 98.7 38.6 31.9 8.2         Sep 2,169.7 649.5 830.4 222.1 608.3 8.0 600.3 591.2 98.6 38.5 32.0 10.2
         Oct 2,172.9 647.2 834.6 223.8 610.8 8.1 602.6 592.3 98.8 41.8 32.1 12.3
         Nov 2,195.4 673.0 830.7 216.9 613.8 8.1 605.6 593.1 98.7 42.1 32.1 14.0         Dec 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.1
Changes *
2003 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 − 20.3 + 15.6 − 0.5 + 16.1 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 + 2.0 + 7.82004 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 − 3.7 + 29.7 − 0.3 + 29.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 0.9
2004          Jan − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 − 12.9 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7         Mar + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Apr + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 4.4 + 4.8 − 0.1 + 4.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 + 7.1 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 3.5 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 7.1 + 3.5 − 0.2 + 3.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.5
         July + 2.1 − 5.5 + 7.0 + 5.1 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Aug + 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.2         Sep + 8.3 + 10.4 − 1.8 − 2.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1
         Oct + 3.2 − 2.3 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 22.5 + 26.4 − 4.5 − 6.9 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec + 5.6 − 26.1 + 21.5 + 18.1 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 10.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 3.8
Domestic government End of year or month *
2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −2003 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −2004 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −
2004          Jan 106.3 16.1 86.6 29.8 56.8 0.5 56.3 2.0 1.7 34.8 1.2 −
         Feb 107.4 16.6 87.2 30.0 57.1 0.5 56.7 2.1 1.6 34.8 1.2 −         Mar 106.4 17.6 85.0 28.6 56.4 0.9 55.6 2.2 1.6 33.5 1.0 −
         Apr 105.8 17.3 84.7 28.6 56.2 0.9 55.3 2.2 1.6 33.3 1.1 −
         May 108.9 18.5 86.6 30.6 56.0 0.9 55.0 2.2 1.6 33.2 1.0 −         June 111.4 20.0 87.5 32.1 55.4 0.9 54.5 2.2 1.6 33.1 1.1 −
         July 109.5 18.5 87.0 31.5 55.5 0.9 54.6 2.4 1.6 33.0 1.0 −
         Aug 108.6 18.7 85.8 31.2 54.7 0.9 53.8 2.4 1.6 33.0 1.0 −         Sep 109.5 19.6 85.8 32.5 53.4 0.9 52.5 2.5 1.6 33.0 1.1 −
         Oct 101.9 15.4 82.4 28.7 53.7 1.0 52.7 2.6 1.5 32.9 1.0 −
         Nov 102.1 17.0 81.0 27.4 53.6 1.0 52.6 2.6 1.6 33.1 1.1 −         Dec 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −
Changes *
2003 − 4.8 + 1.2 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 −2004 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.4 − 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.1 −
2004          Jan − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −         Mar − 1.0 + 1.0 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.1 −
         Apr − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         May + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −         June + 2.6 + 1.6 + 1.0 + 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         July − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −         Sep + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Oct − 7.6 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Nov + 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −         Dec + 2.9 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2003 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.32004 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.1
2004          Jan 2,031.1 616.1 727.7 195.2 532.6 7.8 524.7 588.6 98.7 5.6 29.6 9.8
         Feb 2,034.3 618.8 727.6 193.4 534.3 7.8 526.4 589.4 98.5 5.7 29.6 10.4         Mar 2,039.3 617.7 734.2 196.7 537.6 7.7 529.8 589.2 98.2 5.8 30.1 10.9
         Apr 2,048.2 626.8 734.9 192.3 542.7 7.6 535.0 589.0 97.5 5.8 30.2 10.6
         May 2,053.5 624.2 743.6 197.3 546.3 7.5 538.8 588.3 97.3 5.8 30.2 11.4         June 2,046.8 623.4 738.7 188.3 550.4 7.4 543.0 587.7 97.1 5.7 30.4 9.9
         July 2,050.9 619.0 746.6 194.3 552.2 7.3 545.0 588.3 97.0 5.7 30.5 10.3
         Aug 2,052.8 620.4 746.4 193.4 553.0 7.1 545.9 588.9 97.2 5.6 30.9 8.2         Sep 2,060.2 629.9 744.6 189.6 555.0 7.1 547.9 588.7 97.0 5.5 30.9 10.2
         Oct 2,070.9 631.8 752.2 195.1 557.1 7.2 550.0 589.6 97.3 8.9 31.0 12.3
         Nov 2,093.4 656.0 749.7 189.5 560.2 7.1 553.1 590.5 97.1 9.0 31.1 14.0         Dec 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.1
Changes *
2003 + 58.7 + 47.2 + 1.0 − 18.7 + 19.7 − 0.1 + 19.8 + 15.1 − 4.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 7.82004 + 63.9 + 25.3 + 27.4 − 5.1 + 32.5 − 0.7 + 33.1 + 12.5 − 1.3 + 3.4 + 1.8 + 0.9
2004          Jan − 1.1 + 9.9 − 11.4 − 13.6 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 3.2 + 3.6 − 1.0 − 2.7 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7         Mar + 5.0 − 1.1 + 6.6 + 3.3 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5
         Apr + 9.1 + 9.0 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 5.0 − 0.1 + 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 5.3 − 2.6 + 8.7 + 5.0 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 6.7 − 1.2 − 4.6 − 8.6 + 4.1 − 0.1 + 4.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
         July + 4.1 − 4.0 + 7.5 + 5.7 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Aug + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.2         Sep + 7.1 + 9.6 − 2.1 − 3.7 + 1.6 − + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1
         Oct + 10.8 + 1.9 + 7.6 + 5.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 22.4 + 24.8 − 3.1 − 5.6 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec + 2.7 − 25.9 + 18.6 + 15.0 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 10.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.8
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.52003 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.32004 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.1
2004          Jan 726.6 211.6 488.2 90.4 397.9 1.8 396.1 4.9 21.9 5.3 17.4 9.8
         Feb 723.7 207.6 489.3 90.0 399.3 1.8 397.5 5.1 21.7 5.4 17.4 10.4         Mar 730.9 207.4 496.5 94.6 401.9 1.9 400.0 5.1 21.8 5.5 17.8 10.9
         Apr 740.0 213.5 499.5 92.7 406.8 2.0 404.9 5.2 21.8 5.5 17.8 10.6
         May 741.6 205.6 509.0 98.2 410.8 1.9 408.9 5.3 21.8 5.5 17.8 11.4         June 737.6 204.6 506.2 91.6 414.5 1.9 412.7 5.1 21.7 5.5 18.0 9.9
         July 742.9 200.6 515.4 99.0 416.4 1.9 414.5 5.2 21.8 5.4 18.0 10.3
         Aug 746.1 203.8 515.3 98.7 416.6 1.8 414.8 5.2 21.8 5.3 18.1 8.2         Sep 753.0 212.1 513.9 95.7 418.2 1.9 416.4 5.2 21.8 5.3 18.1 10.2
         Oct 759.4 210.3 522.0 101.9 420.1 1.8 418.3 5.2 21.9 8.6 18.2 12.3
         Nov 769.4 221.5 520.9 97.3 423.6 1.7 421.9 5.1 21.9 8.7 18.3 14.0         Dec 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.1
Changes *
2003 + 29.6 + 11.2 + 17.9 + 2.9 + 15.0 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 7.82004 + 31.1 − 2.3 + 33.0 + 7.3 + 25.7 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 1.0 + 0.9
2004          Jan − 4.2 + 5.8 − 9.9 − 11.7 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Feb − 2.9 − 3.1 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.7         Mar + 7.1 − 0.2 + 7.2 + 4.6 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Apr + 9.5 + 6.1 + 3.0 − 1.9 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 1.6 − 7.9 + 9.4 + 5.5 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 4.1 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 6.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
         July + 5.3 − 4.1 + 9.2 + 7.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5
         Aug + 3.4 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.2         Sep + 6.6 + 8.3 − 1.8 − 3.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1
         Oct + 6.2 − 1.8 + 7.9 + 6.2 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 10.0 + 11.7 − 1.7 − 4.6 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec − 7.4 − 19.4 + 12.1 + 12.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.8
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.6
2003 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.42004 1,334.2 428.1 414.8 71.7 283.5 59.6 13.2 235.3 216.9 25.7 175.1 16.2
2004          July 1,308.0 418.5 405.5 70.1 277.9 57.5 13.0 231.2 214.1 26.2 171.4 16.6
         Aug 1,306.7 416.6 403.5 70.6 275.5 57.4 13.1 231.0 214.1 26.3 171.3 16.5         Sep 1,307.2 417.9 404.3 69.3 277.5 57.5 13.5 230.7 213.9 26.4 171.1 16.4
         Oct 1,311.6 421.5 408.3 71.3 278.6 58.5 13.2 230.2 213.7 26.3 171.2 16.3
         Nov 1,324.0 434.6 420.9 73.8 286.9 60.3 13.6 228.8 212.2 25.4 170.9 15.9         Dec 1,334.2 428.1 414.8 71.7 283.5 59.6 13.2 235.3 216.9 25.7 175.1 16.2
Changes *
2003 + 29.2 + 36.0 + 35.3 + 5.6 + 23.7 + 6.0 + 0.6 − 16.9 − 16.2 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 4.22004 + 32.8 + 27.6 + 26.7 + 4.8 + 19.2 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 5.6 − 5.1 − 3.5 + 0.6 − 2.2
2004          July − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.4
         Aug − 1.5 − 1.9 − 2.0 + 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0         Sep + 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 2.0 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Oct + 4.6 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Nov + 12.4 + 13.0 + 12.6 + 2.5 + 8.7 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.4         Dec + 10.2 − 6.5 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 4.7 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.6
2003 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 21.92004 103.6 41.4 0.8 5.8 34.8 0.0 12.9 15.1 2.7 2.2 10.2 0.1 21.5
2004          July 109.5 47.2 3.0 8.1 36.0 0.0 12.5 19.4 3.2 3.4 12.7 0.1 20.2
         Aug 108.6 47.6 3.0 8.5 36.1 0.0 12.5 16.8 2.5 2.5 11.8 0.1 20.1         Sep 109.5 46.0 3.8 7.1 35.0 0.0 12.6 19.3 3.3 4.2 11.7 0.1 20.1
         Oct 101.9 42.6 0.5 6.9 35.2 0.0 12.7 16.8 2.5 2.6 11.7 0.1 20.0
         Nov 102.1 41.3 0.5 5.7 35.1 0.0 12.9 16.0 2.3 1.9 11.7 0.1 19.9         Dec 103.6 41.4 0.8 5.8 34.8 0.0 12.9 15.1 2.7 2.2 10.2 0.1 21.5
Changes *
2003 − 4.8 − 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.72004 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 2.4
2004          July − 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0         Sep + 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.1 − + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 1.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0
         Oct − 7.6 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Nov + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0         Dec + 2.9 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 − 2002
18.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 − 200318.4 94.3 141.0 5.5 135.6 595.7 586.3 9.5 75.1 0.3 12.8 − 2004
17.0 95.3 135.9 5.4 130.5 583.1 573.6 9.5 75.2 0.3 12.5 − 2004          July
16.9 94.6 136.4 5.3 131.1 583.7 574.1 9.6 75.4 0.3 12.8 −          Aug 
16.8 93.9 136.8 5.3 131.5 583.5 573.8 9.6 75.2 0.3 12.8 −          Sep 
16.5 93.2 137.1 5.4 131.7 584.4 574.9 9.5 75.4 0.3 12.8 −          Oct 
16.6 92.2 136.6 5.5 131.2 585.3 576.0 9.3 75.2 0.3 12.8 −          Nov 18.4 94.3 141.0 5.5 135.6 595.7 586.3 9.5 75.1 0.3 12.8 −          Dec 
Changes *
− 0.7 − 21.6 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 14.7 + 14.4 + 0.3 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2003− 0.5 − 12.3 + 6.7 − 0.7 + 7.4 + 12.2 + 12.0 + 0.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 2004
− 0.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2004          July
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 −          Aug 
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Sep 
− 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Nov + 1.8 + 2.1 + 4.4 − + 4.4 + 10.4 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Dec 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
 
   
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
27.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 2002
24.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0 200325.7 10.5 9.6 2.3 3.3 0.3 21.4 2.9 12.9 4.8 0.8 0.0 2004
23.9 9.6 9.3 2.0 3.0 0.2 19.1 2.8 10.6 4.8 0.9 0.0 2004          July
25.5 10.2 10.3 2.0 3.0 0.3 18.6 3.0 9.9 4.8 0.9 0.0          Aug 
24.5 9.4 10.0 2.1 3.0 0.3 19.7 3.0 11.2 4.6 1.0 0.0          Sep 
23.9 9.5 9.1 2.1 3.1 0.3 18.6 3.0 10.1 4.7 0.9 0.0          Oct 
25.7 10.6 9.7 2.2 3.2 0.3 19.2 3.4 10.2 4.7 0.9 0.0          Nov 25.7 10.5 9.6 2.3 3.3 0.3 21.4 2.9 12.9 4.8 0.8 0.0          Dec 
Changes *
− 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 2003+ 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 2004
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 2004          July
+ 1.6 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Aug 
− 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          Sep 
− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          Oct 
+ 1.8 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Nov − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Dec 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.9
2003 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 16.0 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.02004 613.0 603.5 515.5 397.9 88.0 76.7 9.6 7.7 14.2 105.8 98.4 85.2 7.4
2004          Aug 601.0 591.3 505.6 388.1 85.7 74.0 9.7 7.8 0.3 105.5 98.7 85.4 6.7
         Sep 600.8 591.2 505.7 389.0 85.4 73.9 9.7 7.8 0.3 105.3 98.6 85.3 6.7
         Oct 601.9 592.3 506.3 389.7 86.0 74.5 9.6 7.7 0.4 105.7 98.8 85.5 6.9
         Nov 602.6 593.1 506.2 390.1 86.9 75.2 9.6 7.7 0.5 106.0 98.7 85.3 7.3         Dec 613.0 603.5 515.5 397.9 88.0 76.7 9.6 7.7 10.1 105.8 98.4 85.2 7.4
Changes *
2003 + 14.2 + 15.1 + 28.0 + 23.8 − 12.9 − 12.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 . − 4.6 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.12004 + 12.6 + 13.1 + 14.7 + 20.1 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.4
2004          Aug + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0
         Sep − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Oct + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2
         Nov + 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5         Dec + 10.4 + 10.4 + 9.3 + 7.8 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.3
2003 1,490.1 353.4 20.8 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.22004 1,550.0 382.6 22.9 214.6 36.5 62.1 94.2 1,393.7 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.7
2004          Aug 1,568.8 382.2 21.3 218.5 42.4 69.9 99.0 1,400.0 2.5 0.6 0.4 1.5 41.4 3.5
         Sep 1,580.1 384.9 21.1 219.3 41.3 68.8 98.6 1,412.7 2.5 0.6 0.4 1.5 41.8 3.6
         Oct 1,573.6 385.1 22.2 223.3 39.6 66.3 98.0 1,409.3 2.5 0.5 0.4 1.5 41.5 3.6
         Nov 1,569.8 387.7 23.6 219.6 37.4 65.6 93.6 1,410.6 2.7 0.7 0.4 1.5 42.1 3.6         Dec 1,550.0 382.6 22.9 214.6 36.5 62.1 94.2 1,393.7 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.7
Changes *
2003 + 19.6 + 7.0 + 4.7 + 13.2 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 14.9 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.32004 + 57.4 + 27.9 + 1.8 + 34.7 − 7.9 − 8.0 − 11.0 + 76.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.5
2004          Aug + 2.2 + 4.4 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 1.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.2
         Sep + 11.3 + 2.7 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 12.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
         Oct − 6.4 + 0.2 + 1.1 + 4.0 − 1.7 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Nov − 3.9 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 3.7 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 4.4 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.0         Dec − 19.8 − 5.1 − 0.7 − 5.0 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 0.5 − 16.8 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. — 3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. — 4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. — 5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. — 6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2003 27 172.9 30.1 0.1 10.6 37.3 63.6 8.6 11.3 0.4 29.3 106.8 4.0 7.1 7.2 105.5
2004          Sep 27 180.0 32.5 0.1 12.0 35.4 62.9 9.2 13.8 0.4 29.5 109.2 4.3 6.9 7.4 7.2
         Oct 27 182.0 31.6 0.1 11.8 35.3 63.0 9.3 13.8 0.4 28.5 109.3 4.3 6.5 7.4 6.8         Nov 27 183.0 33.1 0.1 12.0 34.9 63.4 9.3 13.1 0.4 28.5 109.8 4.4 6.8 7.4 7.4
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Sep 16 131.5 26.1 0.0 6.2 22.6 45.1 8.5 9.8 0.3 22.1 74.3 4.1 6.9 4.8 4.6         Oct 16 133.5 25.0 0.0 6.1 22.5 45.1 8.5 9.8 0.3 21.4 74.3 4.1 6.5 4.8 4.2         Nov 16 133.9 26.3 0.0 5.8 22.2 45.5 8.5 9.1 0.3 20.9 74.7 4.2 6.8 4.8 4.6
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Sep 11 48.5 6.4 0.0 5.8 12.9 17.9 0.8 4.0 0.1 7.3 34.9 0.2 − 2.6 2.6         Oct 11 48.5 6.6 0.0 5.7 12.8 17.8 0.8 4.0 0.1 7.2 35.0 0.2 − 2.6 2.6         Nov 11 49.1 6.8 0.0 6.2 12.7 17.9 0.8 4.0 0.1 7.5 35.1 0.2 − 2.6 2.8
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2003 27.0 2.9 5.7 48.2 29.7 43.7 17.9 4.0 8.2 3.2 17.5 12.2 8.0 14.8 11.9 0.6
2004          Sep 2.0 0.1 0.4 3.1 2.1 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.3 10.9 7.8 1.1 2.6 0.0
         Oct 1.9 0.1 0.4 3.4 2.5 3.3 1.4 0.4 0.7 0.4 1.1 10.8 7.9 1.0 0.0         Nov 2.0 0.1 0.4 2.8 1.8 2.8 1.2 0.2 0.5 0.2 1.1 10.5 7.8 1.1 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Sep 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.1 1.3 2.3 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.0 6.5 3.8 0.7 1.7 0.0         Oct 1.3 0.1 0.3 2.4 1.7 2.4 1.0 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 6.4 3.9 0.7 0.0         Nov 1.3 0.1 0.3 1.9 1.1 2.0 0.8 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.9 6.2 3.8 0.7 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Sep 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.0 0.3 0.9 0.0         Oct 0.6 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.0 0.3 0.0         Nov 0.7 0.0 0.2 0.9 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.0 0.3 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.9
2002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.02003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2004          Feb 55 203 1,413.6 666.3 587.2 190.0 397.2 79.1 679.6 482.5 19.3 17.1 463.1 197.1 67.8
         Mar 55 203 1,466.2 689.6 607.6 198.5 409.1 82.0 708.6 506.9 19.0 16.9 487.9 201.7 67.9
         Apr 55 205 1,493.1 713.2 631.2 207.6 423.6 82.0 711.1 509.6 18.8 16.6 490.8 201.5 68.8
         May 55 206 1,435.9 672.9 591.4 199.1 392.3 81.5 691.9 506.0 18.1 16.0 487.9 185.9 71.2         June 55 205 1,435.5 670.2 588.8 190.3 398.5 81.5 681.9 486.5 18.3 16.7 468.1 195.4 83.3
         July 54 204 1,447.9 675.6 589.2 177.6 411.6 86.4 686.8 500.5 17.1 15.7 483.4 186.3 85.6
         Aug 54 206 1,451.9 676.3 588.8 174.4 414.3 87.6 686.5 492.2 17.6 16.3 474.7 194.3 89.1         Sep 53 205 1,452.0 684.1 597.8 179.7 418.0 86.3 680.6 484.4 17.7 16.3 466.8 196.2 87.3
         Oct 53 206 1,454.2 667.4 577.6 171.6 405.9 89.9 693.2 492.1 16.5 15.1 475.6 201.1 93.6
         Nov 53 205 1,483.9 691.7 602.1 176.7 425.4 89.6 692.1 492.1 16.9 15.6 475.1 200.1 100.1
Changes *
2002 − 8 − 11 −139.1 −133.4 −139.9 − 15.4 −124.5 + 6.5 − 3.6 − 9.2 − 1.9 − 2.2 − 7.3 + 5.7 − 2.22003 − 5 − 3 − 6.8 − 45.3 − 17.4 − 12.7 − 4.7 − 27.9 + 22.5 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.7 + 24.9 + 15.9
2004          Feb − + 1 + 24.8 + 19.5 + 21.7 − 1.6 + 23.2 − 2.2 + 6.7 + 9.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 9.5 − 3.0 − 1.3
         Mar − − + 36.7 + 16.7 + 14.4 + 8.5 + 5.9 + 2.4 + 20.1 + 18.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 18.6 + 1.8 − 0.2
         Apr − + 2 + 19.9 + 21.1 + 21.4 + 9.1 + 12.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.7
         May − + 1 − 44.9 − 36.0 − 35.8 − 8.5 − 27.4 − 0.1 − 13.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 13.7 + 4.0         June − − 1 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 3.2 − 8.8 + 5.6 − 0.1 − 10.7 − 19.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 20.1 + 9.2 + 12.0
         July − 1 − 1 + 5.9 + 3.3 − 1.4 − 12.7 + 11.2 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 11.2 − 1.3 − 1.0 + 12.4 − 9.8 + 1.3
         Aug − + 2 + 9.3 + 2.8 + 1.4 − 3.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 5.7 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 6.2 + 8.4 + 3.8         Sep − 1 − 1 + 20.3 + 15.0 + 15.7 + 5.3 + 10.4 − 0.6 + 4.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 4.8 + 0.8
         Oct − + 1 + 16.5 − 11.0 − 15.0 − 8.1 − 6.9 + 4.0 + 20.7 + 14.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 15.2 + 6.7 + 6.8
         Nov − − 1 + 53.8 + 33.4 + 32.9 + 5.1 + 27.8 + 0.5 + 13.1 + 10.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 9.6 + 3.0 + 7.3
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.0
2002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.42003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2004          Feb 46 179 621.3 297.2 235.7 114.8 120.9 61.5 260.4 196.5 38.8 37.1 157.7 63.9 63.7
         Mar 46 176 650.7 300.5 238.8 111.7 127.1 61.7 270.0 204.6 41.6 38.0 163.0 65.4 80.3
         Apr 46 176 663.2 298.4 236.6 111.1 125.5 61.8 274.8 207.7 40.9 37.8 166.8 67.1 90.1
         May 46 175 629.3 280.2 218.7 106.5 112.1 61.5 275.1 206.6 39.5 37.9 167.1 68.5 74.0         June 45 173 628.6 283.0 220.9 110.7 110.2 62.1 278.9 210.0 40.3 37.3 169.7 68.9 66.7
         July 45 173 636.3 292.3 229.6 116.4 113.2 62.7 279.0 209.7 39.6 36.7 170.1 69.2 65.0
         Aug 45 173 627.9 289.0 224.3 115.2 109.1 64.7 278.1 208.5 38.1 36.2 170.3 69.6 60.8         Sep 45 171 634.1 292.8 226.3 114.0 112.4 66.5 279.9 210.6 37.9 35.5 172.8 69.2 61.4
         Oct 45 170 636.6 294.8 228.1 116.1 112.0 66.7 280.4 210.4 36.5 34.9 173.9 70.0 61.4
         Nov 45 170 644.4 297.7 230.2 114.9 115.3 67.5 284.4 212.6 37.8 35.0 174.8 71.8 62.3
Changes *
2002 + 1 + 0 − 78.3 + 6.7 + 13.3 + 20.0 − 6.7 − 6.6 − 70.0 − 42.0 − 5.2 − 4.8 − 36.8 − 28.1 − 15.0
2003 − 1 − 21 − 32.8 − 14.0 − 10.7 + 1.6 − 12.3 − 3.3 − 11.9 − 14.2 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 9.0 + 2.3 − 6.9
2004          Feb − + 2 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 2.6 − 0.4 + 3.0 − 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 4.7
         Mar − − 3 + 26.7 + 1.8 + 2.1 − 3.1 + 5.2 − 0.3 + 8.5 + 7.1 + 2.8 + 0.8 + 4.3 + 1.5 + 16.4
         Apr − − + 10.8 − 3.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.1 + 3.9 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 1.7 + 10.0
         May − − 1 − 32.5 − 17.3 − 17.3 − 4.6 − 12.8 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 16.2         June − 1 − 2 − 0.9 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 4.2 − 2.0 + 0.5 + 3.7 + 3.3 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 2.5 + 0.4 − 7.2
         July − − + 6.9 + 8.9 + 8.5 + 5.7 + 2.8 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.7
         Aug − − − 7.6 − 2.8 − 5.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 + 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 4.2         Sep − − 2 + 9.3 + 5.5 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 4.3 + 2.4 + 3.1 + 3.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 3.7 − 0.4 + 0.8
         Oct − − 1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.2
         Nov − − + 11.9 + 5.1 + 3.5 − 1.2 + 4.7 + 1.6 + 5.7 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.8 + 1.1
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarde da s
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 2001
1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 20021,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 2003
1,186.4 790.4 267.1 523.2 396.1 72.4 66.3 62.6 6.1 5.7 323.7 144.6 28.9 53.7 2004          Feb 
1,227.8 808.2 273.9 534.3 419.5 71.8 65.6 62.4 6.1 5.7 347.8 155.4 28.1 55.0          Mar 
1,249.4 822.6 275.2 547.4 426.8 69.1 62.9 58.7 6.3 5.9 357.7 157.4 28.1 58.2          Apr 
1,193.8 776.0 268.5 507.5 417.9 65.0 58.3 54.4 6.7 6.3 352.9 155.3 27.8 59.0          May1,187.6 775.6 267.1 508.5 412.0 65.9 59.2 55.8 6.7 6.4 346.1 160.2 28.0 59.7          June
1,199.1 774.5 261.5 513.0 424.6 69.2 62.0 58.9 7.1 6.8 355.4 161.9 28.0 58.9          July
1,209.8 785.8 266.7 519.0 424.1 70.0 62.8 59.7 7.2 6.8 354.1 153.6 27.0 61.5          Aug 1,212.4 803.1 280.4 522.7 409.4 69.0 61.8 59.1 7.1 6.8 340.4 147.6 27.1 64.8          Sep 
1,217.4 797.9 280.9 516.9 419.6 71.8 64.9 62.1 6.9 6.6 347.8 144.6 27.2 65.0          Oct 
1,251.2 804.4 280.2 524.3 446.8 64.4 58.2 55.2 6.2 5.9 382.3 139.4 27.2 66.2          Nov 
Changes *
− 53.4 − 31.7 + 56.0 − 87.7 − 21.7 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 26.9 −104.8 + 1.8 + 17.2 2002+ 34.4 + 12.6 + 17.0 − 4.4 + 21.8 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 18.1 − 72.6 + 4.6 + 26.8 2003
+ 31.9 + 25.5 − 14.2 + 39.7 + 6.4 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.0 − 5.3 − 0.0 − 1.7 2004          Feb 
+ 29.7 + 10.0 + 6.8 + 3.2 + 19.6 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 20.3 + 10.8 − 0.8 − 2.9          Mar 
+ 14.8 + 10.7 + 1.3 + 9.5 + 4.1 − 2.7 − 2.8 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 3.0          Apr 
− 47.3 − 41.3 − 6.7 − 34.6 − 6.0 − 4.1 − 4.6 − 4.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 4.7          May− 7.2 − 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 6.0 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 7.0 + 4.9 + 0.2 + 0.0          June
+ 6.4 − 3.9 − 5.7 + 1.8 + 10.2 + 3.2 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 7.0 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 2.2          July
+ 15.0 + 13.5 + 5.3 + 8.2 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 8.3 − 1.0 + 3.5          Aug + 16.6 + 25.8 + 13.6 + 12.2 − 9.2 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.2 − 6.0 + 0.1 + 9.6          Sep 
+ 17.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 15.1 + 2.9 + 3.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 12.2 − 3.0 + 0.1 + 2.4          Oct 
+ 53.0 + 18.4 − 0.8 + 19.2 + 34.6 − 7.4 − 6.7 − 7.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 42.0 − 5.3 − 0.0 + 6.1          Nov 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001
503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003
447.4 263.5 86.0 177.4 183.9 30.1 26.1 25.7 4.0 3.9 153.8 68.3 39.0 66.7 2004          Feb 
470.2 273.7 88.0 185.7 196.5 32.6 28.7 28.3 3.9 3.8 163.9 71.1 39.2 70.2          Mar 
480.6 297.0 75.6 221.4 183.6 30.0 26.2 25.8 3.9 3.8 153.6 70.7 39.4 72.4          Apr 
451.1 271.9 75.7 196.3 179.2 28.5 24.7 24.2 3.8 3.7 150.7 70.6 39.2 68.5          May449.2 273.7 81.0 192.6 175.5 29.4 25.6 25.1 3.8 3.7 146.1 70.3 39.5 69.6          June
457.0 279.0 83.1 195.9 178.0 30.0 26.1 25.3 3.9 3.9 148.0 71.4 39.9 68.0          July
447.8 273.3 80.9 192.3 174.5 28.5 24.2 23.3 4.3 4.2 146.0 72.0 39.7 68.4          Aug 454.1 279.6 84.1 195.5 174.5 28.0 23.6 23.4 4.3 4.3 146.5 71.6 39.4 69.0          Sep 
455.8 276.8 82.8 194.1 179.0 26.6 22.2 21.3 4.4 4.4 152.3 71.2 39.5 70.1          Oct 
458.7 279.8 83.1 196.7 178.9 26.3 21.9 21.0 4.4 4.3 152.6 72.5 39.0 74.2          Nov 
Changes *
− 47.1 − 37.4 + 20.3 − 57.8 − 9.7 − 9.4 − 10.0 − 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 21.4 − 4.4 − 5.4 2002− 13.8 − 10.3 + 0.3 − 10.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 6.3 − 10.3 − 1.6 − 7.2 2003
+ 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.6 2004          Feb 
+ 20.8 + 9.0 + 1.9 + 7.1 + 11.9 + 2.6 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.3 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.9          Mar 
+ 8.8 + 22.5 − 12.4 + 34.9 − 13.7 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 2.2          Apr 
− 28.0 − 24.1 + 0.1 − 24.2 − 3.9 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 4.0          May− 2.1 + 1.6 + 5.4 − 3.8 − 3.7 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 1.1          June
+ 7.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 + 2.9 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 1.6          July
− 8.3 − 5.2 − 2.2 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.4          Aug + 9.0 + 8.0 + 3.1 + 4.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.1          Sep 
+ 3.9 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.2 + 5.3 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.7 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.2          Oct 
+ 6.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 − 0.5 + 4.6          Nov 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market
securities. — 3Including own debt securities. — 4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2004          June 6,925.3 138.5 0.5 138.0 138.8 0.8 0.0
         July 6,949.1 139.0 0.5 138.5 139.1 0.6 0.0
         Aug 6,963.2 139.3 0.5 138.7 139.3 0.6 0.0         Sep 6,960.0 139.2 0.5 138.7 139.3 0.6 0.0
         Oct 6,916.7 138.3 0.5 137.8 138.4 0.6 0.0
         Nov 6,923.3 138.5 0.5 137.9 138.5 0.6 0.0         Dec 6,945.1 138.9 0.5 138.4 139.1 0.7 0.0
2005          Jan  
p,8 6,988.4 139.8 0.5 139.3 140.0 0.8 ...
         Feb  p ... ... ... 140.5 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2004          June 1,913,668 38,273 216 38,058 38,465 407 4
         July 1,914,325 38,287 214 38,073 38,336 263 1
         Aug 1,890,399 37,808 213 37,595 37,860 265 1         Sep 1,875,073 37,501 212 37,290 37,543 253 1
         Oct 1,870,662 37,413 211 37,203 37,503 300 3
         Nov 1,877,711 37,554 210 37,345 37,608 263 2         Dec 1,864,666 37,293 210 37,084 37,436 352 20
2005          Jan  
p 1,886,330 37,727 209 37,517 37,850 333 2
         Feb  p 1,870,260 37,405 209 37,196 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. — 8The total number of deficiencies was not available when
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the this report went to press. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
         Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.71 2005 Jan                  1 1.21
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          to
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
 
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2005 Jan                  5 324,154 259,000 − 2.00 2.06 2.07 7
         Jan                12 343,644 265,000 − 2.00 2.06 2.07 7
         Jan                19 362,771 279,500 − 2.00 2.06 2.07 7
         Jan                26 368,794 273,000 − 2.00 2.06 2.07 7
         Feb                  2 332,198 277,500 − 2.00 2.06 2.06 6
         Feb                  8 327,172 275,500 − 2.00 2.06 2.06 8
         Feb                16 352,917 276,500 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2004 Oct                28 46,646 25,000 − − 2.10 2.11 91
         Nov                25 51,095 25,000 − − 2.13 2.14 91
         Dec                23 34,466 25,000 − − 2.12 2.14 98
2005 Jan                27 58,133 30,000 − − 2.09 2.10 91
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2004          July 2.06 2.02 − 2.45 2.10 2.08 − 2.12 2.07 2.07 2.08 2.12 2.19 2.26 2.36
         Aug 2.04 1.85 − 2.12 2.09 2.07 − 2.11 2.04 2.07 2.08 2.11 2.17 2.22 2.30         Sep 2.05 1.95 − 2.50 2.10 2.07 − 2.15 2.05 2.07 2.08 2.12 2.20 2.28 2.38
         Oct 2.11 2.03 − 2.95 2.13 2.11 − 2.15 2.11 2.08 2.09 2.15 2.19 2.25 2.32
         Nov 2.09 2.05 − 2.40 2.15 2.12 − 2.17 2.09 2.09 2.11 2.17 2.22 2.27 2.33         Dec 2.05
4 1.70 − 2.12 2.15 2.12 − 2.17 2.05 2.13 2.17 2.17 2.21 2.25 2.30
2005          Jan 2.07 1.92 − 2.20 2.12 2.10 − 2.15 2.08 2.10 2.11 2.15 2.19 2.25 2.31
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. — 4 At end-December, 2.08% to 2.11%. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2004          Apr 1.90 3.35 2.08 4.17 4.90 4.75 5.01 8.03 7.08 5.85 4.51 3.91 4.59
         May 1.89 3.28 2.07 4.15 4.89 4.72 4.99 7.99 7.04 5.82 4.50 3.87 4.55         June 1.88 3.27 2.08 4.12 4.87 4.69 4.97 7.93 6.99 5.80 4.47 3.89 4.53
         July 1.89 3.25 2.09 4.11 4.91 4.63 4.94 7.93 6.98 5.76 4.48 3.88 4.50
         Aug 1.89 3.22 2.12 4.03 4.88 4.58 4.91 7.93 6.95 5.77 4.45 3.84 4.48         Sep 1.90 3.22 2.12 3.97 4.82 4.58 4.90 8.06 7.14 5.85 4.46 3.99 4.52
         Oct 1.90 3.27 2.11 3.89 4.69 4.53 4.88 8.05 7.08 5.80 4.42 3.97 4.48
         Nov 1.90 3.26 2.12 3.86 4.67 4.52 4.86 7.93 6.99 5.82 4.41 3.96 4.48         Dec 1.92 3.24 2.16 3.76 4.72 4.49 4.83 7.94 7.02 5.80 4.35 3.97 4.44
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2004          Apr 0.70 1.96 2.13 2.41 2.02 2.57 0.85 1.97 2.04 3.46
         May 0.70 1.86 2.15 2.43 2.00 2.56 0.86 1.96 2.06 3.74         June 0.70 1.87 2.21 2.42 2.00 2.55 0.87 1.99 2.27 3.76
         July 0.70 1.90 2.21 2.54 1.99 2.55 0.86 1.99 2.59 4.00
         Aug 0.71 1.91 2.18 2.67 2.00 2.53 0.87 1.98 2.36 3.99         Sep 0.72 1.90 2.20 2.48 2.00 2.52 0.90 2.00 2.31 3.68
         Oct 0.72 1.92 2.29 2.48 2.00 2.52 0.89 2.04 2.32 3.56
         Nov 0.73 1.94 2.20 2.50 2.01 2.51 0.90 2.04 2.22 3.39         Dec 0.73 1.95 2.19 2.32 2.00 2.52 0.90 2.08 2.68 3.52
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2004          Apr 9.73 7.86 7.35 6.64 8.30 4.24 3.42 4.06 4.77 4.69 3.89 4.97 4.95
         May 9.68 7.96 7.33 6.77 8.27 4.17 3.40 4.05 4.75 4.61 4.14 4.87 4.94         June 9.55 7.96 7.12 6.74 8.42 4.17 3.42 4.12 4.82 4.69 3.93 4.97 5.01
         July 9.57 8.07 7.18 6.86 8.52 4.20 3.47 4.16 4.81 4.69 4.04 4.94 5.01
         Aug 9.62 8.26 7.67 6.89 8.58 4.29 3.50 4.19 4.87 4.65 3.91 5.07 5.02         Sep 9.59 8.18 7.45 6.96 8.45 4.24 3.49 4.14 4.82 4.66 3.90 4.98 5.00
         Oct 9.53 7.98 7.37 6.87 8.34 4.18 3.50 4.12 4.77 4.64 4.08 4.87 4.92
         Nov 9.47 7.97 7.43 6.85 8.23 4.09 3.45 4.07 4.66 4.58 3.96 4.89 4.82         Dec 9.51 7.71 7.24 6.60 7.67 4.07 3.43 3.95 4.49 4.41 3.82 4.59 4.66
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2004          Apr 5.51 3.88 4.75 4.69 3.00 3.28 4.21
         May 5.46 4.00 4.62 4.59 3.00 3.30 4.21         June 5.46 3.97 4.81 4.71 2.99 3.26 4.08
         July 5.36 4.02 4.85 4.65 3.02 3.28 4.27
         Aug 5.37 4.06 4.89 4.73 2.99 3.12 4.30         Sep 5.37 4.00 4.85 4.68 2.99 3.37 4.45
         Oct 5.39 4.02 4.87 4.64 2.98 3.30 4.27
         Nov 5.37 4.02 4.79 4.55 2.95 3.35 4.31         Dec 5.26 3.98 4.67 4.46 3.05 3.55 4.10
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Dec 2.00 128,564 3.16 190,465 2.05 74,309 4.98 29,363
2004          Jan 1.97 126,519 3.14 191,301 2.00 65,515 4.97 29,816
         Feb 1.94 124,617 3.13 191,935 1.99 72,633 4.96 29,775         Mar 1.94 122,662 3.11 192,728 1.98 71,568 4.96 29,211
         Apr 1.92 119,413 3.07 192,985 1.97 71,450 4.93 29,591
         May 1.90 118,543 3.05 192,822 1.98 73,261 4.93 29,523         June 1.89 115,574 3.03 193,431 1.98 71,355 4.88 29,376
         July 1.91 113,816 3.03 193,684 1.99 72,644 4.86 29,709
         Aug 1.91 112,858 3.03 194,631 2.00 70,573 4.82 29,760         Sep 1.90 111,909 2.97 194,950 2.00 69,114 4.81 29,936
         Oct 1.91 111,286 2.96 195,397 2.01 72,291 4.74 28,853
         Nov 1.90 110,334 2.95 194,704 2.01 69,413 4.71 29,239         Dec 1.94 112,266 2.92 199,018 2.07 73,428 4.62 29,684
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2003          Dec 5.55 7,756 5.01 33,052 5.79 886,159 8.90 88,558 6.35 70,446 6.28 329,925
2004          Jan 5.43 7,641 4.97 32,907 5.78 885,875 8.87 84,977 6.32 69,872 6.27 328,719
         Feb 5.38 7,521 4.96 32,809 5.77 884,820 8.77 83,635 6.29 69,585 6.26 328,977         Mar 5.32 7,690 4.90 32,180 5.75 880,980 8.74 84,319 6.27 69,587 6.25 331,220
         Apr 5.29 7,401 4.87 32,148 5.74 881,832 8.81 82,911 6.19 70,268 6.22 331,533
         May 5.27 7,501 4.84 32,268 5.73 882,795 8.74 81,301 6.15 70,586 6.21 331,611         June 5.23 7,635 4.83 33,008 5.71 886,304 8.88 83,204 6.14 70,479 6.21 331,013
         July 5.24 7,577 4.77 33,072 5.69 888,736 8.80 81,277 6.10 71,134 6.21 331,665
         Aug 5.24 7,478 4.75 33,203 5.68 890,887 8.77 80,999 6.07 71,478 6.20 331,010         Sep 5.27 7,597 4.72 33,360 5.67 894,787 8.83 83,016 6.04 70,960 6.20 329,461
         Oct 5.14 7,649 4.67 33,775 5.66 895,414 8.79 80,415 5.95 71,660 6.18 330,628
         Nov 5.12 7,586 4.65 33,278 5.65 896,510 8.72 77,971 5.94 70,561 6.17 328,982         Dec 5.25 7,637 4.63 33,190 5.63 897,825 8.72 80,625 5.91 70,109 6.23 331,646
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Dec 4.84 187,742 4.46 87,966 5.33 488,777
2004          Jan 4.82 181,660 4.40 88,474 5.30 487,166
         Feb 4.78 181,186 4.37 87,879 5.29 488,299         Mar 4.76 183,464 4.34 87,519 5.27 487,244
         Apr 4.75 179,606 4.32 87,478 5.25 489,214
         May 4.77 174,716 4.28 89,876 5.23 491,825         June 4.79 176,791 4.32 90,154 5.22 488,805
         July 4.72 171,094 4.26 90,072 5.21 487,135
         Aug 4.68 170,136 4.21 90,723 5.19 487,903         Sep 4.75 171,070 4.25 89,980 5.25 485,483
         Oct 4.68 169,423 4.18 87,915 5.23 485,720
         Nov 4.61 174,233 4.14 87,256 5.20 486,256         Dec 4.64 166,966 4.15 87,044 5.19 483,878
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by the end of the month. — 1The effective interest rates may always be
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments onhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and deposits and loans but not any other related charges which may occur fornon-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarante es and
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. —
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a home improvements; including loans granted by building and loansample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics 4Consumer credits are loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting System / consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these statistics,
Banking statistics / EWU-Zinsstatistik). This information is currently available other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business , debt
in German only. — oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at consolidation, education etc. — 6 Including overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2003          Dec 1.08 400,936 1.89 29,428 2.84 1,512 2.91 2,519 2.17 502,167 2.72 89,528
2004          Jan 1.10 405,052 1.92 30,791 2.78 1,542 3.15 3,852 2.18 503,431 2.68 88,506
         Feb 1.10 411,617 1.95 23,387 2.41 1,056 2.86 2,340 2.12 504,560 2.66 88,115         Mar 1.12 410,717 2.03 28,021 2.31 840 2.66 2,357 2.10 504,583 2.62 87,863
         Apr 1.13 412,968 2.01 32,020 2.30 1,243 2.76 2,061 2.13 505,420 2.60 86,706
         May 1.13 418,859 1.88 30,506 2.33 1,097 2.74 2,404 2.10 505,649 2.58 85,838         June 1.13 419,073 1.88 25,696 2.46 838 2.71 1,725 2.13 505,366 2.57 85,480
         July 1.14 418,729 1.90 25,693 2.43 1,071 2.86 2,113 2.10 505,800 2.57 85,562
         Aug 1.16 416,996 1.96 24,546 2.50 701 3.12 2,459 2.11 506,415 2.56 85,491         Sep 1.17 418,189 1.89 23,981 2.50 913 2.78 2,724 2.13 506,492 2.55 85,177
         Oct 1.17 421,839 1.92 22,905 2.67 960 3.03 2,649 2.13 506,856 2.54 85,738
         Nov 1.15 434,898 1.92 23,384 2.41 856 3.04 2,839 2.16 506,807 2.54 86,549         Dec 1.17 428,608 1.90 25,454 2.39 929 2.59 2,791 2.13 515,840 2.55 87,804
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Dec 1.05 138,713 1.96 36,247 2.76 360 4.09 1,075
2004          Jan 1.16 136,443 1.92 35,633 2.43 174 3.90 823
         Feb 1.11 128,210 1.95 38,596 2.18 197 4.26 697         Mar 1.11 130,095 1.92 34,914 2.28 201 3.82 1,274
         Apr 1.10 134,285 1.90 30,589 1.85 222 3.93 1,075
         May 1.10 131,703 1.92 32,753 2.44 115 4.24 1,535         June 1.09 134,255 1.92 31,971 2.59 163 4.22 1,273
         July 1.08 131,254 1.95 32,273 3.10 334 4.25 2,601
         Aug 1.08 135,739 1.94 30,356 2.56 102 4.29 1,823         Sep 1.11 138,157 1.95 30,538 2.51 274 3.94 2,033
         Oct 1.13 137,992 1.97 29,266 2.56 258 4.13 1,151
         Nov 1.13 142,752 1.95 29,259 2.24 176 4.04 2,678         Dec 1.15 144,573 2.02 51,828 2.39 211 3.81 2,215
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2003          Dec 6.90 5.02 1,541 5.80 5,234 7.81 3,701 3.57 12,315 4.93 2,578 5.13 3,978
2004          Jan 8.01 5.30 1,427 6.62 4,233 9.00 3,746 3.85 8,611 5.08 1,992 5.27 1,998
         Feb 7.98 4.98 1,308 6.50 4,963 9.08 3,539 3.85 5,613 5.04 1,588 5.07 2,112         Mar 7.83 5.28 1,553 6.29 5,806 8.88 4,494 3.69 8,974 5.11 2,037 5.00 3,549
         Apr 7.56 5.05 1,664 6.08 6,345 8.86 4,074 3.50 9,264 4.92 1,658 5.00 2,903
         May 7.77 5.21 1,147 6.21 5,257 8.94 3,147 3.94 5,901 4.85 1,552 5.10 1,725         June 7.87 5.34 1,402 6.21 5,371 9.11 3,794 3.48 8,704 5.00 2,816 5.07 3,278
         July 8.02 5.25 1,492 6.34 5,020 9.27 3,792 3.64 9,119 4.90 1,908 5.15 2,018
         Aug 8.13 5.42 1,090 6.44 5,187 9.16 3,038 3.52 8,837 5.07 1,379 5.17 1,365         Sep 8.03 5.09 1,365 6.41 4,878 9.19 3,058 3.42 9,097 4.88 1,474 5.07 2,577
         Oct 7.95 4.77 1,210 6.30 4,579 9.17 2,927 3.74 7,395 4.80 1,590 4.90 1,415
         Nov 7.70 4.86 1,251 6.20 4,159 8.88 3,133 3.46 8,436 4.84 1,164 4.75 1,989         Dec 7.18 4.90 1,550 5.95 4,551 8.04 2,846 3.44 10,026 4.54 2,853 4.69 2,967
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volumeweighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Dec 10.48 62,675 5.06 4.63 2,878 4.75 3,710 5.14 7,473 5.19 3,380
2004          Jan 10.40 59,768 5.02 4.57 2,827 4.65 3,280 5.15 5,978 5.19 3,201
         Feb 10.40 57,555 4.95 4.56 1,999 4.61 2,457 5.06 4,262 5.03 2,628         Mar 10.38 57,884 4.85 4.43 2,504 4.48 3,240 4.99 5,417 4.98 2,983
         Apr 10.36 56,755 4.76 4.26 2,706 4.32 3,127 4.91 5,106 4.95 2,964
         May 10.35 55,144 4.80 4.49 2,079 4.37 2,736 4.91 4,497 4.94 2,865         June 10.38 56,024 4.83 4.49 2,314 4.32 3,479 4.96 5,292 5.09 2,934
         July 10.35 54,012 4.84 4.26 3,233 4.51 3,279 4.92 5,963 5.11 2,873
         Aug 10.33 53,601 4.88 4.37 2,071 4.59 2,291 5.04 3,844 4.99 2,648         Sep 10.33 55,219 4.87 4.44 2,058 4.53 2,371 4.96 4,139 4.97 2,551
         Oct 10.26 53,107 4.78 4.30 3,091 4.48 2,343 4.89 4,077 4.88 2,730
         Nov 10.22 50,788 4.72 4.45 1,887 4.40 2,131 4.78 3,961 4.76 3,164         Dec 10.30 52,465 4.61 4.37 2,297 4.29 2,682 4.63 5,217 4.67 3,598
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Dec 6.44 87,201 4.55 6,976 5.05 1,613 5.14 1,850
2004          Jan 6.33 84,562 4.52 6,495 5.13 1,152 5.20 1,579
         Feb 6.26 86,480 4.58 6,151 5.12 1,510 5.04 1,068         Mar 6.22 87,095 4.44 7,140 5.00 1,262 5.20 1,385
         Apr 6.11 84,844 4.43 6,733 4.89 1,419 5.04 1,211
         May 6.27 81,810 4.52 6,616 5.00 987 4.93 1,186         June 6.23 84,291 4.54 7,185 4.98 1,268 5.19 1,509
         July 6.21 80,484 4.62 7,193 5.01 1,360 5.05 1,171
         Aug 6.25 77,547 4.42 6,177 5.08 1,030 5.00 1,098         Sep 6.25 81,220 4.51 7,522 4.92 1,207 4.97 1,216
         Oct 6.11 79,457 4.55 7,213 4.96 1,238 4.92 1,200
         Nov 5.96 80,969 4.61 6,218 4.83 1,336 4.62 1,141         Dec 6.01 76,863 4.50 6,458 4.75 1,520 4.64 2,147
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2003          Dec 3.32 41,204 3.87 5,084 4.78 7,639
2004          Jan 3.25 32,666 4.33 4,274 4.99 4,169
         Feb 3.24 26,802 3.60 2,681 4.58 3,317         Mar 3.20 35,662 3.85 3,509 4.85 5,627
         Apr 3.25 30,662 3.79 3,034 4.57 5,536
         May 3.26 26,670 3.93 3,403 4.79 4,593         June 3.26 32,704 3.93 3,754 4.63 5,444
         July 3.27 35,348 3.91 4,012 4.89 4,475
         Aug 3.26 28,221 3.60 3,766 4.70 3,971         Sep 3.31 31,752 3.65 4,204 4.41 5,135
         Oct 3.26 30,755 3.85 3,246 4.51 4,502
         Nov 3.16 30,886 3.68 3,855 4.46 4,913         Dec 3.34 43,091 3.95 7,061 4.33 8,567
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,9151994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,1091997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,398 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,572 117,119 35,848 81,271 − 63,1082002 178,057 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 54,021 83,314 13,536 69,778 − 94,7432003 170,154 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 35,699 101,553 35,748 65,805 − 68,6012004 222,639 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 88,928 134,295 121,841 12,454 − 88,344
2004          Oct 15,988 6,806 − 5,086 1,669 10,223 9,182 − 1,941 7,509 − 9,450 − 17,929
         Nov 13,044 10,373 − 544 4,769 6,148 2,671 9,957 3,875 6,082 − 3,087         Dec − 27,651 − 31,288 − 15,107 − 3,548 − 12,633 3,637 − 22,509 − 8,883 − 13,626 − − 5,142
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,005 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 81,546 17,575 63,971 − 3,371 − 14,714 11,343 84,9182002 39,700 9,232 30,470 19,058 − 23,236 42,294 20,6422003 17,382 16,838 544 − 7,885 7,056 − 14,941 25,2682004 3,092 10,157 − 7,066 4,220 5,052 − 832 − 1,127
2004          Oct 3,234 1,642 1,592 3,222 1,857 1,365 12
         Nov 2,073 271 1,802 − 298 4,392 − 4,690 2,371         Dec − 262 1,032 − 1,294 1,385 4,747 − 3,362 − 1,647
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8At issue prices. — 9Net purchases or
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt transaction values. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998,
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and excluding syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also specially marked. 
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2004          Sep 86,455 63,386 2,763 7,582 19,445 33,596 1,373 21,696 −         Oct 75,329 49,738 2,215 6,980 14,864 25,680 3,721 21,870 250
         Nov 89,636 64,367 3,163 8,924 15,384 36,896 2,682 22,587 −         Dec 61,917 46,740 2,531 4,219 8,133 31,857 1,197 13,980 170
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,9391993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2004          Sep 33,868 27,170 2,408 5,614 6,070 13,078 1,218 5,480 −         Oct 27,256 15,724 325 2,737 5,903 6,759 3,564 7,968 250
         Nov 44,291 27,138 1,685 4,272 5,941 15,239 2,128 15,026 −         Dec 16,456 13,639 1,051 2,406 1,632 8,550 1,074 1,743 170
Net sales  6 
1992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,1141993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,7011994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2004          Sep 3,981 11,478 − 258 − 1,821 7,796 5,761 1,129 − 8,626 − 2,261         Oct 10,809 − 2,428 338 − 8,597 4,699 1,133 3,017 10,220 − 4,899
         Nov 7,844 1,173 − 808 − 3,471 − 714 6,165 2,165 4,506 − 322         Dec − 20,863 − 11,571 − 407 − 11,147 − 1,645 1,629 − 1,637 − 7,655 − 751
*For definitions, see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to Monthly Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Report 2, Capital market statistics. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,873
1993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2004          Oct 2,786,026 1,696,164 160,576 568,545 319,104 647,940 73,316 1,016,546 171,616
         Nov 2,793,870 1,697,337 159,767 565,074 318,390 654,105 75,481 1,021,052 171,294         Dec 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-December 2004 
952,319 640,973 58,791 222,300 100,477 259,404 18,952 292,394 52,107    less than 2
667,235 438,401 49,401 172,343 88,758 127,899 16,590 212,243 60,605 2 to less than 4
443,798 271,127 27,161 94,818 54,479 94,670 11,819 160,853 34,602 4 to less than 6
245,201 112,997 17,564 32,962 21,910 40,563 10,009 122,195 9,111 6 to less than 8
218,875 97,091 6,332 20,035 20,179 50,547 10,491 111,294 5,303 8 to less than 10
94,590 76,470 77 6,836 6,683 62,873 1,842 16,278 4,944 10 to less than 15
26,373 12,467 35 923 8,318 3,191 618 13,288 2,081 15 to less than 20
124,615 36,238 − 3,709 15,941 16,588 3,523 84,854 1,789 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .1994o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .19963 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2004          Oct 165,170 458 880 124 0 3 − 68 − 434 − 47 837,257
         Nov 164,975 − 195 84 6 0 25 78 − 296 − 92 868,529         Dec 164,802 − 173 631 0 200 34 − 15 − 747 − 278 887,217
oFrom January 1994, including the shares of east German companies market segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM7,771 million). — 1Including shares are traded on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the
on the Official Market, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock Deutsche Börse AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German Germanmore than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.05
1993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2004          Oct 3.6 3.6 3.6 3.9 3.4 4.1 4.3 3.8 119.44 98.89 250.29 3,960.25
         Nov 3.4 3.5 3.5 3.8 3.3 4.0 4.0 3.7 120.11 99.61 260.53 4,126.00         Dec 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.6 3.2 3.8 3.9 3.5 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005          Jan 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.6 3.2 3.8 3.9 3.5 120.97 100.80 269.10 4,254.85
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
Sales of mutual fund shares Purchases
Domestic mutual funds (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loan associations  1 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total shares Total shares dents  4 
Period
DM million
1992 81,514 20,474 − 3,102 − − 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,0011994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,3181997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,000
2001 97,032 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,221 96,082 10,251 2,703 85,831 17,518 9512002 66,478 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 6,996 67,150 2,100 3,007 65,050 3,989 − 6732003 48,195 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 4,252 49,726 − 2,658 734 52,384 3,518 − 1,5302004 13,392 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 11,939 8,322 8,439 3,796 − 117 8,143 5,070
2004          Oct − 1,203 − 1,471 − 1,719 − 1,468 − 507 213 248 268 − 325 990 209 − 1,315 59 − 878
         Nov − 495 − 307 − 1,433 − 1,557 496 − 389 1,126 − 188 − 2,623 − 11 115 − 2,612 − 303 2,128         Dec 1,770 2,613 − 3,395 − 3,955 992 − 413 6,008 − 843 1,839 4,179 1,717 − 2,340 − 2,560 − 69
1Book values. — 2Residual. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign end-1988 recorded under shares). — The figures for the most recent date
fund shares by residents; transaction values. — 4Net purchases or net sales are provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
(−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
operat- Fixed Compen-
of ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex- sation
which pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend- of em-
Period Total Taxes Total  3 ployees iture grants Interest tion aid  4 Balance venue  5 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 − 12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 − 14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.11997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 − 94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 − 91.71998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 − 56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 − 53.41999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 − 26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 − 23.4
2000  
p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  6,p 555.8 446.2 599.9 169.9 69.8 213.8 66.6 40.1 39.2 − 44.1 445.0 449.1 − 4.1 923.5 971.7 − 48.2
2002  pe 550.9 441.7 608.0 173.3 69.5 225.9 66.1 38.7 33.5 − 57.1 457.9 466.4 − 8.5 924.1 989.7 − 65.6
2003  pe 546.6 442.2 615.2 174.0 68.8 236.4 65.7 36.3 32.5 − 68.6 466.8 473.3 − 6.5 924.5 999.6 − 75.1
2003          Q1 117.2 96.3 154.5 40.9 15.6 61.8 23.6 5.6 6.5 − 37.3 116.3 116.8 − 0.5 207.7 245.5 − 37.8
         Q2 135.8 108.9 143.8 40.9 15.5 61.3 10.8 7.5 7.5 − 8.0 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 228.2 239.1 − 10.9         Q3 131.2 109.6 155.8 42.4 16.6 58.5 21.6 9.2 7.4 − 24.6 115.1 117.8 − 2.7 225.0 252.3 − 27.4         Q4  
p 160.7 127.4 159.8 48.1 20.5 55.2 9.5 12.9 13.7 + 0.9 119.0 120.4 − 1.5 261.1 261.7 − 0.6
2004          Q1  p 116.1 97.0 157.9 41.7 15.4 62.8 25.3 5.4 6.3 − 41.8 116.4 116.8 − 0.4 206.1 248.3 − 42.2
         Q2  p 133.1 112.8 141.8 41.3 15.7 59.6 10.0 6.8 6.4 − 8.7 115.8 116.4 − 0.6 226.1 235.5 − 9.3
         Q3  p 133.7 107.9 152.7 41.9 16.1 57.5 20.4 8.5 6.9 − 19.0 114.0 116.0 − 2.1 226.6 247.7 − 21.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly f igures
Office. — *The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed for some insurance sectors are estimated. — 3Including discrepancies in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the clearing transactions between central, state and local government. —
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — 4Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the interests. — 5Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly Federal Labour Office. — 6Owing to modifications of the system of
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between other operatin g
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, expenditure and current grants. see footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. — 2The annual figures differ from the sum of
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  p 240.6 261.3 184.6 207.1 50.5 52.5 119.0 123.2 24.7 25.2
2002  pe 238.9 271.6 183.5 207.4 47.8 53.2 119.9 124.5 25.1 25.3
2003  pe 239.6 278.8 182.3 208.7 48.3 53.5 117.1 125.0 24.7 25.5
2003          Q1 46.6 71.9 42.2 51.1 9.7 12.6 25.2 29.4 5.3 5.6
         Q2 59.1 64.6 44.4 50.2 12.0 12.0 26.7 29.1 5.6 5.8         Q3 57.6 74.5 45.3 50.5 12.2 13.1 29.3 30.6 6.1 6.3         Q4  
p 76.3 67.8 49.9 56.5 14.1 15.6 35.6 35.3 7.6 7.6
2004          Q1  p 44.8 73.4 42.4 51.5 11.1 12.8 25.8 29.7 5.4 5.5
         Q2  p 56.4 62.3 46.5 51.2 11.3 11.5 28.8 29.0 5.7 5.8
         Q3  p 58.3 71.2 45.1 50.5 12.5 12.5 29.9 30.5 6.2 6.2
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. — *See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. — 1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. — 4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Item 1997 1998 1999 2000  1 2001 2002 2003 2004  pe 
Revenue 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.2 965.8 951.2 954.2 961.4 954.4
of which
Taxes 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3 486.0 489.9 487.4
Social contributions 720.1 727.7 375.4 378.4 383.6 389.3 394.8 396.5
Expenditure 1,826.5 1,859.6 972.6 989.7 1,009.8 1,031.7 1,042.7 1,038.8of which
Intermediate consumption 140.2 144.1 76.2 78.0 81.0 84.5 83.9 85.2Compensation of employees 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.9 165.7 168.0 167.9 165.9
Interest 133.2 136.4 68.9 68.4 67.7 66.0 66.7 67.0
Social benefits  
2 984.7 998.4 523.1 532.7 549.2 573.1 587.1 589.4
Gross capital formation 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 36.8 35.9 31.9 30.2
Net lending/net borrowing − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.4 − 23.9 − 58.6 − 77.5 − 81.3 − 84.5
as a percentage of GDP − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.7 − 3.8 − 3.9
Memo item
Debt as defined in the
Maastricht Treaty 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.8 1,283.6 1,366.6 ...
as a percentage of GDP 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.4 60.9 64.2 ...
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office record such
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include proceeds ( €50.85 billion) under "net increase in non-produced assets", with
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus ( €22.8 billion
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. — 1Adjusted for proceeds from the sale or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. — 2 Including social benefits in kind. 
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 581993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 7141997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 1171998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 122002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 512003 442,235 390,437 214,002 155,510 . 20,925 51,671 4,751 + 1272004 ... 386,451 208,909 157,902 . 19,641 ... ... ...
2004          Q3  
p 107,720 93,319 49,623 38,309 . 5,387 14,122 1,311 + 279
         Q4 ... 110,996 64,160 43,262 . 3,574 ... ... ...2004          Aug . 28,209 15,270 11,152 . 1,787 . . .
         Sep . 36,550 19,426 15,300 . 1,824 . . .
         Oct . 26,653 14,546 10,746 . 1,361 . . .
         Nov . 28,001 15,538 11,172 . 1,291 . . .         Dec . 56,342 34,076 21,344 . 922 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Including receipts from the 1988. — 4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  — 2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. — 5Difference between the local government’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
remitted to state government. — 3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,1702002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,8462003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,4092004 409,509 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,653 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2004          Q3 99,038 38,285 29,362 3,148 2,737 3,038 33,972 26,513 7,459 1,431 19,889 4,660 801 5,719
         Q4 117,958 46,282 35,455 4,999 3,728 2,100 35,478 27,261 8,217 2,773 28,117 4,496 812 6,962
2004          Aug 29,797 8,720 9,721 − 1,116 − 982 1,098 11,891 9,246 2,645 486 6,887 1,542 272 1,588
         Sep 38,995 19,139 8,796 5,695 4,070 579 11,332 8,938 2,394 2 6,737 1,516 269 2,445
         Oct 28,102 8,049 8,864 − 1,013 − 569 766 10,992 8,500 2,492 982 6,388 1,422 268 1,449
         Nov 29,511 8,278 8,887 − 866 − 336 593 12,392 9,627 2,765 440 6,628 1,527 247 1,510         Dec 60,345 29,955 17,704 6,877 4,632 742 12,094 9,133 2,961 1,351 15,101 1,548 297 4,003
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table the statutory pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, to local government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to ce ntral
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% was
central and state government), the real property taxes and other local allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; sincegovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2From 2002 49.6% has been allocated to central government and 50.4% to state
1980, the revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax has been government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedallocated to central, state and local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15, central government share. — 6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
and revenue from corporation tax and investment income tax has been and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beenallocated to central and state government in the ratio of 50:50. — 3From affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —
1996, after deducting child benefit. — 4From February 1993, including 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
revenue from the withholding tax on interest income, in which local government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. — 8For the breakdown, see
government has a share of 12%. — 5In 1998, 3.64% and from 1999, 5.63% Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
was allocated to central government to finance the supplementary grant to
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness tax  2 taxes taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 6962003 43,188 14,094 2,204 8,870 6,531 11,722 7,336 230 3,373 786 6,989 24,146 9,658 6712004 41,782 13,630 2,195 8,750 6,597 11,601 7,740 80 4,284 788 6,883 ... ... ...
2004          Q3  
p 9,959 3,478 474 1,743 1,548 2,686 1,883 24 933 224 1,596 7,054 2,891 169
         Q4 16,612 4,292 780 1,546 1,715 3,174 1,691 9 908 185 1,703 ... ... ...2004          Aug 3,376 1,185 166 919 557 684 591 7 328 73 543 . . .
         Sep 3,388 1,163 128 404 407 1,247 600 8 312 75 520 . . .
         Oct 3,331 1,242 205 375 598 637 572 1 254 67 528 . . .
         Nov 3,503 1,249 173 555 462 686 572 6 327 57 564 . . .         Dec 9,778 1,800 402 615 655 1,851 547 2 327 61 612 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. — 2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
General government
1998 2,280,154 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999 1,199,975 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 1052000 1,211,439 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 1082002 1,277,630 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 29 7,845 972003 1,358,121 36,022 246,414 153,616 12,810 471,129 396,832 341 34,163 − 1 6,711 86
2004          Mar 1,403,438 37,209 260,445 159,735 11,245 485,920 400,897 371 40,863 − 45 6,711 88
         June 1,411,658 37,307 269,972 162,642 10,590 488,668 391,296 371 44,057 − 45 6,711 88         Sep 1,429,216 37,494 276,918 166,711 10,568 494,621 390,436 413 46,434 − 38 5,572 87
Central government 7,8 
1998 957,983 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 1861999 714,069 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 1042000 715,819 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2004          Mar 802,690 36,463 88,901 150,050 11,245 450,711 49,888 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
         June 803,991 35,630 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88         Sep 814,356 35,866 95,200 157,026 10,568 459,482 39,864 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86         Dec 812,086 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,381 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
State government (western)
1998 525,380 520 83,390 . . . 430,709 43 10,716 . − 21999 274,208 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 12000 282,431 − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 12001 305,788 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 12002 328,390 250 97,556 . . . 217,333 5 13,246 . . 12003 355,661 472 125,356 . . . 207,880 4 21,949 . . 1
2004          Mar 363,202 222 136,105 . . . 200,366 4 26,504 . . 1
         June 368,240 900 141,270 . . . 197,032 4 29,033 . . 1         Sep 374,415 900 145,136 . . . 198,760 0 29,618 . . 1         Dec 
p 376,511 750 148,219 . . . 192,659 0 34,882 . . 1
State government (eastern)
1998 98,192 445 27,228 . . . 70,289 − 230 . . .1999 53,200 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .2000 55,712 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .2001 58,771 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .2002 63,782 338 23,838 . . . 37,739 − 1,867 . . .2003 68,076 315 28,833 . . . 37,022 − 1,906 . . .
2004          Mar 69,661 524 30,752 . . . 35,314 27 3,044 . . .
         June 71,252 777 31,897 . . . 35,530 27 3,021 . . .         Sep 71,512 729 31,967 . . . 35,295 27 3,495 . . .         Dec 
p 72,026 533 31,476 . . . 36,179 37 3,801 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont’d)
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Local government (western) 9 
1998 158,960 . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .
1999 81,511 . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .2002 84,097 . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .2003 90,906 . 77 . . 603 87,868 19 2,339 . . .
2004          Mar 92,400 . 77 . . 732 89,231 20 2,340 . . .
         June 93,250 . 77 . . 707 90,106 20 2,340 . . .         Sep 93,800 . 77 . . 656 90,707 20 2,340 . . .
Local government (eastern) 9 
1998 39,873 . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .2002 16,745 . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .2003 16,951 . − . . 131 16,601 87 132 . . .
2004          Mar 16,900 . − . . 131 16,549 90 130 . . .
         June 16,900 . − . . 131 16,549 90 130 . . .         Sep 17,000 . − . . 131 16,649 90 130 . . .
German Unity Fund/Indemnification Fund 7 
1998 79,413 − − − . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .1999 40,234 − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .2000 40,629 − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .2001 39,923 − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .2002 39,810 − 3,820 10,134 . 22,685 3,146 − 26 . . .2003 39,568 − 4,610 10,134 . 24,032 793 − − . . .
2004          Mar 40,010 . 4,610 9,634 . 24,177 1,589 − − . . .
         June 39,500 . 4,538 9,634 . 24,183 1,144 − − . . .         Sep 39,608 . 4,538 9,634 . 24,185 1,251 − − . . .         Dec 39,053 . 4,538 9,634 . 24,187 694 − − . . .
ERP Special Fund 7 
1998 34,159 .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . . − . 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .2000 18,386 . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .2001 19,161 . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .2002 19,400 . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .2003 19,261 . . 51 . 10,169 8,522 8 512 . . .
2004          Mar 18,576 . . 51 . 10,169 7,960 8 389 . . .
         June 18,525 . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .         Sep 18,525 . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .         Dec 18,200 . . 51 . 10,169 7,584 8 389 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,8 
1998 77,246 . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt Processing Fund/Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,8 
1998 304,978 − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 − 20 79,899 151999          June 151,097 − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 − 9 40,902 4
Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal 7,8 
1998 3,971 .... 3 0 0 3,671 − − . . .
1999          June 2,302 .... 1 5 3 2,148 − − . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Predominantly Treasury London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
discount paper (Bubills). — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
securities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
paper. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes. Including loans raised government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from supplementary ratios. — 8Since 1 July 1999 central government has assumed joint
public pension funds and liabilities arising from the investment assistance responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabi lities,
levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabilities the Federal Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the
arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and Use of Coal. From July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded
from housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of under central government. — 9Data other than year-end figures have been
the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to their home country. — estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. 
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2003 2004
2003 Sep 2004 Total Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Item € million
Borrowers
Central government  2 767,697 814,356 + 42,292 + 19,995 + 4,520 + 16,293 + 1,484 + 34,993 + 1,301 + 10,365
German Unity Fund 39,099 39,210 − 342 + 588 − 503 + 131 − 558 + 520 − 516 + 107
ERP Special Fund 19,261 18,525 − 139 − 31 + 30 − − 138 − 685 − 51 −Indemnification Fund 469 398 + 100 + 25 + 23 + 26 + 27 − 79 + 6 + 1
State government (western) 355,661 374,415 + 27,271 + 11,596 + 5,404 + 2,616 + 7,655 + 7,541 + 5,038 + 6,175
State government (eastern) 68,076 71,512 + 4,294 + 1,183 + 1,945 − 315 + 1,481 + 1,585 + 1,592 + 260Local government (western)  
3 90,906 93,800 + 7,439 + 2,003 + 1,739 + 1,154 + 2,543 + 1,961 + 1,114 + 491
Local government (eastern)  3 16,951 17,000 + 249 − 46 + 63 + 111 + 121 − 30 + 4 + 110
Total 1,358,121 1,429,216 + 81,164 + 35,311 + 13,221 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 45,805 + 8,487 + 17,509
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 36,022 37,494 + 5,207 − 185 + 535 + 2,258 + 2,598 + 1,187 + 99 + 187 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 246,414 276,918 + 42,463 + 16,486 + 11,936 + 5,075 + 8,965 + 14,031 + 9,528 + 6,946
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 153,616 166,711 + 15,947 + 5,504 + 7,455 − 3,898 + 6,887 + 6,119 + 2,907 + 4,070
Federal savings notes 12,810 10,568 − 5,088 − 2,464 − 1,150 − 530 − 944 − 1,565 − 656 − 22Bonds  
5 471,129 494,621 + 14,829 + 13,266 − 6,927 + 6,481 + 2,008 + 14,792 + 2,748 + 5,953
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 396,832 390,436 − 6,541 − 945 − 1,554 + 4,977 − 9,019 + 4,553 − 9,333 − 910
Loans from social security funds 341 413 + 204 − 2 + 1 + 181 + 24 + 31 − + 42Other loans  
6 34,122 46,394 + 15,319 + 3,684 + 2,932 + 6,611 + 2,092 + 6,700 + 3,194 + 2,377
Old debt  7 85 49 − 41 − 33 − 6 − 3 + 0 − 42 + 0 + 6
Equalisation claims 6,711 5,572 − 1,134 − + 0 − 1,139 + 5 + 0 + 0 − 1,139Investment assistance levy 41 41 − 0 + 0 − 0 − 0 + 0 − − −
Total 1,358,121 1,429,216 + 81,164 + 35,311 + 13,221 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 45,805 + 8,487 + 17,509
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 − − −−−−−−
Credit institutions 524,800 557,400 − 7,127 + 13,319 − 8,968 + 2,215 − 13,693 + 26,088 + 3,768 + 3,451
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 341 413 + 204 − 2 + 1 + 181 + 24 + 31 − + 42
Other  8 289,840 296,363 + 61,187 + 2,594 + 9,788 + 17,919 + 30,885 + 2,786 + 8,319 − 4,584
Foreign creditors  pe 538,700 570,600 + 26,900 + 19,400 + 12,400 − 300 − 4,600 + 16,900 − 3,600 + 18,600
Total 1,358,121 1,429,216 + 81,164 + 35,311 + 13,221 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 45,805 + 8,487 + 17,509
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. — 6Including loans raised abroad. — 7Old liabilities arising
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Net borrowing differs from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer of construction of the former GDR’s armed forces and from housing
debts. — 2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt inassociations. — 4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. — 8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 5Excluding issuers’ holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 − − −2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 − − −2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 − − −2002 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 − − −
2003 Sep 398,318 38,309 793 9,180 260,264 89,773 − − −
Dec 399,304 38,410 793 9,042 260,046 91,013 − − −
2004 Mar 396,842 38,307 793 8,357 258,808 90,578 − − −
June 397,237 37,827 690 8,305 259,854 90,560 − − −
Sep 399,706 38,664 690 8,305 261,515 90,531 − − −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. — 1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. — 2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Schätze)  2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 852004 812,086 34,440 1,074 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,381 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
2004          Jan 786,023 35,941 1,229 92,560 143,816 11,830 448,242 39,290 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 86
         Feb 789,107 35,197 1,208 92,768 144,190 11,212 453,213 38,183 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 86         Mar 802,690 36,463 1,178 88,901 150,050 11,245 450,711 49,888 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
         Apr 798,786 35,616 1,128 95,468 150,031 10,786 449,577 41,875 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 88
         May 804,270 36,639 1,096 95,913 152,810 10,575 452,391 40,513 223 8,456 − 46 6,708 88         June 803,991 35,630 1,105 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88
         July 821,291 35,744 1,111 97,599 153,362 10,439 461,338 47,829 223 9,144 − 45 5,572 88
         Aug 824,560 35,362 1,104 98,350 155,852 10,558 468,445 41,013 223 9,144 − 45 5,572 87         Sep 814,356 35,866 1,091 95,200 157,026 10,568 459,482 39,864 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86
         Oct 827,013 35,341 1,087 102,894 161,759 10,570 460,206 39,892 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86
         Nov 820,571 34,819 1,085 104,060 160,102 10,731 460,112 34,399 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 83         Dec 812,086 34,440 1,074 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,381 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
2005          Jan  
10,p 874,418 34,943 1,062 106,345 169,241 10,818 490,981 45,389 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including Germany to their home country. — 8Commutation and compensation debt
cash bills. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. — and old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency. — 9Since 1 July 1999
3Including loans raised abroad. — 4Including money market loans. — central government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and
employees. — 6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. — 10Since
levy. — 7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the 1 January 2005 central government has assumed joint responsibility for the
former GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection debts of the German Unity Fund. 
with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,3041998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 9402001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,4952002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 − 10,155 + 2,221 + 222003 + 227,078 + 42,292 + 62,535 + 13,636 + 42,327 + 15,947 + 109,500 + 8,874 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,218
2003          Jan-Dec + 227,078 + 42,292 + 62,535 + 13,636 + 42,327 + 15,947 + 109,500 + 8,874 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,218
2004          Jan-Dec + 228,122 + 44,389 + 52,701 + 24,187 + 35,589 + 15,842 + 130,801 + 5,313 + 7,186 − 1,620 + 1,844 + 802
2004          Jan + 26,811 + 18,326 + 12,047 + 12,048 + 385 + 385 + 11,926 + 4,748 + 533 − 776 + 1,920 − 321
         Feb + 17,553 + 3,084 + 4,971 + 4,971 + 7,849 + 375 + 5,535 − 1,156 + 760 + 456 − 1,563 − 1,186         Mar + 36,156 + 13,583 + 1,580 − 2,502 + 5,860 + 5,860 + 15,425 − 2,567 + 673 + 217 + 12,619 + 6,423
         Apr + 3,991 − 3,904 − 1,135 − 1,135 − 19 − 19 + 11,797 + 5,262 + 855 − 507 − 7,507 − 5,683
         May + 17,688 + 5,484 + 6,903 + 2,815 + 4,133 + 2,779 + 7,549 + 1,257 + 448 − 17 − 1,345 + 3,254         June + 17,741 − 279 + 1,087 + 1,087 + 146 + 146 + 13,163 − 4,717 + 187 + 44 + 3,157 + 87
         July + 30,551 + 17,300 + 12,942 + 7,859 + 405 + 405 + 11,629 + 5,371 + 1,111 + 340 + 4,464 + 7,072
         Aug + 14,595 + 3,269 + 7,108 + 7,108 + 7,463 + 2,490 + 6,575 + 489 + 335 + 70 − 6,886 + 2,285         Sep + 18,757 − 10,204 + 1,200 − 8,964 + 1,175 + 1,175 + 15,619 − 2,637 + 977 + 428 − 213 − 11,104
         Oct + 20,064 + 12,657 + 724 + 724 + 4,733 + 4,733 + 13,443 + 7,172 + 303 − 834 + 861 + 8,203
         Nov + 11,485 − 6,442 + 5,004 − 94 + 4,289 − 1,657 + 6,808 + 804 + 640 − 237 − 5,256 − 8,455         Dec + 12,730 − 8,485 + 269 + 269 − 830 − 830 + 11,333 − 8,714 + 365 − 803 + 1,593 + 226
2005          Jan 
p + 36,915 + 23,679 + 13,085 + 6,813 + 334 + 334 + 12,850 + 6,672 + 285 − 502 + 10,362 + 4,588
1After deduction of repurchases. — 2Federal Treasury notes (Schätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance fund
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Germany
1993 290,393 232,408 52,671 298,065 252,920 15,898 − 7,672 39,786 29,957 8,499 1,100 229 6,297
1994 322,335 256,662 61,891 324,323 273,880 17,751 − 1,988 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,8901995 338,185 270,294 64,387 348,115 294,034 20,285 − 9,930 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,8001996  
8 353,672 282,616 68,388 362,667 305,780 21,660 − 8,995 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 374,853 297,402 74,961 372,955 316,511 23,280 + 1,898 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 389,101 297,827 88,755 385,707 327,823 24,393 + 3,394 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,5731999 208,173 152,206 54,628 203,295 172,919 12,950 + 4,878 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,9042000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,8782003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,8622004  
9,p 231,199 156,524 71,304 232,602 198,838 14,228 − 1,403 5,171 4,984 19 41 127 4,904
2003          Q1 55,374 37,289 17,761 57,255 48,883 3,727 − 1,881 8,686 5,649 1,230 1,685 122 4,874         Q2 56,442 38,349 17,749 57,396 48,763 3,735 − 954 7,698 4,906 980 1,686 126 4,867         Q3 57,241 39,085 17,830 58,256 49,409 3,858 − 1,015 6,348 3,822 727 1,683 116 4,855         Q4 59,796 41,772 17,703 58,269 49,363 3,916 + 1,527 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004          Q1 55,431 37,289 17,846 58,350 49,858 3,873 − 2,919 5,879 3,375 696 1,681 127 4,862
         Q2 56,665 38,446 17,873 57,794 49,437 3,416 − 1,129 3,752 1,914 28 1,682 128 4,877         Q3 56,766 38,664 17,779 58,107 49,719 3,456 − 1,341 2,561 731 22 1,681 127 4,889         Q4  
9 62,336 42,126 17,807 58,350 49,824 3,484 + 3,986 5,171 4,984 19 41 127 4,904
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of deducted from pension payments. — 4From 1995, including long-term care
German Pension Insurance Funds. — 1The annual figures do not tally with insurance for pensioners. — 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993, reserves. End of year or quarter. From 1992, figures for the whole of
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending Germany. — 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security
and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government funds; including participating interests. — 8Excluding income arising from
cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance the revaluation of participating interests. — 9Revenue includes proceeds
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been from the disposal of equity interests. 
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Employment Agency
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
Promo- loans
Unemployment support  3,4 Job promotion  4,5 tion of fromwinter central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction Balance ment
Germany
1993 85,109 79,895 1,829 109,536 48,005 34,149 13,856 36,891 15,895 20,996 1,919 − 24,426 24,419
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 − 10,205 10,1421995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 − 6,892 6,8871996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 − 13,763 13,7561997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 − 9,574 9,5741998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 − 7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 − 3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 8672001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 − 1,931 1,9312002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 − 5,623 5,6232003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 272 − 6,215 6,2152004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 217 − 4,176 4,175
2003          Q1 11,617 11,281 48 14,408 7,647 5,422 2,225 4,785 2,576 2,209 180 − 2,790 5,151
         Q2 12,272 11,487 536 14,667 7,975 5,708 2,267 4,721 2,623 2,098 84 − 2,395 2,408         Q3 12,828 11,797 619 13,645 7,251 5,313 1,938 4,453 2,462 1,991 7 − 817 514         Q4 13,917 12,773 878 14,131 6,863 5,086 1,777 5,196 2,903 2,293 1 − 214 − 1,858
2004          Q1 11,524 11,261 47 14,448 8,200 6,001 2,199 4,389 2,491 1,898 144 − 2,924 5,244
         Q2 12,042 11,419 394 13,949 7,782 5,673 2,109 4,268 2,510 1,758 67 − 1,907 1,946         Q3 12,516 11,709 481 12,818 7,044 5,189 1,855 3,919 2,309 1,610 4 − 303 166         Q4 14,233 12,821 753 13,275 6,721 4,958 1,762 4,267 2,522 1,745 3 + 958 − 3,181
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government recipients of wage substitutes are paid in January instead of in
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- December. — 5Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up,
solvency compensation to employees. — 3Unemployment benefit, rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service
short-time working benefit. — 4Including contributions to the statutory Agencies (PSAs), compensation top-up payments and business start-up
health insurance funds and statutory pension insurance sheme. From 2003, grants. 
the January contributions to the statutory pension insurance scheme for
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
  2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2001   2002   2003   2004   2001   2002   2003   2004
Annual Percentage
Item € billion percentage change of total
At  1995  prices
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 450.5 444.6 443.0 445.0 466.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 0.5 4.7 22.4 22.3 22.4 23.1Construction 102.6 96.9 92.3 88.2 86.1 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 4.4 − 2.4 4.9 4.6 4.4 4.3Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 345.9 359.4 364.5 367.8 375.7 3.9 1.4 0.9 2.1 18.1 18.3 18.5 18.6
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 572.9 594.6 595.2 598.5 607.9 3.8 0.1 0.5 1.6 29.9 29.9 30.1 30.1
Public and private services  3 390.1 390.8 397.1 395.4 396.0 0.2 1.6 − 0.4 0.1 19.7 20.0 19.9 19.6
All economic sectors 1,886.5 1,910.9 1,916.2 1,918.9 1,956.4 1.3 0.3 0.1 2.0 96.2 96.4 96.7 96.9Memo item: Enterprise sector 1,657.7 1,683.0 1,688.5 1,693.3 1,731.7 1.5 0.3 0.3 2.3 84.7 85.0 85.3 85.8
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 1,786.2 1,805.9 1,811.3 1,812.7 1,849.2 1.1 0.3 0.1 2.0 90.9 91.1 91.3 91.6
Gross domestic product 1,969.5 1,986.0 1,987.6 1,985.2 2,018.2 0.8 0.1 − 0.1 1.7 100 100 100 100
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,121.2 1,140.7 1,132.5 1,132.5 1,129.4 1.7 − 0.7 0.0 − 0.3 57.4 57.0 57.0 56.0
Government consumption 378.6 382.4 389.8 390.2 391.8 1.0 1.9 0.1 0.4 19.3 19.6 19.7 19.4Machinery and equipment 176.5 167.8 153.4 151.2 153.0 − 4.9 − 8.6 − 1.4 1.2 8.4 7.7 7.6 7.6Premises 242.1 230.5 217.2 210.1 204.9 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 3.2 − 2.5 11.6 10.9 10.6 10.2Other investment  
6 25.5 26.9 27.3 27.8 28.5 5.5 1.4 1.7 2.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4
Changes in inventories  7 − 7.7 − 26.9 − 35.5 − 18.1 − 4.6 . . . . − 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.2
Domestic use 1,936.3 1,921.6 1,884.5 1,893.7 1,903.0 − 0.8 − 1.9 0.5 0.5 96.8 94.8 95.4 94.3Net exports 33.2 64.5 103.1 91.5 115.2 . . . . 3.2 5.2 4.6 5.7
Exports 660.4 698.1 726.6 740.0 800.7 5.7 4.1 1.8 8.2 35.2 36.6 37.3 39.7Imports 627.3 633.7 623.5 648.5 685.5 1.0 − 1.6 4.0 5.7 31.9 31.4 32.7 34.0
Gross domestic product 1,969.5 1,986.0 1,987.6 1,985.2 2,018.2 0.8 0.1 − 0.1 1.7 100 100 100 100
At  current  prices
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,196.8 1,237.2 1,242.2 1,255.3 1,271.0 3.4 0.4 1.1 1.3 59.7 58.9 59.0 58.4
Government consumption 385.8 394.2 405.4 408.5 406.8 2.2 2.8 0.8 − 0.4 19.0 19.2 19.2 18.7Machinery and equipment 176.7 167.4 151.9 146.9 146.8 − 5.3 − 9.3 − 3.2 − 0.1 8.1 7.2 6.9 6.7Premises 240.2 228.9 215.4 208.3 205.7 − 4.7 − 5.9 − 3.3 − 1.2 11.0 10.2 9.8 9.4Other investment  
6 23.2 24.3 24.5 24.5 24.7 5.0 0.6 0.2 0.5 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.1
Changes in inventories  7 − 0.6 − 19.3 − 26.9 − 7.6 6.4 . . . . − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.4 0.3
Domestic use 2,022.0 2,032.8 2,012.5 2,036.0 2,061.4 0.5 − 1.0 1.2 1.2 98.0 95.5 95.7 94.6Net exports 8.0 41.2 94.8 92.2 116.8 . . . . 2.0 4.5 4.3 5.4
Exports 685.3 730.7 761.6 769.3 832.0 6.6 4.2 1.0 8.2 35.2 36.1 36.1 38.2Imports 677.3 689.5 666.8 677.1 715.2 1.8 − 3.3 1.5 5.6 33.2 31.6 31.8 32.8
Gross domestic product 2,030.0 2,074.0 2,107.3 2,128.2 2,178.2 2.2 1.6 1.0 2.3 100 100 100 100
IV Prices (1995 = 100)
Private consumption 106.7 108.5 109.7 110.8 112.5 1.6 1.1 1.0 1.5 . . . .Gross domestic product 103.1 104.4 106.0 107.2 107.9 1.3 1.5 1.1 0.7 . . . .Terms of trade 96.1 96.2 98.0 99.6 99.6 0.1 1.9 1.6 0.0 . . . .
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,099.1 1,120.8 1,129.4 1,132.2 1,132.3 2.0 0.8 0.2 0.0 72.9 72.8 72.1 70.1Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 410.4 417.6 422.4 437.1 484.0 1.7 1.2 3.5 10.7 27.1 27.2 27.9 29.9
National income 1,509.5 1,538.4 1,551.9 1,569.3 1,616.4 1.9 0.9 1.1 3.0 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,021.2 2,062.9 2,088.1 2,114.2 2,168.8 2.1 1.2 1.2 2.6 . . . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in January 2005. Prelimi- products). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6In-
nary figure. — 1Including communication services. — 2Financial interme- tangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertain-
diation, real estate activities, renting and business services. — 3Including ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net in-
care-at-home services. — 4Gross value added after deduction of assumed crease in valuables. 
bank charges, but excluding taxes on products (offset against subsidies on
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-total tion  
2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
1999 95.3 103.6 100.2 94.0 94.5 91.1 96.2 98.5 97.2 92.4 93.3 89.8
2000 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9
2001 99.5 92.5 97.3 100.4 99.3 102.3 100.4 98.8 98.0 101.1 102.1 104.02002 98.3 89.0 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.42003 98.4 85.1 99.8 99.5 99.5 101.9 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.62004  
x 100.7 80.4 101.2 102.5 103.5 105.6 87.5 97.8 104.6 104.2 101.1 113.0
 
2003          Apr 98.4 92.1 100.3 98.7 100.4 99.4 85.7 96.7 105.6 102.9 93.3 108.9         May 96.0 91.1 95.3 96.5 98.9 97.3 79.8 93.9 102.4 101.3 91.9 106.9         June 100.0 98.7 91.6 101.0 102.5 103.3 83.5 97.4 103.5 97.8 101.9 106.7
         July 100.4 102.2 90.6 101.3 102.5 103.1 85.8 98.6 105.0 101.7 98.9 108.7
         Aug 90.0 90.0 90.3 90.0 93.1 86.5 67.2 95.4 98.9 88.2 85.5 80.0         Sep 102.3 100.8 92.2 103.5 103.3 106.7 97.2 99.2 97.6 101.5 104.5 110.8
         Oct 105.1 99.3 102.2 106.0 106.9 106.3 97.9 105.2 104.0 107.2 98.2 112.4
         Nov 106.4 93.2 104.6 107.8 105.3 113.8 100.1 103.1 101.4 103.3 105.8 125.0         Dec 95.0 67.1 107.0 96.2 87.1 108.8 82.9 94.2 92.7 83.0 117.8 97.5
2004          Jan 92.0 49.3 115.8 93.3 96.5 90.7 83.4 93.7 101.9 104.6 82.2 99.0
         Feb 94.1 56.7 105.8 96.3 98.6 97.0 86.5 92.1 101.6 103.1 87.4 112.0         Mar 105.1 76.2 109.7 107.3 107.8 111.9 96.0 99.6 107.3 111.6 105.9 123.6
         Apr 100.9 85.9 102.3 102.1 104.4 104.1 88.2 96.4 107.4 104.1 98.2 116.3
         May 99.9 86.8 97.1 101.4 103.5 104.3 86.3 94.9 102.3 105.4 98.3 117.2         June 103.6 93.0 90.6 106.0 107.2 111.4 87.1 97.3 103.2 111.3 106.1 122.6
         July 103.3 95.5 92.3 105.3 107.2 108.3 87.2 99.3 105.8 106.6 105.1 113.7
         Aug 93.8 85.5 90.3 94.9 98.7 93.4 68.3 95.9 103.7 94.0 89.3 91.9         Sep 106.7 95.0 94.2 109.2 109.1 114.7 97.1 101.5 106.0 107.3 112.4 122.4
         Oct  
x 107.7 93.3 103.0 109.5 110.0 113.2 95.7 104.3 108.6 107.6 104.9 125.3
         Nov  x 105.8 85.7 104.9 107.8 107.7 111.7 93.5 103.9 108.0 106.0 105.2 118.7
         Dec  x 95.4 62.0 108.6 97.1 91.6 106.2 80.7 95.0 99.7 88.2 117.9 93.7
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.9 + 3.5 − 3.6 − 2.3 + 3.2
2000 + 4.8 − 3.5 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 9.7 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 8.2 + 7.1 + 11.2
2001 − 0.4 − 7.5 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 2.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.1 + 2.2 + 4.12002 − 1.2 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.32003 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 5.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 + 2.12004  
x + 2.3 − 5.5 + 1.4 + 3.0 + 4.0 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.5 + 4.3 + 3.4 + 5.0
 
2003          Apr + 0.3 − 4.3 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 4.9 + 1.0 + 3.1 − 1.4 − 4.0 + 2.8         May + 0.4 − 3.9 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 4.4 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 5.8         June − 2.0 − 1.5 + 5.3 − 2.7 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 8.8 − 6.6 − 7.8
         July + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 6.6
         Aug − 2.6 − 4.3 + 1.1 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 3.9 − 9.2 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 7.3 + 0.4 − 12.8         Sep − 2.3 − 3.5 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 2.3 − 2.0 − 6.4 − 2.9 − 5.4 − 6.0 − 4.0 − 3.2
         Oct + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.9 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.9
         Nov + 0.7 − 3.1 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 2.7 − 3.3 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 4.3         Dec + 2.7 + 5.3 + 0.4 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 3.3 − 0.5 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 7.7
2004          Jan + 1.9 − 4.8 + 5.0 + 1.7 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 3.7 + 1.7 − 2.8
         Feb + 1.8 + 10.1 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 4.7 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.4 + 3.4 + 3.1 − 4.4 + 1.0         Mar + 0.5 − 9.2 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.8 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 2.4 + 1.8
         Apr + 2.5 − 6.7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 4.0 + 4.7 + 2.9 − 0.3 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 5.3 + 6.8
         May + 4.1 − 4.7 + 1.9 + 5.1 + 4.7 + 7.2 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 7.0 + 9.6         June + 3.6 − 5.8 − 1.1 + 5.0 + 4.6 + 7.8 + 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 13.8 + 4.1 + 14.9
         July + 2.9 − 6.6 + 1.9 + 3.9 + 4.6 + 5.0 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 4.8 + 6.3 + 4.6
         Aug + 4.2 − 5.0
+ 0.0 + 5.4 + 6.0 + 8.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 4.9 + 6.6 + 4.4 + 14.9
         Sep + 4.3 − 5.8 + 2.2 + 5.5 + 5.6 + 7.5 − 0.1 + 2.3 + 8.6 + 5.7 + 7.6 + 10.5
         Oct  x + 2.5 − 6.0 + 0.8 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 6.5 − 2.2 − 0.9 + 4.4 + 0.4 + 6.8 + 11.5
         Nov  x − 0.6 − 8.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 1.8 − 6.6 + 0.8 + 6.5 + 2.6 − 0.6 − 5.0
         Dec  x + 0.4 − 7.6 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 5.2 − 2.4 − 2.7 + 0.8 + 7.6 + 6.3 + 0.1 − 3.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — oUsing the facture of refined petroleum products. — 4Including mining and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities related to prin-
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Build- ting. — xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office,
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey for
3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in particular, mining of the fourth quarter (industry: on average -1.9%). 
coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas and manu-
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which of which
 
Industry,
total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
Germany  
  
2000 100.0 + 13.9 99.9 + 8.2 100.0 + 21.8 99.9 + 14.0 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 4.2
2001 98.3 − 1.7 97.6 − 2.3 99.1 − 0.9 95.9 − 4.0 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.52002 98.3
+ 0.0 94.6 − 3.1 102.8 + 3.7 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 99.0 − 2.4
2003 99.0 + 0.7 94.7 + 0.1 104.4 + 1.6 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.1 95.4 − 3.6
2004  p 104.7 + 5.8 98.3 + 3.8 112.6 + 7.9 104.9 + 7.3 106.9 + 6.2 94.8 − 0.6
 
2003          Dec 98.0 + 6.8 89.7 + 1.5 108.5 + 12.9 91.1 + 5.3 106.4 + 8.9 86.9 + 1.5
2004          Jan 99.8 + 1.2 93.7 + 1.2 107.4 + 1.1 101.8 + 3.2 99.9 + 0.7 93.0 − 3.5
         Feb 101.2 + 2.4 95.9 + 0.4 107.8 + 4.8 102.2 + 5.6 101.2 + 1.5 98.4 − 3.6         Mar 111.1 + 5.3 105.2 + 5.2 118.6 + 5.5 110.8 + 5.4 113.2 + 6.9 103.7 − 1.1
         Apr 104.1 + 7.1 98.0 + 5.4 111.8 + 9.1 106.3 + 9.1 105.2 + 6.8 92.8 + 1.6
         May 104.0 + 11.7 95.1 + 4.5 115.1 + 20.1 105.0 + 12.3 107.1 + 13.3 88.2 + 2.2         June 105.6 + 4.9 98.4 + 3.5 114.6 + 6.5 107.3 + 8.9 108.3 + 2.9 89.3 + 0.1
         July 105.4 + 8.0 99.5 + 4.8 112.8 + 11.8 107.0 + 9.1 106.6 + 8.8 95.2 + 1.4
         Aug 96.0 + 6.8 92.4 + 5.8 100.4 + 7.7 98.9 + 10.6 94.5 + 5.6 91.7 − 1.3         Sep 108.4 + 5.3 99.9 + 1.5 119.0 + 9.7 108.1 + 7.1 110.4 + 5.7 100.8 − 1.9
         Oct 108.1 + 5.3 102.4 + 3.3 115.3 + 7.5 108.9 + 6.2 109.7 + 6.6 99.5 − 3.3
         Nov 105.3 + 2.8 99.9 + 0.7 112.0 + 5.2 106.8 + 4.6 106.1 + 1.6 97.2 + 1.7         Dec  
p 106.9 + 9.1 99.4 + 10.8 116.4 + 7.3 96.1 + 5.5 120.3 + 13.1 87.5 + 0.7
Western Germany  
  
2000 100.0 + 13.6 99.9 + 7.8 100.0 + 21.4 100.0 + 13.6 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 3.5
2001 97.8 − 2.2 97.2 − 2.7 98.5 − 1.5 95.0 − 5.0 99.1 − 0.9 101.1 + 1.22002 97.3 − 0.5 93.7 − 3.6 101.6 + 3.1 95.1 + 0.1 98.9 − 0.2 98.3 − 2.82003 97.6 + 0.3 93.2 − 0.5 102.9 + 1.3 95.7 + 0.6 99.9 + 1.0 94.3 − 4.12004  
p 103.2 + 5.7 96.5 + 3.5 111.1 + 8.0 102.4 + 7.0 106.2 + 6.3 93.4 − 1.0
 
2003          Dec 96.0 + 6.1 88.0 + 1.3 105.5 + 11.4 89.7 + 4.9 103.4 + 7.9 85.3 + 0.7
2004          Jan 98.1 + 0.5 92.4 + 0.7 105.0 + 0.4 99.8 + 4.0 98.4 − 1.0 91.9 − 3.8
         Feb 99.8 + 1.9 94.2 − 0.6 106.5 + 4.7 100.2 + 5.1 100.1 + 1.0 97.5 − 4.1         Mar 109.6 + 5.2 103.6 + 4.9 116.9 + 5.7 108.3 + 4.8 112.5 + 7.2 102.6 − 1.3
         Apr 102.8 + 7.2 96.3 + 5.1 110.7 + 9.5 103.9 + 9.1 104.9 + 7.2 91.3 + 1.4
         May 102.3 + 11.2 93.0 + 3.9 113.4 + 19.5 102.2 + 11.8 106.2 + 13.0 86.5 + 1.6         June 103.6 + 3.9 96.3 + 3.3 112.3 + 4.5 104.6 + 8.5 106.8 + 1.5 87.8 − 0.5
         July 104.1 + 7.9 97.9 + 4.5 111.5 + 11.7 104.3 + 8.8 106.4 + 8.8 94.0 + 1.0
         Aug 94.5 + 6.7 90.4 + 5.6 99.4 + 7.8 96.0 + 10.9 94.2 + 5.6 90.3 − 1.6         Sep 106.7 + 5.3 97.6 + 1.3 117.6 + 9.5 105.4 + 6.9 109.5 + 5.9 99.3 − 2.5
         Oct 106.5 + 5.2 100.6 + 3.6 113.6 + 7.1 106.3 + 6.2 108.8 + 6.8 97.9 − 3.6
         Nov 103.4 + 3.1 97.6 + 0.2 110.4 + 6.4 103.7 + 3.8 105.1 + 2.8 95.8 + 1.9         Dec  
p 106.4 + 10.8 98.4 + 11.8 115.9 + 9.9 93.6 + 4.3 121.4 + 17.4 85.6 + 0.4
Eastern Germany  
  
2000 99.9 + 18.1 100.0 + 13.9 99.9 + 29.7 99.9 + 20.7 100.0 + 16.3 100.0 + 15.12001 104.9 + 5.0 102.4 + 2.4 110.9 + 11.0 106.0 + 6.1 103.4 + 3.4 106.1 + 6.12002 111.0 + 5.8 104.0 + 1.6 127.9 + 15.3 111.7 + 5.4 110.7 + 7.1 109.4 + 3.12003 117.9 + 6.2 110.8 + 6.5 135.1 + 5.6 122.8 + 9.9 114.1 + 3.1 112.7 + 3.02004  
p 125.5 + 6.4 117.6 + 6.1 144.7 + 7.1 135.0 + 9.9 117.5 + 3.0 117.4 + 4.2
 
2003          Dec 127.3 + 14.5 108.3 + 3.2 173.2 + 37.2 106.8 + 7.8 152.6 + 20.3 112.5 + 13.9
2004          Jan 122.7 + 9.0 107.8 + 6.4 158.5 + 13.4 125.8 − 3.3 122.5 + 29.5 110.0 − 0.2
         Feb 120.7 + 8.7 114.3 + 10.4 136.0 + 5.3 125.4 + 10.1 117.7 + 8.0 112.6 + 5.4         Mar 131.8 + 6.1 122.5 + 8.6 154.2 + 1.6 139.7 + 10.3 125.9 + 2.4 121.9 + 2.7
         Apr 121.9 + 6.0 116.0 + 7.6 136.0 + 2.6 135.1 + 9.6 109.4 + 1.9 116.0 + 4.8
         May 127.3 + 16.7 117.6 + 10.1 150.7 + 31.4 136.6 + 16.4 120.6 + 19.3 114.6 + 7.9         June 133.5 + 17.1 120.6 + 4.3 164.5 + 49.4 139.4 + 13.1 131.9 + 24.4 114.2 + 7.3
         July 123.9 + 10.4 117.2 + 9.0 140.2 + 13.4 138.5 + 11.7 110.6 + 9.3 115.7 + 9.0
         Aug 116.2 + 7.2 113.7 + 7.7 122.2 + 6.1 132.7 + 9.6 99.2 + 4.8 114.3 + 4.2         Sep 131.6 + 5.9 124.7 + 3.1 148.2 + 12.2 139.2 + 8.4 124.9 + 3.2 125.7 + 4.8
         Oct 131.1 + 5.0 122.1 + 0.9 152.6 + 14.0 139.5 + 6.5 123.5 + 4.1 125.3 + 1.6
         Nov 131.0 − 1.0 124.3 + 4.9 147.3 − 11.0 142.6 + 12.0 121.5 − 13.4 120.4 − 0.9         Dec  
p 114.8 − 9.8 110.0 + 1.6 126.2 − 27.1 125.9 + 17.9 102.3 − 33.0 117.8 + 4.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2000 99.9 − 8.6 100.0 99.9 100.0 99.9 − 7.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 − 13.4 100.0 99.9 100.0
2001 94.5 − 5.4 82.9 96.9 99.0 97.4 − 2.5 87.6 99.9 100.6 85.2 − 14.8 68.3 86.4 94.12002 88.7 − 6.1 72.8 91.5 95.6 90.9 − 6.7 79.6 93.1 95.6 81.7 − 4.1 51.9 85.8 95.72003 79.2 − 10.7 67.5 78.4 87.4 80.8 − 11.1 74.5 78.3 87.8 74.2 − 9.2 46.0 79.2 86.2
   
2003          Nov 69.1 − 7.5 61.9 73.5 68.8 71.0 − 3.8 69.5 74.0 68.5 63.1 − 18.8 38.8 71.6 69.4         Dec 69.3 − 12.6 66.7 68.4 71.9 71.1 − 14.4 73.9 68.4 72.5 63.4 − 5.8 44.9 68.3 69.8
2004          Jan 53.2 − 6.2 41.4 65.7 46.5 55.3 − 5.5 47.8 67.6 45.4 46.7 − 8.8 22.0 58.7 49.8
         Feb 66.2 + 2.8 58.3 75.3 60.8 67.3 − 0.3 64.7 79.2 54.9 62.6 + 15.3 38.7 61.8 77.7         Mar 81.8 − 7.7 70.8 72.6 99.2 83.4 − 9.1 81.0 70.8 99.9 76.8 − 2.8 39.5 79.2 96.9
         Apr 77.1 − 6.5 62.8 72.4 91.2 78.7 − 7.4 71.6 73.3 89.6 71.9 − 3.5 36.1 69.4 95.9
         May 75.8 − 8.3 66.6 65.2 93.5 77.0 − 5.6 73.8 64.3 94.0 71.9 − 16.6 44.7 68.4 91.8         June 89.6 − 5.1 72.9 82.6 107.9 92.0 − 4.1 82.3 83.7 107.9 81.8 − 8.7 44.2 78.5 107.6
         July 78.9 − 12.9 63.4 71.9 96.6 80.9 − 11.3 70.8 71.9 97.8 72.9 − 18.2 41.0 72.1 92.8
         Aug 77.6 − 4.2 60.7 74.2 91.9 78.0 − 4.4 68.6 73.5 89.3 76.1 − 3.9 36.4 76.6 99.3         Sep 85.9 − 5.8 71.1 80.2 101.7 88.5 − 3.1 82.2 82.5 99.7 77.7 − 14.6 37.4 72.0 107.6
         Oct 74.9 − 6.5 59.3 72.6 87.2 78.1 − 6.4 69.3 74.2 88.3 64.6 − 7.2 28.8 66.9 83.8
         Nov 61.3 − 11.3 51.0 61.7 67.2 62.6 − 11.8 58.2 61.9 66.1 57.2 − 9.4 28.9 61.1 70.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oBundesbank calculation. — 1Including the
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications railways and post office. 
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there-
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  By enterprises’ main product range of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco  2 products  2 leather goods  2 ing materials  2 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100
1996 96.8 − 0.2 − 1.1 96.6 − 0.7 81.6 + 3.6 103.0 − 1.2 96.2 − 1.5 95.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 91.0 + 5.7
1997 96.1 − 0.7 − 1.4 95.8 − 0.8 83.4 + 2.2 101.4 − 1.6 95.3 − 0.9 96.0 + 0.1 − 0.5 94.4 + 3.7
1998 97.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 97.3 + 1.6 88.1 + 5.6 100.2 − 1.2 98.4 + 3.3 97.5 + 1.6 + 1.5 98.9 + 4.81999 97.6 + 0.6 + 0.3 98.0 + 0.7 94.4 + 7.2 99.9 − 0.3 97.4 − 1.0 98.4 + 0.9 + 0.4 102.2 + 3.3
2000 100.0 + 2.5 + 1.3 99.9 + 1.9 100.1 + 6.0 99.9
+ 0.0 99.9 + 2.6 100.0 + 1.6 + 0.4 100.0 − 2.2
2001 101.8 + 1.8 . 104.6 + 4.7 107.4 + 7.3 99.5 − 0.4 96.6 − 3.3 102.0 + 2.0 . 102.9 + 2.9
2002 100.2 − 1.6 − 2.1 107.3 + 2.6 111.2 + 3.5 94.5 − 5.0 89.0 − 7.9 101.2 − 0.8 − 1.4 105.9 + 2.92003 99.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 109.5 + 2.1 113.9 + 2.4 89.3 − 5.5 88.0 − 1.1 101.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 107.8 + 1.82004  
e 97.7 − 2.1 − 2.3 107.6 − 1.7 113.0 − 0.8 87.9 − 1.6 87.2 − 0.9 98.9 − 2.4 − 2.8 ... ...
 
2003          Dec 120.9 − 0.7 − 1.1 127.3 + 1.0 144.2 + 12.0 109.9 − 7.0 103.9 − 1.9 116.1 − 1.0 − 1.6 100.2 − 2.7
2004          Jan 89.9 − 2.0 − 2.0 100.5 + 1.8 100.8 − 7.9 74.0 − 6.6 78.7 + 1.0 88.7 − 2.2 − 2.5 85.3 − 3.2
         Feb 85.7 − 3.4 − 2.8 97.4 − 1.4 100.1 − 5.2 67.6 − 1.6 77.2 − 0.5 86.6 − 3.5 − 3.3 90.8 − 3.7         Mar 100.4 − 2.0 − 1.5 111.5 − 1.8 112.6 + 1.2 87.5 − 6.9 92.7 − 2.1 102.8 − 3.2 − 3.2 112.6 − 6.6
         Apr 99.7 − 2.0 − 2.0 110.3 − 0.8 112.2 + 0.2 95.2 + 3.5 91.5 − 0.7 102.9 − 1.8 − 2.4 114.7 − 1.8
         May 95.8 − 2.6 − 3.2 108.4 + 0.2 107.9 − 2.1 85.3 − 6.5 86.6 − 2.1 99.2 − 2.7 − 3.8 111.8 − 3.1         June 93.8 − 2.5 − 3.0 105.8 − 2.8 110.6 + 0.2 81.2 − 4.5 83.3 + 0.2 97.1 − 3.2 − 3.9 109.6 − 5.4
         July 96.0 − 1.7 − 2.1 108.3 − 1.3 116.2 + 0.3 86.0
+ 0.0 83.8 − 0.7 99.3 − 2.5 − 3.0 111.9 − 4.4
         Aug 93.2 − 0.1 − 0.7 105.7 − 2.3 109.2 + 2.4 78.3 + 3.2 81.6 + 1.1 93.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 94.6 − 6.0
         Sep 95.5 − 2.3 − 2.5 101.5 − 3.7 110.7 + 0.9 92.6 − 2.4 84.5 + 0.1 96.3 − 2.7 − 3.1 99.8 − 4.6
         Oct 102.7 − 1.5 − 1.9 108.3 − 3.5 119.8 + 3.6 105.5 + 0.2 93.3 + 0.2 104.0 − 1.5 − 2.1 110.1 − 1.7
         Nov 101.6 − 2.7 − 2.7 109.1 − 2.8 115.0 − 1.1 92.0 + 2.8 91.7 − 3.9 102.8 − 1.9 − 2.0 109.2 + 0.7         Dec  
e 118.0 − 2.4 − 2.8 124.6 − 2.1 140.4 − 2.6 110.0 + 0.1 101.4 − 2.4 113.5 − 2.2 − 2.6 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding ding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of auto-
value-added tax; figures from 2003 provisional, partly revised and, judging motive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor vehicle parts and
by past experience, subject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent accessories.— 4Up to (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices; from 2001, at
months. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Exclu- 2000 prices. 
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed  2 
Persons
Mining employed Persons
and under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- vocationaling Con- time motion further Unem-
Annual change Annual sector  
2 Annual ploy- Vacan- schemes  2,5 training  2 workers  2 struction  4 
percen- change, ment cies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- rate  2,6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands in % sands  2 
Germany  
  
2002 38,698 − 0.6 − 225 34,598 − 0.7 6,217 7 883 207 207 340 4,061 + 209 9.8 452
2003 38,316 − 1.0 − 382 34,146 − 1.3 8 6,136 817 195 146 260 4,377 + 315 10.5 355
2004 o 38,441 o + 0.3 o + 125 ... ... ... ... 151 p 117 p 184 9 4,381 9 +9 3 9 10.5 286
2004          Jan 37,765 − 0.3 − 96 6,035 737 164 126 217 9 4,597 9 +3 7 9 11.0 277
         Feb 37,780 − 0.2 − 64 33,582 − 0.6 6,019 711 186 119 203 4,641 + 15 11.1 309
         Mar 38,009 + 0.0 + 12 6,018 761 197 115 200 4,547 + 30 10.9 324
         Apr 38,285 + 0.2 + 87 6,013 778 177 105 199 4,443 + 32 10.7 324
         May 38,402 + 0.3 + 119 34,058 − 0.2 6,004 782 171 108 197 4,293 + 43 10 10.3 319
         June 38,479 + 0.3 + 116 6,006 786 162 113 185 4,233 + 62 10.2 305
         July 38,494 + 0.4 + 145 6,018 786 138 118 165 4,360 + 83 10.5 297
         Aug 38,566 + 0.5 + 183 34,224 − 0.1 6,042 788 107 122 158 4,347 + 110 10.5 287         Sep 38,792 + 0.5 + 203 6,052 788 115 124 166 4,257 + 160 10.3 269
         Oct 38,945 + 0.6 + 230 6,028 778 125 122 167 4,207 + 187 10.1 245
         Nov 38,961 + 0.7 + 271 ... ... 6,009 768 133p 114 p 163 4,257 + 208 10.3 229
         Dec o 38,808 o + 0.8 o + 291 ... ... 133 p 100 p 149 4,464 + 244 10.8 225
2005          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... p 87p 136 11 5,037 11 + 440 11 12.1 p 268
Western Germnay 12 
  
2002 . . . . . 5,593 7 654 162 45 198 2,498 + 178 7.7 378
2003 . . . . . 8 5,503 607 160 31 161 2,753 + 255 8.4 292
2004 . . . . . ... ... 122 p 24p 121 9 2,781 9 +8 7 9 8.5 239
2004          Jan . . . . . 5,401 553 135 23 139 9 2,927 9 +7 1 9 8.9 234
         Feb . . . . . 5,386 535 151 22 131 2,945 + 49 8.9 263         Mar . . . . . 5,384 571 159 22 130 2,871 + 52 8.7 275
         Apr . . . . . 5,377 582 143 22 130 2,805 + 50 8.5 274
         May . . . . . 5,368 584 139 24 130 2,710 + 5810 8.2 265
         June . . . . . 5,368 586 133 25 123 2,669 + 65 8.1 253
         July . . . . . 5,378 585 112 26 110 2,760 + 79 8.4 247
         Aug . . . . . 5,397 586 84 26 105 2,764 + 92 8.4 239         Sep . . . . . 5,405 586 92 27 111 2,700 + 119 8.2 222
         Oct . . . . . 5,381 579 102 26 112 2,692 + 140 8.2 204
         Nov . . . . . 5,363 572 105p 25p 109 2,727 + 149 8.3 191
         Dec . . . . . ... ... 105 p 23p 99 2,860 + 173 8.7 192
2005          Jan . . . . . ... ... ... p 20p 9011 3,266 11 + 339 11 9.9 p 228
Eastern Germany 13  
  
2002 . . . . . 624 7 229 45 161 142 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2003 . . . . . 8 632 210 35 115 99 1,624 + 61 18.5 63
2004 . . . . . ... ... 29 p 93p 639 1,600 9 +6 9 18.4 47
2004          Jan . . . . . 634 183 29 103 78 9 1,670 9 −3 3 9 19.1 43
         Feb . . . . . 633 175 35 97 72 1,696 − 33 19.4 46         Mar . . . . . 633 190 37 93 70 1,676 − 22 19.2 49
         Apr . . . . . 637 196 34 83 69 1,639 − 18 18.8 51
         May . . . . . 637 198 32 85 67 1,583 − 1510 18.3 54
         June . . . . . 638 200 29 88 62 1,565 − 3 18.1 53
         July . . . . . 641 201 26 93 55 1,600 + 4 18.5 50
         Aug . . . . . 645 202 24 96 54 1,582 + 18 18.3 48         Sep . . . . . 647 202 24 98 55 1,557 + 41 18.0 47
         Oct . . . . . 647 199 23 96 55 1,514 + 47 17.5 42
         Nov . . . . . 646 196 27p 89p 54 1,530 + 59 17.7 38
         Dec . . . . . ... ... 28 p 77p 50 1,604 + 71 18.5 33
2005          Jan . . . . . ... ... ... p 67p 4711 1,771 11 + 101 11 20.5 p 40
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Monthly affected by the fact that firms which are required to report and which have
figures: end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; short- been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are inclu-
time workers: mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: averages. — ded for the first time. — 9From January 2004, unemployed persons
1Work-place concept.— 2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundesbank; de- excluding all those participating in occupational aptitude testing and
viations from the official figures are due to rounding. — 3Including active training schemes. — 10From May 2004, calculated on the basis of new
proprietors. — 4The figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site labour force figures. — 11Provisional; Rise influenced by inclusion of social
preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil assistance recipients able to work, who were previously not registere da s
engineering”. — 5Employees involved in job creation schemes and struc- unemployed. — 12Excluding western Berlin; for the mining, manufacturing
tural adjustment measures (SAM). — 6Relative to the total civilian labour and construction sectors, including persons employed in western Berlin. —
force. — 7The figures from March 2002 onwards are positively affected by 13Including western Berlin; for the mining, manufacturing and construction
the fact that construction firms which are required to report and which sectors, excluding persons employed in western Berlin. — oFirst preliminary
have been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are estimate. included for the first time. — 8The figures from 2003 onwards are positively
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index HWWA
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1999 98.6 100.6 100.3 87.7 99.0 98.8 99.3 2 97.0 89.9 97.0 90.8 57.6 83.1
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 95.4 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.4 101.2 100.3 103.0 100.8 101.0 100.6 91.4 91.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 104.9 102.6 100.2 102.4 94.6 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.12003 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 104.1 94.8 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.92004 106.2 105.7 102.9 114.8 108.9 104.8 101.4 105.8 ... 101.1 97.2 101.4 96.3
 
2003          Apr 104.3 106.6 101.4 110.2 105.8 103.7 104.2 94.6 100.9 96.5 76.0 87.8         May 104.1 106.8 101.4 108.2 105.6 103.7 100.3 103.9 93.9 100.5 95.2 72.5 83.5         June 104.4 107.1 101.3 108.8 106.1 103.8 103.9 95.4 100.3 95.1 77.0 81.3
         July 104.6 106.3 101.1 109.2 107.4 103.8 104.1 92.4 100.3 95.2 81.5 82.7
         Aug 104.6 105.1 101.0 110.4 107.7 103.9 100.3 104.1 94.0 100.4 95.8 86.4 85.2         Sep 104.5 105.6 101.4 109.7 106.7 103.9 104.2 97.4 100.5 95.7 78.7 87.5
         Oct 104.5 105.7 101.4 110.0 106.4 103.9 104.2 96.2 100.4 95.5 81.0 88.7
         Nov 104.3 105.5 101.4 109.5 105.8 104.1 100.3 104.2 97.6 100.4 95.5 81.7 91.0         Dec 105.1 105.7 101.4 109.4 109.0 104.1 104.2 96.1 100.2 95.1 80.7 89.4
2004          Jan 105.2 106.9 102.1 110.5 107.2 104.4 104.0 96.6 100.2 95.2 82.6 92.8
         Feb 105.4 106.4 101.9 110.2 108.3 104.5 100.5 104.1 97.8 100.3 95.3 82.2 96.2         Mar 105.7 106.1 103.1 111.4 108.0 104.6 104.7 98.2 100.8 96.4 91.2 103.5
         Apr 106.0 106.3 103.3 113.1 108.1 104.7 105.1 96.8 101.1 96.9 94.9 105.1
         May 106.2 106.6 103.1 116.1 108.1 104.7 101.4 105.6 96.0 101.3 97.6 104.5 101.1         June 106.2 106.7 103.1 114.2 108.6 104.8 105.5 97.6 101.1 97.0 100.8 99.1
         July 106.5 106.0 102.8 115.5 109.9 104.8 106.1 97.0 101.2 97.3 104.7 97.6
         Aug 106.7 104.9 102.8 117.3 110.3 105.0 101.8 106.4 94.5 101.5 98.2 114.3 94.6         Sep 106.4 104.3 102.9 116.6 109.2 105.0 106.6 94.5 101.5 98.3 112.7 93.5
         Oct 106.6 104.2 102.9 120.4 108.9 105.1 107.6 93.3 101.7 99.4 123.0 92.0
         Nov 106.2 104.1 103.0 117.2 108.4 105.2 102.0 107.1
p 93.6 101.6 98.1 108.1 91.4
         Dec 107.3 105.3 103.7 114.5 111.7 105.2 107.2 p 94.1 101.2 97.2 96.8 89.2
2005          Jan e 106.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 107.5 91.0
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 2 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 37.1 − 6.2
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 2 + 3.1 + 6.1 + 3.1 + 10.1 + 73.6 + 20.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.12002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.92003 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.62004 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.5 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 ... + 0.5 + 1.0 + 22.3 + 10.8
 
2003          Apr + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 19.5 − 6.2         May + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 20.7 − 8.0         June + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 3.1 − 8.7 − 9.6
         July + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 7.5
         Aug + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.1
+ 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 5.2
         Sep + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 15.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 10.5 − 3.7
         Nov + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 4.2 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.2         Dec + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 7.5 − 0.2
2004          Jan + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 10.4 + 5.1
         Feb + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 15.5 + 7.2         Mar + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.5 − 2.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.9 + 17.2
         Apr + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 24.9 + 19.7
         May + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 7.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 2.5 + 44.1 + 21.1         June + 1.7 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 5.0 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.5 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 2.0 + 30.9 + 21.9
         July + 1.8 − 0.3 + 1.7 + 5.8 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 5.0 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 28.5 + 18.0
         Aug + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 32.3 + 11.0         Sep + 1.8 − 1.2 + 1.5 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 2.3 − 3.0 + 1.0 + 2.7 + 43.2 + 6.9
         Oct + 2.0 − 1.4 + 1.5 + 9.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 3.3 − 3.0 + 1.3 + 4.1 + 51.9 + 3.7
         Nov + 1.8 − 1.3 + 1.6 + 7.0 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 2.8
p − 4.1 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 32.3 + 0.4
         Dec + 2.1 − 0.4 + 2.3 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 2.9 p − 2.1 + 1.0 + 2.2 + 20.0 − 0.2
2005          Jan e + 1.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... + 30.1 − 1.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWA Index of World Market Prices. — tion price level. — 4Excluding value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Previously: Overall construc- industrial raw materials. 
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999 € billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM / 
€ change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 − 1.8 12.31994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 − 0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 − 2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 − 0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 − 0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 − 1.0 10.81997 1,591.3 − 0.2 1,015.9 − 1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 − 0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 − 1.9 10.41998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.31999 855.4 3.0 549.2 3.4 327.5 3.1 876.7 3.3 1,281.1 3.4 125.1 − 1.9 9.8
2000 884.7 3.4 571.8 4.1 336.8 2.8 908.6 3.6 1,325.8 3.5 129.0 3.1 9.7
2001 904.2 2.2 592.9 3.7 348.1 3.3 941.0 3.6 1,377.6 3.9 140.4 8.8 10.22002 911.2 0.8 595.3 0.4 364.4 4.7 959.7 2.0 1,388.5 0.8 146.3 4.2 10.52003 909.8 − 0.2 590.5 − 0.8 373.9 2.6 964.4 0.5 1,406.4 1.3 151.1 3.3 10.7
2002          Q4 254.3 0.3 164.4 0.1 91.5 4.1 255.8 1.5 357.9 1.2 34.1 6.4 9.5
2003          Q1 211.2 0.3 137.0 − 0.6 94.1 3.1 231.1 0.9 352.4 2.1 50.1 5.6 14.2
         Q2 218.7 − 0.1 138.9 − 1.0 92.7 2.8 231.6 0.5 349.4 1.8 35.3 3.8 10.1         Q3 227.2 − 0.1 151.6 − 0.7 93.1 1.7 244.7 0.2 346.0 1.1 32.0 4.3 9.3         Q4 252.7 − 0.6 163.0 − 0.8 94.0 2.8 257.0 0.5 358.6 0.2 33.7 − 1.1 9.4
2004          Q1 211.7 0.2 138.9 1.4 95.2 1.1 234.0 1.3 356.5 1.2 50.9 1.5 14.3
         Q2 219.4 0.3 142.3 2.4 92.4 − 0.3 234.7 1.3 353.5 1.2 36.7 3.9 10.4         Q3 226.3 − 0.4 153.1 1.0 92.3 − 0.9 245.4 0.3 350.9 1.4 33.2 3.5 9.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2004. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (workplace concept)  2 (workplace concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change change 1995 = 100
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.0 1.9 105.7 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.3 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.7 2.8 104.3 1.5 111.0 3.1 109.6 3.0 108.3 1.8
2000 111.3 2.0 110.9 2.0 105.9 1.6 113.3 2.0 111.8 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.5 1.9 113.0 1.9 107.9 1.9 115.3 1.8 113.6 1.7 113.7 2.22002 116.5 2.7 116.0 2.7 109.5 1.5 118.9 3.2 117.2 3.1 116.0 2.02003 118.8 1.9 118.3 2.0 110.8 1.1 121.9 2.5 120.0 2.4 . .2004 120.4 1.3 120.2 1.5 . . 124.2 1.9 122.3 1.9 . .
2003          Q1 109.2 2.8 108.7 2.9 104.0 1.9 109.6 3.1 108.0 3.0 . .
         Q2 109.9 2.2 109.5 2.2 106.7 1.5 111.8 2.5 110.0 2.4 . .         Q3 122.6 1.9 122.2 2.0 110.4 1.1 131.0 2.2 128.9 2.1 . .         Q4 133.5 1.1 133.0 1.2 122.1 0.2 135.2 2.3 133.1 2.2 . .
2004          Q1 111.1 1.7 110.8 1.9 104.7 0.8 113.1 3.2 111.4 3.2 . .
         Q2 111.6 1.5 111.3 1.7 107.2 0.5 113.4 1.4 111.7 1.5 . .         Q3 123.9 1.0 123.6 1.2 110.1 − 0.3 132.1 0.8 130.1 0.9 . .         Q4 135.0 1.1 134.8 1.4 . . 138.3 2.2 136.2 2.3 . .
2004          June 111.6 1.5 111.4 1.6 . . 113.2 1.1 111.5 1.2 . .
         July 147.5 0.5 147.2 0.6 . . 169.5 1.3 167.0 1.4 . .
         Aug 112.1 1.7 111.8 1.8 . . 113.4 1.4 111.7 1.5 . .         Sep 112.1 1.1 111.9 1.3 . . 113.4 − 0.4 111.7 − 0.3 . .
         Oct 113.0 2.4 112.8 2.7 . . 116.2 3.8 114.5 3.9 . .
         Nov 179.6 0.0 179.4 0.3 . . 185.1 1.9 182.3 1.9 . .         Dec 112.3 1.5 112.2 1.8 . . 113.5 1.2 111.8 1.3 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal
reports. — 2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in Statistical Office, using the old and new classifications of the economic
November 2004. — 3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and sectors. 
hot water supply, and excluding installation and building completion work.
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
X External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2004
Item 2001  1 2002 2003 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep Oct Nov
Current account − 11,042 + 57,815 + 21,832 + 13,644 + 5,832 + 9,886 + 1,500 + 1,192 + 3,247A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,034,831 1,062,941 1,040,226 265,894 285,730 280,455 95,829 100,115 101,286
Imports (fob) 961,438 934,034 934,945 237,265 254,217 255,895 90,808 92,443 95,210
Balance + 73,390 + 128,906 + 105,278 + 28,630 + 31,513 + 24,559 + 5,021 + 7,672 + 6,076
2 Services
Receipts 322,172 333,501 328,849 76,002 88,798 94,587 30,900 29,066 26,418
Expenditure 322,505 317,528 310,961 75,938 79,203 86,504 28,021 26,695 26,022
Balance − 336 + 15,973 + 17,886 + 64 + 9,596 + 8,082 + 2,879 + 2,371 + 396
3 Income − 32,588 − 38,509 − 44,830 − 8,047 − 18,865 − 5,135 − 182 − 3,274 + 1,364
4 Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 78,834 85,398 80,792 31,678 15,476 15,866 5,140 4,192 5,528
Transfer payments to non-residents 130,345 133,949 137,295 38,680 31,887 33,486 11,358 9,770 10,117
Balance − 51,514 − 48,554 − 56,502 − 7,003 − 16,411 − 17,622 − 6,219 − 5,578 − 4,589
Capital account + 6,465 + 10,165 + 13,170 + 3,588 + 4,019 + 4,088 + 1,115 + 614 + 985B
Financial account (net capital exports: −) − 45,547 − 62,094 − 17,925 − 12,206 − 190 − 4,076 + 8,854 − 21,500 + 30,454C
1 Direct investment − 118,131 + 2,068 − 3,388 − 23,595 − 12,941 + 5,255 + 2,473 − 11,593 − 119
By resident units abroad − 311,900 − 175,141 − 130,291 − 27,802 − 28,551 − 12,228 − 5,074 − 25,480 − 11,854By non-resident units in the euro area + 193,775 + 177,209 + 126,901 + 4,208 + 15,610 + 17,483 + 7,547 + 13,887 + 11,735
2 Portfolio investment + 66,111 + 107,323 + 41,678 − 3,058 + 21,718 + 3,585 + 43,874 + 6,211 − 10,454
By resident units abroad − 283,810 − 177,352 − 276,958 − 92,351 − 52,584 − 61,342 + 4,699 − 27,525 − 45,285
Equity − 101,584 − 38,963 − 67,604 − 30,821 − 16,092 − 5,528 + 14,684 − 6,222 − 16,949
Bonds and notes − 156,456 − 89,013 − 179,495 − 46,949 − 28,144 − 37,592 − 13,136 − 18,483 − 16,118
Money market instruments − 25,773 − 49,375 − 29,859 − 14,581 − 8,347 − 18,221 + 3,152 − 2,820 − 12,218
By non-resident units in the euro area + 349,921 + 284,677 + 318,635 + 89,293 + 74,301 + 64,925 + 39,174 + 33,737 + 34,831
Equity + 232,534 + 85,544 + 117,524 + 24,485 − 4,835 + 38,900 + 12,632 + 16,254 + 21,044
Bonds and notes + 113,261 + 157,186 + 188,737 + 42,122 + 80,168 + 33,453 + 38,531 + 15,644 + 18,821
Money market instruments + 4,129 + 41,947 + 12,376 + 22,687 − 1,030 − 7,426 − 11,989 + 1,839 − 5,034
3 Financial derivatives − 845 − 10,874 − 12,371 + 6,576 − 447 − 4,439 + 2,783 − 3,282 + 1,214
4 Other investment − 10,503 − 158,335 − 73,724 − 1,487 − 5,704 − 11,923 − 39,751 − 13,786 + 39,947
Eurosystem + 4,665 + 18,445 + 9,390 − 1,888 + 2,524 + 1,662 + 479 + 1,208 + 2,429
General government + 2,532 − 8,158 − 4,185 − 6,975 − 1,753 + 2,622 + 3,493 + 2,268 − 1,218
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 3,704 − 142,181 − 17,031 + 2,411 + 16,818 − 17,472 − 38,241 − 10,664 + 36,838
Long-term − 24,157 + 17,861 + 6,141 − 10,039 + 4,365 − 13,485 − 5,399 + 12,950 + 2,061Short-term + 27,861 − 160,047 − 23,176 + 12,450 + 12,452 − 3,987 − 32,842 − 23,615 + 34,777
Other sectors  
2 − 21,395 − 26,442 − 61,894 + 4,966 − 23,292 + 1,265 − 5,483 − 6,598 + 1,899
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 17,815 − 2,277 + 29,880 + 9,357 − 2,815 + 3,445 − 525 + 948 − 134
Errors and omissions + 50,130 − 5,888 − 17,076 − 5,027 − 9,661 − 9,898 − 11,469 + 19,694 − 34,686D
*Source: European Central Bank. — 1From January 2001, including   
Greece. — 2 Enterprises and households.  
67*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
X External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item Capital trans-
fers and Change in
the Bundes- acquisition/disposal of Change in bank’s net
Supple- non- the foreign external
Balance mentary produced reserves at Balance of assets aton current External trade Current Financial transaction transaction non-financial unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4,5 Services  6 Income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1,2,3 transactions
DM million
1991 − 36,298 + 21,899 − 2,804 − 30,724 + 33,144 − 57,812 − 4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 18,643 − 319
1992 − 30,013 + 33,656 − 1,426 − 44,983 + 33,962 − 51,222 − 1,963 + 69,792 − 52,888 + 15,072 − 68,7451993 − 23,062 + 60,304 − 3,038 − 52,549 + 27,373 − 55,151 − 1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 − 19,260 + 35,7661994 − 46,749 + 71,762 − 1,104 − 62,803 + 4,852 − 59,455 − 2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 − 11,332 − 12,242
1995 − 38,642 + 85,303 − 4,722 − 63,985 + 178 − 55,416 − 3,845 + 63,647 − 10,355 − 10,805 − 17,754
1996 − 20,643 + 98,538 − 5,264 − 64,743 + 1,815 − 50,989 − 3,283 + 23,607 + 1,882 − 1,564 + 1,6101997 − 14,916 + 116,467 − 7,360 − 68,696 − 2,588 − 52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 8,193 + 8,4681998 − 20,677 + 126,970 − 5,934 − 75,072 − 13,337 − 53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 − 7,128 − 6,295 − 8,231
1999 − 43,915 + 127,542 − 13,656 − 90,099 − 18,775 − 48,927 − 301 − 44,849 + 24,517 + 64,548 − 72,364
2000 − 54,471 + 115,645 − 13,505 − 95,967 − 5,166 − 55,478 + 13,345 + 55,434 + 11,429 − 25,737 + 94,3292001 + 3,421 + 186,771 − 10,499 − 98,323 − 20,889 − 53,639 − 756 − 51,306 + 11,797 + 36,844 + 63,911
€ million
1999 − 22,454 + 65,211 − 6,982 − 46,067 − 9,599 − 25,016 − 154 − 22,931 + 12,535 + 33,003 − 36,9992000 − 27,851 + 59,128 − 6,905 − 49,067 − 2,641 − 28,366 + 6,823 + 28,343 + 5,844 − 13,159 + 48,2302001 + 1,749 + 95,495 − 5,368 − 50,272 − 10,680 − 27,425 − 387 − 26,233 + 6,032 + 18,838 + 32,6772002 + 45,670 + 132,788 − 5,968 − 36,422 − 16,844 − 27,883 − 212 − 70,724 + 2,065 + 23,201 − 33,2922003 + 45,767 + 129,921 − 7,335 − 35,537 − 12,515 − 28,767 + 316 − 69,725 + 445 + 23,197 + 2,6582004  
p + 77,898 + 156,765 − 10,054 − 37,728 − 4,163 − 26,923 + 509 −142,468 + 1,470 + 62,591 − 3,906
2002          Q1 + 9,445 + 33,328 − 1,028 − 10,633 − 6,722 − 5,500 + 160 + 5,740 − 1,352 − 13,993 − 18,496         Q2 + 10,420 + 31,721 − 1,383 − 8,605 − 2,682 − 8,631 − 75 − 9,488 + 2,432 − 3,289 + 1,694         Q3 + 9,507 + 35,543 − 1,552 − 12,652 − 5,563 − 6,269 + 62 − 17,554 + 87 + 7,899 − 17,588         Q4 + 16,299 + 32,195 − 2,005 − 4,532 − 1,877 − 7,483 − 359 − 49,422 + 898 + 32,584 + 1,099
2003          Q1 + 9,010 + 29,835 − 2,049 − 8,307 − 4,690 − 5,779 − 30 − 12,511 − 1,495 + 5,027 + 3,444
         Q2 + 8,103 + 29,841 − 1,860 − 8,340 − 3,649 − 7,890 + 149 − 26,220 + 1,505 + 16,463 + 22,123         Q3 + 10,274 + 38,430 − 1,582 − 13,275 − 4,479 − 8,820 + 208 − 5,229 − 751 − 4,502 − 15,902         Q4 + 18,381 + 31,815 − 1,844 − 5,615 + 303 − 6,278 − 12 − 25,764 + 1,186 + 6,210 − 7,008
2004          Q1  
r + 21,420 + 41,293 − 1,483 − 8,878 − 3,942 − 5,571 + 430 − 14,387 + 205 − 7,669 − 6,821
         Q2  r + 26,400 + 43,233 − 2,223 − 7,566 + 46 − 7,090 + 206 − 67,869 − 339 + 41,602 + 30,993
         Q3  r + 8,456 + 36,871 − 3,236 − 13,358 − 3,785 − 8,036 + 196 − 30,566 + 1,568 + 20,346 − 31,266
         Q4  p + 21,622 + 35,368 − 3,113 − 7,925 + 3,517 − 6,226 − 324 − 29,646 + 37 + 8,311 + 3,189
2002          July + 1,110 + 13,224 − 770 − 3,705 − 5,416 − 2,224 − 203 − 11,194 − 548 + 10,836 − 15,567
         Aug + 2,031 + 10,477 − 312 − 5,856 − 921 − 1,359 + 86 − 4,630 + 886 + 1,627 − 5,579         Sep + 6,367 + 11,842 − 471 − 3,092 + 773 − 2,686 + 179 − 1,730 − 252 − 4,564 + 3,559
         Oct + 3,087 + 11,529 − 364 − 3,826 − 966 − 3,287 − 82 − 21,706 + 570 + 18,132 − 5,279
         Nov + 8,450 + 12,283 − 632 − 1,346 + 446 − 2,301 − 137 − 5,800 − 842 − 1,670 + 4,265         Dec + 4,762 + 8,383 − 1,009 + 640 − 1,357 − 1,895 − 139 − 21,916 + 1,171 + 16,122 + 2,112
2003          Jan − 1,364 + 9,269 − 1,024 − 3,327 − 5,184 − 1,098 + 461 − 3,103 − 97 + 4,102 + 6,799
         Feb + 3,854 + 10,667 − 635 − 2,974 − 522 − 2,682 − 504 − 22,323 − 320 + 19,293 + 677         Mar + 6,519 + 9,898 − 390 − 2,006 + 1,016 − 2,000 + 13 + 12,915 − 1,078 − 18,369 − 4,032
         Apr + 3,006 + 9,111 − 752 − 2,310 − 339 − 2,704 − 126 − 3,639 + 1,449 − 690 + 1,477
         May + 3,170 + 10,400 − 549 − 2,775 − 1,379 − 2,527 + 156 − 7,694 − 854 + 5,221 + 22,684         June + 1,927 + 10,330 − 559 − 3,255 − 1,931 − 2,659 + 119 − 14,887 + 910 + 11,931 − 2,037
         July + 1,147 + 13,844 − 695 − 3,648 − 5,401 − 2,953 + 62 + 308 + 225 − 1,743 − 16,353
         Aug + 1,353 + 10,170 − 356 − 5,401 − 74 − 2,987 + 224 − 10,171 − 717 + 9,311 − 3,057         Sep + 7,775 + 14,416 − 531 − 4,227 + 997 − 2,880 − 78 + 4,633 − 259 − 12,071 + 3,508
         Oct + 6,529 + 10,996 − 510 − 3,786 + 1,704 − 1,874 − 27 − 6,460 − 255 + 213 − 21,689
         Nov + 4,881 + 10,235 − 591 − 1,543 − 320 − 2,899 + 49 − 6,266 + 521 + 815 + 14,870         Dec + 6,970 + 10,584 − 742 − 286 − 1,081 − 1,505 − 35 − 13,038 + 921 + 5,182 − 190
2004          Jan  
r + 1,685 + 12,531 − 640 − 4,140 − 5,528 − 537 + 53 − 1,592 − 206 + 59 + 5,619
         Feb  r + 6,388 + 12,160 − 369 − 2,318 − 471 − 2,615 − 130 + 4,471 − 26 − 10,701 + 556
         Mar  r + 13,347 + 16,602 − 473 − 2,420 + 2,057 − 2,419 + 507 − 17,265 + 437 + 2,974 − 12,996
         Apr  r + 9,804 + 14,343 − 524 − 3,105 + 835 − 1,745 + 82 − 37,457 − 628 + 28,199 + 315
         May  r + 8,825 + 14,147 − 889 − 1,839 − 99 − 2,495 − 29 − 12,412 + 607 + 3,010 + 9,981
         June  r + 7,771 + 14,743 − 810 − 2,622 − 689 − 2,850 + 153 − 18,000 − 318 + 10,394 + 20,697
         July  r + 1,734 + 13,647 − 1,236 − 3,454 − 4,107 − 3,117 + 169 − 2,652 + 847 − 98 − 1,588
         Aug  r + 1,290 + 11,107 − 1,065 − 5,780 − 679 − 2,292 + 80 − 5,867 + 517 + 3,980 − 15,748
         Sep  r + 5,432 + 12,117 − 936 − 4,124 + 1,001 − 2,626 − 53 − 22,047 + 204 + 16,464 − 13,931
         Oct  r + 6,661 + 12,651 − 1,084 − 3,438 + 986 − 2,454 − 22 + 961 + 839 − 8,440 + 23,124
         Nov + 9,106 + 11,979 − 931 − 2,026 + 2,400 − 2,317 − 186 − 17,889 − 182 + 9,151 − 10,787
         Dec  p + 5,855 + 10,738 − 1,097 − 2,461 + 131 − 1,456 − 116 − 12,717 − 621 + 7,599 − 9,147
1From the beginning of 1993, figures subject to significant uncertainty included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. —
owing to changes in the method of data collection for foreign trade. — 4Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, goods returned. — 5See footnote 3. — 6Excluding the expenditure on
exports fob. — 3From January 1993, including additional estimates for freight and insurance included in the cif import figure. — 7Capital
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are exports: −. — 8 Increase: −. 
68*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
X External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2004 1 
Country / group of countries  2001  2002  2003 Jan / Nov Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec  p 
All countries  2 Exports 638,268 651,320 664,455 671,387 55,939 61,535 64,055 66,488 59,534
Imports 542,774 518,532 534,534 525,360 44,832 49,418 51,404 54,509 48,796Balance + 95,495 + 132,788 + 129,921 + 146,027 + 11,107 + 12,117 + 12,651 + 11,979 + 10,738
I Exports 461,512 470,873 490,672 500,529 41,037 46,148 48,443 50,685 ...European countries
Imports 384,901 372,955 384,939 378,028 31,606 35,259 36,274 38,887 ...Balance + 76,611 + 97,918 + 105,733 + 122,501 + 9,431 + 10,889 + 12,169 + 11,798 ...
Exports 401,887 408,286 426,342 432,361 35,351 39,834 41,968 44,081 ... 1 EU member states (25)
Imports 325,968 314,981 324,043 318,035 26,503 29,056 30,590 32,356 ...
Balance + 75,919 + 93,304 + 102,299 + 114,326 + 8,848 + 10,778 + 11,377 + 11,725 ...
Memo item
Exports 351,611 354,813 369,776 375,429 30,559 34,799 36,503 38,313 ...  EU member states (15)
Imports 277,034 262,849 266,404 264,518 22,400 24,205 25,476 27,021 ...Balance + 74,577 + 91,964 + 103,372 + 110,912 + 8,159 + 10,594 + 11,027 + 11,292 ...
Euro-area Exports 275,384 276,270 288,668 294,015 23,710 27,470 28,666 30,057 ...countries Imports 221,680 211,642 215,705 214,900 17,989 19,629 20,463 21,641 ...
Balance + 53,704 + 64,628 + 72,963 + 79,115 + 5,722 + 7,841 + 8,203 + 8,415 ...
of which
Austria Exports 33,486 33,863 35,857 36,287 3,189 3,434 3,649 3,845 ...
Imports 20,664 21,047 21,453 22,354 1,984 2,026 2,167 2,286 ...Balance + 12,822 + 12,816 + 14,404 + 13,933 + 1,205 + 1,407 + 1,482 + 1,558 ...
Belgium and Exports 35,187 34,108 38,413 41,031 3,547 4,087 3,907 4,217 ...Luxembourg Imports 28,521 26,505 26,132 28,138 2,597 2,672 2,799 2,827 ...
Balance + 6,666 + 7,603 + 12,282 + 12,893 + 950 + 1,415 + 1,108 + 1,390 ...
France Exports 69,601 68,721 69,025 69,407 5,519 6,399 6,724 6,969 ...
Imports 49,743 48,200 48,545 47,742 3,675 4,253 4,553 4,497 ...Balance + 19,858 + 20,521 + 20,480 + 21,665 + 1,844 + 2,146 + 2,171 + 2,471 ...
Italy Exports 47,119 47,335 48,414 48,516 3,323 4,427 4,639 4,950 ...
Imports 35,280 33,482 34,259 32,076 2,576 2,872 3,108 3,204 ...Balance + 11,839 + 13,853 + 14,156 + 16,439 + 747 + 1,555 + 1,531 + 1,745 ...
Netherlands Exports 40,011 40,463 42,219 41,819 3,733 3,949 4,319 4,239 ...
Imports 43,233 40,751 42,301 43,603 3,811 4,086 4,190 4,837 ...Balance − 3,222 − 288 − 83 − 1,784 − 78 − 137 + 129 − 598 ...
Spain Exports 27,841 29,436 32,364 34,011 2,465 3,044 3,232 3,532 ...
Imports 15,226 15,532 16,518 15,915 1,219 1,421 1,484 1,641 ...Balance + 12,615 + 13,903 + 15,846 + 18,097 + 1,246 + 1,623 + 1,748 + 1,891 ...
Other EU member Exports 126,503 132,016 137,674 138,347 11,640 12,364 13,302 14,024 ...states Imports 104,288 103,339 108,337 103,135 8,514 9,428 10,128 10,715 ...
Balance + 22,215 + 28,677 + 29,336 + 35,211 + 3,127 + 2,937 + 3,174 + 3,309 ...
of which
United Exports 52,764 53,761 55,597 56,455 4,647 4,999 5,231 5,698 ...Kingdom Imports 37,259 33,075 31,712 31,554 2,765 2,910 3,170 3,495 ...
Balance + 15,505 + 20,685 + 23,885 + 24,902 + 1,882 + 2,089 + 2,061 + 2,203 ...
Exports 59,624 62,588 64,331 68,167 5,686 6,314 6,475 6,604 ... 2 Other European
Imports 58,933 57,974 60,897 59,993 5,104 6,203 5,683 6,531 ... countries
Balance + 692 + 4,614 + 3,434 + 8,175 + 583 + 111 + 792 + 73 ...
II Exports 175,203 178,818 172,329 172,033 15,017 15,553 15,720 15,722 ...Non-European
Imports 157,199 144,950 148,895 149,753 13,482 14,433 15,422 15,567 ... countries
Balance + 18,003 + 33,869 + 23,434 + 22,280 + 1,535 + 1,120 + 298 + 155 ...Exports 12,042 11,797 12,072 12,358 1,282 1,130 1,100 1,131 ... 1 Africa
Imports 11,356 10,248 10,239 9,617 898 966 1,321 931 ...
Balance + 686 + 1,549 + 1,832 + 2,740 + 383 + 164 − 222 + 200 ...
Exports 89,801 89,081 79,629 77,200 6,493 7,030 7,168 7,072 ... 2 America
Imports 59,575 52,822 51,948 49,541 4,402 4,558 4,673 4,678 ...
Balance + 30,226 + 36,259 + 27,681 + 27,660 + 2,091 + 2,472 + 2,496 + 2,394 ...
of which
Exports 67,824 68,263 61,654 59,422 4,840 5,390 5,565 5,545 ... United States
Imports 45,982 40,376 39,231 36,948 3,082 3,367 3,469 3,532 ...Balance + 21,842 + 27,887 + 22,423 + 22,474 + 1,759 + 2,023 + 2,097 + 2,013 ...
Exports 68,936 72,915 75,620 77,473 6,794 6,892 6,979 7,032 ... 3 Asia
Imports 84,220 79,892 84,783 88,717 7,978 8,749 9,266 9,772 ...
Balance − 15,285 − 6,977 − 9,162 − 11,244 − 1,184 − 1,857 − 2,287 − 2,739 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 14,130 15,045 15,511 15,708 1,432 1,360 1,465 1,603 ...
Imports 5,434 4,696 4,469 4,002 356 371 423 439 ...Balance + 8,696 + 10,349 + 11,043 + 11,707 + 1,076 + 989 + 1,042 + 1,165 ...
Japan Exports 13,103 12,576 11,889 11,635 1,067 1,079 1,053 1,066 ...
Imports 22,910 19,896 19,684 19,266 1,598 1,766 1,716 1,929 ...Balance − 9,807 − 7,320 − 7,795 − 7,631 − 531 − 687 − 663 − 862 ...
Exports 12,118 14,571 18,265 19,287 1,502 1,683 1,713 1,682 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 19,942 21,338 25,681 29,524 2,756 3,026 3,577 3,599 ... of China  
3 
Balance − 7,824 − 6,768 − 7,417 − 10,236 − 1,254 − 1,343 − 1,863 − 1,917 ...
Exports 4,424 5,026 5,008 5,002 448 501 474 487 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,048 1,988 1,925 1,878 204 160 163 186 ... polar regions
Balance + 2,375 + 3,038 + 3,083 + 3,124 + 244 + 340 + 311 + 300 ...
Memo item
Exports 24,735 25,282 24,515 24,629 2,188 2,215 2,122 2,104 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 28,351 26,660 27,119 27,363 2,378 2,717 2,774 2,982 ... South-East Asia  4 
Balance − 3,616 − 1,377 − 2,603 − 2,734 − 190 − 503 − 652 − 878 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, yet been broken down by region. — 2Including fuel and other supplies for
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. — 3Excluding
countries according to the current position. — 1The figures for “All Hong Kong. — 4Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia,
countries” include revisions from January until October 2004 which have not Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand . 
69*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
X External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republicof Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2000 − 49,067 − 37,249 + 3,386 + 1,668 − 3,012 + 2,221 − 16,081 − 2,757 − 753 − 512 − 2,129
2001 − 50,272 − 37,955 + 4,151 + 1,079 − 2,455 + 3,488 − 18,581 − 2,538 − 619 − 257 − 10,4242002 − 36,422 − 35,445 + 2,750 + 1,380 − 1,461 + 5,237 − 8,883 − 2,035 + 403 − 144 − 16,7002003 − 35,537 − 36,869 + 1,825 + 1,529 − 882 + 5,050 − 6,190 − 1,863 + 1,419 − 86 − 12,4282004 − 37,728 − 37,170 + 4,327 + 1,422 − 628 + 5,418 − 11,097 − 1,402 + 483 − 94 − 4,069
2003          Q2 − 8,340 − 9,127 + 695 + 355 − 193 + 1,203 − 1,272 − 485 + 177 − 85 − 3,565
         Q3 − 13,275 − 13,994 + 453 + 339 − 369 + 1,316 − 1,020 − 410 + 439 − 240 − 4,239         Q4 − 5,615 − 6,827 + 509 + 386 − 26 + 1,257 − 915 − 393 + 330 + 22 + 281
2004          Q1 − 8,878 − 7,018 + 517 + 351 − 188 + 1,317 − 3,858 − 342 + 214 + 210 − 4,152
         Q2 − 7,566 − 8,965 + 1,529 + 255 − 344 + 1,438 − 1,478 − 303 − 13 − 57 + 103         Q3 − 13,358 − 14,036 + 960 + 483 + 20 + 1,433 − 2,219 − 406 + 102 − 233 − 3,552         Q4 − 7,925 − 7,150 + 1,322 + 332 − 116 + 1,230 − 3,542 − 351 + 181 − 14 + 3,531
2004          Feb − 2,318 − 1,907 + 134 + 112 + 7 + 426 − 1,091 − 93 + 114 + 64 − 534
         Mar − 2,420 − 2,733 + 351 + 136 − 195 + 455 − 434 − 105 + 68 + 80 + 1,977
         Apr − 3,105 − 2,689 + 578 + 66 − 125 + 470 − 1,405 − 83 − 58 − 20 + 855
         May − 1,839 − 2,557 + 256 + 121 − 24 + 453 − 88 − 107 + 61 − 25 − 74         June − 2,622 − 3,719 + 695 + 68 − 195 + 515 + 14 − 113 − 17 − 12 − 677
         July − 3,454 − 3,387 + 303 + 181 + 86 + 485 − 1,122 − 106 + 99 − 76 − 4,031
         Aug − 5,780 − 6,359 + 495 + 122 + 2 + 443 − 484 − 89 + 30 − 85 − 594         Sep − 4,124 − 4,289 + 162 + 180 − 68 + 504 − 613 − 210 − 27 − 72 + 1,073
         Oct − 3,438 − 3,796 + 465 + 110 − 1 + 399 − 615 − 76 + 110 − 6 + 992
         Nov − 2,026 − 2,192 + 447 + 132 − 36 + 389 − 765 − 118 + 5 − 8 + 2,408         Dec − 2,461 − 1,162 + 410 + 90 − 79 + 442 − 2,162 − 157 + 66 + 0 + 131
1From January 2002, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Remittances Other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2000 − 28,366 − 19,094 − 17,100 − 15,398 − 1,995 − 9,271 − 3,458 − 5,814 − 1,599 − 1,189 − 410
2001 − 27,425 − 16,927 − 14,257 − 12,587 − 2,670 − 10,499 − 3,520 − 6,978 − 387 − 1,361 + 9742002 − 27,883 − 16,207 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 3,162 − 11,676 − 3,470 − 8,206 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,2042003 − 28,767 − 18,793 − 15,397 − 13,732 − 3,396 − 9,974 − 3,332 − 6,642 + 316 − 1,235 + 1,5512004 − 26,923 − 17,319 − 14,208 − 12,747 − 3,112 − 9,603 − 3,180 − 6,424 + 509 − 1,095 + 1,604
2003          Q2 − 7,890 − 5,403 − 5,375 − 4,790 − 28 − 2,487 − 833 − 1,654 + 149 − 276 + 425
         Q3 − 8,820 − 6,017 − 4,896 − 4,650 − 1,121 − 2,803 − 833 − 1,970 + 208 − 249 + 457         Q4 − 6,278 − 4,057 − 2,829 − 2,665 − 1,227 − 2,222 − 833 − 1,389 − 12 − 457 + 445
2004          Q1 − 5,571 − 3,337 − 2,466 − 1,822 − 871 − 2,233 − 795 − 1,438 + 430 − 254 + 684
         Q2 − 7,090 − 4,404 − 4,474 − 4,187 + 70 − 2,687 − 795 − 1,892 + 206 − 239 + 445         Q3 − 8,036 − 5,600 − 4,440 − 4,148 − 1,161 − 2,436 − 795 − 1,641 + 196 − 261 + 457         Q4 − 6,226 − 3,978 − 2,828 − 2,591 − 1,150 − 2,248 − 795 − 1,453 − 324 − 342 + 19
2004          Feb − 2,615 − 1,912 − 1,547 − 1,388 − 366 − 702 − 265 − 437 − 130 − 95 − 36
         Mar − 2,419 − 1,703 − 1,420 − 1,296 − 282 − 716 − 265 − 451 + 507 − 75 + 582
         Apr − 1,745 − 851 − 941 − 859 + 90 − 894 − 265 − 629 + 82 − 71 + 153
         May − 2,495 − 1,475 − 1,538 − 1,422 + 63 − 1,020 − 265 − 755 − 29 − 91 + 62         June − 2,850 − 2,078 − 1,995 − 1,906 − 82 − 773 − 265 − 508 + 153 − 77 + 230
         July − 3,117 − 2,140 − 1,623 − 1,501 − 518 − 977 − 265 − 712 + 169 − 102 + 271
         Aug − 2,292 − 1,581 − 1,193 − 1,086 − 388 − 712 − 265 − 447 + 80 − 80 + 160         Sep − 2,626 − 1,879 − 1,624 − 1,561 − 255 − 747 − 265 − 482 − 53 − 79 + 26
         Oct − 2,454 − 1,725 − 1,285 − 1,224 − 440 − 729 − 265 − 464 − 22 − 95 + 73
         Nov − 2,317 − 1,610 − 1,213 − 1,126 − 397 − 707 − 265 − 442 − 186 − 117 − 69         Dec − 1,456 − 643 − 330 − 241 − 313 − 813 − 265 − 548 − 116 − 130 + 14
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
X External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2004
Item 2002 2003 2004 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Oct Nov Dec
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 249,672 − 189,429 − 229,941 − 77,020 − 10,199 − 97,309 − 45,414 − 10,418 − 61,686 + 26,690
1 Direct investment  1 − 9,161 − 2,268 + 5,519 + 10,210 − 2,503 − 7,995 + 5,807 − 610 − 3,728 + 10,144
Equity capital − 38,266 − 13,052 + 23,764 + 21,155 − 1,091 + 4,630 − 930 − 205 − 1,592 + 867
Reinvested earnings  2 + 16,224 + 1,380 + 1,470 + 325 + 149 + 885 + 111 + 101 + 138 − 128
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors + 20,639 + 18,881 − 12,215 − 9,760 + 935 − 11,644 + 8,254 − 140 − 1,491 + 9,886Other capital − 7,759 − 9,477 − 7,500 − 1,511 − 2,496 − 1,866 − 1,628 − 365 − 783 − 480
2 Portfolio investment − 65,848 − 32,323 − 94,901 − 25,990 − 31,569 − 20,356 − 16,985 − 11,024 − 3,429 − 2,532
Equity
3 − 4,832 + 7,628 + 5,964 + 1,230 + 926 + 6,068 − 2,259 − 1,574 − 946 + 262
Mutual fund shares  4 − 6,995 − 4,253 − 11,938 − 7,059 − 2,526 − 3,117 + 764 − 268 + 188 + 843
Bonds and notes  5 − 49,056 − 37,811 − 86,961 − 26,144 − 25,642 − 17,664 − 17,511 − 9,950 − 2,890 − 4,671
Money market instruments − 4,965 + 2,112 − 1,965 + 5,983 − 4,327 − 5,643 + 2,022 + 768 + 220 + 1,034
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 863 − 493 − 5,127 − 1,255 + 2,236 − 2,608 − 3,501 − 2,019 − 10 − 1,472
4 Credit transactions − 172,208 − 151,755 − 132,011 − 58,969 + 22,456 − 65,701 − 29,797 + 3,519 − 54,272 + 20,956
MFIs  7,8 − 132,536 − 122,307 − 121,391 − 36,597 − 14,365 − 33,208 − 37,222 − 18,257 − 46,848 + 27,883
Long-term − 33,790 − 32,556 + 6,296 + 3,570 + 5,597 − 1,007 − 1,864 − 65 − 4 − 1,796
Short-term − 98,746 − 89,750 − 127,687 − 40,167 − 19,962 − 32,201 − 35,358 − 18,192 − 46,845 + 29,679
Enterprises and households − 10,830 − 30,944 − 9,693 − 17,505 + 4,860 − 2,204 + 5,156 − 1,017 + 3,015 + 3,157
Long-term − 1,187 − 2,729 − 2,849 − 669 − 480 − 971 − 729 − 462 − 393 + 126
Short-term  7 − 9,643 − 28,215 − 6,844 − 16,836 + 5,340 − 1,233 + 5,885 − 554 + 3,408 + 3,031
General government + 7,168 + 1,265 + 1,999 + 1,158 + 64 + 1,191 − 414 + 49 + 43 − 506
Long-term + 218 + 692 + 201 + 305 + 7 + 183 − 295 + 30 − 325 −Short-term  
7 + 6,950 + 572 + 1,798 + 853 + 57 + 1,008 − 120 + 19 + 367 − 506
Bundesbank − 36,010 + 230 − 2,925 − 6,025 + 31,896 − 31,480 + 2,684 + 22,743 − 10,482 − 9,577
5 Other investment  9 − 1,592 − 2,590 − 3,422 − 1,016 − 819 − 649 − 938 − 285 − 246 − 407
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 178,948 + 119,704 + 87,473 + 62,633 − 57,670 + 66,743 + 15,768 + 11,379 + 43,797 − 39,408
1 Direct investment  1 + 38,269 + 11,400 − 35,152 − 32,076 − 5,025 − 185 + 2,134 − 3,388 + 3,876 + 1,645
Equity capital + 29,311 + 27,956 + 17,855 + 5,014 − 2,515 + 4,209 + 11,147 + 1,503 + 3,267 + 6,377Reinvested earnings  
2 − 13,008 − 5,484 − 7,220 − 6,898 − 910 + 37 + 551 + 271 + 193 + 87
Credit transactions of
foreign direct investors + 22,162 − 10,886 − 45,773 − 30,246 − 1,581 − 4,418 − 9,528 − 5,153 + 427 − 4,801Other capital − 197 − 186 − 14 + 54 − 19 − 13 − 37 − 8 − 11 − 17
2 Portfolio investment + 109,783 + 91,276 + 91,983 + 34,063 + 1,523 + 38,568 + 17,829 + 17,069 + 7,569 − 6,809
Equity  
3 + 15,712 + 24,204 − 1,432 + 2,793 − 11,739 + 6,740 + 774 + 17 + 2,355 − 1,598
Mutual fund shares − 673 − 1,530 + 5,070 + 835 − 981 + 4,035 + 1,181 − 878 + 2,128 − 69
Bonds and notes  5 + 83,473 + 69,243 + 106,817 + 42,914 + 15,436 + 33,672 + 14,795 + 15,248 + 687 − 1,141
Money market instruments + 11,271 − 642 − 18,473 − 12,479 − 1,193 − 5,879 + 1,079 + 2,681 + 2,400 − 4,002
3 Credit transactions + 30,814 + 17,005 + 30,501 + 60,603 − 54,247 + 28,363 − 4,219 − 2,304 + 32,351 − 34,266
MFIs  7,8 + 28,453 + 12,160 + 32,314 + 57,886 − 52,845 + 28,076 − 802 − 4,284 + 33,656 − 30,175
Long-term + 18,379 − 4,512 − 10,118 − 8,845 − 1,543 + 5,492 − 5,222 − 4 − 1,967 − 3,252
Short-term + 10,075 + 16,672 + 42,432 + 66,730 − 51,302 + 22,584 + 4,420 − 4,280 + 35,623 − 26,923
Enterprises and households + 3,332 − 820 + 2,385 + 7,908 − 3,371 − 310 − 1,842 + 1,123 − 321 − 2,644
Long-term + 5,250 − 1,901 + 2,536 + 3,078 + 95 − 802 + 165 + 121 + 986 − 942
Short-term  7 − 1,918 + 1,081 − 151 + 4,830 − 3,467 + 492 − 2,007 + 1,002 − 1,307 − 1,702
General government − 1,625 + 3,682 − 1,747 − 4,188 + 2,534 + 1,950 − 2,043 + 1,316 − 861 − 2,499
Long-term − 125 + 4,861 − 514 − 2,208 + 1,359 + 1,180 − 844 + 452 − 625 − 671Short-term  
7 − 1,500 − 1,179 − 1,233 − 1,980 + 1,176 + 770 − 1,199 + 864 − 235 − 1,828
Bundesbank + 653 + 1,983 − 2,451 − 1,002 − 564 − 1,354 + 469 − 459 − 124 + 1,051
4 Other investment + 83 + 24 + 142 + 43 + 79 − 3 + 24 + 2 − 0 + 23
III Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) − 70,724 − 69,725 − 142,468 − 14,387 − 67,869 − 30,566 − 29,646 + 961 − 17,889 − 12,717
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including accumulated statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9In particular, subscriptions of the Federal
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- Government to international organisations. 
71*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
X External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,9512004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2003          Aug 98,605 84,197 37,546 8,583 38,068 312 13,592 504 11,060 87,545
         Sep 91,894 81,206 36,491 8,492 36,223 312 9,902 474 10,879 81,016
         Oct 113,947 81,401 36,595 8,539 36,267 312 31,794 440 11,319 102,628
         Nov 97,130 79,624 36,705 8,374 34,545 312 16,742 452 10,518 86,612         Dec 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004          Jan 89,895 76,992 35,834 7,726 33,432 312 12,135 456 10,522 79,374
         Feb 87,987 76,089 34,930 7,736 33,423 312 11,140 446 10,078 77,910         Mar 104,464 79,717 38,266 7,610 33,841 312 23,981 454 9,545 94,920
         Apr 102,021 78,143 35,849 7,880 34,414 312 23,134 432 9,694 92,327
         May 89,877 76,473 35,705 7,685 33,083 312 12,641 451 8,537 81,340         June 69,837 76,996 35,793 7,390 33,813 312 − 7,951 480 9,003 60,834
         July 70,865 76,076 35,721 7,395 32,960 312 − 6,009 486 8,545 62,320
         Aug 87,570 77,171 37,195 7,395 32,581 312 9,455 632 7,755 79,815         Sep 100,176 75,729 36,680 6,996 32,054 312 23,480 655 7,625 92,552
         Oct 76,043 74,334 36,935 6,889 30,510 312 740 656 7,128 68,915
         Nov 85,702 73,506 37,527 6,685 29,294 312 11,233 651 6,937 78,765         Dec 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005          Jan 94,895 73,556 35,888 6,634 31,034 312 20,327 699 6,315 88,580
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
72*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
X External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003 357,399 86,627 270,772 154,953 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,4692004 372,840 98,632 274,208 155,064 119,144 112,342 6,802 503,434 50,211 453,223 358,111 95,112 63,762 31,350
2004          July  
r 384,727 99,250 285,477 164,940 120,537 112,958 7,579 523,260 54,475 468,785 378,146 90,639 58,787 31,852
         Aug  r 381,232 97,032 284,200 167,632 116,568 109,048 7,520 519,323 53,722 465,601 376,720 88,881 56,170 32,711
         Sep  r 390,749 99,491 291,258 169,936 121,322 113,937 7,385 518,390 54,046 464,344 371,025 93,319 61,985 31,334
         Oct  r 390,774 99,532 291,242 167,586 123,656 116,361 7,295 510,418 51,815 458,603 364,522 94,081 62,145 31,936
         Nov 385,639 97,981 287,658 161,505 126,153 118,880 7,273 507,165 51,266 455,899 360,739 95,160 63,123 32,037
         Dec 372,840 98,632 274,208 155,064 119,144 112,342 6,802 503,434 50,211 453,223 358,111 95,112 63,762 31,350
Industrial countries 2
 
2001 298,904 61,403 237,501 151,047 86,454 79,453 7,001 466,206 57,861 408,345 340,344 68,001 54,364 13,6372002  
4 278,074 62,861 215,213 133,509 81,704 75,996 5,708 493,155 55,770 437,385 372,464 64,921 50,731 14,190
2003 305,754 85,390 220,364 140,280 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,2202004 331,109 97,485 233,624 143,949 89,675 84,903 4,772 465,592 48,304 417,288 346,293 70,995 53,480 17,515
2004          July  
r 342,717 97,853 244,864 154,277 90,587 85,286 5,301 484,761 52,386 432,375 364,402 67,973 50,079 17,894
         Aug  r 339,570 95,681 243,889 156,974 86,915 81,610 5,305 480,574 51,593 428,981 363,522 65,459 47,726 17,733
         Sep  r 349,098 98,068 251,030 159,599 91,431 86,167 5,264 480,332 51,966 428,366 357,876 70,490 52,927 17,563
         Oct  r 348,162 98,053 250,109 156,888 93,221 88,176 5,045 472,794 49,840 422,954 351,882 71,072 53,127 17,945
         Nov 343,410 96,661 246,749 150,954 95,795 90,756 5,039 469,173 49,330 419,843 348,217 71,626 53,497 18,129
         Dec 331,109 97,485 233,624 143,949 89,675 84,903 4,772 465,592 48,304 417,288 346,293 70,995 53,480 17,515
EU member states 2
 
2001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003 225,973 81,430 144,543 89,392 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,6422004 254,780 92,867 161,913 96,554 65,359 61,563 3,796 373,461 43,838 329,623 281,173 48,450 36,494 11,956
2004          July  
r 260,893 90,783 170,110 105,315 64,795 60,688 4,107 395,332 47,539 347,793 301,084 46,709 33,963 12,746
         Aug  r 260,081 90,553 169,528 107,573 61,955 57,835 4,120 391,207 46,753 344,454 300,077 44,377 32,214 12,163
         Sep  r 265,981 93,212 172,769 107,724 65,045 60,936 4,109 389,096 47,248 341,848 293,705 48,143 36,042 12,101
         Oct  r 268,631 93,157 175,474 108,073 67,401 63,424 3,977 381,735 45,273 336,462 287,728 48,734 36,391 12,343
         Nov 263,212 91,620 171,592 101,868 69,724 65,773 3,951 379,050 44,947 334,103 284,695 49,408 36,965 12,443
         Dec 254,780 92,867 161,913 96,554 65,359 61,563 3,796 373,461 43,838 329,623 281,173 48,450 36,494 11,956
of which:  Euro-area member states 1
 
2001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,4042004 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 302,864 28,295 274,569 241,860 32,709 24,258 8,451
2004          July 161,410 50,688 110,722 66,161 44,561 41,628 2,933 326,069 32,148 293,921 262,381 31,540 22,224 9,316
         Aug 161,538 51,458 110,080 67,626 42,454 39,493 2,961 321,685 31,454 290,231 260,921 29,310 20,610 8,700         Sep 165,174 53,460 111,714 67,401 44,313 41,462 2,851 318,509 31,835 286,674 254,478 32,196 23,506 8,690
         Oct 164,409 51,756 112,653 67,201 45,452 42,652 2,800 311,309 29,948 281,361 248,696 32,665 23,847 8,818
         Nov 163,387 50,458 112,929 65,585 47,344 44,579 2,765 309,154 29,166 279,988 247,189 32,799 23,918 8,881         Dec 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 302,864 28,295 274,569 241,860 32,709 24,258 8,451
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2001 59,216 1,031 58,185 20,892 37,293 35,404 1,889 39,060 2,271 36,789 14,217 22,572 11,624 10,9482002  
4 53,597 956 52,641 15,404 37,237 35,410 1,827 40,268 1,926 38,342 15,386 22,956 11,891 11,065
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,2492004 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,835
2004          July 42,010 1,397 40,613 10,663 29,950 27,672 2,278 38,499 2,089 36,410 13,744 22,666 8,708 13,958
         Aug 41,662 1,351 40,311 10,658 29,653 27,438 2,215 38,749 2,129 36,620 13,198 23,422 8,444 14,978         Sep 41,651 1,423 40,228 10,337 29,891 27,770 2,121 38,058 2,080 35,978 13,149 22,829 9,058 13,771
         Oct 42,612 1,479 41,133 10,698 30,435 28,185 2,250 37,624 1,975 35,649 12,640 23,009 9,018 13,991
         Nov 42,229 1,320 40,909 10,551 30,358 28,124 2,234 37,992 1,936 36,056 12,522 23,534 9,626 13,908         Dec 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,835
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in January 2001, including Greece. — 2From May 2004, including the new
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in member states: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia ,
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia. — 3All
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. — 4Change in the
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X.7. — 1From reporting population owing to an increase in the exemption limit. 
73*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
X External sector
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.0145
2000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.0288
2001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 9.1611 0.62883 7.5086 1.4670 1.4838 1.7376 2.03662003 1.1312 130.97 7.4307 9.1242 0.69199 8.0033 1.5212 1.5817 1.7379 1.94382004 1.2439 134.44 7.4399 9.1243 0.67866 8.3697 1.5438 1.6167 1.6905 1.8731
2003          June 1.1663 138.05 7.4250 9.1182 0.70224 8.1619 1.5411 1.5798 1.7552 2.0069         July 1.1372 134.99 7.4332 9.1856 0.70045 8.2893 1.5476 1.5694 1.7184 1.9386
         Aug 1.1139 132.38 7.4322 9.2378 0.69919 8.2558 1.5400 1.5570 1.7114 1.9137         Sep 1.1222 128.94 7.4273 9.0682 0.69693 8.1952 1.5474 1.5330 1.6967 1.9227
         Oct 1.1692 128.12 7.4301 9.0105 0.69763 8.2274 1.5485 1.5489 1.6867 1.9446
         Nov 1.1702 127.84 7.4370 8.9939 0.69278 8.1969 1.5590 1.5361 1.6337 1.8608         Dec 1.2286 132.43 7.4419 9.0228 0.70196 8.2421 1.5544 1.6131 1.6626 1.8982
2004          Jan 1.2613 134.13 7.4481 9.1368 0.69215 8.5925 1.5657 1.6346 1.6374 1.8751
         Feb 1.2646 134.78 7.4511 9.1763 0.67690 8.7752 1.5734 1.6817 1.6260 1.8262         Mar 1.2262 133.13 7.4493 9.2346 0.67124 8.5407 1.5670 1.6314 1.6370 1.8566
         Apr 1.1985 129.08 7.4436 9.1653 0.66533 8.2976 1.5547 1.6068 1.6142 1.8727
         May 1.2007 134.48 7.4405 9.1277 0.67157 8.2074 1.5400 1.6541 1.7033 1.9484         June 1.2138 132.86 7.4342 9.1430 0.66428 8.2856 1.5192 1.6492 1.7483 1.9301
         July 1.2266 134.08 7.4355 9.1962 0.66576 8.4751 1.5270 1.6220 1.7135 1.8961
         Aug 1.2176 134.54 7.4365 9.1861 0.66942 8.3315 1.5387 1.6007 1.7147 1.8604         Sep 1.2218 134.51 7.4381 9.0920 0.68130 8.3604 1.5431 1.5767 1.7396 1.8538
         Oct 1.2490 135.97 7.4379 9.0620 0.69144 8.2349 1.5426 1.5600 1.7049 1.8280
         Nov 1.2991 136.09 7.4313 8.9981 0.69862 8.1412 1.5216 1.5540 1.6867 1.8540         Dec 1.3408 139.14 7.4338 8.9819 0.69500 8.2207 1.5364 1.6333 1.7462 1.8737
2005          Jan 1.3119 135.63 7.4405 9.0476 0.69867 8.2125 1.5469 1.6060 1.7147 1.8620
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 14.15. For additional euro reference exchange rates of the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. — 2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics.
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the euro-area member states, the Deutsche Mark value of
the ECU * and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.05076
1992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1As per data from the European exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). — 3Applicable from 1 January
Commission. — 2Up to 1998, reciprocal values of the exchange rates for the 1999. — 4Applicable from 1 January 2001. — 5Deutsche Mark conversion
Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999, euro reference rate. 
74*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
X External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item Effective nominal exchange rates of
Indicators of the German economy’s selected foreign currencies against the
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3,4 currencies of 19 industrial countries  3,5 
EER-23 1 EER-42 2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  6 
In real terms
based on the
In real terms unit labour In real termsbased on the In real terms costs of the based on the based
 on the
consumer national consumer Pound Japanese based on the deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices US dollar sterling yen GDP deflator  7 economy  7 total sales  7 based on consumer prices
1999 95.9 95.9 95.8 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.8 98.2 97.7 100.8 102.3 105.1
2000 86.1 86.0 85.8 85.4 87.9 85.8 91.8 92.8 91.2 105.4 105.2 117.9
2001 86.7 86.8 86.9 85.3 90.4 87.0 92.0 93.2 91.5 112.0 103.6 106.72002 89.2 90.3 90.3 88.4 94.8 90.8 93.0 94.2 92.6 110.7 104.2 100.82003 99.9 101.7 101.7 99.5 106.6 101.5 96.6 97.9 97.2 97.7 99.2 99.92004 103.8 105.9 ... ... 111.0 105.3
p 97.1 99.3 98.8 89.8 103.4 101.7
1999          Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0         Q2 96.2 96.2 96.2 97.4 96.4 96.0 98.6 98.6 98.0 102.8 102.8 99.0         Q3 94.8 94.8 94.6 95.0 95.5 94.6 97.0 97.8 97.1 101.4 102.3 106.2         Q4 92.9 92.7 92.6 93.3 94.3 92.8 95.6 96.4 95.8 99.1 104.1 115.2
2000          Q1 89.5 89.3 89.1 88.4 91.0 89.1 93.6 94.8 93.4 101.5 106.4 114.9
         Q2 86.5 86.4 86.2 86.0 88.2 86.2 91.9 92.8 91.4 104.3 105.4 118.4         Q3 85.1 85.1 84.9 84.5 87.0 84.8 91.3 92.1 90.3 106.2 103.9 119.2         Q4 83.2 83.3 83.1 82.6 85.5 83.1 90.2 91.5 89.5 109.4 105.0 119.2
2001          Q1 88.3 88.0 88.3 86.2 90.9 87.8 92.8 93.8 92.1 109.3 102.4 108.1
         Q2 85.3 85.4 85.4 83.9 88.8 85.6 91.4 92.7 90.8 113.4 104.1 106.9         Q3 86.4 86.6 86.6 84.9 90.5 87.1 91.5 93.1 91.5 112.2 103.9 106.8         Q4 86.8 87.2 87.4 86.1 91.2 87.6 92.1 93.3 91.6 113.1 104.0 104.9
2002          Jan 86.5 87.4 . . 90.7 87.2 . 93.6 91.2 116.4 104.9 98.3
         Feb 85.7 86.6 87.0 84.9 90.1 86.5 92.2 93.2 90.9 117.3 105.3 98.2         Mar 85.7 86.8 . . 90.3 86.7 . 93.2 90.9 116.1 104.6 99.8
         Apr 86.1 87.1 . . 90.7 87.0 . 93.1 90.6 115.3 105.2 99.4
         May 87.7 88.8 88.8 87.1 92.8 89.0 92.6 93.7 91.6 112.0 103.5 101.2         June 89.8 90.9 . . 95.5 91.6 . 94.5 92.9 109.0 101.9 101.7
         July 91.2 92.4 . . 97.5 93.4 . 95.0 94.0 106.0 103.5 104.3
         Aug 90.7 91.9 92.2 90.5 96.9 92.8 93.4 94.5 93.5 107.3 103.5 104.3         Sep 90.7 92.1 . . 97.2 93.1 . 94.6 93.5 107.6 104.7 102.5
         Oct 91.1 92.5 . . 97.7 93.5 . 94.8 94.0 108.5 105.0 99.8
         Nov 91.9 93.1 93.4 91.3 98.5 94.0 93.9 94.9 93.9 106.8 104.3 100.8         Dec 92.9 94.3 . . 99.6 95.0 . 95.5 94.5 106.0 104.0 99.6
2003          Jan 95.3 96.8 . . 102.3 97.6 . 96.2 95.5 103.0 102.6 100.4
         Feb 96.6 98.2 97.8 96.0 103.7 99.0 95.5 96.8 96.3 102.2 101.2 99.2         Mar 97.4 99.0 . . 104.4 99.5 . 97.1 96.5 101.4 99.3 99.8
         Apr 97.9 99.5 . . 104.6 99.5 . 97.3 96.5 101.4 98.7 98.6
         May 101.8 103.5 102.5 100.5 108.5 103.2 97.2 98.8 98.0 96.7 96.9 97.7         June 102.2 104.2 . . 108.8 103.7 . 99.1 98.4 96.1 98.9 96.3
         July 101.0 102.9 . . 107.2 102.2 . 98.4 97.5 97.8 98.5 97.3
         Aug 99.8 101.8 102.1 100.2 106.0 101.2 96.8 98.0 96.9 99.1 98.1 98.3         Sep 99.6 101.7 . . 105.9 101.1 . 97.6 96.8 97.2 98.2 101.1
         Oct 101.3 103.3 . . 108.0 102.9 . 98.1 97.5 93.3 98.8 103.7
         Nov 101.2 103.3 104.5 101.5 108.0 102.9 96.9 98.2 97.6 93.0 99.5 103.9         Dec 104.2 106.2 . . 111.2 105.8 . 99.2 99.1 90.6 99.5 102.9
2004          Jan 105.4 107.4 . . 112.5 106.9 . 99.7 99.5 88.9 101.6 102.9
         Feb 105.3 107.3 106.9 104.2 112.3 106.8
p 97.9 99.4 99.4 89.3 104.1 102.4
         Mar 103.4 105.4 . . 110.2 104.7 . 99.0 98.6 90.9 104.2 102.1
         Apr 101.6 103.7 . . 108.3 103.0 . 98.4 97.6 91.8 104.3 104.0
         May 102.4 104.4 104.7 101.2 109.5 104.1 p 96.7 98.8 98.3 93.4 103.7 100.0
         June 102.3 104.2 . . 109.6 104.0 . 98.5 98.1 91.9 104.9 101.6
         July 102.8 104.8 . . 110.1 104.4 . 99.0 98.3 90.9 105.0 101.2
         Aug 102.7 104.8 105.3 101.7 109.9 104.4 p 96.6 99.1 98.4 91.3 104.6 100.5
         Sep 103.0 105.2 . . 110.3 104.7 . 99.3 98.4 90.7 102.8 100.8
         Oct 104.2 106.3 . . 111.5 105.8 . 99.7 99.0 88.9 101.8 100.8
         Nov 105.6 107.6 ... ... 113.1 107.0 p 97.3 100.1 99.4 85.4 101.4 102.6
         Dec 107.1 109.3 . . 114.4 108.4 . 100.8 100.1 84.3 102.8 102.0
2005          Jan 105.8 108.1 . . 112.9 107.0 . 100.4 99.1 85.3 101.7 103.6
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of to the EER-23 group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the fo llowing
the currency concerned. — 1ECB calculations based on the weighted countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, India, Indonesia,
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro against the currencies Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Romania,
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. — 3The
Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, method of calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB toNorway, Poland, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Sweden, compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin,
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these November 2001, pp 51−65). In contrast to footnote 1, the weights used arecalculations are based on manufactured goods trade between 1999 and based on the relevant trade in the period from 1995 to 1997. — 4Decline in
2001 and capture third-market effects. Where consumer prices were not yet the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. — 5Euro-area countries
available, estimates have been used. For details of the methodology, see as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, UnitedECB, Monthly Bulletin, September 2004, pp 69−72 and the ECB’s Occasional Kingdom and United States. — 6Euro-area countries and countries
Paper No 2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website belonging to the EER-42 group except Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania and(www.ecb.int). — 2ECB calculations. In addition to the countries belonging Malta. — 7 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X External sector

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the External Communica-tion Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or CD-ROM from the Div-ision Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2004 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2005 Monthly Report.
March 2004
– Public finances in crisis – the causes and the
need for action
– German balance of payments in 2003
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005

April 2004
– Recent developments in the corporate bond
market
– Credit risk transfer instruments: their use by
German banks and aspects of financial stability
– The significance of information and communi-
cation technology
May 2004
– Effects of eastward enlargement of the EU on
the German economy
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2004
June 2004
– Monetary policy under uncertainty
– Purchasing power parity theory as a concept
for evaluating price competitiveness
– Overall financial flows in 2003
July 2004
– Financial development and outlook of the
statutory health insurance scheme
– Regulation of the European securites markets
– Initial experience with the new monetary
policy framework and the Bundesbank’s contri-
bution to liquidity management by the Euro-system
August 2004
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2004
September 2004
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2003– Greater flexibility on the German labour
market
– How the Bundesbank analyses enterprises’
creditworthiness
– New capital requirements for credit institutions
(Basel II)
October 2004
– Report on the stability of the German financial
system
– Stress tests at German banks – methods and
results
November 2004
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2004
December 2004
– Demographic burdens on growth and wealth
in Germany
– The insurance sector as a financial intermediary– Credit default swaps – functions, importance
and information content
January 2005
– The relationship between money and prices– German banks’ foreign direct investment and
cross-border services
– Comments on reforming the Stability and
Growth Pact
February 2005
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2004-05
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20033
European economic and monetary union,February 2004
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, January 200542 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, December 20043,5
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2003,
September 20046
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 2000 and 2002, Novem-ber 2004
3
7 Erl/C228uterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20013
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
September 2004
10 International capital links,
May 20041, 6
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2004
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20043
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only available on the internet, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Stat-istics”, “External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.6Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2005
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Research Centre
34/2004
The contribution of rapid financial development to
asymmetric growth of manufacturing industries:Common Claims vs. evidence for Poland
35/2004
Fiscal rules and monetary policy in a dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium model
36/2004
Inflation and core money growth in the euro area
37/2004
Taylor rules for the euro area: the issue of real timedata
38/2004
What do deficits tell us about debt? Empiricalevidence on creative accounting with fiscal rules inthe EU
39/2004
Optimal lender of last resort policy in different
financial systems
40/2004
Expected budget deficits and interest rate swapspreads – Evidence for France, Germany and Italy
41/2004
Testing for business cycle asymmetries based onautoregressions with a Markov-switching intercept
1/2005
Financial constraints and capacity adjustment in
the United Kingdom – Evidence from a large panelof survey data
2/2005
Common stationary and non-stationary factors inthe euro area analyzed in a large-scale factor modelSeries 2
Banking and Financial Supervision
2/2004
Systematic Risk in Recovery Rates – An Empirical
Analysis of US Corporate Credit Exposures
3/2004
Does capital regulation matter for bank behaviour?Evidence for German savings banks
4/2004
German bank lending during emerging marketcrises: A bank level analysis
5/2004
How will Basel II affect bank lending to emerging
markets? An analysis based on German bank leveldata
6/2004
Estimating probabilities of default for German
savings banks and credit cooperatives
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20013
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the internet.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

