MONTHLY REPORT
NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH
2005
Vol 57
No 1 1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1Fax +49 69 5601071Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 18 November 2005.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on theinternet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-
tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in autumn 2005 5
Overview 6
Global and European setting 9Monetary policy and banking business 18
Money market management and
liquidity requirement 19
Financial markets 26
Economic conditions in Germany 34
Service transactions with non-residents
in the first three quarters of 2005 38
Impact of the amalgamation of socialassistance and unemploymentassistance: initial findings 40
Public finances 48
Key fiscal policy elements of thecoalition deal 51
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for euro area 6*Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
4Capital market 48*
Public finances in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*External sector 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
5The economic scene
in Germany
in autumn 2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
6OverviewEconomy regains momentum
After slowing in the second quarter, the Ger-
man economy grew remarkably strongly inthe third quarter of 2005. According to initialcalculations by the Federal Statistical Office,real third-quarter GDP after seasonal andworking-day adjustment was up 0.6 % onthe previous quarter, which showed a slightupward revision of the initial estimate. In sea-sonally adjusted terms, this constitutes ayear-on-year increase in overall economicoutput of 0.9% for the first three quarters ofthis year. According to the available data,growth for 2005 as a whole can be expectedto reach approximately 1%.
Once again, the favourable external econom-
ic developments were a significant contribu-tor to the positive overall result. Closely in linewith the sustained flow of orders, exports ofGerman products increased considerably be-tween July and September. In addition, therewere stronger domestic growth stimuli inGermany. First, there was another significantrise in purchases of machinery and equipmentafter a temporary lull in the second quarter.Second, seasonally adjusted construction in-vestment also increased somewhat for thefirst time in a while. By contrast, consumerspending by households remained veryrestrained. This is reflected in the decliningretail sales figures, for example. The generalincrease in expenditure on energy, whichincludes, say, shared charges for heating inrented accommodation as well as the cost ofelectricity and gas, will most certainly haverestricted spending power in other areas.GDP growth in
third quarter...
...somewhat
more broadly
based

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
7Above all, however, consumer demand is
being curbed by the difficult situation in thelabour market. While the number of personsin work has been increasing since the secondquarter, this development is less the expres-sion of an increased demand for labour in theeconomy and more a sign of the effects oflabour market policy such as measures tocreate low-paid jobs (“one-euro jobs”). Theunemployment rate fell only slightly from thesecond quarter to 11.6 %. In the light of theincreased economic burden resulting fromhigher oil and commodity prices, the moder-ate wage developments helped bolster em-ployment. In the corporate sector, at least,year-on-year unit labour costs in the first sixmonths were down by 1%.
The rise in factory gate prices affected mainly
energy and refined petroleum products. It islikely that these price impulses will also havea knock-on effect on consumer prices. The in-flation rate has already accelerated some-what in the past few months. While still 2 %in July, year-on-year inflation had increased to2.3 % by October.
The financial markets also point towards an
increase in inflationary risks while scepticismabout the economic development has in-creasingly given way to more benign expect-ations. Against this backdrop, capital marketrates in Germany, as in other euro-area coun-tries, have risen by around
1/C252percentage
point from their low in September to 31/C252%.
At the same time, however, US dollar rateshave risen markedly, as a result of which theyield differential for German bonds vis-/C224-viscorresponding US dollar paper currently
stands at around 1.1 percentage points.
The euro has only recently depreciated signifi-
cantly against the US dollar. Valued for a timeat less than US$1.17, the exchange rate wasat its lowest level for two years and lowerthan at the start of monetary union. Meas-ured against the currencies of the euro area’smajor trading partners, the euro also weak-ened slightly on average over the reportingperiod. In mid-November, the euro’s effectiveexchange rate was around 7 % lower than atthe start of this year.
The low level of interest rates maintained
over a long period in the euro area continuedto stimulate monetary expansion in the pastfew months. At its most recent meeting fol-lowing its regular economic and monetaryanalysis of the monetary policy situation inthe euro area, the ECB Governing Councilconsidered the steady interest rate course tobe still appropriate. However, the Counciltook the view that the recent increase in infla-tionary risks over the somewhat longer termwould require a high degree of monetary pol-icy vigilance.
In this connection, it is particularly worth not-
ing the increasingly rapid monetary and creditgrowth in the euro area. During the thirdquarter, M3 grew at a seasonally adjusted an-nual rate of 11
1/C252%, up from just under 10 %
between April and June. As was previouslythe case, monetary growth was primarilysustained by a continuing increase in loans toenterprises and households in the euro area.Housing loans accounted for more than halfPersistent
difficulties in
the labour
market
Accelerated rise
in consumer
prices
Capital market
rates increaseEffective euro
exchange rate
Monetary
policy strategy
Monetary
expansion
accelerates
further

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
8the rise although bank loans to the corporate
sector also increased strongly. In addition, thedemand for credit from German banks in thethird quarter revived somewhat after a longperiod of stagnation. Nevertheless, loans tofinancial institutions outside the banking sec-tor were also a factor, the majority of whichconcerned transactions by German banks insecurities lending.
The economic prospects for consumers and
investors in Germany are darkened not leastby the very critical state of public financesand, despite undeniable progress in recentyears, a continued lack of flexibility in theGerman labour market. Against this back-drop, the coalition negotiations’ particularfocus on the fundamental objective ofbudgetary consolidation is to be welcomed.Consolidation of government budgets is ne-cessary to regain the trust of consumers andinvestors. A move towards reforming the fed-eral structure, raising the retirement age andthe planned reduction in subsidies are alsoimportant steps in the right direction. Thesame applies to the cut in the contributionrate to the Federal Employment Agency,which is to be financed, at least in part, byreductions in expenditure already approved.
On the whole, however, the fiscal policy strat-
egy outlined in the coalition treaty should beviewed with significant reservations. For ex-ample, the consolidation planned for 2006does not go far enough. Through the imple-mentation of these measures, the generalgovernment deficit ratio is likely to fall belowthe threshold defined in the EC Treaty againin 2007 and a significant reduction in the def-icit is likely to be achieved. However, nationaland European budgetary rules will bebreached in 2006, something which will fur-ther weaken their credibility. Given the funda-mental necessity of reducing the structuraldeficit, cyclical conditions, as things stand atpresent, would not have hindered consolida-tion being spread more evenly over a periodof time or, therefore, significant progress asearly as next year. In addition, the bulk of theconsolidation is being accomplished throughhigher tax rates, with only limited spendingcuts. This will not help create the conditionsfor growth and employment in the longerterm.
Implementing further cuts in government
spending in the medium term is thereforevital. The government should further aim toreduce the government expenditure ratio inorder to achieve its target of a balancedbudget and a further reduction in the tax bur-den.
The coalition treaty envisages fundamental
reforms in key areas for the coming parlia-mentary term. These include, particularly, in-come and corporation taxation, the statutoryhealth insurance scheme, the financial consti-tution and an increase in incentives to takeon low-paid employment. In this respect,there is scope for improving the macroeco-nomic framework. The crucial elements herewill be to strengthen individual responsibilityand competition, improve incentive structuresand enhance the transparency of the sys-tems.
Critical public
finance
situation
Consolidation
in 2007Fundamentalreforms
envisaged

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
9Global and
European settingWorld economic activity
The world economy remained on a growth
path after mid-year despite considerable add-itional strains. The renewed surge in oil pricesin August once again visibly reduced real dis-posable income in the oil-consuming coun-tries. In addition, since the end of August, theUS economy has had to cope with consider-able output losses owing to damage causedby severe hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico.This did not leave a distinct mark on thethird-quarter output figures, which were ex-ceptionally favourable, particularly becausethe US economy was running at an extremelyrapid pace at the beginning of the third quar-ter. In Japan, growth slowed distinctly afterthe middle of the year. By contrast, the euroarea saw stronger growth.
In the major industrial nations and economic
regions (the United States, Japan, the UnitedKingdom and the euro area), aggregate realQ3 gross domestic product (GDP) – accordingto figures that are still provisional – was there-fore
3/C254% higher in seasonally and working-
day adjusted terms than in the second quar-ter, in which it had risen at the same rate. Itrose by 2
3/C254% on the year. According to the
available leading indicators, the fourth quar-ter is likely to see a continuation of brisk eco-nomic activity in the industrial countries, al-though the pace is expected to slow downsomewhat in the USA.
International crude oil prices (Brent) rose by
US$15 to around US$65 from early May tomid-August. Following reports of the hurri-cane damage along the Gulf Coast of theDynamic global
economy
despite
renewed surge
in oil prices
Oil markets
calmer since
early
September

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
10United States, prices rose further to US$671/C252
in late August/early September. They then
showed a noticeable downward trend. Inmid-November, oil spot prices stood atUS$55
1/C252. Key factors in the calming on the
oil markets since early September were theannouncement by various industrial nationsthat they would release part of their strategicoil reserves and OPEC’s decision to increaseproduction once again. In addition, high oilprices in consumer countries have apparentlytriggered increased energy saving. In euroterms, the price of Brent crude oil – owing tothe depreciation of the euro against the USdollar – rose somewhat more sharply; as thisreport went to press, the price of a barrel ofoil, at 347
1/C252, was just over one-fifth higher
than in early May. Given the continuing in-crease in the worldwide demand for oil andthe fact that the production losses in the Gulfof Mexico are likely to persist for some time,a sustained decline in crude oil prices is not tobe expected for the time being. The (US$)prices of industrial raw materials, having fall-en slightly during the second quarter, pickedup once again after mid-year and have, sinceearly September, been holding firm at thelevel already reached in March-April. Denom-inated in euro, however, they were one-tenthhigher as this report went to press.
The renewed surge in oil prices in the summer
months put a visible damper on the price cli-mate in the consumer countries. A prominentcase in point was the United States, whereconsiderable supply bottlenecks for oil prod-ucts owing to the hurricane damage to re-fineries drove prices up particularly sharply.Between June and September, consumerprice inflation in industrial nations rose by1.2 percentage points to 3.0%. ExcludingJapan, which dragged down the average con-siderably, consumer prices were 3.6% higherin September than a year before. Core infla-tion (ie excluding energy and food), however,at 1.7%, was virtually unchanged in compari-son with Q2 figures. The larger discrepancybetween the inflation rates indicates that in-direct and second-round effects have so farremained limited in industrial nations.
In its September 2005 World Economic Out-
look, the IMF continues to assume that theworld economy – despite the renewed surgein oil prices in the third quarter – will grow by4
1/C254% both this year and next. The growth
rate would thus remain well above the long-term average of 3
1/C252%. The spring estimateLog scale
US$
or €
Industrial raw materials
2000 = 100
in US dollar terms
in euro termsCrude oil 1
in US dollars
in euroWorld market prices for
crude oil and industrial
raw materials
Sources: Thomson Financial, HWWA Com-
modity Price Index. — 1Price for one barrel
of Brent crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank160
140
120
100
801806050
40
30
2025
2002 2003 2004 2005Stronger oil
price-related
inflation in
industrial
countries
IMF forecast

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
11was maintained without changes for 2005
and revised downwards only slightly for2006, although the oil price assumptions,now at US$54
1/C254for 2005 and US$613/C254for
2006, are respectively around US$8 andUS$18 higher than before. The IMF forecastis based on the expectation that the growth-dampening effects of higher oil prices will beoffset by a continued accommodative monet-ary policy, favourable financial market condi-tions, especially low long-term interest rates,and a sustained improvement in corporatebalance sheet structures.
According to the IMF’s latest forecast, how-
ever, strong global GDP growth will be ac-companied by somewhat weaker growth inreal world trade. Growth rates were reviseddownwards by one-half and one-quarter per-centage point to 7% and 7
1/C252% respectively.
By contrast, price forecasts were revised up-wards. For developing countries and emer-ging markets, in particular, a much strongerincrease in consumer prices than as late asApril 2005 is now expected (6% this year and5
3/C254% in 2006). The estimate for the industrial
countries as a whole was revised upwardsonly slightly for 2005 and 2006 (each by
1/C254percentage point) to 21/C254% and 2% re-
spectively. From today’s perspective, however,this is likely to be the lower limit. In addition,it should be noted that the low Japanese rateis having a strong dampening impact on theaverage value.
The IMF’s risk assessment has likewise
changed little relative to earlier forecasts. Thedangers arising from high and volatile oilprices remain at the top of the list. Increasingprotectionism and a distinct deterioration in
financial market conditions as a result of asudden rise in inflation expectations are alsoregarded as risks. Over the medium term,macroeconomic imbalances, which are stillon the rise, and the unsustainable fiscal pol-icies pursued by some industrial nations arestill considered to be potential sources of risk.The IMF forecasts that the US current accountdeficit will stabilise at just over 6% of GDP in2006, although this will mean – relative to2004 figures – a further rise by one-fifth towhat will then be well over US$800 billion.
In this context, it must be taken into account
that the current account surpluses of theSouth and East Asian emerging market econ-omies, owing to their higher national oil bills,will probably see only slight growth duringIMF forecast for 2005 and 2006*
Item 2003 2004 2005 2006
Real gross domestic
product Annual percentage change
Advanced
economies 1 +1 . 9 +3 . 3 +2 . 5 +2 . 7
of which
United States + 2.7 + 4.2 + 3.5 + 3.3Japan + 1.4 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 2.0Euro area + 0.7 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 1.8
Consumer prices
2
Advanced
economies 1 +1 . 8 +2 . 0 +2 . 2 +2 . 0
of which
United States + 2.3 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 2.8Japan – 0.2 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.1Euro area + 2.1 + 2.1 + 2.1 + 1.8
Unemployment Number of unemployed persons as a
percentage of the labour force
Advanced
economies
1 6.6 6.3 6.1 5.9
of which
United States 6.0 5.5 5.2 5.2Japan 5.3 4.7 4.3 4.1Euro area 8.7 8.9 8.7 8.4
* Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, September 2005. — 1In-
cluding Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore. —2Consumer price index; for the euro area, HICP.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Considerable
risks to the
world economy
remain

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
12the forecasting period, whereas those of the
oil-exporting countries will probably risesharply. Although little is known about howthose countries invest their “surplus” oil rev-enues, the US dollar as an asset may possiblyplay a less important role than in past invest-ment decisions taken by East Asian emergingmarket economies, which were motivated byexchange rate management objectives. High-er interest rates in the USA and a steeperinternational yield curve have acted as acounterpart.
In some South and East Asian emerging mar-
ket economies, the oil price-related depletionof private-sector purchasing power has, inthe past few months, been amplified by thefact that the governments have, in somecases, made significant cuts in their previouspetroleum products subsidies, especially forfiscal reasons. In the light of the still relativelyhigh energy intensity of production in thecountries concerned, this could lead, at leasttemporarily, to shortfalls in growth and in-creased vulnerability to shocks. The energyprice-related macroeconomic strains in the re-gion, however, were cushioned throughoutthe reporting period by the persistent expan-sionary stimuli being emitted by the USA andChina. Chinese Q3 GDP – as in Q2 already –grew by 9
1/C252% on the year. For 2005 as a
whole, a 91/C252% growth rate is once again to
be expected. In the coming year, the growthrate in China and the other South and EastAsian emerging economies could slow downsomewhat, however.
The majority of Latin American economies
– especially Brazil, Mexico and Venezuela –are still benefiting from the high prices ofcrude oil and industrial raw materials. For ex-ample, despite a distinct appreciation of thereal in the first eight months of the year, Bra-zilian exports rose nominally by one-quarteron the year. Domestic activity has likewisepicked up in the past few months, not leastthanks to a decline in the inflation rate whichled the central bank to reduce its lending rateonce again (from 19
1/C252% to 19%). Average
annual GDP growth looks likely to be 31/C252%
after 5% in 2004. Mexico’s economic growthis expected to be on a similar scale. The Ar-gentine government is expecting GDP growthof 7
1/C254% for this year following 9% in 2004.
Fast growth, however, is coming more andmore at the expense of price stability; in2005, the inflation rate is expected to exceedthe 9% mark.
A sharp rise in revenue from exports of raw
materials is also boosting economic activity inthe Commonwealth of Independent States(CIS). With overall capacity utilisation now ata higher level, however, price pressures haverisen sharply over the course of this year. For2005, the Russian government is expectingan inflation rate of 12% with probable GDPgrowth of 5
3/C254%. Over the medium term, the
large share of consumption in the economicgrowth of the CIS, in particular, will createproblems. According to IMF calculations,gross fixed capital formation, averaging 21%of GDP for the 2000-2004 period, was fivepercentage points lower than the corres-ponding figure for the central and east Euro-pean transition countries. This is undoubtedlypartly attributable to the – at times – shakySouth and East
Asian emerging
market
economies
Latin AmericaCommon-
wealth of
Independent
States

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
13framework conditions in which domestic and
foreign investors have to operate.
According to initial calculations, real GDP in
the USA rose by nearly 1% after seasonal andworking-day adjustment in the third quarter,a somewhat stronger rise than in the secondquarter. For 2005 as a whole, growth of justover 3
1/C252% is expected. Without the adverse
effects on overall output caused by the hurri-cane damage in late August and September,third-quarter growth would have been evenstronger. Private consumption, gross fixedcapital formation and government consump-tion were the main drivers. Although inven-tory changes once again had an adverse im-pact, it was much less pronounced than inthe second quarter. With real exports show-ing little growth and imports at a standstill,the deficit in real net exports remained virtu-ally unchanged after seasonal adjustment.
Households’ disposable income was particu-
larly strongly affected by the economic conse-quences of the late summer hurricanes. Non-insured household losses reduced net incomefrom leasing and rents and from entrepre-neurial activity by US$20 billion. At the sametime, revenues from transfer payments werejust over US$10 billion higher owing to insur-ance payments for insured losses. On thewhole, third-quarter disposable income roseby a seasonally adjusted
3/C254% on the period.
However, nominal consumption expenditurerose by a perceptibly larger margin, whichcaused the saving ratio to fall from +0.1% inthe second quarter to –1.1% in the third.US household expenditure was driven up-
wards, in particular, by the strong rise in en-ergy prices which, in the July-October period,were one-quarter up on the year. This causedoverall inflation to rise from 3.0% in thesecond quarter to 3.9%. Excluding energyand food, however, inflation slowed downslightly to 2.1% after mid-year. The core con-sumer price deflator, the US Federal Reserve’spreferred instrument of price analysis, like-wise fell slightly to 1.9% in the third quarter.
After expanding strongly in the first half of
2005, the Japanese economy grew muchmore slowly in the third quarter. Real GDPwas initially estimated to have grown at justunder
1/C252% in seasonally adjusted terms, com-
pared with 11/C252% and3/C254% in the two preced-
ing periods. Its year-on-year growth was 3%.Thus, for 2005, total output growth of be-tween 2% and 2
1/C252% may be expected.
Growth in the summer months was driven inlarge part by domestic demand. Commercialinvestment once again grew strongly at a sea-sonally adjusted
3/C254%. For the first time in six
years, government investment also rose.After a sluggish first half of the year, housingconstruction likewise showed a visible risingtrend. Private consumption was up by
1/C254%
on the period. The strong rise in real exports(2
3/C254% after seasonal adjustment) was offset,
however, by an even stronger increase in im-ports, which meant that cross-border goodstrade nominally reduced GDP growth some-what. In addition, the current account surplushas tended to decrease since mid-2004, a de-velopment attributable above all to higherenergy prices.USA
Japan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
14The available leading indicators point to a
continuation of vibrant economic activity inthe third quarter. The sharp rise in new ordersreceived in the third quarter deserves primarymention here. The renewed surge in crude oilprices after mid-year, along with the depreci-ation of the yen, substantially increased theenergy prices paid by Japanese households;however, this was offset by reductions infood prices, causing overall consumer pricesin the third quarter to fall slightly once againafter seasonal adjustment (-0.3% on theyear).
According to initial estimates, total UK output
rose by just under
1/C252% in the third quarter
after adjustment for seasonal and working-day variations; it was thus somewhat downon the preceding period. The year-on-yearrise was 1
1/C252%. Growth for the entire year is
likely to be somewhere in that range, too.The increase in production in the third quarterwas driven once again by the services sectorand construction, whereas manufacturersproduced a seasonally adjusted
1/C252% less than
in the preceding period. With regard to de-mand, for which the available information isonly sketchy, household consumption con-tinued to sustain economic activity; retail pur-chases were up by
1/C252% in the third quarter
after adjustment for price and seasonal vari-ations. It should be noted here that UK con-sumers’ purchasing power was visibly re-duced in the late summer owing to the sharprise in energy prices. Hence inflation – asmeasured by the Consumer Price Index (CPI)– ran at 2.4% over the July-October periodand was thus well above the UK govern-ment’s medium-term inflation target of2.0%. From mid-year onwards, house pricestended to go back up after having fallensomewhat in the second quarter.
Economic activity in the new EU member
states – measured in terms of industrial out-put – accelerated noticeably during the firsthalf of 2005. This means that the slump inthe second half of 2004 appears to havebeen overcome. The upward movement con-tinued in the third quarter. Seasonally adjustedindustrial production surpassed its second-quarter level by 1
3/C254% and was up by 61/C254%
on the year. Quarter-on-quarter growth wasparticularly pronounced in the Czech Repub-lic, Estonia, Lithuania and Slovakia. Buoyantmanufacturing activity has meant that em-ployment has also continued to rise in thenew EU member states. At the same time,the seasonally adjusted standardised un-employment rate fell slightly and stood at13.3% as this report went to press.
The price climate deteriorated after mid-year.
In this case, too, higher market prices forcrude oil were the main culprit, althoughtheir influence on domestic energy prices wassoftened in some countries by an appreci-ation of their currency. Consumer price infla-tion stood at 2.5% in October comparedwith 2.0% in June-July. At the beginning ofthe year, however, inflation had still been inexcess of 3% and had averaged 4% in 2004.In the meantime, however, the price effectsof the – at times – sharp tax increases whichtook effect in some of these countries uponaccession to the EU on 1 May 2004 havebeen eliminated from the calculation of year-on-year inflation.United
KingdomNew EUmember states

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
15Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Euro-area growth accelerated noticeably after
mid-year. According to an initial estimate(Flash Estimate), real GDP in the third quarterwas up by just over
1/C252% – after adjustment
for seasonal and working-day variations – onthe previous quarter, in which it had gone upby only
1/C254%. Year-on-year growth stood at
11/C252%. According to the European Commis-
sion’s autumn forecast, total output will risein the last quarter of the year by just under
1/C252% after seasonal adjustment. Growth for
2005 as a whole is likely to be 11/C254%.
The slight increase in total output is due,above all, to the faster pace of growth inmanufacturing. In the July-September period,manufacturing output was a seasonally ad-justed
3/C254% higher than in the second quarter
and 11/C254% higher than a year earlier. Corres-
pondingly, capacity utilisation increased in theJuly-October period – for the first time sincethe fourth quarter of 2004. Owing to thesharp decline in the first quarter of 2005,however, it was still below the level it reachedat the beginning of the year. The continuedimprovement in confidence in the manufac-turing industry is consistent with more livelyindustrial output. The key stimuli to manufac-turing once again came from outside theeuro area. In July-August, after elimination ofseasonal influences, goods exports were 5%higher in terms of value than in the secondquarter. By contrast, in the third quarter, pri-vate consumer demand – measured in termsof real retail sales – held firm at the previousquarter’s low levels. As consumer confidencewas still very low even in October, privateconsumption is not expected to recover in thenext few months.
The number of unemployed persons in the
euro area fell slightly after the middle of 2005.According to provisional Eurostat figures, theaverage number of persons without work inthe third quarter stood at a seasonally adjusted12.39 million. This represented a 4.1% year-on-year decline, following a 1.5% fall in thePercent-
age
pointsDispersion in change
in labour costs2
Unweighted standard
deviation
Weighted
standard deviation3Non-wage costsWages and salariesAnnual percentage change
Total labour costs 1Labour costs in the euro area
Source: Eurostat and Bundesbank calcul-
ations. — 1Gross hourly wages and salaries
plus non-wage costs; excluding agricultureand public services. — 2For eight euro-area
countries. — 3Weighted by euro-area
countries’ GDP shares.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.9
1.6
1.3
1.00.76
4
2042064
2
0
2002 2003 2004 2005Third-quarter
GDP
Developments
in key
economic
indicators
Labour market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
16preceding period. The standardised unemploy-
ment rate fell to 8.5%, having been 8.8% ayear earlier.
In June, the Statistical Office of the European
Communities (Eurostat) published its firstquarterly Labour Cost Index (LCI) for the euroarea. It measures the hourly nominal labourcosts (ie gross wages and non-wage costs)adjusted for working-day variations. The indi-cator is calculated for the whole economy(excluding agriculture and public services)and for industry. The euro-area LCI is aggre-gated by Eurostat from the member states’relevant indices, which, except for the Italianindex, are also published. New results are pre-sented nearly three months after the end ofthe reporting quarter; this means that, atpresent, information is available up to thesecond quarter. According to this informa-tion, labour costs in the overall economy andin industry in the second quarter of 2005were, in each case, 2
1/C254% up on the year.
Even if the rates of change are sometimesquite volatile, this still clearly shows that therise in labour costs has tapered off visibly inthe past few years owing, above all, to moremoderate growth in gross wages and salaries.In addition, the rise in non-wage costs hasslowed down. This development has beenrelatively balanced from one member state toanother; whatever the case, the (weightedand unweighted) dispersion of the rates ofchange in total labour costs around the euro-area average did not see any major changeduring this period.
In the third quarter of 2005, too, euro-area
consumer prices – driven by oil prices – rosesharply. After seasonal adjustment, the in-crease was no less than 0.8%, following0.7% in the second-quarter months. Theyear-on-year increase widened from 2.0% to2.3%. The October inflation rate was 2.5%.
Excluding energy and unprocessed food,
quarter-on-quarter inflation, at +0.4% in thethird quarter – which corresponds to a pro-jected annual rate of 1
1/C252% – was much more
moderate than in the preceding period. Theyear-on-year core inflation rate was 1
1/C252%, as
in the second quarter already. The currentunderlying momentum of the HarmonisedIndex of Consumer Prices (HICP), however, isprobably understated by core inflation, sincethe overall level of energy prices is in themidst of an upward movement that cannotbe regarded merely as a reflection of higherEuro-area consumer prices
Annual percentage change
2005
I t e m Q 1Q 2Q 3
HICP, total 2.0 2.0 2.3
of which
Unprocessed food 0.5 0.8 0.8Energy 7.6 8.8 12.9
HICP excluding energy and
unprocessed food 1.6 1.5 1.4
of which
Processed food 2.4 1.6 1.9Industrial goods 0.3 0.3 0.1Services 2.4 2.3 2.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
New Labour
Cost IndexConsumerprices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
17volatility. In addition, wages are still more or
less strictly indexed in various member coun-tries. Furthermore, it should be noted thatthe HICP inflation rate does not capture theprice for the use of owner-occupied accom-modation.
Energy prices rose by nearly 13% on the year.
The strongest rise was recorded by heating oil(+35%), followed by petrol (+14%). Gas
prices (+11%) and, above all, electricity prices(+3%) have so far risen less sharply. However,these energy sources may also be expected tobecome much more expensive in the comingmonths as a consequence, for instance, ofhigher crude oil prices.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
18Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and
the money market
The Governing Council of the European Cen-
tral Bank did not change key interest rates inthe past few months. The main refinancingoperations continued to be conducted asvariable rate tenders with a minimum bid rateof 2%; a rate of 3% was charged for themarginal lending facility and a rate of 1%was paid on the deposit facility. On the basisof its regular economic and monetary analy-ses, the Governing Council has concludedthat the monetary policy stance is still appro-priate. Inflation risks have been increasing re-cently. In particular, the further increase inmoney and loan growth in the euro area callsfor a lot of monetary policy vigilance.
In line with the steady interest rate course,
the overnight rate (Eonia) continued to movesideways in the period under review with theexception of the temporary fluctuations atthe end of the quarter and at the end of thereserve maintenance periods. It was mostlyclose to the marginal lending rate, which wasonly five basis points above the minimum bidrate. The other money market rates weresimilarly calm until the end of September.Since then, however, the interest rates havepicked up markedly in the somewhat longer-term maturity range in the money market.Interest rates on twelve-month deposits haveaccordingly reached 2.7%, a level last seen inJanuary 2003. Compared to the start of Au-gust this corresponds to a rise of almost50 basis points. Three-month money marketrates went up by almost 25 basis points dur-ing the same period. As a result, the yieldEurosystem
interest rates
unchanged
Money market
interest rates
initially
performed
calmly...
... before rising
sharply since
the end of
September

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
19Money market management and liquidity requirement
In the three maintenance periods between 13 July and
11 October 2005, euro-area credit institutions’ need forcentral bank liquidity determined by autonomous liquidityfactors fell by 512.4 billion in net terms. Although bank-
notes in circulation absorbed an additional 59 billion, the
growth was considerably weaker than in the correspond-ing maintenance periods last year, when banknotes in cir-culation had increased by 516 billion. By contrast, the de-
cline in general government deposits with the Eurosystem,which should be seen in connection with the levels of thepreceding periods, some of which were relatively high, ledon balance to a 519.5 billion drop in liquidity needs. A joint
examination of net foreign reserves and other factors, amove which eliminates valuation effects with no impact onliquidity, also shows a decline in liquidity needs of 51.9 bil-
lion here, which as in the preceding periods was caused bypurchases of euro-denominated financial assets whichwere not linked to monetary policy.
The Eurosystem offset the changes in the liquidity needs
arising from autonomous factors by adjusting the volumesof its main refinancing operations; these were initially ex-panded by 511.9 billion to 5309.5 billion in the July/August
maintenance period before the average allotment amountwas reduced by 56 billion and 514.9 billion respectively in
the two following periods. The minimum reserve require-ment rose by 53.5 billion and hence considerably more
sharply than in the same period last year when growth ofjust 50.7 billion had been registered. Since, however, the
Eurosystem had reduced the volume of the main refinan-cing operations by a sum that was lower than the drop inliquidity needs arising from autonomous factors, the creditinstitutions were on balance able to fulfil their increasedreserve requirements smoothly.
The overnight rate measured in terms of the weighted
average Eonia rate was mostly around 2.08% in the pastthree reserve maintenance periods. As well as the usualslight increase in prices at the end of the month or quarter,deviations mainly occurred in the last few days of each re-serve maintenance period. At the end of the July/Augustreserve maintenance period the Eurosystem intended toabsorb the emerging liquidity overhang of 56.5 billion by
means of a fine-tuning operation. However, owing tounderbidding by the credit institutions it was only possibleto absorb 50.5 billion from the market. Market participants
cited as the reason for this the fact that on the morning of9 August there was still too much uncertainty prevailingwith regard to their own liquidity situation. They also didnot find the operation’s fixed interest rate of 2% to be at-tractive enough. In retrospect it turned out that the Euro-system had forecast the liquidity overhang with almostperfect accuracy, since a net recourse to the deposit facilityin the amount of 55.4 billion took place. This would imply
that the optimal volume of the fine-tuning operation layat just under 56 billion and hence only marginally below
the volume being targeted. As this became evident in thecourse of the trading day, the overnight rate fell to a levelclose to the rate of the deposit facility. Eonia stood at1.63%.
By contrast, at the end of the August/September reserve
maintenance period there was a liquidity deficit that wasoffset by a liquidising fine-tuning operation in the amountof59.5 billion. Net recourse to the deposit facility amount-
ed to just 50.3 billion. Since, however, the liquidity situ-
ation was still incorrectly assessed as too tight even afterthe operation, Eonia finally closed at 2.18% on 6 Septem-ber.
The September/October period closed with another liquid-
ity overhang, which owing to unexpected inflows arisingfrom autonomous factors the Eurosystem was unable to
absorb fully by means of a fine-tuning operation in theamount of 58.5 billion, as illustrated by a net recourse to
the deposit facility of 51.3 billion. Despite this, at 1.93%
Eonia was only marginally below the minimum bid rate of2%. This time the operation drew a large amount of inter-est from the credit instituations, which submitted bids inthe amount of 524 billion at a fixed rate of 2.00%.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; changes of daily averages of reserve maintenance
periods to the previous period
2005
Item13 July
to
9 Aug10 Aug
to
6 Sep7 Sep
to
11 Oct
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances by
changes of autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) – 10.0 + 1.1 – 0.1
2 General government deposits
with the Eurosystem
(increase: –) + 0.0 + 4.3 + 15.2
3 Net foreign reserves2+ 12.2 – 0.7 + 3.1
4 Other factors2– 12.3 + 1.2 – 1.6
Total – 10.1 + 5.9 + 16.6
II Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations + 11.9 – 6.0 – 14.9
(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0
(c) Other operations + 0.3 + 0.3 – 0.5
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0
Total + 12.0 – 5.5 – 15.3
III Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I + II) + 1.9 + 0.4 + 1.2
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) – 2.0 – 0.5 – 1.0
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of this Monthly Report .— 2Including end-
of-quarter valuation adjustments with no impact onliquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
20curve on the money market, which at the end
of June was for a time slightly inverted and atthe start of August was very flat, steepenedconsiderably by the end of the reportingperiod. This reflects the rising interest rateexpectations of market participants.
Monetary developments in the euro area
The low level of interest rates has stimulated
monetary expansion in the euro area also inthe last few months. The increase in monet-ary growth seen over several quarters con-tinued to hold up in the third quarter of2005. M3 grew at a seasonally-adjusted an-nual rate of 11
1/C252% from July to September,
up from just under 10% in the months Aprilto June. As was previously the case, the mon-etary expansion was primarily upheld by acontinuing increase in loans to the domesticprivate sector. Alongside this, general govern-ment borrowing or saving also boosted mon-etary growth. In addition, the dynamicgrowth of short-term assets contained in M3during the third quarter was accompanied bya significant drop in investors’ willingness toinvest assets on a longer-term basis withbanks in the euro area. At a seasonally-adjusted annual rate of 4%, monetary capitalformation therefore expanded over the quar-ter under review at its slowest rate since thestart of 2003. Overall, the money stock M3was ultimately up 8.5% on the year. Theaverage 12-month rate over the months Julyto September therefore amounted to 8.2%.
The increase in the money stock in the third
quarter once again primarily concerned theparticularly liquid components contained inM1. In addition, however, the other short-term bank deposits and marketable instru-ments also expanded strongly. In view of lowcapital market rates, expectations at the endof the quarter of a rise in interest rates, andincreased uncertainty on the stock markets,domestic investors displayed a large amountof interest in temporarily parking funds in theform of short-term bank deposits in a secureand liquid way. With a seasonally adjustedannual rate of 12%, overnight deposits ac-cordingly rose somewhat stronger again inthe period from July to September than in thepreceding quarter (+11
1/C252%). For the first time
since the introduction of euro banknotes andcoins they even grew slightly faster thancurrency in circulation, which rose at aseasonally-adjusted annual rate of 11
1/C252%,Seasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
Reference value: 4 ½%Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
87
6
54
3
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Renewed
strong
monetary
growthStrong growthof particularly
liquid
components
of M3

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
21down from over 14% in the previous quarter.
In addition, deposits with an agreed maturityof up to two years also expanded very sharp-ly. Deposits redeemable at notice of up tothree months likewise benefited from domes-tic investors’ marked preference for liquidity.Money market fund shares which over thelast few years have been in particular demandfrom private households wishing to tempor-arily hold funds in a liquid form at marketinterest rates were topped up strongly in thequarter under review together with repur-chase agreements and short-term bankbonds.
The main driving force behind monetary ex-
pansion in the third quarter was once morethe sharp increase in credit to the private sec-tor in the euro area. This also includes banks’purchases of securities issued by domestic en-terprises, which expanded significantly in thequarter under review. Above all, however,their unsecuritised lending to domestic enter-prises and households again rose sharply. Atjust over 10%, the annualised growth ratewas even higher than in the preceding quar-ter (just under 9
1/C252%). Broken down by sec-
tors, housing loans were once more grantedon a large scale and accounted for over halfof the overall private credit expansion in thequarter under review. On top of this, loans tothe corporate sector also rose strongly.
In the third quarter, general government bor-
rowing or saving per se likewise exerted anexpansionary effect on monetary growth inthe euro area. This was held up by both theincrease in loans by banks to public sectorborrowers and a rather sharp decline in cen-€ billion, seasonally adjusted
change over the period indicated
€ billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet counterparts 1
Loans to
enterprises
and households
General
government
borrowing
or saving2
Net externalasset
position
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counterparts
of M3
3Money stock
Apr to June 2005
Increase in M3
July to Sep 2005Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts are
shown in terms of whether they expand (+)
or contract (−) the money stock. — 2Bank
loans to general government less euro-area
central government deposits with MFIs and
holdings of securities issued by the MFIsector. — 3Calculated as a residual of the
other items of the consolidated balance
sheet of the MFI sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank250+200+150+100+50+0 50−100−150−200−Ongoing strong
expansion of
loans to the
private sector...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
22tral governments’ deposits which are not
included in M3.
Monetary expansion in the third quarter was
further boosted by the fact that the longer-term liabilities of banks only increased moder-ately. In particular, the demand for bankbonds with a maturity of more than twoyears was considerably lower between Julyand September than in the two precedingquarters. In Germany, Italy and Austria theoutstanding amount of such bonds actuallydecreased in the quarter under review afterhaving expanded sharply in these countries inthe first half of the year. Longer-term bankdeposits and banks’ capital and reserves alsoincreased at a slower pace in the third quar-ter. Viewed in isolation, however, substantialoutflows of funds to other countries curbedmonetary expansion.
Deposit and lending business of
German banks with domestic customers
The pronounced liquidity preference that
could be observed in the euro area in thethird quarter of 2005 also dominated the de-posit business of German banks. In view ofthe small interest rate advantage of longer-term bank deposits and the considerable risein stock market uncertainty since the middleof the year, which is reflected in an increasein stock market volatility, German investorson balance invested almost exclusively inshort-term bank deposits. With a seasonallyadjusted growth rate of 8%, these funds be-longing to monetary aggregate M3 thereforerose again more sharply in the period underreview than in the preceding quarter(+6
1/C252%). At the same time, longer-term bank
deposits stagnated, thereby reflecting Ger-man investors’ current low propensity forinvesting in such assets.
Turning to short-term bank deposits, over-
night deposits have increased particularlysharply recently, expanding at a seasonally-adjusted annual rate of 14
1/C252% over the sum-
mer months. The short-term liquidity arrange-ments of other financial intermediaries had astrong impact here. On top of this, house-holds and non-financial corporations also in-creased their sight deposits considerably. Bycontrast, the overall rise in short-term timeand savings deposits was somewhat subdued.Although non-financial corporations in par-Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2005 2004
ItemJuly to
SepJuly toSep
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs
1
Overnight + 11.5 + 5.7With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years + 3.3 + 1.3of over 2 years + 1.7 + 5.2
Redeemable at agreed notice
of up to 3 months – 0.5 + 1.4of over 3 months – 3.2 – 0.2
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised + 17.2 + 2.7Securitised + 7.6 – 5.6
to domestic government
Unsecuritised – 5.5 – 0.4Securitised – 0.7 + 6.1
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .—1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank
... while
monetary
capital
formation was
modestFurther sharp
rise in short-
term bank
deposits
Sharp growth
in overnight
deposits...
... and
moderate
growth in other
short-term
deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
23ticular formed short-term time deposits on a
relatively large scale, domestic households fur-ther reduced their short-term time deposits.Households’ interest in deposits with a periodof notice of three months was likewise com-paratively small in view of a continued drop inrates in this segment and partially attractiverates for overnight deposits.
Longer-term savings deposits with a period of
notice of over three months were consider-ably reduced in the period under review afterhaving still attracted moderate demand in thepreceding quarters. By contrast, time depositswith an agreed maturity of over two years in-creased sharply. This asset class, which alsoincludes appropriate fixed-term registeredbank debt certificates, is particularly popularwith insurance companies. This meant that,on balance, longer-term deposits among Ger-man banks remained approximately constant.
Loans by German banks to domestic non-
banks increased noticeably (by 2
1/C252%) during
the third quarter for the first time following along period of stagnation. Thus loans to thedomestic private sector picked up morestrongly over the quarter. As well as grantingtraditional loans, German banks also pur-chased stocks of domestic enterprises on alarger scale. By contrast, they reduced loansto the German public sector on balance.
The increase in loans to the domestic private
sector should not be overstated, however, asthis is due primarily to the sharp rise in short-term non-securitised loans to other financialintermediaries. This increase was for the mostpart based on extensive securities lendingtransactions by German banks where a major
German custodian institution not only sup-plied the trading platform but also acted asthe counterparty. As a result, both repurchaseagreements of other financial institutions andshort-term loans to this sector went up signifi-cantly in the last few months without any add-itional liquidity flowing to private non-banks.Factoring this effect into domestic credit de-velopment brings down the 12-month growthrate of loans to the private sector in Germanyby a quarter to half a percentage point.
According to the German results of the Euro-
system’s bank lending survey,
1the respond-Seasonally adjusted
€b n
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02300
2250
2200
2150
2100
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, German results of euro-
area bank lending survey, Monthly Report, June 2003, pp
69ff. The aggregate survey results for Germany can be
viewed under http://www.bundesbank.de/volkswirtschaft/
vo_veroeffentlichungen.en.php.Longer-term
bank deposits
virtually
unchanged
Loans are up...
... but over-
stated by
special develop-
mentBroadly
unchanged
credit standards
in all lending
categories

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
24ent banks left their credit standards for both
corporate loans and loans to householdslargely unchanged. Nevertheless, the banksreported a further slight reduction in the mar-gins on average loans in their corporate andhousehold lending business, particularly inthe area of consumer loans. Margins chargedon riskier loans were only widened slightly ina small number of cases and the other lend-ing terms also underwent no further changes.
Following the very weak preceding quarter,
the participating institutions reported a slightupturn in the demand for corporate loans inthe third quarter of 2005. The banks cited arise in the borrowing needs of their customersarising from mergers and corporate restruc-turing as one of the reasons for the increasein credit demand. The demand for loans tohouseholds at the participating institutionseven went up markedly, albeit that this is at-tributed by the banks primarily to their moreaggressive distribution strategies. The surveyresults for both the demand and supply sidesof the lending business in Germany were thussimilar to those of the euro area as a whole.
2
For the fourth quarter of 2005 the Germaninstitutions are expecting by and large un-changed credit standards. Furthermore, theyexpect the credit demand, in particular forcorporate and housing loans, to continue toincrease.
The long-term lending rates of German banks
largely continued to decline in the third quar-ter of 2005, although the drop in interestrates was noticeably smaller than in the previ-%
%
%%
%
%
1
2002Consumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in loan margins
Loans to enterprises
Average loansRiskier loansConsumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in credit standards
Loans to enterprisesBank Lending Survey *
*Percentage difference between the num-
bers of respondents reporting ”tightened
considerably” and ”tightened somewhat”
and the numbers of respondents reporting
”eased somewhat” and ”eased consider-
ably”. — 1Expectations for Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−100+
80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−40+
20+
0
20−40+
20+
0
20−60+
40+
20+
0
20−
2003 2004 2005
2See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin , Novem-
ber 2005, pp 22ff.First signs of a
possible upturn
in credit
demand
Long-term
lending rates
down again

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
25ous quarter. In particular, the conditions for
both new lending to households and smallcorporate loans were eased. Reported inter-est rates increased moderately only for largecorporate loans, where individual transac-tions and hence the creditworthiness of indi-vidual borrowers typically have a larger im-pact on the reported credit conditions. In theperiod under review, German banks chargednon-financial enterprises between 4.1% and4.3% for new long-term lending dependingon the loan amount; for long-term consumerloans they charged 8.7% and for housingloans with an interest rate fixed for morethan ten years they charged 4.2%. Develop-ments in short-term lending were, by con-trast, mixed; here banks only charged some-what lower interest rates than at the end ofthe previous quarter for small corporate loansand for housing loans.
The interest rates paid on households’ de-
posits at domestic banks fell slightly again inthe third quarter of 2005. Credit institutionsoffered 2.0% for savings deposits with a no-tice period of up to three months and 2.3%for longer maturities in the quarter under re-view. Depending on the maturity, the rate ofinterest paid on households’ time depositsranged between 1.9% and 2.2%.
3New business
% per
annum
% per
annum% per
annum
... over €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year... up to €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
... over €1 million with
   an initial rate fixation
   of over 5 yearsLoans to non-financial
corporations ...Loans to households
Consumer credit 1
2
Housing loans3Households’ deposits...
...overnight...redeemable at notice
   of up to 3 months
...with an agreed maturity
   of up to 1 yearBank interest
rates in Germany
1 With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year
and up to 5 years. — 2 Decline owing to
special effect. — 3 With an initial rate
fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years.
Deutsche Bundesbank5.5
5.2
4.9
4.6
4.3
4.03.7
3.4
3.12.87.0
6.76.4
6.1
5.85.5
5.2
4.94.6
4.3
4.02.7
2.4
2.11.8
1.5
1.20.9
2003 2004 2005 3The level reported in September 2005 of 2.4% for time
deposits with an agreed maturity of over one year and up
to two years was also influenced by special transactions.
The rates of interest paid in this category typically lie be-
tween those for short-term time deposits (most recently
1.9%) and those for long-term time deposits (most
recently 2.2%).Slight drop in
deposit rates as
well

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
26Financial marketsFinancial market trends
In the third quarter, events in the internation-
al financial markets were determined by fac-tors which in some cases had mutually oppos-ing effects. While the occasional cyclical scep-ticism which had emerged in the wake ofhigh energy prices gave way to more positiveexpectations, inflationary risks increased sig-nificantly. Against this background, capitalmarket rates rose from their temporary lowsin the euro area and the United States, wheremarket players had factored in a further tight-ening on the monetary policy side. In theperiod under review, the increase in the USinterest rate spread was partly offset by re-ports on improved cyclical prospects in theeuro area which supported the euro-dollarexchange rate, with the result that exchangerate movements in the currency marketswere fairly moderate. It was not until Novem-ber that the euro depreciated significantlyagainst the US dollar. The generally benignenvironment in the European stock markets islikely to have buoyed foreign portfolio invest-ment in the euro area. In the third quarter of2005, net capital imports arising from Ger-man cross-border portfolio investment alsoincreased, rising to 38 billion compared with
330
1/C252billion in the previous quarter.
Exchange rates
Against the backdrop of sharp increases in
yields, events in the foreign exchange mar-kets for much of the past few months haveFinancial
market
environment
Euro exchange
rate
movements
against the
US dollar ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
27been comparatively quiet.1The euro-US dol-
lar exchange rate remained largely in a rangeof between US$1.20 and US$1.25 until theend of October. A spate of fairly positive eco-nomic indicators on the euro area and consid-erations on the part of several central banksto shift their reserve assets in favour of theeuro initially boosted the euro, keeping itclose to the ceiling of the exchange rate corri-dor. Moreover, the warning issued by theInternational Monetary Fund about the im-pact of a likely further rise in the US currentaccount deficit and the economic effects ofthe hurricanes in the United States probablydetrimentally affected the dollar. Uncertaintyloomed in the markets for a time as towhether the US Federal Reserve would actu-ally adhere to its policy of moderate interestrate increases in the light of these extraordin-ary pressures.
Following a clear statement by the Fed that it
would react appropriately to existing infla-tionary risks, the mood in the markets againswayed in favour of the US dollar, especiallyas the US central bank raised the FederalFunds target rate at the end of Septemberand in early November by an expected
1/C254per-
centage point in each case. Furthermore, therobust economic performance in the USAand large capital inflows from abroad bol-stered the US currency. Since mid-November,the euro-US dollar exchange rate fell for atime to its lowest level in two years. As thisarticle went to press, 31 equalled US$1.17, or
around 14% below the level recorded atyear-end 2004 and also lower than the levelat the start of monetary union.
2Towards the end of the third quarter and inthe fourth quarter of 2005, the exchangerate fluctuations of the euro against thepound sterling were less pronounced thanthey were against the US dollar. Once theBank of England had reduced the centralbank rate to 4
1/C252% in early August and further
interest rate reductions appeared unlikely forthe time being owing to rising inflation rates,the British currency initially recovered some-what. In the ensuing period the euro-poundexchange rate displayed slight fluctuationsbut no readily apparent trend. As this articlewent to press, the pound was trading at£0.68 to the euro, which was around 4%lower than at the start of the year.
Despite Japan’s improved economic outlook
and the lively foreign demand for Japanesestocks, the euro has tended to strengthenperceptibly vis-/C224-vis the yen in the past fewweeks. This is likely to have been determinedmainly by the fact that Japanese bond yieldsdid not entirely follow the rise in rates on USbonds and the fact that the yield differentialon comparable European and US debt secur-
1As this Monthly Report went to press, the implied vola-
tility of the euro-dollar exchange rate, at 9%, remained
at a generally low level. This was also the case as regards
the volatility of the euro against the yen (somewhat over
7%).
2To what extent the Homeland Investment Act has
helped bolster the US dollar so far this year can hardly be
estimated reliably. The Act, which came into force in the
fourth quarter of 2004, offers US companies a one-time
tax break if they invest their profits made abroad in 2004
and 2005 in the US economy. According to estimates by
the American Shareholders Association, companies
have already exercised this rule to the amount of more
than US$200 billion. However, it is difficult to derive
exact figures from the official statistics; see R M Sauers,
K K Pierce, US International Transactions, First Quarter
2005, BEA, Survey of Current Business, July 2005, p 78
and K K Pierce and M J Argersinger, US International
Transactions, Second Quarter 2005, BEA, Survey of Cur-
rent Business, October 2005, p 84.... the pound
sterling ...
... and the yen

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
28ities widened noticeably as a result. Conse-
quently, the yen depreciated vis-/C224-vis themajor currencies. In early November, the eurowas trading at almost ¥141 and thereforenearly at the peak rate of late 2004. As thisarticle went to press, the euro was tradingonly slightly lower at just under ¥139.
On average, the euro weakened slightly vis-/C224-
vis the currencies of 23 major trading part-ners in the period under review. Hence, asthis article went to press, the effective ex-change rate stood at around 7% below thelevel recorded at the start of this year and 3%below the level recorded at the start of mon-etary union. In real terms, ie taking accountof the simultaneously prevailing inflation dif-ferentials between the euro area and themajor trading partners, the effective euro ex-change rate, which is also a measurement ofthe price competitiveness of companies in theeuro area, was fairly close to the level whichhad been recorded at the start of monetaryunion.
Securities markets and
portfolio transactions
In the third quarter, the international bond
markets were influenced mainly by high oilprices, which at first were primarily perceivedto be slowing down the global economy. As aresult, the yield on ten-year Bunds outstand-ing fell, in line with the worldwide decline inbond yields, to below 3% by the end of Sep-tember, thereby reaching a historical low.With hardly any changes in long-term infla-tionary expectations,
3the corresponding Ger-
man and European real rates of interest fell to1
1/C252% and 11/C254% respectively. However, fol-
lowing reports of higher inflation rates in theeuro area and, particularly in the USA, therelevant central banks’ publicly announced in-flationary concerns and the robust economicexpectations for the global economy increas-ingly focused bond market players’ attentionDaily data, log scale
US$
£¥
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.20  1... pound sterling£ 0.7110  1... yen
¥ 133.73  1against the ...
... US dollar
$ 1.1789  1Exchange rate of the euro
1Rate at the beginning of monetary union
on 4 January 1999. — 2As calculated by the
ECB against the currencies of 23 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank109
106
103
1000.72
0.70
0.68
0.66142
139
136
133
1301.39
1.36
1.33
1.30
1.27
1.24
1.21
1.18
1.15
JF M A M JJASO N D
2005
3According to surveys by Consensus Economics.Effective euro
exchange rateLow bondmarket yields

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
29on the risks to monetary stability arising from
the increase in energy prices. Given the simul-taneous upward interest rate pressure in theUSA, German bond yields subsequently roseby around 50 basis points from their preced-ing low. With long-term inflationary expect-ations still virtually unchanged, the real inter-est rates also increased noticeably.
Interest rate spreads on BBB-rated corporate
bonds, which in the previous quarter had stillbeen suggesting larger default risk premiumsand liquidity premiums, remained virtually un-changed in the third quarter despite negativefactors such as the high price of oil and atemporary marked increase in implied volatil-ity in the equity market; most stood at around105 basis points. Hence, together with lowcapital market rates, the corporate sectorcontinues to enjoy very favourable debt fi-nancing conditions. At the same time, ratingagencies continued to assess companies’creditworthiness as sound and, as was thecase in the two preceding quarters, again car-ried out more company upgrades than down-grades. For this reason, the slight widening inspreads since October suggests that the will-ingness on the part of market players to takeon risks has waned somewhat of late, appar-ently in line with global developments in thecorporate bond market.
4
Despite the low interest rate environment, is-suance in the German bond market was rela-tively weak. At 3282 billion, gross sales of do-
mestic debt securities were much lower in theJuly to September period than in the previousquarter ( 3341
1/C252billion). At 3161/C252billion, net
sales were also clearly below the level seen inthe second quarter ( 3561/C252billion). Non-resi-
dent issuers also tapped the German market.In the period under review, foreign bonds andnotes were sold for 312
1/C252billion; these con-
sisted mainly of paper denominated inpounds sterling and US dollars. As a result,total funds raised through the sale of domes-tic and foreign bonds amounted to 329 bil-
lion compared with 3104
1/C252billion in the
preceding quarter.
The subdued issuing activity in the German
bond market primarily reflects the net re-demptions of credit institutions which re-duced their bonded debt by 310 billion afterDaily data
%
Per-
cent-
age
pointsSpread of US bond yields
over the German bond market
2003 2004 2005Yield on ten-year governmentbonds outstanding
GermanyUSABond yields in Germany
and in the USA
Deutsche Bundesbank1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
4A lower global propensity for risk is indicated by the de-
velopment of the first common factor in a principal com-
ponent analysis which included US and European corpor-
ate bonds of junk bond and investment grade status.Interest rate
spreads on
corporate
bonds ...
... suggest
smaller appetite
for risk in bond
markets
Markedly lower
sales of bonds
and notesCredit
institutions’ net
redemptions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
30selling 346 billion net in the previous quarter.
On balance, they redeemed public sector
Pfandbriefe and mortgage Pfandbriefe total-ling 312 billion and 35 billion respectively,
while debt securities issued by special-purpose banks and other bank debt securitieswere sold for 35 billion and 31
1/C252billion re-
spectively.
In contrast to the credit institutions, general
government tapped the bond market to agreater extent at 327
1/C252billion net in the
period under review than in the previousquarter ( 311
1/C252billion). The bulk of these
issues ( 3251/C252billion) comprised paper issued
by the Federal Government, which, in thelight of the favourable interest rate, was ac-tive primarily in the longer maturity segment.It issued ten-year Bunds for 322
1/C252billion (net)
and 30-year Bunds for 371/C252billion (net). At
the short end of the market, it placed two-year Federal Treasury notes totalling 31
1/C252bil-
lion (net). By contrast, five-year Federal noteswere redeemed for 36 billion net. The Land
governments sold debt securities worth 33
billion net.
Non-financial enterprises reduced their
bonded debt by 31 billion despite low finan-
cing costs. For the second quarter in a row,this involved mainly the redemption of moneymarket paper, although the level of debt inlonger-dated securities increased. This gener-ally indicates, as in other cases, that com-panies have a relatively favourable financialsituation.
In the third quarter, foreign investors were the
main purchasers in the German bond market,Monthly data
Lin scale
Price-earnings ratio2
DAX
share price index
Dow Jones EuroStoxxAverage expected earnings
per share2
DAX
share price index 1
Dow Jones EuroStoxx 1Log scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx
share price index 1
DAX
share price index 1Price movements and
earnings estimates for
European and German
public limited companies
1January 2002 = 100; source: Deutsche Bör-
se AG. — 2Based on year-on-year I / B / E / S
analyst estimates (earnings before good-
will). Source: Thomson Financial Data-
stream.
Deutsche Bundesbank20
18
1614
12
10
8150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80110
100
90
80
70
60
50
45
2002 2003 2004 2005Public sector
borrowing
increases
slightly
Enterprises
reduce bond
market
liabilities
Purchases of
debt securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
31investing 326 billion. In net terms, their inter-
est focused on paper issued by general gov-ernment ( 317 billion). They also added 39b i l -
lion in paper issued by private borrowers totheir portfolios. On balance, domestic non-banks topped up their bond market invest-ments by 313
1/C252billion. They increased invest-
ments in paper issued by general governmentand in foreign paper to the detriment ofbonds and notes issued by private borrowers.The credit institutions reduced their bondholdings by 310 billion net.
On the whole, the equity markets in Germany
and in Europe have been performing wellsince July, not least as a result of further cap-ital investment by non-residents. The dip inlate August was just as quickly corrected asthe short bout of weakness in October. In theperiod under review, US share prices againlagged behind those of European ones, hav-ing already performed more poorly in the firsthalf of the year. Measured against the broadmarket indices CDAX and the Dow JonesEuroStoxx, the prices of German and Euro-pean shares have risen by 10% and 6% re-spectively since early July, while the USS&P 500 has grown by a mere 3%. High en-ergy prices and the hurricanes in the Gulf ofMexico had a negative impact on both sidesof the Atlantic, resulting in production lossesduring various stages of petroleum process-ing. Above and beyond this, the debate overrising inflation rates, particularly in the UnitedStates, depressed share prices. Furthermore,the temporary dip in share prices in the Euro-pean stock market was accompanied by arise in real capital market rates.
5This repre-
sents a higher discount factor and, conse-quently, lowers the present value of future
earnings and hence tends to lower shareprices. However, European share prices haverecently been buoyed by upward revisions inanalysts’ earnings estimates, particularly on amedium-term horizon.
6Favourable economic
indicators and the stable global economic en-vironment also had a positive effect on shareprices. Uncertainty about future share pricedevelopments again declined markedlywhereas between July and October it had stillbeen growing fast.
7Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2004 2005
I t e m Q 3Q 2Q 3Debt securities
Residents 23.8 46.2 3.2
Credit institutions 25.9 26.8 – 10.2of which
Foreign debt securities 13.4 26.0 – 0.9
Non-banks – 2.1 19.4 13.4of which
Domestic debt securities – 17.2 – 2.5 – 0.2
Non-residents 37.7 58.1 25.8
Shares
1
Residents – 15.4 – 26.1 – 4.0
Credit institutions – 7.3 – 4.5 6.0of which
Domestic shares – 3.5 – 6.9 4.5
Non-banks – 8.1 – 21.6 – 10.0of which
Domestic shares – 2.4 – 18.4 – 9.0
Non-residents 6.7 26.5 8.3
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds – 4.9 6.2 6.3
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 1.0 3.2 6.2of which: Share-based funds – 1.8 – 0.8 1.2
1Includes shares acquired in the course of direct investment.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5Measured against the yields of inflation-indexed French
government bonds.
6I/B/E/S estimates on expected corporate earnings for
three to five years included in the Dow Jones EuroStoxx
index increased clearly from 9.4% to 10.2% per year.
7In terms of the VDAXnew or if calculated as the implicit
volatility of options on the Dow Jones EuroStoxx 50
index.Robust equity
market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
32Issuing activity in the German equity market
revived perceptibly in the third quarter of2005. Domestic listed enterprises took advan-tage of the favourable environment and is-sued new shares amounting to 33
1/C252billion
after issues worth only just over 31 billion in
the previous quarter. A large share of the issu-ing volume was attributable to capital in-creases at two large public companies whichpartially financed foreign acquisitions by wayof a capital increase.
8In contrast to what
happened in the second quarter of 2005, for-eign equities were also sold again in Germany(3
1/C252billion). A number of small-scale IPOs
were also launched. There was an equal mixof IPOs which primarily consisted of capital in-creases and those which mainly consisted of aplacement of shares by existing shareholders.
Net amounts of shares were purchased in the
German market by domestic credit institu-tions ( 36 billion), which bought mainly Ger-
man shares, and by non-resident investors(38
1/C252billion). By contrast, domestic non-
banks sold shares in the amount of 310 bil-
lion, the bulk of which was made up ofdomestic securities.
In the third quarter, sales of domestic mutual
funds open to the general public were twiceas high (at just over 36 billion) as in the previ-
ous quarter. The main driver behind this wasthe clear increase in the sale of share-basedfunds, which sold fund shares totalling justover 31 billion, after previously having to re-Major items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2004 2005
Position Q3 Q2 Q3
I Current account 1,2 + 14.3 + 23.7 + 17.6
Foreign trade 1,3 + 36.4 + 41.5 + 41.0
Services 1 – 11.4 – 5.6 – 13.4
Income 1 + 1.5 – 2.3 + 1.8
Current transfers 1 –8 . 6 –6 . 5 –7 . 8
II Capital transfers 1,4 +0 . 2 +0 . 1 +0 . 0
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 31.8 – 21.5 – 25.6
1 Direct investment – 7.3 – 9.4 – 3.1
German investment
abroad – 9.7 – 13.0 – 2.7Foreign investment inGermany + 2.5 + 3.6 – 0.5
2 Portfolio investment + 22.7 + 30.7 + 7.9
German investmentabroad – 25.6 – 54.6 – 28.0
Shares + 6.0 + 1.0 – 3.6Mutual fund shares – 3.1 – 7.8 – 11.7Debt securities – 28.5 – 47.8 – 12.7
Bonds
5 – 21.0 – 45.8 – 8.7
of which:euro-denominatedbonds – 20.8 – 41.4 – 2.8
Money market paper – 7.5 – 2.0 – 4.0
Foreign investmentin Germany + 48.3 + 85.3 + 35.9
Shares + 6.6 + 26.4 + 8.3Mutual fund shares + 4.0 + 0.8 + 1.8Debt securities + 37.7 + 58.1 + 25.8
Bonds
5 + 44.5 + 58.9 + 27.1
of which: public
bonds + 21.2 + 29.2 + 16.5
Money market paper – 6.8 – 0.8 – 1.3
3 Financial derivatives 6 + 0.4 – 0.6 – 3.0
4 Credit transactions – 47.0 – 41.2 – 26.4
Monetary financialinstitutions
7 – 5.1 – 64.7 – 15.9
of which: short-term – 9.6 – 48.3 + 6.1
Enterprises andindividuals – 12.2 + 9.7 – 3.1
of which: short-term – 10.7 + 12.2 – 2.8
General government + 3.1 – 1.0 + 0.4
of which: short-term + 1.8 – 1.3 – 5.0
Bundesbank – 32.8 + 14.8 – 7.9
5 Other investment – 0.7 – 1.1 – 0.9
IV Change in the reserve assets at
transaction values(increase: –)
8 + 1.6 + 1.2 – 0.8
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 15.7 – 3.5 + 8.7
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 8Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank8This acquisition of participating interests is not likely to
be reflected in the balance of payments until the fourth
quarter. For more information on direct investments dur-
ing the period under review, see page 33.More funds
raised in equity
market
Share
purchases
Sales of mutual
fund shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
33deem shares to a similar extent in net terms.
Sales of bond-based funds remained un-changed; on balance, these sales totalled justover 32 billion. New investments in money
market funds rose slightly to just under 31 bil-
lion. In net terms, mixed security-based fundsand open-end real estate funds each soldfund shares amounting to around 3
1/C252billion.
The special funds, which are reserved for in-stitutional investors, raised 36
1/C252billion. Sales
of foreign mutual funds remained unchangedat311
1/C252billion.
Domestic non-banks were the main pur-chasers of mutual fund shares ( 317 billion),
predominantly those of foreign mutual funds.Domestic banks acquired mutual fund sharestotalling 35 billion net, with most of this sum
accruing to domestic mutual funds. Foreigninvestors purchased just under 32 billion in
mutual fund shares in the German market.
Overall, the cross-border securities transac-
tions, as shown in the balance of payments,
9
clearly lost momentum in the third quarter.Foreign investors, for instance, purchasedGerman securities for a total of 336 billion
(385
1/C252billion in the previous quarter), while
domestic investors purchased debt securities,shares and mutual fund shares issued abroadin the amount of 328 billion ( 354
1/C252billion in
the previous quarter). Net capital imports aris-ing from securities transactions totalled 38
billion in the July to September period, com-pared with 330
1/C252billion in the April to June
period.Foreign direct investment
Net capital imports resulting from securities
transactions were accompanied by net capitalexports in the area of foreign direct invest-ment. However, this figure ( 33 billion) was
lower than in the first and second quarters ofthis year, when it was still at 310
1/C252billion and
391/C252billion respectively. The net capital ex-
ports were due primarily to the internationalactivities of German firms. In the periodunder review, these companies transferredcapital totalling 32
1/C252billion to their foreign
branches. Repayment of loans which Germanparent companies had previously taken outwith the subsidiaries abroad played a particu-larly important role. Furthermore, domesticcompanies increased their equity interestsoutside Germany, mainly in lending and insur-ance business, slightly by 31 billion. Foreign
proprietors, by contrast, withdrew a smallamount of capital from their branches andsubsidiaries in Germany ( 3
1/C252billion). In this
context, as has been the case for some timenow, intra-group loans played a decisive role.By comparison, non-resident firms, mainlyfrom the euro area, increased their equityinterests in Germany by 31 billion.
9The balance of payment statistics divides cross-border
equity transactions in line with the degree of participat-
ing interest into portfolio investment (participation below
10% of capital or voting rights) and direct investment
(participation of 10% or more). Reinvested earnings and
loans between affiliated companies are also considered
as direct investments.Purchases of
mutual fund
shares
Total
cross-border
securities
transactionsLower netcapital exports
through
foreign direct
investment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
34Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The German economy picked up again in the
third quarter and achieved a noticeable paceof growth after the temporary economicslowdown in the second quarter of this year.According to the initial calculations of theFederal Statistical Office and after adjustmentfor seasonal and working-day variations, realGDP in the third quarter was up 0.6% on thepreceding three-month period, which was re-vised upwards slightly from the initial esti-mate. Working day adjusted real GDP was up1.4% on the year. The corresponding figurefor the second quarter was 0.7%. Thus, theyear-on-year increase in overall economicoutput for the first three quarters of the cur-rent year as a whole was 0.9%. Current datasupport the expectation of a working-day-adjusted rise in GDP of approximately 1% in2005.
Once again, favourable external economic
developments made a significant contributionto the positive overall outcome. Closely in linewith the sustained positive situation in orders,exports of German products increased con-siderably between the period from July toSeptember. There was a sharp rise particularlyin exports of goods to countries outside theeuro area, whereas exports to euro-area part-ner countries were, on the whole, only slight-ly higher than in the second quarter. At thesame time, imports, especially from non-EUcountries, also recorded a marked increase.As well as imports of consumer goods, im-ports of intermediate and capital goods werestepped up, which was a result of the buoy-ant output and production-related trade linksStronger GDP
growth in 2005
Q3
Favourable
external
economic
developments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
35which have become ever more intensive over
the past few years. In real terms, overall for-eign trade and payments recorded a clearlypositive balance. Furthermore, there werefairly strong growth impulses in Germany aswell. First, there was a significant increase inpurchases of machinery and equipment,which had been weak for a time in thesecond quarter. Second, construction invest-ment also increased somewhat for the firsttime in a long while. Although it was stillnoticeably down on last year’s level, theshortfall had become much smaller.
By contrast, households continued to show a
great deal of restraint in consumer spending.This is evident in declining retail sales, for in-stance. In the third quarter, new car registra-tions also failed to match the level recordedduring the second quarter. High petrol pricesmay well have deterred potential buyers. Thehigh fuel prices also played a part in petrolsales being clearly down on the year, evenduring the peak holiday months of July andAugust. However, even with the sharp rise inprices, many households felt compelled to in-crease their supplies of heating oil somewhatin view of the reduced stocks. The general in-crease in expenditure on fuel supplies, whichincludes both contributions for central heat-ing and hot water, as well as electricity andgas consumption, have undoubtedly restrict-ed the scope for spending in other areas. Thepropensity to save is unlikely to have changedmuch.Output and sales
Broken down by sector, persistently buoyant
industrial business activity significantly con-tributed to the positive performance duringthe third quarter. After adjustment for sea-sonal and working-day variations, output inthe third quarter was up 1
1/C254% on the second
quarter, during which a similarly high increasehad been recorded. The year-on-year increaserose to 3
1/C254%, compared with 21/C252% in the
previous quarter.
According to the Ifo Institute, the increase in
production also resulted in a higher capacityutilisation. On an average of the companiessurveyed, capacity utilisation is now likely tohave returned to a normal level. As a result,investment in expanding capacity is becom-Adjusted for seasonal and working-day
variations, quarterly
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
2005Log scale  
Real GDP
2000 = 100Economic growth in Germany
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−104
102
100
98
96
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005Weak private
consumption
Sharp increasein industrial
output
Slight increase
in capacity
utilisation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
36ing more of an immediate concern, although
production capacities in many companieshave been enhanced by optimising machinerunning times on the basis of extended ormore flexible working hours.
Intermediate and non-durable consumer
goods, in particular, were significant contribu-tors to the growth in industrial production. Inthe basic goods sector, by far the largest in-crease was in the manufacture of basicmetals. While there had been a slight slow-down in this sector during the first six monthsof the year, the figure was now, in fact, some-what higher than the peak figures achievedin the middle of last year. As a result, the ironand steel industry probably came close to itsproduction limits again. Furthermore, outputin the chemicals industry also showed amarked increase and largely offset the slow-down recorded in the second quarter. Amongthe producers of non-durable consumergoods, some parts of the food industry, inparticular, showed a good performance. Thecapital goods sector, on the other hand, re-mained well below the industry average, al-though it was able to maintain the increasedlevel of production achieved in the secondquarter.
Once again, a significant part of production
was intended for export. After seasonal ad-justment, German exports were 4
1/C252%u p
overall on the second quarter in terms ofvalue. There was a very sharp increase in ex-ports of capital goods. In July and August –figures with a sectoral breakdown are avail-able up to then – they were 4
1/C252%u po nt h e
second-quarter level as well in seasonally ad-justed terms. This is also probably linked tothe current high level of capacity utilisation inlarge sections of the world economy, which ismaking investment increasingly necessary.Manufacturers of information and communi-cations technology products, in particular,were able to increase their exports. In add-ition, there was an increase in exports of Ger-man-manufactured machinery and vehiclesto customers abroad. Furthermore, there was2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
2005Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank5+
0
5−
10−
15−105
90100
8595
8090
75
7010+
5+
0
5−105
100
95
90
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Growth in
intermediate
and non-
durable
consumer
goodsLarge volumeof exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
37a moderate increase in exports of intermedi-
ate goods.
The situation in the construction industry
continued to improve during the third quar-ter. After adjustment for seasonal and work-ing-day variations, construction output in-creased again between July and September,although not quite as steeply as in the secondquarter when a good amount of constructionwork made up for winter losses. The figurewas still below that for the same period lastyear, although the shortfall, at 3
1/C252%, was
distinctly lower than before when it was asmuch as over 6%. Based on the number ofhours worked, all of the major subsectors ofthis industry, from residential and commercialconstruction to public sector construction,more or less contributed equally to the in-crease in overall construction activity. In thefinishing trades, too, the year-on-year fall inturnover decreased perceptibly in the secondquarter – the most recent period for whichstatistics are currently available.
By contrast, the situation in trade remained
quite unfavourable in the third quarter. Theretail trade sector, in particular, failed tomatch its level of sales 12 months previously.Purchases of food products, beverages andtobacco decreased in particular. At thewholesale level, however, sharp increases inturnover were achieved in those areas gearedtowards trade and industry, such as machin-ery, equipment and accessories. Buoyantbusiness activity was also recorded in the caseof motor vehicles. This was consistent withthe fact that the transport sector was con-tinuing to experience an upturn. Not onlywater transport, but also the land transport
sector, achieved an improved year-on-year re-sult. In the hotels and restaurants sector, ac-commodation services in July and Septembermanaged to surpass the turnover figures forthe comparable period last year, after havingundergone a negative development well intothe second quarter. Restaurants, by contrast,were suffering losses up until the end of theperiod under review, although the minusrates had become noticeably smaller.
In line with the positive trends in the produc-
tion sector, the business situation for com-mercial service providers showed a markedimprovement in the third quarter. Accordingto surveys of both Ifo and the Centre forEuropean Economic Research (ZEW), enter-prises’ assessment of the current situationTrend in foreign trade by category
of goods
Percentage change
Average of July and August 2005
compared with
Q2 2005;
seasonallyadjustedJuly and August
2004;unadjustedfigures
Item Exports Imports Exports Imports
Total + 3.5 + 4.8 + 8.2 + 8.7Selected main
categories
Intermediate goods + 2.2 + 4.1 + 2.5 – 0.8Capital goods + 4.7 + 3.7 + 6.8 + 1.2Consumer goods – 0.5 + 5.8 + 3.4 + 3.6Energy . + 7.9 + 13.2 + 30.6
Selected categories
Chemicals + 3.2 + 3.7 + 7.0 + 9.8Machinery + 4.4 + 2.9 + 6.6 + 1.3Motor vehicles andmotor vehicle parts + 4.4 + 0.6 + 10.1 – 5.8Information tech-nology + 8.7 + 14.1 + 3.6 + 7.9Metals and metalproducts + 1.4 + 0.3 + 6.1 + 0.3
Deutsche BundesbankRise in
construction
output
Mixed picture
for trade and
transport
Positive
development in
the business
services sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
38Service transactions with non-residents in the first three quarters of 2005
With a share of 13% of the total value of exports
and 20% of that of imports in the first threequarters of 2005, Germany’s service transactionswith non-residents played an important role inforeign trade. From January to September 2005,both cross-border service receipts and cross-border service expenditure were 3
1/C252%u po nt h e
same period last year. Owing to the relativelylarge difference between the two amounts in-volved, the deficit on services rose by 51 billion
to525
1/C252billion.
The rise in the deficit on services can be attrib-uted mainly to insurance-related services. Ger-man receipts from cross-border insurance ser-vices fell by 51 billion. One reason for this was
that for German reinsurers, the relation of re-ceipts from premiums to their payments ofclaims to non-residents deteriorated. The oppo-site was true in the case of foreign reinsurers.The premiums which they received from Germanresidents improved in relation to their paymentsof claims, with the result that German expendi-ture on insurance increased by 51 billion.
Developments in travel, the most importantservices segment, also contributed to the in-crease in the deficit on services in the first threequarters. Although, at 4
1/C252%, receipts from travel
rose somewhat more sharply than expenditureon it (2
1/C252%), the deficit on travel went up by
51/C252billion as the level of receipts was perceptibly
lower than that of expenditure. An above-average number of short trips were made to theCzech Republic and the Netherlands. There wasalso a sharp increase in expenditure on journeysto the traditional holiday destination of Italy aswell as to the United Kingdom. By contrast,fewer journeys were made to Spain, in particu-lar, than in the previous year. There was likewisea decrease in expenditure on journeys to theUnited States.
If the services account is taken as a whole, the in-
crease in net expenditure on insurance servicesand travel was slightly moderated by largersurpluses in transport services, the second mostimportant services sector. This is largely linked toGermany’s buoyant export trade, which ishandled to a greater extent by German transpor-tation enterprises than imports. In the first threequarters of the year taken together, the year-on-year financial services balance remained practic-ally unchanged at 51 billion.
Deutsche BundesbankService transactions with non-residents
5billion
Item 2004Year-on-
yearchangein 2004Jan toSep 2005ChangefromJan toSep2005com-paredwithJan toSep2004
ServicesTotal
Receipts 116.4 + 5.3 88.9 + 3.2Expenditure 147.3 + 2.2 114.2 + 4.0Balance – 31.0 + 3.0 – 25.4 – 1.0
Travel
Receipts 22.2 + 1.8 17.4 + 0.7Expenditure 57.1 – 0.1 46.6 + 1.1Balance – 34.8 + 2.0 – 29.2 – 0.4
Transport
Receipts 29.0 + 3.1 22.9 + 1.4Expenditure 24.6 + 0.5 18.6 + 0.3Balance + 4.3 + 2.6 + 4.3 + 1.2
Merchanting
Balance + 5.3 + 3.0 + 5.2 + 0.7
Insuranceservices
Receipts 2.9 – 3.1 1.0 – 1.0Expenditure 4.1 + 1.2 2.5 + 1.0Balance – 1.2 – 4.3 – 1.5 – 2.0
Financial services
Receipts 4.4 + 0.6 3.4 + 0.3Expenditure 2.8 + 0.7 2.2 + 0.3Balance + 1.6 0 + 1.2 0
Other services
Receipts 52.6 – 0.1 39.0 + 1.0Expenditure 58.8 + 0.1 44.3 + 1.3Balance – 6.2 – 0.2 – 5.4 – 0.4

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
39was positive. This is particularly the case for IT
and telecommunications companies, many ofwhich had still been complaining aboutsluggish business activity in the second quar-ter. Even tax consultants, auditors and busi-ness consultants were noticeably more opti-mistic. Firms’ turnover, which, in the first fewmonths of the year, was down on the year inmany cases, now showed a marked increaseover 12 months.
Employment and unemployment
In the third quarter, the labour market was
heavily influenced by the effects of labourmarket policy. The rise in employment sinceApril, which offset the decline during the firstquarter, is, therefore, hardly likely to havebeen due to an increasing economic need forlabour. According to the Federal StatisticalOffice, the seasonally adjusted number ofpersons in work in Germany had gone up to38.9 million by the end of September. Thissignifies an increase of some 150,000 personsin comparison with the most recent low. Two-fifths of these persons were cross-bordercommuters into Germany, who were oftenemployed as seasonal workers.
Furthermore, there was a sharp increase in
small employment opportunities promoted bylabour market policies, which are also knownas “one-euro jobs”. In September and Octo-ber, 270,000 persons were registered at theFederal Employment Agency as having jobsof this kind. This was roughly just under100,000 more than at the start of the secondquarter. It should be noted, however, that theSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
Millions
Millions
Thou-
sands
Millions
Thou-
sands
%
0
12 3Unemployment rateOctOctLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed- 
OctLin scale
Employed
Year-on-year changeof which
Workers
subject to
social security
contributionsLog scale
EmployedLabour market
1From January 2004, unemployed ex-
cluding participants in aptitude testing and
training measures. The rate of joblessness
cannot be compared with previous figures
because of changes in the way the data are
collected and the figures are calculated. —
2From January 2005, including persons
formerly receiving social assistance but able
to work. — 3From September 2005, includ-
ing persons receiving social assistance frommunicipal authorities having separate re-
sponsibility for the unemployed.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9
8
7600+
300+
0
300−5.0
4.7
4.4
4.1
3.8500+
0
500−28.0
27.5
27.0
26.5
26.039.5
39.0
38.5
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005Increase in
employment
due to labour
market policy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
40Deutsche BundesbankImpact of the amalgamation of social assistance and unemployment assistance: initial ﬁ  ndings
The start of 2005 saw the „Fourth Act Promoting Modern 
Labour Market Services“ (Hartz IV) enter into force. The central component of this reform was the introduction of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (Sozialge-
setzbuch II)  “job seekers basic allowance”. This provides a 
standard legal framework for persons who are ﬁ  t to work 
but who cannot secure a livelihood on their own, ie those people whose income is too low or who are not (or no longer) entitled to beneﬁ  ts under the statutory unemploy-
ment insurance scheme. The new beneﬁ  t, unemployment 
beneﬁ  t II (ALG II) , replaces the previous system in which 
unemployment assistance and social assistance existed side by side, effectively standing in the way of efﬁ  cient support 
and promotion owing to differences in responsibilities, beneﬁ  t entitlements, weighting provisions, rules covering 
jobs which the unemployed can reasonably be expected to accept and career advancement tools. 
It is still too early for a comprehensive assessment of this 
reform, which many consider to be radical. Both the insti-tutions and the people affected are still in the learning and transitional phase. Government also intends to make amendments to unemployment beneﬁ  t  II. Furthermore, 
labour market reforms generally need time to unfold. Finally, the data required to make a scientiﬁ  c evaluation 
is not yet available.
1 Only once the success of the reforms 
have been examined will it be possible to make a balanced assessment of the impact of Hartz IV. 
The focus of public interest is currently on the number of 
people who (rightly or wrongly) receive unemployment beneﬁ  t II and whether the system changeover has resulted 
in signiﬁ  cant changes to social transfers. According to pre-
liminary ﬁ  gures from the Federal Employment Agency, 
in October 2005 around 6.7 million people in 3.7 million income support households received social beneﬁ  ts from 
the basic allowance system under the Second Book of the Social Security Code. That is almost 10% of the population under the age of 65. Of this ﬁ  gure, 1.8 million are peo-
ple who are unable to work, ie mostly children under the age of 15 whose parents are entitled to unemployment beneﬁ  t II. The remaining 4.9 million recipients who are, 
in principle, ﬁ  t to work can be divided into those who are registered as unemployed (2.8 million, mostly long-term unemployed) and those who not unemployed and receive unemployment beneﬁ  t II (2.1 million). Of the latter group, 
around half are working – including jobs created as part of integration measures – and receive unemployment beneﬁ  t II in addition to their wages. This also includes 
self-employed persons with low incomes, who often have only a small claim to unemployment beneﬁ  t II but receive 
a grant for the statutory health insurance scheme. The other half are recipients who are ﬁ  t to work and are not 
employed but are, nevertheless, not classiﬁ  ed as unem-
ployed. A person is deﬁ  ned as “ﬁ  t to work” by law if they 
are aged between 15 and 65 and are capable of working at least three hours per day. These persons are then only deemed unemployed if they are actually available for work. This is usually not the case for persons over the age of 15 in education or vocational training, nor for single parents with small children in view of the frequent lack of childcare. The criteria for entitlement to unemployment beneﬁ  t II are the individual’s ﬁ  nancial need and ability to 
work, rather than unemployment. 
Before the introduction of unemployment beneﬁ  t II, there 
was much concern that it would lead to big cuts in social 
beneﬁ  ts. On the other hand, it was hoped that the transi-
tion from a beneﬁ  t entitlement based on previous earnings 
to an entitlement that is means-tested, together with a cut in the maximum period of entitlement to unemployment beneﬁ  t (however, not until after 2007), would reduce the 
duration of non-employment. However, unemployment beneﬁ  t II has also relaxed the criteria for eligibility to social 
beneﬁ  ts. The principle of mutual responsibility for main-
tenance within the family has been greatly eased. This is 
one of the reasons for the unexpectedly strong increase in 
the number of income support households. In addition to this, social beneﬁ  ts are now issued from one source. In the 
past, recipients of unemployment assistance had to sub-mit an additional application for social assistance if they wished to claim supplementary beneﬁ  ts. Furthermore, 
paying out beneﬁ  ts via the labour exchanges presumably 
reduces the social stigma, which, in turn, is likely to have increased claims. Moreover, previous one-off payments under social assistance have been incorporated into unem-
1 It is to be welcomed that the legislator has provided for an impact 
analysis on the instruments used in the Hartz IV reform to promote integration into the labour market and on the incentives of unemploy-
ment beneﬁ  t II using scientiﬁ  c methods and has indicated that the rel-

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
41ployment beneﬁ  t II as ﬂ  at-rate payments and no longer 
require a separate application. Although this reduces the level of administrative spending and increases the recipi-ent’s level of personal responsibility, the regular monthly payments are higher. Finally, former recipients of unem-ployment beneﬁ  t are paid a limited add-on, ﬁ  nanced from 
tax resources, for a further two years. This is equivalent to two-thirds of the difference between unemployment ben-eﬁ t (including any housing allowance entitlement) and 
unemployment beneﬁ  t II in the ﬁ  rst year and one-third in 
the second year. Only in the fourth year of unemployment is the actual social welfare level reached.
All these facts make it clear that the amalgamation of 
unemployment assistance and social assistance has not resulted in a general reduction in beneﬁ  ts. This was 
also conﬁ  rmed in a study conducted by the Institute for 
Employment Research (Institut für Arbeitsmarkt- und 
Berufsforschung, IAB)  which examined how the beneﬁ  t 
entitlements had been changed by the Hartz IV reform.
2 
According to this study, around 83% of all former recipi-ents of unemployment assistance are also in need of income support within the meaning of the Second Book of the Social Security Code. According to simulations car-ried out by the IAB, almost half of these recipients actu-ally receive higher beneﬁ  t payments. Cuts were made on 
beneﬁ  ts to older people receiving a relatively high level 
of unemployment assistance and (married) couples where one partner is employed. By contrast, beneﬁ  ts to younger 
people were increased.
The IAB study assumes unchanged behaviour on the part 
of the beneﬁ  t recipients. However, it is evident that poten-
tial beneﬁ  t recipients adjust their behaviour in order to 
increase their beneﬁ  t claim. An example would be the divi-
sion of an income support household.
The unexpectedly large number of recipients of unem-
ployment beneﬁ  t II is putting greater strain on public 
ﬁ nances than was expected. By the end of the third quar-
ter, central government’s expenditure on unemployment beneﬁ  t II amounted to €19 billion, thus exceeding the 
original target ﬁ  gure for the whole of 2005 by over €4 bil-lion. However, local government, in particular, is likely to 
record signiﬁ  cant relief on balance owing to the cessation 
of expenditure for recipients of social assistance who are ﬁ t to work and the simultaneous assumption of accommo-
dation costs for income support households since central government is making a substantial contribution to these beneﬁ  ts and state government has also agreed to pass on 
any savings of its own to local government. Nevertheless, given the unexpectedly high number of recipients, there is likely to be far more additional expenditure for the gov-ernment as a whole than there would have been had the old system continued to exist. Once the teething problems have been overcome, the necessary corrections have been made and the anticipated positive employment effects 
have occurred, ﬁ  nancial relief for public ﬁ  nances can be 
expected. 
One crucial factor will certainly be whether steps are taken 
against parties ﬁ  ling fraudulent beneﬁ  t claims once the 
complex reform of the social beneﬁ  t systems has been 
completed. In addition, a review of the range of beneﬁ  ts is 
also necessary. However, the most important task now is to concentrate on efforts to (re)integrate beneﬁ  t recipients 
into the labour market.
evant authorities are to provide the necessary data. — 2 See K Blos and 
H Rudolph, “Verlierer, aber auch Gewinner, Simulationsrechnungen zum Arbeitslosengeld II”, IAB-Kurzbericht Nr 17/2005 .Breakdown of unemployment beneﬁ  t II recipients
Source: Preliminary ﬁ  gures from the Federal Employment Agency 
as at October 2005.6.7 million unemployment beneﬁ  t II recipients in total
2.1 million
recipients of unemployment 
beneﬁ  t II who are ﬁ  t to work and 
not unemployed
1.0 million
recipients of unemploy-ment beneﬁ  t II 
who are working (mainly “one-euro jobs”, self-employed and other people in work with very low employ-ment income)1.1 million 
recipients of unemploy-ment beneﬁ  t II 
who are not working (mainly stu-dents and vocational trainees over the age of 15, single parents with small children)1.8 million 
recipients of social beneﬁ  t 
who are not ﬁ t to work 
(usually chil-dren under the age of 15 in income support house-holds)2.8 million 
recipients of unemploy-ment beneﬁ  t II 
who are ﬁ  t to 
work and unemployed (usually long-term unem-ployed)

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
42relevant current figures only reflect the lower
limit of the employment level, as experiencehas shown that such data are reported onlywith significant time lags. Moreover, accord-ing to initial provisional data, the number ofpersons occupying low-paid part-time jobs,for which there is an earnings ceiling of3400, increased by approximately 50,000 be-
tween April and August.
By contrast, other employment-promoting
measures failed to generate much stimulus.In line with this, the take-up of business start-up grants, which led to the creation of nu-merous one-person businesses in 2004, haslessened perceptibly during the current year.This was mainly due to the fact that, sincethe beginning of this year, only recipients of“unemployment benefit I” are entitled tosuch start-up grants and a business plan hasto be submitted. At the end of the periodunder review, there were just under 3,000fewer small business start-ups than in thesecond quarter. Bridging payments weregranted to just over 70,000 persons, around20,000 fewer than six months previously.There was also a reduction in traditional jobcreation measures, albeit on a small scale.
Given the overall changes in employment re-
sulting from all of the cited components, it isclear that the cyclical component of employ-ment continued to be weak. This is also indi-cated by the number of persons subject toregular social security contributions, whichwas falling up to the end of the period underreview.The fall in unemployment since May wasinterrupted by a rise in September. In season-ally adjusted terms, the number of personsregistered as unemployed at the Federal La-bour Office went up to 4.84 million. This in-crease was due solely to the fact that, for thefirst time, data from the municipalities havingseparate responsibility for recipients of un-employment benefit II were included in theunemployment statistics. According to theFederal Labour Office, this effect rougly sumsup to 68,000 persons. As calculated by the la-bour exchanges, the seasonally adjustednumber of persons registered as unemployedwould be 22,000 lower if they were not in-cluded. Taking this into consideration, theregistered unemployment has generally beendeclining since the second quarter, somethingwhich is to be seen primarily in connectionwith the measures to ease the situation in thelabour market. Unemployment declinedagain in October. The seasonally adjustednumber of persons registered as unemployedwas 4.80 million. The unemployment ratedeclined slightly to 11.6%.
1
Prices and wages
The burden of wage costs in the production
sector, for which current data are available,fell again slightly in July and August. Al-though there was a slight increase in the sea-sonally adjusted wages and salaries per em-ployee in industry, there was no rise in terms
1The rate of unemployment derived from the telephone
survey conducted by the Federal Statistics Office is not
dicussed here, as the September figure is based on a
monthly decline of approximately 650,000 in the number
of persons out of work, which is hardly plausible.Clear
administrative
effects on
unemployment
Continued
relief in wage
costs

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
43of unit labour costs. In the construction sec-
tor, the decline already recorded in thesecond quarter also continued in July andAugust. The corporate sector as a wholeprobably experienced a similar trend. Here,seasonally adjusted unit labour costs in thefirst half of 2005 were, at all events,
1/C254%
lower than in the second half of 2004. Thefigure was 1% down on the year.
In the third quarter, the increase in actual
earnings was still lagging behind the increasein negotiated pay rates. Based on an hourlyrate of pay, the latter were 1.1% up on theyear in the third quarter, compared with1.3% and 1.0% in the first two quarters.Among other factors, this further rise wasdue mainly to one-off payments in the textilesand textile products industry as well as in theiron and steel industry, where there was alsoan increase of 3.5% in earnings from Sep-tember onwards.
The price situation in the international oil
markets has eased in recent weeks. At thetime this report went to press, the price for abarrel of Brent crude oil was just underUS$56. By historical standards, this price wasstill very high. However, compared with themost recent peak in August of just underUS$68 and the interim peak of aroundUS$65 in mid-September, stemming fromfears of a shortage owing to the hurricanes inthe Gulf of Mexico, the situation has obvious-ly eased off. This relief was also felt in theGerman markets.
Crude oil imports became somewhat cheaper
in September. However, this was more thanoffset by further price increases for refined
petroleum products and gas. Imported electri-city also cost more. As a result, import pricesfor energy in total showed a further rise inSeptember. The price increase was a goodtwo-fifths on the year. Outside the energysector, price movements remained very mod-erate throughout the period under review. Inseasonally adjusted terms, imported goodswere no more expensive in September than2000 = 100, log scale
2005Import prices ...
(seasonally adjusted)
... excluding energy
... for energyCommodity prices 1 ...
... for industrial
    raw materials
... for energyCommodity and import prices
1HWWA index “Euroland” on a euro basis.
Deutsche Bundesbank160
140
120
100
90
80
70
60
50
40160
140
120
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
3535
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005Easing in the
oil markets
More expensive
energy imports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
44at the start of 2005. The previous year’s level
was not exceeded either. At the time this re-port went to press, industrial goods alonewere 0.2% cheaper than in the same periodlast year.
German industrial producer prices for energy
went up again in October. Nevertheless, theyear-on-year rate of increase slowed downsomewhat at the end of the reporting period.The year-on-year increase narrowed slightlyto 16.7%. The price of refined petroleumproducts went up by 13.2% in October, andthere was a 26.8% price rise for natural gas.Electricity prices had risen by 11.1% year onyear by the end of the period under review.Producer price increases in the case of deliver-ies to distributors, such as municipal utilities,were even sharper. Here, in September, elec-tricity cost 17.9% more than in the sameperiod of 2004. The corresponding figure forgas was +35.5%. It may be expected thatthese price increases will have knock-oneffects on consumer prices.
In September and October, seasonally adjust-
ed producer prices for other industrial goodswere raised somewhat more sharply than be-fore. The third stage of the increase in to-bacco tax was one cause of this. Even so,even at the end of the period under review,producer prices were scarcely higher thanduring the first few months of the year. Theyear-on-year rate of increase was 1.4% inOctober, compared with 2.1% in the secondquarter. For intermediate goods, in particular,there was a decline in the rate of increaseowing to the fact that the price movementsin the case of steel and steel products con-tinued to decelarate. The rate of inflation forcapital goods remained below 1%.
The rise in consumer prices has accelerated
somewhat in the last few months.
2In season-
ally adjusted terms, the price increases of 1%between August and October were almosttwice as high as in the previous quarter. Theyear-on-year rate of increase, which was2.0% in July, went up to 2.3% in October.According to the Harmonised Index of Con-Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2005
I t e m Q 1Q 2Q 3O c t
Food – 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.2
Manufactured goods 1.2 0.4 0.7 1.4
of which
Tobacco 19.4 10.7 13.0 17.5
Energy 6.8 8.3 13.0 12.6of which
Refined petroleumproducts 8.4 9.3 16.5 13.8Gas 7.3 8.4 10.9 15.3Electricity 4.1 4.3 4.4 4.2Central heating,district heating 6.1 12.4 17.8 20.9
Services 2.2 1.9 2.0 2.1Rents 1.0 1.1 1.0 1.0
Total 1.8 1.7 2.2 2.3
Total excluding seasonal
products, energy, tobacco 0.8 0.8 0.8 1.0
Memo item
Harmonised Index 1.7 1.6 2.2 2.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
2A new index of Perceived Inflation (IWI) was published
recently, which indicates much higher price increases. For
methodological reasons, the rates of inflation shown by
this index are not comparable with usual year-on-year
price index changes. Moreover, a number of convincing
arguments suggest doubts as to whether inflation as per-
ceived by the general public is adequately captured
by this new index. For further details, see J Hoffmann,
H A Leifer and A Lorenz, Index der wahrgenommenen In-
flation oder EU-Verbraucherumfragen? – Zu einem
Ansatz von Professor H W Brachinger, in: Wirtschafts-
dienst, November 2005, pp 706 ff.Sharp rise in
gas and
electricity pricesInflationary
effects of
tobacco taxes
Price surge in
industrial goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
45sumer Prices (HICP), the figure was 2.4%.
Alongside energy, where the pace of priceincrease lost some momentum only towardsthe end of the period under review, industrialgoods were a particular contributor to thisrise. Here, the further increase in tobacco taxas of 1 September played a major part in thesurge in the annual rate of inflation from0.3% in August to 1.3%. Added to this werefairly large price adjustments in the case ofclothing and motor vehicles. In October, theannual overall rate of inflation for industrialgoods was 1.4%. The price rise for serviceswas 2.1%. This was, not least, a result of sur-charges for package holidays and air travel.The year-on-year rate of price increase wassignificantly lower for housing rents at 1.0%and no more than 0.2% for food products.
Orders received and outlook
The outlook is good for the buoyant industrial
activity continuing in the last few months ofthe current year. The main factor in this is theperceptible pick-up in demand for German in-dustrial goods, which remained at a highlevel throughout the summer. After adjust-ment for seasonal and working-day vari-ations, new orders in the third quarter wereup 4
3/C254% on the previous quarter. The year-
on-year increase in the volume of orders,which barely exceeded 2% in the secondquarter, rose to 7%.
Export orders, in particular, increased sub-
stantially again following a temporary lull inthe second quarter. On an average of thethird quarter, export orders were no less than7
1/C254% up on their level in the second quarter.
The year-on-year increase, which narrowedto 3
1/C252% in the second quarter, went up
again to 101/C252%. Buoyant demand for capital
goods was one of the main factors contribut-ing to this improvement. This included, notleast, office machinery and telecommunica-tions equipment. Moreover, a further seriesof major orders came in for manufacturers ofother transport equipment, which primarilyincludes railways as well as the shipbuildingand aircraft manufacturing industries. Finally,the mechanical engineering industry man-aged to recover again following a slight lull inorders in the second quarter. In the intermedi-ate goods sector, a noticeable rise in orderswas recorded by the steel industry, in particu-lar, which had been experiencing a slowdownsince the fourth quarter of last year. Theorder situation has also improved in thechemicals industry.
Domestic orders also increased in the third
quarter. With a seasonally adjusted increaseof 2%, the growth in the volume of orderswas even stronger than in the second quarter.This was also reflected in year-on-year terms,where the rate of increase went up from
3/C254%
in the second quarter to almost 4% in thethird quarter. The performance of the inter-mediate goods sector was better than aver-age. Manufacturers of basic metals as well asmanufacturers of machines used to generateand distribute electricity recorded an increasein orders compared with the previous quarter.Suppliers of capital goods and consumergoods were not quite so successful, althoughtheir order situation also showed an improve-ment compared with the previous year. ThisIndustrial
business activity
still positive

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
46was, not least, the case for manufacturers of
industrial process controls and of optical andphotographic devices.
Positive sentiment in industry also suggests
that this favourable business developmentwill continue. According to surveys conduct-ed by the Ifo Institute, expectations for thenext six months show a marked improvementsince the middle of the year. There has beenan improvement not just in the prospects foroutput, which had been judged unfavourablyby a majority of firms as recently as thesecond quarter. Export opportunities are alsorated highly. The autumn survey conductedby the Association of German Chambers ofIndustry and Commerce (DIHK) also revealeda more positive picture than in the early sum-mer.
The structural adjustment process in the con-
struction industry, which has been ongoingfor a number of years, seems to have beeninterrupted, at least in the second half of2005. In the third quarter, construction orderswere clearly on the up. After the level of out-put in the second quarter had already over-come its first-quarter low, demand for con-struction work in July and August showed afurther increase of 7
1/C252% on the spring
months after adjustment for seasonal andworking-day variations. This means that, forthe first time in a long while, there was aclear year-on-year rise again.
It is still too early to tell, however, whether
this favourable development in business activ-ity signals an end to the downward trend inthe construction sector. The improvementVolume, 2000 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
%
2005Lin scale
Year-on-year changeJuly-
AugTotal construction orders
July-AugDomesticLog scale
ForeignLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Total industrial ordersDemand for industrial goods
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank5+
0
5−
10−
15−120
100115
95110
90105
85100
80
75
70
65105
100
95
90100125
95120
90115
85110
80105
10015+
10+
5+
05−
10−110
105
100
95
90
85
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005- Situation in
construction
stabilised

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
47was due in part to a number of major orders
and it is uncertain whether this will be repeat-ed. This is especially true of industrial con-struction, where enterprises from the railwayand post office subsectors began work on amajor construction project in August. Publicsector clients also started work on an excep-tionally large number of road constructionprojects in July and August. The volume oforders had clearly been down on the year upto that point while growth rates of over 20%were being recorded at the end of the periodunder review. By contrast, developments inhousing construction remained subdued. Al-though there was a slight seasonally adjustedincrease in new orders during the third quar-ter, the figure was still clearly down on theyear. Taking construction permits as a yard-stick, this was mainly due to rented housingconstruction. The trend in single-familyhouses and owner-occupied apartments, onthe other hand, was somewhat more promis-ing.
The outlook for many commercial service pro-
viders remained quite optimistic in the thirdquarter. According to the latest Ifo BusinessClimate in the German Services Sector, theoutlook has recovered again following itsslight deterioration in the second quarter. Ac-cording to data from the surveys of the Euro-pean Centre for Economic Research, therewas a considerable increase in the positive ex-pectations of telecommunications and IT ser-vice providers as well as enterprises in the ICTsector, in particular. In addition, positive senti-ment among tax consultants, auditors andbusiness consultants stayed broadly constant.By contrast, the outlook for architects andfirms working in technical consultancy and
planning remained unfavourable.
It appears uncertain whether improved con-
sumer sentiment in the trade sector, which isindicated in the surveys of both the Associ-ation of German Chambers of Industry andCommerce (DIHK) and the Ifo Institute, willlead to an increase in consumption in the lastfew months of the year. Consumer retail pur-chases declined considerably in the thirdquarter and, in September, they fell to theirlowest level in a long while. High expenditureon energy, which is probably going to in-crease even further, is taking up an increas-ingly large share of the budget for consump-tion. Moreover, in terms of wages, there areno signs of any major increase in households’scope for income. Furthermore, the employ-ment situation will only improve gradually.Many of the employment opportunities pro-moted by labour market policy have beencreated in the low-wage sector.
Owing to the positive developments in indus-
try and for the majority of commercial serviceproviders as well as the emerging stabilisationin the construction sector, a further increasein overall output can be expected for theautumn of this year. As before, the stimuliwill come, in particular, from export business.This is a reflection not only of German enter-prises’ attractive range of products, but alsoof their high degree of price competetive-ness, which is based not least on a moder-ation of operating costs. The financing condi-tions remain a good essential starting pointfor stronger domestic demand.
Service
providers
optimisticOngoing
weakness of
private
consumption
Continuation of
GDP growth

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
48Public financesGeneral government budget
The state of public finances in Germany has
remained extremely tense in 2005. The gen-eral government deficit ratio is likely to besimilar to that of 2004 (3.7%), thus exceed-ing the 3% deficit limit for the fourth year insuccession. From today’s vantage point, theeconomic situation will place an even greaterstrain on government budgets than it did lastyear. If the sale of claims of the Post Officepension fund is not recorded in a way that ef-fects a reduction in deficits as defined in thenational accounts, one-off and temporary ef-fects will have hardly any bearing on the gen-eral government deficit. However, at presentthere is still controversy over the recording ofthis transaction. On balance, the structuraldeficit ratio (ie the deficit ratio adjusted forcyclical and other temporary effects) will re-main largely unchanged this year. Generalgovernment debt, which at year-end 2004amounted to as much as 66.4% of GDP inthe definition for the European budgetarysurveillance procedure, will continue to in-crease sharply.
1
Government revenue in relation to GDP lookslikely to remain largely unchanged. Althoughthe last stage of the tax reform, which cameinto effect at the beginning of the year, hasonce again resulted in shortfalls in income tax
1Under the European budgetary surveillance procedure,
this year the basis for calculating the deficit and debt
ratios is still GDP excluding financial intermediation ser-
vices indirectly measured (FISIM). Accordingly, the ratios
cited here are higher than those calculated on the basis
of the GDP figures for August 2005 published by the Fed-
eral Statistical Office (2004: deficit ratio in both cases
3.7% due to rounding; debt ratio 66.4% instead of
65.5%).Situation
remains
extremely tense
Little change in
revenue and ex-
penditure ratios

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
49receipts and the bases for social security con-
tributions, wage tax and excise taxes aregrowing only sluggishly, there has been astrong increase in revenue from profit-relatedtaxes. Furthermore, additional revenue isbeing raised from the recently introducedmotorway tolls for heavy goods vehicles aswell as subsidy repayments by Landesbanken.
As far as expenditure is concerned, on the
one hand, there has been only a relativelymoderate rise in compensation of employeesand spending on old-age provision. More-over, despite rapidly growing governmentdebt, the rise in interest payments is still verysubdued owing to favourable financing con-ditions. On the other hand, transfers to theEU budget and health care expenditure arelikely to rise markedly again, and labour mar-ket-related spending, in particular, looks setto go up sharply. This is due not only to la-bour market developments but also to thefact that, contrary to original expectations,the Hartz IV reform package has obviously ledto higher government expenditure owing tothe increased number of recipients, whichwas largely the result of the new regulationsthemselves. However, it remains difficult toassess the overall effect of labour-market re-forms owing to the uncertainty surroundingthe data. Additional expenditure at centralgovernment level is likely to be offset at leastin part by lower spending at other levels ofgovernment, in particular local government.
A moderate reduction in the general govern-
ment deficit would have been expected nextyear even without the consolidation measuresagreed upon in the coalition deal. On thebasis of current legislation, the overall tax
ratio in 2006 would have stabilised furthervis-/C224-vis this year, not least because unlike inpreceding years no further tax reductions hadbeen planned. Nevertheless, the total revenueratio would have declined somewhat, sincethe base for social security contributions, inparticular, is likely to have continued to growsluggishly as it did in previous years. By bring-ing forward the transfer deadline for socialsecurity contributions the Federal Govern-ment avoided raising the contribution rate tothe statutory pension insurance scheme (orother consolidation measures) that wouldotherwise have been necessary. However,since this transaction does not affect the gen-eral government deficit as defined in the na-tional accounts, the deficit will be corres-pondingly higher. With regard to expenditure,compensation of employees is expected todecrease in absolute terms on account ofmoderate wage increases and further staffcuts in the public sector. Favourable financingconditions and the likely freeze in pensionpayments will provide additional relief.
Nevertheless, both national and European fis-
cal rules call for a more ambitious deficit re-duction. Many state governments will find itdifficult to comply with the constitutionalborrowing ceilings in 2006, too. The 3% ceil-ing for the general government deficit ratiolaid down in the EC Treaty also risks beingbreached once again, unless additional con-solidation measures are taken. Having alreadybeen extended by one year, the deadline forcorrecting the excessive deficit expires thisyear, however. Under the relaxed rules of theStability and Growth Pact, a lower than ex-
In 2006,
moderate
deficit
reduction in
the absence
of further
measures
Additional
measures
required for
compliance
with national
and European
budgetary rules

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
50pected macroeconomic outcome might be
taken into account when deciding whetherto proceed to the next stages of the excessivedeficit procedure if the reference value isbreached in 2005. Nevertheless, this shouldbe allowed to justify only a limited breach, ifat all. At least if this year’s deficit ratio wereto overshoot the 3% ceiling by a significantmargin yet again, a stricter application of theexcessive deficit procedure would be warrant-ed. This is the only way to prevent precedentsfrom being set so soon after the adoption ofthe changes to the Pact which would enabledeficit ceilings to be breached over manyyears without any serious consequences. Thedeficit ratio ought to be brought down belowthe reference value as early as next year. Thisgeneral government task needs to be tackledby central, state, local government and thesocial security funds alike.
In their coalition agreement, the new govern-
ing parties, the Christian Democratic Union(CDU), the Christian Social Union (CSU) andthe Social Democratic Party (SPD), approvedsubstantial fiscal policy measures for the newparliamentary term (see box on p. 51). Bearingin mind the critical state of public finances,the fundamental aim of the coalition agree-ment, ie fiscal consolation, is to be wel-comed. A move towards reforming the fed-eral structure, raising the retirement age andthe planned reduction in subsidies are import-ant steps in the right direction. The sameholds true for cutting contribution rates tothe Federal Employment Agency, a move tobe financed at least partly through previouslyagreed reductions in expenditure. On thewhole, however, the fiscal policy strategy em-bedded in the coalition agreement should beregarded with considerable reservation.
For example, the scope of the consolidation
planned for 2006 is insufficient. It is true that,if the announced measures are implemented,in 2007 the general government deficit ratiowill probably return to well below the ceilingset in the EC Treaty and a significant deficitreduction will be achieved. However, in 2006national and European budgetary rules willbe violated, thus further undermining theircredibility. It is highly problematic that centralgovernment’s net borrowing is set to increasenext year, considerably exceeding the consti-tutional limit. The provisions of the Stabilityand Growth Pact will not be complied with,either, as the structural consolidation is likelyto fall short of the prescribed target of atleast 0.5% of GDP in 2006. On balance, therecently approved measures will probablyhave hardly any effect on the general govern-ment deficit in 2006. This means that the 3%ceiling for the deficit ratio is likely to bebreached once again. As things stand today,cyclical conditions would not have preventeda more even spread of consolidation meas-ures, enabling distinct progress to beachieved as early as next year.
On balance, the consolidation efforts entail
few real expenditure cuts. Admittedly, the taxbase will be broadened by reducing tax ex-emptions, in particular. However, a broader-based approach would have been feasiblehere, even though the objective of financinga fundamental reform of income tax by redu-cing tax exemptions should not be relin-quished. Moreover, the beneficial effects are
Coalition
parties arrive at
an agreementInsufficient
consolidation in
2006 and ...
... altogether
very much
focused on the
revenue side

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
51Key fiscal policy elements of the coalition deal
In their coalition deal presented on 12 November 2005,
the new governing parties agreed upon numerous fis-cal policy measures and some fundamental reforms tobe implemented in the coming parliamentary term.The most far-reaching consolidation measures will notenter into force until 2007. The following list outlinesthe key fiscal policy elements for general government.
Several deficit-reducing measures are envisaged over
the next two years.
– Introduction of a general right to demand that par-
ents of recipients of unemployment benefit II aged25 or under provide financial support for their off-spring and restrictions on the financing of a flat foryoung people leaving home.
– Efficiency gains through improvements in the ad-
ministrative processes and organisational structuresof Hartz IV.
– Reductions in central government administration
costs.
– Cuts in individual subsidy payments at the central
government level.
– Cuts in the statutory health insurance scheme’s ex-
penditure on pharmaceuticals (compulsory discountto be granted by pharmaceuticals manufacturersplus price moratorium, limited to two years).
– Raising the standard rate of VAT by 3 percentage
points to 19% from 2007.
– Reduction in tax subsidies, providing relief of 54 bil-
lion for central government in 2007, a figure whichwill increase in subsequent years (measures includethe abolition of the grant to home buyers from2006, abolition of the mineral oil tax exemption forbiofuel, tightening of the loss-offset facility for spe-cial tax-saving mutual funds, restrictions on thestandard travel allowance for commuters).
– Raising the top income tax rate from 42% to 45% as
of 2007 for individuals earning more than 5250,000
and married couples earning more than 5500,000
(not applicable to trade income).
– New arrangements for the taxation of investment
income and private capital gains.
– Review of active labour-market policy.
– Acceptance of a significant rise in the contribution
rate to the statutory pension insurance scheme toan estimated 19.9% from 2007 in order to offset acut in central government payments. For the samereason, contribution rates to the statutory health in-surance scheme might rise, too.
– Intensifying measures aimed at combating turnover
tax fraud.By contrast, the following increases in expenditure or
shortfalls in revenue will place increased burden onthe budget.
– Additional infrastructural measures.– Dynamic adjustment of benefits paid out by the
long-term care insurance scheme.
– Introduction of an income-related parental benefit.
– Increase in declining-balance depreciation rates on
capital goods (to expire at the end of 2007).
– More preferential treatment given to transfers of
ownership of businesses with regard to inheritancetax (to take effect by 2007 at the latest).
– Introduction and/or extension of tax relief measures
for households’ expenditure on household services,home maintenance and modernisation, and child-care.
– Lowering the contribution rate to the Federal Em-
ployment Agency by 2 percentage points to 4.5% asof 2007.
– Continuation of investment grants.
In the longer term, the burden on the budget will be
eased by the fact that the statutory retirement age willbe raised by one month per year from 2012 onwardsup to the age of 67. However, individuals who havepaid in compulsory contributions for 45 years will stillbe entitled to claim a full pension at the age of 65.Moreover, the sustainability factor in the pension ad-justment formula is to be applied retroactively if itfailed to curtail the pension adjustment in years ofweak wage growth. The pension reform provisions areto be applied with the same effect to civil service pen-sions. In the case of children born in 2008 or after,child-rearing periods (during which the parent is outof the labour market) are to be given more preferen-tial treatment in the form of increased subsidies grant-ed under the Riester pension plan.
The coalition parties also announced more fundamen-
tal reforms for the new parliamentary term. In additionto the reform of the federalist structure, the details ofwhich have already been worked out to a large extent,but which is still to be complemented by a further re-organisation of the financial constitution, these willprimarily concern the statutory health insurance insti-tutions, income and corporate taxation, and measuresaimed at improving incentives for taking up low-paidwork.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
52watered down by the creation of new tax ex-
emptions elsewhere. The greatest degree ofconsolidation is to be accomplished throughhigher tax rates, which is not conducive tolonger-term conditions for growth and em-ployment.
This consolidation package should be seen as
a first step towards a radical consolidation ofpublic finances. For the medium term, theStability and Growth Pact prescribes an an-nual reduction in the structural general gov-ernment deficit of, on average, at least 0.5%of GDP (currently around 311 billion) until a
close-to-balance structural budgetary pos-ition is reached. Furthermore, the generalgovernment debt ratio is to be brought swift-ly down below the 60% threshold. Thereforeit is vital to implement further sustainablecuts in government spending in the mediumterm. The government must not lose sight ofthe goal of reducing the government expend-iture ratio in order to achieve the objective ofa balanced budget and lower the tax burden.
The coalition agreement envisages funda-
mental fiscal reforms in key areas for thecoming parliamentary term. These include, inparticular, income and corporate taxation,the statutory health insurance scheme, the fi-nancial constitution and increased incentivesto take up low-paid employment. There isscope here for significantly improving theunderlying fiscal policy setting. This will hingeupon strengthening individual responsibilityand competition, improving incentive struc-tures and enhancing system transparency.This will also entail tax cuts (while broadeningtax bases further) and an intensified applica-tion of the equivalence principle for the socialsecurity funds.
Budgetary development of central, state
and local government
Tax revenueTax revenue
2of central, state and local gov-
ernment was almost 3% up on the year in
the third quarter of 2005. This was mainly at-tributable to larger receipts from assessedtaxes and turnover tax, which more than off-set the decline in wage tax revenue primarilybrought about by the tax cuts at the start ofthe year. The positive result with regard to as-sessed taxes reflects, not least, the favourabletrend in profits. Corporation tax revenue wasup by 31 billion. Cash receipts from assessed
income tax increased (+ 31 billion) despite the
tax rate cut, reflecting both a lower figure forgross receipts from the previous year and acontinued reduction in rebates to employees.As regards indirect taxes, receipts from turn-over tax – which tend to fluctuate consider-ably during the course of the year – rosesharply, up just under 4%, after they had re-mained unchanged on the year during thefirst six months of 2005. The decline in min-eral oil tax receipts, which is to be seen inconnection with consumers’ reaction to highenergy prices, was – at 2% – less pronouncedthan in the preceding quarters. Following thetobacco tax increase, receipts from this tax
2According to the budgetary definition. Including EU
shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts
from local government taxes, which are not yet known
for the third quarter.Medium-term
objective
should be to
balance the
budget by
lowering
government
expenditure
ratio
Fiscal reform
must remain on
the agendaMarked
increase in tax
revenue in the
third quarter

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
53surged by 131/C252% despite a continued decline
in sales of taxed cigarettes.
According to the new official tax estimate
from November 2005, tax revenue (includingreceipts from local government taxes) is ex-pected to rise by 1.1% for the whole of 2005.Adjusted for the changes in tax legislationwhich have since been adopted, this figureexceeds previous expectations by 33 billion
despite the slight deterioration in the growthoutlook.
3On the one hand, projections for all
profit-related taxes ( 321/C252billion), for wage
tax (just under 31 billion) and turnover tax
(31/C252billion) were revised upwards on account
of their relatively favourable development sofar this year. On the other hand, significantshortfalls are expected with regard to mineraloil tax revenue (- 31 billion), in particular. The
overall tax ratio, as defined in the govern-ment financial statistics, would then remainunchanged at 20%.
Revenue expectations for 2006 were raised,
too ( 31
1/C254billion, adjusted for recent amend-
ments in tax legislation). However, the baseeffect resulting from the revision of estimatesfor 2005 is counterbalanced by the fact thatthe projected development in the underlyingmacroeconomic bases for tax receipts has de-teriorated vis-/C224-vis last May’s estimate. Thiswould result in a net rise of 2.1% in tax rev-enue with the tax ratio remaining largely un-changed.
These data do not take account of the agree-
ments reached in the new coalition deal. Nextyear, the effects of revenue-increasing andrevenue-decreasing measures could more orless offset each other. From 2007, revenue
will be further boosted, not only by the 3 per-centage point rise in the standard VAT rate to19%, but also by various measures aimed atbroadening the bases for direct taxes, and bycuts in tax subsidies. This growth in receiptswill, however, be curbed by tax concessionsaimed at promoting investment and employ-ment (ie temporary improvement in depreci-ation conditions for capital goods and tax re-ductions granted for households’ expenditureon household services including home main-tenance and modernisation by craftsmen).Nevertheless, the measures agreed upon willYear-on year change
%
Tax receipts, total 1
H1 H2 H1 H2 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes, which are not yet
known for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−
4−
2003 2004 2005
3The Federal Government is now projecting nominal
GDP growth of 1.3% and real GDP growth of 0.8% for
this year whereas in May growth rates of 1.6% and 1%
respectively were anticipated. The projected figures for
2006 are 1.8% (nominal) and 1.2% (real) GDP growth,
compared with 2.4% and 1.6%, respectively, in the May
estimate.Tax estimate for
2005 revised
upwards
Upward adjust-
ment of
revenue expect-
ations for 2006,
too
Coalition deal
aims for
significant rise
in revenue from
2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
54result in a marked rise in the tax ratio
and – even if the planned cut in the contribu-tions to the Federal Employment Agency istaken into account – in the ratio of total taxesand social security contributions from 2007onwards.
Central government budgetIn the third quarter of 2005, central govern-
ment recorded a deficit of 34
1/C252billion, a de-
crease of 381/C252billion on the year. This was
due mainly to an unusually sharp rise in re-ceipts by just over 310 billion (+18%). Tax
revenue was up by 32
1/C252billion (+41/C252%) on
the year. Growth in other receipts, however,was much higher. Loan repayments from for-eign borrowers alone increased by 35 billion.
Proceeds from asset disposals rose, too, by31 billion to 35
1/C252billion. Other significant rev-
enue increases stemmed from the compensa-tory amount from the Federal EmploymentAgency introduced earlier in the year, as wellas from the motorway tolls for heavy goodsvehicles. Although expenditure rose, too,owing to considerable outflows of funds inconnection with the Hartz IV reform and tothe fact that the Federal grant to the statu-tory pension insurance scheme had beenbrought forward and disbursed in September,at 3% this increase fell far short of the rise inreceipts.
According to estimates presented by the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance in the middle of theyear, the deficit estimate of just under 322
1/C252
billion envisaged in the Federal budget plancould be overshot by around 312 billion. The
most recent tax estimate predicts additionalrevenue of 31 billion vis-/C224-vis the May esti-
mate. However, compared with the budgetplan, a tax revenue shortfall of more than32 billion is still expected, due, not least, to
the subdued development of central govern-ment taxes. Furthermore, the Bundesbankprofit was just under 31
1/C252billion less than en-
visaged. Moreover, the original target figureof just over 317 billion for receipts from the
disposal of assets could be undershot. Con-siderable revenue increases resulting fromloan repayments (Poland and Russia havingredeemed considerable debt amounts), how-ever, might largely compensate for the risksassociated with privatisation proceeds. Ex-penditure is likely to rise considerably vis-/C224-visthe budgeted figures owing to the amalgam-ation of unemployment assistance and socialassistance. In the first three quarters, the cen-Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
Q1 to Q3
Type of tax 2004 2005Annualpercent-agechange
Wage tax 88.4 85.1 – 3.8
Assessed income tax 0.4 3.7 .Corporation tax 9.4 10.9 + 16.3Turnover tax 101.9 103.2 + 1.3
of which Q3
Wage tax 29.4 28.2 – 4.1
Assessed income tax 3.1 4.2 + 31.8
Corporation tax 2.7 3.8 + 38.7Turnover tax 34.0 35.3 + 3.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
Central govern-
ment budget
characterised
by temporary
surge in
receipts in the
third quarterIn 2005 as a
whole, new
borrowing will
clearly exceed
previous plans

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
55tral government deficit amounted to slightly
less than 338 billion. As a surplus is expected
for the fourth quarter, however, it is likely todecrease somewhat by the end of the year.
During the next few months, the 2006 draft
budget, which was presented to the FederalCabinet in July and was still awaiting approv-al, will be revised. It originally foresaw a def-icit of almost 322 billion. Asset disposals of
just over 330 billion were planned in order to
achieve formal compliance with the constitu-tional limit on new borrowing. Now, the in-tention is evidently to reduce this figure toaround 315 billion. In the wake of the recent
tax estimate, the budgeted figure for tax re-ceipts needs to be revised only slightly, by justunder 31 billion. On the expenditure side, a
significant upward revision of the slightlymore than 320 billion budgeted for un-
employment benefit II looks likely despite en-visaged relief measures amounting to 33 bil-
lion. Total net borrowing is now expected toamount to 341 billion. This figure exceeds the
level of investment expenditure, which, pur-suant to Article 115 of the Basic Law of theFederal Republic of Germany, defines theconstitutional ceiling for new borrowing, byalmost 320 billion. Given the underlying as-
sumptions for real economic growth, thereseems to be little scope for justifying such amove by invoking the exemption clause pro-vided for in the Basic Law, which permits newborrowing to exceed the constitutional limit ifthis is necessary to avert a disruption to theoverall economic equilibrium. This is particu-larly problematic in view of the fact that, des-pite the clear breach of the constitutionallimit this year, a further increase in net bor-rowing is planned for 2005. In fact, a more
rigorous fiscal consolidation at central gov-ernment level would be warranted as early asnext year.
In 2007, net borrowing is to be brought back
below the constitutional limit pursuant toArticle 115 of the Basic Law. The Federal Gov-ernment’s medium-term plans presentedmid-year indicated a deficit of 322
1/C252billion.
Given the additional burdens arising from theHartz IV reform package and the poorer as-sumptions for the macroeconomic outlook,the borrowing requirement has recently beenestimated at as much as 335 billion, and this
on the basis of extremely cautious extrapola-tions. Cuts in expenditure and additionalstructural receipts are intended to offset ap-proximately 325 billion of that figure. How-€b n
€b n
Cumulative
2005
2004
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
2004
2005Central government
balance of revenue and
expenditure in 2004 and 2005
Deutsche Bundesbank25−
30−
35−
40−
45−
50−10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
30−2006 deficit
well in
excess of
constitutional
limit
Deficit
reduction in
2007 mainly
through
measures on
the revenue
side

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
56ever, measures on the expenditure side rely
largely on shifting the burden towards the so-cial security funds, where no savings are en-visaged that might offset this. This meansthat contribution rates are bound to rise.Hence, an increase in the contribution rate tothe statutory pension insurance scheme hasalready been announced for 2007. A cut intax exemptions of slightly more than 34 bil-
lion is planned. Tax increases to the tune of310 billion are intended to provide further
budget relief.
In 2007, in addition to structural measures,
asset disposals worth 310 billion are to be
employed to comply with the constitutionalborrowing limit. The plan is evidently to selloff claims of the ERP special fund. Such amove, however, would require the liabilitiesof this special fund to be assumed as part ofcentral government debt. This transactionwould allow the constitutional borrowinglimit to be complied with merely in formalterms, if at all. If the structural consolidationof the central government budget is to pro-gress and the burden of taxes and social se-curity contributions is to be lowered again inthe future, during the next few years compre-hensive cuts in spending are needed.
State government budgetsIn the third quarter of 2005, state govern-
ment recorded an aggregate deficit of 36
1/C252
billion. This is a year-on-year rise of 311/C252bil-
lion. Although tax revenue increased slightly,total receipts lagged behind the correspond-ing level of 2004. By contrast, expenditurerose by 1% on balance, despite a slight de-cline in compensation of employees. How-ever, this rise does not appear to reflect therecapitalisation of some Landesbanken whichhave been planned for this year followingsubstantial subsidy repayments made at theturn of 2004/05 in line with a ruling by theEuropean Union. Taking into account themajor adjustments in the supplementarybudgets of Schleswig-Holstein and NorthRhine-Westphalia, in particular, budget plansnow envisage a borrowing requirement of327 billion, rather than the previously predict-
ed deficit reduction from 325 billion (2004) to
323
1/C252billion.
Existing plans do not foresee a noticeable re-duction in deficits for 2006, either. As hasbeen the case this year, Lower Saxony, NorthRhine-Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein,which, before the new relief measures wereagreed, had indicated that they would breachthe regular borrowing ceilings for the entireforthcoming parliamentary term, are unlikelyto be able to comply with the constitutionallimits for net borrowing in 2006. The sameapplies to Berlin, Bremen, Hesse and Saar-land, while other state governments will haverecourse to substantial asset disposals to staywithin the ceilings. Next year, too, most stategovernments in eastern Germany will find italmost impossible to demonstrate appropri-ate use of the special supplementary Federalgrants as their net borrowing will not be suffi-ciently below the statutory ceiling. On thewhole, the financial situation of state govern-ment is also extremely unsatisfactory. Al-though tax receipts are likely to rise percep-tibly in 2007 on account of the measuresforeseen in the coalition treaty, some statesAsset disposals
envisaged for
2007, too
State
government
deficit
increased in the
third quarterIn 2006,
many state
governments
will exceed
statutory
ceilings for new
borrowing

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
57will probably continue to encounter problems
in trying to observe the constitutional bor-rowing limits.
Local government budgetsFor local government, results are currently
available only for the first six months of 2005.By the end of that period, local governmentwas able to cut down deficits by a total of 3
1/C252
billion to just under 34 billion. Revenue rose
by 21/C252%, with local government tax receipts
increasing by 7%. By contrast, key grantsfrom state government decreased by 5
1/C252%.
Grants stemming from the Hartz IV reformpackage yielded additional local governmentreceipts of almost 32 billion. Expenditure was
up by slightly more than 1
1/C252%. However,
fixed asset formation continued to decreasemarkedly (-8
1/C252%).
The rise in total spending was primarily attrib-
utable to an 81/C252% increase in expenditure on
social benefits, which reflected the assump-tion of the costs for accommodation andheating for recipients of unemploymentbenefit II. A comparison of the increase in so-cial payments by local government (whichvaries considerably between individual states)with reimbursements of a certain share inpayments for accommodation and heatingshows that by mid-2005 the pressure on localgovernment budgets (excluding the city-states) had been eased by around 3
1/C252billion.
Last year a formula was unanimously adoptedby central and state government for calcula-tions to examine the relief provided for localgovernment budgets (under this formula, re-cipients of unemployment benefit II who didnot previously receive social benefits under
the Third Book of the Social Security Code(SGB III) are generally classified as former so-cial assistance recipients and it is assumedthat state government’s savings expected toarise from the reforms will be passed on tolocal government). On this basis, the FederalGovernment’s October audit report recordssavings of 36 billion at local government level
(including city-states) for the whole of 2005.This figure includes the central governmentshare in housing benefit payments.Net borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2004 + 72.3 + 70.7 – 16.8 + 66.8
of which
Q1 + 45.3 + 34.6 + 4.1 + 26.6Q2 + 8.2 + 14.6 – 9.6 + 1.5Q3 + 17.6 + 17.1 – 0.9 + 24.4Q4 + 1.2 + 4.4 – 10.4 + 14.3
2005
Q1 + 26.7 + 17.3 + 7.5 + 24.9Q2 + 8.2 + 13.4 – 6.3 + 27.3Q3
pe + 15.4 + 17.7 – 3.0 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market loans.
Deutsche BundesbankSlight decline in
local govern-
ment deficits in
the first half of
2005
Increase in
expenditure on
social benefits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
58Social security funds
Statutory pension insurance schemeThe deficit of the statutory pension insurance
scheme amounted to 31 billion in the third
quarter of 2005, which was 3
1/C252billion less
than in the same period last year. This is duemainly to the fact that the payment of centralgovernment grants amounting to just under31 billion had been brought forward to Sep-
tember. As the financial reserves had beenused up earlier this year, this move had be-come necessary to maintain the pension insur-ance funds’ ability to meet current payments.This alone effected an increase in receipts(+1
1/C252%). As a consequence, however, in the
fourth quarter the seasonal surpluses will besignificantly smaller since Federal grants willbe reduced by a corresponding amount.
Revenue from contributions was
1/C252% down
on the year. The only increase stemmed from
contributions transferred by the Federal Em-ployment Agency. Although payments on be-half of recipients of unemployment benefit Iand former unemployment assistance recipi-ents decreased, this effect was more thancompensated for by contributions introducedearlier this year especially with regard to for-mer recipients of social assistance who nowreceive unemployment benefit II.
4The rise in
expenditure in the third quarter was moder-ate, at just over
1/C252%. This was due, in part, to
the relatively weak increase in the number ofpeople drawing current pensions. Further re-lief was provided by the freeze in pensionpayments in the middle of the year. More-over, the proportion of pensioners’ health in-surance contributions borne by the pensioninsurance funds declined. Since 1 July 2005,pensioners, like employees, have been payinga special contribution of 0.9% to the statu-tory health insurance scheme. Consequently,the general contribution rate to the health in-surance scheme, which continues to be paidin equal parts by pensioners and pension in-surance funds alike, has decreased.
In 2005 as a whole, the deficit of the statu-
tory pension insurance scheme will be morethan twice the amount it was last year ( 31
1/C252
billion). This rise is attributable not only to thenegative trend in contributions but also, inparticular, to the one-off revenue inflow of32 billion from the disposal of shares in the
GAGFAH housing company late in 2004.A sharp rise in the contribution rate for 2006was avoided only by bringing forward thetransfer deadline for social security contribu-tions by half a month. Therefore, an increasein reserves is to be expected at the end of2006, the amount of the reserves being usedas a basis for determining the required contri-bution rate. Without the one-off measurementioned above, there would be a signifi-cant deficit that could no longer be coveredby drawing on reserves.
The measures outlined in the coalition deal
will initially place additional burden on thestatutory pension insurance scheme. In par-ticular, the monthly contribution paid on be-half of recipients of unemployment benefit IIis to be virtually halved from 378 to 340. In
4The uniform contribution base for pension insurance
contributions paid on behalf of recipients of unemploy-
ment benefit II is 3400 per month.Statutory
pension
insurance
scheme
receives
liquidity
assistance
Low contribu-
tion receipts
with moderate
rise in spendingReserves largelyexhausted
From 2007
additional
burden on
contribution
payers arising
from coalition
deal

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
592007, the contribution rate is likely to rise far
more sharply than previously expected to19.9%, partly owing to the lowering of theFederal grant. On the other hand, it has beenagreed that over the medium term pensioncuts that would have resulted from the appli-cation of the sustainability factor but wereprevented by the pension-cutting constraintcontained in the adjustment formula, will beretroactively implemented in years of strongergrowth in wages and salaries. Furthermore,against the backdrop of rising life expectancy,the statutory retirement age is to be raisedgradually from 65 to 67 years. The additionalcurbing of the rise in the contribution ratethat this would have entailed, will, however,be largely offset by continuing to allowpeople who have paid in compulsory contri-butions for 45 years to claim a full pension atthe age of 65. This effectively constitutes abreach of the equivalence principle and anew non-insurance-related benefit.
Federal Employment AgencyIn the third quarter, the Federal Employment
Agency recorded a slight surplus, following asmall deficit during the same time last year.However, the rise of just under 3
1/C252%i nr e -
ceipts is attributable entirely to central gov-ernment reimbursements of administrativecosts incurred in connection with the supervi-sion of unemployment benefit II recipients. Bycontrast, the continued slow growth in regu-lar employment subject to social security con-tributions, in particular, was reflected in a de-cline of almost 1% in contribution receipts.Expenditure was down by just over 1% onbalance. This was partly due to an acceler-ated reduction of 10% in spending on un-
employment benefit I owing to the decreas-ing number of recipients mainly as a result ofthe increase in long-term unemployment. An-other factor was the continued sharp declinein spending on active labour market policies(-34
1/C252%). This is, however, counterbalanced
by the compensatory amount to be paid tocentral government for individuals changingfrom unemployment benefit I to the newbenefit.
5Administrative costs rose due to
additional requirements created by the recentlabour market reform. However, net of the re-Quarterly
€b n
€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)Log scale
Expenditure
RevenueFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−62
60
58
56
54
2003 2004 2005
5In the first three quarters of the year, at 33.8 billion, the
compensatory amount markedly undershot the target
figure of 36.7 billion for the whole of 2005. This is attrib-
utable to the lower than expected number of individuals
switching from unemployment benefit I to the new bene-
fit, due in many cases to their available means exceeding
the limit for entitlement.Improved
annual
outcome of
the Federal
Employment
Agency

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
60spective central government refunds, they are
still perceptibly lower than in 2004.
Following a deficit of 33 billion in the period
between January and September, a signifi-
cant undershooting of the budgeted figurefor the Federal grant ( 34 billion) now looks
likely for the whole of 2005. Subdued growthin revenue from contributions has been ac-companied by an even greater reduction inexpenditure, particularly with respect to ac-tive labour market policies, whose effective-ness is questionable. Next year the bringingforward of the transfer deadline for social se-curity contributions will have a positive one-off effect on receipts of the Federal Employ-ment Agency, too. Therefore a surplus mayeven be expected.
The coalition parties have agreed to scrutinise
all active labour market policies and to reducethe range of the different measures on offer.In particular, promotion of one-person busi-nesses (“Me plcs”) is to expire from mid-2006. At the start of 2007, the contributionrate is to be cut by 2 percentage points to4.5%. One percentage point of this reductionmay largely be achieved by drawing on thesurplus expected for 2006. Also, the firstsubstantial savings resulting from the cutin the maximum period of entitlement tounemployment benefit to 12 months (or18 months in the case of individuals over theage of 55) and the reduction in active labourmarket policies may serve to finance thatmove. The second percentage point will in-volve further funds from central government,which will dedicate around one-third of theadditional receipts expected from the rise inthe VAT standard rate to 19% to this pur-pose.
Statutory health and long-term care
insurance schemes
Financial data for the statutory health and
long-term care insurance schemes are cur-rently available for the first six months of theyear. According to these data, the health in-Quarterly
€b n
€b n€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefit and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding central government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
ures, excluding compensatory amount to
central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−
3−8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.516
15
14
13
12
11
10
2003 2004 2005
Need for grants
likely to be
lower than
budgeted
figureCoalition plans
significant
reduction in
contribution
rate in 2007
Lower surplus
of statutory
health
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
61surance institutions generated a surplus of
slightly more than 31 billion during the first
half of the year. This was a decline of justunder 31
1/C252billion on the year despite a rise
of almost 31 billion in the first instalment of
the new Federal grant which was financed bythe increase in tobacco tax.
6Contribution re-
ceipts remained unchanged from their level in2004. Weak growth in wages and salaries(against the backdrop of largely unchangedcontribution rates) was offset by higher con-tributions paid on behalf of recipients of un-employment benefit II. Previously, lower con-tributions had been paid for recipients of un-employment assistance while no contribu-tions at all had been paid for social assistancerecipients with no earnings subject to com-pulsory insurance. These additional receipts,however, must be seen in the context of extraspending on former social assistance recipi-ents able to work, whose costs in the eventof illness had previously been borne by localgovernment. Overall, revenue rose by 1% inthe first half of the year. The 3% rise in totalexpenditure was driven mainly by additionalspending on pharmaceuticals (+20%). Thehigher discount on pharmaceuticals grantedby manufacturers for one year and the pricemoratorium both expired at the end of 2004,the effect of which far outweighed that ofthe extension of the price regulation forpharmaceuticals. On the whole, the benefi-cial effect of last year’s health system reformon the financial outcome of the statutoryhealth insurance scheme has already begunto unwind. Thus, a far smaller surplus is to beexpected for 2005 as a whole vis-/C224-vis lastyear ( 34 billion).The coalition parties agreed to postpone any
fundamental restructuring of the way inwhich the statutory health insurance schemeis financed. Next year, the financial pressure isto be eased by the introduction of a 5% com-pulsory discount to be granted by pharma-ceuticals manufacturers on generic drugs fora period of two years. Moreover, a generalprice moratorium for pharmaceuticals hasbeen announced for this period, too. By con-trast, the Federal grant ( 34.2 billion in 2006)
to the health insurance scheme to cover non-insurance-related benefits, which was intro-duced in 2004, is to be reduced from 2007.This will increase pressure to raise contribu-tion rates.
The deficit of the statutory long-term care in-
surance scheme declined slightly in the firstsix months of the year. This was attributablemainly to the new additional contributionpayable by childless persons. Also, as in thecase of the health insurance scheme, extra re-ceipts flowed in with regard to unemploy-ment benefit II recipients, which were still vir-tually unaccompanied by any additional ex-penditure. On the expenditure side, the trendtowards substituting financial benefits bybenefits in kind, which has been observed fora long time, continued. In 2005 as a whole,the deficit is likely to be smaller than last year,when it amounted to just under 31 billion.
However, this will only slow down rather thanhalt the erosion of the reserves.
6The Federal grant for non-insurance-related benefits
rises from 31 billion in 2004 to 32.5 billion in 2005 and
eventually to 34.2 billion in 2006.Fundamental
financial reform
has been
postponed
Lower deficit of
statutory long-
term care
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
62The coalition parties have agreed on a dy-
namic adjustment of the rate of the long-term care insurance scheme benefit, whichhas remained unchanged since the schemewas introduced in 1995. This will acceleratethe depletion of reserves, requiring the contri-bution rate to be raised earlier than expected.It has not yet been decided to what extentprivate long-term care insurance funds offer-ing the same range of services will be calledupon to pay a grant towards the statutoryscheme.
Dynamic
adjustment of
benefits
accelerates
depletion of
reserves

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Public finances in Germany
1 General government budgetary
position 52*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005

2 Budgetary position of central,
state and local government 52*
3 Government fiscal position as
defined in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of central, state and
local government 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*
6 Specific taxes levied by central,
state and local government 54*
7 General government debt 55*8 Change in general government
debt 57*
9 Loans raised by general govern-
ment against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Central government debt 58*11 Central government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets
of the German pension insurancefund 59*
13 Revenue and expenditure of the
Federal Employment Agency 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 60*
2 Output in the production sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*X External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 67*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 69*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the euro-area memberstates, the Deutsche Mark value ofthe ECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2004          Mar 11.3 6.7 6.2 5.9 5.9 5.8 7.0 2.01 2.03 4.0
         Apr 10.9 6.2 5.4 5.5 5.9 5.9 7.5 2.08 2.05 4.2
         May 9.4 5.5 4.9 5.2 5.9 6.0 7.6 2.02 2.09 4.4         June 9.5 5.6 5.3 5.2 6.4 6.2 7.6 2.03 2.11 4.4
         July 10.0 5.9 5.5 5.5 6.3 6.3 7.5 2.07 2.12 4.3
         Aug 9.2 5.7 5.6 5.7 6.1 6.0 7.5 2.04 2.11 4.1         Sep 9.7 6.2 6.0 5.8 6.0 6.3 7.9 2.05 2.12 4.1
         Oct 8.9 6.3 5.8 6.0 6.1 6.6 7.8 2.11 2.15 4.0
         Nov 9.7 6.6 6.1 6.2 6.0 6.8 7.8 2.09 2.17 3.9         Dec 9.0 6.7 6.6 6.5 6.1 7.1 8.3 2.05 2.17 3.7
2005          Jan 9.6 7.1 6.8 6.7 6.5 7.3 8.1 2.08 2.15 3.6
         Feb 10.2 7.3 6.6 6.6 6.7 7.4 8.7 2.06 2.14 3.6         Mar 9.3 7.1 6.5 6.6 6.3 7.4 8.7 2.06 2.14 3.7
         Apr 9.3 7.4 6.8 6.9 6.7 7.7 8.4 2.08 2.14 3.5
         May 10.1 7.6 7.3 7.2 6.5 7.8 8.4 2.07 2.13 3.4         June 10.9 8.0 7.6 7.6 6.6 8.0 9.5 2.06 2.11 3.2
         July 11.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 6.8 8.3 9.1 2.07 2.12 3.3
         Aug 11.6 8.6 8.2 8.2 7.0 8.6 9.0 2.06 2.13 3.3         Sep 11.2 8.9 8.5 ... 7.3 8.9 8.3 2.09 2.14 3.1
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.07 2.20 3.3
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.5, p 44*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2004          Mar + 7,949 + 13,437 − 3,488 − 22,382 + 1,253 + 13,895 + 3,746 1.2262 103.4 105.4
         Apr − 1,790 + 9,702 − 15,587 − 2,003 − 8,496 − 2,441 − 2,647 1.1985 101.6 103.6
         May + 506 + 10,198 + 15,739 + 41 + 811 + 14,204 + 684 1.2007 102.4 104.4         June + 4,658 + 11,479 + 11,118 − 10,140 + 33,431 − 11,349 − 824 1.2138 102.3 104.2
         July + 8,270 + 13,520 − 17,621 − 7,245 − 40,038 + 29,427 + 236 1.2266 102.8 104.9
         Aug + 3,284 + 5,162 + 6,300 + 5,067 − 1,612 − 909 + 3,754 1.2176 102.7 104.8         Sep − 143 + 4,867 + 14,436 + 3,318 + 47,797 − 36,168 − 512 1.2218 103.0 105.0
         Oct + 3,413 + 8,441 − 30,391 − 13,434 − 5,512 − 12,373 + 928 1.2490 104.2 106.2
         Nov + 4,724 + 4,469 + 28,373 − 5,801 − 8,604 + 42,832 − 54 1.2991 105.6 107.6         Dec + 7,646 + 7,161 − 23,370 − 24,880 + 36,623 − 36,603 + 1,489 1.3408 107.1 109.3
2005          Jan − 5,818 + 1,367 + 18,253 − 10,478 − 20,737 + 51,045 − 1,577 1.3119 105.8 108.0
         Feb + 5,877 + 5,885 + 27,084 − 2,740 + 24,519 + 394 + 4,911 1.3014 105.1 107.2         Mar + 3,461 + 8,308 − 19,441 − 6,830 − 7,170 − 6,955 + 1,513 1.3201 106.0 108.2
         Apr − 10,696 + 3,966 − 11,529 − 11,580 − 14,964 + 15,816 − 801 1.2938 105.1 107.2
         May − 2,818 + 6,117 + 39,541 + 8,176 + 20,287 + 8,501 + 2,578 1.2694 104.0 106.2         June + 179 + 8,670 + 18,009 − 8,201 + 104,531 − 79,652 + 1,331 1.2165 101.2 103.5
         July + 1,339 + 9,884 − 1,936 − 81,169 + 76,040 + 757 + 2,436 1.2037 101.7 103.8
         Aug − 2,924 + 1,128 − 1,446 − 15,679 − 22,240 + 36,580 − 106 1.2292 102.3 104.5         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2256 101.8 103.9
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2015 101.4 103.5
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables X.12 and 13, pp 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-23 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area
Real gross domestic product 1 
2002 0.9 0.1 2.2 1.2 3.8 6.1 0.4 2.5 0.1 1.0 0.4 2.7 0.9
2003 1.3 − 0.2 2.4 0.8 4.6 3.7 0.3 2.9 − 0.1 1.4 − 1.1 2.9 0.72004 2.9 1.6 3.6 2.3 4.7 4.9 1.2 4.5 1.7 2.4 1.0 3.1 2.1
2004          Q2 2.9 2.1 3.6 3.6 4.6 5.2 1.9 4.7 1.4 2.5 2.0 3.1 2.1
         Q3 2.7 1.2 3.6 1.5 4.5 5.2 1.3 3.8 2.0 3.1 1.1 3.4 1.9         Q4 2.4 1.3 3.9 1.9 4.8 2.8 1.1 3.6 2.3 3.3 0.6 3.1 1.6
2005          Q1 1.2 − 0.5 1.7 1.5 3.5 ... − 0.3 3.1 − 0.5 1.9 0.1 3.1 1.3
         Q2 1.2 1.6 0.2 1.9 3.7 ... 0.0 ... 1.3 2.1 0.5 ... 1.1         Q3 ... 1.3 ... ... 3.7 ... ... ... ... 2.0 ... ... 1.5
Industrial production 1,2 
2002 1.3 − 1.0 2.2 − 1.5 0.8 7.2 − 1.6 2.1 − 0.3 0.8 − 0.5 0.2 − 0.52003 0.8 0.4 1.2 − 0.3 0.3 4.7 − 0.6 4.8 − 2.4 2.0 0.1 1.4 0.32004 3.2 3.0 4.2 1.8 1.2 0.3 − 0.7 6.9 2.6 6.2 − 2.7 1.6 2.0
2004          Q2 2.0 4.0 3.7 3.3 2.3 3.2 1.0 9.1 3.4 6.3 − 1.0 2.4 3.0
         Q3 5.5 4.7 6.2 1.5 0.9 0.1 − 1.0 7.0 3.2 7.8 − 3.3 2.2 2.7         Q4 3.6 2.0 6.1 1.8 − 0.7 − 5.8 − 2.2 5.1 2.6 7.9 − 5.0 0.4 1.1
2005          Q1 − 1.2 2.8 0.1 0.6 − 1.8 − 2.9 − 2.8 5.0 − 1.5 4.6 − 2.1 0.3 0.5
         Q2 0.5 2.3 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 1.1 4.7 0.2 5.1 − 0.3 0.1 0.5         Q3 − 2.8
6p 3.1 − 1.2 0.1 − 0.8 2.5 0.2 ... − 1.6 ... 0.8 0.7 1.3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 76.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.22003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.8 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 79.0 78.9 81.02004 80.4 83.2 84.5 84.1 75.6 75.6 76.4 85.6 82.7 81.3 80.4 79.0 81.5
2004          Q3 81.5 83.4 84.7 84.3 76.3 75.3 76.9 87.4 83.1 82.3 81.4 79.8 82.0
         Q4 80.9 83.9 86.9 84.6 74.1 75.0 76.7 86.0 82.7 82.4 80.2 79.3 82.1
2005          Q1 80.9 83.9 85.5 84.0 71.9 72.2 76.4 84.9 82.3 82.2 81.6 80.1 81.9
         Q2 79.4 81.9 87.5 84.6 72.4 69.7 76.4 83.2 82.0 81.8 79.2 80.1 81.1         Q3 78.2 82.7 82.4 82.5 71.9 78.2 75.9 79.8 81.7 81.3 79.9 80.6 80.9         Q4 79.1 82.9 84.3 82.9 72.2 76.8 76.7 81.4 82.1 81.3 79.2 80.1 81.2
Unemployment rate 4 
2002 7.3 7.7 9.1 8.9 10.3 4.3 8.6 2.8 2.8 4.2 5.0 11.5 8.32003 8.0 8.8 9.0 9.5 9.7 4.6 8.4 3.7 3.7 4.3 6.3 11.5 8.72004 7.9
7 9.2 8.8 9.6 10.5 4.5 8.0 4.8 4.6 4.8 6.7 11.0 8.9
2005          Apr 8.3 9.5 8.4 9.6 4.3 7.7 5.2 4.8 5.1 7.3 9.5 8.8         May 8.4 9.2 8.3 9.6 4.3 7.7 5.4 4.7 5.1 7.3 9.3 8.6         June 8.5 9.2 8.3 9.6 4.3 7.7 5.4 4.7 5.2 7.3 9.2 8.6
         July 8.4 9.0 8.3 9.5 4.3 ... 5.4 4.6 5.2 7.2 8.9 8.5
         Aug 8.4 9.3 8.3 9.4 4.4 ... 5.5 4.6 5.2 7.2 8.8 8.5         Sep 8.4 ... 8.3 9.4 4.3 ... 5.6 4.6 5.2 7.3 8.6 8.4
         Oct ... ... ... ... 4.3 ... ... ... 5.3 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.3
2003 1.5 1.0 1.3 2.2 3.4 4.0 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.1 2.12004 1.9 1.8 0.1 2.3 3.0 2.3 2.3 3.2 1.4 2.0 2.5 3.1 2.1
2005          Apr 2.4 1.4 1.1 2.0 3.3 2.2 2.2 3.7 1.3 2.3 2.0 3.5 2.1
         May 2.3 1.6 0.6 1.7 3.2 2.2 2.3 3.7 1.1 2.0 1.8 3.0 2.0         June 2.7 1.8 1.0 1.8 3.2 1.9 2.2 3.2 1.5 2.0 0.6 3.2 2.1
         July 2.7 1.9 0.9 1.8 3.9 2.2 2.2 4.0 1.5 2.1 1.9 3.3 2.2
         Aug 2.9 1.9 1.0 2.0 3.6 2.1 2.2 4.3 1.6 1.9 2.5 3.3 2.2         Sep 3.0 2.6 1.1 2.4 3.8 2.8 2.2 4.7 1.7 2.6 2.7 3.8 2.6
         Oct 2.2 2.4 0.8 2.0 3.7 2.7 2.6 5.0
p 1.5 p 2.0 2.6 3.5 p 2.5
General government financial balance 5 
2002 0.0 − 3.8 4.3 − 3.2 − 4.9 − 0.4 − 2.7 2.1 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 2.5
2003 0.1 − 4.1 2.5 − 4.2 − 5.7 0.2 − 3.2 0.2 − 3.2 − 1.2 − 2.9 0.0 − 3.02004 0.0 − 3.7 2.1 − 3.6 − 6.6 1.4 − 3.2 − 0.6 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 2.7
General government debt 5 
2002 105.4 61.2 42.3 58.8 111.6 32.4 108.3 6.8 51.3 66.7 56.1 53.2 68.52003 100.0 64.8 45.2 63.2 108.8 31.5 106.8 6.7 52.6 65.1 57.7 49.4 69.82004 95.7 66.4 45.1 65.1 109.3 29.8 106.5 6.6 53.1 64.3 59.4 46.9 70.2
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central sonally adjusted. — 5  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — excluding financial intermediation services indirectly measured (FISIM) ;
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece, Portugal and the Euro−area Euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank, member states: European
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and Commission. — 6  Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by
energy; adjusted for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey for the
seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and third quarter (industry in Germany: on average − 2.5%). — 7  Comparability
October. — 4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; sea- impaired owing to changeover to new method of collection and calculati on. 
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2004          Feb 46.2 33.3 7.0 12.9 21.2 9.0 24.6 15.7 16.0 7.6 − 0.3 9.3 − 0.7
         Mar 77.6 46.7 16.4 30.9 14.2 6.7 76.8 70.1 45.9 7.1 − 0.2 31.0 7.9
         Apr 89.9 85.8 26.8 4.1 11.0 7.1 70.0 62.9 28.3 10.3 − 1.1 16.4 2.7
         May 72.2 47.5 3.9 24.7 30.5 − 21.2 − 11.3 10.0 23.8 5.6 − 0.9 16.3 2.8         June 60.4 46.6 − 8.1 13.8 8.5 14.3 − 26.3 − 40.5 22.1 9.9 − 0.4 8.0 4.5
         July 28.1 26.4 − 9.0 1.8 − 4.6 − 0.6 − 6.3 − 5.7 28.1 6.8 0.1 14.9 6.4
         Aug − 18.9 − 13.8 − 10.2 − 5.0 − 0.1 30.3 45.7 15.4 18.7 6.7 − 0.0 9.2 2.8         Sep 53.5 57.5 − 2.8 − 4.0 2.9 34.9 22.6 − 12.3 45.2 3.5 − 0.3 31.8 10.1
         Oct 56.4 57.3 5.8 − 0.9 − 1.1 20.5 30.9 10.4 25.2 7.3 0.9 15.3 1.8
         Nov 89.9 86.4 17.6 3.5 6.9 10.3 106.0 95.6 29.1 15.4 0.8 7.2 5.8         Dec 27.4 70.4 15.6 − 43.0 − 48.4 26.4 − 7.3 − 33.7 40.9 26.1 1.2 9.1 4.6
2005          Jan 97.7 54.7 15.3 43.0 38.2 − 17.4 82.3 99.7 11.9 1.9 − 0.3 10.7 − 0.4
         Feb 60.3 37.0 10.2 23.2 32.5 13.6 66.0 52.4 46.3 7.5 0.5 32.6 5.7         Mar 48.2 53.7 6.6 − 5.6 − 4.5 − 22.7 37.1 59.8 46.7 15.3 − 0.1 23.7 7.8
         Apr 136.5 120.0 67.9 16.5 11.9 2.1 109.5 107.4 17.3 5.4 − 0.5 15.2 − 2.8
         May 53.5 59.8 0.6 − 6.3 − 3.9 − 39.5 − 6.7 32.8 26.0 0.2 − 0.4 21.5 4.7         June 73.4 66.9 − 20.9 6.5 7.8 102.0 23.2 − 78.8 71.4 19.2 − 0.7 30.3 22.5
         July 51.1 52.0 − 9.5 − 0.9 − 1.4 4.1 48.1 44.0 13.6 6.1 − 1.0 7.0 1.5
         Aug 0.1 4.8 − 0.4 − 4.7 − 5.8 − 1.8 − 5.0 − 3.2 18.6 1.6 − 1.0 13.0 5.1         Sep 95.2 96.2 11.0 − 1.1 − 7.2 − 18.5 58.8 77.3 19.4 3.7 − 1.6 12.0 5.3
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2004          Feb 16.6 2.9 − 3.6 13.7 22.4 − 23.5 − 2.7 20.8 − 5.8 0.6 − 0.4 0.5 − 6.5
         Mar 28.7 10.4 9.6 18.3 5.8 − 2.0 10.3 12.3 9.4 0.0 − 0.2 9.4 0.2
         Apr 10.8 16.4 13.3 − 5.6 1.1 15.0 22.0 7.0 13.0 4.5 − 1.2 6.2 3.4
         May − 10.4 − 10.6 − 8.3 0.1 6.0 11.1 − 4.9 − 16.0 5.0 4.3 − 0.9 4.9 − 3.3         June − 9.2 − 12.4 − 12.7 3.2 8.5 21.2 − 8.5 − 29.7 7.9 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 6.0
         July 6.4 − 4.1 − 1.5 10.5 1.5 − 3.3 − 9.4 − 6.1 8.0 1.7 0.1 2.3 3.9
         Aug − 7.4 − 8.1 − 5.4 0.8 5.4 12.1 12.3 0.2 2.8 1.9 − 0.0 5.2 − 4.3         Sep 5.3 10.7 0.6 − 5.3 − 0.8 11.1 35.0 23.9 9.9 1.1 − 0.3 9.9 − 0.7
         Oct 11.7 − 0.6 1.5 12.3 7.3 18.7 8.1 − 10.6 3.9 2.7 0.6 − 0.5 1.1
         Nov 6.1 11.8 1.1 − 5.7 − 1.8 3.3 41.4 38.1 0.5 2.6 0.8 − 0.9 − 2.0         Dec − 14.0 − 1.8 9.9 − 12.2 − 8.2 10.3 − 25.6 − 36.0 2.1 3.7 1.1 − 5.2 2.5
2005          Jan 20.9 6.3 6.3 14.6 10.2 − 4.8 26.3 31.1 2.3 0.6 − 0.3 0.7 1.3
         Feb − 2.2 0.6 − 5.1 − 2.8 1.6 1.7 14.0 12.3 4.9 4.1 0.5 4.8 − 4.5         Mar 8.5 − 1.1 6.2 9.6 9.8 − 10.4 4.0 14.3 10.6 2.6 − 0.0 7.8 0.3
         Apr 63.2 50.8 45.3 12.4 7.5 15.6 56.3 40.7 11.8 − 2.8 − 0.5 10.8 4.2
         May − 21.7 − 15.0 − 17.7 − 6.6 − 5.7 − 22.7 − 25.5 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 0.5 2.0 0.7         June − 27.7 − 9.3 − 16.0 − 18.4 − 12.8 49.9 − 6.3 − 56.2 9.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 4.9 5.3
         July 3.9 2.9 4.5 1.0 − 3.0 3.7 14.3 10.6 6.8 1.8 − 0.7 2.8 2.9
         Aug 2.8 2.7 2.3 0.2 3.4 − 3.4 − 10.4 − 7.0 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.0 0.6         Sep 5.1 17.3 1.9 − 12.2 − 7.2 0.1 16.0 16.0 − 5.7 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 2.0 − 1.7
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
18.9 − 6.4 − 26.6 2.5 1.7 4.4 − 2.7 − 5.9 6.7 14.3 7.5 2.3 2004          Feb 
− 9.2 20.3 − 27.3 33.7 40.7 6.1 34.6 − 12.3 5.2 − 9.1 5.3 − 2.6          Mar 
− 4.7 20.8 − 52.6 33.3 24.4 9.8 14.6 0.6 8.3 5.8 8.0 5.4          Apr 
15.5 − 16.1 − 27.7 35.8 18.7 7.3 11.5 11.0 6.0 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 2.4          May
28.7 − 2.9 − 26.9 30.3 44.2 6.4 37.8 − 26.1 12.2 − 4.3 − 3.7 4.7          June
− 22.2 − 5.8 − 27.5 19.7 1.4 13.3 − 11.9 10.6 7.6 6.0 3.9 − 2.2          July− 8.5 17.4 − − 16.1 − 29.7 − 38.7 − 2.8 − 35.9 3.4 5.6 1.3 11.0 1.3          Aug 
11.1 − 2.0 − 34.2 56.6 63.1 4.6 58.5 − 8.6 2.2 − 8.3 − 13.3 − 0.9          Sep 
− 6.7 − 3.1 − 61.5 42.0 10.1 6.4 3.8 27.7 4.1 13.9 7.4 − 1.7          Oct − 14.6 46.6 − 39.0 43.8 50.5 4.3 46.2 − 13.5 6.7 − 5.7 − 3.2 4.2          Nov − 20.4 − 71.3 − 104.7 109.4 38.7 19.7 19.1 39.1 31.6 5.0 − 8.0 − 1.6          Dec 
18.2 41.7 − 8.4 − 0.3 14.6 − 8.5 23.2 − 27.8 12.8 − 0.2 12.4 − 3.5 2005          Jan 
29.5 − 12.3 − 10.3 4.9 5.0 3.7 1.3 − 5.3 5.2 − 1.7 − 1.9 8.9          Feb 
− 22.7 − 26.3 − 27.7 35.0 26.9 8.2 18.7 4.1 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 6.5          Mar 
− 6.5 43.0 − 84.8 57.2 33.1 9.3 23.8 16.7 7.3 − 0.7 13.7 14.7          Apr 
− 7.4 − 51.2 − 46.6 34.1 30.1 4.8 25.4 − 1.9 5.9 12.8 7.3 − 7.6          May
38.1 6.6 − 59.3 68.1 76.4 10.7 65.7 − 12.2 3.8 − 0.3 − 14.4 6.0          June
− 0.8 − 8.9 − 51.3 37.7 17.2 9.9 7.3 14.9 5.6 − 0.0 12.9 0.7          July− 44.3 42.9 − − 18.9 − 34.7 − 51.0 − 5.5 − 45.5 11.9 4.3 10.3 4.0 1.6          Aug 
15.1 − 15.7 − 57.8 79.1 54.0 6.2 47.8 23.1 2.0 − 14.8 − 6.9 0.5          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
1.3 − 1.8 1.1 0.9 − 0.6 5.7 − 5.2 1.2 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 2004          Feb 
0.6 12.2 1.2 2.3 4.4 1.2 − 0.1 0.1 0.8 − 0.5 3.0          Mar 
− 0.6 13.0 1.9 2.7 0.4 5.8 − 5.0 0.9 − 1.0 0.1 − 0.3          Apr 
1.0 − 10.7 1.0 2.3 5.3 − 2.7 8.7 0.2 − 0.3 0.3 − 1.0          May
2.4 10.3 0.6 2.3 − 8.6 3.3 − 9.8 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.8          June
− 1.0 − 0.1 1.7 3.6 − 3.8 − 8.5 3.9 0.5 0.6 3.9 − 4.2          July
2.4 − 2.9 3.0 − 0.8 2.5 1.7 0.7 0.7 − 2.5 1.3 0.7          Aug 
− 3.9 1.5 2.3 1.3 9.0 14.6 − 5.1 0.1 3.9 − 2.3 − 2.1          Sep 
− 2.6 29.4 1.4 1.0 − 0.3 − 3.5 2.3 0.5 3.1 − 1.3 − 1.4          Oct 
− 1.9 − 7.6 0.8 2.1 18.4 29.2 − 9.5 − 0.1 0.8 − 1.9 − 0.2          Nov 
0.1 4.0 0.3 4.8 − 10.0 − 29.5 23.5 9.2 − 7.2 − 3.9 − 2.2          Dec 
1.4 − 4.7 1.1 − 2.0 17.1 23.2 − 15.8 0.9 10.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 2005          Jan 
− 0.8 − 5.6 1.3 1.0 1.0 5.2 − 5.6 0.3 2.2 0.3 − 1.4          Feb 
− 3.3 − 1.7 2.1 2.5 − 7.4 0.4 − 5.5 − 1.0 1.0 1.6 − 3.9          Mar 
0.8 54.2 0.9 2.3 12.0 2.4 6.9 0.1 0.3 0.4 1.8          Apr 
− 1.3 − 50.1 2.4 1.0 9.0 9.0 3.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.9          May
0.8 6.6 0.7 3.4 5.7 10.0 − 5.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 0.2 2.5          June
0.4 1.0 0.6 2.2 − 0.6 0.6 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.5 1.4 − 2.0          July
− 0.4 − 7.9 1.6 − 1.2 9.0 1.7 1.1 − 0.5 3.9 0.1 2.7          Aug 
0.5 4.2 2.3 1.0 6.2 7.1 0.2 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.5 1.9          Sep 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Up to end-2002, including national banknotes and German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the
coins still in circulation. — 10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2003          Aug 14,358.6 10,166.1 8,004.9 6,975.7 410.0 619.3 2,161.2 818.3 1,342.9 2,928.4 1,264.0
         Sep 14,404.9 10,211.8 8,026.2 6,996.3 415.2 614.8 2,185.5 819.8 1,365.8 2,887.0 1,306.1
         Oct 14,490.6 10,258.6 8,060.6 7,025.0 422.8 612.7 2,198.0 819.5 1,378.5 2,950.2 1,281.8
         Nov 14,604.7 10,346.8 8,121.2 7,071.6 427.1 622.5 2,225.5 828.9 1,396.6 2,953.2 1,304.7         Dec 14,551.8 10,359.3 8,155.1 7,102.5 429.0 623.6 2,204.3 840.1 1,364.1 2,885.7 1,306.8
2004          Jan 14,761.7 10,406.4 8,179.7 7,118.1 429.0 632.7 2,226.7 835.1 1,391.7 3,014.2 1,341.0
         Feb 14,858.3 10,451.0 8,208.5 7,140.0 434.7 633.9 2,242.5 826.7 1,415.8 3,033.5 1,373.8         Mar 15,060.2 10,530.2 8,257.4 7,172.3 435.7 649.4 2,272.8 842.3 1,430.5 3,151.8 1,378.2
         Apr 15,223.0 10,620.2 8,342.9 7,230.4 440.4 672.1 2,277.4 836.6 1,440.8 3,228.3 1,374.4
         May 15,251.5 10,683.4 8,383.8 7,270.0 444.5 669.3 2,299.7 830.8 1,468.9 3,196.2 1,371.8         June 15,323.7 10,750.7 8,433.7 7,321.8 449.0 662.9 2,317.0 836.5 1,480.6 3,179.1 1,393.9
         July 15,346.7 10,780.5 8,460.8 7,356.4 451.2 653.3 2,319.7 842.8 1,477.0 3,182.6 1,383.6
         Aug 15,379.8 10,759.3 8,441.9 7,347.8 450.7 643.3 2,317.5 837.8 1,479.7 3,222.8 1,397.6         Sep 15,481.9 10,806.1 8,494.4 7,401.9 449.3 643.1 2,311.7 830.7 1,481.1 3,211.4 1,464.4
         Oct 15,580.2 10,860.6 8,549.2 7,450.2 452.1 647.0 2,311.3 830.7 1,480.6 3,216.4 1,503.3
         Nov 15,772.1 10,945.7 8,630.8 7,513.3 457.4 660.1 2,314.9 827.2 1,487.8 3,279.3 1,547.1         Dec 15,719.1 10,962.7 8,689.9 7,556.8 466.9 666.2 2,272.8 832.9 1,439.9 3,234.5 1,521.9
2005          Jan 15,987.2 11,068.5 8,746.5 7,597.1 471.2 678.1 2,322.1 838.7 1,483.4 3,368.5 1,550.2
         Feb 16,099.2 11,127.9 8,784.2 7,623.3 481.1 679.8 2,343.7 829.3 1,514.3 3,416.6 1,554.8         Mar 16,260.4 11,175.1 8,836.6 7,669.9 482.8 683.9 2,338.5 828.1 1,510.4 3,478.9 1,606.3
         Apr 16,566.8 11,313.9 8,955.7 7,722.0 493.4 740.4 2,358.2 832.8 1,525.4 3,598.1 1,654.8
         May 16,753.6 11,380.9 9,024.7 7,786.2 499.1 739.4 2,356.2 830.6 1,525.6 3,656.7 1,716.0         June 17,042.4 11,512.5 9,140.3 7,919.1 507.3 713.9 2,372.2 829.6 1,542.7 3,719.2 1,810.7
         July 17,113.3 11,559.1 9,190.8 7,977.5 506.5 706.8 2,368.3 830.0 1,538.3 3,756.3 1,798.0
         Aug 17,091.7 11,558.5 9,193.5 7,980.5 507.1 705.9 2,365.0 831.1 1,533.9 3,746.2 1,787.1         Sep 17,311.6 11,662.5 9,299.7 8,068.0 506.7 725.0 2,362.9 837.4 1,525.5 3,837.3 1,811.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2003          Aug 4,373.2 3,322.7 2,624.8 2,296.4 64.5 263.9 697.9 469.1 228.8 886.0 164.4         Sep 4,384.6 3,337.1 2,634.6 2,309.9 64.2 260.5 702.5 463.0 239.4 877.7 169.8
         Oct 4,387.2 3,333.3 2,624.5 2,303.4 66.5 254.6 708.8 466.1 242.7 882.7 171.3
         Nov 4,409.5 3,355.4 2,637.9 2,311.5 66.9 259.5 717.5 472.5 245.0 884.0 170.2         Dec 4,392.5 3,337.7 2,630.9 2,303.9 69.0 258.0 706.7 469.9 236.8 883.7 171.1
2004          Jan 4,416.6 3,334.2 2,621.1 2,291.7 68.4 260.9 713.2 470.2 242.9 921.4 161.0
         Feb 4,424.0 3,346.3 2,619.5 2,295.4 67.9 256.2 726.7 461.6 265.2 916.1 161.5         Mar 4,479.7 3,374.8 2,629.5 2,295.8 66.6 267.0 745.3 474.2 271.1 939.4 165.5
         Apr 4,514.1 3,385.7 2,646.0 2,299.2 65.4 281.5 739.6 467.5 272.2 962.8 165.7
         May 4,495.6 3,374.2 2,634.5 2,296.1 66.2 272.3 739.7 461.6 278.0 952.1 169.3         June 4,477.8 3,364.6 2,621.6 2,295.8 66.5 259.2 742.9 456.3 286.6 944.6 168.6
         July 4,479.3 3,372.7 2,619.4 2,292.9 70.7 255.8 753.4 465.2 288.2 937.4 169.1
         Aug 4,477.2 3,362.1 2,608.0 2,286.8 69.1 252.1 754.2 460.6 293.6 949.3 165.8         Sep 4,507.8 3,365.6 2,616.9 2,294.9 69.5 252.6 748.6 455.9 292.7 974.8 167.4
         Oct 4,522.7 3,376.3 2,615.4 2,291.9 69.3 254.3 760.9 460.8 300.0 976.6 169.8
         Nov 4,559.3 3,380.9 2,626.0 2,301.2 68.5 256.2 754.9 456.8 298.2 1,005.9 172.4         Dec 4,511.9 3,363.1 2,620.3 2,285.7 68.7 265.9 742.9 453.1 289.7 969.6 179.2
2005          Jan 4,562.3 3,381.7 2,623.9 2,283.1 68.7 272.0 757.7 457.7 300.1 1,009.8 170.8
         Feb 4,569.3 3,376.7 2,622.0 2,286.5 69.6 266.0 754.7 453.2 301.5 1,018.7 173.9         Mar 4,580.5 3,384.2 2,619.8 2,278.0 71.6 270.1 764.4 453.1 311.4 1,029.4 166.9
         Apr 4,706.9 3,446.9 2,670.0 2,283.0 74.7 312.2 776.9 458.0 318.9 1,087.9 172.2
         May 4,682.9 3,426.6 2,656.1 2,286.6 76.1 293.4 770.5 457.3 313.2 1,078.6 177.8         June 4,650.4 3,397.3 2,644.9 2,291.2 80.8 272.9 752.4 451.9 300.5 1,080.5 172.5
         July 4,665.0 3,400.1 2,646.8 2,288.6 80.4 277.9 753.2 455.8 297.4 1,091.8 173.1
         Aug 4,654.8 3,402.2 2,648.8 2,288.2 80.1 280.4 753.4 452.6 300.8 1,079.7 172.9         Sep 4,684.5 3,407.5 2,666.3 2,303.8 80.2 282.3 741.2 447.7 293.5 1,103.6 173.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4From
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to end-2002, also including national
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — banknotes and coins still in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*).
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). From 2002, the German contribution
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
362.7 6,089.2 5,741.0 5,779.2 2,078.5 951.1 72.2 1,203.8 1,382.4 91.2 2003          Aug 
364.8 6,118.0 5,754.9 5,789.2 2,117.6 922.4 73.0 1,203.3 1,382.3 90.6          Sep 
371.2 6,118.4 5,769.3 5,806.7 2,112.8 934.7 73.9 1,208.4 1,386.3 90.6          Oct 
379.1 6,179.9 5,818.3 5,851.8 2,151.0 927.4 75.5 1,215.5 1,391.5 90.8          Nov 397.9 6,239.4 5,912.6 5,934.1 2,188.8 921.8 74.9 1,232.2 1,424.6 91.8          Dec 
389.1 6,244.5 5,889.6 5,923.5 2,177.7 904.4 75.1 1,235.3 1,440.2 90.8 2004          Jan 
393.5 6,263.6 5,891.4 5,924.9 2,171.7 899.4 74.6 1,242.6 1,446.1 90.5          Feb 
399.6 6,290.5 5,920.7 5,966.5 2,210.4 892.2 73.1 1,250.4 1,450.2 90.3          Mar 
409.4 6,322.1 5,947.9 5,997.9 2,225.0 894.2 71.7 1,261.1 1,456.8 89.2          Apr 
416.6 6,366.8 5,980.0 6,023.2 2,235.3 900.5 71.2 1,266.1 1,461.7 88.3          May423.0 6,433.1 6,021.8 6,060.1 2,275.7 875.9 71.3 1,276.3 1,472.9 88.0          June
436.2 6,417.4 6,028.2 6,069.2 2,260.8 887.0 70.7 1,283.1 1,479.4 88.0          July
433.4 6,384.5 6,000.9 6,045.8 2,223.8 892.2 69.3 1,289.6 1,482.9 88.0          Aug 438.0 6,444.1 6,051.3 6,088.9 2,275.5 881.2 67.8 1,293.0 1,483.7 87.7          Sep 
444.4 6,476.5 6,087.4 6,126.5 2,275.2 906.3 69.7 1,300.1 1,486.6 88.6          Oct 
448.7 6,504.0 6,128.7 6,165.8 2,305.9 893.7 69.4 1,315.4 1,492.0 89.4          Nov 468.4 6,589.6 6,245.0 6,274.3 2,321.0 925.0 71.6 1,344.8 1,521.5 90.5          Dec 
459.9 6,624.1 6,248.9 6,284.3 2,340.9 901.5 71.4 1,347.7 1,532.6 90.2 2005          Jan 
463.6 6,661.4 6,255.0 6,292.4 2,340.9 900.0 70.9 1,354.9 1,534.9 90.8          Feb 
471.8 6,684.8 6,295.3 6,344.2 2,367.7 905.4 70.7 1,370.4 1,538.7 91.2          Mar 
481.1 6,731.3 6,347.6 6,397.3 2,392.3 922.5 71.6 1,375.9 1,544.3 90.7          Apr 
485.8 6,760.8 6,373.2 6,429.1 2,419.6 920.4 72.2 1,377.1 1,549.5 90.3          May496.6 6,912.1 6,486.5 6,537.5 2,643.9 904.9 78.2 1,429.9 1,390.2 90.5          June
506.4 6,936.3 6,503.8 6,571.3 2,654.6 921.9 77.7 1,433.3 1,394.4 89.5          July
500.9 6,860.9 6,468.2 6,537.8 2,606.5 933.7 77.5 1,435.1 1,396.6 88.4          Aug 507.1 6,951.1 6,541.0 6,609.9 2,653.8 949.3 83.5 1,439.1 1,397.4 86.9          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
99.3 2,193.4 2,117.6 2,082.5 593.2 228.9 17.5 662.7 491.0 89.3 2003          Aug 
100.2 2,188.3 2,112.7 2,079.6 603.5 217.2 17.5 661.0 491.8 88.5          Sep 
101.5 2,188.7 2,113.6 2,083.5 606.9 216.1 17.8 661.3 492.8 88.6          Oct 
103.9 2,211.8 2,137.8 2,105.1 628.8 214.6 18.3 661.2 493.4 88.9          Nov 108.5 2,215.1 2,143.0 2,105.2 616.1 216.3 18.5 662.1 502.3 89.9          Dec 
103.5 2,209.9 2,137.7 2,102.7 626.1 202.7 18.5 662.9 503.6 88.8 2004          Jan 
104.4 2,213.0 2,140.9 2,103.8 630.1 198.8 18.3 663.3 504.7 88.5          Feb 
106.7 2,215.1 2,142.0 2,106.6 631.3 200.7 18.0 663.6 504.8 88.2          Mar 
109.3 2,219.4 2,145.3 2,112.5 637.8 196.2 17.5 668.3 505.6 87.1          Apr 
111.6 2,229.8 2,154.8 2,118.4 634.1 202.7 16.9 672.6 505.8 86.2          May113.8 2,229.2 2,151.6 2,114.1 636.3 193.0 16.6 676.9 505.5 85.8          June
117.4 2,226.0 2,149.7 2,113.7 629.2 197.9 16.2 678.5 506.0 85.9          July
116.7 2,232.2 2,153.1 2,119.1 630.6 199.7 16.0 680.3 506.6 85.8          Aug 118.0 2,238.1 2,162.0 2,126.3 644.8 191.9 15.9 681.5 506.7 85.5          Sep 
119.0 2,237.6 2,164.0 2,132.6 642.0 197.5 16.0 684.1 507.0 86.1          Oct 
121.1 2,258.0 2,187.6 2,153.3 668.5 188.1 15.7 687.1 507.0 86.9          Nov 125.9 2,264.6 2,193.8 2,158.6 639.4 208.7 15.7 690.9 516.0 88.0          Dec 
123.9 2,275.5 2,203.9 2,167.3 661.1 193.9 15.7 691.8 517.0 87.8 2005          Jan 
124.9 2,278.8 2,208.6 2,170.9 664.8 189.0 15.7 695.8 517.3 88.3          Feb 
127.4 2,272.0 2,204.8 2,169.7 666.7 183.6 15.5 698.0 517.2 88.7          Mar 
129.7 2,279.1 2,210.9 2,177.8 669.1 192.2 15.7 695.3 517.3 88.2          Apr 
130.7 2,285.8 2,217.2 2,182.7 677.7 193.6 15.7 691.4 516.7 87.7          May134.1 2,288.9 2,220.6 2,182.8 686.7 186.4 16.1 691.0 515.4 87.1          June
136.3 2,289.1 2,221.5 2,185.0 688.3 189.1 16.0 690.0 515.3 86.4          July
135.2 2,290.5 2,224.1 2,185.3 689.5 189.8 15.7 690.5 514.4 85.4          Aug 136.2 2,296.5 2,229.3 2,191.8 697.8 189.7 15.9 690.1 514.4 83.9          Sep 
includes the volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim
Bundesbank in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). — 5Excluding
Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The central governments’ deposits. — 6 In Germany, only saving deposits. 
volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can be
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2003          Aug 163.0 147.0 73.4 45.7 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.3 217.1 214.2 587.1 1,864.5 1,516.1
         Sep 183.9 144.9 74.8 42.0 1.0 23.9 2.8 0.3 211.5 207.9 576.9 1,860.0 1,519.5
         Oct 165.8 145.9 78.1 39.9 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.4 224.7 221.1 582.3 1,896.0 1,541.0
         Nov 180.4 147.7 80.0 39.6 0.9 24.0 2.9 0.3 224.7 220.9 585.2 1,904.4 1,554.1         Dec 155.7 149.6 79.7 41.5 0.9 24.3 2.9 0.4 208.7 206.4 581.5 1,878.0 1,537.6
2004          Jan 174.1 146.9 78.4 41.2 0.9 23.2 2.9 0.3 213.4 210.7 591.7 1,903.5 1,551.5
         Feb 193.0 145.7 76.7 41.3 0.9 23.5 3.0 0.4 227.7 224.4 599.2 1,913.6 1,561.0         Mar 183.8 140.3 73.5 39.1 0.9 23.3 3.1 0.4 218.6 215.0 602.6 1,951.3 1,578.4
         Apr 179.6 144.7 77.7 39.2 1.0 23.1 3.2 0.4 224.8 221.8 611.0 1,975.9 1,588.7
         May 195.1 148.5 78.3 42.5 1.0 23.1 3.3 0.4 221.2 217.8 609.0 1,986.4 1,591.7         June 223.7 149.2 81.1 40.6 1.0 22.8 3.3 0.4 216.9 213.4 609.2 1,999.9 1,601.1
         July 201.5 146.8 77.6 41.3 1.0 22.9 3.4 0.4 223.0 219.5 613.0 2,017.2 1,610.1
         Aug 193.0 145.7 78.0 40.7 1.0 22.1 3.5 0.5 224.3 220.2 624.1 2,026.0 1,618.9         Sep 204.1 151.0 81.5 42.8 1.0 21.8 3.5 0.5 215.9 212.5 609.5 2,048.9 1,637.5
         Oct 197.4 152.6 83.7 41.9 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 229.7 226.7 617.1 2,057.4 1,643.1
         Nov 182.8 155.4 89.2 39.2 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 223.9 220.9 613.4 2,059.7 1,646.8         Dec 162.4 152.9 84.8 42.0 1.3 20.3 3.8 0.5 228.8 225.9 604.9 2,060.3 1,654.9
2005          Jan 180.6 159.3 92.4 41.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 228.7 225.5 616.4 2,085.7 1,663.7
         Feb 210.1 158.9 92.4 40.6 1.4 20.2 3.9 0.4 227.0 224.2 615.4 2,122.8 1,693.3         Mar 187.4 153.3 87.4 40.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 227.0 223.3 614.6 2,144.9 1,702.7
         Apr 180.9 153.2 88.2 39.0 1.5 20.3 3.8 0.5 226.3 222.5 627.8 2,176.8 1,714.0
         May 173.5 158.2 90.6 41.3 1.5 20.4 4.0 0.5 239.2 235.2 634.8 2,202.9 1,721.3         June 211.6 163.0 93.9 42.9 1.5 20.4 3.9 0.4 238.9 234.5 621.3 2,242.0 1,742.4
         July 210.8 154.2 87.2 40.8 1.6 20.3 3.9 0.5 238.9 235.6 635.1 2,248.8 1,741.5
         Aug 166.8 156.4 89.4 40.8 1.5 20.0 4.2 0.4 249.2 245.4 639.8 2,262.1 1,745.5         Sep 181.9 159.4 90.6 42.6 1.5 20.0 4.3 0.4 234.4 230.9 631.5 2,279.2 1,754.0
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2003          Aug 46.0 65.0 14.0 27.1 0.6 21.2 1.7 0.3 12.4 12.4 36.4 821.8 688.4         Sep 46.3 62.5 13.9 24.7 0.7 21.2 1.7 0.3 15.6 15.6 36.3 825.6 689.8
         Oct 45.5 59.7 13.8 22.1 0.6 21.2 1.6 0.4 21.1 21.1 35.7 829.7 692.4
         Nov 45.7 61.0 14.4 22.6 0.6 21.4 1.6 0.3 20.0 20.0 35.2 833.2 698.6         Dec 45.9 64.0 15.8 23.9 0.6 21.6 1.6 0.4 14.1 14.1 35.4 826.4 693.3
2004          Jan 46.0 61.3 14.4 23.6 0.6 20.7 1.7 0.3 16.6 16.6 34.9 836.4 695.5
         Feb 47.3 62.0 15.2 23.3 0.6 20.9 1.7 0.4 17.5 17.5 34.7 833.7 695.2         Mar 47.9 60.6 15.4 21.7 0.6 20.7 1.8 0.4 18.2 18.2 34.2 851.5 698.5
         Apr 47.3 59.7 14.9 21.4 0.6 20.6 1.8 0.4 17.3 17.3 34.2 858.7 698.9
         May 48.3 63.1 15.7 24.1 0.6 20.5 1.8 0.4 17.0 17.0 34.6 861.5 701.5         June 50.7 64.4 17.3 24.0 0.6 20.3 1.8 0.4 16.1 16.1 34.5 859.1 697.1
         July 49.7 62.6 15.6 23.7 0.6 20.4 1.9 0.4 16.8 16.8 38.4 860.1 692.4
         Aug 52.1 61.0 15.7 22.8 0.6 19.5 2.0 0.5 14.2 14.2 39.6 865.1 696.9         Sep 48.1 63.6 15.8 25.4 0.6 19.3 2.0 0.5 18.1 18.1 37.5 869.5 699.7
         Oct 45.6 59.4 15.0 21.9 0.7 19.2 2.1 0.5 21.2 21.2 36.2 865.5 691.2
         Nov 43.7 61.1 16.7 21.8 0.7 19.3 2.0 0.5 22.0 22.0 34.3 860.8 687.5         Dec 43.8 62.2 16.0 24.8 0.6 18.1 2.2 0.5 14.8 14.8 30.5 850.2 678.1
2005          Jan 45.2 63.0 17.9 23.9 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 25.1 25.1 30.2 854.7 673.7
         Feb 44.3 63.5 19.2 23.2 0.6 18.0 2.1 0.4 27.3 27.3 30.5 856.4 671.1         Mar 41.0 61.2 17.5 22.7 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 862.2 671.6
         Apr 41.8 59.4 17.5 20.9 0.6 18.0 1.9 0.5 28.6 28.6 32.6 875.9 676.5
         May 40.5 62.5 18.4 22.8 0.7 18.1 2.1 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 880.9 676.1         June 41.3 64.9 19.6 23.9 0.7 18.1 2.2 0.4 28.3 28.3 32.4 890.3 681.5
         July 41.7 62.4 18.5 22.4 0.6 18.1 2.3 0.5 26.7 26.7 33.8 892.6 682.4
         Aug 41.6 63.6 19.1 23.1 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 30.6 30.6 34.0 893.4 678.4         Sep 42.1 62.6 18.0 23.2 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 28.0 28.0 33.5 894.7 678.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building with money market fund shares. — 5Excluding liabilities arising from
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central securities issued. — 6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 7The
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates should on
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with or M3. — 8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution, the difference
January 2002 Monthly Report , they were published in this table together
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
... ... 1,767.7 2,677.3 1,009.5 − 3.2 1,552.8 − 2,573.2 5,126.0 6,027.0 4,096.3 156.2 2003          Aug 
... ... 1,768.0 2,642.2 1,011.7 5.6 1,612.6 − 2,615.6 5,137.0 6,017.4 4,097.9 156.3          Sep 
... ... 1,791.9 2,690.5 1,009.3 9.6 1,587.3 − 2,620.4 5,157.9 6,069.0 4,124.4 157.3          Oct 
... ... 1,800.7 2,685.2 1,009.3 4.9 1,631.2 − 2,667.8 5,206.0 6,119.7 4,140.7 158.1          Nov ... ... 1,785.4 2,634.0 1,004.7 8.9 1,598.3 − 2,727.1 5,295.8 6,178.7 4,138.7 162.9          Dec 
... ... 1,807.9 2,749.4 1,003.5 16.4 1,649.8 − 2,702.9 5,271.7 6,172.4 4,161.1 161.8 2004          Jan 
... ... 1,816.6 2,765.3 1,002.8 21.6 1,670.5 − 2,703.3 5,273.5 6,197.5 4,176.3 166.4          Feb 
... ... 1,856.8 2,856.2 1,020.6 21.2 1,699.3 − 2,745.5 5,310.2 6,225.9 4,241.8 168.2          Mar 
... ... 1,876.4 2,936.8 1,016.5 16.2 1,710.0 − 2,770.7 5,344.5 6,279.8 4,266.8 166.4          Apr 
... ... 1,890.2 2,930.9 1,014.0 17.2 1,689.1 − 2,788.6 5,377.4 6,303.8 4,282.1 167.0          May... ... 1,899.8 2,892.7 1,018.9 16.1 1,713.5 − 2,833.4 5,408.0 6,334.2 4,306.2 163.2          June
... ... 1,919.4 2,897.7 1,026.3 17.4 1,697.9 − 2,834.8 5,428.5 6,362.3 4,340.2 170.8          July
... ... 1,926.8 2,902.7 1,033.0 20.4 1,729.9 − 2,795.7 5,398.0 6,345.6 4,359.8 173.2          Aug ... ... 1,948.7 2,861.6 1,039.4 14.6 1,808.9 − 2,857.1 5,451.1 6,376.7 4,391.0 176.0          Sep 
... ... 1,958.5 2,847.5 1,041.7 20.8 1,843.5 − 2,866.0 5,490.4 6,436.1 4,410.9 177.7          Oct 
... ... 1,956.1 2,904.7 1,050.4 44.1 1,921.4 − 2,913.7 5,528.9 6,469.7 4,433.4 185.9          Nov ... ... 1,958.0 2,842.2 1,047.0 33.6 1,842.9 − 2,948.9 5,632.2 6,568.2 4,461.2 192.8          Dec 
... ... 1,986.4 2,993.4 1,049.8 29.3 1,899.0 − 2,966.0 5,637.3 6,581.7 4,495.0 192.6 2005          Jan 
... ... 2,008.8 3,029.0 1,054.0 21.9 1,903.3 − 2,970.7 5,643.9 6,600.4 4,529.2 195.5          Feb 
... ... 2,038.8 3,110.4 1,062.9 0.4 1,943.0 − 2,998.1 5,681.0 6,628.6 4,584.1 194.2          Mar 
... ... 2,055.9 3,224.7 1,063.6 15.5 2,019.6 − 3,031.6 5,738.9 6,714.0 4,606.9 194.8          Apr 
... ... 2,089.4 3,310.2 1,076.2 − 12.2 2,055.1 − 3,064.6 5,779.0 6,766.5 4,653.9 194.1          May... ... 2,123.5 3,252.2 1,132.6 − 14.2 2,159.7 − 3,304.6 5,852.5 6,831.3 4,797.3 196.6          June
... ... 2,129.6 3,287.8 1,131.2 − 16.5 2,144.7 − 3,321.4 5,889.3 6,882.5 4,804.3 200.9          July
... ... 2,141.4 3,279.3 1,137.8 1.8 2,159.0 − 3,269.3 5,853.1 6,862.7 4,823.1 201.9          Aug ... ... 2,158.9 3,371.8 1,156.3 − 16.8 2,194.6 − 3,324.0 5,934.0 6,920.2 4,861.6 204.0          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
25.7 29.5 766.7 640.5 285.5 − 67.4 450.4 40.8 607.2 1,374.0 1,477.8 1,825.8 − 2003          Aug 
26.4 29.3 770.0 639.8 279.8 − 60.1 459.3 42.2 617.3 1,370.9 1,478.4 1,820.9 −          Sep 
25.7 30.1 773.9 638.2 279.6 − 63.5 457.6 43.4 620.7 1,371.7 1,484.4 1,825.0 −          Oct 
28.6 31.5 773.1 635.5 279.6 − 70.8 465.2 44.4 643.2 1,394.3 1,509.6 1,824.4 −          Nov 30.0 31.3 765.1 625.4 279.6 − 67.8 464.3 44.6 631.9 1,395.2 1,505.9 1,818.7 −          Dec 
31.2 29.8 775.4 642.8 276.3 − 47.1 446.8 48.1 640.5 1,391.1 1,503.6 1,824.6 − 2004          Jan 
26.7 31.3 775.8 663.0 270.2 − 60.8 452.6 49.2 645.3 1,392.7 1,502.9 1,819.0 −          Feb 
29.6 31.4 790.6 680.7 273.8 − 54.5 460.7 50.4 646.8 1,394.2 1,507.6 1,837.3 −          Mar 
29.8 31.1 797.7 690.9 274.2 − 52.8 472.2 52.3 652.7 1,395.8 1,508.3 1,848.3 −          Apr 
27.6 32.3 801.5 671.6 270.6 − 61.3 471.9 53.3 649.8 1,401.8 1,513.4 1,851.8 −          May29.5 29.7 799.9 642.5 276.7 − 54.5 474.3 53.9 653.5 1,395.1 1,504.8 1,860.1 −          June
27.2 27.7 805.2 638.2 280.6 − 59.0 478.3 55.6 644.8 1,391.0 1,501.1 1,871.1 −          July
29.2 26.5 809.4 636.6 278.9 − 69.5 480.2 58.6 646.4 1,394.0 1,503.5 1,874.5 −          Aug 27.5 26.1 815.9 654.3 277.5 − 80.2 493.1 60.9 660.7 1,403.1 1,512.3 1,880.2 −          Sep 
27.2 25.1 813.3 639.6 278.9 − 58.8 502.5 62.3 656.9 1,402.1 1,511.7 1,882.2 −          Oct 
29.5 22.7 808.7 669.7 277.1 − 73.6 510.9 63.1 685.2 1,420.6 1,529.0 1,879.6 −          Nov 27.5 22.5 800.2 627.6 277.6 − 69.5 516.2 63.4 655.4 1,423.3 1,518.6 1,875.2 −          Dec 
27.6 21.2 805.8 667.8 279.2 − 76.0 506.0 64.5 679.0 1,432.3 1,536.4 1,883.1 − 2005          Jan 
27.2 26.5 802.8 676.7 275.0 − 77.0 501.8 65.8 684.0 1,431.9 1,543.3 1,880.3 −          Feb 
23.6 26.1 812.6 695.2 276.1 − 95.6 510.3 67.9 684.1 1,425.8 1,535.8 1,893.9 −          Mar 
24.9 26.6 824.5 737.1 281.0 − 43.8 516.5 68.8 686.6 1,435.3 1,547.9 1,907.4 −          Apr 
25.1 24.4 831.5 745.4 282.5 − 89.5 517.3 71.3 696.1 1,447.7 1,557.5 1,911.5 −          May27.0 25.0 838.4 693.3 290.0 − 95.1 522.3 72.0 706.3 1,451.0 1,563.7 1,925.0 −          June
25.2 24.8 842.6 702.5 291.6 − 98.3 526.9 72.6 706.8 1,452.5 1,563.0 1,929.1 −          July
27.0 25.7 840.7 694.3 292.3 − 111.5 531.3 74.1 708.5 1,454.8 1,572.1 1,927.1 −          Aug 28.9 25.7 840.1 712.8 294.7 − 120.9 545.3 76.4 715.8 1,462.3 1,578.4 1,926.9 −          Sep 
between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central govern-
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen ments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetaryby the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo transactions, money
III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding central governments’ deposits), market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities up to 2
and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments’ years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2003          Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3         June 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         July 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
         Aug 315.8 213.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 391.6 51.5 − 1.6 132.8 524.6         Sep 315.0 214.0 45.0 0.1 − 0.6 − 391.7 54.4 − 4.4 132.0 524.2
         Oct 321.3 208.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 395.5 48.3 − 1.1 131.9 527.5
         Nov 321.8 205.8 45.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 399.4 43.4 − 2.2 131.8 531.4
         Dec 320.1 235.5 45.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 416.1 57.0 − 4.5 132.6 548.7
2004          Jan 309.2 232.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 427.6 37.0 − 11.2 133.6 561.4
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 303.3 219.4 56.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 418.0 48.6 − 21.1 134.1 552.3
         Apr 301.4 217.9 67.1 0.4 − 0.4 − 425.3 51.5 − 25.7 135.3 561.0
         May 310.7 213.2 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 436.4 46.0 − 18.9 135.0 571.5         June 311.3 224.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.5 − 442.5 52.2 − 21.1 137.1 580.1
         July 308.2 245.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 449.1 65.0 − 24.1 138.8 588.1
         Aug 300.8 253.6 75.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 460.9 61.1 − 31.8 139.1 600.1         Sep 299.4 251.6 75.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 462.8 56.3 − 32.4 139.3 602.3
         Oct 298.8 256.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 465.1 58.2 − 32.1 139.3 604.4
         Nov 298.3 257.9 75.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 − 469.7 55.1 − 32.1 138.4 608.4         Dec 298.0 265.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.5 475.4 60.2 − 36.0 138.5 614.1
2005          Jan 290.3 272.9 75.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 496.0 45.3 − 41.9 139.1 635.2
         Feb 280.6 276.6 78.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 487.1 63.8 − 55.5 140.0 627.2
         Mar 280.2 277.8 82.2 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 489.5 68.5 − 59.2 141.3 630.9
         Apr 282.1 278.2 86.9 0.2 − 0.1 − 498.6 67.4 − 62.1 143.3 642.0
         May 287.0 276.5 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 505.5 62.9 − 58.9 144.0 649.7
         June 286.8 273.1 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 512.8 53.5 − 62.0 145.5 658.5
         July 293.3 297.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.3 522.6 67.4 − 57.3 147.9 670.6
         Aug 305.5 309.5 90.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.0 532.6 67.4 − 45.0 149.8 682.7         Sep 304.8 303.5 90.0 − 0.3 0.1 − 531.5 63.1 − 46.2 150.2 681.8
         Oct 307.9 288.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 531.6 47.9 − 44.6 151.4 683.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2003          Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7         June 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         July 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
         Aug 73.7 111.0 29.6 0.2 − 0.1 − 109.6 0.1 66.5 38.2 147.9
         Sep 73.9 114.0 29.1 0.1 − 0.4 − 109.8 0.1 69.2 37.7 147.9
         Oct 75.7 106.5 29.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 110.8 0.1 63.4 37.5 148.4
         Nov 76.1 102.3 30.8 0.0 − 0.2 − 111.5 0.1 60.0 37.5 149.1
         Dec 76.1 118.3 30.9 0.3 − 0.1 − 115.9 0.1 72.2 37.4 153.4
2004          Jan 73.1 119.5 32.3 0.2 − 0.1 − 116.2 0.1 70.9 37.9 154.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 72.4 109.7 41.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 113.5 0.1 72.0 37.9 151.5
         Apr 72.9 97.9 48.7 0.2 − 0.3 − 115.8 0.1 65.7 37.8 153.9
         May 75.4 100.7 51.8 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 119.3 0.1 70.9 37.7 157.0         June 75.6 115.6 49.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.2 0.1 80.9 38.3 159.9
         July 74.6 127.9 49.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 122.7 0.1 91.1 38.5 161.1
         Aug 72.1 136.9 50.3 0.0 − 0.1 − 126.2 0.1 94.7 38.3 164.6         Sep 72.2 131.7 50.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 127.5 0.1 88.8 37.9 165.4
         Oct 72.1 129.8 48.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 127.7 0.1 84.8 37.5 165.3
         Nov 72.2 136.0 46.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 − 128.3 0.1 88.4 37.5 166.0
         Dec 72.2 142.4 46.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 129.9 0.1 93.4 37.6 167.5
2005          Jan 70.2 144.7 46.9 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 135.2 0.1 89.1 37.4 172.7
         Feb 67.7 137.7 49.4 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 133.2 0.1 83.8 37.9 171.1
         Mar 67.6 145.3 52.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.0 134.0 0.1 93.5 37.5 171.5
         Apr 68.1 133.3 53.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 136.6 0.0 79.8 38.0 174.7
         May 69.3 140.3 52.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 138.4 0.1 85.9 38.1 176.5         June 69.5 139.3 52.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 141.2 0.1 81.5 38.5 179.7
         July 71.1 149.5 53.0 0.1 − 0.0 0.1 142.6 0.1 92.0 38.9 181.6
         Aug 74.1 155.6 53.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 145.2 0.0 98.9 39.4 184.7         Sep 74.0 148.4 52.6 0.0 0.2 0.0 − 145.2 0.0 90.9 39.0 184.3
         Oct 75.1 149.4 55.1 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 145.1 0.1 95.2 39.0 184.2
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem forof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 − 20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8 2003          Apr 
− 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 − 5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May
− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 − 2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          June
− 10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 − 10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          July
− 4.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 8.9 − 0.9 − 4.5 + 0.6 + 9.4          Aug − 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 6.3 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.4 − + 3.8 − 6.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.3          Oct 
+ 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 3.9 − 4.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.9          Nov 
− 1.7 + 29.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − + 16.7 + 13.6 − 2.3 + 0.8 + 17.3          Dec 
− 10.9 − 2.9
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − + 11.5 − 20.0 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 12.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 5.9 − 13.2 + 11.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 9.6 + 11.6 − 9.9 + 0.5 − 9.1          Mar 
− 1.9 − 1.5 + 10.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 7.3 + 2.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.7          Apr 
+ 9.3 − 4.7 + 7.9 − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 5.5 + 6.8 − 0.3 + 10.5          May+ 0.6 + 11.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − 0.4 + 6.1 + 6.2 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 8.6          June
− 3.1 + 20.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 12.8 − 3.0 + 1.7 + 8.0          July
− 7.4 + 8.2
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 11.8 − 3.9 − 7.7 + 0.3 + 12.0          Aug 
− 1.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 − 4.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.2          Sep 
− 0.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.1          Oct 
− 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − + 4.6 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 4.0          Nov − 0.3 + 7.8
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.7 + 5.1 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 5.7          Dec 
− 7.7 + 7.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 20.6 − 14.9 − 5.9 + 0.6 + 21.1 2005          Jan 
− 9.7 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 8.9 + 18.5 − 13.6 + 0.9 − 8.0          Feb 
− 0.4 + 1.2 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 4.7 − 3.7 + 1.3 + 3.7          Mar 
+ 1.9 + 0.4 + 4.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 − 1.1 − 2.9 + 2.0 + 11.1          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 6.9 − 4.5 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 7.7          May
− 0.2 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.3 − 9.4 − 3.1 + 1.5 + 8.8          June
+ 6.5 + 24.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 9.8 + 13.9 + 4.7 + 2.4 + 12.1          July
+ 12.2 + 11.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 12.3 + 1.9 + 12.1          Aug − 0.7 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.9          Sep 
+ 3.1 − 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 15.2 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 1.3          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6 2003          Apr 
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May
− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          June
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          July
− 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 2.5 + 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.1 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.8 − 7.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 − − 0.2 − + 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.2 + 0.6          Oct 
+ 0.4 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.7          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 16.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.1 − + 4.4 + 0.0 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 4.2          Dec 
− 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 0.8 − 9.8 + 9.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 2.6          Mar + 0.5 − 11.8 + 7.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 2.4 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 2.5 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 3.1          May+ 0.2 + 14.9 − 2.4 + 0.1 − + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 2.9          June
− 1.0 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 1.3          July
− 2.5 + 9.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 3.5          Aug + 0.1 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.3 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 + 0.8          Sep 
− 0.1 − 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.7          Nov 
− 0.0 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 1.6          Dec 
− 2.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 5.1 2005          Jan 
− 2.5 − 6.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 2.0 + 0.0 − 5.3 + 0.4 − 1.6          Feb 
− 0.0 + 7.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.7 − 0.4 + 0.4          Mar 
+ 0.4 − 12.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 13.7 + 0.5 + 3.2          Apr 
+ 1.3 + 7.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.7 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 0.1 + 1.8          May+ 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 0.4 + 3.3          June
+ 1.7 + 10.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.4 + 1.8          July
+ 3.0 + 6.1 + 0.9 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.5 + 3.1          Aug − 0.2 − 7.2 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.4 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          Oct 
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingeuro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2005 Mar                  4 906.9 125.2 151.8 23.1 128.6 18.2 7.9 7.9 −
                              11 905.4 125.1 151.9 22.9 129.0 18.3 7.6 7.6 −
                              18 912.7 125.0 151.8 22.4 129.4 19.3 8.1 8.1 −
                              24 926.4 124.9 150.1 22.4 127.7 18.8 8.9 8.9 −
         Apr                  1 3 927.2 3 128.1 3 155.9 3 22.9 3 133.0 3 19.1 9.3 9.3 −
                                8 927.2 128.0 156.5 22.8 133.7 19.6 8.7 8.7 −
                              15 922.2 128.0 154.9 22.7 132.2 20.0 8.7 8.7 −
                              22 934.5 128.0 154.6 22.6 132.0 20.5 9.1 9.1 −
                              29 934.5 127.4 155.9 22.5 133.4 20.5 9.7 9.7 −
         May                 6 927.1 127.4 155.1 22.2 132.8 21.3 8.9 8.9 −
                              13 922.9 127.4 155.7 22.4 133.3 20.3 8.9 8.9 −
                              20 929.8 127.3 156.2 22.3 133.9 20.1 8.8 8.8 −
                              27 927.8 127.3 155.1 22.3 132.8 20.2 9.0 9.0 −
         June                 3 940.2 127.1 155.6 22.3 133.3 20.1 9.4 9.4 −
                              10 938.0 127.0 155.2 22.2 133.0 20.4 9.0 9.0 −
                              17 940.8 126.8 152.4 21.3 131.0 20.9 9.3 9.3 −
                              24 967.9 126.7 153.0 21.3 131.6 20.3 9.0 9.0 −
2005 July                 1 3 988.4 3 138.5 3 162.6 3 22.2 3 140.4 3 21.0 9.2 9.2 −
                                8 988.7 138.4 162.5 22.2 140.3 20.9 8.8 8.8 −
                              15 979.5 138.3 161.6 22.0 139.6 21.6 9.6 9.6 −
                              22 989.7 138.1 161.0 20.5 140.5 21.2 10.4 10.4 −
                              29 996.8 138.1 159.6 20.5 139.1 21.5 9.6 9.6 −
         Aug                  5 994.9 138.0 160.4 20.2 140.2 21.5 9.5 9.5 −
                              12 987.8 137.9 159.3 20.2 139.1 21.6 9.5 9.5 −
                              19 984.1 137.8 159.9 20.2 139.7 21.6 9.6 9.6 −
                              26 992.3 137.8 159.5 20.1 139.4 21.6 9.5 9.5 −
         Sep                  2 977.0 137.8 159.7 19.9 139.8 22.0 9.4 9.4 −
                                9 979.0 137.8 158.1 19.8 138.2 21.9 9.0 9.0 −
                              16 964.2 137.8 159.4 19.8 139.6 21.0 9.2 9.2 −
                              23 974.2 137.8 160.7 19.6 141.1 21.2 9.1 9.1 −
                              30 3 996.0 3 149.9 3 160.0 19.4 3 140.6 22.0 9.0 9.0 −
         Oct                  7 991.0 149.8 161.3 19.4 141.9 21.2 9.0 9.0 −
                              14 983.4 149.7 160.0 19.4 140.6 21.4 9.2 9.2 −
                              21 998.6 149.6 161.3 19.3 142.0 21.1 8.5 8.5 −
                              28 1 003.5 149.2 160.2 19.3 140.9 21.4 8.7 8.7 −
         Nov                  4 998.6 149.1 161.2 19.3 142.0 20.8 8.2 8.2 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2003          Dec 3 267.7 36.5 3 40.1 7.6 3 32.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2004          Jan 258.1 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 258.2 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 256.2 3 38.3 3 41.5 7.6 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 268.0 38.3 42.1 7.9 34.2 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 276.6 38.3 41.5 7.8 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 290.3 3 35.8 3 41.2 7.4 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 295.9 35.8 40.4 7.4 33.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 284.2 35.8 39.8 7.4 32.4 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 283.6
3 36.7 3 39.1 7.0 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 293.7 36.7 38.2 7.0 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 298.6 36.7 38.4 6.9 31.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 293.5 3 35.5 3 35.8 6.5 3 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
2005          Jan 287.9 35.5 36.2 6.5 29.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 300.1 35.5 35.7 6.4 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 294.6 3 36.4 3 37.4 6.1 3 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 299.0 36.4 37.0 6.1 30.9 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 304.6 36.4 37.2 6.2 31.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 310.7 3 39.8 3 38.9 5.8 3 33.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 317.5 39.8 38.6 5.0 33.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 315.3 39.8 37.6 5.0 32.6 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 325.0 3 43.3 39.5 5.0 34.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 324.6 43.3 39.3 5.0 34.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
360.0 275.0 85.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.2 76.4 41.3 123.0 2005 Mar                  4
357.5 272.5 85.0 − − − 0.0 3.2 77.7 41.3 122.9                               11
361.5 276.5 85.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.5 78.8 41.3 123.4                               18
376.1 291.0 85.0 − − 0.1 0.0 2.9 79.7 41.3 123.7                               24
366.8 276.0 90.0 − − 0.7 0.0 2.7 79.7 41.2 3 124.4          Apr                  1
365.0 275.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.0 80.7 41.2 124.5                                 8
360.5 270.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.1 80.7 41.2 125.2                               15
372.0 282.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.0 80.1 41.2 126.0                               22
370.5 280.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.9 79.8 41.2 126.5                               29
363.2 273.0 90.0 − − 0.2 0.0 3.0 80.1 41.2 126.9          May                  6
357.5 267.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.8 81.1 41.2 128.1                               13
362.5 272.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.0 82.4 41.2 128.3                               20
361.2 271.0 90.0 − − 0.2 0.0 2.8 82.9 41.2 128.1                               27
372.0 281.5 90.0 − − 0.5 0.0 2.5 83.2 41.2 129.0          June                  3
369.0 279.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.5 84.0 41.2 129.7                               10
373.6 283.5 90.0 − − 0.1 0.0 2.9 83.4 41.2 130.3                               17
400.1 310.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.1 3.1 84.2 41.2 130.3                               24
398.2 308.0 90.0 − − 0.2 0.0 3.2 85.7 40.7 3 129.3 2005 July                  1
397.5 307.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.9 87.4 40.7 129.6                                 8
388.5 298.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.2 85.6 40.7 130.5                               15
398.5 308.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.4 85.9 40.7 130.4                               22
407.0 317.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.3 85.7 40.8 131.3                               29
404.0 314.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.1 85.9 40.8 131.6          Aug                  5
398.0 308.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.8 86.5 40.8 131.5                               12
393.0 303.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.3 86.3 40.8 131.8                               19
400.0 310.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.2 87.6 40.8 132.2                               26
383.0 293.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.3 88.7 40.8 132.4          Sep                  2
384.5 294.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.4 89.9 40.8 133.6                                 9
369.5 279.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.6 89.6 40.8 133.5                               16
377.6 287.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.6 90.1 40.8 133.5                               23
384.0 293.5 90.0 − − 0.5 0.0 3.4 90.9 40.7 3 136.2                               30
378.0 288.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.7 91.6 40.8 135.7          Oct                  7
371.0 281.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.2 91.8 40.8 136.2                               14
386.0 296.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.4 91.8 40.8 136.1                               21
391.5 301.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.3 92.3 40.8 136.3                               28
384.5 294.0 90.0 − − 0.5 0.0 2.8 92.9 40.8 138.3          Nov                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
162.3 129.9 32.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0 2003          Dec 
157.4 117.4 40.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0 2004          Jan 
157.6 109.9 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 
141.7 94.1 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 30.1          Mar 
153.7 104.3 49.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.1          Apr 
173.2 123.7 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          May189.4 139.9 49.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          June
196.0 145.1 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
184.8 135.3 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Aug 173.6 127.4 45.6 − − 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.5          Sep 
195.1 148.1 46.9 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0          Oct 
199.8 153.5 46.0 − − 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0          Nov 190.4 143.0 47.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Dec 
185.1 134.3 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.3 2005          Jan 
205.2 151.7 53.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 
184.4 129.9 52.1 − − 2.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 31.7          Mar 
201.7 148.2 53.5 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Apr 
190.8 139.3 51.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 35.6          May208.1 151.2 55.6 − − 1.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2          June
215.3 163.4 51.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
194.5 142.6 51.9 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 38.6          Aug 211.2 156.0 54.8 − − 0.4 − 0.1 − 4.4 26.1          Sep 
203.0 148.6 54.2 − − 0.2 − 0.1 − 4.4 34.2          Oct 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2005 Mar                  4 906.9 493.6 142.4 142.3 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 72.4 65.5 6.9
                              11 905.4 494.6 144.6 144.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 67.6 60.8 6.8
                              18 912.7 495.5 147.1 146.7 0.4 − − − 0.1 − 69.8 62.9 6.8
                              24 926.4 501.7 144.0 144.0 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 81.9 74.9 7.1
         Apr                  1 5 927.2 500.9 142.2 142.1 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 75.1 68.1 7.0
                                8 927.2 502.9 142.2 142.1 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 72.4 65.4 7.0
                              15 922.2 502.3 143.4 143.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 67.7 60.6 7.0
                              22 934.5 502.1 143.7 143.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 79.6 72.5 7.1
                              29 934.5 507.0 139.3 138.9 0.4 − − 0.0 0.1 − 77.6 70.6 7.0
         May                 6 927.1 512.7 146.5 146.1 0.3 − − − 0.1 − 56.6 49.6 6.9
                              13 922.9 513.5 141.8 141.8 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 57.2 50.2 7.0
                              20 929.8 510.9 148.0 147.9 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 59.3 52.5 6.9
                              27 927.8 511.9 144.3 144.2 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 61.0 54.3 6.6
         June                 3 940.2 517.1 146.0 145.9 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 66.1 59.2 6.9
                              10 938.0 519.1 144.9 144.9 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 62.7 55.7 7.1
                              17 940.8 519.7 147.5 147.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 62.9 55.8 7.1
                              24 967.9 520.4 146.6 146.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 90.8 83.8 6.9
2005 July                 1 5 988.4 526.0 154.0 154.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 75.7 68.6 7.1
                                8 988.7 530.3 148.1 147.9 0.2 − − − 0.3 − 77.8 70.7 7.0
                              15 979.5 531.4 149.7 149.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 65.6 58.6 7.0
                              22 989.7 530.2 150.8 150.8 0.0 − − − 0.3 − 75.2 68.3 6.9
                              29 996.8 533.8 145.2 145.0 0.2 − − 0.0 0.1 − 84.9 77.9 6.9
         Aug                  5 994.9 537.5 152.4 152.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 71.2 64.2 7.0
                              12 987.8 536.8 150.9 150.8 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 67.9 61.0 6.9
                              19 984.1 532.5 149.5 149.5 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 68.5 61.4 7.1
                              26 992.3 527.7 150.4 150.3 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 80.4 73.4 7.0
         Sep                  2 977.0 530.9 146.7 146.7 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 63.5 56.4 7.1
                                9 979.0 532.0 151.5 151.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 61.5 54.6 6.9
                              16 964.2 530.4 151.4 151.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 47.0 39.5 7.5
                              23 974.2 528.9 148.1 148.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 60.2 52.9 7.4
                              30 5 996.0 533.2 145.2 145.1 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 65.4 57.9 7.6
         Oct                  7 991.0 536.3 154.3 154.1 0.2 − − − 0.2 − 48.2 40.3 7.9
                              14 983.4 535.4 150.9 150.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 46.4 38.6 7.8
                              21 998.6 533.3 149.4 149.3 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 63.7 56.3 7.4
                              28 1 003.5 536.2 150.3 150.2 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 65.3 57.6 7.6
         Nov                  4 998.6 539.7 149.1 148.9 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 56.3 48.9 7.4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2003          Dec 5 267.7 121.4 44.6 44.5 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.6 0.1 0.5
2004          Jan 258.1 112.4 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Feb 258.2 113.3 36.8 36.7 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Mar 
5 256.2 115.0 31.0 31.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.4 0.4
         Apr 268.0 117.7 38.3 38.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         May 276.6 120.8 43.4 43.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         June
5 290.3 122.3 36.6 36.6 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 295.9 126.0 39.3 39.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Aug 284.2 125.2 41.4 40.9 0.4 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 283.6 126.5 40.1 40.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 293.7 128.2 35.5 35.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov 298.6 129.5 48.3 48.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Dec 
5 293.5 136.3 41.3 41.2 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2005          Jan 287.9 132.3 40.8 40.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Feb 300.1 133.0 40.2 40.2 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Mar 
5 294.6 136.1 38.1 38.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.3
         Apr 299.0 137.9 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         May 304.6 139.4 41.3 41.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         June
5 310.7 142.6 34.6 33.7 0.8 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         July 317.5 145.2 39.7 39.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Aug 315.3 143.5 39.0 39.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Sep 
5 325.0 145.0 38.8 38.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Oct 324.6 146.2 37.4 37.3 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of thisfinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
8.3 0.3 9.4 9.4 − 5.6 51.6 − 64.8 58.3 2005 Mar                  4
8.2 0.4 9.8 9.8 − 5.6 51.3 − 64.8 58.4                               11
8.4 0.4 11.2 11.2 − 5.6 51.6 − 64.8 58.1                               18
9.0 0.4 9.2 9.2 − 5.6 51.5 − 64.8 58.1                               24
8.9 0.2 9.8 9.8 − 5.7 5 54.0 − 5 72.0 58.2          Apr                  1
8.9 0.2 10.9 10.9 − 5.7 53.7 − 72.0 58.2                                 8
8.9 0.3 9.6 9.6 − 5.7 54.0 − 72.0 58.2                               15
8.9 0.3 10.0 10.0 − 5.7 54.0 − 72.0 58.2                               22
9.2 0.4 10.9 10.9 − 5.7 54.2 − 72.0 58.2                               29
9.4 0.4 10.9 10.9 − 5.7 54.7 − 72.0 58.2          May                  6
9.3 0.3 10.4 10.4 − 5.7 54.3 − 72.0 58.2                               13
9.5 0.3 10.7 10.7 − 5.7 55.1 − 72.0 58.2                               20
10.4 0.2 9.8 9.8 − 5.7 54.0 − 72.0 58.3                               27
10.2 0.2 10.3 10.3 − 5.7 54.2 − 72.0 58.3          June                  3
9.8 0.2 10.4 10.4 − 5.7 54.7 − 72.0 58.3                               10
10.1 0.3 8.8 8.8 − 5.7 55.5 − 72.0 58.3                               17
9.9 0.4 8.5 8.5 − 5.7 55.1 − 72.0 58.3                               24
9.7 0.3 5 9.1 5 9.1 − 5.9 5 56.9 − 5 92.3 58.3 2005 July                  1
9.9 0.3 8.9 8.9 − 5.9 56.6 − 92.3 58.3                                 8
10.0 0.4 8.7 8.7 − 5.9 57.0 − 92.3 58.3                               15
10.0 0.2 9.0 9.0 − 5.9 57.4 − 92.3 58.3                               22
10.1 0.2 8.0 8.0 − 5.9 57.9 − 92.3 58.3                               29
10.2 0.3 8.9 8.9 − 5.9 57.8 − 92.3 58.3          Aug                  5
10.2 0.3 7.7 7.7 − 5.9 57.3 − 92.3 58.3                               12
10.3 0.4 8.1 8.1 − 5.9 58.3 − 92.3 58.3                               19
10.3 0.2 8.0 8.0 − 5.9 58.7 − 92.3 58.3                               26
11.3 0.5 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 59.0 − 92.3 58.4          Sep                  2
10.7 0.2 7.2 7.2 − 5.9 59.2 − 92.3 58.4                                 9
10.6 0.3 7.7 7.7 − 5.9 60.1 − 92.3 58.4                               16
10.3 0.3 9.5 9.5 − 5.9 60.0 − 92.3 58.4                               23
11.1 0.2 10.4 10.4 − 5.9 5 62.3 − 5 103.7 58.4                               30
10.6 0.2 10.9 10.9 − 5.9 62.2 − 103.7 58.4          Oct                  7
10.8 0.3 9.3 9.3 − 5.9 62.2 − 103.7 58.4                               14
10.9 0.2 10.4 10.4 − 5.9 62.4 − 103.7 58.4                               21
11.2 0.2 9.8 9.8 − 5.9 62.3 − 103.7 58.4                               28
11.4 0.6 9.9 9.9 − 5.9 63.5 − 103.7 58.4          Nov                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
7.7 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.4 5 10.5 44.6 5 29.1 5.0 2003          Dec 
7.3 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 11.4 48.1 29.1 5.0 2004          Jan 
7.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.4 12.7 49.2 29.1 5.0          Feb 
6.5 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.5 10.8 50.4 5 32.2 5.0          Mar 
6.2 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 10.9 52.3 32.2 5.0          Apr 5.8 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 11.5 53.3 32.2 5.0          May5.6 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 32.2 53.9
5 29.3 5.0          June
5.9 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.5 30.3 55.6 29.3 5.0          July5.8 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 15.2 58.6 29.3 5.0          Aug 5.6 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4 12.0 60.9 29.6 5.0          Sep 
5.9 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 24.1 62.3 29.6 5.0          Oct 
5.6 0.0 1.5 1.5 − 1.4 13.9 63.1 29.6 5.0          Nov 5.9 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4
5 9.7 63.4 5 27.8 5.0          Dec 
3.5 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 64.5 27.8 5.0 2005          Jan 
3.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.4 21.0 65.8 27.8 5.0          Feb 3.2 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 9.4 67.9
5 30.1 5.0          Mar 
3.4 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 68.8 30.1 5.0          Apr 3.5 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.4 9.6 71.3 30.1 5.0          May3.3 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.5 13.0 72.0
5 35.9 5.0          June
3.5 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 10.8 72.6 35.9 5.0          July3.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.5 10.5 74.1 35.9 5.0          Aug 3.5 0.0 4.1 4.1 − 1.5 11.0 76.4
5 39.2 5.0          Sep 
3.4 0.0 4.0 4.0 − 1.5 11.0 76.5 39.2 5.0          Oct 
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.0
1997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.22004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2003          Dec 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004          Jan 6,424.2 13.2 2,084.1 1,713.6 1,101.3 612.4 370.4 278.3 92.1 3,329.8 3,078.3 2,489.0 2,230.4
         Feb 6,448.7 13.2 2,100.2 1,722.7 1,101.9 620.8 377.5 282.5 94.9 3,341.8 3,081.9 2,483.5 2,230.2         Mar 6,506.7 12.7 2,106.5 1,725.6 1,098.7 626.9 380.9 282.2 98.7 3,370.4 3,102.9 2,491.9 2,228.9
         Apr 6,568.8 12.9 2,132.5 1,749.7 1,115.1 634.6 382.9 282.4 100.4 3,381.2 3,110.1 2,506.6 2,230.4
         May 6,583.5 13.8 2,163.3 1,771.6 1,127.6 644.0 391.7 289.0 102.7 3,369.7 3,101.0 2,497.0 2,229.7         June 6,551.3 13.1 2,150.2 1,746.3 1,112.7 633.6 404.0 299.5 104.4 3,360.1 3,090.4 2,483.2 2,229.4
         July 6,574.9 13.2 2,171.4 1,765.1 1,130.4 634.7 406.3 303.2 103.0 3,368.3 3,093.3 2,477.1 2,225.1
         Aug 6,567.5 13.2 2,167.2 1,759.6 1,126.4 633.2 407.6 301.7 105.9 3,357.7 3,086.1 2,470.3 2,221.8         Sep 6,597.6 13.2 2,165.1 1,759.6 1,123.8 635.8 405.6 295.9 109.6 3,361.1 3,091.0 2,478.1 2,229.6
         Oct 6,627.7 13.9 2,178.3 1,759.5 1,128.1 631.4 418.7 306.4 112.4 3,371.9 3,094.1 2,475.6 2,226.8
         Nov 6,683.4 13.3 2,197.3 1,771.7 1,137.6 634.1 425.6 310.6 115.1 3,376.5 3,098.8 2,482.9 2,233.7         Dec 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005          Jan 6,672.1 13.2 2,182.9 1,749.0 1,124.6 624.4 433.9 312.6 121.4 3,377.2 3,092.4 2,478.8 2,216.8
         Feb 6,717.4 12.8 2,220.8 1,752.4 1,124.4 628.1 468.3 339.6 128.7 3,372.3 3,080.6 2,474.4 2,219.9         Mar 6,723.0 13.6 2,215.6 1,757.1 1,123.7 633.4 458.5 325.4 133.0 3,379.8 3,084.0 2,475.2 2,216.6
         Apr 6,908.4 13.1 2,275.5 1,814.0 1,174.8 639.1 461.6 325.9 135.6 3,442.4 3,127.8 2,518.2 2,217.5
         May 6,892.0 13.8 2,284.9 1,808.0 1,167.1 640.9 477.0 338.3 138.6 3,422.1 3,107.1 2,500.9 2,220.6         June 6,851.3 13.6 2,279.3 1,788.0 1,141.2 646.8 491.4 348.5 142.8 3,392.9 3,073.3 2,482.3 2,222.8
         July 6,871.3 14.0 2,282.1 1,797.8 1,149.9 647.8 484.3 342.6 141.7 3,395.6 3,082.2 2,488.3 2,224.4
         Aug 6,849.5 13.5 2,270.8 1,787.5 1,143.7 643.8 483.3 338.5 144.8 3,397.7 3,085.8 2,491.0 2,225.3         Sep 6,873.8 14.0 2,271.5 1,770.2 1,129.9 640.3 501.3 353.7 147.6 3,403.1 3,089.8 2,505.3 2,238.3
 Changes 1
1997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 − 0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.21999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.12002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.42004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 4.1 − 26.5 − 18.1 − 15.5 − 2.6 − 8.5 − 9.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 4.6 − 6.6
         Feb 26.4 0.0 17.3 9.0 0.4 8.6 8.3 4.2 4.1 16.6 8.0 − 1.1 2.5         Mar 47.2 − 0.5 6.2 2.8 − 3.2 6.0 3.4 − 0.3 3.7 28.7 21.7 9.0 − 0.9
         Apr 57.9 0.1 26.1 24.1 16.4 7.7 1.9 0.2 1.7 10.8 7.1 14.6 1.4
         May 19.5 1.0 30.7 21.9 12.5 9.3 8.9 6.5 2.3 − 10.4 − 8.2 − 8.8 0.1         June − 33.2 − 0.7 − 13.0 − 25.2 − 14.9 − 10.3 12.2 10.6 1.7 − 9.2 − 10.1 − 13.2 0.2
         July 21.8 0.1 23.4 18.8 17.7 1.2 4.6 3.7 0.9 6.4 3.3 − 5.7 − 3.8
         Aug − 5.3 − 0.1 − 7.0 − 5.5 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 4.3 2.9 − 7.4 − 6.8 − 6.4 − 2.9         Sep 39.6 0.0 − 1.7 0.3 − 2.6 2.9 − 1.9 − 5.8 3.8 5.3 6.3 9.2 9.4
         Oct 36.3 0.7 13.2 0.0 4.3 − 4.3 13.2 10.4 2.7 11.7 3.9 − 1.8 − 2.0
         Nov 67.8 − 0.6 19.3 12.2 9.5 2.7 7.1 4.2 2.9 6.1 5.7 8.3 7.9         Dec − 55.0 1.9 − 19.2 − 17.8 − 11.2 − 6.6 − 1.4 − 4.2 2.9 − 14.0 − 12.4 0.2 − 6.6
2005          Jan 40.4 − 2.0 8.2 − 1.2 1.7 − 2.9 9.4 6.2 3.2 20.9 11.7 1.9 − 4.1
         Feb 50.7 − 0.4 38.0 3.6 − 0.2 3.8 34.5 27.1 7.4 − 2.2 − 9.4 − 2.0 5.4         Mar − 0.5 0.8 − 4.9 4.9 − 0.6 5.6 − 9.9 − 14.2 4.3 8.5 4.8 2.2 − 1.9
         Apr 183.0 − 0.5 59.4 56.8 51.1 5.7 2.6 0.5 2.1 63.2 44.4 43.7 1.4
         May − 32.5 0.7 9.2 − 6.1 − 7.7 1.6 15.3 12.4 2.9 − 21.7 − 21.4 − 18.0 2.6         June − 46.3 − 0.2 − 5.5 − 19.8 − 25.9 6.1 14.4 10.2 4.2 − 27.7 − 32.1 − 16.7 4.4
         July 22.1 0.4 2.9 10.0 8.8 1.2 − 7.0 − 5.9 − 1.1 3.9 10.0 7.0 2.7
         Aug − 19.9 − 0.5 − 11.3 − 10.5 − 6.2 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 3.6 2.7 2.8 4.3 3.4 1.3         Sep 23.9 0.5 0.7 − 17.3 − 13.8 − 3.4 18.0 15.2 2.8 5.5 4.2 14.3 13.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996
300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003          Dec 
258.6 589.2 440.2 149.0 251.5 132.0 61.2 119.5 25.6 93.9 843.7 683.0 153.4 2004          Jan 
253.3 598.3 432.1 166.2 260.0 136.0 65.2 124.0 25.0 99.0 839.5 680.6 154.0          Feb 
263.0 611.0 444.9 166.2 267.4 137.6 67.0 129.8 24.9 104.9 859.1 697.2 158.0          Mar 
276.2 603.5 437.2 166.3 271.1 139.4 68.8 131.7 25.8 105.9 884.1 722.1 158.1          Apr 
267.2 604.1 431.4 172.7 268.7 137.6 66.3 131.1 25.8 105.3 875.0 707.5 161.6          May253.9 607.2 426.2 181.0 269.7 138.4 66.5 131.3 25.7 105.6 867.0 695.6 160.8          June
252.0 616.2 434.4 181.8 275.0 142.3 67.7 132.8 26.4 106.4 860.7 687.7 161.3          July
248.4 615.8 429.9 186.0 271.6 137.7 65.0 133.9 26.2 107.6 871.6 696.5 157.9          Aug 248.5 612.9 425.8 187.1 270.1 138.8 65.3 131.3 25.7 105.6 898.6 725.5 159.6          Sep 
248.7 618.5 430.9 187.7 277.8 139.9 65.1 137.9 25.5 112.4 901.8 727.5 161.9          Oct 
249.1 615.9 426.6 189.3 277.7 143.1 67.5 134.6 25.7 108.9 931.8 756.6 164.6          Nov 255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4          Dec 
262.0 613.6 427.5 186.2 284.9 145.2 66.3 139.7 25.8 113.9 935.8 762.7 163.1 2005          Jan 
254.5 606.2 422.2 184.0 291.7 147.6 66.6 144.1 26.5 117.5 945.4 771.9 166.2          Feb 
258.6 608.8 420.7 188.2 295.8 144.6 61.4 151.2 28.0 123.2 955.0 780.7 159.1          Mar 
300.7 609.6 422.8 186.8 314.6 151.8 65.5 162.9 30.7 132.1 1,013.1 835.4 164.2          Apr 
280.3 606.2 421.7 184.5 315.0 155.2 66.0 159.8 31.1 128.7 1,001.3 821.1 169.8          May259.5 591.0 416.2 174.7 319.6 162.6 68.4 157.0 31.2 125.8 1,001.0 815.4 164.5          June
263.9 593.9 418.9 175.0 313.4 158.5 64.2 154.9 32.4 122.5 1,014.5 830.9 165.1          July
265.8 594.8 417.0 177.8 311.9 157.7 62.9 154.2 31.1 123.0 1,002.5 815.7 164.9          Aug 267.0 584.6 410.7 173.9 313.2 161.0 65.5 152.2 32.6 119.6 1,020.0 829.8 165.2          Sep 
Changes 1
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 − 2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 199830.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
2.1 3.6 0.6 3.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 2.7 − 0.4 3.1 31.9 32.1 − 16.1 2004          Jan 
− 3.7 9.1 − 8.0 17.2 8.6 4.0 4.0 4.6 − 0.6 5.2 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 4.8          Feb 
9.8 12.7 12.7 − 0.0 7.0 1.4 1.6 5.6 − 0.1 5.8 10.7 8.6 2.1          Mar 
13.2 − 7.5 − 7.6 0.1 3.6 1.8 1.7 1.9 0.9 1.0 21.3 21.2 − 0.4          Apr 
− 8.9 0.6 − 5.9 6.5 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 2.4 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.4 − 10.4 2.6          May
− 13.4 3.1 − 5.2 8.3 0.9 0.8 0.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.2 − 8.9 − 14.1 − 1.5          June
− 1.8 9.0 8.2 0.8 3.1 1.6 1.2 1.5 0.8 0.8 − 8.2 − 9.8 0.1          July
− 3.6 − 0.3 − 4.5 4.2 − 0.6 − 1.7 0.1 1.1 − 0.1 1.2 12.6 10.6 − 3.6          Aug − 0.2 − 2.9 − 4.1 1.1 − 0.9 1.5 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 34.9 36.0 0.9          Sep 
0.2 5.7 5.1 0.6 7.9 1.3 − 0.0 6.6 − 0.1 6.7 9.0 7.5 1.7          Oct 0.4 − 2.6 − 4.2 1.6 0.4 3.5 2.7 − 3.1 0.3 − 3.4 41.1 38.9 1.9          Nov 6.8 − 12.5 − 4.1 − 8.4 − 1.7 − 2.0 − 5.1 0.3 0.0 0.3 − 26.1 − 19.1 2.4          Dec 
6.0 9.8 4.4 5.4 9.1 4.4 4.1 4.8 − 0.0 4.8 25.6 21.0 − 12.4 2005          Jan 
− 7.4 − 7.4 − 5.2 − 2.2 7.2 2.6 0.4 4.6 0.8 3.8 14.6 13.6 0.7          Feb 
4.1 2.6 − 1.6 4.2 3.7 − 3.3 − 5.4 7.0 1.4 5.6 4.1 3.7 − 9.0          Mar 
42.2 0.8 2.2 − 1.4 18.8 7.2 4.1 11.6 2.8 8.9 56.7 53.5 4.2          Apr 
− 20.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 2.3 − 0.3 2.9 0.1 − 3.2 0.3 − 3.5 − 25.7 − 27.2 5.0          May
− 21.0 − 15.4 − 5.7 − 9.8 4.4 7.3 2.3 − 2.9 0.1 − 3.0 − 5.5 − 10.6 − 7.4          June
4.3 3.0 2.7 0.3 − 6.1 − 4.1 − 4.2 − 2.0 1.2 − 3.2 15.0 16.9 − 0.2          July2.1 0.9 − 1.9 2.8 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 1.3 0.5 − 10.2 − 12.8 − 0.7          Aug 1.2 − 10.2 − 6.3 − 3.9 1.3 3.2 2.5 − 1.9 1.4 − 3.4 17.6 14.2 − 0.4          Sep 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 End of year or month
 
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.5
1997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.32004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2003          Dec 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004          Jan 6,424.2 1,461.1 1,212.6 248.5 2,209.5 2,082.6 630.5 861.5 233.5 590.6 502.1 80.9 9.5
         Feb 6,448.7 1,454.4 1,215.7 238.7 2,212.3 2,085.6 633.8 860.3 230.1 591.5 503.3 79.5 10.8         Mar 6,506.7 1,459.9 1,203.6 256.3 2,214.3 2,088.7 632.9 864.4 230.9 591.4 503.5 77.8 13.1
         Apr 6,568.8 1,482.1 1,227.2 254.9 2,219.0 2,097.2 641.7 864.4 225.6 591.2 504.3 74.5 10.6
         May 6,583.5 1,496.5 1,251.2 245.4 2,229.4 2,105.3 640.0 874.8 232.1 590.6 504.6 75.8 9.4         June 6,551.3 1,501.5 1,256.7 244.8 2,228.7 2,101.4 640.7 870.7 224.0 590.0 504.3 76.7 12.4
         July 6,574.9 1,524.1 1,274.6 249.6 2,225.5 2,103.0 634.7 877.7 228.7 590.6 504.9 72.9 9.7
         Aug 6,567.5 1,510.2 1,259.4 250.8 2,231.7 2,105.7 636.2 878.2 228.9 591.3 505.6 74.0 9.8         Sep 6,597.6 1,495.3 1,242.0 253.3 2,237.6 2,113.6 645.8 876.6 225.6 591.2 505.7 76.0 14.4
         Oct 6,627.7 1,534.8 1,277.0 257.7 2,237.1 2,118.1 646.8 879.0 225.7 592.3 506.3 73.5 9.6
         Nov 6,683.4 1,536.2 1,285.2 250.9 2,257.3 2,140.2 672.5 874.6 218.3 593.0 506.2 73.4 11.9         Dec 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005          Jan 6,672.1 1,524.6 1,258.7 265.9 2,275.1 2,155.3 665.1 886.0 225.7 604.1 516.4 74.7 13.5
         Feb 6,717.4 1,552.6 1,282.7 269.8 2,278.4 2,160.3 670.4 885.0 220.6 605.0 516.7 73.7 13.2         Mar 6,723.0 1,524.3 1,255.2 269.1 2,271.6 2,159.7 672.3 882.2 214.5 605.2 516.5 70.9 11.5
         Apr 6,908.4 1,630.5 1,328.3 302.2 2,278.7 2,170.3 675.5 890.0 220.1 604.8 516.6 66.5 10.7
         May 6,892.0 1,593.7 1,303.3 290.5 2,285.4 2,177.0 683.3 889.6 223.2 604.1 516.4 67.9 12.4         June 6,851.3 1,577.1 1,301.4 275.7 2,288.5 2,179.8 691.4 885.7 218.6 602.7 515.6 67.4 14.5
         July 6,871.3 1,581.0 1,311.5 269.5 2,288.7 2,185.9 694.8 889.3 220.8 601.9 515.5 61.1 11.6
         Aug 6,849.5 1,557.4 1,290.4 267.0 2,290.1 2,188.2 697.1 890.7 221.6 600.4 515.0 60.2 11.0         Sep 6,873.8 1,553.7 1,290.8 262.9 2,296.1 2,192.6 703.0 890.7 221.9 598.9 515.0 61.5 12.4
 Changes 1
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 − 3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 − 0.31998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.42004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 11.1 − 17.2 6.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 8.2 − 13.1 − 14.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 0.2
         Feb 26.4 − 6.3 3.3 − 9.6 3.0 3.1 4.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 0.9 1.2 − 1.4 1.3         Mar 47.2 4.0 − 12.6 16.6 1.6 2.8 − 1.1 4.0 0.7 − 0.1 0.1 − 1.8 2.3
         Apr 57.9 21.5 23.2 − 1.7 4.7 8.7 8.6 0.3 − 5.1 − 0.2 0.9 − 3.5 − 2.6
         May 19.5 15.3 24.2 − 8.9 10.7 8.3 − 1.5 10.4 6.6 − 0.6 0.3 1.4 − 1.2         June − 33.2 4.8 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 4.0 0.3 − 3.7 − 7.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.8 3.0
         July 21.8 22.3 17.8 4.6 − 3.3 1.5 − 5.7 6.6 4.3 0.7 0.5 − 3.9 − 2.7
         Aug − 5.3 − 13.5 − 15.0 1.4 7.3 3.7 1.5 1.5 0.2 0.7 0.7 1.2 0.1         Sep 39.6 − 13.1 − 16.8 3.6 6.5 8.2 9.9 − 1.5 − 3.2 − 0.1 0.1 2.2 4.7
         Oct 36.3 41.0 35.4 5.6 − 0.1 4.8 1.3 2.4 0.1 1.1 0.5 − 2.3 − 4.8
         Nov 67.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.4 20.9 22.6 26.6 − 4.8 − 7.2 0.8 − 0.1 0.2 2.4         Dec − 55.0 − 5.9 − 13.7 7.8 8.5 9.6 − 26.1 25.3 21.7 10.4 9.3 − 1.3 − 3.1
2005          Jan 40.4 − 6.2 − 12.9 6.7 10.0 6.2 18.6 − 13.0 − 14.4 0.7 0.9 2.4 4.6
         Feb 50.7 28.8 24.3 4.5 3.6 5.3 5.4 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.8 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2         Mar − 0.5 − 29.7 − 28.1 − 1.5 − 6.9 − 0.5 2.3 − 1.7 − 5.5 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.8
         Apr 183.0 105.9 73.0 32.9 7.0 10.6 3.2 7.7 5.6 − 0.3 0.1 − 4.4 − 0.8
         May − 32.5 − 39.7 − 26.1 − 13.6 5.8 6.1 7.4 − 0.5 2.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 1.0 1.6         June − 46.3 − 17.7 − 2.2 − 15.5 2.8 2.6 7.9 − 4.0 − 4.6 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 2.0
         July 22.1 4.3 10.2 − 6.0 3.0 6.2 3.4 3.6 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 2.8
         Aug − 19.9 − 23.2 − 21.0 − 2.3 1.0 2.3 2.3 1.5 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6         Sep 23.9 − 3.7 0.4 − 4.1 6.0 4.3 5.9 − 0.1 0.3 − 1.5 0.1 1.2 1.4
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  
7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 200359.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003          Dec 
67.5 11.9 3.8 3.1 45.9 45.2 16.6 36.4 1,493.9 128.6 585.4 336.8 284.5 2004          Jan 
64.9 10.9 3.8 3.1 47.3 45.8 17.5 36.2 1,503.7 127.3 604.4 332.1 288.0          Feb 
60.9 10.1 3.7 3.1 47.8 46.2 18.2 35.8 1,532.3 134.7 623.1 330.1 292.8          Mar 
60.2 10.2 3.7 3.1 47.2 46.2 17.3 35.7 1,549.0 135.3 632.3 333.7 299.7          Apr 
62.7 12.3 3.7 3.0 48.3 45.8 17.0 36.1 1,559.8 132.3 612.5 336.4 295.8          May60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 50.7 47.1 16.1 36.0 1,554.2 123.6 582.1 337.5 295.2          June
59.6 9.7 3.6 3.0 49.7 47.2 16.8 39.9 1,558.7 120.0 576.6 339.4 293.9          July
60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 52.1 47.6 14.2 41.1 1,562.9 120.7 577.2 336.9 293.3          Aug 58.0 8.2 3.5 2.9 48.1 46.0 18.1 38.7 1,575.0 119.7 595.6 335.1 302.2          Sep 
60.4 10.3 3.5 2.9 45.6 42.6 21.2 37.4 1,569.6 118.0 582.7 335.5 309.3          Oct 
58.1 8.0 3.4 2.8 43.7 41.3 22.0 35.6 1,569.6 116.1 616.1 332.3 314.4          Nov 59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2          Dec 
58.0 8.5 3.2 2.7 45.2 41.8 25.1 31.3 1,559.9 110.2 615.0 333.1 308.1 2005          Jan 
57.3 8.0 3.2 2.7 44.3 41.5 27.3 31.6 1,570.4 117.3 623.3 332.7 301.2          Feb 
56.3 8.0 3.1 2.6 41.0 40.5 28.3 34.0 1,585.3 114.8 639.3 334.6 305.7          Mar 
52.8 9.3 3.1 2.5 41.8 39.4 28.6 34.4 1,606.5 117.7 680.0 341.0 308.7          Apr 
52.5 9.5 2.9 2.5 40.5 39.2 28.3 33.9 1,614.2 115.8 686.9 343.8 305.7          May50.4 8.5 2.5 2.1 41.3 39.7 28.3 34.2 1,637.1 118.2 636.2 343.9 306.0          June
47.0 7.4 2.5 2.1 41.7 41.4 26.7 35.7 1,640.1 116.2 645.0 346.2 307.9          July
46.8 7.7 2.4 2.0 41.6 40.5 30.6 35.8 1,639.6 118.1 640.3 344.0 311.6          Aug 46.6 7.6 2.4 2.0 42.1 40.8 28.0 35.6 1,637.2 118.0 657.6 343.9 321.6          Sep 
Changes 1
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 − 6.2 − 6.2 − − 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 199724.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 1.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.9 2.5 − 0.3 4.2 − 2.7 12.7 − 3.9 − 13.9 2004          Jan 
− 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.6 0.9 − 0.2 10.0 − 1.3 19.6 − 4.6 4.1          Feb 
− 4.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.8 − 0.5 23.2 7.5 14.0 − 2.5 6.7          Mar 
− 0.8 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 15.5 0.3 6.1 3.5 7.7          Apr 
2.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.3 12.0 − 3.0 − 16.7 2.8 − 4.6          May
− 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 8.6 − 31.0 1.1 − 0.6          June
− 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 0.0 0.6 3.9 3.8 − 3.6 − 7.0 1.8 − 0.4          July
1.1 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 0.4 − 2.5 1.2 5.2 0.6 2.1 − 3.3 − 1.8          Aug 
− 2.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.6 3.9 − 2.4 15.6 − 1.0 23.8 − 1.2 6.4          Sep 
2.5 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 3.4 3.1 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 9.2 0.8 5.3          Oct 
− 2.1 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.3 0.8 − 1.8 3.8 − 1.9 40.6 − 2.6 2.6          Nov 
1.9 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 7.2 − 4.1 − 11.3 0.7 − 33.4 − 2.4 0.7          Dec 
− 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.3 10.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.6 29.6 2.9 − 5.9 2005          Jan 
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.2 0.3 12.3 0.9 11.5 − 0.0 − 7.9          Feb 
− 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 1.0 1.0 2.4 12.9 − 2.5 12.2 1.5 6.0          Mar 
− 3.6 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.8 − 1.1 0.3 0.4 20.1 3.0 39.7 5.7 3.9          Apr 
− 0.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 2.4 − 1.9 − 3.1 1.7 1.1          May− 2.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.8 0.5 − 0.1 0.3 21.0 2.4 − 54.2 − 0.3 1.9          June
− 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.4 1.7 − 1.5 1.5 1.5 − 2.1 10.0 2.5 0.8          July
− 0.2 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.2 3.9 0.1 0.0 1.9 − 3.6 − 2.1 4.0          Aug − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.3 0.1 17.3 − 0.2 9.7          Sep 
footnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than four with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data collected the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published together with money
separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the deposits market fund shares. 
with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt securities
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2005          Apr 2,140 6,952.1 53.1 2,740.8 1,977.2 748.8 3,749.8 492.7 2,550.2 3.0 694.5 142.8 265.6
         May 2,136 6,935.7 55.2 2,746.7 1,977.1 756.0 3,720.3 480.8 2,555.1 2.9 674.0 142.4 271.1         June 2,129 6,892.6 50.5 2,756.9 1,974.7 767.6 3,678.9 462.6 2,558.7 2.8 648.4 142.6 263.7
         July 2,118 6,910.8 55.7 2,759.6 1,979.9 764.4 3,687.8 463.4 2,566.1 3.0 649.8 143.7 264.0
         Aug 2,110 6,890.4 53.3 2,735.2 1,956.1 762.2 3,693.0 457.6 2,568.8 2.9 656.9 143.5 265.5         Sep 2,098 6,913.3 54.7 2,751.1 1,970.1 763.3 3,698.8 465.0 2,572.6 2.8 651.9 144.5 264.3
Commercial banks 5
2005          Aug 249 1,931.7 17.2 760.3 622.8 134.4 976.8 256.4 546.0 1.5 168.2 76.3 101.1         Sep 249 1,924.8 19.6 762.0 626.4 132.6 968.2 261.7 540.5 1.5 160.2 76.1 98.9
   Big banks 6
2005          Aug 5 1,246.9 9.3 490.0 415.7 71.5 609.2 175.2 306.7 1.2 122.6 63.8 74.6         Sep 5 1,229.7 10.8 474.8 401.2 70.9 607.1 177.3 308.1 1.2 117.2 63.8 73.2
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2005          Aug 161 583.7 7.3 216.5 157.4 58.8 324.1 60.9 218.6 0.3 43.1 12.4 23.4         Sep 161 586.7 8.1 226.2 168.0 58.0 317.5 61.8 211.7 0.3 42.9 12.3 22.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2005          Aug 83 101.0 0.7 53.7 49.7 4.0 43.5 20.3 20.6 0.0 2.5 0.1 3.1         Sep 83 108.5 0.8 61.0 57.2 3.8 43.6 22.7 20.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 3.1
Landesbanken
2005          Aug 12 1,371.4 3.4 766.6 590.2 166.6 531.4 66.0 371.0 0.3 92.7 27.4 42.7         Sep 12 1,378.7 3.6 772.7 594.6 167.2 532.8 66.4 372.7 0.3 91.8 27.9 41.8
Savings banks
2005          Aug 463 995.5 18.0 232.7 77.0 155.0 708.5 65.3 542.4 0.7 100.1 15.7 20.6         Sep 463 994.3 17.4 229.6 74.2 154.6 710.8 66.3 542.5 0.6 101.3 15.7 20.8
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2005          Aug 2 225.7 1.1 155.0 105.0 48.6 50.4 11.4 19.2 0.0 19.6 11.7 7.5         Sep 2 224.9 0.8 155.3 104.9 49.2 49.8 11.7 19.0 0.0 19.0 11.7 7.4
Credit cooperatives
2005          Aug 1,317 578.2 12.0 148.8 60.7 86.4 394.3 38.5 311.2 0.3 44.0 6.1 16.9         Sep 1,305 578.3 11.8 146.2 58.5 86.1 396.6 39.6 311.9 0.3 44.5 6.7 17.0
Mortgage banks
2005          Aug 25 888.5 1.0 240.7 143.4 97.3 628.3 11.6 472.0 − 144.7 0.8 17.7         Sep 25 906.9 0.9 250.7 152.6 98.1 635.8 10.1 479.5 − 146.2 0.8 18.7
Building and loan associations
2005          Aug 26 189.3 0.0 47.6 34.1 13.4 122.7 1.4 103.1 . 18.2 0.4 18.5         Sep 26 190.1 0.1 48.1 34.4 13.5 123.0 1.4 103.2 . 18.4 0.4 18.6
Special purpose banks
2005          Aug 16 710.1 0.6 383.5 322.9 60.5 280.5 6.9 203.8 − 69.5 5.1 40.5         Sep 16 715.3 0.5 386.5 324.5 61.8 282.0 7.9 203.3 − 70.5 5.1 41.1
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2005          Aug 125 446.2 4.0 188.4 137.0 51.3 241.2 42.6 144.0 0.2 54.4 0.9 11.8         Sep 125 469.9 5.1 206.8 155.7 51.0 244.5 45.2 145.4 0.2 53.6 0.9 12.8
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2005          Aug 42 345.2 3.4 134.6 87.4 47.2 197.7 22.3 123.4 0.2 51.8 0.8 8.7         Sep 42 361.4 4.3 145.7 98.5 47.2 200.9 22.6 124.7 0.1 53.5 0.8 9.7
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,035.5 317.8 1,717.6 2,583.3 749.4 352.2 764.8 132.3 614.2 524.1 102.7 1,653.6 291.4 388.2 2005          Apr 
2,007.7 319.3 1,688.3 2,587.8 754.4 354.7 763.2 121.0 613.3 523.7 102.3 1,662.5 292.8 384.9          May
1,962.1 299.6 1,662.4 2,569.0 759.7 329.4 766.3 104.0 611.4 522.5 102.3 1,684.4 294.2 382.9          June
1,967.2 263.8 1,703.3 2,575.2 760.5 335.9 766.6 106.7 610.5 522.4 101.6 1,687.4 296.7 384.4          July
1,945.1 271.8 1,673.3 2,574.0 759.7 339.1 765.4 107.7 608.9 521.8 100.7 1,684.7 296.9 389.6          Aug 1,945.9 267.5 1,678.3 2,590.0 772.6 345.1 764.9 115.5 607.4 521.9 100.0 1,681.7 297.8 397.9          Sep 
Commercial banks 5
732.1 146.5 585.5 759.4 355.0 169.7 120.6 85.5 105.3 96.6 8.7 210.3 91.9 138.1 2005          Aug 
717.3 148.0 569.2 767.4 365.8 170.7 118.7 91.7 103.4 95.3 8.8 207.9 91.5 140.8          Sep 
Big banks 6
481.7 107.3 374.3 460.7 179.5 125.6 84.1 80.8 71.2 69.2 0.4 160.5 50.8 93.3 2005          Aug 
452.5 105.8 346.7 471.3 194.1 122.2 84.0 86.8 70.6 68.7 0.4 160.4 50.8 94.6          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
176.7 25.6 151.1 277.9 163.4 37.2 34.8 4.7 34.1 27.4 8.3 49.8 38.2 41.1 2005          Aug 
184.2 28.6 155.6 274.6 159.2 41.3 32.9 4.9 32.8 26.5 8.3 47.6 37.8 42.5          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
73.7 13.6 60.1 20.7 12.1 6.9 1.7 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 2.9 3.7 2005          Aug 
80.5 13.5 67.0 21.4 12.5 7.1 1.8 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 2.9 3.7          Sep 
Landesbanken
444.9 67.2 377.7 329.5 53.2 43.4 215.5 13.1 16.7 15.8 0.6 480.8 58.4 57.9 2005          Aug 
452.3 64.9 387.4 333.0 55.3 45.5 214.9 13.8 16.7 15.8 0.6 476.9 59.0 57.5          Sep 
Savings banks
217.1 3.8 213.3 638.5 206.8 47.0 12.1 − 305.0 252.8 67.5 42.8 49.6 47.6 2005          Aug 
216.8 5.0 211.8 636.2 206.1 46.8 12.0 − 304.6 253.3 66.8 42.4 49.7 49.3          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
133.4 37.2 96.2 37.5 7.7 11.6 17.1 9.1 − − 1.1 33.4 10.2 11.1 2005          Aug 
131.5 34.7 96.9 38.3 7.9 12.3 17.0 9.6 − − 1.1 33.5 10.2 11.3          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
76.8 2.0 74.9 413.0 133.0 51.0 25.2 − 181.5 156.2 22.2 30.9 32.4 25.1 2005          Aug 
75.6 2.2 73.4 412.9 132.6 51.6 25.1 − 181.4 156.2 22.1 30.5 32.4 26.8          Sep 
Mortgage banks
162.1 6.5 155.6 155.5 1.1 5.6 148.6 − − − 0.1 525.0 22.0 23.8 2005          Aug 
168.4 6.7 161.6 161.1 1.9 6.5 151.6 0.3 1.0 0.9 0.1 529.1 22.4 26.0          Sep 
Building and loan associations
28.0 1.4 26.6 120.8 0.3 0.9 119.0 − 0.4 0.4 0.3 6.2 7.4 26.8 2005          Aug 
27.9 1.7 26.2 121.2 0.3 0.9 119.3 − 0.4 0.4 0.3 6.3 7.4 27.2          Sep 
Special purpose banks
150.7 7.2 143.5 119.8 2.5 9.8 107.3 − − − 0.2 355.3 25.1 59.2 2005          Aug 
156.1 4.3 151.8 119.8 2.6 10.7 106.2 − − − 0.2 355.0 25.3 59.2          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
146.7 26.1 120.6 161.5 101.8 19.1 30.3 0.1 6.9 6.7 3.5 101.0 15.4 21.7 2005          Aug 
169.2 30.6 138.5 163.8 102.2 20.7 30.5 0.1 6.8 6.7 3.5 99.0 15.5 22.5          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
73.0 12.5 60.5 140.8 89.7 12.2 28.6 0.1 6.9 6.7 3.4 101.0 12.5 17.9 2005          Aug 
88.7 17.1 71.6 142.3 89.7 13.6 28.8 0.1 6.8 6.6 3.5 99.0 12.6 18.8          Sep 
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Commercial by foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. —
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank 8Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- included in the categories ”Regional banks and other commercial banks”bank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum of the banks majority-owned and ”Mortgage banks”. 
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2004          Apr 12.6 39.4 1,673.5 1,070.7 0.0 8.6 594.1 2.4 3,022.9 2,664.3 3.2 3.0 350.5
         May 13.5 41.4 1,693.0 1,081.2 0.0 7.7 604.1 2.4 3,013.6 2,657.8 3.2 2.9 347.8         June 12.8 37.3 1,671.7 1,070.0 0.0 7.7 594.0 2.3 3,003.5 2,652.5 3.0 3.6 342.6
         July 12.8 39.9 1,687.1 1,082.3 0.0 6.9 597.9 2.3 3,007.5 2,656.4 3.0 6.8 340.2
         Aug 12.8 41.6 1,679.0 1,075.6 0.0 7.4 596.0 2.3 3,001.8 2,648.6 3.0 5.9 343.3         Sep 12.9 41.4 1,680.5 1,073.4 0.0 7.9 599.2 2.1 3,006.1 2,652.3 2.9 3.9 345.9
         Oct 13.5 37.0 1,686.4 1,083.4 0.0 6.5 596.4 2.2 3,009.8 2,654.8 2.8 4.5 346.7
         Nov 12.8 47.5 1,688.7 1,083.2 0.0 6.7 598.8 2.2 3,014.6 2,657.4 2.8 3.9 349.4         Dec 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005          Jan 12.9 44.6 1,671.9 1,075.0 0.0 7.2 589.7 2.2 3,009.9 2,641.6 2.6 2.6 362.1
         Feb 12.5 44.1 1,676.1 1,075.3 0.0 7.7 593.0 2.2 3,000.5 2,639.5 2.5 2.5 355.0         Mar 13.2 39.3 1,684.2 1,077.9 0.0 8.5 597.7 2.2 3,003.9 2,634.7 2.5 1.4 364.2
         Apr 12.7 39.9 1,739.1 1,127.1 0.1 8.8 603.1 2.2 3,042.4 2,637.8 2.5 1.9 399.2
         May 13.3 41.4 1,732.2 1,118.4 0.1 8.1 605.7 2.1 3,022.1 2,639.8 2.4 2.2 376.7         June 13.1 36.9 1,716.9 1,097.2 0.0 8.3 611.4 2.1 2,988.9 2,636.7 2.3 1.5 347.5
         July 13.5 41.7 1,719.7 1,100.0 0.0 8.7 611.0 2.1 2,998.0 2,640.9 2.5 2.1 352.6
         Aug 13.0 39.7 1,712.2 1,095.9 0.0 9.8 606.5 2.1 3,001.1 2,639.8 2.4 2.0 356.9         Sep 13.6 40.7 1,693.9 1,081.2 0.1 10.5 602.2 2.1 3,004.7 2,646.6 2.3 1.1 354.5
Changes *
1996 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 − 2.0 + 4.7 + 10.61997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 − 1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 36.51998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.11999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2004          Apr + 0.1 + 8.3 + 16.9 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 7.7 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.6
         May + 0.9 + 2.0 + 19.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7         June − 0.7 − 4.1 − 21.3 − 11.2 − − 0.1 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 10.1 − 5.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 5.2
         July + 0.1 + 2.5 + 15.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 3.9 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 2.3
         Aug − 0.0 + 1.7 − 8.1 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 3.1         Sep + 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 2.2 − + 0.6 + 3.4 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Oct + 0.7 − 4.5 + 5.9 + 10.0 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.8
         Nov − 0.7 + 10.5 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.7         Dec + 2.1 − 6.3 − 9.0 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 15.4 − 15.5 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.6
2005          Jan − 2.1 + 3.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 − − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.1 + 8.6 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 11.1
         Feb − 0.3 − 0.5 + 4.2 + 0.4 − + 0.5 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 9.3 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 7.1         Mar + 0.7 − 4.8 + 8.1 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 4.6 − 0.0 + 3.3 − 4.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 9.2
         Apr − 0.5 + 0.7 + 54.9 + 49.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 38.5 + 3.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 35.0
         May + 0.6 + 1.5 − 6.9 − 8.7 − − 0.7 + 2.5 − 0.0 − 20.2 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.5         June − 0.2 − 4.5 − 15.2 − 21.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 5.9 − 0.0 − 33.4 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 29.3
         July + 0.4 + 4.8 + 2.8 + 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 5.1
         Aug − 0.6 − 2.0 − 7.5 − 4.1 − + 1.1 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.3         Sep + 0.6 + 1.0 − 18.3 − 14.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 4.3 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 6.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 2.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). — 5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). — 6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. — 7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). — 8Up to December
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). — 4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. — 11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month *
 
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
2.0 54.4 106.6 1,227.8 143.2 1,084.5 0.1 27.7 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 591.2 99.2 39.0 2004          Apr 
2.0 54.3 107.1 1,252.0 134.2 1,117.7 0.1 27.6 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 590.6 98.9 39.0          May
2.0 54.9 106.7 1,257.3 129.2 1,128.0 0.1 28.4 2,158.3 643.5 826.2 590.0 98.7 38.8          June
1.0 55.9 103.5 1,275.2 125.7 1,149.4 0.1 29.5 2,160.4 637.6 833.6 590.6 98.6 38.7          July
1.0 55.8 102.2 1,260.2 122.4 1,137.7 0.1 29.4 2,161.3 639.1 832.2 591.3 98.7 38.6          Aug 1.0 57.0 102.6 1,243.1 124.4 1,118.6 0.1 30.7 2,169.7 649.5 830.4 591.2 98.6 38.5          Sep 
1.0 59.9 101.8 1,278.0 129.8 1,148.1 0.1 30.5 2,172.9 647.2 834.6 592.3 98.8 41.8          Oct 
1.0 60.2 101.8 1,286.4 148.4 1,137.9 0.1 30.4 2,195.4 673.0 830.7 593.1 98.7 42.1          Nov 1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7          Dec 
1.0 61.7 100.9 1,259.0 141.3 1,117.6 0.1 30.2 2,209.2 665.9 841.3 604.1 97.8 43.7 2005          Jan 
1.0 61.3 98.3 1,282.7 130.4 1,152.2 0.1 29.7 2,216.1 670.9 843.1 605.0 97.2 43.7          Feb 
1.0 60.9 98.0 1,255.8 131.3 1,124.4 0.1 29.6 2,218.8 673.0 845.1 605.2 95.5 43.4          Mar 
1.0 60.7 103.6 1,328.8 163.2 1,165.5 0.1 29.5 2,226.4 675.9 850.4 604.9 95.2 43.3          Apr 
1.0 60.7 103.2 1,303.9 151.6 1,152.3 0.1 29.7 2,232.9 683.9 850.1 604.1 94.8 43.0          May1.0 58.5 102.8 1,301.6 139.3 1,162.3 0.1 27.0 2,238.9 692.5 849.3 602.7 94.5 43.5          June
0.0 58.2 104.0 1,312.0 121.9 1,190.0 0.1 26.9 2,245.4 695.2 854.4 601.9 93.8 43.4          July
0.0 58.2 103.7 1,290.1 128.7 1,161.3 0.1 27.3 2,250.3 698.1 858.8 600.4 93.0 43.5          Aug 
− 56.6 104.7 1,290.6 121.0 1,169.6 0.1 27.2 2,254.3 704.0 858.9 598.9 92.4 42.0          Sep 
Changes *
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996− 5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 23.2 + 3.2 + 20.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 2004          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 24.2 − 9.0 + 33.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          May
− + 0.6 − 0.4 + 5.3 − 5.0 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2          June
− 0.9 + 1.1 − 3.1 + 17.9 − 3.4 + 21.4 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 5.5 + 7.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1          July+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 3.4 − 11.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1          Aug 
− + 1.2 + 0.4 − 17.1 + 2.0 − 19.1 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 8.3 + 10.4 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− + 3.0 − 0.8 + 34.9 + 5.4 + 29.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 4.2 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 3.3          Oct 
− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 8.4 + 18.6 − 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 22.5 + 26.4 − 4.5 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.3          Nov 
− 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 15.3 − 28.8 + 13.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 26.0 + 21.5 + 10.4 − 0.3 − 0.4          Dec 
− − 0.1 + 1.3 − 12.1 + 21.7 − 33.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.2 + 19.0 − 9.9 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.1 2005          Jan 
− − 0.2 − 2.6 + 23.7 − 10.9 + 34.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 7.0 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 27.1 + 0.9 − 28.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.1 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.3          Mar 
− − 0.2 + 5.6 + 72.9 + 31.8 + 41.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 2.9 + 5.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1          Apr − + 0.0 − 0.3 − 24.8 − 11.6 − 13.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 8.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.3          May
− 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 2.3 − 12.3 + 10.0 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 6.1 + 8.6 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
− 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 10.6 − 17.4 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 6.4 + 2.7 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1          July
− − 0.0 − 0.2 − 21.9 + 6.8 − 28.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 4.4 − 1.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          Aug 
− 0.0 − 1.6 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 7.7 + 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 5.9 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.4          Sep 
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. — 17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. — 13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). — 20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer
one month. — 16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2004          Apr 0.3 825.5 720.4 557.5 162.9 2.2 102.8 1.7 625.8 376.7 137.2 239.5 5.0 244.0
         May 0.3 836.2 725.7 570.5 155.2 1.9 108.7 1.7 613.1 361.8 123.6 238.2 5.0 246.3         June 0.4 835.5 722.1 566.9 155.2 2.1 111.3 1.7 618.9 363.8 124.6 239.1 7.3 247.8
         July 0.4 829.1 717.3 557.4 159.9 1.7 110.1 1.6 626.0 366.1 127.6 238.5 9.7 250.2
         Aug 0.4 828.3 714.6 557.9 156.7 1.8 112.0 1.6 635.0 372.4 134.6 237.7 12.1 250.5         Sep 0.3 854.3 735.7 578.0 157.7 2.0 116.6 1.7 634.5 375.5 141.8 233.6 10.6 248.4
         Oct 0.3 873.8 751.8 595.5 156.3 2.0 120.0 1.7 639.0 370.9 139.0 231.8 11.1 257.1
         Nov 0.4 898.7 772.7 619.1 153.7 2.0 124.0 1.6 652.7 386.3 158.1 228.2 11.3 255.2         Dec 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005          Jan 0.3 918.7 784.9 627.9 156.9 3.3 130.5 1.5 656.3 380.8 151.7 229.1 9.8 265.7
         Feb 0.3 962.5 821.3 660.8 160.5 3.5 137.7 1.5 662.7 381.2 152.9 228.3 7.7 273.8         Mar 0.4 969.4 821.6 657.3 164.3 4.5 143.4 1.5 659.3 372.1 139.4 232.7 5.1 282.0
         Apr 0.4 1,001.7 850.2 679.8 170.4 5.8 145.7 1.5 707.4 405.6 168.8 236.8 6.5 295.3
         May 0.4 1,014.5 858.7 681.6 177.1 5.4 150.4 1.5 698.2 396.5 155.0 241.5 4.3 297.3         June 0.5 1,040.0 877.6 693.9 183.7 6.2 156.2 1.5 690.0 385.1 141.2 243.9 4.0 300.9
         July 0.4 1,040.0 880.0 691.0 188.9 6.6 153.4 1.4 689.8 389.2 145.4 243.8 3.4 297.2
         Aug 0.5 1,023.0 860.2 668.5 191.7 7.0 155.8 1.5 691.9 387.1 144.0 243.0 4.8 300.0         Sep 0.4 1,057.2 889.0 690.2 198.8 7.1 161.1 1.5 694.1 391.4 142.7 248.7 5.4 297.4
Changes *
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.41997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 − 0.1 + 10.4 − 1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.91998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.01999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2004          Apr − + 20.3 + 18.4 + 17.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 5.6 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.3
         May + 0.0 + 13.0 + 7.5 + 14.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 + 5.8 − 0.0 − 9.7 − 12.7 − 13.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.0         June + 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.7
         July + 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.9 − 10.2 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.8 − 1.6 + 2.4 + 0.1
         Aug − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.5 − 1.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.5         Sep − 0.0 + 30.2 + 25.1 + 23.0 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 4.2 + 6.6 + 8.2 − 1.6 − 1.3 − 1.2
         Oct − 0.0 + 22.7 + 19.3 + 19.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 8.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 9.2
         Nov + 0.1 + 30.6 + 26.3 + 26.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 0.0 + 20.0 + 20.6 + 20.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.0         Dec − 0.2 − 4.9 − 8.3 − 9.4 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 18.6 − 20.1 − 20.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.8
2005          Jan + 0.1 + 21.8 + 17.6 + 16.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 19.7 + 12.6 + 13.5 − 0.9 − 1.3 + 8.4
         Feb − 0.0 + 46.4 + 39.0 + 34.9 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 7.2 − 0.0 + 9.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 8.7         Mar + 0.1 + 4.1 − 2.6 − 5.6 + 3.0 + 1.0 + 5.6 − − 6.5 − 11.7 − 14.2 + 2.5 − 2.5 + 7.7
         Apr − 0.0 + 31.5 + 27.8 + 21.9 + 5.8 + 1.3 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 47.4 + 33.2 + 29.3 + 3.8 + 1.3 + 12.9
         May + 0.1 + 4.7 + 0.7 − 4.1 + 4.8 − 0.5 + 4.4 + 0.0 − 17.7 − 16.0 − 16.0 + 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.5         June + 0.0 + 22.6 + 16.0 + 10.2 + 5.7 + 0.9 + 5.8 − 0.0 − 11.1 − 13.9 − 14.5 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 3.1
         July − 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.4 − 2.2 + 5.6 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 3.5
         Aug + 0.0 − 15.9 − 18.1 − 21.7 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 2.1         Sep − 0.1 + 32.2 + 26.8 + 20.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.6 − 1.8 + 4.5 + 0.6 − 3.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
9.6 39.3 646.0 127.7 518.3 403.7 114.6 0.5 323.8 56.9 266.8 106.6 160.2 0.9 2004          Apr 
9.6 39.4 616.9 114.2 502.7 389.0 113.8 0.5 325.2 62.9 262.4 102.3 160.0 0.9          May
9.6 38.9 603.8 129.4 474.4 360.2 114.2 0.5 310.2 60.6 249.6 90.0 159.7 0.9          June
9.7 39.2 598.6 123.8 474.8 359.8 115.1 0.5 309.9 54.1 255.8 96.6 159.1 0.9          July
9.7 39.3 594.3 106.8 487.5 371.5 116.0 0.5 318.7 57.2 261.5 102.7 158.8 0.9          Aug 9.7 38.8 609.9 128.7 481.2 366.3 115.0 0.5 325.3 64.8 260.5 98.6 161.9 0.8          Sep 
9.6 38.8 602.8 118.6 484.2 368.7 115.5 0.5 323.3 55.1 268.2 108.7 159.5 0.8          Oct 
9.7 38.1 617.6 140.9 476.7 363.1 113.6 0.5 333.5 62.3 271.2 114.8 156.4 0.8          Nov 9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8          Dec 
9.9 39.4 626.8 143.8 483.0 367.2 115.8 0.6 345.9 67.1 278.7 124.8 153.9 0.8 2005          Jan 
10.8 39.2 630.3 131.4 498.9 385.2 113.6 0.6 353.5 73.3 280.2 127.3 153.0 1.8          Feb 
10.8 39.2 656.8 149.4 507.4 393.9 113.5 0.6 333.1 68.1 264.9 111.9 153.0 1.8          Mar 
10.7 39.3 706.7 154.6 552.1 436.1 116.0 0.6 356.9 73.5 283.4 137.5 145.9 1.7          Apr 
10.6 39.2 703.7 167.7 536.0 419.3 116.7 0.7 354.9 70.5 284.4 136.9 147.5 1.6          May10.5 39.8 660.4 160.3 500.1 373.2 126.9 0.6 330.1 67.2 262.9 112.7 150.2 1.5          June
10.4 39.8 655.2 141.9 513.3 387.5 125.8 0.8 329.8 65.2 264.6 115.8 148.8 1.1          July
10.7 39.8 655.0 143.1 511.9 385.9 126.0 0.7 323.7 61.7 262.0 115.5 146.5 1.0          Aug 10.7 39.8 655.2 146.5 508.7 381.8 127.0 0.7 335.8 68.6 267.2 120.7 146.5 0.9          Sep 
Changes *
− 2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 − 1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 − 2.0 1996+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.0 − 0.6 + 3.8 − 9.1 + 12.8 + 13.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 5.1 + 1.3 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 0.0 2004          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 26.7 − 13.1 − 13.6 − 13.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 − 3.3 − 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0          May
+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 13.5 + 15.2 − 28.7 − 29.1 + 0.3 − − 15.1 − 2.3 − 12.8 − 12.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          June
+ 0.1 + 0.1 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 6.6 + 5.4 + 6.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 16.9 + 13.5 + 12.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 3.1 + 6.4 + 6.2 + 0.2 − 0.0          Aug + 0.0 − 0.2 + 19.5 + 22.5 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 7.9 + 1.4 − 3.3 + 4.7 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 3.8 − 9.5 + 5.6 + 4.0 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 9.4 + 9.0 + 10.5 − 1.4 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 19.8 + 23.2 − 3.4 − 2.6 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 13.6 + 7.6 + 6.0 + 7.2 − 1.2 + 0.0          Nov + 0.2 + 1.5 − 10.2 − 53.1 + 42.8 + 42.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 19.3 − 25.4 + 6.1 + 9.5 − 3.4 + 0.0          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.3 + 17.4 + 55.9 − 38.4 − 40.0 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 30.7 + 30.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 2005          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 11.9 + 17.5 + 19.2 − 1.7 − + 9.0 + 6.3 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.9          Feb 
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 23.7 + 17.5 + 6.2 + 7.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 22.3 − 5.3 − 16.9 − 15.4 − 1.6 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 49.2 + 5.0 + 44.2 + 41.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 23.4 + 5.4 + 18.0 + 25.5 − 7.5 − 0.0          Apr 
− 0.1 − 0.6 − 10.1 + 12.0 − 22.1 − 21.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 6.9 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.1          May− 0.1 + 0.4 − 46.0 − 8.1 − 37.9 − 47.6 + 9.7 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 3.6 − 22.9 − 24.8 + 1.9 − 0.1          June
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 18.2 + 13.7 + 14.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 1.9 + 5.0 + 3.2 + 1.8 − 0.4          July
+ 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 3.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.0          Aug + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 3.0 − 4.5 − 5.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 11.1 + 6.8 + 4.3 + 4.9 − 0.7 − 0.2          Sep 
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). — 5Up capital supplied to branches abroad. — 8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 9Up to December 1998,
registered debt securities. — 6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). — 7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2004          Apr 3,022.9 2,667.5 346.1 304.0 303.3 0.7 42.2 39.9 2.3 2,676.8 2,116.1
         May 3,013.6 2,661.0 335.4 297.1 296.2 0.9 38.3 36.3 2.0 2,678.2 2,113.0         June 3,003.5 2,655.4 331.5 294.9 294.2 0.7 36.7 33.8 2.9 2,672.0 2,102.1
         July 3,007.5 2,659.4 335.7 287.6 287.0 0.6 48.2 42.0 6.2 2,671.7 2,104.4
         Aug 3,001.8 2,651.6 324.8 281.2 280.5 0.6 43.6 38.4 5.2 2,677.0 2,105.5         Sep 3,006.1 2,655.2 325.1 287.2 286.7 0.5 37.9 34.5 3.4 2,681.0 2,106.8
         Oct 3,009.8 2,657.6 330.2 283.5 282.9 0.6 46.8 42.8 3.9 2,679.6 2,108.6
         Nov 3,014.6 2,660.3 335.0 293.1 292.0 1.1 41.9 39.0 2.8 2,679.6 2,106.4         Dec 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005          Jan 3,009.9 2,644.2 323.6 279.1 278.5 0.6 44.4 42.5 2.0 2,686.3 2,117.7
         Feb 3,000.5 2,642.1 325.2 285.2 284.6 0.6 40.0 38.1 1.9 2,675.3 2,109.7         Mar 3,003.9 2,637.2 325.3 287.8 286.8 1.0 37.5 37.1 0.4 2,678.5 2,107.7
         Apr 3,042.4 2,640.3 328.8 285.7 284.6 1.1 43.1 42.3 0.8 2,713.6 2,147.6
         May 3,022.1 2,642.3 331.0 286.3 285.1 1.2 44.7 43.7 1.0 2,691.2 2,130.1         June 2,988.9 2,639.0 325.7 289.1 288.2 1.0 36.5 36.0 0.5 2,663.3 2,109.2
         July 2,998.0 2,643.3 323.1 284.0 283.0 1.0 39.1 38.0 1.1 2,674.9 2,120.4
         Aug 3,001.1 2,642.3 318.5 280.5 279.3 1.3 37.9 37.2 0.7 2,682.7 2,126.2         Sep 3,004.7 2,649.0 326.2 293.5 292.9 0.6 32.7 32.2 0.5 2,678.4 2,126.9
Changes *
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 282.5 + 219.91998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.31999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.02004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2004          Apr + 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.0 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 + 0.9 + 14.3 + 17.6
         May − 9.4 − 6.5 − 10.4 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 3.4         June − 10.1 − 5.6 − 3.7 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 + 0.9 − 6.4 − 11.2
         July + 4.0 + 4.0 + 4.2 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 11.5 + 8.2 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 2.3
         Aug − 5.7 − 7.9 − 10.9 − 6.4 − 6.5 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 3.6 − 0.9 + 5.3 + 1.1         Sep + 4.1 + 3.7 + 2.2 + 6.0 + 6.2 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.1
         Oct + 3.8 + 2.3 + 5.2 − 3.7 − 3.8 + 0.1 + 8.9 + 8.3 + 0.6 − 1.4 + 1.9
         Nov + 4.8 + 2.7 + 4.7 + 9.6 + 9.2 + 0.5 − 4.9 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 2.2         Dec − 15.4 − 15.6 − 14.1 − 9.3 − 9.0 − 0.2 − 4.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 1.4 + 6.2
2005          Jan + 8.6 − 2.5 + 2.7 − 4.7 − 4.5 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 7.2 + 0.2 + 5.9 + 3.4
         Feb − 9.3 − 2.2 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 6.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 8.0         Mar + 3.3 − 4.8 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 3.2 − 2.0
         Apr + 38.5 + 3.0 + 3.5 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 5.6 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 35.0 + 39.8
         May − 20.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 22.4 − 17.4         June − 33.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − 8.1 − 7.7 − 0.5 − 28.1 − 20.9
         July + 9.1 + 4.3 − 2.6 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 11.6 + 11.2
         Aug + 3.1 − 1.1 − 4.6 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 7.8 + 5.8         Sep + 3.1 + 6.3 + 7.4 + 12.6 + 13.2 − 0.6 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,6 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,927.1 194.7 1,732.5 189.0 47.4 560.7 397.2 34.9 362.3 161.5 2.0 7.0 2004          Apr 
1,933.6 197.1 1,736.4 179.5 47.4 565.1 394.9 34.6 360.3 168.3 2.0 6.9          May
1,935.2 198.2 1,737.0 166.9 48.1 569.9 392.3 34.4 357.9 175.7 2.0 6.8          June
1,938.2 199.0 1,739.2 166.2 49.2 567.3 392.3 34.1 358.2 174.0 1.0 6.7          July
1,941.3 200.2 1,741.1 164.2 49.1 571.5 391.3 33.9 357.4 179.1 1.0 6.7          Aug 1,942.9 199.2 1,743.7 163.9 50.3 574.2 391.2 34.5 356.7 182.0 1.0 6.7          Sep 
1,944.0 198.0 1,746.0 164.7 53.3 571.0 387.9 32.9 354.9 182.0 1.0 6.7          Oct 
1,941.7 195.6 1,746.1 164.7 53.5 573.2 387.5 32.9 354.6 184.7 1.0 6.7          Nov 1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5          Dec 
1,938.3 194.0 1,744.3 179.4 55.3 568.6 385.0 32.1 352.8 182.7 1.0 6.4 2005          Jan 
1,935.3 193.0 1,742.3 174.4 54.9 565.6 384.1 30.9 353.2 180.6 1.0 6.4          Feb 
1,929.8 192.3 1,737.5 178.0 54.6 570.8 383.5 31.7 351.8 186.3 1.0 6.3          Mar 
1,932.9 191.0 1,741.8 214.7 54.5 566.0 380.5 31.9 348.7 184.5 1.0 6.2          Apr 
1,935.5 191.0 1,744.5 194.6 54.5 561.1 378.0 31.2 346.8 182.1 1.0 6.2          May1,934.6 190.9 1,743.7 174.6 52.5 554.1 380.2 32.1 348.1 172.9 1.0 6.0          June
1,941.4 192.5 1,748.9 179.0 52.3 554.5 380.9 32.6 348.3 173.5 0.0 5.9          July
1,946.0 195.4 1,750.6 180.2 52.3 556.5 379.8 33.1 346.6 176.7 0.0 5.9          Aug 1,945.4 195.1 1,750.3 181.5 52.0 551.5 378.4 33.2 345.3 173.0 − 4.6          Sep 
Changes *
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 − 18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 13.4 − 0.5 − 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 2004          Apr 
+ 6.1 + 2.5 + 3.7 − 9.5 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 6.8 − − 0.0          May
+ 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 12.6 + 0.8 + 4.8 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 7.4 − − 0.2          June
+ 3.0 + 0.8 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.0          July
+ 3.1 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 5.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Aug + 1.6 − 0.9 + 2.6 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 3.0 − 3.2 − 3.3 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Oct 
− 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.7 − + 0.0          Nov − 2.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 8.8 − 0.1 − 7.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 − 0.2          Dec 
− 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.0 + 2.5 − 2.7 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 5.2 − − 0.1 2005          Jan 
− 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 4.9 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 2.1 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 5.5 − 0.8 − 4.7 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 5.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 3.1 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 36.7 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 3.1 − 1.8 − − 0.1          Apr 
+ 2.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 − 20.1 + 0.0 − 4.9 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 2.4 − − 0.0          May− 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 2.0 − 7.2 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 9.2 − 0.0 − 0.2          June
+ 6.8 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 4.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1          July
+ 4.6 + 2.9 + 1.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 3.2 − − 0.0          Aug − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 4.9 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 1.3          Sep 
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. — 6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. — 9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). — 10Excluding
possible. — 7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). — 11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. — 8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2002 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2003 2,241.6 1,124.5 1,083.3 867.1 216.2 1,252.2 335.1 151.0 37.2 59.0 152.3 32.1 54.4 54.4
2004          Sep 2,229.9 1,129.0 1,087.8 869.9 217.9 1,226.6 326.8 142.3 37.7 56.2 144.6 32.7 56.6 56.1
         Dec 2,224.2 1,127.7 1,086.0 869.7 216.3 1,211.6 320.4 136.7 37.1 53.0 141.4 31.9 56.1 60.0
2005          Mar 2,216.9 1,120.6 1,081.3 867.0 214.3 1,209.7 316.5 135.7 37.0 53.1 137.9 31.1 57.0 67.3
         June 2,223.1 1,133.4 1,082.7 880.1 202.6 1,210.8 314.3 135.8 36.6 52.0 136.5 31.5 58.2 70.1         Sep 2,238.5 1,143.8 1,087.9 890.9 197.0 1,218.3 312.8 134.5 37.3 50.9 134.1 32.2 57.6 79.7
 Short-term lending
2002 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.62003 313.9 − 14.1 − 14.1 266.7 8.9 46.6 4.2 13.2 55.9 3.9 8.0 25.8
2004          Sep 287.0 − 12.0 − 12.0 241.9 7.0 43.0 3.8 12.6 52.1 4.4 6.5 23.3
         Dec 283.4 − 12.5 − 12.5 239.3 7.6 40.9 3.5 11.1 52.9 3.6 5.9 26.4
2005          Mar 287.1 − 11.9 − 11.9 245.0 7.3 41.7 3.9 12.1 51.0 3.7 5.9 33.3
         June 288.4 − 11.6 − 11.6 246.2 6.9 42.4 3.5 11.4 50.1 3.9 6.4 35.1         Sep 293.1 − 11.7 − 11.7 250.2 7.1 41.9 4.0 10.9 48.0 4.0 6.5 42.1
 Medium-term lending
2002 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.82003 195.0 − 38.2 − 38.2 121.2 12.0 17.5 2.3 6.0 11.9 3.4 10.9 6.5
2004          Sep 199.2 − 39.2 − 39.2 124.2 12.2 17.6 2.7 5.8 11.7 3.3 11.8 7.2
         Dec 194.3 − 38.8 − 38.8 119.9 11.8 16.4 2.5 5.6 11.1 3.2 11.3 7.6
2005          Mar 192.3 − 38.3 − 38.3 118.9 11.7 16.0 2.1 5.4 11.0 3.0 11.4 7.9
         June 190.9 − 36.0 − 36.0 118.4 10.9 16.0 2.0 5.4 11.2 3.1 11.4 8.2         Sep 195.1 − 35.9 − 35.9 122.9 10.8 16.0 2.1 5.3 11.4 3.1 11.0 9.2
 Long-term lending
2002 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.02003 1,732.8 1,124.5 1,031.0 867.1 164.0 864.3 314.2 86.9 30.6 39.9 84.5 24.7 35.5 22.1
2004          Sep 1,743.7 1,129.0 1,036.5 869.9 166.7 860.5 307.6 81.6 31.2 37.8 80.8 24.9 38.3 25.7
         Dec 1,746.5 1,127.7 1,034.7 869.7 165.0 852.4 301.0 79.4 31.2 36.2 77.3 25.0 38.9 26.0
2005          Mar 1,737.5 1,120.6 1,031.1 867.0 164.1 845.7 297.6 78.0 31.0 35.6 75.9 24.4 39.6 26.0
         June 1,743.7 1,133.4 1,035.1 880.1 155.0 846.1 296.5 77.4 31.1 35.1 75.2 24.6 40.4 26.9         Sep 1,750.3 1,143.8 1,040.3 890.9 149.5 845.2 294.9 76.6 31.3 34.7 74.7 25.0 40.2 28.4
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2004          Q3 + 0.2 + 4.5 + 6.1 + 5.2 + 1.0 − 8.6 − 2.3 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.9         Q4 − 7.4 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 1.7 − 1.2 − 10.2 − 4.3 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 2.7 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 3.6
2005          Q1 − 7.3 − 9.2 − 4.6 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.5 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 6.4
         Q2 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 3.7 − 2.3 + 1.1 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 2.7         Q3 + 14.9 + 5.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 7.4 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 2.3 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 9.3
 Short-term lending
2004          Q3 − 7.5 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 8.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.8         Q4 − 3.6 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.6 + 3.1
2005          Q1 + 3.7 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 5.7 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 6.9
         Q2 + 1.3 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.8         Q3 + 4.3 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0
 Medium-term lending
2004          Q3 + 0.7 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1         Q4 − 4.3 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 3.5 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.5
2005          Q1 − 2.1 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1
         Q2 + 0.2 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1         Q3 + 4.0 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 4.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.2
 Long-term lending
2004          Q3 + 7.1 + 4.5 + 6.0 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 2.8         Q4 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 4.1 − 3.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
2005          Q1 − 8.9 − 9.2 − 3.5 − 4.4 + 0.9 − 6.7 − 3.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.4
         Q2 + 4.8 + 3.3 + 2.5 + 3.7 − 1.3 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.8         Q3 + 6.6 + 5.5 + 5.5 + 5.6 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.0
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5 2002
711.9 160.7 44.0 207.2 437.0 67.7 975.6 744.7 230.9 118.6 21.6 13.7 3.5 2003
700.4 166.5 43.9 203.0 426.8 64.6 989.9 757.8 232.1 122.5 20.4 13.4 3.2 2004          Sep 
695.5 163.7 42.5 204.2 419.0 61.7 999.4 762.4 237.0 129.2 19.9 13.2 3.2          Dec 
690.5 161.6 42.3 201.1 413.7 61.5 994.2 761.7 232.5 129.2 18.7 13.1 3.0 2005          Mar 
690.1 161.2 41.6 201.5 412.7 60.9 999.3 765.3 234.0 131.7 18.9 13.0 3.1          June
692.0 161.0 44.4 201.2 411.2 60.2 1,006.5 771.9 234.7 132.7 19.5 13.7 3.2          Sep 
Short-term lending
123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0 2002109.1 17.9 14.6 31.2 49.4 12.9 45.9 5.1 40.8 2.4 21.6 1.2 0.0 2003
96.2 16.8 12.3 27.5 45.8 12.4 43.7 5.0 38.7 2.3 20.4 1.4 0.0 2004          Sep 
95.0 15.8 11.5 27.6 44.4 11.4 43.0 4.9 38.0 2.3 19.9 1.1 0.0          Dec 
93.3 15.2 10.9 26.1 43.3 12.0 41.0 4.6 36.4 2.4 18.7 1.1 0.0 2005          Mar 
93.4 15.3 10.7 25.9 42.3 11.4 41.2 4.7 36.5 2.3 18.9 1.0 0.0          June
92.7 14.9 13.1 24.7 41.1 11.1 41.8 4.6 37.3 2.7 19.5 1.1 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1 200262.7 5.7 5.6 18.0 30.4 4.5 73.2 26.2 47.0 37.1 − 0.6 0.1 2003
63.9 6.7 6.7 17.7 30.0 4.0 74.5 26.9 47.6 38.3 − 0.5 0.1 2004          Sep 
62.3 6.5 6.5 17.2 29.6 3.9 73.8 26.9 46.9 37.7 − 0.5 0.1          Dec 
62.1 6.3 6.8 16.4 29.2 3.8 72.8 26.6 46.2 37.4 − 0.5 0.1 2005          Mar 
61.2 6.1 6.2 16.1 30.5 3.8 72.0 25.0 46.9 38.6 − 0.5 0.1          June
64.9 7.1 7.0 17.1 30.2 3.8 71.6 25.0 46.6 38.1 − 0.6 0.1          Sep 
Long-term lending
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4 2002540.0 137.1 23.8 158.0 357.2 50.4 856.5 713.4 143.1 79.1 − 11.9 3.4 2003
540.3 143.0 24.9 157.8 351.1 48.2 871.7 725.8 145.8 82.0 − 11.5 3.1 2004          Sep 
538.2 141.5 24.5 159.5 345.0 46.4 882.6 730.6 152.0 89.2 − 11.5 3.1          Dec 
535.2 140.0 24.6 158.6 341.3 45.7 880.4 730.5 149.8 89.4 − 11.5 3.0 2005          Mar 
535.5 139.8 24.6 159.6 340.0 45.6 886.1 735.6 150.5 90.8 − 11.5 3.0          June
534.4 139.0 24.2 159.4 339.9 45.3 893.1 742.3 150.8 91.9 − 12.0 3.1          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 2.8 + 1.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 − 1.8 − 1.6 + 8.7 + 8.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 2004          Q3
− 2.4 − 2.2 − 1.3 + 1.8 − 4.8 − 1.6 + 3.1 + 4.9 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1          Q4
− 4.2 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 5.3 − 0.2 − 5.2 − 0.6 − 4.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 2005          Q1
− 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.5 + 5.3 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1          Q2
+ 1.7 − 0.3 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 + 6.9 + 6.6 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.1          Q3
Short-term lending
− 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 2004          Q3
− 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 −          Q4
− 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 1.1 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2005          Q1
+ 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.7 − 0.4 + 2.4 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2004          Q3
− 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2005          Q1
− 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.9 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 3.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 0.7 + 2.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 7.8 + 8.1 − 0.3 + 1.5 − − 0.2 − 0.1 2004          Q3
− 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.8 − 0.5 + 4.6 + 5.1 − 0.5 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.1          Q4
− 2.7 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2.3 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.1 2005          Q1
+ 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 4.4 + 3.5 + 0.8 + 1.4 − + 0.0 + 0.1          Q2
− 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 7.0 + 6.7 + 0.3 + 1.0 − + 0.6 + 0.1          Q3
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. — loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2003 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.32004 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.1
2004          Oct 2,172.9 647.2 834.6 223.8 610.8 8.1 602.6 592.3 98.8 41.8 32.1 12.3
         Nov 2,195.4 673.0 830.7 216.9 613.8 8.1 605.6 593.1 98.7 42.1 32.1 14.0         Dec 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.1
2005          Jan 2,209.2 665.9 841.3 223.1 618.1 8.1 610.1 604.1 97.8 43.7 32.1 12.2
         Feb 2,216.1 670.9 843.1 220.4 622.7 8.1 614.6 605.0 97.2 43.7 32.1 14.4         Mar 2,218.8 673.0 845.1 219.3 625.8 7.5 618.3 605.2 95.5 43.4 31.5 18.7
         Apr 2,226.4 675.9 850.4 222.4 628.0 7.5 620.5 604.9 95.2 43.3 31.5 16.7
         May 2,232.9 683.9 850.1 225.3 624.8 7.5 617.3 604.1 94.8 43.0 31.8 16.7         June 2,238.9 692.5 849.3 223.9 625.4 7.6 617.7 602.7 94.5 43.5 32.2 19.5
         July 2,245.4 695.2 854.4 227.3 627.1 7.7 619.5 601.9 93.8 43.4 32.4 18.1
         Aug 2,250.3 698.1 858.8 230.7 628.1 7.6 620.5 600.4 93.0 43.5 32.2 21.7         Sep 2,254.3 704.0 858.9 231.4 627.5 7.7 619.8 598.9 92.4 42.0 32.1 21.0
Changes *
2003 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 − 20.3 + 15.6 − 0.5 + 16.1 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 + 2.0 + 7.82004 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 − 3.7 + 29.7 − 0.3 + 29.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 0.9
2004          Oct + 3.2 − 2.3 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 22.5 + 26.4 − 4.5 − 6.9 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec + 5.6 − 26.0 + 21.5 + 18.1 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 10.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 3.8
2005          Jan + 9.2 + 19.0 − 9.9 − 11.9 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.1
         Feb + 7.0 + 5.0 + 1.8 − 2.7 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2         Mar + 3.1 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 0.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 4.3
         Apr + 7.6 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 3.1 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.0
         May + 6.5 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 2.9 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0         June + 6.1 + 8.6 − 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 2.8
         July + 6.4 + 2.7 + 5.1 + 3.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.4
         Aug + 4.5 + 2.4 + 4.4 + 3.4 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 1.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.6         Sep + 3.9 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.7
Domestic government End of year or month *
2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −2003 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −2004 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −
2004          Oct 101.9 15.4 82.4 28.7 53.7 1.0 52.7 2.6 1.5 32.9 1.0 −
         Nov 102.1 17.0 81.0 27.4 53.6 1.0 52.6 2.6 1.6 33.1 1.1 −         Dec 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −
2005          Jan 104.7 18.7 81.9 30.0 51.9 0.9 51.0 2.6 1.5 34.5 1.1 −
         Feb 105.0 19.7 81.2 29.4 51.8 0.9 50.8 2.5 1.5 34.5 1.1 −         Mar 101.7 18.2 79.5 29.4 50.2 0.5 49.6 2.4 1.5 34.2 1.1 −
         Apr 98.8 18.0 76.9 27.1 49.8 0.5 49.2 2.4 1.5 34.1 1.1 −
         May 101.7 19.0 78.5 28.8 49.7 0.5 49.1 2.6 1.6 33.8 1.1 −         June 104.5 20.7 79.6 30.4 49.2 0.5 48.6 2.7 1.6 34.0 1.1 −
         July 103.7 19.0 80.4 31.6 48.8 0.5 48.3 2.8 1.6 33.7 1.1 −
         Aug 104.0 20.1 79.3 31.2 48.1 0.5 47.6 3.0 1.6 33.8 1.0 −         Sep 103.3 19.1 79.6 32.6 47.1 0.5 46.5 3.1 1.5 32.4 1.0 −
Changes *
2003 − 4.8 + 1.2 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 −2004 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.4 − 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.1 −
2004          Oct − 7.6 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Nov + 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −         Dec + 2.9 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 −
2005          Jan + 1.1 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 0.3 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −         Mar − 3.3 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 −
         Apr − 2.9 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         May + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −         June + 2.8 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 −
         July − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.8 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.8 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 −         Sep − 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2003 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.32004 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.1
2004          Oct 2,070.9 631.8 752.2 195.1 557.1 7.2 550.0 589.6 97.3 8.9 31.0 12.3
         Nov 2,093.4 656.0 749.7 189.5 560.2 7.1 553.1 590.5 97.1 9.0 31.1 14.0         Dec 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.1
2005          Jan 2,104.5 647.2 759.4 193.1 566.2 7.1 559.1 601.6 96.3 9.2 31.0 12.2
         Feb 2,111.2 651.2 761.9 191.0 570.9 7.2 563.7 602.4 95.7 9.3 31.0 14.4         Mar 2,117.1 654.8 765.6 190.0 575.6 6.9 568.7 602.8 94.0 9.2 30.4 18.7
         Apr 2,127.6 658.0 773.5 195.3 578.2 7.0 571.2 602.4 93.7 9.2 30.4 16.7
         May 2,131.2 664.9 771.6 196.5 575.1 7.0 568.1 601.5 93.2 9.2 30.7 16.7         June 2,134.5 671.8 769.7 193.5 576.2 7.1 569.1 600.0 92.9 9.5 31.1 19.5
         July 2,141.6 676.2 774.0 195.7 578.3 7.2 571.2 599.1 92.2 9.7 31.3 18.1
         Aug 2,146.3 678.0 779.5 199.5 580.0 7.1 572.9 597.4 91.4 9.7 31.2 21.7         Sep 2,150.9 684.9 779.3 198.8 580.5 7.2 573.3 595.9 90.8 9.6 31.1 21.0
Changes *
2003 + 58.7 + 47.2 + 1.0 − 18.7 + 19.7 − 0.1 + 19.8 + 15.1 − 4.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 7.82004 + 63.9 + 25.3 + 27.4 − 5.1 + 32.5 − 0.7 + 33.1 + 12.5 − 1.3 + 3.4 + 1.8 + 0.9
2004          Oct + 10.8 + 1.9 + 7.6 + 5.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 22.4 + 24.8 − 3.1 − 5.6 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec + 2.7 − 25.9 + 18.6 + 15.0 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 10.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.8
2005          Jan + 8.0 + 17.1 − 9.3 − 11.4 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 2.1
         Feb + 6.7 + 3.9 + 2.5 − 2.2 + 4.7 + 0.0 + 4.6 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2         Mar + 6.3 + 4.1 + 3.7 − 0.7 + 4.4 + 0.1 + 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.3
         Apr + 10.5 + 3.2 + 7.9 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.0
         May + 3.6 + 6.9 − 1.9 + 1.2 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0         June + 3.3 + 7.0 − 1.9 − 3.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.8
         July + 7.2 + 4.4 + 4.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.4
         Aug + 4.6 + 1.7 + 5.5 + 3.8 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.6         Sep + 4.6 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.52003 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.32004 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.1
2004          Oct 759.4 210.3 522.0 101.9 420.1 1.8 418.3 5.2 21.9 8.6 18.2 12.3
         Nov 769.4 221.5 520.9 97.3 423.6 1.7 421.9 5.1 21.9 8.7 18.3 14.0         Dec 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.1
2005          Jan 771.2 218.2 525.9 101.4 424.5 1.8 422.8 5.2 21.9 8.8 18.3 12.2
         Feb 772.7 217.3 528.5 99.6 428.9 1.9 427.0 5.2 21.8 8.8 18.3 14.4         Mar 778.8 218.4 533.3 100.2 433.2 1.9 431.2 5.3 21.8 8.8 18.9 18.7
         Apr 787.2 218.7 541.4 106.0 435.5 2.0 433.4 5.4 21.7 8.8 18.9 16.7
         May 791.5 222.4 541.8 107.3 434.5 2.0 432.5 5.4 21.9 8.8 19.2 16.7         June 792.6 224.5 541.0 105.6 435.4 2.0 433.3 5.2 22.0 9.0 19.6 19.5
         July 799.3 226.0 545.9 108.3 437.5 2.1 435.4 5.5 22.0 9.3 19.8 18.1
         Aug 807.6 229.5 551.0 112.1 439.0 2.0 436.9 5.3 21.8 9.2 19.8 21.7         Sep 812.0 234.5 550.6 111.1 439.4 2.1 437.4 5.4 21.6 9.1 19.7 21.0
Changes *
2003 + 29.6 + 11.2 + 17.9 + 2.9 + 15.0 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 7.82004 + 31.1 − 2.3 + 33.0 + 7.3 + 25.7 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 1.0 + 0.9
2004          Oct + 6.2 − 1.8 + 7.9 + 6.2 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 10.0 + 11.7 − 1.7 − 4.6 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec − 7.4 − 19.4 + 12.1 + 12.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.8
2005          Jan + 9.0 + 16.2 − 7.4 − 8.8 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.1
         Feb + 1.5 − 1.0 + 2.5 − 1.8 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.2         Mar + 5.3 + 1.1 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.3
         Apr + 8.4 + 0.3 + 8.1 + 5.8 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.0
         May + 4.4 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0         June + 1.1 + 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.8
         July + 6.6 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 2.7 + 2.2 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.4
         Aug + 8.2 + 3.4 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.6         Sep + 4.4 + 5.0 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.6
2003 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.42004 1,334.2 428.1 414.8 71.7 283.5 59.6 13.2 235.3 216.9 25.7 175.1 16.2
2005          Apr 1,340.4 439.3 425.3 73.9 291.8 59.6 14.0 232.1 215.0 24.7 174.9 15.4
         May 1,339.6 442.4 427.7 74.5 293.3 59.9 14.7 229.8 212.6 23.8 174.4 14.4         June 1,341.8 447.4 432.0 75.1 296.3 60.7 15.3 228.7 211.7 23.2 174.2 14.3
         July 1,342.4 450.2 435.7 76.2 298.1 61.4 14.5 228.2 211.2 23.2 173.8 14.2
         Aug 1,338.7 448.5 433.7 76.9 295.5 61.3 14.8 228.5 211.0 23.2 173.7 14.1         Sep 1,338.9 450.4 435.1 76.1 296.8 62.2 15.3 228.7 211.0 23.1 173.8 14.1
Changes *
2003 + 29.2 + 36.0 + 35.3 + 5.6 + 23.7 + 6.0 + 0.6 − 16.9 − 16.2 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 4.22004 + 32.8 + 27.6 + 26.7 + 4.8 + 19.2 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 5.6 − 5.1 − 3.5 + 0.6 − 2.2
2005          Apr + 2.1 + 2.9 + 3.7 + 2.1 + 0.9 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0
         May − 0.8 + 3.1 + 2.4 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 1.0         June + 2.2 + 4.9 + 4.3 + 0.6 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1
         July + 0.5 + 2.9 + 3.7 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1
         Aug − 3.6 − 1.8 − 2.1 + 0.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1         Sep + 0.2 + 2.0 + 1.5 − 0.8 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.6
2003 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 21.92004 103.6 41.4 0.8 5.8 34.8 0.0 12.9 15.1 2.7 2.2 10.2 0.1 21.5
2005          Apr 98.8 39.4 0.5 6.4 32.6 0.0 12.8 17.8 4.2 3.5 10.0 0.1 21.0
         May 101.7 39.2 0.6 6.1 32.4 0.0 12.7 16.3 3.4 2.8 10.1 0.1 20.7         June 104.5 39.7 1.1 6.6 31.9 0.0 12.8 19.8 4.8 4.9 10.0 0.1 21.0
         July 103.7 41.4 0.6 9.3 31.5 0.0 12.9 19.1 4.6 4.4 10.0 0.1 20.5
         Aug 104.0 40.5 1.1 8.2 31.2 0.0 12.9 17.9 3.8 4.1 9.9 0.2 20.5         Sep 103.3 40.8 1.1 9.5 30.1 0.0 12.9 18.7 4.3 4.3 9.8 0.2 19.2
Changes *
2003 − 4.8 − 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.72004 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 2.4
2005          Apr − 2.9 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 − − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − − 0.1
         May + 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3         June + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.5 − + 0.0 + 3.4 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
         July − 0.8 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 2.6 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
         Aug − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0         Sep − 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 − 2002
18.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 − 200318.4 94.3 141.0 5.5 135.6 595.7 586.3 9.5 75.1 0.3 12.8 − 2004
17.1 89.3 142.8 4.9 137.8 597.1 587.3 9.8 72.0 0.4 11.5 − 2005          Apr 
17.2 89.2 140.6 5.0 135.6 596.1 586.2 9.9 71.3 0.4 11.5 −          May
17.0 87.9 140.9 5.1 135.8 594.8 584.9 9.9 71.0 0.4 11.5 −          June
17.0 87.4 140.8 5.1 135.7 593.7 583.8 9.9 70.3 0.4 11.5 −          July
17.5 87.4 141.1 5.1 136.0 592.1 582.0 10.1 69.7 0.5 11.4 −          Aug 17.7 87.7 141.0 5.1 135.9 590.5 580.4 10.1 69.3 0.5 11.4 −          Sep 
Changes *
− 0.7 − 21.6 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 14.7 + 14.4 + 0.3 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2003− 0.5 − 12.3 + 6.7 − 0.7 + 7.4 + 12.2 + 12.0 + 0.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 2004
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − 2005          Apr 
+ 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          May
− 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
− 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          July
+ 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Sep 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
 
   
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
27.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 2002
24.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0 200325.7 10.5 9.6 2.3 3.3 0.3 21.4 2.9 12.9 4.8 0.8 0.0 2004
24.3 9.8 8.8 2.4 3.2 0.3 17.3 3.4 8.5 4.8 0.7 0.0 2005          Apr 
26.5 11.1 9.7 2.4 3.3 0.3 19.6 3.9 10.2 4.8 0.8 0.0          May
25.3 10.6 9.0 2.4 3.3 0.3 19.7 4.1 9.9 4.9 0.8 0.0          June
25.0 10.4 8.9 2.4 3.4 0.3 18.2 3.5 9.0 4.9 0.9 0.0          July
27.4 11.5 10.0 2.4 3.5 0.3 18.2 3.7 8.9 4.6 0.9 0.0          Aug 25.5 10.1 9.4 2.4 3.5 0.3 18.4 3.5 9.3 4.7 0.9 0.0          Sep 
Changes *
− 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 2003+ 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 2004
− 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2005          Apr 
+ 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          May
− 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          June
− 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          July
+ 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 −          Aug − 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Sep 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.9
2003 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 16.0 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.02004 613.0 603.5 515.5 397.9 88.0 76.7 9.6 7.7 14.2 105.8 98.4 85.2 7.4
2005          May 613.3 604.1 516.4 402.2 87.7 77.3 9.2 7.4 0.3 102.3 94.8 81.7 7.5
         June 611.4 602.7 515.6 401.7 87.1 76.6 8.7 6.9 0.3 102.3 94.5 81.3 7.8
         July 610.5 601.9 515.5 402.2 86.4 76.1 8.6 6.9 0.4 101.6 93.8 80.6 7.8
         Aug 608.9 600.4 515.0 401.9 85.4 75.1 8.5 6.8 0.3 100.7 93.0 79.9 7.7         Sep 607.4 598.9 515.1 398.5 83.9 73.6 8.5 6.8 0.3 100.0 92.4 79.2 7.6
Changes *
2003 + 14.2 + 15.1 + 28.0 + 23.8 − 12.9 − 12.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 . − 4.6 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.12004 + 12.6 + 13.1 + 14.7 + 20.1 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.4
2005          May − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0
         June − 1.9 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.4 . − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.3
         July − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.1
         Aug − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1         Sep − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.3
2003 1,490.1 353.4 20.8 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.22004 1,550.0 382.6 22.9 214.6 36.5 62.1 94.2 1,393.7 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.7
2005          May 1,617.2 403.9 24.3 258.7 42.3 69.5 95.5 1,452.3 2.5 0.6 0.4 1.5 45.3 2.5
         June 1,638.3 410.8 24.8 261.8 42.4 71.1 95.3 1,471.9 2.3 0.4 0.5 1.5 46.1 2.5
         July 1,641.5 414.3 25.2 263.3 38.5 69.5 94.5 1,477.4 2.0 0.4 0.5 1.1 45.9 2.5
         Aug 1,639.4 410.2 26.5 267.2 38.4 71.9 91.7 1,475.8 1.9 0.3 0.5 1.1 45.3 2.5         Sep 1,636.0 410.0 26.3 268.3 38.3 72.7 90.2 1,473.1 1.6 0.3 0.5 0.9 45.7 2.5
Changes *
2003 + 19.6 + 7.0 + 4.7 + 13.2 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 14.9 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.32004 + 57.4 + 27.9 + 1.8 + 34.7 − 7.9 − 8.0 − 11.0 + 76.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.5
2005          May + 9.0 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
         June + 21.1 + 6.9 + 0.5 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 19.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0
         July + 0.2 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 0.8 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Aug − 2.1 − 5.0 + 1.3 + 3.9 − 0.1 + 2.4 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0         Sep − 3.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.5 − 2.7 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. — 3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. — 4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. — 5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. — 6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2004 27 183.9 32.9 0.1 11.6 34.5 63.8 9.3 14.2 0.4 27.5 113.2 4.6 6.8 7.4 96.4
2005          July 26 189.2 33.8 0.1 13.7 32.2 63.0 9.5 18.1 0.4 27.8 115.7 4.8 6.3 7.4 7.4
         Aug 26 189.3 34.1 0.0 13.5 31.7 63.4 9.5 18.2 0.4 27.6 116.0 4.8 6.2 7.4 7.8         Sep 26 190.1 34.4 0.0 13.7 31.2 63.8 9.6 18.4 0.4 27.5 116.3 4.9 6.3 7.4 8.2
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005          July 15 138.2 26.0 0.0 6.4 20.4 45.4 8.6 13.3 0.3 20.4 78.3 4.5 6.3 4.8 4.6         Aug 15 138.5 26.3 0.0 6.3 20.0 45.8 8.7 13.3 0.3 20.5 78.5 4.6 6.2 4.8 4.9         Sep 15 139.1 26.5 0.0 6.4 19.7 46.2 8.7 13.4 0.3 20.3 78.8 4.7 6.3 4.8 5.3
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005          July 11 51.0 7.8 0.0 7.3 11.9 17.6 0.9 4.9 0.1 7.4 37.4 0.2 − 2.7 2.8         Aug 11 50.8 7.8 0.0 7.2 11.7 17.5 0.9 4.9 0.1 7.2 37.5 0.2 − 2.7 2.8         Sep 11 51.0 8.0 0.0 7.3 11.5 17.5 0.9 5.0 0.1 7.2 37.5 0.2 − 2.7 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2004 26.0 3.1 5.4 42.0 28.3 40.3 17.1 4.2 7.8 3.5 15.4 10.4 7.7 13.3 11.0 0.6
2005          July 2.0 0.1 0.5 4.0 2.8 3.6 1.7 0.5 0.7 0.4 1.2 10.9 7.8 1.1 0.0
         Aug 2.0 0.1 0.5 3.2 2.0 2.9 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.2 10.9 7.8 1.2 0.0         Sep 2.0 0.1 0.5 3.1 2.1 3.0 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.2 10.7 7.7 1.2 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005          July 1.3 0.1 0.3 2.7 1.7 2.6 1.1 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.0 6.5 3.8 0.8 0.0         Aug 1.3 0.1 0.3 2.1 1.1 2.0 0.8 0.2 0.3 0.1 1.0 6.5 3.7 0.7 0.0         Sep 1.3 0.1 0.3 2.1 1.2 2.2 0.8 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.0 6.3 3.7 0.8 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005          July 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.1 0.4 0.0         Aug 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.5 4.0 0.4 0.0         Sep 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.1 0.4 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.0
2003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.52004 52 203 1,452.7 681.0 595.7 170.2 425.6 85.2 671.0 477.3 17.1 15.8 460.2 193.7 100.7
2004          Nov 53 205 1,483.9 691.7 602.1 176.7 425.4 89.6 692.1 492.1 16.9 15.6 475.1 200.1 100.1
         Dec 52 203 1,452.7 681.0 595.7 170.2 425.6 85.2 671.0 477.3 17.1 15.8 460.2 193.7 100.7
2005          Jan 52 203 1,499.6 692.2 607.9 174.9 433.0 84.3 698.6 501.7 18.9 17.5 482.8 196.9 108.9
         Feb 52 203 1,512.5 690.2 609.9 171.0 438.9 80.3 713.4 510.9 18.9 17.6 492.0 202.5 108.8         Mar 52 202 1,522.7 701.4 623.9 181.3 442.6 77.5 709.6 503.3 18.4 17.3 485.0 206.2 111.7
         Apr 52 202 1,568.7 709.0 633.2 191.0 442.1 75.8 744.9 532.5 20.1 18.8 512.4 212.5 114.8
         May 54 204 1,613.0 722.6 646.7 194.8 452.0 75.9 772.9 556.7 21.4 20.0 535.3 216.3 117.4         June 54 205 1,658.5 762.2 686.0 194.7 491.3 76.3 779.0 556.1 21.6 20.4 534.4 223.0 117.2
         July 54 207 1,626.1 726.3 653.1 176.3 476.8 73.2 779.8 562.8 21.5 20.4 541.3 217.0 120.0
         Aug 54 207 1,648.9 718.3 645.6 174.7 470.9 72.7 799.8 577.8 20.6 19.4 557.2 222.0 130.9
Changes *
2003 − 5 − 3 − 6.8 − 45.3 − 17.4 − 12.7 − 4.7 − 27.9 + 22.5 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.7 + 24.9 + 15.92004 − 3 + 1 +207.5 +100.7 + 90.1 − 15.4 +105.5 + 10.6 + 64.2 + 57.8 − 1.9 − 1.0 + 59.7 + 6.4 + 42.7
2004          Nov − − 1 + 53.8 + 33.4 + 32.9 + 5.1 + 27.8 + 0.5 + 13.1 + 10.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 9.6 + 3.0 + 7.3
         Dec − 1 − 2 − 13.4 − 3.6 + 0.2 − 6.5 + 6.7 − 3.8 − 11.1 − 7.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 7.7 − 3.6 + 1.3
2005          Jan − − + 16.2 − 0.9 + 0.9 + 4.7 − 3.8 − 1.8 + 10.5 + 12.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 10.4 − 1.7 + 6.7
         Feb − − + 23.7 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 3.9 + 9.8 − 3.7 + 21.2 + 13.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 13.6 + 7.5 + 0.4         Mar − − 1 − 3.0 + 6.1 + 9.3 + 10.3 − 1.0 − 3.2 − 11.4 − 13.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 12.6 + 1.7 + 2.3
         Apr − − + 42.1 + 6.2 + 8.0 + 9.7 − 1.8 − 1.8 + 33.1 + 27.4 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 25.7 + 5.7 + 2.8
         May + 2 + 2 + 7.3 + 1.3 + 2.0 + 3.7 − 1.8 − 0.6 + 8.7 + 10.1 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 8.8 − 1.5 − 2.7         June − + 1 + 32.3 + 34.7 + 34.7 − 0.1 + 34.7 + 0.0 − 1.5 − 6.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 6.5 + 4.7 − 0.9
         July − + 2 − 27.2 − 34.1 − 31.2 − 18.4 − 12.8 − 2.9 + 3.6 + 9.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.2 − 5.4 + 3.3
         Aug − − + 26.6 − 6.4 − 6.0 − 1.6 − 4.4 − 0.4 + 22.1 + 16.4 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 17.3 + 5.8 + 11.0
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.4
2003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.62004 45 170 647.7 304.4 236.1 117.1 119.0 68.3 282.1 211.9 38.6 35.0 173.3 70.2 61.2
2004          Nov 45 170 644.4 297.7 230.2 114.9 115.3 67.5 284.4 212.6 37.8 35.0 174.8 71.8 62.3
         Dec 45 170 647.7 304.4 236.1 117.1 119.0 68.3 282.1 211.9 38.6 35.0 173.3 70.2 61.2
2005          Jan 45 170 648.0 299.9 229.9 110.3 119.6 70.0 284.9 211.1 37.4 34.7 173.7 73.9 63.2
         Feb 45 171 658.3 305.7 233.5 112.6 120.9 72.1 285.2 207.3 37.0 35.2 170.3 78.0 67.4         Mar 45 174 667.6 312.1 238.8 113.7 125.1 73.3 288.4 207.0 37.3 35.5 169.7 81.4 67.1
         Apr 44 172 664.9 306.6 234.1 112.5 121.6 72.6 289.6 206.7 37.5 35.8 169.2 82.9 68.7
         May 44 168 679.1 305.3 233.2 118.4 114.8 72.2 302.0 213.3 38.1 35.5 175.2 88.7 71.8         June 44 165 700.5 321.3 247.9 126.2 121.7 73.3 310.1 215.2 37.2 35.1 178.0 94.9 69.2
         July 44 165 689.8 314.1 241.4 125.4 116.0 72.7 308.3 212.5 37.4 35.4 175.0 95.9 67.4
         Aug 43 162 702.5 320.8 248.8 125.2 123.6 72.0 313.7 217.9 38.4 36.1 179.5 95.8 67.9
Changes *
2003 − 1 − 21 − 32.8 − 14.0 − 10.7 + 1.6 − 12.3 − 3.3 − 11.9 − 14.2 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 9.0 + 2.3 − 6.92004 − 1 − 9 + 9.3 + 0.8 − 8.1 − 10.2 + 2.0 + 9.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 2.8 + 4.2 + 7.0 + 0.1
2004          Nov − − + 11.9 + 5.1 + 3.5 − 1.2 + 4.7 + 1.6 + 5.7 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.8 + 1.1
         Dec − − + 6.8 + 8.5 + 7.1 + 2.2 + 4.9 + 1.4 − 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.0
2005          Jan − − − 4.8 − 7.4 − 8.1 − 6.8 − 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 1.6 + 3.6 + 1.7
         Feb − + 1 + 12.1 + 6.8 + 4.3 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 3.2 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 2.8 + 4.1 + 4.4         Mar − + 3 + 6.9 + 5.1 + 4.4 + 1.1 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 2.4 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 3.4 − 0.5
         Apr − 1 − 2 − 3.3 − 5.9 − 5.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 1.5 + 1.6
         May − − 4 + 8.5 − 4.6 − 2.9 + 5.9 − 8.9 − 1.7 + 10.4 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 4.1 + 5.8 + 2.7         June − − 3 + 19.4 + 14.7 + 14.1 + 7.8 + 6.3 + 0.6 + 7.4 + 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.1 + 6.2 − 2.7
         July − − − 9.9 − 6.7 − 6.2 − 0.8 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 2.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 2.8 + 1.0 − 1.7
         Aug − 1 − 3 + 13.1 + 7.0 + 7.5 − 0.2 + 7.7 − 0.5 + 5.5 + 5.5 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 4.6 − 0.0 + 0.5
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarde da s
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 2002
1,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 20031,226.9 798.4 295.2 503.2 428.4 61.8 55.7 52.4 6.1 5.8 366.6 139.9 21.7 64.3 2004
1,251.2 804.4 280.2 524.3 446.8 64.4 58.2 55.2 6.2 5.9 382.3 139.4 27.2 66.2 2004          Nov 
1,226.9 798.4 295.2 503.2 428.4 61.8 55.7 52.4 6.1 5.8 366.6 139.9 21.7 64.3          Dec 
1,266.5 814.2 293.4 520.8 452.3 70.0 63.8 60.6 6.3 5.9 382.3 143.6 21.8 67.7 2005          Jan 
1,288.0 815.9 294.8 521.1 472.2 70.6 64.5 61.3 6.2 5.9 401.5 136.5 22.9 65.1          Feb 
1,300.8 828.8 311.2 517.6 472.0 71.8 66.2 63.0 5.6 5.3 400.2 135.3 22.2 64.4          Mar 
1,339.7 848.9 331.7 517.2 490.8 69.8 64.2 60.9 5.6 5.3 421.0 137.9 22.3 68.8          Apr 
1,375.9 866.6 333.4 533.1 509.3 69.3 63.7 60.1 5.6 5.3 440.0 145.8 22.5 68.8          May1,416.1 914.2 359.0 555.1 502.0 68.9 63.5 60.2 5.4 5.1 433.0 150.0 22.8 69.6          June
1,379.8 900.1 350.5 549.6 479.7 69.1 63.9 60.9 5.2 4.9 410.6 148.8 22.8 74.8          July
1,382.4 915.1 353.7 561.4 467.3 65.8 61.0 58.0 4.9 4.6 401.5 158.3 23.0 85.2          Aug 
Changes *
+ 34.4 + 12.6 + 17.0 − 4.4 + 21.8 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 18.1 − 72.6 + 4.6 + 26.8 2003+ 186.4 + 93.2 + 28.1 + 65.1 + 93.3 − 4.4 − 4.8 − 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 97.7 + 0.4 − 8.7 + 29.4 2004
+ 53.0 + 18.4 − 0.8 + 19.2 + 34.6 − 7.4 − 6.7 − 7.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 42.0 − 5.3 − 0.0 + 6.1 2004          Nov 
− 10.1 + 2.6 + 15.0 − 12.4 − 12.7 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.1 + 0.5 − 5.4 + 1.6          Dec 
+ 15.8 + 1.5 − 1.8 + 3.3 + 14.3 + 8.2 + 8.1 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.0 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 3.4 2005          Jan 
+ 29.7 + 6.7 + 1.4 + 5.3 + 23.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 22.4 − 7.1 + 1.0 + 0.0          Feb 
+ 1.9 + 6.5 + 16.4 − 9.9 − 4.7 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 5.8 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 3.0          Mar 
+ 35.9 + 18.7 + 20.5 − 1.8 + 17.3 − 2.0 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 19.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 3.6          Apr 
+ 10.4 + 3.1 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 7.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.9 + 8.0 + 0.2 − 11.3          May+ 29.7 + 41.7 + 25.6 + 16.1 − 12.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 11.7 + 4.1 + 0.3 − 1.8          June
− 32.4 − 12.1 − 8.5 − 3.6 − 20.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 20.4 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 6.4          July
+ 5.4 + 16.9 + 3.2 + 13.6 − 11.4 − 3.3 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 8.1 + 9.5 + 0.2 + 11.5          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002
467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003462.3 277.5 83.4 194.1 184.9 31.8 27.3 26.5 4.5 4.3 153.1 73.5 39.1 72.7 2004
458.7 279.8 83.1 196.7 178.9 26.3 21.9 21.0 4.4 4.3 152.6 72.5 39.0 74.2 2004          Nov 
462.3 277.5 83.4 194.1 184.9 31.8 27.3 26.5 4.5 4.3 153.1 73.5 39.1 72.7          Dec 
460.0 272.0 74.9 197.1 188.0 28.9 24.4 23.0 4.6 4.4 159.0 73.8 39.5 74.7 2005          Jan 
470.1 283.8 79.7 204.1 186.3 28.7 24.1 22.5 4.6 4.4 157.6 73.7 40.3 74.2          Feb 
477.1 289.7 79.8 209.9 187.4 29.5 24.8 23.4 4.7 4.5 157.9 74.8 40.7 74.9          Mar 
479.4 292.8 80.7 212.1 186.6 28.7 23.0 21.0 5.6 5.5 157.9 72.2 40.7 72.6          Apr 
489.8 298.0 89.1 209.0 191.8 28.3 22.6 20.7 5.6 5.5 163.5 74.3 40.8 74.2          May508.5 308.6 91.5 217.1 199.9 28.5 22.7 20.9 5.7 5.6 171.5 75.7 41.4 74.9          June
501.2 305.7 92.1 213.6 195.6 27.3 21.5 19.9 5.8 5.7 168.2 75.4 41.4 71.8          July
512.2 310.5 94.5 216.1 201.7 29.5 23.7 22.4 5.8 5.7 172.2 76.9 41.5 71.9          Aug 
Changes *
− 13.8 − 10.3 + 0.3 − 10.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 6.3 − 10.3 − 1.6 − 7.2 2003+ 1.4 − 0.7 − 16.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 5.4 − 2.2 + 4.7 2004
+ 6.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 − 0.5 + 4.6 2004          Nov 
+ 6.6 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 7.0 + 5.5 + 5.4 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1          Dec 
− 6.7 − 8.1 − 8.4 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 2.9 − 3.0 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.4 2005          Jan 
+ 11.6 + 12.8 + 4.8 + 8.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.3          Feb 
+ 5.0 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 4.6 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.5          Mar 
+ 1.9 + 2.9 + 0.9 + 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 1.8 − 2.3 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 2.6          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 1.9 + 8.4 − 6.5 + 3.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.8 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.1          May+ 16.8 + 9.4 + 2.4 + 7.0 + 7.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.2 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.6          June
− 6.7 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.2 − 4.1 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.9          July
+ 11.4 + 5.1 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 6.3 + 2.2 + 2.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.1          Aug 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market
securities. — 3Including own debt securities. — 4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2005          Mar 7,157.8 143.2 0.5 142.6 143.3 0.6 0.0
         Apr 7,180.2 143.6 0.5 143.1 144.0 0.9 0.0
         May 7,255.5 145.1 0.5 144.6 145.5 0.9 0.0         June 7,385.1 147.7 0.5 147.2 147.9 0.7 0.0
         July 7,483.7 149.7 0.5 149.2 149.8 0.6 0.0
         Aug 7,509.3 150.2 0.5 149.7 150.2 0.6 0.0         Sep 7,560.8 151.2 0.5 150.7 151.4 0.7 0.0
         Oct  
p,8 7,502.9 150.1 0.5 149.5 150.2 0.7 ...
         Nov  p ... ... ... 152.0 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2005          Mar 1,896,128 37,923 209 37,713 37,981 268 6
         Apr 1,894,850 37,897 209 37,688 38,059 371 0
         May 1,914,823 38,296 209 38,088 38,463 375 2         June 1,938,803 38,776 209 38,567 38,897 330 2
         July 1,969,869 39,397 208 39,190 39,418 228 3
         Aug 1,951,162 39,023 205 38,818 39,047 229 2         Sep 1,945,542 38,911 205 38,706 39,015 309 0
         Oct  
p 1,939,827 38,797 204 38,593 38,802 209 1
         Nov  p 1,962,969 39,259 204 39,056 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. — 8The total number of deficiencies was not available when
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the this report went to press. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
         Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.71 2005 Jan                  1 1.21
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          to          July                  1 1.17
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
 
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2005 Oct                12 380,299 281,000 − 2.00 2.07 2.07 7
         Oct                19 383,949 296,000 − 2.00 2.06 2.07 7
         Oct                26 371,445 301,500 − 2.00 2.06 2.07 8
         Nov                  3 354,563 294,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.06 6
         Nov                  9 366,131 295,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.06 7
         Nov                16 401,859 293,500 − 2.00 2.05 2.06 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2005 July               28 46,758 30,000 − − 2.07 2.08 92
         Sep                  1 62,563 30,000 − − 2.08 2.09 91
         Sep                29 52,795 30,000 − − 2.09 2.10 84
         Oct                28 51,313 30,000 − − 2.17 2.19 90
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2005          Apr 2.08 2.05 − 2.45 2.12 2.09 − 2.14 2.08 2.09 2.10 2.14 2.17 2.21 2.27
         May 2.07 1.98 − 2.12 2.11 2.09 − 2.12 2.07 2.10 2.10 2.13 2.14 2.16 2.19         June 2.07 1.70 − 2.20 2.09 2.06 − 2.12 2.06 2.10 2.10 2.11 2.11 2.10 2.10
         July 2.07 1.92 − 2.12 2.10 2.07 − 2.12 2.07 2.10 2.11 2.12 2.13 2.15 2.17
         Aug 2.08 1.40 − 2.10 2.11 2.09 − 2.13 2.06 2.10 2.11 2.13 2.16 2.19 2.22         Sep 2.09 2.07 − 2.25 2.12 2.09 − 2.17 2.09 2.11 2.12 2.14 2.17 2.19 2.22
         Oct 2.07 1.88 − 2.11 2.18 2.15 − 2.26 2.07 2.10 2.12 2.20 2.27 2.34 2.41
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2005          Jan 1.91 3.23 2.12 3.73 4.78 4.45 4.79 8.07 6.97 5.77 4.41 3.90 4.41
         Feb 1.92 3.26 2.11 3.70 4.74 4.45 4.76 8.06 7.03 5.76 4.39 3.92 4.46         Mar 1.92 3.22 2.09 3.70 4.75 4.41 4.78 8.07 6.97 5.77 4.38 3.91 4.40
         Apr 1.93 3.22 2.10 3.57 4.69 4.38 4.74 8.02 6.94 5.76 4.34 3.86 4.37
         May 1.92 3.19 2.10 3.50 4.63 4.36 4.71 8.00 6.87 5.74 4.33 3.85 4.35         June 1.92 3.22 2.10 3.55 4.62 4.33 4.67 7.92 6.93 5.72 4.31 3.85 4.35
         July 1.91 3.18 2.11 3.49 4.57 4.29 4.63 7.89 6.86 5.70 4.30 3.82 4.29
         Aug 1.92 3.18 2.10 3.51 4.54 4.24 4.60 7.96 6.86 5.73 4.25 3.80 4.28         Sep 1.92 3.19 2.12 3.53 4.52 4.23 4.60 7.94 6.85 5.70 4.25 3.78 4.26
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2005          Jan 0.74 1.95 2.29 2.54 1.98 2.49 0.93 2.04 2.25 3.26
         Feb 0.74 1.95 2.19 2.33 1.97 2.49 0.93 2.04 2.25 3.47         Mar 0.74 1.93 2.16 2.40 1.96 2.47 0.94 2.00 2.35 3.15
         Apr 0.74 2.01 2.09 2.32 1.95 2.45 0.95 2.01 2.23 2.92
         May 0.75 1.94 2.01 2.20 1.97 2.43 0.95 2.01 2.12 3.31         June 0.69 1.95 2.21 2.20 2.17 2.38 0.91 2.01 2.05 3.57
         July 0.68 1.94 2.01 2.19 2.15 2.34 0.94 2.02 2.21 3.11
         Aug 0.69 1.95 2.07 2.32 2.03 2.31 0.96 2.02 2.22 2.90         Sep 0.69 1.97 2.05 2.05 2.02 2.29 0.96 2.04 2.23 3.02
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2005          Jan 9.60 8.01 6.97 6.83 8.33 4.07 3.44 3.97 4.43 4.45 3.96 4.64 4.62
         Feb 9.65 7.77 6.20 6.83 8.18 3.98 3.40 3.94 4.39 4.33 4.00 4.73 4.49         Mar 9.60 7.83 6.62 6.72 8.12 3.97 3.40 3.89 4.35 4.27 3.84 4.60 4.57
         Apr 9.62 7.81 6.60 6.64 8.19 3.95 3.40 3.89 4.36 4.28 3.97 4.71 4.62
         May 9.64 7.82 6.96 6.56 8.00 3.93 3.38 3.85 4.28 4.20 3.86 4.68 4.61         June 9.61 7.72 6.62 6.49 7.90 3.89 3.32 3.76 4.13 4.09 3.84 4.60 4.50
         July 9.52 7.80 6.67 6.61 7.96 3.87 3.33 3.70 4.06 4.05 3.89 4.54 4.29
         Aug 9.58 7.99 6.99 6.70 8.10 3.89 3.32 3.72 4.00 3.99 3.80 4.59 4.41         Sep 9.60 7.85 7.04 6.43 7.94 3.82 3.31 3.69 3.98 3.96 3.85 4.51 4.25
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2005          Jan 5.38 3.97 4.69 4.47 3.02 3.30 4.10
         Feb 5.30 3.91 4.76 4.36 3.02 3.34 3.81         Mar 5.28 3.89 4.51 4.32 3.02 3.48 4.11
         Apr 5.22 3.88 4.51 4.34 3.00 3.54 3.99
         May 5.14 3.91 4.45 4.24 2.99 3.61 3.80         June 5.12 3.87 4.45 4.14 2.92 3.44 3.88
         July 5.12 3.86 4.40 4.11 2.96 3.56 3.77
         Aug 5.04 3.91 4.45 4.13 2.87 3.53 3.81         Sep 5.06 3.81 4.37 4.03 2.90 3.35 3.84
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Sep 1.90 111,909 2.97 194,950 2.00 69,114 4.81 29,936
         Oct 1.91 111,286 2.96 195,397 2.01 72,291 4.74 28,853
         Nov 1.90 110,334 2.95 194,704 2.01 69,413 4.71 29,239         Dec 1.94 112,266 2.92 199,018 2.07 73,428 4.62 29,684
2005          Jan 1.94 109,623 2.91 198,936 2.05 71,982 4.61 28,809
         Feb 1.92 109,099 2.89 198,918 2.01 70,218 4.56 28,550         Mar 1.98 107,152 2.88 198,059 2.03 69,433 4.57 28,190
         Apr 1.98 106,627 2.87 198,127 2.03 71,680 4.42 23,890
         May 1.99 106,379 2.83 195,384 2.03 71,741 4.42 23,881         June 1.98 105,056 2.83 195,073 2.03 69,719 4.33 24,559
         July 1.98 104,577 2.82 194,330 2.03 72,105 4.23 25,296
         Aug 1.97 104,573 2.80 194,000 2.04 74,930 4.19 24,961         Sep 1.97 105,016 2.77 193,374 2.03 74,966 4.19 24,849
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2004          Sep 5.27 7,597 4.72 33,360 5.67 894,787 8.83 83,016 6.04 70,960 6.20 329,461
         Oct 5.14 7,649 4.67 33,775 5.66 895,414 8.79 80,415 5.95 71,660 6.18 330,628
         Nov 5.12 7,586 4.65 33,278 5.65 896,510 8.72 77,971 5.94 70,561 6.17 328,982         Dec 5.25 7,637 4.63 33,190 5.63 897,826 8.72 80,598 5.91 70,109 6.23 331,682
2005          Jan 5.20 7,201 4.60 32,930 5.61 896,162 8.72 79,153 5.88 69,565 6.21 330,629
         Feb 5.14 7,107 4.58 32,852 5.60 895,869 8.77 77,215 5.91 69,138 6.20 329,691         Mar 5.14 7,152 4.56 33,789 5.59 894,877 8.80 77,975 5.89 69,157 6.20 327,558
         Apr 5.07 7,116 4.58 31,177 5.56 897,746 8.70 76,047 5.86 70,598 6.19 329,222
         May 4.99 6,983 4.56 30,996 5.54 898,416 8.76 75,999 5.83 71,128 6.19 328,707         June 4.99 7,118 4.53 30,947 5.52 899,575 8.77 77,156 5.83 71,357 6.18 328,311
         July 4.93 7,032 4.49 30,817 5.49 902,650 8.70 75,090 5.79 71,644 6.16 328,183
         Aug 4.95 6,792 4.46 30,942 5.47 904,553 8.73 74,731 5.76 71,856 6.15 328,911         Sep 4.95 6,928 4.40 30,915 5.45 906,439 8.74 76,922 5.75 70,882 6.14 328,569
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Sep 4.75 171,070 4.25 89,980 5.25 485,483
         Oct 4.68 169,423 4.18 87,915 5.23 485,720
         Nov 4.61 174,233 4.14 87,256 5.20 486,256         Dec 4.64 166,976 4.15 87,044 5.19 483,878
2005          Jan 4.65 163,146 4.12 86,960 5.15 483,211
         Feb 4.69 164,658 4.09 86,165 5.14 483,024         Mar 4.66 164,367 4.06 85,401 5.12 480,353
         Apr 4.59 163,098 4.04 84,101 5.09 481,216
         May 4.61 162,342 4.06 83,456 5.07 481,891         June 4.63 164,192 4.02 83,350 5.05 478,638
         July 4.56 160,600 3.99 84,654 5.01 481,158
         Aug 4.55 156,384 3.96 86,614 5.00 479,790         Sep 4.58 162,536 3.92 87,116 4.98 477,806
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by the end of the month. — 1The effective interest rates may always be
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments onhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and deposits and loans but not any other related charges which may occur fornon-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarante es and
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. —
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a home improvements; including loans granted by building and loansample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for the purpose of personal
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / use in the consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these
Banking statistics / EWU-Zinsstatistik). This information is currently available statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes suc h as business,
in German only. — oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at debt consolidation, education etc. — 6 Including overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2004          Sep 1.17 418,189 1.89 23,981 2.50 913 2.78 2,724 2.13 506,492 2.55 85,177
         Oct 1.17 421,839 1.92 22,905 2.67 960 3.03 2,649 2.13 506,856 2.54 85,738
         Nov 1.15 434,898 1.92 23,384 2.41 856 3.04 2,839 2.16 506,807 2.54 86,549         Dec 1.17 428,606 1.90 25,470 2.39 929 2.59 2,791 2.13 515,840 2.55 87,804
2005          Jan 1.19 429,342 1.93 26,734 2.72 1,647 2.89 4,284 2.09 516,803 2.51 87,540
         Feb 1.20 434,050 1.93 22,719 2.52 1,089 2.69 1,796 2.11 517,068 2.51 88,103         Mar 1.21 436,542 1.91 24,402 2.53 958 2.76 4,236 2.06 516,937 2.49 88,481
         Apr 1.21 439,717 1.88 21,835 2.31 743 2.61 4,268 2.05 517,005 2.47 88,013
         May 1.23 442,889 1.89 22,796 2.20 1,067 2.49 1,225 2.12 516,455 2.45 87,517         June 1.22 448,210 1.89 25,674 2.72 994 2.25 1,031 2.10 515,200 2.40 86,665
         July 1.17 450,961 1.88 22,781 2.22 1,060 2.35 2,043 2.08 515,042 2.36 85,918
         Aug 1.17 449,144 1.88 23,949 2.37 1,060 2.17 1,469 1.98 514,260 2.33 84,891         Sep 1.18 450,969 1.89 23,194 2.41 1,123 2.17 3,022 2.00 514,247 2.31 83,344
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Sep 1.11 138,157 1.95 30,538 2.51 274 3.94 2,033
         Oct 1.13 137,992 1.97 29,266 2.56 258 4.13 1,151
         Nov 1.13 142,752 1.95 29,259 2.24 176 4.04 2,678         Dec 1.14 144,569 2.02 51,843 2.39 211 3.81 2,215
2005          Jan 1.19 140,648 2.03 39,113 2.50 181 3.50 1,526
         Feb 1.20 140,178 1.97 33,053 2.24 134 3.93 1,055         Mar 1.22 140,864 1.96 36,334 2.57 236 3.58 996
         Apr 1.24 144,016 1.97 35,595 2.35 314 3.56 907
         May 1.24 144,622 1.98 35,025 2.27 194 3.87 636         June 1.24 148,194 1.97 48,861 2.08 235 4.10 1,211
         July 1.25 149,050 1.98 36,761 2.20 128 3.38 1,113
         Aug 1.27 151,273 1.99 41,006 2.35 98 3.58 596         Sep 1.25 152,999 2.01 46,851 2.52 234 3.52 1,389
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2004          Sep 8.03 5.09 1,365 6.41 4,878 9.19 3,058 3.42 9,097 4.88 1,474 5.07 2,577
         Oct 7.95 4.77 1,210 6.30 4,579 9.17 2,927 3.74 7,395 4.80 1,590 4.90 1,415
         Nov 7.70 4.86 1,251 6.20 4,159 8.88 3,133 3.46 8,436 4.84 1,164 4.75 1,989         Dec 7.18 4.90 1,550 5.95 4,551 8.04 2,846 3.44 10,026 4.54 2,853 4.68 2,967
2005          Jan 7.94 4.98 1,347 6.38 4,289 9.05 2,847 3.68 9,059 4.64 1,578 4.67 2,251
         Feb 7.92 4.85 1,531 6.35 3,720 8.98 2,743 3.66 4,633 4.68 1,182 4.38 1,653         Mar 7.82 4.73 1,648 6.26 4,173 8.90 3,353 3.71 7,213 4.72 1,700 4.58 2,224
         Apr 7.84 4.90 1,405 6.15 4,809 8.94 3,627 3.70 7,385 4.79 1,415 4.61 2,157
         May 7.87 5.47 1,324 6.04 3,972 8.93 3,085 3.61 8,078 4.75 1,488 4.58 1,620         June 7.86 5.35 1,515 6.09 4,707 8.73 3,779 3.65 8,095 4.69 2,177 4.60 2,597
         July 7.94 5.37 1,180 6.19 4,978 8.74 3,699 3.65 8,413 4.62 1,941 4.44 2,397
         Aug 7.98 5.54 1,085 6.23 4,073 8.70 3,487 3.63 8,483 4.64 1,550 4.50 2,399         Sep 7.91 5.41 1,203 6.16 5,262 8.71 3,081 3.58 9,626 4.61 1,858 4.30 2,490
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Sep 10.33 55,219 4.87 4.44 2,058 4.53 2,371 4.96 4,139 4.97 2,551
         Oct 10.26 53,107 4.78 4.30 3,091 4.48 2,343 4.89 4,077 4.88 2,730
         Nov 10.22 50,788 4.72 4.45 1,887 4.40 2,131 4.78 3,961 4.76 3,164         Dec 10.30 52,435 4.61 4.37 2,292 4.29 2,682 4.63 5,217 4.67 3,598
2005          Jan 10.32 50,978 4.55 4.37 2,467 4.20 2,321 4.56 4,631 4.62 3,507
         Feb 10.30 50,158 4.49 4.35 1,668 4.20 1,962 4.51 3,504 4.48 2,816         Mar 10.36 50,933 4.49 4.34 2,078 4.13 2,210 4.47 4,901 4.52 3,655
         Apr 10.37 48,690 4.50 4.28 2,786 4.13 2,376 4.50 5,023 4.58 3,484
         May 10.46 48,565 4.40 4.33 2,075 4.08 2,204 4.39 4,412 4.40 3,324         June 10.38 49,871 4.27 4.25 2,196 4.01 2,449 4.22 5,527 4.26 4,262
         July 10.35 47,624 4.22 4.15 3,353 3.94 2,699 4.17 6,315 4.23 4,226
         Aug 10.40 48,289 4.19 4.30 2,010 3.88 2,439 4.10 5,789 4.19 4,615         Sep 10.42 50,075 4.17 4.21 2,095 3.95 2,331 4.11 5,388 4.16 4,390
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Sep 6.25 81,220 4.51 7,522 4.92 1,207 4.97 1,216
         Oct 6.11 79,457 4.55 7,213 4.96 1,238 4.92 1,200
         Nov 5.96 80,969 4.61 6,218 4.83 1,336 4.62 1,141         Dec 6.01 76,804 4.50 6,458 4.75 1,520 4.64 2,147
2005          Jan 5.89 74,567 4.44 5,388 4.82 1,205 4.59 1,497
         Feb 5.88 78,066 4.34 5,232 4.84 1,094 4.58 1,160         Mar 5.99 74,692 4.36 7,033 4.67 1,298 4.71 1,341
         Apr 5.92 71,303 4.44 6,588 4.64 1,121 4.68 1,329
         May 5.95 71,559 4.38 6,289 4.56 1,065 4.38 1,835         June 5.97 72,936 4.41 7,080 4.50 1,346 4.43 1,308
         July 5.95 69,329 4.37 6,987 4.54 1,242 4.41 1,542
         Aug 5.97 67,834 4.29 6,317 4.54 1,737 4.42 1,350         Sep 5.95 71,180 4.28 7,229 4.46 1,284 4.32 1,532
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Sep 3.31 31,752 3.65 4,204 4.41 5,135
         Oct 3.26 30,755 3.85 3,246 4.51 4,502
         Nov 3.16 30,886 3.68 3,855 4.46 4,913         Dec 3.34 43,091 3.95 7,061 4.33 8,560
2005          Jan 3.35 34,508 3.75 4,041 4.27 4,889
         Feb 3.40 26,543 3.66 3,928 3.99 5,083         Mar 3.23 44,390 3.59 5,771 4.28 6,314
         Apr 3.12 49,798 3.76 4,657 4.28 5,827
         May 3.11 42,311 3.68 5,578 3.94 5,733         June 3.15 45,170 3.67 5,302 4.05 6,020
         July 3.15 42,996 3.82 4,692 4.09 5,191
         Aug 3.17 40,536 3.72 4,520 4.10 5,272         Sep 3.22 41,689 3.51 4,177 4.11 5,925
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,9151994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,1091997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,9462002 175,219 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,184 63,734 13,536 50,198 − 111,4852003 185,193 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,738 95,252 35,748 59,504 − 89,9412004 240,861 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 107,150 107,071 121,841 − 14,770 − 133,790
2005          July 2,654 8,728 − 5,198 − 1,673 15,599 − 6,074 − 13,000 − 5,507 − 7,493 − 15,654
         Aug 1,211 − 4,624 1,868 − 634 − 5,857 5,835 4,642 2,988 1,654 − − 3,431         Sep 25,158 12,218 − 6,585 1,243 17,560 12,940 11,598 − 7,678 19,276 − 13,560
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,932
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6781998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,728 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,193
2001 82,665 17,575 65,090 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,9172002 37,404 9,232 28,172 16,472 − 23,236 39,708 20,9322003 14,046 16,838 − 2,791 − 14,631 7,056 − 21,687 28,6782004 3,157 10,157 − 7,002 7,783 5,045 2,738 − 4,627
2005          July 513 428 85 − 662 2,164 − 2,826 1,175
         Aug 609 163 446 − 245 2,647 − 2,892 854         Sep 3,170 3,141 29 − 3,067 1,229 − 4,296 6,237
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005          June 116,419 85,669 1,667 15,010 19,458 49,535 1,673 29,077 −         July 94,505 64,022 3,202 7,988 13,493 39,339 3,172 27,311 −
         Aug 63,458 47,147 968 7,781 12,340 26,058 710 15,602 −         Sep 69,302 40,440 2,065 5,800 7,081 25,494 2,945 25,917 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,9391993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005          June 57,114 41,201 1,055 10,085 6,736 23,326 935 14,978 −         July 45,080 28,579 1,897 6,449 4,779 15,454 2,250 14,251 −
         Aug 24,399 15,695 662 5,467 3,550 6,016 675 8,029 −         Sep 25,034 12,913 1,938 4,111 1,847 5,017 1,457 10,665 −
Net sales  6 
1992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,1141993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,7011994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005          June 31,033 26,231 − 496 1,815 4,381 20,531 − 2,178 6,980 − 5,887         July 25,718 6,862 675 − 4,692 2,247 8,632 357 18,499 − 1,749
         Aug − 4,836 1,868 − 786 − 4,091 2,358 4,387 685 − 7,389 − 3,908         Sep − 331 − 6,540 − 4,727 367 − 1,328 − 853 2,350 3,859 − 205
*For definitions, see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to Monthly Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Report 2, Capital market statistics. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,873
1993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005          July 2,930,429 1,788,038 163,106 538,056 352,354 734,521 77,481 1,064,911 144,458
         Aug 2,925,594 1,789,906 162,320 533,966 324,314 769,307 78,166 1,057,522 140,550         Sep 2,925,263 1,783,365 157,593 534,333 322,986 768,454 80,516 1,061,381 140,345
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-September 2005 
999,338 653,569 55,499 211,827 113,264 272,979 20,301 325,468 39,600    less than 2
680,178 455,158 49,982 157,231 86,013 161,933 14,121 210,898 61,662 2 to less than 4
469,981 278,520 25,264 102,465 50,163 100,628 17,020 174,442 22,196 4 to less than 6
257,914 130,734 21,427 32,905 19,680 56,722 8,853 118,326 4,299 6 to less than 8
238,556 114,242 5,139 17,075 18,547 73,480 12,057 112,258 5,149 8 to less than 10
109,918 96,678 196 7,445 9,156 79,881 1,788 11,452 3,948 10 to less than 15
26,257 13,786 85 1,545 8,845 3,310 245 12,226 1,743 15 to less than 20
143,123 40,679 − 3,840 17,318 19,522 6,131 96,312 1,747 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 364,548
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 533,9201994o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 519,280
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 553,11019963 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 723,077
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 1,040,7691998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005          July 164,727 25 192 281 18 7 − 292 − 44 − 137 964,930
         Aug 165,037 307 120 78 15 7 − 83 340 − 170 957,320         Sep 165,339 302 453 98 31 0 − 3 − 190 − 85 999,658
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — oFrom January was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose shares are traded
1994, including the shares of east German companies (resultant increase in on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
share circulation: DM7,771 million). — 1Including shares issued out of Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse
company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on the Official Mar- AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
ket, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock market segment
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German Germanmore than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.05
1993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005          July 2.9 3.0 3.0 3.2 2.8 3.3 3.5 3.0 122.52 102.14 304.73 4,886.50
         Aug 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.2 2.9 3.4 3.5 3.0 122.90 102.81 302.19 4,829.69         Sep 2.9 2.9 2.9 3.1 2.8 3.2 3.3 2.9 122.50 102.33 315.92 5,044.12
         Oct 3.1 3.1 3.1 3.2 3.0 3.4 3.5 3.1 120.76 100.89 307.23 4,929.07
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1992 81,514 20,474 − 3,102 − − 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,0011994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,3181997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 48,016 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 4,073 49,860 − 2,658 734 52,518 3,339 − 1,8442004 13,404 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 11,951 8,340 8,446 3,796 − 106 8,155 5,064
2005          July 10,864 7,235 4,009 1,122 2,382 311 3,226 3,629 8,923 1,610 444 7,313 3,185 1,941
         Aug 7,347 3,962 1,717 141 1,205 39 2,245 3,385 6,537 862 405 5,675 2,980 810         Sep 5,913 1,264 454 − 406 408 67 809 4,649 6,818 2,755 754 4,063 3,895 − 905
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
operat- Fixed Compen-
of ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex- sation
which pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend- of em-
Period Total Taxes Total  3 ployees iture grants Interest tion aid  4 Balance venue  5 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 − 12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 − 14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.11997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 − 94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 − 91.71998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 − 56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 − 53.41999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 − 26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 − 23.4
2000  
p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  6,p 554.0 446.2 598.2 169.9 69.8 212.5 66.6 40.1 39.2 − 44.2 445.1 449.1 − 4.0 921.9 970.1 − 48.2
2002  pe 550.7 441.7 607.8 173.3 69.5 225.7 66.1 38.7 33.5 − 57.0 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 923.7 989.1 − 65.4
2003  pe 547.5 442.2 615.0 174.0 68.8 236.2 65.7 36.3 34.8 − 67.5 467.8 474.4 − 6.6 925.9 1,000.0 − 74.1
2004  pe 543.7 443.0 610.1 173.5 68.5 237.9 64.8 34.4 29.9 − 66.4 470.1 468.7 + 1.4 925.1 990.1 − 65.0
2004          Q1  p 116.3 96.9 158.5 41.7 15.7 63.0 25.3 5.4 6.3 − 42.1 116.4 116.8 − 0.4 206.4 248.9 − 42.5
         Q2  p 132.9 112.9 141.5 41.5 15.5 59.4 10.0 6.8 6.3 − 8.6 115.8 116.4 − 0.6 226.0 235.2 − 9.2
         Q3  p 133.6 107.8 152.1 41.9 16.1 57.5 20.4 8.5 6.3 − 18.6 114.0 116.0 − 2.1 226.5 247.1 − 20.6
         Q4  p 159.7 125.6 157.3 46.6 20.7 56.1 8.7 12.6 10.7 + 2.4 121.6 118.7 + 2.9 263.6 258.3 + 5.3
2005          Q1  p 121.7 99.2 159.9 41.1 15.2 66.3 25.2 4.6 6.6 − 38.2 117.1 117.5 − 0.4 211.3 249.9 − 38.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly f igures
Office. — *The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed for some insurance sectors are estimated. — 3Including discrepancies in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the clearing transactions between central, state and local government. —
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — 4Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the interests. — 5Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly Federal Labour Office. — 6Owing to modifications of the system of
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between other operatin g
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, expenditure and current grants. see footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. — 2The annual figures differ from the sum of
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  p 240.6 261.3 184.6 207.1 50.4 52.6 119.5 123.2 24.8 25.2
2002  pe 238.9 271.6 183.5 207.5 48.0 53.3 119.9 124.5 25.1 25.3
2003  pe 239.6 278.8 182.9 208.8 49.1 53.5 117.1 125.0 24.7 25.5
2004  pe 233.8 273.6 186.4 207.8 48.4 52.1 120.8 124.7 25.0 25.1
2004          Q1  p 44.8 73.4 42.7 52.1 11.1 12.8 25.8 29.7 5.4 5.5
         Q2  p 56.4 62.3 46.3 51.0 11.3 11.5 28.8 29.0 5.7 5.8
         Q3  p 58.3 71.2 45.2 49.9 12.5 12.5 29.9 30.5 6.2 6.2
         Q4  p 74.4 66.7 51.7 54.3 13.1 15.0 35.9 34.9 7.6 7.5
2005          Q1  p 46.0 74.9 45.8 52.9 10.8 12.5 25.7 29.4 5.6 5.5
         Q2  p 61.4 66.0 47.0 50.2 11.6 11.5 29.9 30.4 6.2 5.9
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. — *See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. — 1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. — 4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Item 1997 1998 1999 2000  1 2001 2002 2003 2004  pe 
Revenue 1,731.7 1,779.3 945.0 967.0 952.6 955.2 963.7 958.7
of which
Taxes 857.2 897.3 490.5 511.7 488.3 485.4 489.6 487.2Social contributions 720.2 727.8 375.4 378.4 383.7 389.2 394.4 395.3
Expenditure 1,830.7 1,862.9 974.3 990.7 1,012.2 1,034.7 1,050.3 1,039.9of which
Intermediate consumption 150.6 154.3 83.5 82.4 85.2 88.7 89.2 89.5Compensation of employees 319.4 319.8 165.6 166.1 166.2 169.1 169.0 168.7Interest 126.7 129.0 63.2 65.1 64.5 62.9 64.6 62.9Social benefits  
2 984.7 998.4 523.1 532.7 551.2 574.1 588.1 586.6
Gross capital formation 69.0 69.4 37.6 36.8 36.8 35.5 32.9 30.7
Net lending/net borrowing − 99.0 − 83.6 − 29.3 − 23.7 − 59.6 − 79.6 − 86.6 − 81.2
Memo item
As defined in the Maastricht TreatyDeficit as % of GDP  
3,4 2.7 2.2 1.5 1.2 2.9 3.8 4.1 3.7
Debt level 2,234.9 2,317.6 1,224.3 1,231.0 1,241.5 1,293.0 1,381.0 1,451.0
as % of GDP  3 60.6 61.2 61.9 60.4 59.6 61.2 64.8 66.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In intermediation services indirectly measured (FISIM) is still being used as the
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include basis for calculating the deficit and debt ratios for the current year .
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share Accordingly, the ratios listed here are therefore higher than those
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. — 1Adjusted for proceeds from the sale calculated based on August 2005 GDP figures published by the Federal
of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office record such Statistical Office (deficit ratio: up to 0.1 percentage point higher, deb t ratio:
proceeds ( €50.8 billion) under "net increase in non-produced assets", with up to 1 percentage point higher). — 4Unlike the net lending/net borrowing
the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus ( €27.1 billion balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit ratio as defined in the
or 1.3% of GDP) is shown. — 2Including social benefits in kind. — 3In the Maastricht Treaty includes interest payments arising from swap transactions
European budgetary surveillance procedure, GDP excluding financial and forward rate agreements. 
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 581993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 7141997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 1171998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 122002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 512003 442,235 390,437 214,002 155,510 . 20,925 51,671 4,751 + 1272004 442,966 386,459 208,919 157,900 . 19,641 56,365 5,243 + 142
2005          Q2 111,698 96,535 52,716 39,438 . 4,381 14,538 1,486 + 625
         Q3 ... 96,077 52,065 38,840 . 5,172 ... ... ...
2005          May . 31,333 16,961 12,805 . 1,566 . . .
         June . 37,947 20,715 15,671 . 1,562 . . .
         July . 29,328 15,851 11,909 . 1,568 . . .
         Aug . 28,609 15,801 11,172 . 1,635 . . .         Sep . 38,140 20,413 15,759 . 1,969 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Including receipts from the 1988. — 4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  — 2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. — 5Difference between the local government’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
remitted to state government. — 3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,1702002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,8462003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,4092004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005          Q2 102,224 40,747 29,030 3,359 2,715 5,643 33,009 25,180 7,829 1,454 20,556 5,673 786 5,689
         Q3 101,803 38,946 28,172 4,150 3,798 2,826 35,277 27,519 7,758 1,575 20,235 4,868 901 5,726
2005          May 32,980 11,304 9,777 − 779 − 440 2,747 12,070 9,108 2,962 462 6,765 2,121 259 1,648
         June 40,441 20,011 9,769 5,062 3,965 1,216 11,037 8,638 2,399 5 7,288 1,846 255 2,494
         July 30,997 10,336 10,355 − 1,093 − 191 1,265 11,078 8,721 2,358 1,091 6,587 1,645 261 1,669
         Aug 30,150 8,443 9,192 − 1,004 − 586 841 12,522 9,867 2,655 483 6,750 1,647 305 1,541         Sep 40,656 20,167 8,625 6,248 4,574 720 11,677 8,931 2,746 1 6,898 1,576 336 2,515
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table the statutory pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, to local government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to ce ntral
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% was
central and state government), the real property taxes and other local allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; sincegovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2From 2002 49.6% has been allocated to central government and 50.4% to state
1980, the revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax has been government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedallocated to central, state and local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15, central government share. — 6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
and revenue from corporation tax and investment income tax has been and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beenallocated to central and state government in the ratio of 50:50. — 3From affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —
1996, after deducting child benefit. — 4From February 1993, including 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
revenue from the withholding tax on interest income, in which local government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. — 8For the breakdown, see
government has a share of 12%. — 5In 1998, 3.64% and from 1999, 5.63% Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
was allocated to central government to finance the supplementary grant to
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness tax  2 taxes taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 6962003 43,188 14,094 2,204 8,870 6,531 11,722 7,336 230 3,373 786 6,989 24,146 9,658 6712004 41,782 13,630 2,195 8,750 6,597 11,601 7,740 80 4,284 788 6,883 28,373 9,939 797
2005          Q2 9,916 3,610 562 1,627 2,010 2,832 2,342 80 1,413 202 1,635 7,985 2,752 192
         Q3 9,776 3,951 512 1,709 1,589 2,698 2,107 4 849 221 1,687 ... ... ...
2005          May 3,447 1,220 165 637 468 828 776 5 744 67 529 . . .
         June 3,313 1,143 191 486 863 1,292 779 68 381 73 545 . . .
         July 3,368 1,264 186 430 570 769 724 1 303 77 540 . . .
         Aug 3,241 1,292 159 886 501 672 702 3 280 70 593 . . .         Sep 3,167 1,395 167 394 518 1,257 682 1 266 73 554 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. — 2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
General government
1999 1,199,975 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 105
2000 1,211,439 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 1082002 1,277,630 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 29 7,845 972003 1,358,121 36,022 246,414 153,616 12,810 471,129 396,832 341 34,163 − 1 6,711 86
2004          June 1,411,658 37,307 269,972 162,642 10,590 488,668 391,296 371 44,057 − 45 6,711 88
         Sep 1,429,216 37,494 276,918 166,711 10,568 494,621 390,436 413 46,434 − 38 5,572 87         Dec 1,430,413 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,418 379,984 430 53,672 − 38 5,572 82
2005          Mar 1,457,149 37,489 290,175 162,644 11,037 506,670 387,456 474 55,586 − 36 5,572 84
         June 1,465,358 37,214 295,608 170,389 11,180 507,071 381,150 501 56,623 − 36 5,572 87
Central government 7,8,9 
1999 714,069 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 1042000 715,819 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2004          June 803,991 35,630 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88
         Sep 814,356 35,866 95,200 157,026 10,568 459,482 39,864 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86         Dec 812,083 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 81
2005          Mar 870,368 36,393 102,959 162,592 11,037 495,478 45,119 373 10,798 − 36 5,572 83
         June 874,015 36,021 105,227 170,338 11,180 495,879 38,778 408 10,562 − 36 5,572 86         Sep 885,155 35,989 106,836 163,284 11,061 514,173 38,303 408 10,608 − 36 4,443 86
State government (western)
1999 274,208 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 12000 282,431 − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 12001 305,788 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 12002 328,390 250 97,556 . . . 217,333 5 13,246 . . 12003 355,661 472 125,356 . . . 207,880 4 21,949 . . 1
2004          June 368,240 900 141,270 . . . 197,032 4 29,033 . . 1
         Sep 374,415 900 145,136 . . . 198,760 0 29,618 . . 1         Dec 376,697 750 148,219 . . . 193,216 3 34,508 . . 1
2005          Mar 382,341 250 154,965 . . . 190,360 3 36,762 . . 1
         June 384,373 0 157,226 . . . 189,139 3 38,005 . . 1
State government (eastern)
1999 53,200 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .2000 55,712 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .2001 58,771 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .2002 63,782 338 23,838 . . . 37,739 − 1,867 . . .2003 68,076 315 28,833 . . . 37,022 − 1,906 . . .
2004          June 71,252 777 31,897 . . . 35,530 27 3,021 . . .
         Sep 71,512 729 31,967 . . . 35,295 27 3,495 . . .         Dec 71,975 533 31,400 . . . 35,428 − 4,614 . . .
2005          Mar 73,190 846 32,251 . . . 35,866 − 4,227 . . .
         June 74,898 1,193 33,154 . . . 36,142 − 4,409 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont’d)
  
  
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Local government (western) 10 
1999 81,511 . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .
2000 81,414 . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .2002 84,097 . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .2003 90,906 . 77 . . 603 87,868 19 2,339 . . .
2004          June 93,250 . 77 . . 707 90,106 20 2,340 . . .
         Sep 93,800 . 77 . . 656 90,707 20 2,340 . . .         Dec 95,057 . − . . 552 91,317 13 3,174 . . .
2005          Mar 95,600 . − . . 591 91,819 15 3,175 . . .
         June 97,250 . − . . 591 93,469 15 3,175 . . .
Local government (eastern) 10 
1999 20,726 . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .2002 16,745 . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .2003 16,951 . − . . 131 16,601 87 132 . . .
2004          June 16,900 . − . . 131 16,549 90 130 . . .
         Sep 17,000 . − . . 131 16,649 90 130 . . .         Dec 17,353 . − . . 131 16,914 73 235 . . .
2005          Mar 17,250 . − . . 131 16,809 75 235 . . .
         June 17,250 . − . . 131 16,809 75 235 . . .
ERP Special Fund 7 
1999 16,028 . . − . 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .2000 18,386 . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .2001 19,161 . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .2002 19,400 . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .2003 19,261 . . 51 . 10,169 8,522 8 512 . . .
2004          June 18,525 . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .
         Sep 18,525 . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .         Dec 18,200 . . 51 . 10,169 7,584 8 389 . . .
2005          Mar 18,098 . . 51 . 10,169 7,482 8 389 . . .
         June 17,270 . . 51 . 10,169 6,812 − 238 . . .         Sep 15,864 . . 51 . 10,169 5,406 − 238 . . .
Indemnification Fund 
1999 132 .... 1 3 2 ......
2000 204 .... 2 0 4 ......
2001 285 .... 2 8 5 ......
2002 369 .... 3 6 9 ......
2003 469 .... 4 6 9 ......
2004          June 396 .... 3 9 6 ......
         Sep 398 .... 3 9 8 ......
         Dec 400 .... 4 0 0 ......
2005          Mar 302 .... 3 0 2 ......
         June 302 .... 3 0 2 ......
         Sep 301 .... 3 0 1 ......
German Unity Fund 7,9 
1999 40,102 − 275 500 . 28,846 10,292 − 189 . . .2000 40,425 − 275 2,634 . 29,593 7,790 − 133 . . .2001 39,638 − 3,748 10,134 . 21,292 4,315 − 149 . . .2002 39,441 − 3,820 10,134 . 22,315 3,146 − 26 . . .2003 39,099 − 4,610 10,134 . 23,563 793 − − . . .
2004          June 39,103 . 4,538 9,634 . 23,787 1,144 − − . . .
         Sep 39,210 . 4,538 9,634 . 23,787 1,251 − − . . .         Dec 38,650 . 4,538 9,634 . 23,787 690 − − . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Predominantly Treasury joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
discount paper (Bubills). — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
securities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term ratios. — 8On 1 July 1999 central government assumed joint responsibility
paper. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes. Including loans raised for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal
abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from supplementary Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal.
public pension funds and liabilities arising from the investment assistance As from July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded under centr al
levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabilities government. — 9On 1 January 2005 central government assumed joint
arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and responsibility for the debts of the German Unity Fund. As from January, thefrom housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of aforementioned special fund is recorded under central government. —the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to their home country. — 10Data other than year-end figures have been estimated. Including debt of
6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the municipal special purpose associations. 
London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
€ million
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2004 2005
Item 2004 June 2005 Total Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 1st hf Q1 Q2
Borrowers
Central government  2 812,083 874,015 + 44,386 + 34,993 + 1,301 + 10,365 − 2,273 + 23,279 + 19,633 + 3,646
German Unity Fund  2 38,650 − − 450 + 520 − 516 + 107 − 561 − − −
ERP Special Fund 18,200 17,270 − 1,061 − 685 − 51 − − 325 − 931 − 102 − 828
Indemnification Fund 400 302 − 69 − 79 + 6 + 1 + 2 − 98 − 98 + 0
State government (western) 376,697 384,373 + 21,036 + 7,541 + 5,038 + 6,175 + 2,282 + 7,676 + 5,644 + 2,033
State government (eastern) 71,975 74,898 + 3,899 + 1,585 + 1,592 + 260 + 462 + 2,923 + 1,216 + 1,707Local government (western)  
3 95,057 97,250 + 4,805 + 1,961 + 1,114 + 491 + 1,239 + 3,431 + 1,180 + 2,251
Local government (eastern)  3 17,353 17,250 + 373 − 30 + 4 + 110 + 289 − 25 − 103 + 78
Total 1,430,413 1,465,358 + 72,917 + 45,805 + 8,487 + 17,509 + 1,115 + 36,260 + 27,373 + 8,888
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 35,722 37,214 − 299 + 1,187 + 99 + 187 − 1,772 + 1,491 + 1,766 − 275 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 279,796 295,608 + 33,382 + 14,031 + 9,528 + 6,946 + 2,878 + 15,812 + 10,379 + 5,433
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 168,958 170,389 + 15,342 + 6,119 + 2,907 + 4,070 + 2,246 + 1,431 − 6,314 + 7,745
Federal savings notes 10,817 11,180 − 1,993 − 1,565 − 656 − 22 + 249 + 362 + 219 + 143Bonds  
5 495,418 507,071 + 24,289 + 14,792 + 2,748 + 5,953 + 796 + 11,653 + 11,252 + 401
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 379,984 381,150 − 16,223 + 4,553 − 9,333 − 910 − 10,534 + 2,482 + 8,109 − 5,627
Loans from social security funds 430 501 + 89 + 31 − + 42 + 17 + 71 + 44 + 27Other loans  
6 53,632 56,583 + 19,509 + 6,700 + 3,194 + 2,377 + 7,238 + 2,951 + 1,913 + 1,038
Old debt  7 4 4 5 1 − 4 1 − 4 2 +0 +6 −4 +6 +4 +3
Equalisation claims 5,572 5,572 − 1,138 + 0 + 0 − 1,139 + 1 − − −Investment assistance levy 41 41 − − −−−−−−
Total 1,430,413 1,465,358 + 72,917 + 45,805 + 8,487 + 17,509 + 1,115 + 36,260 + 27,373 + 8,888
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 − − −−−−−−
Credit institutions 541,900 528,200 + 17,725 + 26,088 + 3,768 + 3,451 − 15,582 − 12,384 + 7,637 − 20,021
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 430 501 + 89 + 31 − + 42 + 17 + 71 + 44 + 27Other  
8 263,943 260,317 − 11,697 − 6,914 + 3,219 − 10,384 + 2,380 − 3,627 − 5,208 + 1,582
Foreign creditors  pe 619,700 671,900 + 66,800 + 26,600 + 1,500 + 24,400 + 14,300 + 52,200 + 24,900 + 27,300
Total 1,430,413 1,465,358 + 72,917 + 45,805 + 8,487 + 17,509 + 1,115 + 36,260 + 27,373 + 8,888
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. — 6Including loans raised abroad. — 7Old liabilities arising
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Net borrowing differs from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer of construction of the former GDR’s armed forces and from housing
debts. — 2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt inassociations. — 4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. — 8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 5Excluding issuers’ holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund  3 Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 − − −2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 − − −2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 − − −2002 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 − − −2003 399,304 38,410 793 9,042 260,046 91,013 − − −
2004 June 397,237 37,827 690 8,305 259,854 90,560 − − −
Sep 399,706 38,664 690 8,305 261,515 90,531 − − −
Dec 399,250 36,791 690 7,981 262,070 91,719 − − −
2005 Mar 399,064 36,069 − 7,878 264,478 90,639 − − −
June 394,063 31,898 − 7,050 264,757 90,358 − − −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. — 1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. — 2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Schätze)  2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 852004 812,083 34,440 1,074 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 81
2004          Oct 827,013 35,341 1,087 102,894 161,759 10,570 460,206 39,892 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86
         Nov 820,571 34,819 1,085 104,060 160,102 10,731 460,112 34,399 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 83         Dec 812,083 34,440 1,074 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 81
2005          Jan  
10 874,505 34,968 1,090 106,345 169,269 10,895 490,938 45,389 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
         Feb 876,329 34,936 1,099 107,310 162,504 10,951 495,304 48,593 363 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
         Mar 870,368 36,393 1,113 102,959 162,592 11,037 495,478 45,119 373 10,798 − 36 5,572 83
         Apr 878,471 36,543 1,122 109,471 168,826 11,067 496,610 39,139 398 10,798 − 36 5,572 84
         May 875,543 36,089 1,121 110,280 166,045 11,119 492,031 43,152 408 10,798 − 36 5,572 85         June 874,015 36,021 1,111 105,227 170,338 11,180 495,879 38,778 408 10,562 − 36 5,572 86
         July 889,814 36,128 1,091 110,360 171,179 11,186 506,393 39,106 408 10,562 − 36 4,443 86
         Aug 878,779 35,886 1,095 110,935 156,950 11,125 514,177 34,243 408 10,562 − 36 4,443 86         Sep 885,155 35,989 1,076 106,836 163,284 11,061 514,173 38,303 408 10,608 − 36 4,443 86
         Oct 
p 888,106 35,722 1,060 113,486 168,426 11,076 503,350 40,541 408 10,608 − 36 4,443 84
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including Germany to their home country. — 8Commutation and compensation debt
cash bills. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. — and old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency. — 9On 1 July 1999
3Including loans raised abroad. — 4Including money market loans. — central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and
employees. — 6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. — 10On 1 January
levy. — 7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
former GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection German Unity Fund. 
with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 9402001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,4952002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 − 10,155 + 2,221 + 222003 + 227,078 + 42,292 + 62,535 + 13,636 + 42,327 + 15,947 + 109,500 + 8,874 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,2182004 + 228,122 + 44,389 + 52,701 + 24,185 + 35,589 + 15,842 + 130,801 + 5,313 + 7,186 − 1,620 + 1,844 + 802
2004          Jan-Oct + 203,907 + 59,315 + 47,428 + 24,012 + 32,130 + 18,329 + 112,659 + 13,222 + 6,182 − 580 + 5,507 + 9,030
2005          Jan-Oct 
p + 199,664 + 37,369 + 45,681 + 19,184 + 27,332 − 481 + 111,684 + 14,849 + 1,925 − 8,098 + 13,042 + 2,250
2004          Oct + 20,064 + 12,657 + 724 + 724 + 4,733 + 4,733 + 13,443 + 7,172 + 303 − 834 + 861 + 8,203         Nov + 11,485 − 6,442 + 5,004 − 94 + 4,289 − 1,657 + 6,808 + 804 + 640 − 237 − 5,256 − 8,455         Dec + 12,730 − 8,485 + 269 + 268 − 830 − 830 + 11,333 − 8,714 + 365 − 803 + 1,593 + 226
2005          Jan + 37,004 + 23,768 + 13,043 + 6,772 + 362 + 362 + 12,951 + 6,774 + 285 − 502 + 10,362 + 4,588
         Feb + 14,998 + 1,824 + 4,366 + 4,366 + 213 − 6,765 + 7,107 + 990 + 177 + 100 + 3,134 − 1,756         Mar + 13,233 − 5,961 + 174 + 174 + 89 + 89 + 15,149 − 2,809 + 224 − 1,014 − 2,404 − 7,798
         Apr + 16,692 + 8,103 + 1,132 + 1,131 + 6,233 + 6,233 + 12,766 + 6,693 + 95 − 2,422 − 3,533 + 5,598
         May + 20,117 − 2,928 + 5,478 − 4,579 + 3,205 − 2,780 + 6,442 + 406 + 250 − 718 + 4,742 − 4,800         June + 17,505 − 1,528 + 3,848 + 3,848 + 4,292 + 4,292 + 12,895 − 5,059 + 50 − 1,031 − 3,579 + 694
         July + 23,703 + 15,799 + 10,514 + 10,514 + 841 + 841 + 11,298 + 5,246 + 236 − 487 + 814 + 14,482
         Aug + 10,517 − 11,035 + 7,785 + 7,785 + 620 − 14,229 + 6,622 + 273 + 70 − 283 − 4,581 − 13,116         Sep + 25,105 + 6,376 − 4 − 4 + 6,335 + 6,335 + 14,044 − 4,060 + 176 − 449 + 4,554 + 6,078
         Oct 
p + 20,790 + 2,952 − 654 − 10,823 + 5,141 + 5,141 + 12,410 + 6,397 + 362 − 1,293 + 3,532 − 1,720
1After deduction of repurchases. — 2Federal Treasury notes (Schätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the German
pension insurance fund *
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Germany
1993 290,393 232,408 52,671 298,065 252,920 15,898 − 7,672 39,786 29,957 8,499 1,100 229 6,297
1994 322,335 256,662 61,891 324,323 273,880 17,751 − 1,988 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,8901995 338,185 270,294 64,387 348,115 294,034 20,285 − 9,930 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,8001996  
8 353,672 282,616 68,388 362,667 305,780 21,660 − 8,995 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 374,853 297,402 74,961 372,955 316,511 23,280 + 1,898 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 389,101 297,827 88,755 385,707 327,823 24,393 + 3,394 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,5731999 208,173 152,206 54,628 203,295 172,919 12,950 + 4,878 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,9042000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,8782003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,8622004  
9 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2004          Q1 55,431 37,289 17,846 58,350 49,858 3,873 − 2,919 5,879 3,375 696 1,681 127 4,862         Q2 56,665 38,446 17,873 57,794 49,437 3,416 − 1,129 3,751 1,914 28 1,681 128 4,877         Q3 56,766 38,664 17,779 58,107 49,719 3,456 − 1,341 2,560 731 22 1,681 127 4,889         Q4  
9 62,336 42,126 17,807 58,350 49,824 3,484 + 3,986 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005          Q1 55,160 36,897 17,996 58,001 50,031 3,390 − 2,841 2,607 2,432 16 41 118 4,828         Q2 56,913 38,647 17,911 58,286 49,929 3,413 − 1,373 1,195 1,020 16 42 118 4,874         Q3 57,546 38,492 18,807 58,455 50,150 3,337 − 909 362 187 16 43 117 4,885
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of Social Security Code V have been deducted from pension payments. —
German Pension Insurance Funds. — *Excluding German pension insurance 4From 1995, including long-term care insurance for pensioners. — 5Largely
for the mining, railroad and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. —
not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security funds;
provisional. From 1993, including financial compensation payments. including participating interests. — 8Excluding income arising from the
Excluding investment spending and proceeds. — 2Including contributions revaluation of participating interests. — 9Revenue includes proceeds from
for recipients of government cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension the disposal of equity interests. 
insurance funds to health insurance institutions under section 50 of the
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Employment Agency
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
Promo- loans
Unemployment support  4,5 Job promotion  5,6 tion of fromwinter central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction Balance ment
Germany
1993 85,109 79,895 1,829 109,536 48,005 34,149 13,856 36,891 15,895 20,996 1,919 − 24,426 24,419
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 − 10,205 10,1421995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 − 6,892 6,8871996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 − 13,763 13,7561997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 − 9,574 9,5741998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 − 7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 − 3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 8672001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 − 1,931 1,9312002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 − 5,623 5,6232003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 272 − 6,215 6,2152004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 217 − 4,176 4,175
2004          Q1 11,524 11,261 47 14,448 8,200 6,001 2,199 4,389 2,491 1,898 144 − 2,924 5,244
         Q2 12,042 11,419 394 13,949 7,782 5,673 2,109 4,268 2,510 1,758 67 − 1,907 1,946         Q3 12,516 11,709 481 12,818 7,044 5,189 1,855 3,919 2,309 1,610 4 − 303 166         Q4 14,233 12,821 753 13,275 6,721 4,958 1,762 4,267 2,522 1,745 3 + 958 − 3,181
2005          Q1 11,934 11,072 40 14,775 7,983 5,805 2,178 3,332 2,083 1,249 139 − 2,842 5,532
         Q2 13,283 11,449 324 13,697 7,394 5,376 2,018 3,062 1,956 1,105 97 − 414 223         Q3 12,924 11,618 420 12,662 6,357 4,720 1,637 2,576 1,670 906 5 + 262 − 458
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government the January contributions to the statutory pension insurance scheme for
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- recipients of wage substitutes are paid in January instead of in
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a December. — 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up,
compensatory amount to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit, rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service
short-time working benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory Agencies (PSAs), compensation top-up payments and business start-up
health insurance funds and statutory pension insurance sheme. From 2003, grants. 
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
  2003   2004   2005
  2002   2003   2004   2002   2003   2004   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 99.5 100.5 105.0 − 1.6 1.0 4.4 1.9 3.8 6.3 4.2 3.4 1.1 4.5Construction 90.5 86.4 85.1 − 4.1 − 4.5 − 1.6 − 2.5 2.3 − 0.5 − 4.2 − 3.1 − 11.7 − 1.7Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 103.7 102.3 104.2 0.7 − 1.3 1.9 − 1.1 2.0 2.4 1.0 2.2 1.2 2.1
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 104.6 105.2 107.1 1.5 0.6 1.8 1.1 1.4 2.7 1.4 1.7 1.5 1.3
Public and private services  3 102.4 102.1 102.4 2.0 − 0.3 0.4 − 0.4 0.7 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1
Gross value added 101.8 101.7 103.9 0.3 − 0.1 2.1 0.4 2.1 3.0 1.5 1.7 0.2 1.7
Gross domestic product  4 101.3 101.1 102.8 0.1 − 0.2 1.6 0.3 2.0 2.1 1.2 1.3 − 0.3 1.5
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 101.3 101.5 102.0 − 0.5 0.1 0.6 − 0.3 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 1.5 − 0.8 0.5
Government consumption 102.0 102.1 100.5 1.4 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.4 − 0.3
Machinery and equipment 89.1 88.9 91.3 − 7.5 − 0.2 2.6 0.4 − 1.3 0.9 5.1 5.1 3.7 7.5Premises 89.8 88.4 86.3 − 5.8 − 1.6 − 2.3 1.0 1.2 − 2.0 − 4.4 − 3.3 − 10.9 − 1.8Other investment  
6 107.6 111.1 113.1 1.3 3.3 1.8 4.2 1.9 2.0 1.6 1.7 2.2 2.2
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . − 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 1.7 0.5 0.5 0.9
Domestic use 97.6 98.1 98.7 − 1.9 0.6 0.6 0.9 0.3 − 0.5 1.4 1.0 − 1.0 1.5Net exports  
8 . . . 1.9 − 0.7 1.1 − 0.6 1.7 2.6 − 0.1 0.3 0.6 0.1
Exports 111.0 113.6 124.2 4.2 2.4 9.3 2.7 8.0 13.7 7.3 8.4 4.1 5.4Imports 99.9 104.9 112.3 − 1.4 5.1 7.0 5.1 3.5 7.1 8.7 8.5 2.8 6.2
Gross domestic product  
4 101.3 101.1 102.8 0.1 − 0.2 1.6 0.3 2.0 2.1 1.2 1.3 − 0.3 1.5
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,266.7 1,287.6 1,312.5 0.6 1.7 1.9 1.2 1.9 1.4 1.4 2.9 0.4 1.6
Government consumption 412.3 415.5 412.8 3.0 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.9 0.3 0.6 − 1.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 0.5Machinery and equipment 151.9 146.9 149.4 − 9.3 − 3.2 1.7 − 2.0 − 2.4 0.1 4.3 4.0 2.8 6.3Premises 216.5 213.0 210.7 − 6.1 − 1.6 − 1.1 1.1 1.3 − 0.8 − 2.7 − 1.5 − 9.0 − 1.0Other investment  
6 24.5 24.5 24.9 − 1.5 − 0.2 1.6 0.0 0.5 1.8 2.0 2.2 1.7 1.2
Changes in inventories  7 − 24.0 − 11.6 − 4.0 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,047.9 2,075.8 2,106.2 − 1.1 1.4 1.5 1.4 0.9 0.6 2.2 2.1 0.1 2.4Net exports 97.1 87.6 109.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 765.6 772.7 842.8 4.1 0.9 9.1 0.1 6.1 13.0 7.7 9.6 5.1 6.1Imports 668.5 685.1 733.4 − 3.6 2.5 7.0 1.8 0.2 6.7 10.0 11.1 4.9 8.2
Gross domestic product  
4 2,145.0 2,163.4 2,215.7 1.5 0.9 2.4 0.8 3.0 3.1 1.7 1.9 0.5 1.9
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 103.0 104.5 106.0 1.2 1.5 1.4 1.5 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.2 1.1Gross domestic product 102.7 103.7 104.5 1.4 1.0 0.8 0.6 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.4Terms of trade 102.0 103.0 102.8 2.1 1.0 − 0.2 0.6 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 1.2
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,128.7 1,131.1 1,134.5 0.7 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 0.8 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 452.5 468.9 523.8 2.8 3.6 11.7 5.1 12.1 17.4 8.0 9.8 4.3 8.7
National income 1,581.2 1,600.0 1,658.3 1.3 1.2 3.6 1.2 4.3 5.6 2.4 2.4 1.3 2.6
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,120.9 2,147.3 2,216.0 1.4 1.2 3.2 1.5 3.6 4.3 2.5 2.5 0.9 2.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2005. — 1In- products). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6In-
cluding communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate tangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertain-
activities, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home servi- ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net in-
ces. — 4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on crease in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-
Period total tion  2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
2000 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9
2001 99.5 92.5 97.3 100.4 99.4 102.3 100.4 98.8 98.0 101.1 102.1 104.02002 98.3 89.0 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.42003 98.4 85.1 99.8 99.5 99.5 101.9 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.62004 100.8 80.4 102.6 102.5 103.4 105.7 87.4 97.9 104.6 103.7 101.2 111.9
 
2004          Jan 92.0 49.3 116.2 93.3 96.6 90.6 83.4 93.6 101.9 104.6 82.5 97.4         Feb 94.1 56.7 106.4 96.2 98.7 96.9 86.5 92.0 101.6 103.1 87.7 110.1         Mar 105.1 76.2 110.2 107.2 107.9 111.7 96.0 99.5 107.5 111.6 106.2 121.6
         Apr 100.6 85.9 101.0 101.9 104.4 103.8 88.1 96.3 107.6 104.1 98.5 114.3
         May 99.8 86.8 97.6 101.3 103.5 104.0 86.2 94.8 102.5 105.4 98.5 115.3         June 103.5 93.0 91.0 105.9 107.2 111.0 87.0 97.2 103.5 111.3 106.4 120.6
         July 103.3 95.5 92.6 105.2 107.1 108.3 87.0 99.1 105.6 106.6 105.4 112.1
         Aug 93.8 85.5 90.7 94.9 98.6 93.5 68.1 95.8 103.7 94.0 89.5 90.6         Sep 106.8 95.0 95.3 109.1 109.1 114.6 96.8 101.3 106.0 107.3 112.8 120.7
         Oct 108.2 93.3 104.9 109.9 109.9 113.8 96.6 105.4 108.0 106.8 104.0 127.0
         Nov 106.7 85.7 110.0 108.3 107.7 112.2 94.4 104.9 107.7 105.2 104.2 120.4         Dec 95.9 61.9 115.5 96.9 89.5 107.9 78.8 95.4 99.1 84.3 118.3 92.9
2005          Jan  
r 94.8 48.5 112.7 97.1 101.5 95.3 81.8 95.0 112.3 105.0 86.2 106.7
         Feb  r 94.9 43.5 107.9 98.3 99.6 100.4 85.8 94.5 109.1 101.7 93.0 112.2
         Mar  r 7 106.8 7 60.0 112.3 110.5 109.2 117.8 95.8 102.4 118.5 109.3 113.8 126.4
         Apr  r 7 102.5 7 79.7 101.2 104.8 106.3 109.1 87.3 97.4 110.6 105.9 100.8 122.4
         May  r 7 100.5 7 81.9 97.8 102.6 105.5 104.5 79.8 98.2 111.5 101.9 98.6 112.2
         June  r 7 106.3 7 88.1 92.4 109.5 109.5 117.1 90.6 98.9 109.1 106.6 115.3 122.1
         July  x 7 106.4 7 91.3 96.9 108.9 110.1 113.5 83.9 103.1 115.1 107.6 106.6 121.8
         Aug  x 7 95.6 7 83.3 92.5 97.0 101.4 94.4 70.0 98.8 110.2 95.4 91.2 89.9
         Sep  x 7 110.1 7 91.7 96.3 113.3 113.1 119.2 95.8 106.4 114.2 108.4 112.9 125.6
Annual percentage change  
  
2000 + 4.8 − 3.5 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 9.7 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 8.2 + 7.1 + 11.2
2001 − 0.4 − 7.5 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 2.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.1 + 2.2 + 4.12002 − 1.2 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.32003 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 5.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 + 2.12004 + 2.4 − 5.5 + 2.8 + 3.0 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 3.5 + 4.0
 
2004          Jan + 1.9 − 4.8 + 5.3 + 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.7 + 3.7 + 2.1 − 4.4         Feb + 1.8 + 10.1 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 4.8 − 1.4 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 + 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.7         Mar + 0.5 − 9.2 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 4.0 + 1.0 + 2.7 + 0.2
         Apr + 2.2 − 6.7 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 4.0 + 4.4 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 5.6 + 5.0
         May + 4.0 − 4.7 + 2.4 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 6.9 + 8.0 + 1.0
+ 0.0 + 4.0 + 7.2 + 7.9
         June + 3.5 − 5.8 − 0.7 + 4.9 + 4.7 + 7.5 + 4.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 13.8 + 4.4 + 13.0
         July + 2.9 − 6.6 + 2.3 + 3.8 + 4.5 + 5.0 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 4.8 + 6.6 + 3.1
         Aug + 4.2 − 5.0 + 0.3 + 5.4 + 5.9 + 8.1 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 5.0 + 6.6 + 4.7 + 13.3         Sep + 4.4 − 5.8 + 3.4 + 5.4 + 5.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 + 8.6 + 5.7 + 7.9 + 8.9
         Oct + 2.9 − 6.0 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 2.8 + 7.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 + 3.8 − 0.4 + 5.9 + 13.0
         Nov + 0.3 − 8.0 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 2.3 − 1.4 − 5.7 + 1.7 + 6.2 + 1.8 − 1.5 − 3.7         Dec + 0.9 − 7.7 + 7.9 + 0.7 + 2.8 − 0.8 − 4.9 + 1.3 + 7.0 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 4.7
2005          Jan  
r + 3.0 − 1.6 − 3.0 + 4.1 + 5.1 + 5.2 − 1.9 + 1.5 + 10.2 + 0.4 + 4.5 + 9.5
         Feb  r + 0.9 − 23.3 + 1.4 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 3.6 − 0.8 + 2.7 + 7.4 − 1.4 + 6.0 + 1.9
         Mar  r 7 + 1.6 7 − 21.3 + 1.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 5.5 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 10.2 − 2.1 + 7.2 + 3.9
         Apr  r 7 + 1.9 7 − 7.2 + 0.2 + 2.8 + 1.8 + 5.1 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 2.8 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 7.1
         May  r 7 + 0.7 7 − 5.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 0.5 − 7.4 + 3.6 + 8.8 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 2.7
         June  r 7 + 2.7 7 − 5.3 + 1.5 + 3.4 + 2.1 + 5.5 + 4.1 + 1.7 + 5.4 − 4.2 + 8.4 + 1.2
         July  x 7 + 3.0 7 − 4.4 + 4.6 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 4.8 − 3.6 + 4.0 + 9.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 8.7
         Aug  x 7 + 1.9 7 − 2.6 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 6.3 + 1.5 + 1.9 − 0.8
         Sep  x 7 + 3.1 7 − 3.5 + 1.0 + 3.8 + 3.7 + 4.0 − 1.0 + 5.0 + 7.7 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 4.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — oUsing the quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities related to prin-
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The ting. — 7Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of es-
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Build- timates, to the results of the annual overall survey in the constructio n sector
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — (average +3%). — xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statis-
3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in particular, mining of tical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Producti on
coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas and manu- Survey for the third quarter (industry: on average -2.5%). 
facture of refined petroleum products. — 4Including mining and
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 Durable goods Non-durable goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
total  
  
2001 98.3 − 1.7 95.9 − 4.0 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.5 99.8 − 0.1 102.5 + 2.6
2002 98.3 + 0.0 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 99.0 − 2.4 95.7 − 4.1 101.0 − 1.5
2003 98.9 + 0.6 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.1 95.5 − 3.5 89.9 − 6.1 98.8 − 2.22004 104.7 + 5.9 104.9 + 7.3 107.1 + 6.4 94.7 − 0.8 89.1 − 0.9 98.2 − 0.6
 
2004          Sep 108.3 + 5.4 108.2 + 7.2 110.3 + 5.8 100.8 − 2.0 94.0 − 4.3 105.0 − 0.8
         Oct 108.1 + 5.3 108.9 + 6.1 109.8 + 6.8 99.4 − 3.4 96.4 − 4.6 101.4 − 2.4
         Nov 105.3 + 2.8 106.8 + 4.7 105.9 + 1.3 97.2 + 1.7 95.2 − 2.2 98.4 + 4.1         Dec 108.1 + 10.3 95.1 + 4.4 123.8 + 16.4 86.5 − 0.5 78.1 − 4.2 91.8 + 1.8
2005          Jan 106.7 + 6.9 109.2 + 7.3 107.1 + 7.2 96.5 + 3.8 88.1 − 2.5 101.6 + 7.4
         Feb 105.0 + 3.8 104.3 + 2.2 106.1 + 4.8 102.3 + 4.1 87.8 − 1.8 111.1 + 6.8         Mar 116.9 + 5.2 114.4 + 3.0 121.0 + 7.0 108.2 + 4.3 97.3 − 0.2 114.9 + 6.8
         Apr 105.1 + 0.9 105.7 − 0.6 107.0 + 1.8 95.4 + 2.9 90.7 + 1.7 98.3 + 3.5
         May 105.5 + 1.4 106.6 + 1.6 108.1 + 0.8 91.3 + 3.4 85.8 − 2.3 94.7 + 6.9         June 113.2 + 7.2 110.8 + 3.2 119.4 + 10.4 95.4 + 6.7 92.8 + 3.5 97.1 + 9.0
         July 114.5 + 8.6 114.0 + 6.5 118.3 + 10.9 100.7 + 5.8 89.0 + 0.9 108.0 + 8.4
         Aug 101.5 + 5.9 102.2 + 3.3 101.8 + 7.7 97.9 + 6.6 78.9 + 6.9 109.6 + 6.5         Sep  
p 117.5 + 8.5 114.5 + 5.8 122.7 + 11.2 105.1 + 4.3 97.9 + 4.1 109.6 + 4.4
from the domestic market  
  
2001 97.6 − 2.4 96.4 − 3.5 98.0 − 2.0 99.9 + 0.0 99.5 − 0.4 100.2 + 0.4
2002 94.6 − 3.1 94.6 − 1.9 94.6 − 3.5 94.6 − 5.3 92.0 − 7.5 96.3 − 3.92003 94.6
+ 0.0 95.0 + 0.4 96.0 + 1.5 90.0 − 4.9 86.7 − 5.8 92.1 − 4.4
2004 98.2 + 3.8 100.5 + 5.8 99.9 + 4.1 86.9 − 3.4 83.3 − 3.9 89.2 − 3.1
 
2004          Sep 99.8 + 1.5 102.7 + 6.4 99.6 − 0.8 92.2 − 5.2 86.1 − 7.3 96.0 − 4.1
         Oct 102.4 + 3.3 105.0 + 4.6 103.3 + 4.8 92.3 − 4.7 89.7 − 7.6 94.0 − 2.8
         Nov 99.8 + 0.6 104.0 + 3.9 99.1 − 1.9 89.6 − 2.5 89.2 − 4.9 89.9 − 0.8         Dec 98.7 + 10.0 89.5 + 5.0 114.8 + 18.4 79.3 − 3.8 72.6 − 6.1 83.6 − 2.3
2005          Jan 96.9 + 3.3 102.9 + 6.4 94.3 + 0.9 87.4 + 1.0 82.5 − 5.6 90.4 + 5.2
         Feb 95.8 − 0.1 97.6 + 1.2 95.3 − 2.6 92.3 + 3.7 83.1 − 1.9 97.9 + 6.6         Mar 106.6 + 1.4 107.1 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.9 99.7 + 3.9 92.3 − 1.5 104.2 + 6.9
         Apr 97.9 − 0.1 99.8 − 1.7 99.4 + 0.5 88.0 + 3.4 85.6 + 3.1 89.5 + 3.3
         May 96.0 + 0.9 100.2 + 0.1 96.2 + 1.1 83.8 + 3.6 80.3 − 1.1 86.0 + 6.6         June 103.7 + 5.5 103.8 + 1.9 109.6 + 9.1 86.9 + 6.1 86.1 + 5.0 87.5 + 7.1
         July 103.9 + 4.4 108.2 + 3.5 103.9 + 4.1 91.9 + 8.1 84.4 + 5.5 96.7 + 9.6
         Aug 95.9 + 4.0 98.7 + 1.6 95.4 + 6.0 89.1 + 4.7 74.9 + 6.4 98.0 + 4.0         Sep  
p 105.2 + 5.4 107.4 + 4.6 106.2 + 6.6 96.1 + 4.2 91.2 + 5.9 99.1 + 3.2
from abroad  
  
2001 99.1 − 0.8 95.1 − 4.9 100.7 + 0.7 104.8 + 4.9 100.5 + 0.5 107.5 + 7.62002 102.8 + 3.7 99.1 + 4.2 104.1 + 3.4 108.6 + 3.6 103.9 + 3.4 111.5 + 3.72003 104.3 + 1.5 102.3 + 3.2 105.1 + 1.0 107.5 − 1.0 97.2 − 6.4 113.9 + 2.22004 112.9 + 8.2 111.7 + 9.2 113.8 + 8.3 112.2 + 4.4 102.4 + 5.3 118.1 + 3.7
 
2004          Sep 119.0 + 9.7 116.7 + 8.2 120.1 + 11.3 120.1 + 4.1 111.9 + 1.4 125.1 + 5.6
         Oct 115.3 + 7.6 114.9 + 8.4 115.7 + 8.4 115.5 − 0.7 111.7 + 1.4 117.9 − 1.8
         Nov 112.1 + 5.3 111.3 + 6.0 112.2 + 4.1 114.2 + 9.8 108.9 + 3.3 117.4 + 13.8         Dec 119.9 + 10.5 103.8 + 3.5 132.1 + 14.8 102.6 + 5.9 90.5 − 0.8 109.9 + 9.5
2005          Jan 118.9 + 10.8 119.0 + 8.4 119.0 + 12.5 116.9 + 8.6 101.0 + 3.9 126.4 + 11.0
         Feb 116.5 + 8.1 114.9 + 3.6 116.1 + 11.3 124.6 + 4.4 98.6 − 1.5 140.5 + 7.3         Mar 129.8 + 9.4 125.9 + 7.1 132.5 + 11.3 127.3 + 5.3 108.6 + 2.4 138.7 + 6.8
         Apr 114.1 + 2.0 114.8 + 0.8 114.0 + 2.8 112.0 + 2.0 102.3 − 1.1 117.8 + 3.6
         May 117.3 + 1.9 116.6 + 3.7 119.1 + 0.8 108.0 + 3.0 98.3 − 4.4 113.9 + 7.3         June 125.0 + 8.9 121.7 + 4.9 128.5 + 11.4 114.6 + 7.9 108.2 + 0.9 118.5 + 12.3
         July 127.7 + 13.2 123.0 + 10.8 131.6 + 16.4 120.4 + 2.0 99.6 − 6.7 133.0 + 6.6
         Aug 108.5 + 8.1 107.7 + 5.8 107.7 + 9.2 117.5 + 9.9 88.1 + 8.0 135.3 + 10.7         Sep  
p 132.8 + 11.6 125.7 + 7.7 138.0 + 14.9 125.4 + 4.4 113.1 + 1.1 132.9 + 6.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany  1 Eastern Germany  2 
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2001 94.6 − 5.4 82.9 97.0 99.1 98.9 − 1.1 88.6 102.2 101.6 82.6 − 17.3 67.2 81.9 92.4
2002 88.8 − 6.1 72.8 91.5 95.7 92.1 − 6.9 80.5 94.8 96.4 79.6 − 3.6 51.6 82.0 94.02003 79.3 − 10.7 67.5 78.6 87.5 82.0 − 11.0 75.6 79.6 88.7 72.0 − 9.5 45.2 75.4 84.32004 74.3 − 6.3 61.3 72.8 84.2 77.0 − 6.1 70.5 74.6 83.8 67.1 − 6.8 35.7 67.7 85.2
   
2004          Aug 77.5 − 4.4 60.5 74.2 91.8 78.1 − 5.4 69.9 73.9 88.2 75.8 − 1.6 34.7 74.9 101.2
         Sep 85.9 − 5.7 71.3 80.2 101.4 89.1 − 3.7 84.0 81.8 100.9 76.8 − 12.0 36.2 75.3 102.6
         Oct 74.5 − 6.4 59.0 72.1 86.9 78.9 − 6.8 70.1 75.1 88.8 62.5 − 5.0 28.4 63.4 82.0
         Nov 61.8 − 11.6 51.3 62.3 67.7 64.2 − 12.1 59.2 64.7 66.9 55.0 − 10.1 29.6 55.6 69.5         Dec 69.5 + 0.3 56.1 78.7 67.3 71.8 − 0.7 64.1 79.8 67.4 63.0 + 3.3 33.9 75.8 67.1
2005          Jan 46.6 − 12.7 39.7 50.4 46.8 50.1 − 7.7 46.8 54.8 46.6 37.2 − 26.6 20.2 37.6 47.1
         Feb 52.1 − 21.3 45.3 54.4 53.7 55.2 − 18.2 54.6 53.8 57.3 43.4 − 30.4 19.7 55.8 44.5         Mar 78.9 − 3.2 64.6 82.2 84.2 83.3 − 1.0 74.7 86.8 84.6 67.1 − 9.6 36.9 68.9 83.1
         Apr 70.9 − 8.0 56.3 70.2 80.8 74.3 − 7.0 65.8 74.2 79.9 61.5 − 11.4 30.2 58.7 83.1
         May 77.9 + 2.6 62.3 70.7 95.6 81.9 + 3.7 71.0 73.8 98.2 66.8 − 1.2 38.4 61.7 89.0         June 88.6 − 1.4 66.7 86.2 105.0 93.7 − 0.7 79.0 91.3 105.7 74.6 − 3.7 32.8 71.3 103.0
         July 81.4 + 3.2 59.1 74.2 103.5 84.2 + 2.6 68.5 74.2 105.6 74.0 + 5.4 33.1 74.1 98.3
         Aug 82.5 + 6.5 57.5 81.8 98.7 86.9 + 11.3 67.3 86.9 99.4 70.1 − 7.5 30.4 67.0 96.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications 0.2.8. — 1Excluding West Berlin. — 2Including West Berlin. — 3Including
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there- the railways and post office. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  By enterprises’ main product range of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco  2 products  2 leather goods  2 ing materials  2 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2003 = 100
1997 96.3 − 0.6 − 1.3 87.8 − 0.7 73.2 + 2.2 113.4 − 1.6 108.2 − 0.9 94.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 87.4 + 3.7
1998 97.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 89.1 + 1.5 77.3 + 5.6 112.1 − 1.1 111.7 + 3.2 96.3 + 1.7 + 1.5 91.6 + 4.81999 97.8 + 0.5 + 0.3 89.7 + 0.7 82.9 + 7.2 111.8 − 0.3 110.6 − 1.0 97.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 94.6 + 3.3
2000 100.2 + 2.5 + 1.3 91.5 + 2.0 87.8 + 5.9 111.7 − 0.1 113.4 + 2.5 98.7 + 1.5 + 0.3 92.6 − 2.1
2001 102.1 + 1.9 . 95.7 + 4.6 94.3 + 7.4 111.3 − 0.4 109.6 − 3.4 100.7 + 2.0 . 95.3 + 2.92002 100.5 − 1.6 − 1.3 98.3 + 2.7 97.6 + 3.5 105.7 − 5.0 100.9 − 7.9 99.9 − 0.8 − 0.8 98.1 + 2.92003  
5 100.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 100.2 + 1.9 100.1 + 2.6 100.1 − 5.3 100.2 − 0.7 100.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 100.5 + 2.4
2004 100.7 + 0.6 + 0.7 102.5 + 2.3 99.0 − 1.1 102.7 + 2.6 102.9 + 2.7 101.0 + 0.8 + 0.5 102.1 + 1.6
 
2004          Sep 98.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 97.6 + 1.1 97.9 + 0.6 106.0 − 0.1 99.7 + 1.8 98.2 − 0.2 − 0.5 97.2 − 1.7
         Oct 105.9 + 0.8 + 0.8 103.6 + 0.5 105.0 + 1.9 120.3 + 1.6 110.2 + 4.6 105.6 + 0.9 + 0.6 104.7 + 0.9
         Nov 106.9 + 0.7 + 0.8 105.8 + 1.1 102.9 − 1.2 110.4 + 8.8 110.7 + 2.2 107.2 + 2.0 + 1.9 109.9 + 7.9         Dec 123.8 + 2.0 + 1.8 122.4 + 3.5 119.5 − 1.0 129.4 + 4.3 121.6 + 4.0 117.7 + 2.1 + 1.8 97.4 + 3.4
2005          Jan 95.1 + 4.5 + 4.6 97.8 + 4.4 95.3 + 10.4 88.2 + 1.4 95.2 + 4.5 92.7 + 3.3 + 3.2 84.1 − 1.5
         Feb 89.6 + 2.2 + 1.6 96.6 + 5.6 95.3 + 8.9 73.2 − 6.8 88.3 − 1.7 88.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 86.4 − 4.5         Mar 104.7 + 1.7 + 1.3 108.4 + 3.2 105.0 + 5.5 102.7 + 0.3 108.7 − 0.5 106.7 + 2.0 + 1.4 114.6 + 2.6
         Apr 101.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 104.6 + 0.6 99.7 + 1.5 114.1 + 3.9 102.5 − 4.3 104.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 113.6 + 1.2
         May 102.5 + 5.0 + 4.7 108.3 + 6.6 102.7 + 8.7 102.2 + 4.4 102.0 + 1.0 104.7 + 4.7 + 4.2 111.9 + 3.8         June 97.7 + 0.9 + 0.5 103.9 + 3.7 101.1 + 2.7 94.8 − 1.0 97.3 − 1.5 100.7 + 1.2 + 0.6 111.0 + 1.7
         July 99.4
+ 0.0 − 0.2 101.7 − 2.0 107.1 + 4.6 100.1 − 1.3 100.1 + 1.1 102.4 + 1.1 + 0.6 112.1 + 4.6
         Aug 96.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 98.1 − 2.7 98.5 + 2.3 95.9 + 3.0 96.9 + 0.5 96.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 95.3 + 3.5
         Sep  e 97.9 − 0.5 − 1.4 97.3 − 0.3 101.3 + 3.5 103.5 − 2.4 99.5 − 0.2 98.8 + 0.6 − 0.7 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding vehicle parts and accessories.— 4Up to (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices;
value-added tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version from 2001, at 2000 prices. — 5Unadjusted figures from January 2003 are
0.2.8. — 1Excluding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding provisional as they do not include Lower Saxony, especially uncertain in the
the sale of automotive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor most recent months. 
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployed  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-manu- ment pro-
going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cationaling Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  
3 6  7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percen- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7  8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2002 39,092 − 0.6 − 224 35,090 − 0.7 6,217 883 207 193 340 4,061 + 209 9.8 452
2003 38,723 − 0.9 − 369 34,650 − 1.3 9 6,136 817 195 143 260 4,377 + 315 10.5 355
2004 38,868 + 0.4 + 145 34,652 + 0.0 6,019 769 151 117 184 10 4,381 10 +9 3 10 10.5 286
2004          Oct 39,359 + 0.6 + 254 6,024 778 125 122 167 4,207 + 187 10.1 245         Nov 39,338 + 0.6 + 236 34,998 + 0.2 6,008 768 133 114 163 4,258 + 208 10.3 229         Dec 39,100 + 0.5 + 186 5,978 744 133 100 149 4,464 + 244 10.8 225
2005          Jan 38,356 + 0.1 + 49 5,949 684 148 85 135
11 5,040 11 + 442 11 12.1 12 268
         Feb r 38,375 r + 0.1 r + 30 34,114 − 0.4 5,930 660 168 77 122 5,217 + 575 12.6 333
         Mar r 38,435 r − 0.1 r − 56 5,925 13 668 174 67 116 5,176 + 628 12.5 394
         Apr r 38,564 r − 0.3 r − 133 5,919 13 696 159 59 113 4,968 + 524 12.0 434
         May r 38,730 r − 0.3 − 106 34,471 − 0.4 5,915 13 703 142 53 112 4,807 + 513 11.6 442
         June r 38,828 r − 0.2 r − 97 5,911 13 708 137 50 109 4,704 + 471 14 11.3 439
         July r 38,827 r − 0.1 r − 56 5,918 13 708 109 50 99 4,772 + 412 11.5 447
         Aug 38,902 − 0.0 − 16 ... ... 5,946 13 714 89 15 5115 95 4,729 + 382 11.4 464
         Sep 16 39,208 16 − 0.0 16 − 3 5,958 ... 96 15 5415 102 17 4,650 17 + 393 17 11.2 467
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 5415 107 4,556 + 349 11.0 453
Western Germany o 
  
2002 . . . . . 5,593 639 162 45 198 2,498 + 178 7.7 378
2003 . . . . . 9 5,503 594 160 31 161 2,753 + 255 8.4 292
2004 . . . . . 5,380 562 122 24 121 10 2,783 10 +8 9 10 8.5 239
2004          Oct . . . . . 5,378 567 102 26 112 2,694 + 141 8.2 204         Nov . . . . . 5,362 560 105 25 109 2,729 + 151 8.3 191         Dec . . . . . 5,337 546 105 23 99 2,862 + 174 8.7 192
2005          Jan . . . . . 5,234 505 118 19 89
11 3,269 11 + 341 11 10.0 12 228
         Feb . . . . . 5,215 490 133 18 80 3,423 + 476 10.4 279
         Mar . . . . . 5,210 13 496 137 16 78 3,397 + 524 10.3 320
         Apr . . . . . 5,202 13 514 128 14 76 3,263 + 457 9.9 345
         May . . . . . 5,199 13 518 113 13 75 3,171 + 460 9.7 344
         June . . . . . 5,194 13 521 110 12 73 3,117 + 447 14 9.5 344
         July . . . . . 5,198 13 520 87 10 67 3,173 + 412 9.6 346
         Aug . . . . . 5,221 13 524 69 15 915 63 3,166 + 401 9.6 359
         Sep . . . . . 5,232 ... 77 15 915 6817 3,134 17 + 432 17 9.5 357
         Oct . . . . . ... ... ... 15 815 71 3,097 + 402 9.4 345
Eastern Germany +  
  
2002 . . . . . 624 244 45 148 142 1,563 + 31 17.7 742003 . . . . .9 632 223 35 112 99 1,624 + 61 18.5 63
2004 . . . . . 639 207 29 93 63 10 1,599 10 +4 10 18.4 47
2004          Oct . . . . . 647 211 23 96 55 1,513 + 45 17.5 42         Nov . . . . . 645 208 27 89 54 1,529 + 57 17.7 38         Dec . . . . . 641 199 28 77 50 1,602 + 70 18.5 33
2005          Jan . . . . . 715 179 30 65 46
11 1,771 11 + 101 11 20.5 12 40
         Feb . . . . . 715 170 35 59 41 1,794 + 99 20.7 54
         Mar . . . . . 715 13 172 36 51 38 1,779 + 104 20.5 74
         Apr . . . . . 717 13 182 31 45 37 1,705 + 67 19.7 89
         May . . . . . 717 13 185 29 41 37 1,636 + 54 18.9 98
         June . . . . . 717 13 187 27 38 36 1,587 + 23 14 18.5 96
         July . . . . . 720 13 188 21 39 32 1,599 − 0 18.6 101
         Aug . . . . . 724 13 191 20 15 4215 32 1,562 − 19 18.2 106
         Sep . . . . . 727 ... 19 15 4515 3417 1,516 17 −3 9 17 17.6 110
         Oct . . . . . ... ... ... 15 4615 36 1,459 − 53 17.0 108
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual clusion of firms which are required to report and which have been iden-
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- tified in the course of drawing up the corporate register. — 10From Janu-
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- ary 2004, unemployed persons excluding all those participating in occupa-
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Work-place concept; aver- tional aptitude testing and training schemes. — 11From January 2005, un-
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — employed persons including recipients of social assistance who are able to
3Up to December 2004, western Germany including West Berlin and east- work. — 12From January 2005, including offers of job opportunities. —
ern Germany excluding West Berlin. — 4The figures refer to the economic 13Provisional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall sur-
classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or vey. — 14From June 2005, calculated on the basis of new labour force fig-
parts thereof; civil engineering”. — 5Mid-month level. — 6Employees in- ures. — 15Annualised data from the Federal Employment Agency based on
volved in job creation schemes and structural adjustment measures (SAM); information received so far. — 16Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal
provisional and partly revised data. — 7Mid-month level; end of month fig- Statistical Office. — 17From September 2005, unemployed persons in-
ures up to December 2004. — 8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — cluding recipients of social assistance who are able to work registered with
9The figures from 2003 onwards are positively affected by the first-time in- municipalities having separate responsibility for the unemploye d. 
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index HWWA
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Period Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
2000 = 100  
  
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.4 101.2 100.3 103.0 107.3 101.0 100.6 91.4 91.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 104.9 102.6 100.2 102.4 100.4 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.12003 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 104.1 101.4 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.92004 106.2 105.7 102.9 114.8 108.9 104.8 101.4 105.8 99.9 101.1 97.2 101.4 96.3
 
2004          Jan 105.2 106.9 102.1 110.5 107.2 104.4 104.0 103.8 100.2 95.2 82.6 92.8         Feb 105.4 106.4 101.9 110.2 108.3 104.5 100.5 104.1 105.3 100.3 95.3 82.2 96.2         Mar 105.7 106.1 103.1 111.4 108.0 104.6 104.7 105.3 100.8 96.4 91.2 103.5
         Apr 106.0 106.3 103.3 113.1 108.1 104.7 105.1 104.6 101.1 96.9 94.9 105.1
         May 106.2 106.6 103.1 116.1 108.1 104.7 101.4 105.6 104.3 101.3 97.6 104.5 101.1         June 106.2 106.7 103.1 114.2 108.6 104.8 105.5 107.4 101.1 97.0 100.8 99.1
         July 106.5 106.0 102.8 115.5 109.9 104.8 106.1 105.1 101.2 97.3 104.7 97.6
         Aug 106.7 104.9 102.8 117.3 110.3 105.0 101.8 106.4 99.9 101.5 98.2 114.3 94.6         Sep 106.4 104.3 102.9 116.6 109.2 105.0 106.6 99.4 101.5 98.3 112.7 93.5
         Oct 106.6 104.2 102.9 120.4 108.9 105.1 107.6 97.6 101.7 99.4 123.0 92.0
         Nov 106.2 104.1 103.0 117.2 108.4 105.2 102.0 107.1 98.9 101.6 98.1 108.1 91.4         Dec 107.3 105.3 103.7 114.5 111.7 105.2 107.2 99.0 101.2 97.2 96.8 89.2
2005          Jan 106.9 105.7 103.5 116.4 109.8 105.4 108.1 97.9 101.5 98.0 107.5 95.7
         Feb 107.3 106.3 103.6 117.5 110.5 105.6 102.5 108.5 99.0 101.8 98.8 111.4 99.2         Mar 107.6 106.6 103.7 120.7 110.3 105.6 109.1 100.3 102.1 100.1 125.3 103.1
         Apr 107.7 106.4 103.7 123.3 109.7 105.7 109.9 98.7 102.1 100.1 128.2 103.1
         May 108.0 107.1 103.6 123.0 110.9 105.8 102.5 109.9 98.7 102.0 99.7 124.3 102.3         June 108.1 107.0 103.5 125.8 110.6 105.9 110.4 98.8 102.2 101.3 144.6 106.6
         July 108.6 105.9 103.2 129.0 112.1 106.0 111.0 97.9 102.4 101.9 151.8 107.0
         Aug 108.7 104.9 103.1 130.9 112.5 106.0 102.7 111.3
p 99.1 102.4 102.8 160.9 105.9
         Sep 109.1 104.8 104.2 135.1 111.3 106.0 111.8 p 99.0 102.8 103.3 160.5 105.8
         Oct 109.1 104.4 104.3 135.6 111.2 106.1 ... ... ... ... 154.0 108.0
Annual percentage change  
  
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 2 + 3.1 + 5.9 + 3.1 + 10.1 + 73.6 + 20.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 7.3 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.12002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 6.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.92003 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.62004 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.5 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 22.3 + 10.8
 
2004          Jan + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 4.0 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 10.4 + 5.1         Feb + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 15.5 + 7.2         Mar + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.5 − 2.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.9 + 17.2
         Apr + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 4.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 24.9 + 19.7
         May + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 7.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 6.0 + 0.8 + 2.5 + 44.1 + 21.1         June + 1.7 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 5.0 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.5 + 5.7 + 0.8 + 2.0 + 30.9 + 21.9
         July + 1.8 − 0.3 + 1.7 + 5.8 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 28.5 + 18.0
         Aug + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 32.3 + 11.0         Sep + 1.8 − 1.2 + 1.5 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 2.3 − 5.2 + 1.0 + 2.7 + 43.2 + 6.9
         Oct + 2.0 − 1.4 + 1.5 + 9.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 3.3 − 5.4 + 1.3 + 4.1 + 51.9 + 3.7
         Nov + 1.8 − 1.3 + 1.6 + 7.0 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 2.8 − 5.7 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 32.3 + 0.4         Dec + 2.1 − 0.4 + 2.3 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 2.9 − 4.1 + 1.0 + 2.2 + 20.0 − 0.2
2005          Jan + 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.4 + 5.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.9 − 5.7 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 30.1 + 3.1
         Feb + 1.8 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 6.6 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 4.2 − 6.0 + 1.5 + 3.7 + 35.5 + 3.1         Mar + 1.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 8.3 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 4.2 − 4.7 + 1.3 + 3.8 + 37.4 − 0.4
         Apr + 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 9.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 4.6 − 5.6 + 1.0 + 3.3 + 35.1 − 1.9
         May + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 2.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 4.1 − 5.4 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 18.9 + 1.2         June + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 10.2 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 4.6 − 8.0 + 1.1 + 4.4 + 43.5 + 7.6
         July + 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 4.6 − 6.9 + 1.2 + 4.7 + 45.0 + 9.6
         Aug + 1.9
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 11.6 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 4.6 p − 0.8 + 0.9 + 4.7 + 40.8 + 11.9
         Sep + 2.5 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 15.9 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 4.9 p − 0.4 + 1.3 + 5.1 + 42.4 + 13.2
         Oct + 2.3 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 12.6 + 2.1 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... + 25.2 + 17.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWA Index of World Market Prices. — tion price level. — 4Excluding value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Previously: Overall construc- industrial raw materials. 
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999 € billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM / 
€ change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change %
1991 1,355.4 . 940.9 . 426.1 . 1,367.0 . 1,975.5 . 254.7 . 12.9
1992 1,466.6 8.2 1,001.9 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,475.8 8.0 2,120.2 7.3 268.8 5.6 12.71993 1,504.2 2.6 1,030.5 2.9 511.2 7.9 1,541.7 4.5 2,194.0 3.5 264.5 − 1.6 12.11994 1,526.0 1.4 1,026.6 − 0.4 529.3 3.5 1,555.9 0.9 2,275.7 3.7 259.1 − 2.1 11.4
1995 1,575.1 3.2 1,034.9 0.8 553.5 4.6 1,588.4 2.1 2,344.9 3.0 257.6 − 0.6 11.0
1996 1,592.5 1.1 1,029.9 − 0.5 599.0 8.2 1,629.0 2.6 2,386.5 1.8 251.7 − 2.3 10.51997 1,589.7 − 0.2 1,012.9 − 1.7 613.2 2.4 1,626.1 − 0.2 2,427.6 1.7 245.4 − 2.5 10.11998 1,623.0 2.1 1,036.3 2.3 625.0 1.9 1,661.3 2.2 2,474.2 1.9 249.4 1.7 10.11999 854.6 3.0 547.5 3.3 330.5 3.4 878.0 3.4 1,297.7 2.6 122.7 − 3.8 9.5
2000 883.4 3.4 569.6 4.0 339.9 2.8 909.5 3.6 1,337.4 3.1 123.2 0.4 9.2
2001 902.0 2.1 590.0 3.6 353.8 4.1 943.9 3.8 1,389.5 3.9 130.9 6.2 9.42002 908.4 0.7 591.5 0.2 368.7 4.2 960.1 1.7 1,406.1 1.2 139.4 6.5 9.92003 907.7 − 0.1 587.5 − 0.7 379.0 2.8 966.5 0.7 1,435.5 2.1 147.9 6.1 10.32004 912.0 0.5 600.3 2.2 379.3 0.1 979.6 1.4 1,466.4 2.1 153.8 4.0 10.5
2003          Q3 226.3 − 0.0 150.4 − 0.6 94.4 1.9 244.7 0.3 354.3 1.3 30.9 0.7 8.7
         Q4 252.1 − 0.4 162.2 − 0.4 95.7 3.1 257.9 0.9 365.6 1.2 32.1 1.4 8.8
2004          Q1 213.5 0.9 140.2 2.2 96.7 1.7 236.9 2.0 367.1 1.7 50.8 0.2 13.8
         Q2 219.9 1.0 142.4 3.4 94.0 0.2 236.4 2.1 360.6 1.7 35.6 4.2 9.9         Q3 226.5 0.1 153.0 1.7 93.7 − 0.7 246.6 0.8 360.5 1.7 32.4 4.7 9.0         Q4 252.1 − 0.0 164.7 1.5 95.0 − 0.8 259.7 0.7 378.2 3.4 35.1 9.2 9.3
2005          Q1 213.3 − 0.1 141.0 0.5 95.5 − 1.3 236.4 − 0.2 370.3 0.9 52.6 3.7 14.2
         Q2 219.2 − 0.3 142.1 − 0.2 93.9 − 0.0 236.0 − 0.2 367.1 1.8 37.0 3.8 10.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2005. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (workplace concept)  2 (workplace concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change change 2000 = 100
1995 89.8 4.9 90.2 4.6 94.8 3.1 88.3 6.1 89.5 5.5 89.9 4.1
1996 92.1 2.6 92.3 2.4 96.2 1.4 91.6 3.8 92.0 2.9 92.5 2.91997 93.4 1.5 93.7 1.5 96.3 0.2 93.4 1.9 93.6 1.7 94.2 1.71998 95.2 1.9 95.3 1.8 97.2 0.9 95.1 1.8 95.1 1.7 95.7 1.61999 98.0 2.9 98.1 2.8 98.6 1.4 98.0 3.1 98.0 3.0 97.4 1.8
2000 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 1.5 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.7
2001 101.9 1.9 101.9 1.9 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.7 1.7 102.2 2.22002 104.7 2.7 104.6 2.7 103.2 1.4 105.0 3.2 104.8 3.1 104.3 2.02003 106.7 2.0 106.8 2.1 104.4 1.2 107.6 2.5 107.4 2.4 . .2004 108.0 1.2 108.2 1.4 104.9 0.5 109.6 1.8 109.3 1.8 . .
2003          Q4 119.9 1.1 120.0 1.2 115.0 0.4 119.4 2.3 119.1 2.2 . .
2004          Q1 99.8 1.8 100.0 2.0 99.2 1.3 99.9 3.2 99.7 3.2 . .
         Q2 100.2 1.5 100.3 1.6 101.4 0.9 100.1 1.4 99.9 1.4 . .         Q3 111.2 1.0 111.4 1.1 104.0 − 0.0 116.6 0.8 116.3 0.8 . .         Q4 120.8 0.7 121.1 1.0 114.7 − 0.2 121.8 2.0 121.5 2.0 . .
2005          Q1 101.1 1.3 101.4 1.4 99.5 0.3 101.4 1.6 101.2 1.5 . .
         Q2 101.2 1.0 101.6 1.2 101.4 0.1 101.3 1.2 101.1 1.2 . .         Q3 112.4 1.1 112.8 1.2 . . 118.4 1.6 118.2 1.6 . .
2005          Mar 101.8 1.5 102.2 1.7 . . 103.8 2.3 103.5 2.2 . .
         Apr 101.6 1.7 101.9 1.9 . . 101.2 1.6 101.0 1.6 . .
         May 101.1 0.6 101.4 0.8 . . 101.4 0.6 101.2 0.6 . .         June 101.1 0.9 101.4 1.1 . . 101.4 1.5 101.2 1.5 . .
         July 134.1 1.3 134.5 1.4 . . 151.9 1.5 151.5 1.5 . .
         Aug 101.5 0.9 101.8 1.1 . . 101.8 1.7 101.5 1.7 . .         Sep 101.7 1.0 102.0 1.1 . . 101.7 1.6 101.5 1.6 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. — 2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2005. — 3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
X External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2004 2005
Item 2002 2003 2004 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug
Current account + 64,483 + 20,409 + 46,760 + 15,783 + 3,520 − 13,335 + 179 + 1,339 − 2,924A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,062,129 1,039,689 1,129,631 298,848 278,880 304,282 105,671 103,547 97,259
Imports (fob) 933,580 936,951 1,026,923 278,777 263,320 285,529 97,001 93,663 96,131
Balance + 128,548 + 102,736 + 102,708 + 20,071 + 15,560 + 18,753 + 8,670 + 9,884 + 1,128
2 Services
Receipts 332,095 329,269 355,467 92,126 83,924 94,991 33,689 35,346 33,697
Expenditure 315,711 309,619 327,777 85,476 80,700 85,525 29,802 31,531 31,873
Balance + 16,381 + 19,653 + 27,689 + 6,651 + 3,224 + 9,466 + 3,887 + 3,814 + 1,824
3 Income − 31,876 − 45,833 − 27,955 + 3,068 − 3,049 − 25,486 − 5,847 − 6,750 − 326
4 Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 85,358 80,830 79,989 18,018 32,330 16,645 5,593 5,098 5,552
Transfer payments to non-residents 133,930 136,978 135,669 32,025 44,544 32,712 12,123 10,707 11,102
Balance − 48,571 − 56,146 − 55,682 − 14,007 − 12,215 − 16,068 − 6,531 − 5,609 − 5,550
Capital account + 10,166 + 13,110 + 17,425 + 5,949 + 1,123 + 3,889 + 2,077 + 864 + 833B
Financial account (net capital exports: −) − 43,935 − 5,942 − 5,476 − 25,388 + 25,896 + 46,021 + 18,009 − 1,936 − 1,446C
1 Direct investment + 618 + 5,398 − 78,065 − 44,115 − 20,048 − 11,605 − 8,201 − 81,169 − 15,679
By resident units abroad − 179,948 − 136,003 − 155,391 − 82,662 − 32,325 − 27,047 − 19,580 − 82,588 − 12,477By non-resident units in the euro area + 180,568 + 141,400 + 77,328 + 38,548 + 12,277 + 15,442 + 11,379 + 1,419 − 3,202
2 Portfolio investment + 127,765 + 43,396 + 72,780 + 27,262 + 3,801 + 106,651 + 101,507 + 75,329 − 16,079
By resident units abroad − 176,158 − 276,701 − 283,535 − 71,032 − 123,096 − 89,732 − 21,702 − 34,096 − 36,801
Equity − 38,795 − 67,002 − 74,104 − 20,817 − 48,186 − 746 + 3,453 − 14,693 − 2,765
Bonds and notes − 88,690 − 182,318 − 151,874 − 42,408 − 74,472 − 74,338 − 28,077 − 19,125 − 21,674
Money market instruments − 48,671 − 27,382 − 57,557 − 7,808 − 438 − 14,648 + 2,922 − 278 − 12,362
By non-resident units in the euro area + 303,924 + 320,099 + 356,314 + 98,293 + 126,897 + 196,384 + 123,209 + 109,425 + 20,722
Equity + 86,237 + 117,235 + 123,106 + 68,105 + 36,513 + 27,595 + 52,333 + 105,026 + 22,989
Bonds and notes + 157,873 + 170,415 + 211,412 + 31,991 + 45,263 + 155,676 + 75,936 + 2,630 − 9,924
Money market instruments + 59,815 + 32,451 + 21,799 − 1,802 + 45,122 + 13,113 − 5,060 + 1,769 + 7,657
3 Financial derivatives − 10,954 − 12,175 − 1,724 − 4,755 − 7,189 + 3,203 + 3,024 + 711 − 6,161
4 Other investment − 159,089 − 72,521 − 10,799 − 6,144 + 44,484 − 55,335 − 79,652 + 757 + 36,580
Eurosystem + 18,443 + 9,145 + 7,448 + 5,131 + 5,220 − 914 + 140 − 1,090 + 1,256
General government − 8,203 − 4,469 − 4,548 + 1,756 + 4,270 − 9,176 − 2,652 + 249 + 6,881
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 142,185 − 18,536 − 13,100 − 14,692 + 69,095 − 52,180 − 87,031 + 7,587 + 25,211
Long-term + 17,128 + 4,559 − 19,342 − 139 − 11,260 + 3,570 + 5,122 − 6,934 + 250Short-term − 159,316 − 23,094 + 6,242 − 14,554 + 80,355 − 55,748 − 92,153 + 14,521 + 24,961
Other sectors  
1 − 27,143 − 58,662 − 598 + 1,662 − 34,102 + 6,932 + 9,890 − 5,988 + 3,231
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 2,277 + 29,957 + 12,332 + 2,363 + 4,847 + 3,108 + 1,331 + 2,436 − 106
Errors and omissions − 30,714 − 27,576 − 58,707 + 3,657 − 30,539 − 36,575 − 20,265 − 266 + 3,537D
* Source: European Central Bank. — 1 Enterprises and households.  
  
67*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
X External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item Capital trans-
fers and Change in
the Bundes- acquisition/disposal of Change in bank’s net
Supple- non- the foreign external
Balance mentary produced reserves at Balance of assets aton current External trade Current Financial transaction transaction non-financial unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4,5 Services  6 Income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1,2,3 transactions
DM million
1991 − 40,182 + 21,899 − 2,804 − 30,724 + 29,260 − 57,812 − 4,565 + 12,715 + 9,605 + 22,427 − 319
1992 − 35,363 + 33,656 − 1,426 − 44,983 + 28,611 − 51,222 − 1,963 + 69,462 − 52,888 + 20,753 − 68,7451993 − 31,162 + 60,304 − 3,038 − 52,549 + 19,272 − 55,151 − 1,915 + 20,652 + 22,795 − 10,370 + 35,7661994 − 49,143 + 71,762 − 1,104 − 62,803 + 2,457 − 59,455 − 2,637 + 57,861 + 2,846 − 8,927 − 12,242
1995 − 42,682 + 85,303 − 4,722 − 63,985 − 3,863 − 55,416 − 3,845 + 60,472 − 10,355 − 3,590 − 17,754
1996 − 21,263 + 98,538 − 5,264 − 64,743 + 1,195 − 50,989 − 3,283 + 22,407 + 1,882 + 256 + 1,6101997 − 16,463 + 116,467 − 7,360 − 68,692 − 4,139 − 52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 9,740 + 8,4681998 − 26,738 + 126,970 − 7,315 − 75,053 − 18,036 − 53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 − 7,128 − 234 − 8,231
1999 − 46,941 + 127,542 − 14,355 − 90,036 − 21,215 − 48,877 − 301 − 44,849 + 24,517 + 67,574 − 72,364
2000 − 63,909 + 115,645 − 14,019 − 95,848 − 14,232 − 55,456 + 13,345 + 55,434 + 11,429 − 16,299 + 94,3292001 + 6,486 + 186,771 − 10,615 − 97,521 − 18,529 − 53,621 − 756 − 34,865 + 11,797 + 17,338 + 63,911
€ million
1999 − 24,001 + 65,211 − 7,340 − 46,035 − 10,847 − 24,990 − 154 − 22,931 + 12,535 + 34,550 − 36,999
2000 − 32,676 + 59,128 − 7,168 − 49,006 − 7,276 − 28,354 + 6,823 + 28,343 + 5,844 − 8,333 + 48,2302001 + 3,316 + 95,495 − 5,427 − 49,862 − 9,474 − 27,416 − 387 − 17,826 + 6,032 + 8,865 + 32,6772002 + 48,155 + 132,788 − 6,357 − 35,473 − 14,742 − 28,061 − 212 − 42,825 + 2,065 − 7,184 − 33,2922003 + 45,172 + 129,921 − 8,310 − 33,970 − 13,784 − 28,684 + 312 − 46,207 + 445 + 279 + 2,6582004  
r + 84,486 + 156,096 − 12,340 − 30,964 + 117 − 28,423 + 430 − 112,628 + 1,470 + 26,241 − 3,906
2002          Q4 + 15,536 + 32,195 − 2,126 − 4,296 − 2,737 − 7,501 − 359 − 35,738 + 898 + 19,662 + 1,099
2003          Q1 + 10,971 + 29,835 − 2,170 − 8,008 − 2,933 − 5,752 − 30 − 4,626 − 1,495 − 4,820 + 3,444
         Q2 + 5,598 + 29,841 − 2,001 − 8,008 − 6,452 − 7,782 + 149 − 25,579 + 1,505 + 18,327 + 22,123         Q3 + 12,208 + 38,430 − 1,671 − 13,364 − 2,388 − 8,800 + 208 + 3,006 − 751 − 14,671 − 15,902         Q4 + 16,395 + 31,815 − 2,469 − 4,590 − 2,010 − 6,351 − 16 − 19,007 + 1,186 + 1,442 − 7,008
2004          Q1  
r + 25,546 + 41,359 − 2,552 − 7,088 − 463 − 5,711 + 280 + 5,742 + 205 − 31,774 − 6,821
         Q2  r + 24,568 + 43,303 − 2,835 − 5,945 − 2,401 − 7,553 + 177 − 57,329 − 339 + 32,923 + 30,993
         Q3  r + 14,334 + 36,436 − 3,567 − 11,400 + 1,471 − 8,605 + 191 − 31,833 + 1,568 + 15,741 − 31,266
         Q4  r + 20,038 + 34,998 − 3,387 − 6,531 + 1,511 − 6,554 − 218 − 29,208 + 37 + 9,352 + 3,189
2005          Q1 + 27,946 + 43,229 − 3,414 − 6,322 + 1,781 − 7,328 − 1,493 − 24,033 − 181 − 2,238 − 6,813
         Q2 + 23,744 + 41,543 − 3,400 − 5,636 − 2,276 − 6,488 + 105 − 21,536 + 1,230 − 3,543 + 15,846         Q3  
p + 17,597 + 41,017 − 4,093 − 13,401 + 1,833 − 7,758 + 50 − 25,561 − 783 + 8,696 − 8,668
2003          Apr + 1,000 + 9,111 − 830 − 2,178 − 2,484 − 2,620 − 126 − 4,367 + 1,449 + 2,044 + 1,477
         May + 2,130 + 10,400 − 560 − 2,644 − 2,541 − 2,524 + 156 − 7,732 − 854 + 6,301 + 22,684         June + 2,469 + 10,330 − 610 − 3,186 − 1,427 − 2,638 + 119 − 13,480 + 910 + 9,982 − 2,037
         July + 5,712 + 13,844 − 762 − 3,796 − 631 − 2,943 + 62 + 5,113 + 225 − 11,113 − 16,353
         Aug + 418 + 10,170 − 341 − 5,423 − 1,005 − 2,983 + 224 − 8,318 − 717 + 8,393 − 3,057         Sep + 6,078 + 14,416 − 568 − 4,144 − 753 − 2,873 − 78 + 6,211 − 259 − 11,951 + 3,508
         Oct + 4,415 + 10,996 − 581 − 3,529 − 619 − 1,853 − 27 − 4,414 − 255 + 281 − 21,689
         Nov + 4,499 + 10,235 − 702 − 1,150 − 986 − 2,898 + 49 − 3,866 + 521 − 1,204 + 14,870         Dec + 7,480 + 10,584 − 1,187 + 88 − 406 − 1,600 − 38 − 10,728 + 921 + 2,365 − 190
2004          Jan  
r + 6,369 + 12,498 − 1,089 − 3,842 − 639 − 560 + 13 + 5,532 − 206 − 11,709 + 5,619
         Feb  r + 6,852 + 12,273 − 729 − 1,939 − 76 − 2,677 − 179 + 8,034 − 26 − 14,680 + 556
         Mar  r + 12,326 + 16,588 − 734 − 1,307 + 251 − 2,474 + 447 − 7,824 + 437 − 5,385 − 12,996
         Apr  r + 8,345 + 14,371 − 737 − 2,183 − 1,252 − 1,855 + 84 − 34,452 − 628 + 26,652 + 315
         May  r + 7,941 + 14,140 − 991 − 1,419 − 1,091 − 2,699 − 30 − 8,942 + 607 + 425 + 9,981
         June  r + 8,283 + 14,791 − 1,107 − 2,343 − 59 − 2,999 + 123 − 13,935 − 318 + 5,847 + 20,697
         July  r + 6,655 + 13,572 − 1,398 − 2,439 + 277 − 3,356 + 164 + 2,177 + 847 − 9,842 − 1,588
         Aug  r + 2,784 + 10,917 − 1,249 − 4,731 + 314 − 2,467 + 80 − 8,407 + 517 + 5,026 − 15,748
         Sep  r + 4,894 + 11,947 − 920 − 4,230 + 880 − 2,782 − 53 − 25,603 + 204 + 20,557 − 13,931
         Oct  r + 6,398 + 12,387 − 1,164 − 2,643 + 342 − 2,524 − 22 + 620 + 839 − 7,835 + 23,124
         Nov  r + 7,107 + 11,763 − 1,231 − 1,498 + 453 − 2,380 − 186 − 19,795 − 182 + 13,056 − 10,787
         Dec  r + 6,533 + 10,848 − 992 − 2,389 + 716 − 1,650 − 10 − 10,032 − 621 + 4,130 − 9,147
2005          Jan + 6,812 + 13,333 − 1,464 − 2,652 + 215 − 2,621 − 1,218 + 11,994 − 353 − 17,234 − 1,641
         Feb + 9,086 + 13,571 − 944 − 1,796 + 618 − 2,363 − 106 − 9,437 + 494 − 37 + 18,279         Mar + 12,049 + 16,324 − 1,006 − 1,873 + 947 − 2,344 − 169 − 26,590 − 322 + 15,032 − 23,451
         Apr + 7,176 + 12,719 − 1,073 − 936 − 2,055 − 1,479 − 199 − 20,838 + 404 + 13,457 + 13,005
         May + 5,541 + 12,079 − 993 − 2,460 − 1,021 − 2,063 + 273 + 10,620 − 141 − 16,293 − 16,881         June + 11,027 + 16,746 − 1,334 − 2,240 + 800 − 2,945 + 32 − 11,318 + 967 − 707 + 19,723
         July + 7,604 + 14,466 − 1,254 − 3,606 + 593 − 2,595 + 101 − 5,985 + 324 − 2,044 − 1,210
         Aug + 2,629 + 11,576 − 1,533 − 5,613 + 455 − 2,256 − 86 − 6,515 + 932 + 3,041 − 20,142         Sep  
p + 7,364 + 14,975 − 1,305 − 4,183 + 784 − 2,907 + 35 − 13,060 − 2,039 + 7,700 + 12,684
1From the beginning of 1993, figures subject to significant uncertainty included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. —
owing to changes in the method of data collection for foreign trade. — 4Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, goods returned. — 5See footnote 3. — 6Excluding the expenditure on
exports fob. — 3From January 1993, including additional estimates for freight and insurance included in the cif import figure. — 7Capital
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are exports: −. — 8 Increase: −. 
68*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
X External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2005
Country / group of countries  2002  2003  2004 r Jan / Aug May Jun Jul Aug Sep  p 
All countries  1 Exports 651,320 664,455 731,544 510,094 63,546 68,743 64,498 63,327 69,463
Imports 518,532 534,534 575,448 399,280 51,468 51,998 50,032 51,751 54,488Balance + 132,788 + 129,921 + 156,096 + 110,814 + 12,079 + 16,746 + 14,466 + 11,576 + 14,975
I Exports 470,873 490,672 541,395 377,279 47,710 51,000 46,763 45,062 ...European countries
Imports 372,955 384,939 408,698 286,010 37,252 37,154 35,552 36,087 ...Balance + 97,918 + 105,733 + 132,697 + 91,269 + 10,458 + 13,846 + 11,211 + 8,976 ...
Exports 408,286 426,342 466,326 323,970 41,007 43,642 39,876 37,977 ... 1 EU member states (25)
Imports 314,981 324,043 342,636 237,349 31,108 31,095 30,238 28,695 ...
Balance + 93,304 + 102,299 + 123,691 + 86,621 + 9,899 + 12,547 + 9,639 + 9,282 ...
Memo item
Exports 354,813 369,776 404,770 281,365 35,423 37,889 34,544 32,545 ...  EU member states (15)
Imports 262,849 266,404 285,049 199,785 26,205 26,143 25,367 23,971 ...Balance + 91,964 + 103,372 + 119,720 + 81,581 + 9,218 + 11,746 + 9,177 + 8,574 ...
Euro-area Exports 276,270 288,668 317,696 221,302 27,935 30,145 27,020 25,198 ...countries Imports 211,642 215,705 230,717 161,285 20,987 21,061 20,453 19,316 ...
Balance + 64,628 + 72,963 + 86,979 + 60,018 + 6,948 + 9,084 + 6,567 + 5,882 ...
of which
Austria Exports 33,863 35,857 40,244 27,084 3,484 3,555 3,343 3,492 ...
Imports 21,047 21,453 24,020 16,198 2,049 2,148 2,205 1,936 ...Balance + 12,816 + 14,404 + 16,224 + 10,886 + 1,435 + 1,407 + 1,137 + 1,556 ...
Belgium and Exports 34,108 38,413 43,992 31,250 3,850 4,208 3,429 3,839 ...Luxembourg Imports 26,505 26,132 28,818 22,220 2,910 2,872 2,736 2,698 ...
Balance + 7,603 + 12,282 + 15,173 + 9,030 + 941 + 1,337 + 693 + 1,141 ...
France Exports 68,721 69,025 74,360 52,421 6,665 7,085 6,183 5,672 ...
Imports 48,200 48,545 51,535 35,093 4,571 4,765 4,320 3,950 ...Balance + 20,521 + 20,480 + 22,825 + 17,328 + 2,093 + 2,320 + 1,863 + 1,723 ...
Italy Exports 47,335 48,414 51,479 35,219 4,441 4,940 4,614 3,436 ...
Imports 33,482 34,259 35,676 23,435 3,121 2,994 3,029 2,672 ...Balance + 13,853 + 14,156 + 15,803 + 11,784 + 1,319 + 1,947 + 1,585 + 764 ...
Netherlands Exports 40,463 42,219 46,730 31,048 3,938 4,148 3,810 3,972 ...
Imports 40,751 42,301 46,204 34,259 4,528 4,392 4,196 4,476 ...Balance − 288 − 83 + 526 − 3,211 − 590 − 244 − 386 − 504 ...
Spain Exports 29,436 32,364 36,249 26,625 3,473 3,804 3,433 2,773 ...
Imports 15,532 16,518 17,426 11,973 1,664 1,561 1,418 1,191 ...Balance + 13,903 + 15,846 + 18,823 + 14,652 + 1,809 + 2,243 + 2,015 + 1,582 ...
Other EU member Exports 132,016 137,674 148,630 102,668 13,072 13,498 12,856 12,779 ...states Imports 103,339 108,337 111,919 76,065 10,121 10,034 9,785 9,378 ...
Balance + 28,677 + 29,336 + 36,711 + 26,603 + 2,951 + 3,464 + 3,072 + 3,401 ...
of which
United Exports 53,761 55,597 59,986 41,128 4,973 5,266 5,392 4,916 ...Kingdom Imports 33,075 31,712 34,466 25,069 3,268 3,351 3,339 3,018 ...
Balance + 20,685 + 23,885 + 25,520 + 16,059 + 1,705 + 1,915 + 2,053 + 1,898 ...
Exports 62,588 64,331 75,069 53,310 6,703 7,358 6,886 7,086 ... 2 Other European
Imports 57,974 60,897 66,062 48,661 6,144 6,059 5,314 7,392 ... countries
Balance + 4,614 + 3,434 + 9,007 + 4,649 + 559 + 1,299 + 1,572 − 306 ...
II Exports 178,818 172,329 188,782 131,950 15,755 17,512 17,649 18,178 ...Non-European
Imports 144,950 148,895 166,132 112,855 14,158 14,791 14,429 15,607 ... countries
Balance + 33,869 + 23,434 + 22,650 + 19,094 + 1,597 + 2,722 + 3,221 + 2,571 ...
Exports 11,797 12,072 13,785 9,674 1,210 1,299 1,317 1,264 ... 1 Africa
Imports 10,248 10,239 11,092 8,160 1,055 927 926 1,332 ...
Balance + 1,549 + 1,832 + 2,694 + 1,515 + 155 + 372 + 391 − 67 ...
Exports 89,081 79,629 84,694 59,296 7,079 8,154 7,971 7,792 ... 2 America
Imports 52,822 51,948 54,679 37,070 4,654 5,112 4,615 5,181 ...
Balance + 36,259 + 27,681 + 30,016 + 22,226 + 2,425 + 3,043 + 3,356 + 2,611 ...
of which
Exports 68,263 61,654 64,860 44,618 5,418 6,274 5,746 5,820 ... United States
Imports 40,376 39,231 40,709 27,097 3,357 3,768 3,264 3,738 ...Balance + 27,887 + 22,423 + 24,151 + 17,521 + 2,061 + 2,506 + 2,482 + 2,083 ...
Exports 72,915 75,620 84,789 59,169 6,998 7,578 7,853 8,603 ... 3 Asia
Imports 79,892 84,783 98,177 66,326 8,279 8,545 8,720 8,926 ...
Balance − 6,977 − 9,162 − 13,388 − 7,157 − 1,281 − 966 − 867 − 323 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 15,045 15,511 17,357 13,460 1,649 1,749 1,847 2,002 ...
Imports 4,696 4,469 4,398 3,019 391 370 421 444 ...Balance + 10,349 + 11,043 + 12,959 + 10,441 + 1,258 + 1,379 + 1,426 + 1,557 ...
Japan Exports 12,576 11,889 12,719 8,909 940 1,062 1,106 1,174 ...
Imports 19,896 19,684 21,583 13,607 1,663 1,837 1,703 1,693 ...Balance − 7,320 − 7,795 − 8,865 − 4,699 − 722 − 775 − 597 − 520 ...
Exports 14,571 18,265 20,992 13,547 1,624 1,683 1,938 2,125 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 21,338 25,681 32,791 24,382 3,027 3,168 3,371 3,393 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 6,768 − 7,417 − 11,800 − 10,835 − 1,403 − 1,485 − 1,433 − 1,268 ...Exports 5,026 5,008 5,513 3,810 468 481 508 518 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 1,988 1,925 2,184 1,300 170 207 168 168 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,038 + 3,083 + 3,329 + 2,511 + 298 + 274 + 340 + 350 ...
Memo item
Exports 25,282 24,515 26,838 18,064 2,159 2,397 2,252 2,581 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 26,660 27,119 30,012 18,850 2,353 2,360 2,392 2,454 ... South-East Asia  
3 
Balance − 1,377 − 2,603 − 3,174 − 787 − 194 + 36 − 140 + 127 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by regi on. —
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 
69*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
X External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2000 − 49,006 − 37,188 + 3,386 + 1,668 − 3,012 + 2,221 − 16,081 − 2,757 − 753 − 651 − 6,625
2001 − 49,862 − 37,821 + 4,254 + 1,080 − 2,431 + 3,488 − 18,433 − 2,544 − 591 − 359 − 9,1152002 − 35,473 − 35,154 + 2,771 + 1,418 − 1,556 + 5,237 − 8,188 − 2,028 + 497 − 30 − 14,7122003 − 33,970 − 36,761 + 1,719 + 1,624 − 755 + 5,086 − 4,884 − 1,814 + 1,440 − 155 − 13,6282004 − 30,964 − 34,822 + 4,318 + 1,626 − 531 + 5,316 − 6,870 − 1,342 + 819 + 262 − 145
2004          Q1 − 7,088 − 6,493 + 590 + 389 − 167 + 1,275 − 2,681 − 336 + 267 + 308 − 771
         Q2 − 5,945 − 8,722 + 1,532 + 306 − 291 + 1,442 − 213 − 368 + 71 − 11 − 2,390         Q3 − 11,400 − 13,584 + 1,011 + 464 + 21 + 1,425 − 738 − 294 + 220 − 161 + 1,632         Q4 − 6,531 − 6,023 + 1,184 + 466 − 94 + 1,174 − 3,238 − 344 + 261 + 127 + 1,384
2005          Q1 − 6,322 − 6,924 + 1,202 + 404 + 1,010 + 1,104 − 3,117 − 341 + 91 + 246 + 1,534
         Q2 − 5,636 − 7,799 + 1,470 + 474 − 302 + 950 − 429 − 350 + 35 − 138 − 2,138         Q3 − 13,401 − 14,454 + 1,601 + 299 − 393 + 904 − 1,358 − 425 − 47 − 252 + 2,085
2004          Nov − 1,498 − 1,852 + 381 + 128 − 38 + 371 − 489 − 119 + 5 + 36 + 417
         Dec − 2,389 − 882 + 394 + 214 − 55 + 421 − 2,483 − 148 + 144 + 54 + 662
2005          Jan − 2,652 − 2,346 + 252 + 140 + 1,175 + 379 − 2,253 − 136 − 5 + 87 + 129
         Feb − 1,796 − 2,104 + 476 + 74 + 22 + 343 − 608 − 89 − 76 + 74 + 544         Mar − 1,873 − 2,474 + 473 + 190 − 187 + 382 − 257 − 116 + 172 + 85 + 862
         Apr − 936 − 1,692 + 435 + 204 − 249 + 325 + 42 − 101 + 102 − 47 − 2,008
         May − 2,460 − 2,830 + 511 + 138 + 2 + 303 − 584 − 118 − 13 − 48 − 973         June − 2,240 − 3,277 + 524 + 132 − 54 + 322 + 114 − 131 − 54 − 43 + 843
         July − 3,606 − 3,601 + 578 − 21 − 288 + 221 − 496 − 163 + 31 − 92 + 685
         Aug − 5,613 − 5,985 + 566 + 115 + 52 + 404 − 764 − 126 − 7 − 67 + 522         Sep − 4,183 − 4,869 + 456 + 205 − 157 + 279 − 98 − 135 − 72 − 94 + 878
1From January 2002, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Remittances Other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2000 − 28,354 − 19,094 − 17,100 − 15,398 − 1,995 − 9,260 − 3,458 − 5,802 − 1,599 − 1,189 − 410
2001 − 27,416 − 16,927 − 14,257 − 12,587 − 2,670 − 10,489 − 3,520 − 6,969 − 387 − 1,361 + 9742002 − 28,061 − 16,286 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 3,241 − 11,776 − 3,470 − 8,305 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,2042003 − 28,684 − 18,730 − 15,426 − 13,730 − 3,304 − 9,954 − 3,332 − 6,622 + 312 − 1,238 + 1,5502004 − 28,423 − 17,570 − 14,216 − 12,739 − 3,354 − 10,853 − 3,180 − 7,673 + 430 − 1,094 + 1,524
2004          Q1 − 5,711 − 3,169 − 2,316 − 1,672 − 853 − 2,541 − 795 − 1,747 + 280 − 254 + 535
         Q2 − 7,553 − 4,457 − 4,469 − 4,162 + 12 − 3,096 − 795 − 2,301 + 177 − 239 + 416         Q3 − 8,605 − 5,714 − 4,434 − 4,142 − 1,280 − 2,891 − 795 − 2,096 + 191 − 261 + 451         Q4 − 6,554 − 4,229 − 2,996 − 2,763 − 1,233 − 2,324 − 795 − 1,529 − 218 − 340 + 122
2005          Q1 − 7,328 − 4,720 − 3,734 − 3,189 − 986 − 2,608 − 732 − 1,877 − 1,493 − 2,040 + 547
         Q2 − 6,488 − 3,534 − 3,771 − 3,322 + 236 − 2,953 − 732 − 2,222 + 105 − 315 + 420         Q3 − 7,758 − 5,176 − 4,469 − 4,151 − 707 − 2,583 − 732 − 1,851 + 50 − 331 + 380
2004          Nov − 2,380 − 1,666 − 1,213 − 1,126 − 453 − 715 − 265 − 450 − 186 − 117 − 69
         Dec − 1,650 − 825 − 498 − 413 − 327 − 825 − 265 − 560 − 10 − 128 + 118
2005          Jan − 2,621 − 1,739 − 1,456 − 1,156 − 283 − 881 − 244 − 638 − 1,218 − 1,896 + 678
         Feb − 2,363 − 1,484 − 1,059 − 901 − 426 − 879 − 244 − 635 − 106 − 63 − 43         Mar − 2,344 − 1,496 − 1,219 − 1,132 − 277 − 848 − 244 − 604 − 169 − 81 − 88
         Apr − 1,479 − 591 − 1,043 − 987 + 452 − 888 − 244 − 644 − 199 − 101 − 98
         May − 2,063 − 922 − 1,014 − 949 + 91 − 1,141 − 244 − 897 + 273 − 114 + 387         June − 2,945 − 2,021 − 1,714 − 1,386 − 307 − 924 − 244 − 680 + 32 − 99 + 131
         July − 2,595 − 1,687 − 1,360 − 1,232 − 328 − 908 − 244 − 664 + 101 − 88 + 189
         Aug − 2,256 − 1,452 − 1,202 − 1,053 − 250 − 804 − 244 − 560 − 86 − 142 + 55         Sep − 2,907 − 2,036 − 1,907 − 1,866 − 129 − 871 − 244 − 627 + 35 − 101 + 136
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
X External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2004 2005
Item 2002 2003 2004 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 254,047 − 199,019 − 253,924 − 50,233 − 150,091 − 93,010 − 70,518 − 19,010 − 2,987 − 48,520
1 Direct investment  1 − 16,120 + 3,556 + 5,853 + 8,734 − 10,463 − 13,022 − 2,654 − 13 − 1,057 − 1,585
Equity capital − 38,612 − 14,801 + 25,938 + 1,188 − 2,741 − 4,905 − 777 − 51 − 227 − 499
Reinvested earnings  2 + 9,740 + 4,251 + 899 + 925 − 220 + 2,706 + 2,008 + 285 + 573 + 1,150
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors + 21,345 + 24,060 − 13,415 + 8,209 − 6,713 − 9,203 − 3,147 − 111 − 1,309 − 1,727Other capital − 8,594 − 9,954 − 7,570 − 1,587 − 789 − 1,620 − 738 − 135 − 94 − 509
2 Portfolio investment − 62,944 − 47,377 − 112,900 − 19,534 − 66,878 − 54,557 − 27,970 + 1,664 − 10,665 − 18,970
Equity
3 − 4,674 + 7,434 + 6,199 − 2,127 + 794 + 1,040 − 3,605 − 780 − 1,445 − 1,381
Mutual fund shares  4 − 7,088 − 4,073 − 11,951 + 780 − 14,506 − 7,765 − 11,664 − 3,629 − 3,385 − 4,649
Bonds and notes  5 − 47,456 − 54,045 − 99,938 − 20,222 − 55,973 − 45,813 − 8,729 + 6,824 − 4,141 − 11,412
Money market instruments − 3,726 + 3,307 − 7,210 + 2,035 + 2,808 − 2,019 − 3,972 − 750 − 1,694 − 1,528
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 942 − 63 − 4,193 − 3,427 − 3,437 − 567 − 3,008 + 540 − 3,451 − 98
4 Credit transactions − 172,354 − 152,053 − 139,099 − 35,009 − 68,134 − 23,794 − 35,836 − 20,670 + 12,418 − 27,584
MFIs  7,8 − 132,536 − 122,305 − 121,390 − 37,222 − 57,496 − 46,925 − 19,085 − 8,105 + 18,412 − 29,393
Long-term − 33,790 − 32,555 + 6,297 − 1,864 − 11,076 − 20,999 − 21,228 − 5,941 − 4,348 − 10,939
Short-term − 98,746 − 89,750 − 127,687 − 35,358 − 46,420 − 25,926 + 2,144 − 2,163 + 22,760 − 18,454
Enterprises and households − 10,976 − 31,245 − 17,436 − 639 − 14,492 + 9,171 − 10,988 − 2,888 + 1,246 − 9,346
Long-term − 1,396 − 2,880 − 3,363 − 845 − 1,091 − 2,506 − 719 − 600 − 518 + 399
Short-term  7 − 9,580 − 28,365 − 14,072 + 206 − 13,401 + 11,678 − 10,268 − 2,288 + 1,764 − 9,745
General government + 7,168 + 1,267 + 2,578 + 165 + 8,686 − 1,488 + 3,844 − 7,522 + 12,859 − 1,494
Long-term + 218 + 694 + 781 + 285 + 2,200 + 1,144 + 4,825 + 3,888 + 610 + 327Short-term  
7 + 6,950 + 572 + 1,798 − 120 + 6,486 − 2,633 − 981 − 11,409 + 12,248 − 1,820
Bundesbank − 36,010 + 230 − 2,851 + 2,687 − 4,833 + 15,449 − 9,607 − 2,156 − 20,100 + 12,648
5 Other investment  9 − 1,686 − 3,083 − 3,586 − 996 − 1,180 − 1,071 − 1,049 − 532 − 232 − 285
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 211,222 + 152,812 + 141,296 + 21,026 + 126,058 + 71,474 + 44,958 + 13,025 − 3,528 + 35,460
1 Direct investment  1 + 53,679 + 23,841 − 28,054 + 1,042 − 181 + 3,622 − 473 − 3,346 − 341 + 3,214
Equity capital + 35,874 + 40,475 + 21,585 + 11,385 + 941 + 4,918 + 1,022 + 426 − 163 + 758Reinvested earnings  
2 − 7,080 − 7,668 − 6,415 − 1,152 − 621 − 2,274 − 142 − 127 + 154 − 169
Credit transactions of
foreign direct investors + 25,081 − 8,780 − 43,242 − 9,155 − 502 + 957 − 1,424 − 3,641 − 329 + 2,546Other capital − 197 − 186 + 19 − 37 + 2 + 21 + 71 − 4 − 3 + 78
2 Portfolio investment + 126,710 + 112,285 + 133,656 + 24,233 + 55,080 + 85,298 + 35,905 + 18,767 − 1,752 + 18,889
Equity  
3 + 15,907 + 24,188 − 5,198 + 491 + 3,534 + 26,364 + 8,277 + 1,172 + 870 + 6,234
Mutual fund shares − 682 − 1,844 + 5,064 + 1,181 + 128 + 821 + 1,845 + 1,941 + 810 − 905
Bonds and notes  5 + 82,880 + 67,141 + 147,724 + 22,575 + 41,947 + 58,932 + 27,089 + 13,791 − 3,205 + 16,503
Money market instruments + 28,605 + 22,799 − 13,934 − 13 + 9,472 − 819 − 1,306 + 1,863 − 226 − 2,943
3 Credit transactions + 30,751 + 16,647 + 35,476 − 4,314 + 71,229 − 17,444 + 9,402 − 2,353 − 1,554 + 13,309
MFIs  7,8 + 28,453 + 10,701 + 32,357 − 749 + 64,383 − 17,797 + 3,196 − 999 − 5,495 + 9,690
Long-term + 18,379 − 5,972 − 10,060 − 5,154 − 2,253 + 4,527 − 755 + 841 − 1,636 + 40
Short-term + 10,075 + 16,672 + 42,417 + 4,405 + 66,636 − 22,324 + 3,951 − 1,840 − 3,859 + 9,650
Enterprises and households + 3,270 + 283 + 7,188 − 1,990 + 3,463 + 510 + 7,905 + 1,252 + 3,563 + 3,091
Long-term + 5,188 − 545 + 3,919 − 325 + 3,318 + 8 + 409 − 73 + 440 + 42
Short-term  7 − 1,918 + 828 + 3,269 − 1,665 + 145 + 502 + 7,496 + 1,325 + 3,123 + 3,048
General government − 1,625 + 3,680 − 1,619 − 2,044 + 5,152 + 533 − 3,445 − 3,271 + 1,381 − 1,554
Long-term − 125 + 4,859 − 385 − 845 + 3,015 − 840 + 581 + 319 + 637 − 375Short-term  
7 − 1,500 − 1,179 − 1,233 − 1,199 + 2,137 + 1,374 − 4,026 − 3,590 + 744 − 1,180
Bundesbank + 653 + 1,983 − 2,451 + 469 − 1,769 − 690 + 1,746 + 666 − 1,003 + 2,083
4 Other investment + 83 + 40 + 218 + 65 − 71 − 1 + 124 − 44 + 119 + 49
III Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) − 42,825 − 46,207 − 112,628 − 29,208 − 24,033 − 21,536 − 25,561 − 5,985 − 6,515 − 13,060
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including accumulated statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9In particular, subscriptions of the Federal
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- Government to international organisations. 
71*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
X External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,9512004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2004          May 89,877 76,473 35,705 7,685 33,083 312 12,641 451 8,537 81,340
         June 69,837 76,996 35,793 7,390 33,813 312 − 7,951 480 9,003 60,834
         July 70,865 76,076 35,721 7,395 32,960 312 − 6,009 486 8,545 62,320
         Aug 87,570 77,171 37,195 7,395 32,581 312 9,455 632 7,755 79,815         Sep 100,176 75,729 36,680 6,996 32,054 312 23,480 655 7,625 92,552
         Oct 76,043 74,334 36,935 6,889 30,510 312 740 656 7,128 68,915
         Nov 85,702 73,506 37,527 6,685 29,294 312 11,233 651 6,937 78,765         Dec 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005          Jan 94,895 73,556 35,888 6,634 31,034 312 20,327 699 6,315 88,580
         Feb 75,603 72,794 36,348 6,538 29,908 312 1,809 687 5,542 70,061         Mar 100,452 73,813 36,399 6,143 31,271 312 25,627 699 6,322 94,131
         Apr 87,967 74,123 36,905 6,096 31,123 312 12,782 750 6,123 81,845
         May 107,063 76,431 37,282 6,340 32,809 350 29,451 831 6,292 100,771         June 90,055 78,700 39,816 5,830 33,054 350 10,141 864 5,822 84,232
         July 90,752 77,205 38,927 5,007 33,270 350 12,291 907 6,491 84,261
         Aug 109,966 76,342 39,121 4,990 32,231 350 32,397 878 5,456 104,511         Sep 103,805 82,825 43,325 4,994 34,506 350 19,747 883 7,580 96,225
         Oct 111,515 82,506 43,325 4,979 34,202 350 27,777 882 7,374 104,141
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
72*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
X External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,585
2002  4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003 362,099 86,627 275,472 159,653 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,4692004 377,540 98,632 278,908 159,764 119,144 112,342 6,802 506,434 50,211 456,223 361,111 95,112 63,762 31,350
2005          Apr 399,912 104,542 295,370 171,970 123,400 116,057 7,343 501,290 53,088 448,202 352,952 95,250 61,957 33,293
         May 400,068 105,601 294,467 170,833 123,634 116,096 7,538 506,017 54,474 451,543 357,126 94,417 60,741 33,676         June 401,908 98,045 303,863 175,661 128,202 120,921 7,281 512,106 55,859 456,247 357,804 98,443 65,458 32,985
         July 403,117 101,398 301,719 175,052 126,667 119,394 7,273 508,845 58,303 450,542 352,382 98,160 64,644 33,516
         Aug 399,351 101,521 297,830 174,386 123,444 116,235 7,209 510,571 62,444 448,127 350,991 97,136 63,087 34,049         Sep 417,566 108,972 308,594 178,097 130,497 123,222 7,275 518,147 64,015 454,132 352,748 101,384 68,079 33,305
Industrial countries 2
 
2001 298,904 61,403 237,501 151,047 86,454 79,453 7,001 466,206 57,861 408,345 340,344 68,001 54,364 13,6372002  
4 278,074 62,861 215,213 133,509 81,704 75,996 5,708 493,155 55,770 437,385 372,464 64,921 50,731 14,190
2003 310,454 85,390 225,064 144,980 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,2202004 335,809 97,485 238,324 148,649 89,675 84,903 4,772 468,592 48,304 420,288 349,293 70,995 53,480 17,515
2005          Apr 355,923 102,700 253,223 160,200 93,023 87,849 5,174 463,858 51,281 412,577 342,393 70,184 51,408 18,776
         May 355,273 103,922 251,351 158,681 92,670 87,342 5,328 468,917 52,550 416,367 347,184 69,183 50,327 18,856         June 356,114 96,269 259,845 163,385 96,460 91,296 5,164 474,721 53,958 420,763 348,047 72,716 54,489 18,227
         July 357,124 99,571 257,553 162,679 94,874 89,645 5,229 471,098 56,484 414,614 342,714 71,900 53,419 18,481
         Aug 353,381 99,660 253,721 161,873 91,848 86,578 5,270 472,783 60,661 412,122 341,058 71,064 52,061 19,003         Sep 371,231 107,071 264,160 166,063 98,097 92,748 5,349 479,892 62,257 417,635 342,758 74,877 56,565 18,312
EU member states 2
 
2001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003 230,673 81,430 149,243 94,092 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,6422004 259,480 92,867 166,613 101,254 65,359 61,563 3,796 376,461 43,838 332,623 284,173 48,450 36,494 11,956
2005          Apr 277,463 98,907 178,556 110,469 68,087 64,003 4,084 376,009 46,967 329,042 280,347 48,695 35,580 13,115
         May 274,017 100,025 173,992 106,378 67,614 63,415 4,199 379,894 48,221 331,673 283,799 47,874 34,771 13,103         June 272,034 92,713 179,321 109,810 69,511 65,428 4,083 383,723 49,519 334,204 283,937 50,267 37,484 12,783
         July 275,711 96,116 179,595 110,734 68,861 64,735 4,126 380,039 51,935 328,104 278,313 49,791 36,937 12,854
         Aug 274,080 96,283 177,797 111,850 65,947 61,794 4,153 382,454 56,054 326,400 277,754 48,646 35,457 13,189         Sep 284,774 103,532 181,242 110,794 70,448 66,166 4,282 388,306 57,627 330,679 278,725 51,954 39,417 12,537
of which:  Euro-area member states 1
 
2001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,4042004 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 305,864 28,295 277,569 244,860 32,709 24,258 8,451
2005          Apr 173,153 58,239 114,914 68,253 46,661 43,833 2,828 311,548 28,801 282,747 250,293 32,454 23,288 9,166
         May 170,024 59,185 110,839 64,818 46,021 43,081 2,940 314,259 29,796 284,463 253,106 31,357 22,314 9,043         June 169,344 53,639 115,705 68,377 47,328 44,490 2,838 315,953 29,801 286,152 253,133 33,019 24,049 8,970
         July 172,579 57,070 115,509 69,272 46,237 43,359 2,878 309,986 30,160 279,826 247,496 32,330 23,338 8,992
         Aug 175,804 61,453 114,351 70,430 43,921 41,001 2,920 309,063 31,545 277,518 246,975 30,543 21,372 9,171         Sep 180,285 64,028 116,257 69,219 47,038 44,019 3,019 312,099 31,185 280,914 247,896 33,018 24,221 8,797
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2001 59,216 1,031 58,185 20,892 37,293 35,404 1,889 39,060 2,271 36,789 14,217 22,572 11,624 10,9482002  
4 53,597 956 52,641 15,404 37,237 35,410 1,827 40,268 1,926 38,342 15,386 22,956 11,891 11,065
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,2492004 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,835
2005          Apr 43,989 1,842 42,147 11,770 30,377 28,208 2,169 37,432 1,807 35,625 10,559 25,066 10,549 14,517
         May 44,795 1,679 43,116 12,152 30,964 28,754 2,210 37,100 1,924 35,176 9,942 25,234 10,414 14,820         June 45,794 1,776 44,018 12,276 31,742 29,625 2,117 37,385 1,901 35,484 9,757 25,727 10,969 14,758
         July 45,993 1,827 44,166 12,373 31,793 29,749 2,044 37,747 1,819 35,928 9,668 26,260 11,225 15,035
         Aug 45,970 1,861 44,109 12,513 31,596 29,657 1,939 37,788 1,783 36,005 9,933 26,072 11,026 15,046         Sep 46,335 1,901 44,434 12,034 32,400 30,474 1,926 38,255 1,758 36,497 9,990 26,507 11,514 14,993
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in January 2001, including Greece. — 2From May 2004, including the new
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in member states: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia ,
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia. — 3All
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. — 4Change in the
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X.7. — 1From reporting population owing to an increase in the exemption limit. 
73*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
X External sector
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Switzerland Norway Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK GBP SEK CHF NOK CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 2.926  27.421 115.740 25.580 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 2.753  26.912 111.198 25.143 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 2.483  21.248 111.949 23.303 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 2.4816 21.013 118.712 22.982 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 2.2620 20.116 121.240 22.614 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 2.3478 22.434 121.891 23.292 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 2.8410 22.718 119.508 24.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 2.9142 22.128 121.414 23.297 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 0.65874 8.8075 1.6003 8.3104 1.5840 1.6523 2.0145
2000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 0.60948 8.4452 1.5579 8.1129 1.3706 1.5889 2.0288
2001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 0.62187 9.2551 1.5105 8.0484 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 0.62883 9.1611 1.4670 7.5086 1.4838 1.7376 2.03662003 1.1312 130.97 7.4307 0.69199 9.1242 1.5212 8.0033 1.5817 1.7379 1.94382004 1.2439 134.44 7.4399 0.67866 9.1243 1.5438 8.3697 1.6167 1.6905 1.8731
2004          Mar 1.2262 133.13 7.4493 0.67124 9.2346 1.5670 8.5407 1.6314 1.6370 1.8566         Apr 1.1985 129.08 7.4436 0.66533 9.1653 1.5547 8.2976 1.6068 1.6142 1.8727
         May 1.2007 134.48 7.4405 0.67157 9.1277 1.5400 8.2074 1.6541 1.7033 1.9484         June 1.2138 132.86 7.4342 0.66428 9.1430 1.5192 8.2856 1.6492 1.7483 1.9301
         July 1.2266 134.08 7.4355 0.66576 9.1962 1.5270 8.4751 1.6220 1.7135 1.8961
         Aug 1.2176 134.54 7.4365 0.66942 9.1861 1.5387 8.3315 1.6007 1.7147 1.8604         Sep 1.2218 134.51 7.4381 0.68130 9.0920 1.5431 8.3604 1.5767 1.7396 1.8538
         Oct 1.2490 135.97 7.4379 0.69144 9.0620 1.5426 8.2349 1.5600 1.7049 1.8280
         Nov 1.2991 136.09 7.4313 0.69862 8.9981 1.5216 8.1412 1.5540 1.6867 1.8540         Dec 1.3408 139.14 7.4338 0.69500 8.9819 1.5364 8.2207 1.6333 1.7462 1.8737
2005          Jan 1.3119 135.63 7.4405 0.69867 9.0476 1.5469 8.2125 1.6060 1.7147 1.8620
         Feb 1.3014 136.55 7.4427 0.68968 9.0852 1.5501 8.3199 1.6128 1.6670 1.8192         Mar 1.3201 138.83 7.4466 0.69233 9.0884 1.5494 8.1880 1.6064 1.6806 1.8081
         Apr 1.2938 138.84 7.4499 0.68293 9.1670 1.5475 8.1763 1.5991 1.6738 1.7967
         May 1.2694 135.37 7.4443 0.68399 9.1931 1.5449 8.0814 1.5942 1.6571 1.7665         June 1.2165 132.22 7.4448 0.66895 9.2628 1.5391 7.8932 1.5111 1.5875 1.7175
         July 1.2037 134.75 7.4584 0.68756 9.4276 1.5578 7.9200 1.4730 1.6002 1.7732
         Aug 1.2292 135.98 7.4596 0.68527 9.3398 1.5528 7.9165 1.4819 1.6144 1.7675         Sep 1.2256 136.06 7.4584 0.67760 9.3342 1.5496 7.8087 1.4452 1.6009 1.7515
         Oct 1.2015 138.05 7.4620 0.68137 9.4223 1.5490 7.8347 1.4149 1.5937 1.7212
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 2.15 p.m. ECB time. For additional euro reference exchange
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle rates of the ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5,
and end of the month. — 2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- Exchange rate statistics. 
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the euro-area member states, the Deutsche Mark value of
the ECU * and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1As per data from the European exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). — 3Applicable from 1 January
Commission. — 2Up to 1998, reciprocal values of the exchange rates for the 1999. — 4Applicable from 1 January 2001. — 5Deutsche Mark conversion
Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999, euro reference rate. 
74*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
X External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item Effective nominal exchange rates of
Indicators of the German economy’s selected foreign currencies against the
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  1,2 currencies of 19 industrial countries  1,3 
EER-23  4 EER-42  5 19 industrial countries  3 49 countries  6 
In real terms
based on the
In real terms unit labour In real termsbased on the In real terms costs of the based on the based
 on the
consumer national consumer Pound Japanese based on the deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices US dollar sterling yen GDP deflator  7 economy  7 total sales  7 based on consumer prices
1999 95.9 95.9 95.7 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.7 98.2 97.7 100.8 102.3 105.1
2000 86.1 86.0 85.8 85.1 87.9 85.8 91.3 92.8 91.1 105.4 105.2 117.9
2001 86.7 86.8 86.8 84.8 90.4 87.0 91.3 93.2 91.4 112.0 103.6 106.72002 89.2 90.3 90.2 87.9 94.8 90.8 92.2 94.2 92.6 110.7 104.2 100.82003 99.9 101.7 101.5 99.0 106.6 101.6 95.8 97.8 97.2 97.7 99.2 99.92004 103.8 105.9 105.4 103.1 111.0 105.4 96.1 99.3 98.8 89.8 103.4 101.7
1999          Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
         Q2 96.2 96.2 96.1 97.3 96.4 95.9 98.4 98.6 98.0 102.8 102.8 99.0         Q3 94.8 94.7 94.5 95.1 95.5 94.6 96.9 97.7 97.1 101.4 102.3 106.2         Q4 92.9 92.7 92.4 93.3 94.3 92.7 95.3 96.3 95.8 99.1 104.1 115.2
2000          Q1 89.5 89.4 89.2 88.1 91.0 89.2 93.4 94.7 93.4 101.5 106.4 114.9
         Q2 86.5 86.3 86.3 85.8 88.2 86.1 91.5 92.8 91.4 104.3 105.4 118.4         Q3 85.1 85.1 84.9 84.2 87.0 84.8 90.7 92.1 90.3 106.2 103.9 119.2         Q4 83.2 83.3 82.9 82.3 85.5 83.0 89.7 91.4 89.5 109.4 105.0 119.2
2001          Q1 88.3 88.0 88.1 86.0 90.9 87.8 92.0 93.8 92.0 109.3 102.4 108.1
         Q2 85.3 85.4 85.2 83.3 88.8 85.6 90.7 92.7 90.7 113.4 104.1 106.9         Q3 86.4 86.5 86.6 84.3 90.5 87.0 91.0 93.1 91.5 112.2 103.9 106.8         Q4 86.8 87.2 87.2 85.5 91.2 87.6 91.6 93.2 91.5 113.1 104.0 104.9
2002          Q1 86.0 86.9 86.8 84.6 90.4 86.8 91.3 93.3 91.0 116.6 104.9 98.8
         Q2 87.8 88.9 88.6 86.5 93.0 89.2 91.6 93.7 91.7 112.1 103.5 100.8         Q3 90.9 92.1 92.1 89.8 97.2 93.1 92.6 94.7 93.6 107.0 103.9 103.7         Q4 91.9 93.3 93.4 90.7 98.6 94.2 93.3 95.0 94.0 107.1 104.4 100.1
2003          Jan 95.3 96.8 . . 102.3 97.6 . 96.2 95.5 103.0 102.6 100.4
         Feb 96.6 98.2 97.5 95.3 103.7 98.9 94.7 96.8 96.3 102.2 101.2 99.2         Mar 97.4 98.9 . . 104.4 99.5 . 97.0 96.5 101.4 99.3 99.8
         Apr 97.9 99.6 . . 104.6 99.6 . 97.3 96.5 101.4 98.7 98.6
         May 101.8 103.6 102.3 99.7 108.5 103.3 96.3 98.7 98.0 96.7 96.9 97.7         June 102.2 104.2 . . 108.8 103.7 . 99.0 98.3 96.1 98.9 96.3
         July 101.0 102.9 . . 107.2 102.3 . 98.4 97.5 97.8 98.5 97.3
         Aug 99.8 101.7 102.0 99.8 106.0 101.1 95.8 97.9 96.8 99.1 98.1 98.3         Sep 99.6 101.6 . . 105.9 101.0 . 97.5 96.8 97.2 98.2 101.1
         Oct 101.3 103.3 . . 108.0 102.9 . 98.0 97.5 93.3 98.8 103.7
         Nov 101.2 103.2 104.2 101.2 108.0 102.9 96.2 98.0 97.4 93.0 99.5 103.9         Dec 104.2 106.3 . . 111.2 105.9 . 99.2 99.1 90.6 99.5 102.9
2004          Jan 105.4 107.4 . . 112.5 106.9 . 99.8 99.6 88.9 101.6 102.9
         Feb 105.3 107.3 106.2 104.1 112.3 106.8 96.7 99.5 99.5 89.3 104.1 102.4         Mar 103.4 105.4 . . 110.2 104.7 . 99.0 98.6 90.9 104.2 102.1
         Apr 101.6 103.6 . . 108.3 103.0 . 98.5 97.7 91.8 104.3 104.0
         May 102.4 104.4 104.0 101.6 109.5 104.1 95.4 98.7 98.3 93.4 103.7 100.0         June 102.3 104.2 . . 109.6 104.0 . 98.5 98.1 91.9 104.9 101.6
         July 102.8 104.9 . . 110.1 104.5 . 98.9 98.4 90.9 105.0 101.2
         Aug 102.7 104.8 104.5 102.2 109.9 104.4 95.7 99.1 98.5 91.3 104.6 100.5         Sep 103.0 105.0 . . 110.3 104.6 . 99.2 98.4 90.7 102.8 100.8
         Oct 104.2 106.2 . . 111.5 105.7 . 99.5 98.9 88.9 101.8 100.8
         Nov 105.6 107.6 107.0 104.6 113.1 107.1 96.5 99.9 99.3 85.4 101.4 102.6         Dec 107.1 109.3 . . 114.4 108.5 . 100.9 100.2 84.3 102.8 102.0
2005          Jan 105.8 108.0 . . 112.9 106.9 . 100.3 99.2 85.3 101.7 103.6
         Feb 105.1 107.2 107.0 104.3 111.9 105.8
p 96.3 100.1 98.8 86.1 102.9 102.4
         Mar 106.0 108.2 . . 112.9 106.8 . 100.4 98.9 85.3 103.0 101.4
         Apr 105.1 107.2 . . 111.9 105.8 . 99.9 98.5 86.8 104.0 100.4
         May 104.0 106.2 104.8 102.7 110.6 104.6 p 95.1 99.7 98.0 87.8 103.2 102.0
         June 101.2 103.5 . . 107.6 101.9 . 98.7 96.6 89.6 104.4 102.0
         July 101.7 103.8 . . 108.0 102.0 . 99.0 96.8 90.7 101.6 99.8
         Aug 102.3 104.5 ... ... 108.7 102.7 p 94.4 99.3 97.2 89.2 102.4 99.9
         Sep 101.8 103.9 . . 108.2 102.2 . 99.4 97.2 88.8 103.4 99.5
         Oct 101.4 103.5 . . 107.8 101.7 . 99.2 96.8 90.5 102.7 97.1
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of United States. The weights used in these calculations are based on
the currency concerned. — 1The method of calculation is consistent with manufactured goods trade between 1999 and 2001 and capture
the procedure used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of third-market effects. Where consumer prices were not yet available,
the euro (see Monthly Bulletin, November 2001, pp 51−65). In contrast to estimates have been used. For details of the methodology, see
footnote 4, the weights used are based on the relevant trade in the period ECB, Monthly Bulletin, September 2004, pp 69−72 and the ECB’s Occasional
from 1995 to 1997. — 2Decline in the figures implies an increase in Paper No 2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website
competitiveness. — 3Euro-area countries as well as Canada, Denmark, (www.ecb.int). — 5ECB calculations. In addition to the countries belonging
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. — to the EER-23 group (see footnote 4), this group also includes the following4ECB calculations based on the weighted averages of the effective countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, India, Indonesia,
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Romania ,
Australia, Canada, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Hong Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Norway, Poland, Singapore, 6Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-42 group except
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania and Malta. — 7 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X External sector

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-ision. For a small fee to cover costs, afile which is updated monthly andcontains approximately 40,000 timeseries published by the Bundesbankcan be obtained on magnetic tape cas-sette or CD-ROM from the DivisionStatistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2004 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2005 Monthly Report.
December 2004
– Demographic burdens on growth and wealth
in Germany
– The insurance sector as a financial intermediary– Credit default swaps – functions, importance
and information content
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005

January 2005
– The relationship between money and prices
– German banks’ foreign direct investment and
cross-border services
– Comments on reforming the Stability and
Growth Pact
February 2005
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2004-05
March 2005
– Credit growth, bank capital and economic
activity
– German balance of payments in 2004
April 2005
– The changes to the Stability and Growth Pact– Deficit-limiting budgetary rules and a national
stability pact in Germany
– Supervision of financial conglomerates in Ger-
many
May 2005
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2005
June 2005
– Investment and financing in 2004– Germany’s external relations with the People’s
Republic of ChinaJuly 2005
– Rapid change in paid employment– Exchange rates and interest rate differentials:
recent developments since the introduction ofthe euro
August 2005
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2005
September 2005
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2004
– Recent trends in individual payments– The role of volatility patterns in financial mar-
kets
– Potential financial risk faced by the Internation-
al Monetary Fund
October 2005
– Germany’s financial linkage to the EU budget– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
– an analysis based on a new dataset
– New transparency rules for credit institutions– Risk appetite in a dynamic financial market
environment
November 2005
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2005
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 2003
3
European economic and monetary union,February 2004
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-rungsunion, April 2005
3
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200342 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, September 20053,5
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2004,
September 20056
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 2000 and 2002, Novem-ber 2004
6
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, February 20053
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 International capital links,
April 20051, 6
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2005
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20043
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Solely available on the internet, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Stat-istics”, “External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.6Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2005
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
31/2005
Umstellung der deutschen VGR auf Vorjahrespreis-basis – Konzept und Konsequenzen f/C252r die aktuelleWirtschaftsanalyse sowie die /C246konometrische
Modellierung
32/2005
Determinants of current account developments inthe central and east European EU member states –consequences for the enlargement of the euroarea
33/2005
An estimated DSGE model for the German econ-
omy within the euro area
34/2005
Rational inattention: a research agenda
35/2005
Monetary policy with model uncertainty: distribu-tion forecast targeting
36/2005
Comparing the value revelance of R&D reportingin Germany: standard and selection effects
37/2005
European inflation expectations dynamics
38/2005
Dynamic factor models
39/2005
Short-run and long-run comovement of GDP and
some expenditure aggregates in Germany, France
and Italy
40/2005
A “wreckers theory” of financial distressSeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
11/2005
Financial integration and systemic risk
12/2005
Evaluating the German bank merger wave
13/2005
Incorporating prediction and estimation risk in
point-in-time credit portfolio models
14/2005
Time series properties of a rating system based onfinancial ratios
15/2005
Inefficient or just different? Effects of heterogen-eity on bank efficiency scores
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the internet.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

