MONTHLY REPORT
MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER
2005
Vol 57
No 5

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1Fax +49 69 5601071Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 13 May 2005.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on theinternet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in spring 2005 5
Overview 6Global and European setting 9
Has the recycling of oil revenues tothe consumer countries accelerated? 12
Monetary policy, banking business and
the capital market 22
Money market management andliquidity needs 23
Measuring the liquidity and defaultrisk component of corporate bondspreads 32
Economic conditions in Germany 34
Revision of Germany’s nationalaccounts 36
Foreign trade and payments 47
Statistics on the structure andactivities of foreign affiliates (FATS) 54
Public finances 58
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
4Capital market 48*
Public finances in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*External sector 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
5The economic scene
in Germany
in spring 2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
6OverviewStrong external impulse, weak domestic
demand
Following a flat cyclical evolution in the
second half of 2004, the German economypicked up speed in the first few months ofthe current year. According to the calcula-tions of the Federal Statistical Office, realgross domestic product (GDP) increased bythe surprisingly strong rate of 1% comparedwith the previous quarter after adjustmentfor seasonal and working-day variations. Theyear-on-year growth rate likewise improvedappreciably from 0.5% in the final threemonths of 2004 to 1.1% in the first quarterof 2005. That holds at least for the workingday-adjusted figures. It should be noted inthis context that the outcome for the fourthquarter of 2004 was significantly depressedvis-/C224-vis the unadjusted figures by the excep-tionally high number of working days in thatperiod, whereas the adjusted result for thefirst quarter of 2005 has been increasedsharply compared with the unadjusted figureowing to the relatively low number of work-ing days as this year the Easter holidays fell inMarch. Hence it appears likely that both thedecline in the fourth quarter and the recoveryduring the period under review are somewhatoverstated. But even after these possible stat-istical disparities are taken into account, therewas a marked increase in macroeconomicmomentum during the first quarter. This isborne out by the fact that aggregate GDPduring the past two quarters (ie the fourthquarter of 2004 and the first quarter of2005), over which these exceptional calendareffects largely cancel out, shows an increaseon the previous two-quarter period of 0.4%.Buoyant start to
the year

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
7The main factor fuelling the economic recov-
ery in the first quarter of 2005 was externaldemand. Although the pace of global eco-nomic expansion slowed somewhat in theearly part of this year in the wake of the newrecord highs reached by crude oil prices andthe expectation that the situation on the oilmarkets will remain tense, the negative cyclic-al consequences of the booming commoditymarkets have remained within bounds so far.Besides the reduced energy dependency ofproduction in the industrial countries, this isdoubtless due also in part to the fact thatthe additional revenues accruing to the oil-exporting countries are today apparentlybeing recycled into a rising import demandon the part of the oil-producing countriesfaster than was the case in the past – fromwhich the German economy and other oil-consuming countries are benefiting (see boxon page 12).
The downside of this exclusively export-driven
growth is the heavy dependence of currenteconomic activity in Germany on the externalsector. The pronounced global imbalancesharbour risks which could adversely affectGermany, in particular, as its weak domesticdemand offers an insufficient counterweight.In the early part of this year domestic demandremained fundamentally sluggish. Accordingto initial data, private consumption providedno noticeable impetus in the first quarter des-pite higher retail trade turnover. Constructioninvestment remained muted, partly onaccount of the inclement weather, and asustained revival in investment in machineryand equipment is likewise not yet in sight.Judging by the surveys carried out by the Ifo
Institute, business sentiment deteriorated inthe course of the first months of this year.The announced intention to lower corpor-ation tax rates constitutes an effort to im-prove the underlying conditions for entrepre-neurial activity and more employment. Theefficacy of such an initiative would be en-hanced especially if it were perceived not as aone-off measure but rather as a step towardsa comprehensive reform of the overall incometax and corporation tax regime. New prob-lems of credibility would arise, by contrast, ifthe announced move were to fail to material-ise. However, given the tense situation ofpublic finances and the result of the most re-cent estimate for the tax revenue outturn, itis also crucial to prevent any further haemor-rhaging of tax receipts.
Moreover, critical utterances concerning the
competition-oriented behaviour of enter-prises and investors have engendered freshuncertainty. Together with the Federal Cab-inet’s decision to broaden the scope of theGerman Employee Posting Act (Arbeitneh-
mer-Entsendegesetz) with a view to extend-
ing the reach of collective labour agreementsin response to fears of downward pressure onwages in the wake of the phased EU enlarge-ment, this has clearly aroused doubts aboutthe economic policymakers’ readiness to con-tinue the reform course. This debate needs tobe informed by the realisation that jobswhich are costlier than the employees’ contri-bution to the company’s earnings are just notviable in an open economy.
External
demand acting
as dynamo
Domestic
demand still
weakPoorer
sentiment and
expectations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
8To date there has been no marked improve-
ment of the situation on the labour market.Although registered unemployment fell a lit-tle during the reporting period and in Apriltotalled 4.89 million on a seasonally adjustedbasis, this is not so much a sign of a cyclicalupturn as an expression of a delayed seasonalrevival and of a technical lowering of the job-less total in connection with the registrationof former recipients of unemployment bene-fit. By contrast, the declining trend in thenumber of employees subject to full social se-curity contributions persisted up to the end ofthe reporting period. The increase in thenumber of employed persons in the firstquarter is chiefly attributable to the trend ingovernment-subsidised special forms of em-ployment. Marked headway in the creationof new jobs is not just the key to strengthen-ing the confidence of consumers and their in-come prospects; it would also make an im-portant contribution to consolidating publicfinances and the social security systems.
The current monetary policy stance of the
Eurosystem certainly constitutes no obstacleto making such headway. With a policy cred-ibly oriented to price level stability and fa-vourable financing conditions, the monetarypolicymakers have put in place a frameworkconducive to more growth and employment.
Despite the renewed rise in oil prices, the in-crease in consumer prices of 1
1/C252% in April re-
mains consistent with price stability. Henceprice developments are continuing to bolsterpurchasing power. In addition, low interestrates across the maturity range are strength-ening the propensity to spend on the finan-cing side. Banks’ lending rates in Germanyhave likewise declined further, and the insti-tutions active in the German market haveeased their credit standards slightly. Even so,the demand for credit is stagnating in Ger-many; it is thus well below the average trendin the rest of the euro area, where somecountries are recording a brisk demand forcredit from households to finance thepurchase of real estate and entrepreneurialactivities.
If the weak domestic demand is to be lasting-
ly overcome and the potential output of theGerman economy strengthened through newinvestment and a higher labour force partici-pation rate, there is no alternative to furtherresolute reform measures in Germany. Thatapplies to the labour market and to wage for-mation as well as to the social security andtaxation systems.Labour market
still in the
doldrums
Monetary
policy
framework

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
9Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
At the start of the year, the upswing in the
global economy continued at a fairly rapidrate. However, according to the early eco-nomic indicators from the industrial coun-tries, overall economic growth appears tohave lost some momentum in the secondquarter. This may have been due mainly tothe fact that crude oil prices have remainedat a very high level since the last quarter of2004 except for a brief respite at the very endof last year. At the beginning of April theyreached a record high of US$57 (Brent crudeoil); in mid-May they stood at roughly US$50.Thus, in the period from January to April,crude oil prices were 55% higher in terms ofUS dollars than they had been in the sameperiod of the previous year. In terms of theeuro, which had appreciated considerablyagainst the dollar during the twelve-monthperiod, the increase amounted to 47%. Fur-thermore, industrial raw material prices con-tinued to rise in the first four months of2005. In US dollar terms, they were up 17%on the year, and in euro 10%.
The ongoing surge in prices on the inter-
national commodity markets has been ac-companied by considerable shifts in purchas-ing power away from the consumer countriesin favour of the supplier countries. However,the upward thrust in prices witnessed sincethe beginning of 2004, especially on the oilmarkets, have so far had only limited negativeimpact on the global economy comparedwith the distortions in former times of sharplyrising prices. The oil crises at the beginning ofthe 1970s and the early 1980s, for example,Global
economy
remains on
growth path
but momentum
has slackened
Pressures from
current surge in
oil prices lower
than in 1970s
and 1980s

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
10led to significant growth losses. First, infla-
tionary pressures in the consumer countriesincreased dramatically, forcing monetary pol-icy makers to counteract with restrictivemeasures. The main reason for this, asidefrom the higher energy-dependency of themanufacturing sector, was the rapid forma-tion of wage-price spirals. Second, it wasgenerally only after long delays that the sup-plier countries’ soaring income was rechan-nelled back into the industrial countries in theform of rising demand for goods or increasedcapital exports. During the transition period,global output slowed down (see explanatorynotes on pages 12).
In contrast to the situation at that time, the
overall price climate has remained relativelyrelaxed during the current surge in prices onthe crude oil markets as second-round effects
have been limited. In addition, recent analy-ses seem to indicate that revenue increases inthe oil-exporting countries are now beingchannelled into purchases of goods abroadmuch more rapidly than was formerly thecase. This is partly due to the fact that pro-duction capacities are nearly exhausted andconsequently investment in the exploration ofnew sources and in conveying systems isbeing stepped up considerably. (By contrast,the oil crises in the 1970s and early 1980swere caused not so much by capacity short-ages but rather by OPEC’s output policy andby delivery disruptions following political un-rest in the Middle East.) Moreover, owing tothe generally weak revenue situation in the1990s, in many oil-exporting countries pent-up demand has accumulated, particularlywith regard to the public infrastructure,which can now be relieved. It should also beborne in mind that, as a result of the rapidpopulation growth, above all in the MiddleEast, many oil-producing countries which hadbeen low absorber countries since the 1970shave now become high absorber countries.According to IMF estimates, those emergingmarket economies which export energy com-modities increased their real imports by 13%in 2004 compared with 3
1/C252% in 2003; a rise
of 111/C252is expected for 2005. At the same
time, the current account surpluses in thesecountries will presumably also continue torise.
The continuing favourable financing condi-
tions on the capital markets have presumablyalso played a key role in enabling the globaleconomy to successfully withstand the pres-Log scale
US$
or €
Industrial raw materials
2000 = 100
in US dollar terms
in euro termsCrude oil 1
in US dollars
in euroWorld market prices for
crude oil and industrial
raw materials
Sources: Thomson Financial, HWWA Com-
modity Price Index. — 1Price for one barrel
of Brent crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank160
140
120
100
8050
40
30
2025
2002 2003 2004 2005
Favourable
financing
conditions
and stable
economic
environments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
11sures emanating from the commodity mar-
kets so far. The Latin American emergingmarket economies, in particular, are currentlyprofiting from this with relatively low interestrate premiums. In this context, it is also worthmentioning that monetary policy in the indus-trial countries and in China is still taking anaccommodating stance, albeit not to thesame extent as in recent years. The south andeast Asian emerging market economies areparticularly affected by the increases in thecrude oil prices because of the rather energy-intensive nature of their production – com-pared with that of the industrial countries –and their strong dependency on imports forenergy commodities. However, a robust up-swing is still under way in this region. More-over, the underlying structural conditionshave improved considerably since the finan-cial crisis at the end of the 1990s.
The differential in the growth rates of the in-
dustrial countries widened in the course of2004. While the US and British economiescontinued to expand sharply in the secondhalf of 2004, economic growth in the euroarea and in Japan slowed down, at times con-siderably. Domestic economic activity in thesetwo regions was unable to compensate forthe weaker stimuli from abroad. The largergrowth differentials, together with the highercommodity and crude oil prices, increasedthe external imbalances. Although GDPgrowth picked up again in the euro area (andmost likely in Japan, too) in the first quarterof 2005, this was partly a reaction to thepoor results of the previous quarter. In the in-dustrial countries as a whole, seasonally-adjusted industrial output in the first quarterof 2005 was up by 1% on the level of the pre-
vious three months and by 2% on the year.Consumer price inflation stabilised in the firstquarter of 2005. Seasonally-adjusted priceswere only slightly higher than they had beenin the previous three months. The year-on-year rate of increase fell from 2.5% in thefinal quarter of 2004 to an average of 2.2%.This was due in part to the temporary easingof crude oil prices at the end of 2004, a de-velopment which was reflected, albeit after acertain delay, in the energy prices at con-sumer level. Base effects in the euro area alsocontributed to the decline in inflation. Exclud-ing Japan, which is again experiencing slightdeflation, inflation was at 2.5%.
According to the IMF’s World Economic Out-
look published at the beginning of April, theglobal economy will remain on a growth paththroughout 2005 and 2006. It predicts thatwhile the pace of growth, at almost 4
1/C252%i n
each case, will no longer be as fast as it wasin 2004 when it reached just over 5%, it willremain well above the long-term average of3
1/C252% (1985 to 2004). It is worth noting that
the IMF’s forecast for the world economy in2005 is virtually unchanged from its forecastof spring 2004 even though the oil price as-sumptions on which it bases its prognoseswere upwardly adjusted year-on-year fromUS$27 in April 2004 to US$37.25 in thefourth quarter of 2004 to currentlyUS$46.50. This would indicate that the globalupswing is more robust than has been as-sumed for some time. According to the IMFforecast, the rather subdued global produc-tion activity is accompanied by world tradegrowth which is less vigorous than before;Industrial
output and
price develop-
ments in the
industrial
countriesIMF forecast

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
12Deutsche BundesbankHas the recycling of oil revenues to the consumer countries accelerated?
If it is assumed that the price of oil will remain high 
for some time to come, the implications of this for the 
global growth process take on even greater importance. 
This notably includes the question of the likely impact on 
the worldwide demand for goods.
Given the relatively price-inelastic demand for oil in 
the short run and the fairly limited response of export 
prices of industrial products, an increase in the price of oil leads initially to additional (net) revenues for 
the oil-producing countries: real income is transferred 
from the oil-importing countries to the oil-exporting countries. To the extent that the states which beneﬁ  t 
from the shifts in the terms of trade spend their extra 
revenues on additional imports of goods and services, 
the loss of purchasing power in the consumer countries 
due to higher oil prices results in lower real national income but does not lead to a decline in aggregate 
output. However, the demand proﬁ  le changes, since 
lower real domestic demand is accompanied  by higher exports. But experience suggests that the decline in 
real income and the consequent drop in demand in the 
consuming countries following an oil price shock occur 
faster than the expansion of demand on the part of the 
oil-producing countries.
1 This means that global demand 
falls per se, at least for a time.
Various indicators, especially the robust import growth 
of the oil-producing countries last year, suggest that 
the process of disbursement of such additional oil 
revenues has accelerated over time. This hypothesis can 
be tested using a structural vector-autoregressive (SVAR) 
model consisting of the oil price as well as the nominal merchandise exports and imports of the OPEC countries.2 
The response of exports and imports to an identiﬁ  ed oil 
price shock can be gauged from the corresponding  
impulse response functions. A change in the response 
behaviour can be observed by splitting the overall 
available observation period (1980 Q1 to 2004 Q3) into two sub-periods (1980 Q1 to 1990 Q4 and 1991 Q1 to 
2004 Q3), which are then analysed separately.
The analysis shows that an unexpected rise in oil prices 
gives an immediate signiﬁ  cant boost to the OPEC 
countries’ nominal exports, but increases imports only with a time lag of around three quarters. After 14 to 16 
quarters, the accumulated responses generally lose their 
statistical signiﬁ  cance. The growth lead of OPEC exports 
over imports in response to an oil price shock can be 
derived from these accumulated responses.
The chart on page 13 shows this growth lead for the 
aggregate trade of the OPEC countries vis-à-vis the world and vis-à-vis Germany separately for the two sub-
periods. In general the export response initially exceeds 
the import response; as a rule, the difference expands 
up to the third quarter and steadily declines thereafter. 
It is noticeable that the curve for the second sub-period is shifted noticeably downwards, which indicates an 
acceleration in the recycling of the oil revenues. Twelve 
to 13 quarters after the oil price rise in the later period (1991 to 2004) the accumulated growth lead of exports is 
fully neutralised by the subsequent increase in imports, 
whereas in the earlier period exports were still ahead 
even after 20 quarters. Moreover, in Germany’s case 
the difference now declines steadily from the outset; 
1 In addition, part of the higher revenues are invested on the interna-
tional ﬁ  nancial markets, which tends to depress the interest rate level 
and may stimulate investment demand. In such a scenario, however, a stabilising effect on real value added is similarly likely only after time-lags and as a function of the interest rate elasticity of domestic demand. — 2 The data used were taken from the IMF‘s Direction of 
Trade Statistics and – in the case of the oil price – from its International Financial Statistics. To identify the VAR, a simple recursive order is adopted using the stated – and theoretically speciﬁ  ed – sequence of 
the variables so that the oil price does not depend contemporaneously 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
13the curve no longer displays a “bulge” in the ﬁ  rst few 
quarters.
This simple SVAR analysis comes up with ﬁ  ndings similar 
to those of other studies. For example, the UK National 
Institute for Economic and Social Research (NIESR) esti-mates that the recycling velocity has doubled compared 
with the period prior to1985. On the basis of simulations 
using its multi-country econometric model (NiGEM), the NIESR concludes that an increase in oil revenues is now 
reﬂ ected in an equally high rise in OPEC imports as early 
as after four years.
3
In the context of simulations in NiGEM, Barrell and Pomerantz (2004) also compared the output effects of 
a permanent oil price rise in two alternative scenarios, 
which differ only with regard to the pace at which the oil revenues are disbursed.
4 While the one scenario reﬂ  ects 
the current situation, the other is based on the slow 
recycling velocity of the 1970s. Both scenarios produce almost identical output effects for the USA. By contrast, 
the output of the European economies, especially of the 
German economy, declines more sharply in the event 
of a slower disbursement of the oil revenues. This is 
because the oil-exporting countries import substantially more from Europe than from the USA. Given an 
unchanged structure of foreign trade, an increase in 
oil prices therefore implies a global shift in demand in favour of the European economies. A major role is also 
played in this context by the very close trade links with 
the oil-producing CIS countries − above all, Russia.
on the two other variables. — 3 See NIESR (2004), Oil Price Shocks and 
the World Economy Today, National Institute Economic Review 189, July 2004, p 14-17. — 4 See R Barrell and O Pomerantz (2004), Oil Prices 
and the World Economy, NIESR working paper, also published in Focus on European Economic Integration, 1/2004, OeNB, p 152-177. — 5 Dif-ference between the cumulative growth rates of the nominal exports 
and imports of the OPEC countries vis-à-vis the world and Germany following an oil price rise of 10%; a positive sign indicates the cumula-tive growth lead of nominal exports.Percent-
age
points
Percent-
age
points
Germany
1980 to 1990
1991 to 2004
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Quarters following shockWorld economy
1980 to 1990
1991 to 2004Differences in growth between
the nominal exports and imports
of the OPEC countries followingan oil price rise
5
5+
4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1–
2–5+
4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1–

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
14following an increase of 10% in 2004, rises
of 71/C252% are predicted for 2005 and 2006.
However, this also means that Japan and theeuro area, whose domestic economies arestill marked by considerable weaknesses, cancontinue to expect external expansionarystimuli in the future.
Global economic growth is still being driven
by the United States and China according tothe IMF forecast. Both countries have, how-ever, played a major role in the current exter-nal imbalances, which are repeatedly thefocal point of the financial market debateabout risk assessments. In 2004, the USA’strade deficit (goods) vis-/C224-vis China amount-ed to US$162 billion compared with an over-all deficit of US$651 billion. The IMF forecastpredicts that the US current account deficitwill increase again this year and next year, notleast as a result of the rise in oil prices. How-ever, in relation to GDP , it will be no larger in2006 – at 5.7% – than it was in 2004. Thevolatility of the oil markets and their highlevel of susceptibility to disturbances pose afurther risk, especially for highly indebted andpoor countries. The IMF estimates that asharp increase in long-term interest rates inthe USA could lead to a world-wide deterior-ation of the financing conditions whichwould probably also have a negative impacton the stock and property markets.
According to the initial estimate, in the period
from January to March 2005, real GDP in theUSA rose by
3/C254% on the previous quarter
after adjustment for seasonal and working-day variations. This means that the pace ofgrowth slowed down only slightly comparedQuarterly, annual percentage change
Euro area
2JapanUSAof which:
Total excluding JapanIndustrial countries, total
Total
Core rate 1Consumer prices in the
industrial countries
Sources: national statistics, Eurostat and
Bundesbank calculations. — 1Excluding en-
ergy and food; euro-area: HICP excluding
energy and unprocessed food. — 2Eurostat
flash estimate for April.
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
2+
1+
01+
0
1−
2−4
32
1
04
32
1
04
32
1
0
2002 2003 2004 2005Major risks still
present
USA

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
15with the two preceding quarters. Year-on-
year growth was 31/C252%.1It seems likely that
the robust upswing in the USA will continueeven though the indicators available so farpresent a mixed picture for the second quar-ter of the year.
Given the demand structure of growth in the
first quarter of 2005, it is striking that inven-tory investment, at
1/C254percentage point,
made a more significant contribution to therise in overall output than it did in the previ-ous quarter. In addition, the real external bal-ance of goods and services went further intothe red, depressing GDP growth by almost
1/C252
percentage point. In the first quarter of 2005,final domestic demand increased by “only”
3/C254%, compared with 1% and 11/C254% in the
two preceding quarters. There was a shiftingof emphasis here, too. While real expenditureon new residential buildings increased moresharply, the growth in commercial invest-ment, at 1%, was much smaller than before,not least as a result of the expiry of the depre-ciation allowances at the end of 2004. Privateconsumption rose by almost 1%, which wasalmost as much as in the final quarter of2004. However, given the fairly small rise innominal disposable income, this was at theexpense of saving. The private saving ratio inthe first quarter of 2005 was
1/C252% compared
with 11/C252% in the preceding period, although
it was then affected by special factors.
Price developments were somewhat calmer
than they had been in the fourth quarter of2004, which meant that the pressure onhousehold budgets eased. The rate of in-crease in the consumer price index fell by 0.3percentage point to 3.0% mainly as a result
of the smaller year-on-year rise in energyprices. By contrast, the core rate (excludingenergy and food) continued its upward trendand reached 2.3%, its highest level since thethird quarter of 2002. However, the core rateof the personal consumption expenditure de-flator, at 1.6%, shows that low home-growninflationary pressures were unchanged in thefirst quarter of 2005.
2
At the beginning of 2005, the Japanese econ-omy overcame the economic slump whichIMF forecast for 2005 and 2006*
Item 2003 2004 2005 2006
Real gross domestic
product Annual percentage change
Advanced
economies 1 +2 . 0 +3 . 4 +2 . 6 +3 . 0
of which
United States + 3.0 + 4.4 + 3.6 + 3.6Japan + 1.4 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.9Euro area + 0.5 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 2.3
Consumer prices
2
Advanced
economies 1 +1 . 8 +2 . 0 +2 . 0 +1 . 9
of which
United States + 2.3 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 2.4Japan – 0.2 0.0 – 0.2 0.0Euro area + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.9 + 1.7
Unemployment Number of unemployed persons as a
percentage of the labour force
Advanced
economies
1 6.6 6.3 6.1 6.0
of which
United States 6.0 5.5 5.3 5.2Japan 5.3 4.7 4.5 4.4Euro area 8.7 8.8 8.7 8.4
* Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, April 2005. — 1Including
Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore. — 2Consumer
price index; for the euro area, HICP.
Deutsche Bundesbank
1The quarterly result will probably be revised upward,
mainly as a result of the significant decline in the trade
deficit in March, which was not known at the time of the
first GDP estimate.
2For the reasons behind the divergence between the
two core rates, see Deutsche Bundesbank, The economic
scene in Germany around the turn of 2004-05, Monthly
Report, February 2005, pp 12-14.Japan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
16had begun in the second quarter of 2004.
During the period from January to March,seasonally adjusted industrial output in-creased on average by 2%, which was 1
1/C252%
higher than a year previously. However, theeconomic indicators for the second quarterwere, on the whole, disappointing. For ex-ample, the Bank of Japan’s Tankan survey inMarch 2005 indicates that confidence amongbusinesses has once again declined. Con-sumer confidence also fell in April. In the firstquarter of 2005, consumer prices went downon the year by
1/C254%, having risen by1/C252%i n
the final quarter of 2004 as a result of risingenergy and food prices.
In the first quarter of 2005, real GDP in China
was 9
1/C252% higher than it had been a year earl-
ier. This sharp rise at the start of 2005 meansthat the IMF forecast of 8
1/C252% for the year
may even be exceeded. Assuming that do-mestic economic activity remains buoyant,the Chinese economy should also benefitfrom strong growth in textile and clothing ex-ports owing to the abolition of the formersystem of quotas at the end of 2004. Despitethe ongoing economic boom, inflationarypressures at consumer level declined. InMarch, the rate of increase in consumerprices was “only” 2.7%, having been almosttwice as high in the third quarter of 2004.This supports the IMF’s prediction that theinflation rate would decline from 3.9 % in2004 to 3.0% this year.
Real GDP in the United Kingdom rose again
sharply in the first three months of 2005;however, the seasonally and working-day-adjusted result of
1/C252% was not quite as highas it had been at the end of 2004. There was
a23/C254% rise on the year. The services and con-
struction sectors were responsible for thequarterly rise in overall output. By contrast,industrial production declined. Although nodata are yet available on the use of total out-put, private consumer demand, which waspreviously the main driving force behind do-mestic economic activity in the UK, seems tohave lost momentum. In the first threemonths of the year, retail turnover rose only
1/C254% on the previous quarter after adjustment
for price and seasonal variations. The strongerupward pressure on prices probably played arole in the more subdued consumption activ-ity. The Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices(HICP) rose on average by 1.7% during thefirst three months of the year, compared with1.4% in the previous quarter. In March, theHICP inflation rate, at 1.9%, came very closeto the 2.0% ceiling set by the government.Measured in terms of the national Retail PriceIndex (RPIX), inflation reached 2.4% towardsthe end of the period under review. More-over, the upward trend in property pricesvirtually came to a halt in the final quarter of2004, which well nigh put an end to anystimulating effects on consumption from thisdirection.
In 2004, aggregate output in the new EU
member states (and in the candidate coun-tries Romania and Bulgaria) rose by 5
1/C252%
compared with 2% in the euro area. How-ever, over the course of 2004, economic ac-tivity slowed down in these countries, too.Seasonally adjusted industrial output grew,on average, by
1/C252% in January and February
2005, which was less than in the previousChina
United
KingdomNew EU
member states

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
17quarter. The IMF forecast predicts GDP
growth of “only” 41/C254% in both 2005 and
2006. Unemployment in the new EU memberstates continued to decline in recent months,reaching 13
1/C252% – as a percentage of the la-
bour force – in March. The rate of consumerprice increases slowed considerably at the be-ginning of 2005. The annual rate of increasewas “only” 3.3% in the first three months ofthe year compared with 4.8% and 4.4% re-spectively in the third and fourth quarters of2004. A further decline can be expected inthe second quarter of 2005 as the hefty taxincreases which came into force a year previ-ously upon accession to the EU will now“drop out” of the inflation rate calculation. InMarch, inflation rates ranged from 1.2% inthe Czech Republic to 6.6% in Latvia. Theoverall positive economic picture in the newmember states is, however, clouded some-what by the persistently large current accountdeficits. Overall (including the candidatecountries), in 2004 they amounted to almost5% of aggregate GDP . According to the IMFforecast, the latest oil price developmentsalone mean that no improvement can be ex-pected this year.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
According to initial Eurostat estimates, in the
first quarter of 2005, seasonally adjustedoverall output in the euro area was up by
1/C252% on the previous quarter and by 11/C252%o n
the year. The marked acceleration in growthcompared with the final quarter of 2004(+
1/C254%) is particularly noteworthy given that
production in the agricultural and construc-tion sectors was severely impaired by the un-
usually cold winter weather in many parts ofEurope for a time. The increase is attributableprimarily to the higher growth rate in Ger-many which was, in part, a technical responseto the decline in real GDP in the precedingperiod. All in all, the rather moderate cyclicalrecovery process in the euro area appears tohave continued after the turn of the year. Asyet, no further data are available on the out-put and expenditure components of real GDPin the euro area in the first three months ofthe year. However, the marked rise in nominalexports to non-euro-area countries – accom-panied by stagnating imports – in January-February compared with the level in the lastquarter of 2004 indicates that foreign tradewas a source of major stimuli. In addition,consumer demand was slightly more briskthan previously; in the three-month periodfrom January to March, seasonally adjustedreal retail turnover, in any case, exceeded thelevel in the weak preceding quarter by
1/C252%.
The higher GDP growth in the first quarter of
2005 was accompanied by more buoyant in-dustrial production. In January and February,seasonally adjusted production in this sectorrose again slightly (
1/C254%) following a decline
in the final quarter of 2004. At the beginningof 2005, it was up by 1
1/C254% on the year. The
growth in industrial production over thecourse of the year was driven by a greateroutput of intermediate and consumer goodsas well as a sharp rise in energy production,which was attributable mainly to the coldwinter weather in February. By contrast, theproduction of capital goods and durable con-sumer goods stagnated at fourth-quarterStronger GDP
growth in Q1Industrial
activity more
positive

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
18levels. After adjustment for seasonal vari-
ations, industrial capacity utilisation in Aprilwas 1 percentage point below what it hadbeen in January and, thus, at its lowest levelsince the third quarter of 2003.
At the beginning of the second quarter, how-
ever, the economy in the euro area deterior-ated again. Industrial confidence fell percep-tibly in March-April and was once againbelow its long-term average. The estimate forexport expectations has been halved sinceOctober. Similarly, there was a sharp down-ward trend in the volume of new manufac-turing orders in the first two months of theyear. It should, however, be borne in mindthat the comparable figure from the finalquarter of 2004 was influenced by majororders in the aviation industry. Consumer sen-timent has stabilised recently at a low level.
Unemployment in the euro area rose again
slightly after the turn of the year, partly as aresult of the unusually cold winter weather inFebruary. According to preliminary data re-leased by Eurostat, in the first quarter of2005, a seasonally adjusted average of 12.75million persons were without paid employ-ment. This constitutes a year-on-year increaseof
1/C252%. The standardised unemployment rate
persisted at 8.8%.
Consumer price inflation in the euro area
slowed down at the beginning of 2005. Theseasonally adjusted and annualised rate of in-crease in the first three months of the yearwas, on average, just under 1
1/C252% compared
with 2% in the final quarter of 2004. Onekey factor in the easing of inflationary pres-Seasonally adjusted,
quarterly percentage change
2005SpainItalyFranceGermanyEuro areaGrowth trends in
the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
01.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Weak
economic
indicators at
beginning of
second quarter
Labour market
Consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
19sure was the, at times, more subdued move-
ments in crude oil prices. In addition to this,inflation in the core components declined.The prices for services increased less sharplythan in earlier months, and the price of dur-able and non-durables goods (excluding en-ergy) even fell slightly. This is partly attribut-able to the fact that the winter clearancesales in January and February had a some-what greater impact than in previous years.The overall year-on-year HICP inflation ratedeclined from 2.3% in the final quarter of2004 to 2.0%. According to preliminary data,the inflation rate in April was 2.1%.
The spread of inflation rates in the euro area
narrowed further and in the first quarter of2005 remained at a relatively low level interms of the average over the past five years.However, there has been little change in theperformance ranking of the countries with re-gard to price stability since the start of Euro-pean monetary union at the beginning of1999. Overall, Germany has remained themost price-stabile country in the euro areadespite considerable administered price hikes.It is also worth noting that only the Nether-lands and Finland have since managed toslightly reduce the inflation differential toGermany which had built up by 2003. InFinland’s case, this was largely owing to thecut in tax on alcoholic beverages in 2004.
Exchange rates
In the second quarter of 2005, the foreign ex-
change market was caught between a furthertightening of monetary policy in the USA andthe ongoing debate about global economic
imbalances. The changing influences werestrongly reflected in the development of theeuro-dollar exchange rate in particular.
While market participants appeared to view
the US external position less anxiously at thebeginning of the year, owing, in part, to anoptimistic forecast from the Federal Reserveand the announcement of expenditure cutsby the US government, this estimation wasmodified somewhat in mid-February. Al-though there had been a surprisingly sharpreduction in the US trade deficit in December,this was due mainly to the lower oil price andthe subsequently lower value of imports.Market developments were shaped far moreby the debate which erupted at this timeabout possible additional burdens on the US
Seasonally adjusted, in percentage points
IE
GR
PT
ES
NL
LUIT
BE
FR
AT
FI2002 Q1
2005 Q1Inflation differential *
vis-à-vis Germany
*Relative change in the HICP of 2002 Q1
and 2005 Q1 vis-à-vis 1999 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank15 12 9 6 3 0
Current trends
in the foreign
exchange
marketsEuro’s
exchange rate
movement
against the
US dollar ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
20budget, for example, as a result of military ex-
penditure, which once again focused themarket participants’ attention on the USA’songoing high financing needs and the associ-ated external economic risks.
The resultant weakening of the US dollar was
increased by news that some Asian centralbanks were planning to diversify their foreignreserves, which had hitherto been held pre-dominantly in US dollars. Intense foreign ex-change market intervention by central banksin Asia in recent years had meant that theirUS dollar reserve holdings had expanded con-siderably and had thus played a key role inmeeting the USA’s substantial financingneeds. Even though these central banks maynot have increased their foreign reserves withthe aim of making a profit but rather, in gen-eral, in order to stabilise exchange rates, anyvaluation losses would still have to be borneby the economy concerned. Consequently,the markets feared that diversification effortsby individual central banks to avoid valuationlosses could prompt other central banks totake similar measures, which would have afurther adverse effect on the dollar rate. Des-pite statements issued by several Asian cen-tral banks that they were not planning to selldollar holdings, the euro rose to US$1.34 bymid-March. This was almost as high as itspeak at the end of December.
However, reports of exceptionally large net
inflows into the USA eased the pressure onthe dollar. Favourable economic and labourmarket data for the USA and a further in-crease in interest rates by the Federal Reservewith an accompanying warning that infla-tionary pressures were developing conveyed a
picture of a solid upswing on the other sideof the Atlantic and drew attention back tothe United State’s expanding yield advantageover the euro area, a scenario which tends todraw further capital imports into USA. As aresult, the euro weakened against the US dol-lar. This was also partly due to the, in somecases, disappointing economic data from thisside of the Atlantic, for example, the declinein the Ifo index and the weakening of the Sta-bility and Growth Pact, which is potentiallydetrimental to the euro. As this report wentto press, the euro was trading at US$1.28, al-most 6
1/C252% below its highest level at the end
of 2004.
In the second quarter of the year, the euro-
yen exchange rate remained for a time largelywithin a relatively narrow corridor of between¥137 and ¥140 per euro. The lack of move-ment in the exchange rate may be due, inpart, to the fact that in the past few monthsthe Japanese economy has conveyed just asmixed a picture as that of the euro area. Inparticular, news of the decline in the Japan-ese trade surplus was seen as an additionalrisk for the Japanese economy, which hadhitherto been materially bolstered by exports.However, speculation about possible changesto the Chinese monetary system also influ-enced the yen. Thus, at the end of April, theeuro fell against the yen as speculation inten-sified about a forthcoming appreciation orflexibilisation of the renminbi. The marketsassumed that this would mean that in otherAsian countries, such as Japan, political resist-ance to an appreciation of their own currencywould falter. Consequently, as this report... against the
yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
21went to press, the euro was trading at ¥136,
almost 4% below its highest level at the turnof the year.
Following a weak period at the beginning of
the year, the euro managed to gain againstthe pound sterling up to mid-March beforedepreciating again. As is so often the case,the euro-pound sterling rate mimicked theeuro-dollar rate movements. Moreover, initialexpectations of an interest rate cut in theUnited Kingdom were transformed in thecourse of the second quarter into speculationabout an interest rate increase and this alsoplayed a role. In the light of renewed uncer-tainty about the British economy, the eurohas recently gained ground again against thepound sterling. As this report went to press, itwas trading at £0.68, which was approxi-mately its level in mid-February.
At the beginning of May, three new EU coun-
tries – Latvia, Malta and Cyprus – joined theexchange rate mechanism (ERM II). The cen-tral rates against the euro were set atLVL 0.702804, MTL 0.429300 andCYP 0.585274. The exchange rates may fluc-tuate within a €15% band around these cen-tral rates. Latvia has unilaterally undertakento observe a smaller fluctuation band of 1%.When it joined ERM II, Malta relinquished itsformer peg to a currency basket. It has unilat-erally agreed to maintain its currency’sexchange rate at the central rate.
The exchange rate movements against the US
dollar and the pound sterling were key fac-tors behind euro’s appreciation, on average,against the currencies of 23 trading partners
– including the new ERM II members – up tomid-March, and its subsequent decline. Asthis report went to press, the euro was 4%below its highest level at the end of 2004.Overall, this balanced out the competitivelosses suffered by euro-area suppliers lastyear as a result of exchange movements.Log scale
US$
££¥
¥
1999 00 01 02 03 04Nominal effective
exchange rate 1
1999 Q1 = 100... pound sterling... yenagainst the ...
... US dollar
*Monthly averages; from 2005 daily
data.   — 1As calculated by the ECB against
the currencies of 23 countries. 
Deutsche BundesbankExchange rate of the euro *
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.57110
100
931.35
1.25
1.15
1.05
0.95
0.85
2005105
100
95
90
85
80801100.700.75
0.70
0.65140
130
120
110140
JF M A M... and against
the pound
sterling
New members
in ERM II
Effective
exchange rate
of the euro

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
22Monetary policy,
banking business and
the capital marketInterest rate policy and the money
market
Over the past few months the Governing
Council of the ECB has maintained its steadymonetary policy course. The main refinancingoperations continued to be conducted asvariable rate tenders with a minimum bid rateof 2% while the interest rates on the margin-al refinancing facility and the deposit facilityremained at 3% and 1% respectively. Bothnominal and real interest rates are at excep-tionally low levels, lending ongoing supportto economic activity. One reason for leavingthe central rates unchanged was that there isstill no significant evidence of domestic infla-tionary pressures building up in the euro area.However, there are upside risks to price stabil-ity over the medium term. Owing to the per-sistently high price of oil, second-round ef-fects in the wage and price formation processcannot be entirely ruled out. In this respect,the evolution of longer-term inflation expect-ations needs to be monitored closely. Strictmonetary policy vigilance is also necessaryowing to the continued abundance of liquid-ity.
Apart from the temporary fluctuations at the
end of the quarter and at the end of the min-imum reserve period, the EONIA overnightrate remained largely unchanged in theperiod under review. This rate was in mostcases close to the marginal rate, which stoodat 5 basis points above the minimum bid rate.The very short-term money market rates alsoremained correspondingly flat. Until earlyApril, this had also largely been the case forthe longer-term rates in the money market;Eurosystem
interest rates
unchanged
Money market
rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
23Money market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods from 19 Jan-
uary 2005 to 12 April 2005, euro-area credit institutions’central bank balance requirements arising from the au-tonomous factors determining liquidity increased by 512.7
billion in net terms. The volume of banknotes in circulationincreased by 52.6 billion, which was essentially the out-
come of two diverging developments. First, the volume ofbanknotes in circulation declined by 58.9 billion during the
January/February reserve maintenance period, reducingthe sharp increase occurring during the pre-Christmasperiod by around half. Second, the volume of banknotes incirculation increased sharply in the March/April reserveperiod, particularly during the week before Easter, by 59.1
billion. Liquidity needs arising from general governmentdeposits increased markedly by 522.1 billion net during the
period under review. If, in order to eliminate valuation ef-fects, the changes in net foreign reserves and other factorsare taken together, these two items resulted in a liquidityprovision of 512.0 billion. The required level of minimum
reserves went up by 52.3 billion, resulting in increasing
demand for central bank money.
The greater need for liquidity was covered during the re-
porting period primarily by the longer-term refinancingoperations being topped up by 511.9 billion and only sec-
ondarily by the normally more important main refinancingoperations (MROs) involved in banks’ refinancing beingtopped up by 55.3 billion. Starting with the longer-term
operation on 27 January, the Eurosystem topped up thelonger-term refinancing operations by expanding thevolume of the individual operations from 525 billion to
530 billion.
The interest rate for overnight deposits (EONIA) was at
2.08% in January and remained mostly stable over thecourse of the period under review (2.06%/2.07%), and wasthus at a slightly lower level compared to the three preced-ing periods. This development also took place in the con-text of the ECB’s return to the allotting of the benchmarkamount during the main refinancing operation of 2 March.The ECB had been allotting liquidity above the benchmarkamount in the individual MROs since the November/De-cember 2004 reserve period. The periods under reviewwere characterised by rises in the EONIA rate at the end ofeach month and at the end of the quarter as well as minordeviations following the allotment of the last MRO in eachreserve period.
During the reserve maintenance period which began on
19 January and which lasted only 20 days, the EONIA re-mained fairly stable after the allotment of the last MRO atrates of between 2.01% and 2.07%. On the last day of thereserve maintenance period, the ECB conducted a liquid-ity-providing fine-tuning operation totalling 52.5 billion.
The EONIA stood at 2.03% on this day.
During the reserve maintenance period starting on 8 Febru-
ary, the market apparently assumed there was an excess ofliquidity following the allotment of the last MRO. After aliquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operation was carried outwith a volume of 53.5 billion on the last day of the reserve
period, the EONIA rate stood at 2.01%.
A 35-day minimum reserve period began on 9 March and
included the Easter holidays. On the last day of this period,the EONIA stood somewhat higher at 2.18%. This was alsodue to the fact that this time the ECB, contrary to the fivepreceding reserve periods, did not conduct any fine-tuningoperations on the last day of the reserve period as therewas merely a slight liquidity deficit on the morning of thatday. Net recourse to the marginal lending facility on thisday amounted to only 50.9 billion. At the start of the new
April/May reserve maintenance period the EONIA fell backagain to 2.07%.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods
2005
Item19 Jan
to
7 Feb8 Feb
to
8 March9 March
to
12 April
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances by
1 Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) + 8.9 – 2.4 – 9.1
2 Change in general govern-
ment deposits with the
Eurosystem (increase: –) – 18.5 – 4.7 + 1.1
3 Change in net foreign
reserves2– 9.7 – 0.4 + 1.9
4 Other factors2,3+ 13.6 + 3.7 + 2.9
Total – 5.7 – 3.8 – 3.2
II Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations + 3.7 + 1.2 + 0.4
(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations + 3.0 + 4.2 + 4.7
(c) Other operations – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.1
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0
Total + 6.5 + 5.2 + 5.3
III Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I + II) – 0.9 + 1.3 + 2.0
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) – 0.9 – 1.3 – 0.1
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of this Monthly Report .— 2Including end-
of-quarter valuation adjustments with no impact onliquidity. — 3Including monetary policy operations con-
cluded in the second stage and still outstanding in thethird stage of monetary union (outright transactions andthe issuance of debt certificates) as well as financial assetsnot connected with monetary policy.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
24since then, however, they have fallen mark-
edly. Thus the yield curve on the money mar-ket became discernibly flatter during theperiod under review. At the same time, theforward rates on three-month deposits,which reflect interest rate expectations, havedeclined perceptibly. At the end of the periodunder review, the premium on three-monthdeposits with a maturity of 9 to 12 months(forward rate agreements) was only around10 basis points.
Monetary developments in the euro area
In the January to March period, the money
stock M3 increased more moderately than inthe second half of 2004. At a seasonally ad-justed annual rate of just under 5%, M3 atleast expanded more slowly than in the fourth
quarter of 2004 (over 7
1/C252%). Apart from the
somewhat weaker lending to the private sec-tor and noticeably lower inflow of moneyfrom abroad, it was again mainly greatermonetary capital formation that contributedto this development. However, the strongmonetary growth recorded in 2004 is stillhaving a marked impact on the year-on-yeargrowth rate, which from January to Marchaveraged 6.7%.
Among the components of the money stock,
the most liquid categories continued to ex-pand exceptionally sharply in the first quarterof the year. This applies particularly to cashholdings, which in the period under reviewgrew at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of24%, or twice the rate of the previous quar-ter. Overnight deposits also grew robustly at aseasonally adjusted annual rate of just under11
1/C252%. However, this probably reflects the
large-scale switching of short-term time de-posits into sight deposits. At all events, de-posits with an agreed maturity of up to twoyears declined by just under 5
1/C252% in the
period under review. In the first quarter, sea-sonally adjusted short-term savings depositswith an agreed period of notice of up tothree months expanded by an annualised rateof just under 5
1/C252%. The development of mar-
ketable instruments, which are a componentof M3 and on the whole were reduced in thefirst quarter, had a retarding effect on monet-ary growth. Of these instruments, repurchaseagreements contracted, in particular, al-though money market funds also redeemedshares on balance. Only bank debt securitiesSeasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
2005Reference value: 4 ½ %Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
87
6
54
3
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Slower rate
of monetary
growthComponents
of the money
stock

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
25with maturities of up to two years enjoyed
greater demand.
The more subdued monetary growth in the
first quarter was accompanied by somewhatweaker lending to the private sector. Particu-larly the volume of loans to the private sectorin the euro area fell vis-/C224-vis the fourth quar-ter of 2004. Between January and March,unsecuritised lending expanded at a seasonal-ly adjusted annualised rate of 6
1/C252%, com-
pared with 81/C252% in the previous quarter. In a
year-on-year comparison to end-March, how-ever, loans to the private sector were 7.6%above their prior-year level. In particular,housing loans to households contributed tothe strong year-on-year rise in loans to theprivate sector. Approximately half of thecredit growth was attributable to these loans(3
1/C254percentage points). The increase in unse-
curitised lending to non-financial enterprisesalso made a significant contribution to thisdevelopment (2
1/C252percentage points). By con-
trast, the contributions made by consumerloans and other credit to households weremuch less significant (around
1/C252percentage
point).
External transactions of domestic non-banks,
which are reflected in the development of theMFI sector’s net external asset position, tend-ed to curb monetary growth in the first quar-ter. Longer-term investments with banks inthe euro area, which again expanded consid-erably in the period under review, had thesame effect. In particular, a large amount ofbank debt securities with a maturity of overtwo years were sold outside the banking sec-€ billion, seasonally adjusted,
change over the period indicated
€ billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet counterparts1
Loans to
enterprises
and households
General
government
borrowing
or saving2
Net externalasset
position
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counterparts
of M3
3Money stock
Oct to Dec 2004
Increase in M3
Jan to March 2005Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts are
shown in terms of whether they expand (+)
or contract (−) the money stock. — 2Bank
loans to general government less euro-area
central government deposits with MFIs and
holdings of securities issued by the MFIsector. — 3Calculated as a residual of the
other items of the consolidated balance
sheet of the MFI sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank200+160+120+80+40+0 40−80−120−160−Balance sheet
counterparts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
26tor. Furthermore, longer-term time deposits
also increased sharply.
In the period under review, general govern-
ment borrowing or saving, by contrast, exert-ed a slightly expansionary effect on monetarygrowth. The considerable increase in loans topublic authorities was accompanied, how-ever, by a topping up of cash holdings of cen-tral government in the euro area with domes-tic banks, which are traditionally not includedin the money stock M3.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
Much the same as in the euro area as a
whole, the liquid bank deposits of privatenon-banks, which are included in M3, record-
ed only a moderate increase in Germany inthe first quarter of this year. However, therewere marked shifts within the individual typesof short-term deposits. While overnight de-posits went up sharply, domestic investorsmassively reduced their short-term time de-posits. This was influenced, however, by theshort-term treasury operations of other finan-cial intermediaries (for example, investmentcompanies or large enterprises’ financingsubsidiaries). By contrast, the investmentbehaviour of non-financial enterprises andhouseholds during the period under reviewdoes not provide any indication of a wide-spread increase in German investors’ liquiditypreference as was the case in the wake ofsliding share prices in 2001 and in early 2003.
In the first quarter of 2005, overnight de-
posits increased particularly sharply at a sea-sonally adjusted annual rate of over 15%.Particularly other financial intermediaries de-pleted their short-term time deposits to topup their overnight deposits. Over and abovethis, there were considerable shifts out ofshort-term time deposits into repurchaseagreements in the first quarter, which, froman economic point of view, represent asset-backed bank deposits and are reported separ-ately. In the period under review, householdsalso favoured other liquid bank deposits, in-cluding deposits with an agreed period of no-tice of three months, over short-term timedeposits. In net terms, only short-term sav-ings deposits at a rate of interest above theminimum rate of return were increased.Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2005 2004
ItemJan to
MarchJan to
March
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 25.9 + 11.4
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 24.9 – 18.1of over 2 years + 9.3 + 6.9
Redeemable at agreed notice
of up to 3 months + 0.7 + 2.6of over 3 months + 0.2 – 1.5
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised – 0.3 – 5.0Securitised + 2.7 + 8.3
to domestic government
Unsecuritised – 2.3 + 5.3Securitised + 7.4 + 20.1
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .— 1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche BundesbankSlight rise in
short-term
bank deposits
Sharp increase
in overnight
deposits ...
... alongside
steep fall in
short-term time
deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
27The longer-term bank deposits of the domes-
tic private sector rose again sharply duringthe January to March period. It was mainlytime deposits redeemable at notice of overtwo years which increased. As in the previousquarters, domestic insurance corporations es-pecially invested in such deposits. By compari-son, households preferred longer-term sav-ings deposits (redeemable at notice of overthree months) in the period under review.
Lending by German banks to domestic non-
banks declined somewhat in the first quarter.This particularly applies to lending to govern-ment in Germany, where both loans and theoutstanding volume of securities of domesticpublic borrowers decreased. By contrast,banks lent more to private domestic non-banks. However, this increase was mostly dueto a perceptible increase in short-term loansto other financial intermediaries. By compari-son, medium-term and long-term loans todomestic private non-banks rose only slightly.In the past 12 months, the only longer-termbank loans to increase were housing loans tohouseholds. By contrast, other forms of unse-curitised lending to households as well asloans to domestic enterprises decreased.
The results of the Eurosystem’s bank lending
survey
1indicate that the continued low level
of lending in the first quarter of 2005 was pri-marily due to lower credit demand. As a re-sult, on balance, the respondent banks easedtheir credit standards for loans to enterprisesslightly for the first time since the surveybegan in the fourth quarter of 2002. Thecredit standards for housing loans and con-sumer loans likewise tended to be slightly ex-pansionary. According to the respondent
banks, this was the result of increasing com-petitive pressure, particularly in the area ofconsumer loans. Furthermore, the credit mar-gins for average-risk exposures narrowed par-ticularly for housing loans, and to a lesser de-gree for consumer loans and loans to enter-prises. Margins widened further, albeit moreweakly on the whole only in the case of risk-ier loans. Respondent banks reported that thegenerally more favourable financing condi-tions during the reporting period coincidedwith a further decline in credit demand.Banks attributed this mainly to an ongoingSeasonally adjusted
€b n
%
2005Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02300
2250
2200
2150
2100
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
1For more information on the bank lending survey, see
Deutsche Bundesbank, German results of euro-area bank
lending survey, Monthly Report, June 2003, pp 67-76.
The aggregate survey results for Germany can be viewed
under http://www.bundesbank.de/volkswirtschaft/vo_ver-
oeffentlichungen.en.php.Sharp increase
in longer-term
bank deposits
Further fall
in lending
Small volume
of lending
predominately
demand-driven

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
28fall in financing needs for fixed investment as
well as households’ low consumer confi-dence.
For the second quarter of 2005, the credit in-
stitutions do not expect enterprises’ or house-holds’ demand for credit to change consider-ably and anticipate that credit standards willremain unchanged. Hence the German sur-vey results regarding the supply side weremore or less in line with the results for theeuro area as a whole. Demand for credit,however, continued to be much weaker inGermany.
2
In the first quarter of 2005, domestic banks’rates for new lending to the private sectorwere slightly lower overall. Above all, short-term loans to enterprises, housing loans andconsumer loans became cheaper. By contrast,there was a mixed development in the area oflong-term lending. Whereas the correspond-ing rates for loans to non-financial enterprisesbarely changed, the rates for housing loanswent down again. The rates for consumerloans increased considerably. At the end ofthe period under review, German banks werecharging non-financial enterprises between4.2% and 4.7% for new long-term lendingdepending on the loan amount. Theycharged 4.5% for loans for house purchasewith an interest rate fixation of over ten yearsand 8.9% for long-term consumer loans.
The rates in domestic credit institutions’ de-
posit business changed only marginally dur-ing the first three months of 2005 for the%
%
%%
%
%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q21
2002Consumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in loan margins
Loans to enterprises
Average loansRiskier loansConsumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in credit standards
Loans to enterprisesBank Lending Survey *
*Difference between the sum of the per-
centages for ”tightened considerably” and
”tightened somewhat” and the sum of the
percentages for ”eased somewhat” and
”eased considerably”. — 1Expectations for
Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−100+
80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−40+
20+
0
20−40+
20+
0
20−60+
40+
20+
0
20−
2003 2004 2005
2See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, May
2005, pp 17 ff.Demand for
credit again
weaker than in
the euro area
as a whole
Lending rates
falling slightly
on the whole
Little change in
deposit rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
29second quarter in a row. While the rates on
savings deposits declined slightly, there was aslight increase in the rates on time deposits.Towards the end of the period – dependingon the maturity – the rates on households’time deposits were between 2.0% and2.8%, while those for enterprises were be-tween 2.0% and 3.6%. At the end of thequarter, banks were paying 2.1% for savingsdeposits with a notice period of up to threemonths and 2.5% for longer maturities.
Securities markets
The situation on the German and European
capital markets increasingly reflects thedampened expectations for economic activityand a drop in investors’ willingness to takerisks. Against this background, the yield onten-year German government bonds (Bunds),after having risen temporarily in February, fellback below the 3
1/C252% mark and subsequently
to a historical low. Given the basically con-stant inflation expectations,
3this also indi-
cates a corresponding decrease in real interestrates.
In mid-February, the rally on the equity mar-
kets which had lasted for two years, came toa temporary halt. In the second half of April,share prices then sagged noticeably. In Ger-many, the broad CDAX share price index haslost 1
3/C254% since the start of the year. In the
rest of the euro area, share price movementswere somewhat more positive. However,other euro-area countries likewise recordedNew business
% per
annum
% per
annum% per
annum
2005... over €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year... up to €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
... over €1 million with an initial
   rate fixation of over 5 yearsLoans to non-financial
corporations ...Loans to households
Consumer credit 1
2
Housing loans3Households’ deposits...
...overnight...redeemable at notice
   of up to 3 months
...with an agreed maturity
   of up to 1 yearBank interest
rates in Germany
1 With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year
and up to 5 years. — 2 Decline owing to
special effect. — 3 With an initial rate
fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years.
Deutsche Bundesbank5.5
5.24.94.64.3
4.0
3.73.43.1
2.87.0
6.76.46.15.8
5.5
5.24.9
4.6
4.34.32.7
2.42.1
1.8
1.5
1.2
0.9
2003 2004
3According to surveys by Consensus Economics.Financial
markets driven
by unfavour-
able cyclical
expectations
and heightened
risk aversion
Slight fall in
share price level

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
30marked swings in the period under review.
For a time, European share prices were over5% above the levels seen at the start of theyear before doubts about the pace of theeconomic upturn caused prices on the Euro-pean stock exchanges to recede. However, inthe assessment of the financial analysts, theshort-term earnings outlook for listed enter-prises has developed positively. These esti-mates suggest that, on a long-term compari-son, equities still have a relatively low valu-
ation. Thus in April, the price-earnings ratioof German blue chips, calculated on the basisof equity analysts’ earnings estimates for thenext 12 months, was 12 – clearly below theaverage level recorded since 1988 (16
3/C254).4
The enterprises contained in the EuroStoxxindex were valued at a similar level.
The yield spreads on BBB-rated corporate
bonds, after having fallen to the lowest levelsince the start of monetary union, havewidened markedly since February. As theMonthly Report went to press, BBB-rated
European corporate bonds were yielding132 basis points above government bonds,compared with a yield spread of less than halfof this amount in early March. All the same,this is well below their long-term averagevalue since 1999, which, in conjunction withthe exceptionally low capital market rates,continues to suggest favourable financingconditions in the capital market.
The increase in the yield spreads is apparently
a result of both higher default risk premia andhigher liquidity premia which emerged onthe European capital markets, too, followingprofit warnings and the subsequent ratingdowngrades of General Motors and Ford. Atall events, the premia on credit default swapshave also increased for European enterpriseswithout there being any concrete signs ofDaily data
%
%
Per-
cent-
age
points
Per-
cent-
age
pointsMemo item:
Yield spread of European
corporate bonds1
2003 2004 2005Spread of US bond yieldsover the German bond marketYield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
GermanyUSABond yields in Germany
and in the USA
1Spread of seven to ten-year BBB-rated
European corporate bonds over euro-area
government bonds with a comparable ma-
turity. Source: Merrill Lynch Indices.
Deutsche Bundesbank2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.51.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−5.5
4.55.0
4.04.5
3.5
3.0
4When comparing the current earnings outlook with
past performance account must be taken of the fact
that, from April 2005, the earnings forecasts already in-
clude changes reflecting the international accounting
standards (IFRS) and are currently higher than the previ-
ous earnings which were reported in accordance with the
German Commercial Code. This will probably push down
the PER by approximately3/C254of a point.Increase in yield
spreads on
corporate
bonds ...
... suggests
greater risk
aversion on
the part of
investors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
31similar problems in the corporate sector in
the euro area. Given the steady upward trendin expected corporate earnings in the euroarea, the ratings situation in the market as awhole is still favourable. In the first quarter ofthe year, rating agencies gave more rating up-grades than downgrades to European firms.It therefore seems likely that the increase inthe yield spreads is primarily the result ofgreater risk aversion on the part of marketparticipants, who are now demanding higherpremia for an unchanged risk level.
The low interest rate level was accompanied
by lively issuing activity on the German bondmarket. Gross sales of domestic debt secur-ities came close to reaching a new recordhigh with a market value of 3335 billion.
After taking account of redemptions andchanges in issuers’ holdings of their ownbonds, German issuers raised funds amount-ing to 361 billion. At the same time, sales of
foreign bonds and notes in the German mar-ket raised 353
1/C252billion net. Hence total funds
raised in the first quarter of 2005 totalled3114
1/C252billion, compared with only 34 billion
in the fourth quarter of 2004.
Domestic credit institutions attracted the
lion’s share of these resources ( 3311/C252billion),
after having redeemed bonds and notes total-ling 320
1/C252billion in the fourth quarter of
2004. In the first quarter of 2005, debt secur-ities issued by specialised credit institutions(324 billion) and other bank debt securities
(318
1/C252billion) were also in demand. By con-
trast, net sales of mortgage Pfandbriefe to-talled only 33 billion, while public Pfandbriefe
were actually sold on balance (- 314 billion).In the quarter under review, general govern-
ment tapped the capital market for 322
1/C252bil-
lion. Three-quarters of this sum was raisedby central government ( 316
1/C252billion), which
was mainly active in the longer-term maturitysegment. It issued ten-year Bunds for 39
1/C252
billion and 30-year Bunds for 37 billion net.
At the short end of the maturity range, it soldtwo-year Federal Treasury notes (Sch/C228tze) to-talling 33
1/C252billion and redeemed 36 billion
net worth of five-year Federal notes (Bobls).State government added 36
1/C252billion to its
capital market debt.
Despite the low yields for corporate bonds,
non-financial corporations primarily issuedmoney market paper ( 34 billion net). They
sold longer-term corporate bonds in theamount of only 32
1/C252billion (net).March 2000 = 100, daily data, log scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx
share price index
CDAX share price index
2003 2004 2005Equity prices in Germany
and in the euro area
Source: Deutsche Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank70
60
50
40
30
253545
Increased
borrowing on
the capital
market
Banks raise
more fundsModerate
borrowing
by general
government
Short-term
debt incurred
by enterprises

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
32Deutsche BundesbankMeasuring the liquidity and default risk component of corporate bond spreads
Interest rate spreads on corporate bonds reﬂ  ect both 
compensation for the default risk of the bond and a premium for the lower liquidity of such bonds vis-à-vis government bonds. An increase in the spread may therefore be an indication of a higher default risk or of lower market liquidity. However, spreads may also rise if market participants demand greater compen-sation for the same level of risk. The determinants of the various components of the spread cannot be observed directly. A comparison with the premia on credit default swaps (CDS), however, gives some insight into the relative importance of default and liquidity premia.
With a CDS, the risk shedder transfers the default 
risk of the underlying (eg a bond) to the risk taker in return for the regular payment of a premium. In 
contrast to the interest rate spreads on bonds, these 
CDS premia should, for a number of reasons, not contain any major liquidity premia: a new contract 
can be concluded at any time, short positions can 
be entered into easily and, according to empirical studies, information is processed more quickly on the 
CDS market than on the bond market.
1
Apart from a few minor distorting factors, CDS premia should therefore essentially reﬂ  ect the 
expectation of default and the corresponding risk premium, which varies with investors‘ level of risk 
aversion.
2
The adjacent chart shows the movement of the interest rate spreads on European BBB-rated bonds 
compared with the CDS premia on the bonds 
contained in the corresponding index.
3 During the 
observation period it became apparent, that, in line with corresponding studies for the United States,
4 
more than half of the spreads are attributable to 
default risk premia. Furthermore, it can be seen that the share attributable to default risk has remained 
relatively constant until quite recently. This suggests that the decline in the interest rate premia up to 
March 2005 was attributable only very marginally to an improved credit worthiness. Instead, it is likely that market participants demanded a lower liquidity premium. This may be the result of greater market liquidity or lower risk aversion to liquidity shortages. One reason for the possible decline in the level of risk aversion could be the search for yield during phases of low capital market rates.
The rise in the interest rate spreads since mid-March, 
by contrast, is attributable to both higher default 
risk premia and higher liquidity premia. This sug-gests that particularly market participants’ general 
risk aversion has increased, after having fallen 
considerably previously. This is consistent with the observation that on other markets, too, such as the 
European equity markets, the recent relatively high 
level of liquidity appears to have hardly waned at all.
5
1 See R Blanco, S Brennan, I W Marsh, An Empirical Analysis 
of the Dynamic Relationship Between Investment Grade Bonds and Credit Default Swaps , forthcoming in the Journal 
of Finance. — 2 The distorting factors include the cheapest-
to-deliver option linked to a CDS, counterparty risk and the uncertainties associated with the deﬁ  nition of the default 
event. — 3 The corresponding credit default swaps were 
obtained for the bonds included in the Merrill Lynch BBB Index (residual maturity of 7 to 10 years) for the respective residual maturity and the average premium was calculated. This can only serve as an approximation of the default risk of the index, however. First, credit derivatives with a matching maturity only exist for 26 of the 38 bonds contained in the 
Merrill Lynch index, although an analysis of the yields of the bonds for which no CDSs are available shows that the resul-ting distortion is not signiﬁ  cant. Second, the length of the 
available time series varies. — 4 See F A Longstaff, S Mithal, 
E Neis, Corporate Bond Yields: Default Risk or Liquidity? New 
Evidence from the Credit-Default Swap Market , forthcoming 
in the Journal of Finance. — 5 This is suggested by indicators 
of illiquidity on the equity market, which are based on the inﬂ uence which a certain trading volume has on the share 
price.Basis
points
BBB-rated corporate bond spread
CDS premiaCorporate bond spreads
and CDS premia
Sources: Bloomberg and Datastream.120
100
80
60
40
20
0
MAMJ J A SOND J FMAM
2004 2005Difference

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
33Foreign investors and domestic credit institu-
tions were the main purchasers in the bondmarket, investing similar amounts in debtsecurities ( 353
1/C252billion and 3461/C252billion
respectively). Credit institutions purchasedforeign debt securities, in particular ( 334
1/C252
billion). Over and above that, they also pur-
chased government debt securities. Domesticnon-banks also purchased mainly foreigndebt securities on balance ( 319 billion).
Issuing activity in the German equity market
picked up in the first three months of 2005.Sales of new shares issued by domestic enter-prises increased to 32 billion, compared with
31
1/C252billion in the first quarter of last year. On
balance, German shares were purchased bycredit institutions ( 31
1/C252billion) and foreign in-
vestors ( 331/C252billion). In the first quarter, do-
mestic non-banks reduced their holdings by33 billion, thus continuing the trend of the
previous quarters. By contrast, foreign equi-ties were hardly in demand.
Sales of mutual fund shares were buoyant in
the first quarter of 2005. In net terms, 324
billion worth of mutual fund shares weresold, compared with 312
1/C252billion in the first
quarter of 2004. Sales concentrated mainlyon shares in foreign funds ( 314
1/C252billion) and
specialised funds ( 39 billion), which doubled
and trebled respectively. By contrast, investorslost interest in domestic mutual funds opento the general public. Sales of these mutualfund shares dropped from 33 billion in the
first quarter of 2004 to merely 3
1/C252billion. In
particular, mixed funds (- 32 billion), share-based funds (- 32 billion) and open-end real
estate funds (- 31/C252billion) recorded outflows
of resources. Bond-based funds and moneymarket funds, by contrast, recorded inflowsamounting to 32
1/C252billion and 32 billion re-
spectively.
As usual, domestic non-banks were again the
most active investor group, investing primarilyin foreign mutual funds ( 311 billion) and only
to a lesser extent in domestic funds ( 35
1/C252bil-
lion). Credit institutions invested 331/C252billion
in both domestic and foreign mutual fundunits; by contrast, foreign investors’ pur-chases of German mutual fund shares re-mained virtually unchanged.Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5bn
2004 2005 2004
ItemOct to
DecJan to
MarJan to
Mar
Bonds and notes
Residents – 18.5 60.8 42.7
Credit institutions 2.5 46.4 55.3of which
Foreign bonds and notes 17.3 34.6 23.4
Non-banks – 21.0 14.4 – 12.6of which
Domestic bonds and notes – 21.9 – 4.6 – 16.3
Non-residents 22.6 53.7 51.2
Shares
Residents 4.6 – 1.5 1.5
Credit institutions 11.0 1.5 6.7of which
Domestic shares 8.8 2.3 7.4
Non-banks – 6.4 – 3.0 – 5.2of which
Domestic shares – 6.3 – 4.0 – 6.1
Non-residents 0.5 3.7 0.0
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 7.4 8.9 2.8
Invesetment in funds open tothe general public – 6.5 0.4 2.8of which: Share-based funds 1.1 – 1.8 0.6
Deutsche BundesbankPurchases of
debt securities
Increased
activity on the
equity market
Specialised
mutual funds
and foreign
mutual funds
popular

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
34Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
Following a cyclical sideways movement in
the second half of 2004, the German econ-omy showed perceptible growth again in thefirst few months of the current year. Accord-ing to the official statistics, which are basedon revised data in line with the modifiedmethodology described in the notes onpage 36-37, real gross domestic product(GDP) in the first quarter of 2005 was 1.0%up on the final quarter of 2004 after seasonaland working-day adjustment. In year-on-yearterms, this signifies an increase in overall out-put of 1.1%, compared with +0.5% in thefinal quarter of last year. The changes in theunadjusted figures, ie excluding the markedworking-day effects, amount to 0.0%, com-pared with +1.3% in autumn 2004.
The major differences in the year-on-year
rates reflect the fact that November and De-cember 2004 clearly had more working daysthan the same months of 2003. On the otherhand, the fact that Easter fell early this yearhad the opposite effect in March 2005.Working-day adjustment attempts to elimin-ate such differences in order to obtain a morereliable assessment of cyclical developments.Especially with regard to the current situation,it should be remembered in this context thata great deal of the data for March are stillprovisional or estimated. Moreover, adjust-ment calculations are fundamentally subjectto uncertainty as the actual impact of a vary-ing number of working days cannot be identi-fied directly and adjustment has to rely on es-timates on the basis of multi-year averages. Itis in the nature of such estimation methodsStrong GDP
growth in
2005 Q1
Working-day
adjustment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
35that the effects of changes in the flow and
organisation of the production processes andin the current business and orders situationcan be captured only approximately. The par-ticular calendar features affecting the numberof working days in the past two quartersalong with greater flexibility in the deploy-ment of labour and machinery as well as thewidely varying orders situation in the differenteconomic sectors suggest that the estimatedeffects are, if anything, exaggerating theworking-day influences somewhat. As a re-sult of this, the stagnation in growth in thefinal quarter of 2004 is possibly likewise over-stated as is the subsequent recovery in thefirst quarter of this year. Under these circum-stances, it may be assumed that the upwardcyclical momentum is less than may seem tobe the case at first glance when looking atthe figures for the first quarter of 2005.
GDP growth in the first quarter of 2005 was
sustained mainly by foreign trade. After aweak development in the last few months of2004, exports of goods and services haveclearly expanded again. As import activitiesdeclined during the same period, net exportshave shown a sharp increase. By contrast, do-mestic demand was still generating hardlyany stimuli. Despite picking up slightly in thelast few months of 2004, construction invest-ment has been on a downward trend for along while and was hampered at the begin-ning of the year, not least, by the spells ofcold winter weather. In contrast to the fourthquarter of 2004, purchases of tangible andintangible capital goods increased. It is doubt-ful, however, that this implies the start of asustained improvement. According to Ifo In-stitute data, for example, utilisation of avail-
able industrial capacity in March 2005 was nolonger as high as it had been in December2004.
The estimation of private consumption is cur-
rently made more difficult by the still-incom-plete reorganisation of the retail trade statis-tics. Although the existing official data showa slight increase in sales, this outcome is veryuncertain owing to the fact that the surveyhas only a low degree of representativeness.Despite an improvement during the first threemonths of the year, registrations of new carsare noticeably down on the level at the endof 2004, when a very large number of carswere purchased. Furthermore, the petroleumindustry is reporting marked falls in the con-sumption of its products. Not only was there
Adjusted for seasonal and working-day
variations, quarterly
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
2005Log scale  
Real GDP
2000 = 100Economic growth in Germany
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−104
102
100
98
96
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Expanding
foreign trade
Restrained
consumer
demand

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
36Deutsche BundesbankRevision of Germany’s national accounts
At the end of April 2005, the Federal Statistical Ofﬁ  ce 
published the results of a major revision of Germany’s national accounts for the period from 1991 to 2004. Apart from the standard practice of including newly available basic statis tical data, this revision involved, in particular, two 
conceptual changes by means of which legally binding direct-ives issued by the European Commission were implemented in the ofﬁ  cial German statistics. This ﬁ  rstly concerned the 
changeover from a ﬁ  xed-price basis to calculations based on 
the previous year’s prices when determining real economic 
variables; in this connection, increasing use was also made 
of hedonic methods in measuring the prices that are 
adjusted for changes in the quality of goods. Secondly, the 
calculation and allocation methods for the imputed bank 
service charge were revised. 
According to Federal Statistical Ofﬁ  ce data, the conceptual 
adjustment of the imputed bank service charge – now 
termed “ﬁ  nancial intermediation services indirectly meas-
ured (FISIM)” – has, on balance, resulted in an increase 
in the level of nominal gross domestic product (GDP) of 
between 1.2% and 2.2% on an annual basis. The value of bank services is now no longer fully allocated to intermedi-
ate input, except in the case of producing economic entities. 
For all other economic entities, especially households, any 
ﬁ nancial services that are used are now counted as part 
of consumption expenditure and thus have an impact on 
the level of GDP. The same accounting practice applies to 
cross-border banking business. The banks’ implicit service 
fee is thereby measured as the difference between actual 
and “pure” interest ﬂ  ows. The latter are ascertained using 
a hypothetical “pure” interest rate which is assumed to be 
identical for both deposits and loans. 
As part of the revision, real variables are no longer 
calculated on the basis of ﬁ  xed prices but on the previous 
year’s prices with subsequent chaining. Under the previous 
ﬁ xed-price approach, the volume variables were evaluated 
using the average prices in a given base year. In Germany, 
this was most recently 1995. This approach does have the 
advantage that volume data can be calculated in the same 
way as value data. Under this concept, therefore, real GDP is 
determined as the sum of domestic expenditure plus exports 
and less imports. However, this advantage has a number of 
accompanying drawbacks. Firstly, the economic growth 
shown in the accounts is dependent on the chosen base 
year. Secondly, the volume movements determined in this way become less and less meaningful the further removed 
the period under review is from the base period. This is because the price structure in the base period tends to become less and less representative. Therefore, depending on the strength of price-induced substitution effects, this approach produces methodology-related distortions, which means that the published GDP growth rates tend to be too high. 
An obvious alternative approach is therefore to use the 
most up-to-date price basis possible in each case. This devel-
opment was pioneered by the USA, which introduced an 
annually changing weighting as long ago as 1996. Following 
the revision of the national accounts, the volumes in Ger-
many are now evaluated using the relevant average prices 
from the previous year. Although this no longer produces a 
continuous volume time series owing to the annually chang-
ing price basis and the associated breaks, the chaining of the 
relevant factors measuring the change – which describe the 
ratio of the volume evaluated at previous-year prices to the 
nominal values of the previous year – allows this jump to be 
eliminated. The outcome is a “chain index”, set at a standard 
100 in the chosen reference year of 2000. A major feature of 
this chain index is that a subsequent changeover to a new 
reference year has no impact on the rates of change shown, 
for example, for GDP growth. Although the ﬁ  ndings for the 
individual chain links are still additive, this is no longer the Year-on-year change
%
NewOld
1992 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004Real gross domestic product (GDP)
3+
2+
1+
0
1–

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
37case for the chain index – apart from the reference year and 
the following year. In other words, unlike before, real GDP cannot be derived from the summation of its components. The annually changing price ratios now also have to be taken into account in the aggregation. 
The chart on page 36 shows that the economic picture 
painted in Germany since 1991 remains largely unchanged 
even after the revision. Nevertheless, the new rates of 
change shown for real GDP differ from the previous data 
by up to 0.4 percentage point in some years. All in all, this 
now reveals annual average economic growth of 1.5% for 
the period from 1991 to 2004. Compared with the earlier 
calculation approach using 1995 prices, this represents 
an upward revision of 0.2 percentage point per year. This 
initially seems surprising as the changeover from a ﬁ  xed-
price basis to ﬁ  gures based on the previous year’s prices 
should tend to lead to economic growth being shown at a 
lower level for the years following the earlier base year. The 
upward revision can be explained by the increased use of 
hedonic methods in measuring prices that are adjusted for 
changes in the quality of goods. 
In the case of products with rapidly changing features, 
hedonic methods are particularly suitable for breaking 
down price differences between new and old variants into 
a “real” change in price and a (monetary) component for 
a change in quality. Following the introduction of price 
indices calculated in this way for PCs in the consumer price 
index in 2002, Germany’s national accounts also applied 
such techniques to PC prices and not only in the area of 
private consumption expenditure, but also with regard to 
machinery/equipment, imports and exports so as to ensure 
consistency in the national accounts system. Moreover, since 
2004, hedonic methods have been used for IT investment 
goods in the producer price indices, import price indices and 
export price indices. For reasons of temporal consistency, 
hedonically-determined price variables have now also been 
applied to past periods. The fact that greater account is being 
taken of these methods is likely to be a key reason why the 
price trend not only of GDP, but also of many expenditure 
components, now exhibits a ﬂ  atter curve. Therefore, given 
a virtually unrevised average rate of nominal GDP growth 
throughout the revision period (+2.8% per year compared 
with +2.9% earlier), the calculation produces the somewhat 
higher growth trend for real GDP.Sharp corrections have been recorded, in particular, in the 
prices of machinery and equipment, a large part of which consists of IT goods. Whereas the deﬂ  ator of investment in 
machinery and equipment hitherto showed a slight rise in the period from 1991 to 2004 overall, the chart below now shows a distinct decline of 1% per year on average. Real expenditure on new machinery and equipment was sharply revised upwards accordingly. Whereas previous records sug-gested that 2004 was 5% down on the 1991 level, the new ﬁ gures indicate that real expenditure on new machinery 
and equipment was recently 10% higher than in 1991. 
The method involving annually changing calculations based 
on the previous year’s prices is legally binding only for the 
annual national accounts. However, in order to ensure that 
there are no discrepancies between the annual national 
accounts and the quarterly national accounts, the Federal 
Statistical Ofﬁ  ce has adapted the calculation methods for 
the quarterly data accordingly. The economic picture hith-
erto painted for 2004 remains largely unchanged. Upward 
economic developments in the ﬁ  rst half of the year – which 
are, however, shown to be somewhat weaker than before 
– were followed by a sideways movement in the second 
half of the year. Owing to the somewhat more favourable 
“statistical overhang”, the annual result for 2004 still shows 
an increase of 1.6% in calendar-month terms or 1% after 
working-day adjustment. 1991 = 100, log scale
NewOld
1991 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004Deflator of investment in
machinery and equipment
106
104
102
100
98
96
94
92
90
88

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
38comparatively little demand for petrol, owing
to the high prices, purchases of heating oilwere also cut back despite the continuingcold weather. Overall, this means that therewas little change to the picture of subduedconsumer spending in the first quarter of2005 either.
After the fairly sharp expansion in overall out-
put in the first quarter, growth in the follow-ing months is likely to have lost some mo-mentum. One indication of this is that bothindustry and the construction sector failed tomatch their January level of business activity.According to the surveys conducted by theIfo Institute, the business climate in trade andindustry, too, deteriorated after the start ofthe year. An increasing number of firms wererating the current situation as well as the out-look for business less positively than before.Studies by the Centre for European EconomicResearch (ZEW) indicate that optimismamong commercial service providers has like-wise waned. This information points to a flat-tening of growth in the second quarter of2005.
Output and labour market
Industrial output in the first quarter was no-
ticeably higher than in the fourth quarter oflast year. In seasonally and working-day ad-justed terms, the figure was around 1
3/C254%u p
on the average level of the final quarter of2004, in which the potential of the largenumber of working days was probably notfully utilised. The year-on-year increase wentup to 3
3/C254%. This was noticeably more than inSeasonally adjusted, monthly
Balance
Balance
Propensity to purchase
2005Households’ assessment of the
economic situation2
MonthlyCurrent situationBusiness
expectations2000 = 100
Business climate in the
industrial sector 1Sentiment in the industrial
sector and among households
1 Source: Ifo Institute. — 2  According to
GfK data. Moving five-month averages.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−40+
20+
0
20−
40−105
100
95
90
85
80110
105
100
95
9085
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004Muted spring
outlook
Increase
in industrial
output

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
39the final quarter of 2004, when growth of no
more than 11/C252% had been achieved.
The increase in production at the start of the
year was higher than average in the case ofconsumer goods. In terms of durable goods,manufacturers of household electrical appli-ances and of television receivers and appar-atus for telephony and telegraphy made aparticular contribution to this. In the case ofnon-durable goods, along with pharmaceut-ical products and toilet articles, the clothingindustry was to the fore, which was thereforeable to compensate, at least to some extent,for the period of weakness in the second halfof 2004. Production has clearly picked up inthe food and drink industry, too. The year-on-year rise in output in the consumer goodssector, at 3
3/C254%, was sharper than it had been
for several years. There was also quite astrong expansion in the production of capitalgoods. There was a cutback in the manufac-ture of road vehicles, partly owing to tech-nical problems with suppliers. However, thiswas more than offset by an improvement inthe manufacture of machinery and equip-ment as well as in the case of computerequipment and office machinery. With a sea-sonally adjusted increase in output of justunder 1% from the fourth to the first quarter,the performance of the basic goods sectorclearly lagged behind the average growth inindustry as a whole. The situation in thechemicals industry continued to improve, as ithad been doing for some time. Given an ex-tended period with a high degree of utilisa-tion, steel production, however, appears tohave reached the limits of its capacity.In the construction sector, the mild weather
at the end of 2004 and the beginning of2005 meant that business activity was com-paratively little affected by climatic condi-tions. Construction output in December andJanuary was therefore quite high in seasonallyadjusted terms. This changed with the onsetof winter weather in February. As the wea-ther in March was also cold, there was amarked decline in the number of hours2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
2005Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank5+
0
5−
10−
15−105
90100
8595
8090
75
7010+
5+
0
5−105
100
95
90
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Decline in
construction
output

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
40worked in these two months. In the first
quarter of 2005 as a whole, seasonally adjust-ed output was almost 8% down on the finalquarter of 2004 and was more than one-tenth down on the year. The decline in thefinishing trades is likely to have been some-what smaller since inside work is less depend-ent on the weather. Apart from these tem-porary negative effects, an end to the con-tractionary process of structural adjustmentin the construction sector was still not appar-ent at the start of 2005 either.
The situation in the wholesale and retail trade
is likely to have improved somewhat in thefirst quarter of this year. This is suggested bythe fact that year-on-year sales were more fa-vourable than in the last few months of2004. In the wholesale trade, it was not onlybusiness in machinery and equipment for theproduction sector that registered a positivedevelopment. Fairly sharp increases in turn-over were also achieved in the case of durableand non-durable goods, which are largelydestined for households. Whether the sameapplies to the retail trade must remain anopen question at present since the availabledata – as mentioned at the beginning of thisarticle – are subject to major uncertainty. Atall events, business in the first few months ofthis year appears not to have been unfavour-able. Statistical difficulties also make it harderto assess the situation with regard to hotelsand restaurants. For this sector as a whole,the information that is available points to animprovement. At least, for the first time insome while, the year-on-year figure for turn-over seems no longer to have been negative.According to the survey of the EuropeanCentre for Economic Research, this is hardly
the case for the commercial service providers.Their assessment of current business develop-ments took a further slight turn for theworse. For the first time in a year, the firmsreporting falls in turnover were in the major-ity. The negative balance was especially largein the case of architects, in IT services and inthe communication and information technol-ogy (CIT) sector.
In the first few months of the year, the labour
market was shaped to a major extent by theimpact of administrative measures. Develop-ments in employment continued to bemarked by an increased use of government-assisted special forms of employment, suchas one-person businesses, “mini-jobs” andone-euro job opportunities. As calculated bythe Federal Statistical Office, the total season-ally adjusted number of persons in work hadrisen to 38.97 million by March. On an aver-age of the first three months of 2005, therewas a rise of almost 40,000 on the final quar-ter of 2004. This was some 200,000, or0.5%, higher than in the same period of lastyear. The number of self-employed personsand persons assisting in family-run busi-nesses, which amounts to around 4.4 million,rose within a year by over 140,000. Accord-ing to provisional calculations, at the be-ginning of this year, 4.7 million employedpersons were performing only low-paid part-time work, ie 135,000 more than one yearpreviously. According to the Federal Employ-ment Agency, around 120,000 recipients ofbasic social security (unemployment benefit II)were employed in one-euro job opportunitiesin April. By contrast, the beginning of 2005
Positive devel-
opment in sales
in some sectors
of the economyEmployment
marked by
labour market
policy measures

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
41saw no end to the long-continuing negative
trend in terms of employees fully subject tosocial security contributions. The figure inFebruary was 150,000 lower than in thesame month of 2004, which was probablydue, in part, to a delay in the spring upturnon account of the persistent cold weather. InMarch, the number of persons employedunder traditional work creation measures wasaround 50,000 lower than one year earlier.
The Federal Labour Agency’s statistics on va-
cancies are also being increasingly affected bylabour market policy measures. For example,the seasonally adjusted increase in registeredvacancies since the beginning of this year isdue mainly to the additional supply of one-euro job opportunities. If these are excluded,the number of job vacancies has probablyshown hardly any increase. This is indicatedby the fact that, according to the latest surveyof firms undertaken by the Institut f/C252r
Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung (IAB), the
Federal Employment Agency’s labour marketand employment research institution, thesupply of jobs in the German economy as awhole has shown a further year-on-year fall.Although the survey refers to the fourth quar-ter of 2004, the demand for labour in theeconomy is unlikely to have picked up signifi-cantly in the first few months of the currentyear.
Following a sharp January rise in the season-
ally adjusted registered unemployment figure,the increase slowed down again in the twoensuing months. From March to April, therewas even a slight fall to 4.89 million. This isnot a sign of a cyclical improvement, how-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Millions
Millions
Thou-
sands
Millions
Thou-
sands
%
0
200512Unemployment rateApril
Rate of joblessnessAprilLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed- AprilLin scale
Year-on-year change
Employed
Jan-
Feb
Workers subject to social
security contributionsWorkers
subject to
social security
contributionsJan-
FebLog scale
EmployedLabour market
1From January 2004, unemployed exclud-
ing participants in aptitude testing and
training measures. — 2From January 2005,
including persons formerly receiving social
assistance but able to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9
8
7600+
300+
0
300−5.0
4.7
4.4
4.1
3.8500+
0
500−
1000−28.0
27.5
27.0
26.539.5
39.0
38.5
- 
2001 2002 2003 2004Persistent low
labour demand
in the economy
Fall in
unemployment
owing to
special factors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
42ever. Rather, one factor in the slight drop in
registered unemployment is that the usualspring upturn was delayed until April owingto the persistently cold winter weather. Ac-cording to the Federal Labour Agency, thismay have affected roughly 50,000 persons inseasonally adjusted terms. Another factor isthat no more former recipients of social as-sistance are likely to have registered as un-employed in April, which contrasts with thefirst three months of the year when therewere some 380,000 registrations of this kind.A further alleviating factor was that around20,000 former recipients of unemploymentassistance, who are not granted basic socialsecurity because they have an adequate in-come, did not re-register.
The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate,
as calculated by the Federal EmploymentAgency, was 11.8% in April, compared with10.8% in December 2004. The seasonally ad-justed rate of joblessness (which is calculatedby the Federal Statistical Office in accordancewith the ILO methodology on the basis of atelephone survey), at 9.5% in March, wasonly slightly higher than at the end of lastyear (9.2%). This is due to a seasonally ad-justed increase of 135,000 in the number ofpersons out of work, which may probably beseen as being largely independent of adminis-trative factors and therefore interpreted as acyclical change.
Orders
New industrial orders in the first few months
of the year failed to match their peak of De-cember last year, when some very large-scale
orders had been received. In seasonally andworking-day adjusted terms, the level in thefirst quarter as a whole was a good
1/C254%
down on the final quarter of last year. Theyear-on-year increase went down to 3
1/C252%
from 41/C252% in the last few months of 2004.
The main reason for the slowdown was thedecline in domestic demand. On an averageof the first quarter, domestic orders werearound 3% down on the final quarter of2004 in seasonally adjusted terms. The year-on-year figure was -
3/C254%, having been +21/C252%
in autumn last year. The performance of thecapital goods sector was especially unfavour-able. This was also due to the fact that de-mand for motor vehicles became more sub-dued again following a surge in demand inthe last few months of 2004. Additionally,fewer orders were placed with mechanicalengineering manufacturers and for steel andstructural metal products. This contrastswith the consumer goods sector, where theorders situation has improved. Pharmaceut-ical goods and printed products were particu-larly in demand. In the case of intermediategoods, the positive performance of the chem-icals industry contrasted with cutbacks in themanufacture of basic metals.
External demand remained buoyant up to the
end of the period under review. The level oforders in the first three months of the year asa whole was 2
3/C254% up on the average of the
fourth quarter. The year-on-year figure, at+7
3/C254%, was, in fact, higher than at the end
of last year (+61/C252%). The capital goods sector
with its main representative – mechanical en-gineering – was clearly the best performer,Weakening
of domestic
demand
Buoyant export
business

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
43along with structural metal products. By con-
trast, the improvement in the intermediategoods sector was on a distinctly smaller scale.There were, in fact, slightly fewer orders forconsumer goods than at the end of 2004.
Demand for construction work, which ap-
peared to be stabilising at a low level lastyear, showed a further marked decline in thefirst few months of the current year. In Janu-ary/February, new construction orders wereroughly one-tenth down on the final quarterof 2004 in seasonally adjusted terms and justover 15% down on the already low level inthe same period of last year. This signals a fur-ther perceptible loss of level in ordering, eventhough this may be somewhat exaggeratedby delayed orders owing to the persistentcold winter weather in February.
The decline in industrial construction was es-
pecially sharp. In the first two months of2005, there was a seasonally adjusted fall ofaround 17% in this subsector, signifying ayear-on-year decline of over one-quarter. Thefall in demand for residential constructioncompared with the end of 2004 was notquite as marked (-8
1/C252%). Even so, the level of
residential construction orders has halved inthe past five years, while the other subsectorsperformed somewhat better. This applies par-ticularly to public sector construction, wherethe longer-term drop in demand is “only”somewhat over one-fifth. Latterly, too, publicsector customers’ restraint has been lessmarked. On an average of the first twomonths of this year, they reduced their ordersby 5% in seasonally adjusted terms comparedwith the final quarter of 2004.Volume, 2000 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
%
2005Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Jan-
FebTotal construction orders
Jan-
FebDomesticLog scale
ForeignLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Total industrial ordersDemand for industrial goods
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−120
100115
95110
90105
85100
80
75
70
65105
100
95
90100115
95110
90105
85100
8015+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−110
105
100
95
90
85
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004- Decline in
construction
orders

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
44A clear majority of the firms among the com-
mercial service providers surveyed by theCentre for European Economic Research inthe first quarter of the year still rated thedemand situation as positive. The assess-ments in the fourth quarter had been evenmore favourable, however. There was some-what less optimism not only among firms ofarchitects but also in the telecoms sector andamong tax consultants and auditors. This wasnot offset by the continuing improvement in
the outlook for the advertising industry andresearch and development enterprises.
Prices
Prices have continued to be strongly influ-
enced by the energy sector recently. Inter-national oil prices seem to have eased some-what from their peak at the end of Marchand in early April, when a barrel of BrentNorth Sea Oil was being quoted on somedays at more than US$55 on the spot mar-kets. International oil prices had not gonedown below US$50 even at the beginning ofMay, however. From a European perspective,this corresponded to around 340 per barrel,
which is also a very high level in historicalterms. Along with the price of oil, gas prices,too, have risen sharply in Germany. Finally,electricity has become noticeably more ex-pensive. At the end of the period under re-view, import prices were almost one-third upon the year. At the industrial producer level,the price of electricity in Germany was higherthan at any time since mid-1999.
The higher cost of energy has noticeably
shaped import prices as a whole. The season-ally adjusted 2.3% rise between December2004 and March 2005 and the 3.8% year-on-year price increase were attributable solelyto energy. If energy is excluded, importedgoods cost hardly any more in seasonally ad-justed terms in March than they did at theend of 2004 and were only marginally up onthe year. This was due to the fact that thepersistent price reductions in the case of cap-2000 = 100, log scale
2005Import prices ...
(seasonally adjusted)
... excluding energy
... for energyCommodity prices 1 ...
... for industrial
    raw materials
... for energyCommodity and import prices
1HWWA index “Euroland” on a euro basis.
Deutsche Bundesbank140
120
100
90
80
70
60
50
40120
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
35
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Waning
optimism of
commercial
service
providersMajor impact of
energy on the
price climate
Import prices ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
45ital and consumer goods largely offset the
higher cost of intermediate products caused,in particular, by the higher prices for non-ferrous metals as well as iron and steel.
There were similar, albeit not quite so
marked, trends in German domestic industrialfactory gate prices of raw materials and en-ergy. Here, an overall year-on-year price in-crease of 4.2% contrasted with a price rise of2.6% if energy is excluded. The increase inthe prices of both capital goods and con-sumer products, at 1.2% and 1.4% respect-ively, was distinctly lower, while prices ofbasic goods and inputs went up 5.0% on theyear. At all events, the sharp upward move-ment in the price of metals, which is the mainfactor behind the increase, seems to haveeased somewhat compared with the peak atthe start of the year, when the annual rate ofprice increase had reached 22.6%.
The overall year-on-year price increase at the
consumer level in April was 1.6%. Excludingenergy, the figure was 0.9%. The costs of en-ergy, taken on its own, was 9% higher than12 months previously. The sharpest price fluc-tuation was in light heating oil, which was36.5% up on the year owing, not least, tothe late spell of cold weather. Gas cost 8.0%more and the price of electricity was 4.0%higher than in the same period of 2004. Out-side of the energy sector, services continuedto show higher-than-average price increases.In April, services cost 1.5% more than at thesame time last year. The cost of using motorvehicles have shown a particularly strong riseowing to a tax increase on cars that do notmeet strict criteria for exhaust gases. By con-trast, the prices of package holidays have
been reduced perceptibly more sharply thanis usual at this time of year. There has been amarked decline in the year-on-year figure formanufactured goods which was +0.4% atthe end of the period under review. Althoughthis is related to a base effect caused by lastyear’s tobacco tax increase, upward pressureon prices in the case of many industrialgoods, too, has been within narrow bounds.Clothing, household appliances and com-puters, in fact, cost less in year-on-yearterms. In the case of food, seasonal productsbecame much more expensive in Februaryand March, mainly on account of the un-favourable weather conditions which affect-ed harvests in many regions, including theMediterranean. In April, prices returned tonormal again, however. In the case of house
Consumer prices
Annual percentage change
2004 2005
Item Q3 Q4 Q1 April
Food – 0.6 – 1.0 – 0.3 0.1
Manufactured goods 1.6 1.8 1.2 0.4
of which
Tobacco 12.2 16.2 19.4 10.7
Energy 6.1 7.1 6.8 9.0
of which
Refined petroleumproducts 10.3 11.2 8.4 11.4Gas – 0.2 2.1 7.3 8.0Electricity 4.0 3.8 4.1 4.0Central heating,district heating 1.4 3.1 6.1 10.7
Services 2.3 2.4 2.2 1.5
Rents 1.0 1.2 1.0 1.0
Total 1.8 2.0 1.8 1.6
Total excluding seasonal
products, energy, tobacco 1.3 1.3 0.8 0.7
Memo item
Harmonised Index 2.0 2.1 1.6 1.4
Deutsche Bundesbank... and
industrial
producer prices
have gone up
owing to
energy
Moderate
consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
46rents, the burden on households remained
moderate up to the end of the period underreview. In year-on-year terms, rent adjust-ments were no more than +1% on average.
The increase in construction prices has accel-
erated, however. In the first quarter, construc-tion work cost 2.0% more than in the sameperiod of last year. At the beginning of 2004,the rate of price increase was no more than0.2%. This was due mainly to the dramaticprice increases for steel and steel products. In
line with their differing use of steel, price de-velopments vary among the individual con-struction subsectors. Road construction wasleast affected, with prices remaining nearlyconstant over the past 12 months. Commer-cial and industrial buildings, which have arelatively large percentage of steel construc-tions, were most affected with a 3.2% rateof inflation. Office buildings and residentialconstruction were in mid-position.
Construction
work costs
more

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
47Foreign trade and
paymentsForeign trade and current account
Against the backdrop of fairly robust growth
in the global economy, the external environ-ment remained predominantly favourable tothe German economy at the start of 2005.The global economic strains resulting fromthe high, and in the first quarter of this yearstill rising, oil price have evidently been limit-ed so far. In particular, there were dynamicimpulses for German foreign trade fromSouth-East Asia, which was characterised bybuoyant economic growth. In some euro-areapartner countries, on the other hand, theeconomic recovery has not yet gained anyreal momentum. In the period under review,the euro lost some of the gains which it hadmade at the end of 2004. Hence, theappreciation-related dampening effects onforeign demand did not increase further.Overall, German exports of goods rose by1
1/C252% nominally in the first quarter of 2005 in
seasonally adjusted terms compared with theprevious three months.
The continuing optimistic export expectations
of German enterprises reflect the favourableunderlying external conditions. Although en-terprises’ optimism is no longer quite asmarked as in the second half of 2004, theoutlook for the next few months has rarelybeen better. This assessment is also supportedby the trend in orders received from abroad,which again went up noticeably on the quar-ter (+2
3/C254%) in seasonally adjusted terms and
in terms of volume.
Regionally, German exporters increased their
deliveries across the board at the start of theExternal
environment
Outlook
Exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
48year. The value of exports to both euro-area
partner countries and to non-euro-area coun-tries rose by approximately 1
1/C252% on an aver-
age of January and February 2005 comparedwith the average of the fourth quarter of2004 – regional and sectoral breakdowns ofstatistical information on German foreigntrade for March are not yet available. As ex-port prices went up only slightly over thesame period, there was a similar level of
growth in exports in real terms.
The heaviest demand came from Asia. There
was a particularly sharp increase in exports(+19
1/C252%) to Japan, which – as other indica-
tors also suggest – was evidently able to over-come its economic slowdown in the secondhalf of last year. Substantial increases werealso achieved in exports to the dynamically-growing emerging markets of South-EastAsia (+16
1/C252%) and again to China (+6%). In
addition, sales of German products to coun-tries that, as oil producers, were benefitingfrom the high energy prices also rose. For ex-ample, exports to the OPEC countries andRussia went up by 15
1/C252% in nominal terms at
the beginning of the year. In view of the highutilisation rate of production capacities andthe urgent need to increase them further, it islikely that these developments were not sim-ply a result of consumptive recycling of the oilreceipts. By contrast, exports to the USA weremuch more subdued, with the value rising byonly 2
1/C252% in the first two months of the
year – probably also as a result of the ex-change rate. However, export sales wereslowed down by the decline in exports to theEU countries outside the euro area (-2
1/C252%),
which account for one-fifth of total Germanexports. This was due mainly to noticeablylower exports to the new EU member states(-6
1/C252%). However, this development should
not be interpreted as a sign of a reversal ofthe hitherto expansionary trend as trade withcentral and eastern European countries issubject to substantial short-term fluctuationsand, in the past, had frequently been relative-ly weak at the beginning of the year. In add-€b n
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
2005AprLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 2000 = 100MonthlyMonthly 1Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−120
115
110
105
100
95190
185
180
175
170
165
160
155
2001 2002 2003 2004Regional
breakdown of
exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
49ition, the values shown for the new EU mem-
ber states are subject to increased uncertaintyowing to the change in the method of re-cording foreign trade since they joined theEU.
The sectoral German export trend shows that
foreign demand is being sustained by boththe robust expansion in global productionand heavy private consumption in Germany’strading partners. Thus, it was not just exportsof intermediate goods (+5%) and capitalgoods (+3
1/C252%), which, together, make up
around three-quarters of German exports,that rose noticeably on an average of Januaryand February compared with the previousperiod; German consumer goods were alsoheavily in demand (+5
1/C252%). Following the
weaker trend towards the end of last year, ex-port sales by the German car industry, whoseproducts are classed as capital goods, notice-ably recovered (+9%). In addition, the valueof exports of machinery (+8
1/C252%), as well as
of metals and metal products (+71/C252%), went
up sharply. By contrast, German manufactur-ers of information and communications tech-nology products had to make do with a moremoderate increase in foreign turnover of justunder 2%.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the value of
German imports of goods in the first quarterof 2005 was
1/C252% below the previous three-
month level. In the same period, there was arise in import prices of just over
1/C252%, which,
in turn, was mainly a result of the increase inthe price of energy sources. In real terms,therefore, imports were actually down by justover 1% on the quarter.At the beginning of the year – here, too, only
the data for January and February are cur-rently available – the sectoral breakdown ofimports of goods reflected the continuingweak domestic demand, which is character-ised by a wait-and-see attitude towards in-vestment on the part of German enterprisesand by consumer restraint. In the periodunder review, imports of capital goods weretherefore just over 2
1/C252% lower in nominal
terms than on an average of the fourth quar-ter. The main reason for this was the sharpdecline, due only partly to prices, in importsof information and communication technol-ogy products (-9%), most of which areclassed as capital goods. This was not offsetby a noticeable rise in imports of motorvehicles and somewhat higher imports ofmachinery, either. At the same time, domesticTrend in foreign trade by region and
by category of goods
Average of January and February 2005 compared
with the average of October to December 2004%; seasonally adjusted
ItemEx-
portsIm-
ports
Total + 1,5 + 0,6Selected country/group of countries
Euro-area countries + 1.6 + 0.3
Other EU countries – 2.4 + 0.6United States + 2.5 – 0.7Japan + 19.6 – 0.8China, People’s Republic of + 6.2 – 3.0Russian Federation + 15.5 + 6.4OPEC countries + 15.4 – 6.7Emerging marketsin South-East Asia + 16.4 – 4.0
Categories of goods
Selected main categories
Intermediate goods + 4.8 + 3.6Capital goods + 3.5 – 2.7Consumer goods + 5.4 + 0.7Energy . – 0.8
Selected categories
Chemicals + 3.8 + 2.5Machinery + 8.6 + 1.4Motor vehicles and motor vehicleparts + 9.0 + 8.0Information technology + 1.8 – 8.9Metals and metal products + 7.3 + 8.2
Deutsche BundesbankBreakdown
of exports of
goods
Imports of
goodsBreakdown
of imports of
goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
50demand for foreign consumer goods in-
creased only moderately at the start of theyear (+
1/C252%). By contrast, there was a rise of
around 31/C252% in imports of intermediate
goods. The fact that a large proportion of im-ported intermediate goods are used in manu-facturing products that are ultimately intend-ed for export is also likely to have been a fac-tor. Metals and metal products, which arepredominantly included in the intermediategoods segment, were in particular demand inthis regard (+8% in nominal terms). By con-trast, the value of imports of energy sourcesfell somewhat compared with the high levelrecorded at the end of last year when theprice of oil was noticeably lower for a time.
Suppliers from the OPEC countries were al-
most the only suppliers to be affected by thelower imports of energy at the start of theyear. Accordingly, overall imports – compris-ing mainly oil – from this group of countriesfell by just over 6
1/C252% in the period under re-
view. By contrast, Russia and the United King-dom, as suppliers of energy sources, gainedincreased shares of the German market. Inthis respect, each of these two countries nowhas a greater share than all the OPEC coun-tries put together. Not least as a result of this,total German imports from these two coun-tries rose steeply; in the case of Russia therewas a nominal rise of 6
1/C252% and in the case of
the United Kingdom one of as much asroughly 11% in the first two months of theyear. By contrast, the trend in imports fromother important partner countries was muchless buoyant for most of the period under re-view. Sales on the German market frequentlyreached only the average level of the finalMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2004 2005
I t e m Q 1Q 4Q 1
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 176.5 190.2 185.6
Imports (cif) 135.3 154.9 142.3
Balance + 41.3 + 35.3 + 43.2
2 Services (balance) – 7.0 – 7.4 – 6.53 Income (balance) – 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.94 Current transfers (balance) – 5.7 – 6.6 – 7.3
Balance on current account
2 + 25.5 + 19.4 + 27.9
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 38.4 + 37.6 + 41.32 Services – 7.2 – 9.6 – 6.93 Income – 0.8 + 0.0 + 2.04 Current transfers – 7.2 – 6.7 – 8.8
Current account
2 + 20.5 + 17.7 + 24.1
II Balance of capital transfers 3 + 0.3 – 0.2 – 1.5
III Balance of financial account 4 + 6.2 – 23.4 – 19.3
IV Change in the reserve assets
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.2
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions – 32.2 + 4.2 – 6.9
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 52. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankRegional
breakdown of
imports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
51quarter of 2004 or were even noticeably
below it. In particular, imports from China(-3%), the emerging markets of South-EastAsia (-4%) and the ten new EU memberstates (-5%) were therefore considerablydown.
1Overall, there was an increase in im-
ports from non-euro-area countries of justover
1/C252%. Imports from other euro-area trad-
ing partners rose even more modestly (justunder
1/C252%). In particular, the lower demand
(roughly 5%) for products from the Nether-lands contributed to this moderate develop-ment.
Owing to the greater increase in the value of
exports of goods than that of imports ofgoods, the seasonally adjusted trade balancein the first quarter of 2005 went up by 34 bil-
lion quarter on quarter to 341
1/C252billion. The
deficit on invisible current transactions fell by2
1/C252billion to 3131/C252billion in seasonally ad-
justed terms in the same period although thedeficit on current transfers increased by32 billion. Both the 32
1/C252billion fall in the def-
icit on services and the 32 billion rise in net
cross-border income contributed to the lowerdeficit. All in all, the surplus on Germany’scurrent account went up to 324 billion in the
first quarter of 2005 from 317
1/C252billion in the
previous quarter.
Financial transactions
Rising yield differentials between the major
currency areas, a certain degree of uncer-tainty over further global economic develop-ments and a slight easing on the foreign ex-change markets following the strong appreci-ation of the euro at the end of last year deter-
mined events on the international financialmarkets in the first quarter of 2005. Thisprompted investors operating internationallyto focus more heavily on interest-bearingpaper. The trends described are also evidentin Germany’s financial transactions with non-residents, which resulted in net capital ex-ports – not least as counterparts of the largercurrent account surplus. If portfolio invest-ment and direct investment are taken to-gether, there were outflows of funds of317
1/C252billion from Germany in the first quar-
ter of the current year.
In portfolio investment alone, net capital ex-
ports from January to March 2005 amountedto310 billion after net capital imports of
322
1/C252billion and 341/C252billion, respectively,
had been recorded in the previous two quar-ters.
The turnaround can be attributed mainly to
transactions by domestic investors, who no-ticeably increased their new portfolio invest-ment on the international markets during thefirst three months of the year ( 367
1/C252billion,
up from 3191/C252billion in the previous three-
month period). Their main preference wasfor relatively low-risk forms of investment.They acquired foreign bonds and notesfor355
1/C252billion, notably long-term euro-
denominated debt instruments issued by for-eign borrowers ( 348
1/C252billion). However, the
yield advantage of this type of paper in rela-tion to comparable Federal securities fell fur-ther in the first quarter. The average spread
1The data on imports from the new EU member states
are subject to increased uncertainty.Current
account
Trends in
financial
transactionsPortfolio
investment
German
investment in ...
... foreign
bonds and
notes ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
52stood at just seven basis points, ie four points
below the level of the final quarter of 2004.Demand from German investors for foreigncurrency bonds also picked up ( 37 billion).
Dollar paper, in particular, benefited from theincreased yield advantage over euro assetsand the recovery of the US dollar.
German investors also took a keen interest in
foreign mutual fund shares in the first quar-ter. They added net amounts worth 314
1/C252bil-
lion of this type of paper to their portfolios, amove which may have been influenced bythe reinvestment of distributed profits. How-ever, the amount invested also exceeded thelevels that foreign investment companies hadbeen receiving from Germany at the start ofthe year over the past few years.
Overall, transactions in shares and money
market paper were not a significant factor inthe first quarter. German investors sold for-eign equities on balance ( 31 billion) after ac-
quiring shares for 32 billion in the previous
quarter, and, as in the previous quarter, theyalso reduced their holdings of foreign moneymarket paper ( 31
1/C252billion).
Foreign investors considerably extended their
acquisitions of securities in Germany in thefirst quarter ( 357
1/C252billion compared with
324 billion in the previous three-month
period), albeit less so than German investorsabroad. Demand for German bonds andnotes was particularly high ( 342 billion), espe-
cially for private bonds ( 329 billion, up from
38
1/C252billion) and, to a lesser extent, public
sector debt securities ( 3121/C252billion). Demand
for the latter even fell slightly on the quarter.Financial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2004 2005
I t e m Q 1Q 4Q 1
1 Direct investment – 17.7 + 9.8 – 7.8
German investment
abroad + 9.5 + 8.7 – 10.2Foreign investmentin Germany – 27.3 + 1.0 + 2.5
2 Portfolio investment + 18.6 + 4.7 – 9.9
German investment
abroad – 32.7 – 19.5 – 67.3
Shares + 1.4 – 2.1 + 0.8
Mutual fund shares – 7.0 + 0.8 – 14.5Bonds and notes – 29.7 – 20.2 – 55.4Money market paper + 2.6 + 2.0 + 1.7
Foreign investment
in Germany + 51.3 + 24.2 + 57.3
Shares – 0.8 + 0.5 + 3.5
Mutual fund shares + 0.8 + 1.2 + 0.1Bonds and notes + 56.0 + 22.6 + 41.9Money market paper – 4.8 – 0.0 + 11.8
3 Financial derivatives
1 –2 . 0 –3 . 4 –3 . 4
4 Credit transactions + 8.3 – 33.5 + 3.2
Monetary financial
institutions 2 + 21.3 – 38.0 + 6.9
Long-term – 5.3 – 7.0 – 13.3
Short-term + 26.6 – 31.0 + 20.2
Enterprises and
individuals – 2.9 + 3.2 – 10.9
Long-term + 3.2 – 1.2 + 2.3
Short-term – 6.1 + 4.3 – 13.3
General government – 3.0 – 1.9 + 13.8
Long-term – 1.9 – 0.6 + 5.2
Short-term – 1.1 – 1.3 + 8.6
Bundesbank – 7.0 + 3.2 – 6.6
5 Other investment – 1.0 – 0.9 – 1.36 Balance of all
statistically recordedcapital flows + 6.2 – 23.4 – 19.3
Memo item
Change in the reserveassets at transaction values(increase: –)
3 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.2
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding the Bundesbank. —
3Excluding allocation of SDRs and changes due to
value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank... investment
funds ...
... shares and
money market
paper
Foreign
investment in ...
... German
bonds and
notes, money
market paper ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
53Given the low level of interest rates, the yield
advantage of private bonds may have been acrucial factor for investors. Following thetrend of acquiring increasing amounts ofinterest-bearing paper, non-residents boughtmoney market paper on balance betweenJanuary and March 2005 for the first timesince 2003. Funds may have been parkedhere in order to be able to carry out short-term portfolio shifts while share prices wererising.
Foreign investors increased their involvement
in the German share markets somewhat be-tween January and March and acquired33
1/C252billion worth of shares (compared with
31/C252billion in the previous three months). This
may, to a certain extent, have been an expres-sion of what is still a comparatively favourableassessment of German shares. Their price-earnings ratio on an average of the first quar-ter and on the basis of earnings forecasts forthe coming year thus stood at 12.4 comparedwith 15.3 for US shares, despite price move-ments being more favourable at the time.
As with portfolio investment, there were also
noticeable net capital exports resulting fromdirect investment in the period under review(38 billion), following net inflows of capital at
the end of 2004. German parent companiesprovided their non-resident subsidiaries with310 billion net between January and March,
partly in the form of investment capital butmainly in the form of intra-group tradecredits. The most important countries target-ed by German direct investment at the startof 2005 were the United States, the othereuro-area countries, especially France and the
Netherlands, and Switzerland.
Foreign proprietors increased their direct in-
vestment in Germany by 32
1/C252billion net in
the first quarter of 2005. The main reason forthis was intra-group credit transactions,which likewise count as direct investment.After providing a lesser amount of borrowedfunds to their branches domiciled in Germanyfor some time – not least as a consequence ofchanges in tax law – foreign direct investorsagain provided them with sizeable amountsof such funds in the first quarter of 2005. Atthe same time, they supplied their Germansubsidiaries with further investment capital.
There were net capital imports of 33 billion in
the first quarter of 2005 as a result of theQuarterly
€b n
Acquisition ...
... of German bonds and notes
    by non-residents
... of foreign bonds and notes
    by residentsPortfolio investment
Deutsche Bundesbank70
605040
30
2010
0
2003 2004 2005... and
German shares
German direct
investment
abroadForeign direct
investment in
Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
54Deutsche BundesbankStatistics on the structure and activities of foreign affiliates (FATS)*
One of the signs of advancing economic globalisation
is the growth in foreign direct investment. Monitor-ing this development and comparing national econ-omies requires detailed statistics such as those expect-ed by the policy decision-makers of the EU at inter-national negotiations on GATS.
1For this purpose, a
council regulation on Community statistics on thestructure and activity of foreign affiliates is currentlybeing discussed at EU level. The aim of the regulationis to gain information on affiliates under foreign con-trol (inward FATS) in the various EU countries and – ata later date – to obtain information on affiliatesabroad controlled by investors in the various EU coun-tries (outward FATS). Control of an affiliate is assumedto exist if there is a majority stake – that is, a holdingof more than 50% of the capital shares. Inward FATSare to be classified regionally on the basis of the ul-timate controlling unit, which in statistical termsmeans that, in the case of a foreign investor which isitself a dependent enterprise, control is allocated tothe parent company’s country of domicile. One of theobjectives of these statistics is to ascertain the cross-border impact on employment, turnover, valueadded, imports and exports as well as on the researchexpenditure of the national economies.
The Bundesbank’s annual foreign direct investment
survey captures cross-border participations of 10%and more in the capital or voting rights of enterprisesand already contains some of the aforementioned in-formation on the investment enterprises’ turnoverand employees.
2The analysis of the latest statistics in
line with the requirements for FATS – solely for cross-border majority participations – gives the followingresults (more detailed information is contained in thetable on page 56) at the end of 2003 for the key fig-ures
3for enterprises abroad in which German invest-
ors have direct or indirect4majority participations and
for enterprises in Germany in which non-residentshave direct or indirect majority participations, the in-
formation being classified according to the ultimatecontrolling unit.
At the end of 2003, there were records of just under
20,000 enterprises abroad in which German investorsheld a majority stake. Conversely, there were onlyslightly more than 8,400 enterprises in Germany whichwere under foreign control. Enterprises in the EUcountries accounted for almost half of the Germanparticipating interests. Of the other industrial coun-tries, it was primarily the United States, with almost3,000 enterprises, that featured as a major investmentcountry for German residents. The relatively major im-portance of the transition and developing countriesmay be seen in the fact that German investors heldparticipating interests in a total of more than 5,400enterprises there, which was more than they held inthe industrial countries outside the EU. At the end of2003, for example, a very large number of participat-ing interests were recorded in Poland and the CzechRepublic. Overall, German investors’ interest in thecountries in transition was focused on enterprises inthe manufacturing sector, which accounted for almosthalf of the investment companies in these countries.
Investors from other EU countries played the greatest
role in the case of foreign-controlled enterprises inGermany. Most investors from other industrial coun-tries came from Switzerland (with 1,095 participatinginterests) and the United States (1,699). Investors fromthe transition and developing countries had only aminor impact on the corporate landscape in Germany,with stakes in fewer than 5% of foreign-controlledenterprises in Germany.
At the end of 2003, there were only about two for-
eign majority stakes in Germany for every five Germanmajority stakes held abroad. However, such enter-
*Foreign affiliates statistics. — 1General Agreement on Trade in
Services. — 2Investment enterprises with a balance sheet total
equivalent to over 53 million are captured. — 3The key figures donot include the holding companies which hold other reportable
stakes. — 4Participations of directly held investment companies are
deemed to be indirect. The percentages of participating interests are

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
55prises in Germany had a much greater average turn-
over and, at 5740 billion, attained almost two-thirds
of the turnover achieved by German investors in theiraffiliates abroad. German investors’ foreign turnoverwas spread more or less equally between the EU coun-tries and the other industrial countries, notably inFrance ( 594 billion), the United Kingdom ( 5107 bil-
lion) and, in particular, the United States ( 5329 bil-
lion). The transition and developing countries to-gether contributed only 18% to German investors’turnover abroad.
Just over 3.7 million people worked in enterprises
abroad in which German investors had a majoritystake; 38% of these were in other EU countries, slight-ly more than one-quarter in the industrial countriesoutside the EU and (at 37%) a fairly high percentagein the transition and developing countries. In Poland,the Czech Republic and Hungary alone a total of justunder half a million employees worked in enterprisesunder German control. At the end of 2003, about1.9 million persons worked in Germany in enterprisesunder foreign control, and more than half of theseemployees were in affiliates of investors from EUcountries. At the end of 2003, there was almost anequal balance in the number of employees in enter-prises in the industrial countries outside the EU inwhich Germans had a majority stake and the numberin German enterprises controlled by investors fromthe industrial countries outside the EU.
In terms of numbers, majority participating interests
in enterprises in the manufacturing sector accountedfor one-third of the majority stakes on both sides. In2003, these accounted for 42% of the foreign turn-over arising from German majority stakes and justover 54% of foreign investors’ turnover in Germany.At around 57%, there was an almost equally largepercentage of persons employed in cross-bordermajority-controlled manufacturing enterprises in
both cases. The manufacture of motor vehicles abroadwas of particular importance for German investors: in2003, this economic sector accounted for almost two-fifths of foreign turnover in manufacturing and morethan one-quarter of the numbers employed. Ataround 30%, the percentage of enterprises engagedin the wholesale and retail trades and in the mainten-ance and repair of motor vehicles, motorcycles andpersonal and household goods (“trading affiliates”)was likewise significant in both directions. Whereasenterprises in Germany accounted for only 29% of theturnover of foreign investors, 37% of foreign turnoverwas generated in these enterprises. On a percentagebasis, the number of employees in this economic sec-tor was about 20% on both sides of the participatinginterest relationships. More than half of the tradingaffiliates of German investors were domiciled in otherEU countries.
While enterprises engaged in financial intermedi-
ation, especially “Other financial intermediaries” (763participating interests), played a major role for Ger-man investors with almost 1,900 majority stakesabroad, this economic sector was only of secondaryimportance for foreign investors in Germany giventhat they had fewer than 350 participating interests.A different picture emerges in the services sector sub-area “Real estate, renting and business activities”. Atthe end of 2003, these economic segments accountedfor no more than 14% of German investors’ foreignparticipating interests but almost one-quarter of theforeign-controlled enterprises in Germany. The turn-over achieved by foreign investors in these enterprisesamounted to 549 billion and, in absolute terms, there-
fore exceeded the sum achieved by German investorsin this segment abroad ( 540 billion). It was primarily
in the economic sector “Other business activities” thatforeign investors showed a marked interest.
not multiplied in the chain. A secondary majority stake exists when
both the investor holds a majority participation in a primary invest-ment company and this primary investment company holds a further
(secondary) majority participation in an enterprise.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
56Key figures for enterprises directly or indirectly majority-owned
on a cross-border basis
Number of enterprises
End-2003 levelEnterprises’ turnover
in5billion in 2003Number of employees
in the enterprisesEnd-2003 level in 1,000s
Country/economic sectorGerman
investorsabroadForeign
investors inGermanyGerman
investorsabroadForeign
investors inGermanyGerman
investorsabroadForeign
investors inGermany
Grand total 19,882 8,412 1,147.5 740.1 3,744.4 1,931.1
by investing/lending country
1
EU countries 9,165 4,606 496.0 406.9 1,415.1 1,052.5
of which
Euro-area countries 6,948 3,327 365.3 272.6 1,064.4 752.3of which
Austria 987 377 53.6 14.8 196.3 52.3France 1,623 853 94.0 71.6 279.8 243.1Italy 1,015 273 59.9 23.1 135.0 43.7Netherlands 1,024 1,106 38.1 119.6 98.9 264.9Spain 912 94 53.9 7.9 177.3 25.5
United Kingdom 1,650 809 107.0 117.8 277.5 200.9
Other industrial countries 5,275 3,560 443.2 330.0 958.5 894.2
of which
Japan 298 481 23.7 48.2 45.1 61.6Switzerland 910 1,095 35.6 71.4 82.2 241.7United States 2,997 1,699 328.8 194.0 684.5 552.0
Countries in transition 3,094 98 107.4 3.1 815.0 8.7
of which
China, People’s Republic of
2 464 19 9.6 0.4 92.0 0.2
Czech Republic 643 7 28.5 0.2 188.0 0.3Hungary 485 10 20.5 0.3 138.3 0.4Poland 776 16 24.2 0.3 162.1 4.0
Developing countries 2,348 308 100.9 20.9 555.8 37.5
in Africa 305 40 14.1 2.4 78.7 6.8in America 898 103 43.3 6.4 260.7 17.9in Asia und Oceania 1,145 170 43.5 12.2 216.4 13.1
By economic sector of the direct
investment enterprise
Manufacturing 6,580 2,787 485.3 402.5 2,141.9 1,082.6
of which
Chemical industry 1,143 324 103.3 44.9 306.8 116.2Mechanical engineering 1,050 493 40.7 36.7 237.5 166.3Manufacture of motor vehiclesand vehicle parts 724 140 190.3 48.0 574.1 149.3
Electricity, gas and water supply 338 29 30.0 3.2 57.3 3.4
Wholesale and retail trade; Repair of
motor vehicles and motorcycles andpersonal and household goods 6,178 2,450 422.9 216.4 762.6 352.5
Transport and communication services 1,134 337 69.0 25.3 310.1 90.8
Financial intermediation 1,892 347 74.6 19.9 162.0 49.1
of which
Credit institutions 403 146 – – 84.2 28.5Other financial intermediation 763 37 21.1 1.9 20.7 0.9
Real estate, renting and business activities 2,822 1,984 39.8 48.9 168.4 221.3
of which
Real estate activities 949 563 3.1 2.2 2.6 2.2Other business activities 809 744 16.3 18.4 91.7 155.8
Other economic sectors 938 478 25.9 23.9 142.1 131.4
1Key figures for enterprises in which foreign investors from
various countries have a majority stake are allocated in full toeach country. — 2Excluding Hong Kong.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
57statistically recorded non-securitised credit
transactions of non-banks. This was duemainly to transactions by general govern-ment, which led to net capital imports of314 billion.
2By contrast, enterprises and indi-
viduals exported funds on balance ( 311 bil-
lion) during the same period. As is usual atthe beginning of the year, they transferredmainly short-term funds that they had repat-riated at the end of 2004 to their accountswith foreign banks.
The non-securitised credit transactions of the
monetary financial institutions (including theBundesbank) were almost in balance in theperiod under review, following net capital ex-ports of 335 billion in the final quarter of last
year. There were net inflows of 37 billion re-
sulting from the external payments of creditinstitutions. By contrast, the cross-bordertransactions of the Bundesbank which, on
balance, were marked by the increase inclaims within the large-value payment systemTARGET ( 35 billion) led to capital exports
amounting to 36
1/C252billion net.
The Bundesbank’s reserve assets, whose
changes are shown separately from cross-border financial transactions in the balance ofpayments, rose only slightly – at transactionvalues – between January and March. By con-trast, valuation changes led to a rise in the re-serve assets of just under 32
1/C252billion when
valued at market prices. The increase was at-tributable to a rise in both the price of goldand in the foreign reserve assets.Credit trans-
actions of
non-banks
2Transactions made by the Federal government, some of
which were not statistically recorded until the start of
2005, were among the contributory factors to this com-
paratively large amount.Credit trans-
actions of the
banking systemThe
Bundesbank’s
reserve assets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
58Public financesBudgetary development of central,
state and local government
The deficit of central and state government
(the results for local government are not yetknown) was 338 billion in the first quarter
and therefore 32
1/C252billion below the very high
value in the same period of 2004. Owing to astrong increase in non-tax receipts, revenuegrew by just under 5%. Tax revenue stag-nated; this was partly due to income tax cutsand higher transfers to the EU. Expenditurewent up by 1
1/C252%.
The deficit, having gone down only marginal-
ly in 2004 to 367 billion, is expected to fall
more visibly this year. This will be chiefly facili-tated by a strong increase in non-tax revenuedue mainly to greater central governmentasset disposals. By contrast, only a small in-crease in tax revenue is expected according tothe most recent tax estimate. In the light ofbudget law requirements, the rise in expend-iture is likely to remain very limited. As a re-sult of the pay settlement of February 2005and the expected continuation of staff cuts,expenditure on personnel will barely increase.Although the temporary cessation of grantsto the Post Office pension fund will also pro-vide relief on the expenditure side this year,this will lead to additional expenditure in thefuture. On the whole, the current budgetplans are fraught with considerable risks.
Tax revenue
1increased by just under 2% in
the first quarter compared with the same
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the first quarter.Overview
Tax revenue in
the first quarter

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
59period in 2004. Revenue from assessed taxes
grew noticeably. Besides the positive trend inprofits, corporation tax receipts were also bol-stered by various statutory measures aimed atbroadening the assessment base. In the caseof assessed income tax, lower tax refunds toemployees, the cut in grants to homebuyersstarting in 2004 and final inflows in connec-tion with the tax amnesty had a noticeableimpact. By contrast, wage tax revenue de-clined by 5
1/C252%. The effects of this year’s tax
cuts were compounded by the fact that lastyear’s tax relief measures had only a partialimpact in the first quarter of 2004 in terms ofactual cash receipts. Among the indirecttaxes, turnover tax revenue went up by justunder 2%. However, this revenue is very vola-tile over the course of the year. Revenue fromtobacco tax grew by 5%; however, the im-pact of the tax increases from March and De-cember 2004 was diminished by the sus-tained decline in the consumption of taxedcigarettes. With the continued rise in energyprices, the revenue from mineral oil taxesbased on the actual amounts sold also wentdown again (by 4
1/C252%).
In the new official tax estimate, which as-
sumes real GDP growth of 1% and nominalGDP growth of 1.6%, an increase in tax rev-enue of merely 0.5% (including local govern-ment taxes) is expected for 2005. Comparedwith the autumn 2004 estimate, shortfallsamounting to 35 billion are anticipated.
2This
is based on the worsened expectations con-cerning developments on the labour marketand in private consumption, which are espe-cially reflected in lower revenue from wagetax ( 34 billion) and from turnover tax(31
1/C252billion). Furthermore, the projected rev-
enue from mineral oil tax and tobacco tax hasnow been revised downwards (by 31 billion in
total). On the other hand, the forecasts forprofit-related taxes were revised upwards (by32 billion) as a result of more favourable
profit expectations. In 2005 the tax ratio (asdefined in the government’s financial statis-tics) will go down again to 20.1% owingabove all to the additional lowering of in-come tax rates. Over the next few years it willthen go back up somewhat. By 2008 theshortfalls will increase vis-/C224-vis the compar-able forecast from May 2004, which hassince been adjusted for amendments in taxlegislation, and will then amount to 321 bil-
lion or 0.9% of GDP .Year-on-year change
%
Tax receipts, total 1
H1 H2 H1 H2 Q1 Q2Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes, which are not yet
known for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−
4−
2003 2004 2005
2Excluding recent amendments in tax legislation, which
play no significant role.Further outlook

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
60Since the official estimate is based exclusively
on existing legislation, the tax relief measuresfor enterprises, which were discussed at the“job summit” between the government andopposition parties in March 2005, adopted bythe cabinet on 4 May and thus only at the be-ginning of the legislative process, are not con-tained in the current estimate. The decisionprovides that from 2006 the corporation taxrate will be lowered from 25% to 19%. Fornon-corporations the entitlement to offsetlocal business tax against income tax will beextended, and inheritance and gift tax in con-nection with transferring business assets willbe phased out as long as the enterprise is notsold. The total expected shortfalls of just over36 billion are to be partly counterfinanced by
tightening the loss-offset facility for special“tax-saving mutual funds” and further re-stricting the tax loss-carry-forward facility.
Furthermore, it is assumed that, owing to thelower tax rates, profits taxed in Germany willincrease considerably, thus financing just over32 billion of the tax shortfalls. Given that the
tax burden on corporate profits in Germany ishigh by international standards, the plannedcut in the corporation tax rate is a step in theright direction. Unlike eliminating tax loop-holes, the objective of limiting the tax loss-carry-forward facility, which has a legitimatefunction within the overall tax system, ap-pears problematic. Attempts to alter inherit-ance tax need to heed the requirements ofequal treatment of different types of assetsand the practicability of such measures.Moreover, given the tense budgetary pos-ition, the very high degree of uncertainty andthe frequently disappointed expectations inthe last few years with regard to the financialimpact of tax measures, short-term self-finan-cing of relief measures should not be part ofa conservative budget plan.
However, the planned measures will not re-
solve the structural weaknesses of the currenttax system. The main problems are the highmarginal income tax rate combined with anassessment base restricted by numerous ex-emptions, the distortions regarding the tax-ation of labour income and capital income,corporate financing and the different legalforms of the business organisation, as well asthe associated intransparency. A comprehen-sive reform of income tax and corporation taxis, however, made more difficult by the factthat the tight budgetary situation will barelyjustify any further tax shortfalls. A dual in-come tax, such as that suggested by the Ger-
Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue in 5billion
Q1
Type of tax 2005 2004Annual
percent-agechange
Wage tax 27.9 29.5 – 5.6
Assessed income tax – 3.8 – 5.8 .Corporation tax 4.4 2.2 + 102.8Turnover tax 34.9 34.2 + 1.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
Reduction of
business tax
burden ...
... should be in-
tegrated into a
comprehensive
reform

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
61man Council of Economic Experts3and now
being further elaborated on behalf of theFederal Ministry of Finance, might be a prag-matic interim step despite the problematictaxation of capital income and labour incomeat different rates. This would, however, besubject to the condition that a satisfactory so-lution is found for the various problems relat-ing to the concrete implementation, particu-larly the difficulty of distinguishing betweencapital and labour income.
Central government’s deficit in the first quar-
ter was 329 billion and therefore more or less
at the same level as in 2004. Despite stagnat-ing tax revenue, overall revenue rose by justunder 3%. Non-tax revenue grew sharply byjust under 31
1/C252billion. This was due to the
compensatory amount paid by the FederalEmployment Agency, a higher Bundesbankprofit vis-/C224-vis the previous year and revenuefrom motorway tolls. Expenditure grew byjust over 2% owing largely to high labourmarket-related spending.
Central government’s deficit is expected to be
reduced by 317
1/C252billion to around 3221/C252bil-
lion in 2005. However, this is fraught withconsiderable risks. For example, the Bundes-bank profit was just under 31
1/C252billion lower
than planned. Furthermore, the latest tax es-timate anticipates shortfalls of 33
1/C252billion.
This will make it difficult to achieve the rev-enue target even if the sharp increase in assetdisposals (doubled from last year’s figure to317 billion) is attained. On the expenditure
side, labour market-related spending in par-ticular is subject to considerable risks. Al-though the transfers from central govern-ment to the municipalities (contributing to
accommodation and heating costs for the re-cipients of “unemployment benefit II”) arelikely to be lower than envisaged, the highnumber of recipients means that additionalexpenditure on “unemployment benefit II”payments is unavoidable. Overall, centralgovernment spending to provide basic socialsecurity protection for job-seekers will exceedbudget estimates (just over 327
1/C252billion). In
these projections, which are based on centralgovernment plans, it must be noted that re-organising the basic social security system willbring about a considerable easing of the fi-nancial burden on the general governmentbudget over the medium term comparedwith continuing to disburse unemploymentassistance and social assistance side by side –provided administrative expenditure does notincrease considerably.
Central government is faced with a large task
of consolidation. The budget plan envisagesthat structurally – ie excluding the merelytemporary relief afforded by asset disposalsor reduced grants to the Post Office pensionfunds – the constitutional ceiling for net bor-rowing will be overshot in 2005 by just over320 billion.
4The medium-term outlook will
3See the Annual Report 2003/04 of the German Council
of Economic Experts, Bundestags-Drucksache 15/2000,
sections 584-612 (full report available in German only). In
the case of a dual income tax, the various forms of capital
income are decoupled from the taxation of labour in-
come and taxed at a uniform proportional rate. This
should reduce the existing distortions influencing entre-
peneurs’ decisions concerning investment, financing and
the legal form of an enterprise while at the same time
minimising tax shortfalls compared with a more compre-
hensive reform embracing taxation of labour income,
too.
4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Deficit-limiting budgetary
rules and a national stability pact in Germany, Monthly
Report, April 2005, pp 23-37.Central govern-
ment in the first
quarter ...
... and in 2005
as a wholeOutlook

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
62also be clouded by the considerably more un-
favourable expectations regarding tax rev-enue. Even if labour market-related spendingis lowered and the growth of interest expend-iture were to remain dampened despite highnew borrowing owing to favourable finan-cing conditions, there will still be a consider-able need for adjustment. Additional burdensresulting from tax cuts which are not counter-financed or from increased grants to othergovernment levels can therefore not be sus-tained.
The deficit of the special funds was 3
1/C252billion
in the first quarter and thus 31 billion below
the figure for the same quarter in 2004. Thiswas mainly due to central government as-suming joint responsibility for the GermanUnity Fund’s debt and to the improved resultof the ERP special fund. For 2005 as a whole,
as in 2004, the special funds may record asmall surplus.
In the first quarter of 2005, state government
reduced its year-on-year deficit by 32 billion
to just under 39 billion. Although tax revenue
declined marginally in the wake of the laststage of the tax reform and the reallocationof turnover tax shares to central government,overall revenue rose by 6% owing to the sub-sidy repayments which some Landesbanks
have been ordered to make by the EuropeanCommission. Expenditure went up by justover 2%, mainly due to the recapitalisation ofone Landesbank in the wake of the subsidy
repayments. The rise in expenditure on per-sonnel was limited to 1% partly because offurther staff reductions which were promotedby the increase in weekly working hours forthe majority of civil servants and followingthe termination of the working-hours con-tract for many employees subject to wagenegotiations.
In 2004 the deficit was reduced somewhat
more sharply than planned to just over325 billion. However, this was partly due to
initial subsidy repayments from Landesbanks
(31 billion). As with most of the subsidy re-
payments received this year, the attendant,and almost equally high, injections of capitalmandated by the European Commission willnot put a burden on budgets until later in theyear. State governments plan to lower theirdeficits only moderately this year to 323 bil-
lion. According to the results of the latest taxestimate, these plans are then only likely tobe achieved if stringent fiscal prudence is€b n
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2The Federal Government’s
balance of revenue
and expenditure
Deutsche Bundesbank9+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−
9−
12−
15−
18−
21−
24−
27−
30−
2004 2005
Special fundsState
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
63practised. This is also necessary in the me-
dium term in order to end the structuralunderfunding of the budgets without raisingtaxes.
5
For local government, results are currentlyavailable only up to the end of 2004. The def-icit for 2004 as a whole was more thanhalved to just under 34 billion. This owed
largely to the noticeable increase in revenueof almost 3%. As a result of tax cuts, localgovernment also had to contend with falls inrevenue from their share of income tax. How-ever, the very strong rise in local business taxrevenue, in conjunction with the reduction inthe levy on trade tax payable to central andstate government, caused local governmenttax revenue to increase by just under 9
1/C252%.
The key grants from state government werelikewise raised. By contrast, overall expend-iture went down by just under
1/C252%. While so-
cial benefits continued to grow substantially,expenditure on personnel was kept stablemainly owing to the persistent decline in thenumber of employees. Expenditure on inter-est and for non-financial assets declinedsignificantly.
The deficit is likely to continue its decline this
year. In addition to the promised 32
1/C252billion
in relief from the amalgamation of unemploy-ment assistance and social assistance, localbusiness tax revenue is also expected to con-tinue its favourable development. In the lightof the recent rise, to just over 320 billion, in
cash advances – which, contrary to thebudgetary provisions, are used not only forliquidity management but frequently alsofor longer-term financing of current expend-iture – many local governments still have a
considerable need for consolidation.
In the first quarter central, state and local
government debt rose very sharply, by327
1/C252billion. The largest borrower was cen-
tral government, which increased its debt by319
1/C252billion. However, state government,
too, had a considerable need for funds(37 billion). Three-fifths of total new borrow-
ing consisted of medium and long-term bor-rowing. The remaining borrowing require-ment was covered by short-term securities,money market loans and cash advances.Net borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecur-
ities 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2003 + 81.2 + 73.4 – 0.8 + 26.9
2004
pe + 71.8 + 70.9 – 16.2 + 42.9
of which
Q1 + 45.3 + 34.6 + 4.1 + 16.9Q2 + 8.2 + 14.6 – 9.6 – 3.6Q3 + 17.6 + 17.1 – 0.9 + 18.6Q4
pe + 0.7 + 4.6 – 9.8 + 11.0
2005
Q1pe + 27.3 + 17.1 + 10.2 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market loans.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5For specifics, see Deutsche Bundesbank, loc cit, p 29.Local
government
Debt

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
64Social security funds
The deficit of the statutory pension insurance
scheme in the first quarter of 2005 was justunder 33 billion and therefore almost as high
as in the previous year. Both revenue and ex-penditure declined marginally. Revenue fromcompulsory contributions was 1
1/C252% down on
the first quarter of 2004. This negative under-lying trend was offset somewhat by the add-itional revenue for unemployed people in-sured in the statutory pension insurancescheme. The reclassification of numerouspeople previously receiving social assistancebut not insured in the statutory pension insur-ance scheme to recipients of „unemploymentbenefit II“ insured in the statutory pension in-surance scheme boosted revenues. After thenon-adjustment of pensions in mid-2004, ex-penditure on pensions was only around
1/C252%
above the value for the previous year. Ex-penditure on the statutory health insurancescheme and the long-term care insurancescheme for pensioners went down by 13%.This was partly due to the fact that since1 April 2004 pensioners have had to pay thefull contribution to the long-term care insur-ance scheme.
In the middle of the year there will be further
– albeit weaker – relief resulting from the levyof a special contribution to the statutoryhealth insurance scheme of 0.9% which is tobe paid in full by the insured person. The con-sequent reduction of the general contributionrate by the same percentage, which then be-comes possible, will then give the statutorypension insurance scheme relief regarding itsexpenditure on the statutory health insurancescheme for pensioners. Furthermore, the indi-vidual pension amount will not be raised thisyear. Using the pension adjustment formulashould have actually reduced this figure, butthis was prevented by the safeguard clause.
6
The persistently weak growth of wages willmake it impossible to maintain the ratio be-tween wage growth and the increase in pen-sions factored into the pension adjustmentformula and envisaged in the long-term cal-culations for stabilising the contribution rate.
Over the course of the year, mainly as a result
of the drop in revenue, liquidity constraintsmay occur; these will have to be bridged bybringing forward the Federal grants orQuarterly
€b n
€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
Expenditure
RevenueFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−62
60
58
56
54
52
2002 2003 2004 2005
6According to this clause, the individual pension amount
can only be lowered if this is based on a corresponding
decline in the income of insured persons.Statutory
pension
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
65through additional liquidity assistance from
the Federal Government. Even though re-serves will still be available at the end of theyear, they are likely to be significantly lowerthan the minimum reserve of 0.2 month’s ex-penditure. The idea is to avoid raising thecontribution rates in 2006, which will then benecessary according to current legislation, byhaving employers transfer the social securitycontributions at the end of the month inwhich the wages or salaries are being paid in-stead of in the middle of the followingmonth. This one-off measure would signifi-cantly improve the liquidity of all social secur-ity institutions in 2005, although it will notsolve the longer-term structural problems.
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a
deficit of nearly 33 billion in the first quarter
of 2005; this was about as high as the figuresfor the last two years. The relatively sharp risein both revenue (3
1/C252%) and expenditure (al-
most 21/C252%) is mainly due to the fact that the
higher administration costs associated withthe introduction of basic social security protec-tion for job-seekers are refunded by centralgovernment. Revenue from contributions de-clined by a little over 1
1/C252% as a result of the
persistently weak growth of employment andwages.
Spending on unemployment benefit was
2
1/C252% lower. The dampened development in
the number of recipients – not least owing toincreasing long-term unemployment – is likelyto have continued. Expenditure on active la-bour market policy measures went down by24% or 31 billion. However, this decline is
not attributable solely to savings but is mainlydue to the fact that job promotion measures
for recipients of „unemployment benefit II“are no longer being funded by the FederalEmployment Agency. This was, however, off-set by a compensatory amount of 31
1/C252billion
paid to the Federal budget.
For the statutory health insurance funds, pre-
liminary results are only available up to theend of 2004. These showed a surplus ofQuarterly
€b n
€b n€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefit and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
ures, excluding compensatory amount to
central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−
3−8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.017
16
15
14
13
12
11
2002 2003 2004 2005Federal
Employment
Agency
Statutory
health
insurance funds

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
6634 billion for last year compared with a deficit
of331/C252billion for 2003, although with the
decrease in the average contribution ratefrom 14.3% to 14.2%, revenue was down byaround 31 billion. The dramatic improvement
in the results can be attributed to the recenthealth system reform, which primarily led to areduction in expenditure of just over 3%.Revenue grew by just over 1
1/C252% particularly
because of the heavier burden of social secur-ity contributions on company pensions andthe new Federal grant.
The high surplus was probably used largely to
repay part of the debt accumulated up toend-2003. Most health insurance institutionstherefore exceeded the repayment objectiveof at least one-quarter of the previous year’sdebt as prescribed by the Social SecurityCode.
7The health insurance institutions were
also supposed to use part of the savingsachieved by the Act modernising the statu-tory health insurance scheme (GKV-Moderni-
sierungesetz) directly to lower contribution
rates. However, if persistently weak contribu-tion growth and a reduction in the impact ofthe expenditure cuts make a significant finan-cial deterioration appear likely, the health in-surance institutions would be forced to raisethe contribution rates again. The success ofthe reform is largely evident in the fact that asharp increase in the contribution rates wasaverted.
The long-term care insurance scheme record-
ed another record deficit of almost 31 billion
in 2004. Liquid reserves consequently fell to33
1/C252billion at the end of 2004, coming closer
to the statutory minimum level of just over32 billion. Whereas revenue persisted at the
same level as in 2003, expenditure rose byjust under 1%. The shift – which has been ob-served since the long-term care insurancescheme was launched in 1995 – from cashbenefits for carers within the family to bene-fits in kind through professional care servicescontinued. On the whole, the non-automaticadjustment of benefits is having a positive ef-fect on the financial development. Addition-ally, there will be a slight relief this year sinceall childless persons born after 1939 will haveto start paying a 0.25% higher contributionrate once they reach the age of 23. The de-pletion of reserves will therefore be delayedand the pressure for a reform will be tempor-arily reduced.
General government budget trends
The situation of public finances will not relax
noticeably this year either. With the overalldeficit ratio (as defined in the national ac-counts) for 2004 of 3.6% exceeding the 3%ceiling for the third year in succession, a de-cline for 2005 is possible. However, there is ahigh risk that the reference value will be over-shot again.
7Gross borrowing totalled 38.3 billion at the end of
2003. According to section 222 (5) of the Fifth Book of
the Social Security Code ( Sozialgesetzbuch, SGB V) as in-
terpreted by the Federal Social Insurance Authority
(Bundesversicherungsamt) , debt in 2004 had to be re-
duced by at least one-quarter. The debt remaining at the
start of 2005 is to be reduced by at least one-third this
year and so on until it has been completely repaid by the
end of 2007. Starting in 2008, the minimum reserves are
to be replenished up to one-quarter of a month’s expend-
iture.Long-term care
insurance
schemeDeficit ratio
also threatens
to exceed the
3% ceiling in
2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
67Economic activity will continue to have a
negative impact on the deficit development.By contrast, temporary factors may help tolower the deficit. For example, the FederalGovernment is expecting relief from the saleof Post Office pension fund claims and fromLandesbank payments to state government
budgets.
8
Following a significant decline in 2004, therevenue ratio is likely to decrease only moder-ately in 2005. On the one hand, the last stageof the income tax reform will result in rev-enue shortfalls. Furthermore, the measure-ment bases for wage tax, social security con-tributions and excise taxes are likely to growrelatively sluggishly. On the other hand, an in-crease in profit-related taxes is to be expect-ed. Non-tax revenue will grow noticeably,particularly given that the motorway toll sys-tem has now been introduced and takinginto account the grant repayments fromLandesbanks.
The decline in the expenditure ratio is also
likely to continue – at a slower pace. Accord-ing to central government’s plans, the ab-sence of a grant payment to the Post Officepension funds will help curb expendituregrowth. Furthermore, savings on personnelexpenditure and the comparatively slow-growing expenditure of the statutory pensioninsurance scheme will also make themselvesfelt. The favourable refinancing conditionsfor maturing debt securities are likely toresult in a relatively small rise in interest ex-penditure despite the sharp increase in debt.Expenditure on health care may, however, goback up mainly as a result of the expiry ofmeasures for cutting costs on pharmaceut-
icals.
As things stand today, no substantial tax cuts
are expected to come into force next year ifthe planned changes to business taxationhave a largely neutral effect on revenue. Ex-penditure on personnel, in particular, is likelyto provide further relief, and presumably alsolabour market-related expenditure, whichmay benefit not least from the increased im-pact of Hartz IV. On the other hand, the abo-lition of the temporary influences planned forthis year will burden public finances. On thewhole, compliance with the 3% ceiling willthen be endangered if economic growth re-mains weak. In the national accounts, thecontemplated bringing forward of the trans-fer deadline for social security contributions isnot likely to have a deficit-lowering impactand the social security funds will probablyrecord a significant deficit.
The state of public finances therefore remains
critical. The debt ratio is rising continuously.The individual levels of government still faceserious budget problems. Central govern-ment and some state governments will onlybe able to comply with the national deficitceiling, if at all, by resorting to temporarymeasures, and the depletion of assets by gen-eral government is also likely to continue.Extensive consolidation of public financesremains a central task for all levels of govern-ment.
8At least for the sale of Post Office pension fund claims,
the statistical entry in the national accounts is still uncer-
tain.Revenue ratio
nearly stable
Declining ex-
penditure ratioCompliance
with 3% ceiling
not certain in
2006 either

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
68

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Public finances in Germany
1 General government budgetary
position 52*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005

2 Budgetary position of central,
state and local government 52*
3 Government fiscal position as
defined in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of central, state and
local government 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*
6 Specific taxes levied by central,
state and local government 54*
7 General government debt 55*8 Change in general government
debt 57*
9 Loans raised by general govern-
ment against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Central government debt 58*11 Central government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets
of the German pension insurancefund 59*
13 Revenue and expenditure of the
Federal Employment Agency 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 60*
2 Output in the production sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*X External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 67*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 69*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the euro-area memberstates, the Deutsche Mark value ofthe ECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2003          Sep 11.0 8.2 7.6 8.0 5.5 5.4 5.6 2.02 2.15 4.2
         Oct 11.6 8.1 8.0 7.6 5.7 5.4 6.0 2.01 2.14 4.3
         Nov 10.5 7.6 7.4 7.5 6.2 6.0 6.2 1.97 2.16 4.4         Dec 10.7 7.7 7.1 7.0 5.9 5.8 6.1 2.06 2.15 4.4
2004          Jan 11.3 7.5 6.5 6.6 5.7 5.7 6.1 2.02 2.09 4.2
         Feb 10.7 6.8 6.2 6.3 5.7 5.7 6.2 2.03 2.07 4.2         Mar 11.3 6.7 6.2 5.9 5.9 5.7 7.0 2.01 2.03 4.0
         Apr 10.9 6.2 5.4 5.5 5.9 5.9 7.5 2.08 2.05 4.2
         May 9.4 5.5 4.9 5.2 5.9 5.9 7.6 2.02 2.09 4.4         June 9.5 5.6 5.3 5.2 6.4 6.2 7.6 2.03 2.11 4.4
         July 10.0 5.9 5.4 5.4 6.3 6.3 7.5 2.07 2.12 4.3
         Aug 9.2 5.7 5.6 5.7 6.1 6.0 7.5 2.04 2.11 4.1         Sep 9.7 6.2 6.0 5.8 6.0 6.3 7.9 2.05 2.12 4.1
         Oct 8.9 6.3 5.8 5.9 6.1 6.6 7.8 2.11 2.15 4.0
         Nov 9.7 6.6 6.0 6.1 6.0 6.7 7.8 2.09 2.17 3.9         Dec 8.9 6.7 6.6 6.5 6.0 7.0 8.3 2.05 2.17 3.7
2005          Jan 9.6 7.1 6.8 6.7 6.5 7.3 8.0 2.08 2.15 3.6
         Feb 10.2 7.3 6.7 6.7 6.6 7.3 8.7 2.06 2.14 3.6         Mar 9.3 7.1 6.5 ... 6.3 7.5 8.6 2.06 2.14 3.8
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.08 2.14 3.5
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.5, p 44*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2003          Sep + 4,533 + 10,768 − 4,845 − 9,035 + 12,143 − 7,899 − 55 1.1222 99.6 101.6
         Oct + 4,776 + 12,834 + 5,723 − 4,005 + 38,652 − 29,661 + 737 1.1692 101.3 103.3
         Nov + 2,638 + 7,953 + 14,181 + 4,647 + 4,448 − 444 + 5,530 1.1702 101.2 103.3         Dec + 6,622 + 8,021 − 23,844 − 8,625 − 33,757 + 11,165 + 7,373 1.2286 104.2 106.3
2004          Jan + 2,206 + 4,768 − 13,360 − 9,502 − 1,692 + 898 − 3,064 1.2613 105.4 107.4
         Feb + 6,037 + 9,504 + 22,375 + 8,896 + 17,095 − 12,212 + 8,596 1.2646 105.3 107.3         Mar + 7,949 + 13,437 − 3,488 − 22,382 + 1,253 + 13,895 + 3,746 1.2262 103.4 105.4
         Apr − 1,790 + 9,702 − 15,587 − 2,003 − 8,496 − 2,441 − 2,647 1.1985 101.6 103.6
         May + 506 + 10,198 + 15,739 + 41 + 811 + 14,204 + 684 1.2007 102.4 104.4         June + 4,658 + 11,479 + 11,118 − 10,140 + 33,431 − 11,349 − 824 1.2138 102.3 104.2
         July + 8,270 + 13,520 − 17,621 − 7,245 − 40,038 + 29,427 + 236 1.2266 102.8 104.8
         Aug + 3,284 + 5,162 + 6,300 + 5,067 − 1,612 − 909 + 3,754 1.2176 102.7 104.8         Sep − 143 + 4,867 + 14,436 + 3,318 + 47,797 − 36,168 − 512 1.2218 103.0 105.1
         Oct + 3,526 + 8,932 − 30,066 − 12,647 − 6,225 − 12,122 + 928 1.2490 104.2 106.3
         Nov + 5,286 + 4,604 + 25,212 − 6,404 − 11,557 + 43,228 − 54 1.2991 105.6 107.7         Dec + 5,457 + 7,275 + 9,420 + 5,096 + 35,821 − 33,076 + 1,579 1.3408 107.1 109.4
2005          Jan − 7,246 + 234 + 25,852 − 11,384 − 20,878 + 59,670 − 1,556 1.3119 105.8 107.9
         Feb + 8,013 + 6,149 + 21,557 − 4,622 + 22,218 − 1,026 + 4,987 1.3014 105.1 107.2         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3201 106.0 108.2
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2938 105.1 107.4
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables X.12 and 13, pp 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-23 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area
Real gross domestic product 1 
2002 0.9 0.2 2.2 1.2 3.8 6.1 0.4 2.5 0.6 1.2 0.4 2.2 0.9
2003 1.3 0.0 2.4 0.5 4.7 3.7 0.3 2.9 − 0.9 0.8 − 1.1 2.5 0.52004 ... 1.6 3.7 ... 4.2 4.9 1.2 4.5 1.3 2.0 1.0 2.6 2.1
2004          Q1 3.2 1.8 3.3 2.8 4.3 6.4 0.8 1.2 0.8 0.7 2.7 2.0
         Q2 2.8 1.9 3.6 4.0 4.1 5.2 2.0 1.4 1.9 1.8 2.6 2.6         Q3 2.7 1.2 3.9 1.9 4.0 5.2 1.3 1.6 ... 0.9 2.7 1.8         Q4 ... 1.3 4.0 1.9 4.2 2.8 0.8 1.6 ... 0.6 2.8 1.8
2005          Q1 ... 0.0 ... ... ... ... ... − 0.3 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 1,2 
2002 1.3 − 1.0 2.2 − 1.4 0.8 7.5 − 1.6 2.1 − 0.3 0.8 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.5
2003 0.8 0.4 1.2 − 0.3 0.3 5.0 − 0.6 4.8 − 2.4 2.0 0.1 1.4 0.32004 3.2 3.0 4.2 1.7 1.2 0.5 − 0.7 6.9 2.6 6.0 − 2.6 1.6 2.0
2003          Q4 1.5 1.6 0.1 1.2 0.1 14.7 0.0 2.9 − 1.2 2.3 1.5 1.3 1.4
2004          Q1 1.8 1.6 0.7 0.4 2.1 4.5 − 0.4 6.6 1.5 2.3 − 1.3 1.4 1.0
         Q2 2.0 4.0 3.7 3.2 2.3 3.7 1.0 9.0 3.4 5.8 − 1.0 2.4 3.0         Q3 5.5 4.7 6.2 1.7 0.9 0.1 − 1.0 7.0 3.2 7.6 − 3.2 2.2 2.8         Q4 3.5 2.0 6.1 1.7 − 0.8 − 5.8 − 2.1 5.0 2.6 8.1 − 4.9 0.4 1.1
2005          Q1 ...
6p 3.3 − 0.7 0.7 ... ... ... 5.1 − 1.2 ... − 1.1 0.4 ...
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 76.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.2
2003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.8 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 79.0 78.9 81.12004 80.4 83.2 84.5 84.1 75.6 75.6 76.4 85.6 82.7 81.3 80.4 79.0 81.6
2004          Q1 79.4 82.8 82.8 84.2 77.5 74.4 76.3 83.5 82.1 80.0 80.6 77.0 81.1
         Q2 79.6 82.6 83.4 83.2 74.6 77.7 75.8 85.6 82.8 80.4 79.3 79.7 81.1         Q3 81.5 83.4 84.7 84.3 76.3 75.3 76.9 87.4 83.1 82.3 81.4 79.8 82.0         Q4 80.9 83.9 86.9 84.6 74.1 75.0 76.7 86.0 82.7 82.4 80.2 79.3 82.1
2005          Q1 80.9 83.9 85.5 84.0 71.9 72.2 76.4 84.9 82.3 82.2 81.6 80.1 81.9
         Q2 79.4 81.9 87.5 83.3 72.4 69.7 76.4 83.0 82.0 81.8 79.2 80.1 80.9
Unemployment rate 4 
2002 7.3 8.7 9.1 8.9 10.3 4.3 8.6 2.8 2.8 4.2 5.0 11.3 8.22003 8.0 9.6 9.0 9.5 9.7 4.6 8.4 3.7 3.7 4.3 6.3 11.3 8.72004 7.8
7 9.2 8.8 9.7 10.5 4.5 8.0 4.2 4.6 4.5 6.7 10.8 8.8
2004          Oct 7.9 9.4 8.8 9.6 4.4 8.0 4.3 4.7 4.5 6.9 10.5 8.8         Nov 8.0 9.1 8.8 9.7 4.4 8.0 4.4 4.8 4.5 6.9 10.5 8.8         Dec 8.0 9.2 8.8 9.7 4.3 8.0 4.4 4.8 4.5 6.9 10.5 8.8
2005          Jan 8.0 9.3 8.9 9.7 4.3 ... 4.4 5.0 4.5 6.9 9.9 8.8
         Feb 8.0 9.4 9.0 9.8 4.3 ... 4.4 5.0 4.6 6.9 9.9 8.8         Mar 8.0 9.5 8.3 9.8 4.3 ... 4.5 ... 4.6 6.9 9.9 8.9
         Apr ... ... ... ... 4.2 ... ... ... 4.6 ... 9.8 ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.3
2003 1.5 1.0 1.3 2.2 3.4 4.0 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.1 2.12004 1.9 1.8 0.1 2.3 3.0 2.3 2.3 3.2 1.4 2.0 2.5 3.1 2.1
2004          Oct 2.7 2.2 0.6 2.3 3.3 2.5 2.1 4.1 1.5 2.4 2.4 3.6 2.4
         Nov 2.3 2.0 0.2 2.2 3.2 2.8 2.0 4.0 1.5 2.4 2.6 3.5 2.2         Dec 1.9 2.2 0.1 2.3 3.1 2.4 2.4 3.5 1.2 2.5 2.6 3.3 2.4
2005          Jan 2.0 1.6 − 0.2 1.6 4.2 2.1 2.0 2.8 1.2 2.4 2.0 3.1 1.9
         Feb 2.3 1.8 0.0 1.9 3.2 2.0 2.0 3.2 1.5 2.3 2.1 3.3 2.1         Mar 2.8 1.7 0.9 2.1 2.9 1.9 2.1 3.5 1.5
p 2.5 2.3 3.4 p 2.1
         Apr 2.4 1.4 ... ... 3.3 ... 1.9 3.7 p 1.3 ... ... 3.5 e 2.1
General government financial balance 5 
2002 0.1 − 3.6 4.3 − 3.2 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 2.6 2.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 2.52003 0.4 − 3.8 2.5 − 4.2 − 5.2 0.2 − 2.9 0.5 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 2.9 0.3 − 2.92004 0.1 − 3.6 2.1 − 3.7 − 6.1 1.3 − 3.0 − 1.1 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 2.9 − 0.3 − 2.7
General government debt 5 
2002 105.4 59.7 42.5 59.0 112.2 32.6 108.0 7.5 52.6 66.7 58.5 55.0 69.12003 100.0 63.1 45.3 63.9 109.3 32.0 106.3 7.1 54.3 65.4 60.1 51.4 70.52004 95.6 65.1 45.1 65.6 110.5 29.9 105.8 7.5 55.7 65.2 61.9 48.9 70.9
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central including proceeds from sales of UMTS licences; Euro-area aggregate:
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — European Central Bank, member states: European Commission, Germany1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece and Portugal is calculated according to the revised national accounts of April 2005. — 6  Adjusted in ad-
from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; ad- vance by the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of
justed for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally the Quarterly Production Survey for the fourth quarter (industry in
adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and October. — Germany: on average − 2.6%). — 7  Comparability impaired owing to
4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally changeover to new method of collection and calculation. 
adjusted. — 5  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition;
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2003          Aug 0.3 10.3 4.0 − 10.0 − 3.7 − 31.8 − 70.6 − 38.8 16.9 7.6 − 1.6 3.4 7.5
         Sep 57.0 31.9 1.0 25.1 23.3 11.9 29.5 17.6 26.4 0.6 − 0.6 19.5 6.8
         Oct 51.2 32.8 3.6 18.4 18.6 11.9 50.2 38.3 27.5 4.9 0.1 20.6 2.0
         Nov 90.8 67.4 14.3 23.4 13.8 17.2 43.2 26.0 28.9 7.9 0.2 16.6 4.2         Dec 21.7 44.0 4.0 − 22.3 − 32.3 − 8.6 − 11.4 − 2.8 20.3 16.8 1.1 0.7 1.8
2004          Jan 43.5 29.1 5.5 14.5 17.2 20.7 109.6 88.9 18.1 1.6 − 1.1 16.5 1.0
         Feb 45.2 32.2 7.0 12.9 21.2 9.0 24.7 15.7 16.0 7.6 − 0.3 9.3 − 0.7         Mar 77.3 46.5 16.4 30.9 14.2 6.7 76.8 70.1 45.9 7.1 − 0.2 31.0 8.0
         Apr 89.9 85.8 26.8 4.1 11.0 7.1 70.0 62.9 28.3 10.3 − 1.1 16.4 2.7
         May 72.3 47.7 3.9 24.6 30.5 − 21.2 − 11.3 10.0 23.8 5.6 − 0.9 16.3 2.8         June 60.5 46.6 − 8.1 13.9 8.5 14.2 − 26.5 − 40.6 22.4 9.9 − 0.4 8.5 4.4
         July 29.7 27.9 − 9.0 1.8 − 4.6 − 0.5 − 7.3 − 6.8 28.2 6.8 0.1 14.9 6.4
         Aug − 19.1 − 14.0 − 10.2 − 5.0 − 0.1 30.3 45.7 15.4 18.7 6.7 − 0.0 9.2 2.8         Sep 53.3 57.2 − 2.8 − 3.9 2.9 34.9 22.7 − 12.3 45.2 3.5 − 0.3 31.8 10.2
         Oct 55.3 56.2 5.8 − 0.9 − 1.1 20.4 30.7 10.4 25.2 7.3 0.9 15.3 1.8
         Nov 89.6 86.7 17.6 3.0 6.9 10.1 106.2 96.0 29.3 15.4 0.8 7.2 5.9         Dec 28.3 71.3 16.7 − 43.0 − 48.4 26.9 − 7.2 − 34.1 43.3 26.0 1.2 10.2 5.8
2005          Jan 93.7 51.6 13.3 42.1 37.3 − 22.3 82.1 104.4 8.0 2.0 − 0.3 8.7 − 2.4
         Feb 61.8 38.4 11.9 23.4 32.4 14.0 66.0 52.0 46.8 7.5 0.5 32.9 5.9         Mar 50.3 58.5 8.3 − 8.2 − 5.7 − 12.1 42.6 54.7 43.8 16.8 − 0.1 22.8 4.3
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2003          Aug − 13.6 2.7 0.9 − 16.3 − 11.0 16.7 − 20.6 − 37.3 5.7 3.2 − 1.5 2.2 1.8
         Sep 17.7 12.8 − 3.6 4.9 10.8 − 1.8 10.5 12.3 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 9.1 − 4.8
         Oct − 1.8 − 9.3 − 3.4 7.5 4.5 6.4 − 0.2 − 6.6 3.1 0.3 0.1 2.6 0.2
         Nov 24.5 15.5 5.5 8.9 2.4 7.9 12.4 4.6 3.3 0.2 0.2 3.0 − 0.1         Dec − 10.1 0.0 1.1 − 10.2 − 7.8 14.2 15.2 1.0 − 0.2 1.5 1.0 − 2.9 0.2
2004          Jan − 0.6 − 6.8 1.4 6.2 6.1 20.2 32.1 11.9 2.6 − 0.2 − 1.1 6.5 − 2.7
         Feb 16.6 2.9 − 3.6 13.7 22.4 − 23.5 − 2.7 20.8 − 5.8 0.6 − 0.4 0.5 − 6.5         Mar 28.7 10.4 9.6 18.3 5.8 − 2.0 10.3 12.3 9.4 0.0 − 0.2 9.4 0.2
         Apr 10.8 16.4 13.3 − 5.6 1.1 15.0 22.0 7.0 13.0 4.5 − 1.2 6.2 3.4
         May − 10.4 − 10.6 − 8.3 0.1 6.0 11.1 − 4.9 − 16.0 5.0 4.3 − 0.9 4.9 − 3.3         June − 9.2 − 12.4 − 12.7 3.2 8.5 21.2 − 8.5 − 29.7 7.9 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 6.0
         July 6.4 − 4.1 − 1.5 10.5 1.5 − 3.3 − 9.4 − 6.1 8.0 1.7 0.1 2.3 3.9
         Aug − 7.4 − 8.1 − 5.4 0.8 5.4 12.1 12.3 0.2 2.8 1.9 − 0.0 5.2 − 4.3         Sep 5.3 10.7 0.6 − 5.3 − 0.8 11.1 35.0 23.9 9.9 1.1 − 0.3 9.9 − 0.7
         Oct 11.7 − 0.6 1.5 12.3 7.3 18.7 8.1 − 10.6 3.9 2.7 0.6 − 0.5 1.1
         Nov 6.1 11.8 1.1 − 5.7 − 1.8 3.3 41.4 38.1 0.5 2.6 0.8 − 0.9 − 2.0         Dec − 14.0 − 1.8 9.9 − 12.2 − 8.2 10.3 − 25.6 − 36.0 2.1 3.7 1.1 − 5.2 2.5
2005          Jan 20.9 6.3 6.3 14.6 10.2 − 4.8 26.3 31.1 2.3 0.6 − 0.3 0.7 1.3
         Feb − 2.2 0.6 − 5.1 − 2.8 1.6 1.7 14.0 12.3 4.9 4.1 0.5 4.8 − 4.5         Mar 8.5 − 1.1 6.2 9.6 9.8 − 10.4 4.0 14.4 10.7 2.7 − 0.0 7.8 0.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 10.0 − 33.0 − − 5.4 − 2.7 − 13.8 1.2 − 15.0 3.9 7.2 − 2.9 2.2 − 2.1 2003          Aug 
20.9 23.1 − − 1.5 16.6 45.8 2.2 43.7 − 29.6 0.3 − 4.5 − 8.2 − 5.3          Sep 
− 18.0 3.0 − 50.7 19.9 4.3 6.4 − 2.1 10.5 5.1 13.2 5.7 11.8          Oct 
14.6 17.1 − 47.5 52.1 49.2 7.9 41.3 − 4.1 7.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 0.2          Nov 
− 26.8 − 45.4 − 65.1 96.0 66.9 18.8 48.2 0.4 28.7 − 16.0 − 3.4 − 11.6          Dec 
20.5 34.9 − − 9.3 − 30.4 − 26.8 − 8.8 − 18.0 − 21.2 17.5 6.9 9.6 4.7 2004          Jan 
18.9 − 7.1 − 26.3 2.5 1.7 4.4 − 2.7 − 5.9 6.7 14.0 7.5 2.3          Feb 
− 9.2 20.2 − 27.1 33.7 40.7 6.1 34.6 − 12.2 5.2 − 9.3 5.3 − 2.6          Mar 
− 4.7 20.9 − 52.5 33.3 24.4 9.8 14.6 0.6 8.3 5.8 8.0 5.4          Apr 
15.5 − 15.9 − 27.7 35.8 18.8 7.3 11.5 11.0 6.0 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 2.4          May
28.7 − 2.9 − 26.6 30.3 44.1 6.4 37.8 − 26.1 12.2 − 4.2 − 3.7 4.2          June
− 22.2 − 3.5 − 26.6 19.7 1.4 13.3 − 11.9 10.6 7.6 5.2 3.9 − 2.2          July− 8.5 15.5 − − 14.4 − 29.7 − 38.7 − 2.8 − 35.9 3.4 5.6 3.0 11.0 1.3          Aug 
11.1 − 2.3 − 34.1 56.6 63.1 4.6 58.5 − 8.6 2.2 − 8.3 − 13.3 − 0.9          Sep 
− 6.7 − 3.6 − 60.8 42.0 10.1 6.4 3.8 27.7 4.1 13.1 7.4 − 1.7          Oct − 14.6 46.2 − 38.9 43.8 50.5 4.3 46.2 − 13.5 6.7 − 5.5 − 3.1 3.7          Nov − 19.1 − 72.3 − 103.4 109.4 38.7 19.7 19.0 39.2 31.6 3.2 − 8.1 − 1.1          Dec 
16.9 35.5 − 10.9 1.4 16.0 − 8.5 24.5 − 27.5 12.8 0.4 12.8 − 3.6 2005          Jan 
29.5 − 12.4 − 11.9 4.5 4.4 3.7 0.7 − 5.1 5.2 − 1.7 − 2.2 11.2          Feb 
− 23.9 − 10.3 − 28.7 32.9 25.7 8.2 17.5 2.9 4.2 0.6 − 0.5 − 4.3          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
0.6 − 4.5 2.5 − 0.1 1.2 1.7 2.9 2.7 1.5 − 0.4 − 7.2 2003          Aug 
0.3 11.8 1.3 0.9 1.5 10.8 − 13.8 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 0.5          Sep 
− 0.7 − 3.6 1.2 1.3 5.9 3.3 − 3.5 0.9 5.6 − 0.7 0.2          Oct 
0.1 3.3 1.0 2.4 25.5 22.8 − 0.3 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 4.1          Nov 
0.2 7.0 0.2 4.5 − 3.0 − 10.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.9 0.2 1.2          Dec 
0.0 19.7 3.5 − 5.0 − 2.7 8.3 − 14.1 1.3 2.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 2004          Jan 
1.3 − 1.8 1.1 0.9 − 0.6 5.7 − 5.2 1.2 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0          Feb 
0.6 12.2 1.2 2.3 4.4 1.2 − 0.1 0.1 0.8 − 0.5 3.0          Mar 
− 0.6 13.0 1.9 2.7 0.4 5.8 − 5.0 0.9 − 1.0 0.1 − 0.3          Apr 
1.0 − 10.7 1.0 2.3 5.3 − 2.7 8.7 0.2 − 0.3 0.3 − 1.0          May2.4 10.3 0.6 2.3 − 8.6 3.3 − 9.8 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.8          June
− 1.0 − 0.1 1.7 3.6 − 3.8 − 8.5 3.9 0.5 0.6 3.9 − 4.2          July
2.4 − 2.9 3.0 − 0.8 2.5 1.7 0.7 0.7 − 2.5 1.3 0.7          Aug 
− 3.9 1.5 2.3 1.3 9.0 14.6 − 5.1 0.1 3.9 − 2.3 − 2.1          Sep 
− 2.6 29.4 1.4 1.0 − 0.3 − 3.5 2.3 0.5 3.1 − 1.3 − 1.4          Oct 
− 1.9 − 7.6 0.8 2.1 18.4 29.2 − 9.5 − 0.1 0.8 − 1.9 − 0.2          Nov 
0.1 4.0 0.3 4.8 − 10.0 − 29.5 23.5 9.2 − 7.2 − 3.9 − 2.2          Dec 
1.4 − 4.7 1.1 − 2.0 17.1 23.2 − 15.8 0.9 10.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 2005          Jan 
− 0.8 − 5.6 1.3 1.0 1.0 5.2 − 5.6 0.3 2.2 0.3 − 1.4          Feb 
− 3.3 − 1.7 2.1 2.5 − 7.6 − 0.1 − 5.5 − 0.5 1.0 1.6 − 4.1          Mar 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Up to end-2002, including national banknotes and German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the
coins still in circulation. — 10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2003          Feb 14,113.9 9,904.5 7,780.0 6,831.3 383.4 565.3 2,124.5 828.6 1,295.9 2,911.4 1,298.0
         Mar 14,126.4 9,944.9 7,809.8 6,854.7 388.5 566.5 2,135.1 829.1 1,306.0 2,894.8 1,286.7
         Apr 14,231.8 10,030.0 7,882.5 6,891.0 406.1 585.5 2,147.5 823.3 1,324.2 2,907.3 1,294.6
         May 14,302.7 10,088.4 7,914.2 6,907.1 409.7 597.5 2,174.1 818.9 1,355.2 2,881.2 1,333.2         June 14,382.4 10,102.3 7,945.2 6,942.3 409.2 593.7 2,157.1 817.8 1,339.2 2,961.9 1,318.2
         July 14,374.7 10,159.9 7,986.4 6,963.0 406.9 616.4 2,173.5 825.9 1,347.6 2,947.9 1,267.0
         Aug 14,364.0 10,167.7 8,004.9 6,975.7 410.0 619.3 2,162.8 819.8 1,342.9 2,933.8 1,262.5         Sep 14,410.1 10,213.3 8,026.2 6,996.3 415.2 614.8 2,187.0 821.3 1,365.8 2,892.2 1,304.6
         Oct 14,495.7 10,260.2 8,060.6 7,025.0 422.8 612.7 2,199.6 821.1 1,378.5 2,955.3 1,280.2
         Nov 14,609.7 10,348.3 8,121.2 7,071.6 427.1 622.5 2,227.1 830.5 1,396.6 2,958.2 1,303.2         Dec 14,557.3 10,360.9 8,155.1 7,102.4 429.0 623.6 2,205.8 841.7 1,364.1 2,890.6 1,305.8
2004          Jan 14,768.8 10,409.9 8,179.5 7,117.9 429.0 632.7 2,230.4 838.7 1,391.7 3,019.1 1,339.8
         Feb 14,864.4 10,453.5 8,207.3 7,138.8 434.7 633.9 2,246.2 830.4 1,415.8 3,038.4 1,372.5         Mar 15,066.1 10,532.4 8,256.0 7,170.9 435.7 649.4 2,276.4 845.9 1,430.5 3,156.8 1,376.8
         Apr 15,228.9 10,622.5 8,341.5 7,229.0 440.4 672.1 2,281.0 840.2 1,440.8 3,233.5 1,372.9
         May 15,257.6 10,685.9 8,382.7 7,268.9 444.5 669.3 2,303.2 834.3 1,468.9 3,201.3 1,370.3         June 15,331.0 10,753.3 8,432.6 7,320.7 449.0 662.9 2,320.7 840.2 1,480.6 3,185.2 1,392.4
         July 15,354.6 10,784.7 8,461.3 7,356.9 451.2 653.3 2,323.4 846.4 1,477.0 3,187.6 1,382.3
         Aug 15,387.4 10,763.3 8,442.1 7,348.1 450.7 643.3 2,321.1 841.5 1,479.7 3,227.8 1,396.4         Sep 15,489.3 10,809.8 8,494.3 7,401.9 449.3 643.1 2,315.5 834.4 1,481.1 3,216.5 1,463.1
         Oct 15,586.4 10,863.2 8,548.1 7,449.1 452.1 647.0 2,315.1 834.5 1,480.6 3,221.2 1,502.0
         Nov 15,778.9 10,948.1 8,630.0 7,512.5 457.4 660.1 2,318.1 830.4 1,487.8 3,284.2 1,546.7         Dec 15,725.7 10,965.1 8,689.2 7,555.7 467.0 666.4 2,275.9 836.0 1,439.9 3,239.2 1,521.4
2005          Jan 15,991.5 11,067.5 8,743.0 7,595.1 469.9 678.0 2,324.5 841.0 1,483.5 3,373.2 1,550.8
         Feb 16,105.3 11,128.6 8,782.9 7,621.5 479.9 681.5 2,345.7 831.3 1,514.4 3,421.3 1,555.5         Mar 16,287.0 11,179.7 8,841.2 7,671.6 482.4 687.2 2,338.6 828.7 1,509.9 3,488.3 1,619.0
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2003          Feb 4,383.3 3,351.8 2,627.3 2,303.8 66.5 257.0 724.6 477.9 246.6 841.2 190.2         Mar 4,395.2 3,351.2 2,624.8 2,302.6 67.2 255.0 726.4 474.6 251.7 861.1 182.9
         Apr 4,400.8 3,353.3 2,629.0 2,300.8 67.3 260.9 724.3 475.4 248.9 867.3 180.3
         May 4,401.1 3,351.6 2,629.9 2,298.8 67.9 263.2 721.7 470.7 251.1 871.8 177.7         June 4,411.5 3,334.6 2,629.8 2,301.7 67.0 261.1 704.8 463.7 241.2 906.3 170.6
         July 4,391.1 3,334.6 2,620.8 2,293.4 64.4 263.0 713.9 474.3 239.6 891.4 165.1
         Aug 4,373.2 3,322.7 2,624.8 2,296.4 64.5 263.9 697.9 469.1 228.8 886.0 164.4         Sep 4,384.6 3,337.1 2,634.6 2,309.9 64.2 260.5 702.5 463.0 239.4 877.7 169.8
         Oct 4,387.2 3,333.3 2,624.5 2,303.4 66.5 254.6 708.8 466.1 242.7 882.7 171.3
         Nov 4,409.5 3,355.4 2,637.9 2,311.5 66.9 259.5 717.5 472.5 245.0 884.0 170.2         Dec 4,392.5 3,337.7 2,630.9 2,303.9 69.0 258.0 706.7 469.9 236.8 883.7 171.1
2004          Jan 4,416.6 3,334.2 2,621.1 2,291.7 68.4 260.9 713.2 470.2 242.9 921.4 161.0
         Feb 4,424.0 3,346.3 2,619.5 2,295.4 67.9 256.2 726.7 461.6 265.2 916.1 161.5         Mar 4,479.7 3,374.8 2,629.5 2,295.8 66.6 267.0 745.3 474.2 271.1 939.4 165.5
         Apr 4,514.1 3,385.7 2,646.0 2,299.2 65.4 281.5 739.6 467.5 272.2 962.8 165.7
         May 4,495.6 3,374.2 2,634.5 2,296.1 66.2 272.3 739.7 461.6 278.0 952.1 169.3         June 4,477.8 3,364.6 2,621.6 2,295.8 66.5 259.2 742.9 456.3 286.6 944.6 168.6
         July 4,479.3 3,372.7 2,619.4 2,292.9 70.7 255.8 753.4 465.2 288.2 937.4 169.1
         Aug 4,477.2 3,362.1 2,608.0 2,286.8 69.1 252.1 754.2 460.6 293.6 949.3 165.8         Sep 4,507.8 3,365.6 2,616.9 2,294.9 69.5 252.6 748.6 455.9 292.7 974.8 167.4
         Oct 4,522.7 3,376.3 2,615.4 2,291.9 69.3 254.3 760.9 460.8 300.0 976.6 169.8
         Nov 4,559.3 3,380.9 2,626.0 2,301.2 68.5 256.2 754.9 456.8 298.2 1,005.9 172.4         Dec 4,511.9 3,363.1 2,620.3 2,285.7 68.7 265.9 742.9 453.1 289.7 969.6 179.2
2005          Jan 4,562.3 3,381.7 2,623.9 2,283.1 68.7 272.0 757.7 457.7 300.1 1,009.8 170.8
         Feb 4,569.3 3,376.7 2,622.0 2,286.5 69.6 266.0 754.7 453.2 301.5 1,018.7 173.9         Mar 4,580.5 3,384.2 2,619.7 2,278.0 71.6 270.1 764.4 453.1 311.4 1,029.4 166.9
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4From
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to end-2002, also including national
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — banknotes and coins still in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*).
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). From 2002, the German contribution
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
319.3 5,913.0 5,560.3 5,586.5 1,956.1 952.7 75.4 1,175.6 1,324.8 101.9 2003          Feb 
327.2 5,963.8 5,610.4 5,640.1 1,995.3 948.3 75.9 1,182.7 1,337.5 100.4          Mar 
336.3 5,979.6 5,640.1 5,671.4 2,012.8 961.3 74.1 1,179.6 1,345.8 97.7          Apr 
343.8 6,041.4 5,695.7 5,715.4 2,035.9 972.4 73.0 1,185.2 1,352.6 96.4          May351.0 6,100.7 5,715.9 5,744.9 2,083.6 940.3 72.4 1,188.1 1,365.6 94.8          June
361.5 6,093.3 5,739.0 5,770.2 2,090.1 944.5 72.1 1,194.4 1,376.3 92.8          July
362.7 6,089.2 5,741.0 5,779.2 2,078.5 951.1 72.2 1,203.8 1,382.4 91.2          Aug 364.8 6,118.0 5,754.9 5,789.2 2,117.6 922.4 73.0 1,203.3 1,382.3 90.6          Sep 
371.2 6,118.4 5,769.3 5,806.7 2,112.8 934.7 73.9 1,208.4 1,386.3 90.6          Oct 
379.1 6,179.9 5,818.3 5,851.8 2,151.0 927.4 75.5 1,215.5 1,391.5 90.8          Nov 397.9 6,239.3 5,914.7 5,936.2 2,190.9 921.8 74.9 1,232.2 1,424.6 91.8          Dec 
389.1 6,244.5 5,889.6 5,923.5 2,177.7 904.4 75.1 1,235.3 1,440.2 90.8 2004          Jan 
393.5 6,263.6 5,891.4 5,924.9 2,171.7 899.4 74.6 1,242.6 1,446.1 90.5          Feb 
399.6 6,290.5 5,920.7 5,966.5 2,210.4 892.2 73.1 1,250.4 1,450.2 90.3          Mar 
409.4 6,322.1 5,947.9 5,997.9 2,225.0 894.2 71.7 1,261.1 1,456.8 89.2          Apr 
416.6 6,366.8 5,980.0 6,023.2 2,235.4 900.5 71.2 1,266.1 1,461.7 88.3          May423.0 6,433.1 6,021.8 6,060.1 2,275.7 875.9 71.3 1,276.3 1,472.9 88.0          June
436.2 6,417.4 6,028.2 6,069.0 2,260.8 886.9 70.7 1,283.1 1,479.4 88.0          July
433.4 6,384.5 6,000.9 6,045.7 2,223.8 892.1 69.3 1,289.6 1,482.9 88.0          Aug 438.0 6,444.1 6,051.3 6,088.8 2,275.5 881.1 67.8 1,293.0 1,483.7 87.7          Sep 
444.4 6,476.5 6,087.4 6,126.4 2,275.2 906.2 69.7 1,300.1 1,486.6 88.6          Oct 
448.7 6,504.0 6,128.7 6,165.7 2,305.9 893.7 69.4 1,315.4 1,492.0 89.4          Nov 468.4 6,590.8 6,245.0 6,274.2 2,320.9 926.6 71.6 1,343.0 1,521.6 90.5          Dec 
459.9 6,623.8 6,248.5 6,283.9 2,340.2 903.1 71.7 1,345.9 1,532.7 90.2 2005          Jan 
463.6 6,661.7 6,255.3 6,292.7 2,340.7 901.7 71.2 1,353.2 1,535.1 90.8          Feb 
471.7 6,683.7 6,295.6 6,344.4 2,367.5 905.5 71.4 1,370.2 1,538.6 91.2          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
86.6 2,173.9 2,094.9 2,058.5 564.8 237.3 18.5 656.1 481.8 100.0 2003          Feb 
89.0 2,175.8 2,098.2 2,063.3 572.0 232.8 18.6 657.9 483.5 98.4          Mar 
91.9 2,176.7 2,100.4 2,068.2 580.4 233.5 18.1 655.8 484.6 95.8          Apr 
93.2 2,189.4 2,112.0 2,073.9 585.9 236.9 17.8 653.8 485.3 94.3          May96.0 2,194.7 2,115.7 2,076.1 600.0 225.8 17.6 653.4 486.3 92.9          June
99.4 2,183.0 2,107.8 2,071.3 591.1 225.3 17.3 658.5 488.3 90.8          July
99.3 2,193.4 2,117.6 2,082.5 593.2 228.9 17.5 662.7 491.0 89.3          Aug 
100.2 2,188.3 2,112.7 2,079.6 603.5 217.2 17.5 661.0 491.8 88.5          Sep 
101.5 2,188.7 2,113.6 2,083.5 606.9 216.1 17.8 661.3 492.8 88.6          Oct 
103.9 2,211.8 2,137.8 2,105.1 628.8 214.6 18.3 661.2 493.4 88.9          Nov 108.5 2,215.1 2,143.0 2,105.2 616.1 216.3 18.5 662.1 502.3 89.9          Dec 
103.5 2,209.9 2,137.7 2,102.7 626.1 202.7 18.5 662.9 503.6 88.8 2004          Jan 
104.4 2,213.0 2,140.9 2,103.8 630.1 198.8 18.3 663.3 504.7 88.5          Feb 
106.7 2,215.1 2,142.0 2,106.6 631.3 200.7 18.0 663.6 504.8 88.2          Mar 
109.3 2,219.4 2,145.3 2,112.5 637.8 196.2 17.5 668.3 505.6 87.1          Apr 
111.6 2,229.8 2,154.8 2,118.4 634.1 202.7 16.9 672.6 505.8 86.2          May113.8 2,229.2 2,151.6 2,114.1 636.3 193.0 16.6 676.9 505.5 85.8          June
117.4 2,226.0 2,149.7 2,113.7 629.2 197.9 16.2 678.5 506.0 85.9          July
116.7 2,232.2 2,153.1 2,119.1 630.6 199.7 16.0 680.3 506.6 85.8          Aug 118.0 2,238.1 2,162.0 2,126.3 644.8 191.9 15.9 681.5 506.7 85.5          Sep 
119.0 2,237.6 2,164.0 2,132.6 642.0 197.5 16.0 684.1 507.0 86.1          Oct 
121.1 2,258.0 2,187.6 2,153.3 668.5 188.1 15.7 687.1 507.0 86.9          Nov 125.9 2,264.6 2,193.8 2,158.6 639.4 208.7 15.7 690.9 516.0 88.0          Dec 
123.9 2,275.5 2,203.9 2,167.3 661.1 193.9 15.7 691.8 517.0 87.8 2005          Jan 
124.9 2,278.8 2,208.6 2,170.9 664.8 189.0 15.7 695.8 517.3 88.3          Feb 
127.4 2,272.0 2,204.8 2,169.7 666.7 183.6 15.5 698.0 517.2 88.7          Mar 
includes the volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim
Bundesbank in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). — 5Excluding
Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The central governments’ deposits. — 6 In Germany, only saving deposits. 
volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can be
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2003          Feb 175.8 150.6 72.2 49.9 1.0 24.4 2.7 0.4 233.3 229.7 547.8 1,804.6 1,487.5
         Mar 176.2 147.5 71.8 47.1 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 224.0 220.8 556.2 1,804.8 1,486.5
         Apr 159.7 148.4 75.0 45.2 1.0 24.2 2.8 0.3 230.5 227.0 565.2 1,837.3 1,518.8
         May 170.1 155.9 76.9 50.8 0.9 24.1 2.8 0.3 231.7 228.2 571.7 1,821.2 1,516.4         June 200.3 155.5 80.1 46.8 0.9 24.6 2.8 0.3 215.0 212.1 570.9 1,835.4 1,517.4
         July 173.0 150.1 75.2 46.4 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 219.9 216.4 584.9 1,852.3 1,519.4
         Aug 163.0 147.0 73.4 45.7 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.3 217.1 214.2 587.1 1,864.5 1,516.1         Sep 183.9 144.9 74.8 42.0 1.0 23.9 2.8 0.3 211.5 207.9 576.9 1,860.0 1,519.5
         Oct 165.8 145.9 78.1 39.9 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.4 224.7 221.1 582.3 1,896.0 1,541.0
         Nov 180.4 147.7 80.0 39.6 0.9 24.0 2.9 0.3 224.7 220.9 585.2 1,904.3 1,554.1         Dec 153.6 149.6 79.7 41.5 0.9 24.3 2.9 0.4 208.7 206.4 581.5 1,878.0 1,537.6
2004          Jan 174.1 146.9 78.4 41.2 0.9 23.2 2.9 0.3 214.6 211.9 591.7 1,903.5 1,551.5
         Feb 193.0 145.7 76.7 41.3 0.9 23.5 3.0 0.4 228.6 225.3 599.2 1,913.6 1,561.0         Mar 183.8 140.3 73.5 39.1 0.9 23.3 3.1 0.4 219.4 215.8 602.6 1,951.3 1,578.4
         Apr 179.6 144.7 77.7 39.2 1.0 23.1 3.2 0.4 225.5 222.5 611.0 1,975.9 1,588.7
         May 195.1 148.5 78.3 42.5 1.0 23.1 3.3 0.4 221.9 218.5 609.0 1,986.4 1,591.8         June 223.7 149.2 81.1 40.6 1.0 22.8 3.3 0.4 217.7 214.3 609.2 1,999.9 1,601.1
         July 201.5 146.9 77.6 41.5 1.0 22.9 3.4 0.4 223.0 219.5 613.0 2,017.2 1,610.1
         Aug 193.0 145.8 78.0 40.8 1.0 22.1 3.5 0.5 226.0 221.9 624.1 2,026.0 1,618.9         Sep 204.1 151.1 81.5 42.9 1.0 21.8 3.5 0.5 217.6 214.2 609.5 2,048.9 1,637.5
         Oct 197.4 152.7 83.7 42.0 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 230.7 227.6 617.1 2,057.5 1,643.1
         Nov 182.8 155.4 89.2 39.2 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 225.1 222.0 613.5 2,059.3 1,646.8         Dec 163.7 152.9 84.8 42.1 1.3 20.3 3.8 0.5 228.2 225.4 604.9 2,060.4 1,654.9
2005          Jan 180.6 159.3 92.4 41.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 228.7 225.5 616.8 2,083.8 1,661.7
         Feb 210.1 159.0 92.4 40.6 1.4 20.2 3.9 0.4 227.0 224.2 615.5 2,123.4 1,693.7         Mar 186.1 153.1 87.3 40.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 227.7 223.9 615.2 2,146.7 1,702.5
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2003          Feb 48.3 67.2 14.8 28.0 0.7 21.7 1.7 0.4 10.9 10.9 37.2 825.8 710.3         Mar 46.6 65.9 14.5 27.1 0.7 21.6 1.6 0.3 11.2 11.2 37.8 819.4 701.0
         Apr 45.5 63.1 14.1 24.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 11.3 11.3 37.2 818.7 699.8
         May 47.7 67.8 14.8 28.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 12.3 12.3 37.7 814.0 698.7         June 48.1 70.5 17.4 28.4 0.7 22.1 1.6 0.3 10.8 10.8 37.3 819.6 699.7
         July 45.3 66.3 14.0 27.9 0.6 21.9 1.6 0.3 10.9 10.9 36.9 822.7 696.4
         Aug 46.0 65.0 14.0 27.1 0.6 21.2 1.7 0.3 12.4 12.4 36.4 821.8 688.4         Sep 46.3 62.5 13.9 24.7 0.7 21.2 1.7 0.3 15.6 15.6 36.3 825.6 689.8
         Oct 45.5 59.7 13.8 22.1 0.6 21.2 1.6 0.4 21.1 21.1 35.7 829.7 692.4
         Nov 45.7 61.0 14.4 22.6 0.6 21.4 1.6 0.3 20.0 20.0 35.2 833.2 698.6         Dec 45.9 64.0 15.8 23.9 0.6 21.6 1.6 0.4 14.1 14.1 35.4 826.4 693.3
2004          Jan 46.0 61.3 14.4 23.6 0.6 20.7 1.7 0.3 16.6 16.6 34.9 836.4 695.5
         Feb 47.3 62.0 15.2 23.3 0.6 20.9 1.7 0.4 17.5 17.5 34.7 833.7 695.2         Mar 47.9 60.6 15.4 21.7 0.6 20.7 1.8 0.4 18.2 18.2 34.2 851.5 698.5
         Apr 47.3 59.7 14.9 21.4 0.6 20.6 1.8 0.4 17.3 17.3 34.2 858.7 698.9
         May 48.3 63.1 15.7 24.1 0.6 20.5 1.8 0.4 17.0 17.0 34.6 861.5 701.5         June 50.7 64.4 17.3 24.0 0.6 20.3 1.8 0.4 16.1 16.1 34.5 859.1 697.1
         July 49.7 62.6 15.6 23.7 0.6 20.4 1.9 0.4 16.8 16.8 38.4 860.1 692.4
         Aug 52.1 61.0 15.7 22.8 0.6 19.5 2.0 0.5 14.2 14.2 39.6 865.1 696.9         Sep 48.1 63.6 15.8 25.4 0.6 19.3 2.0 0.5 18.1 18.1 37.5 869.5 699.7
         Oct 45.6 59.4 15.0 21.9 0.7 19.2 2.1 0.5 21.2 21.2 36.2 865.5 691.2
         Nov 43.7 61.1 16.7 21.8 0.7 19.3 2.0 0.5 22.0 22.0 34.3 860.8 687.5         Dec 43.8 62.2 16.0 24.8 0.6 18.1 2.2 0.5 14.8 14.8 30.5 850.2 678.1
2005          Jan 45.2 63.0 17.9 23.9 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 25.1 25.1 30.2 854.7 673.7
         Feb 44.3 63.5 19.2 23.2 0.6 18.0 2.1 0.4 27.3 27.3 30.5 856.4 671.1         Mar 41.0 61.2 17.5 22.7 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 862.0 671.6
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building with money market fund shares. — 5Excluding liabilities arising from
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central securities issued. — 6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 7The
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates should on
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with or M3. — 8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution, the difference
January 2002 Monthly Report , they were published in this table together
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
... ... 1,691.7 2,713.4 1,010.3 11.8 1,560.4 − 2,451.2 4,951.5 5,845.5 4,004.4 197.4 2003          Feb 
... ... 1,701.6 2,690.6 999.6 13.1 1,546.6 − 2,497.5 5,006.4 5,889.7 4,009.1 199.3          Mar 
... ... 1,708.3 2,713.1 997.0 − 21.4 1,593.4 − 2,527.2 5,052.4 5,977.1 4,007.2 198.1          Apr 
... ... 1,713.3 2,653.4 993.6 − 5.7 1,649.9 − 2,561.5 5,109.4 6,020.7 4,012.9 200.4          May... ... 1,731.2 2,668.4 997.6 15.3 1,626.3 − 2,605.4 5,130.1 6,020.3 4,036.8 186.6          June
... ... 1,753.4 2,678.5 999.8 5.3 1,577.5 − 2,584.8 5,124.2 6,027.9 4,065.2 154.4          July
... ... 1,767.7 2,677.3 1,014.4 − 3.2 1,553.3 − 2,573.2 5,126.0 6,027.0 4,101.2 156.2          Aug ... ... 1,768.0 2,642.2 1,016.6 5.6 1,612.9 − 2,615.6 5,137.0 6,017.5 4,102.8 156.3          Sep 
... ... 1,791.9 2,690.5 1,014.1 9.6 1,587.5 − 2,620.4 5,157.9 6,069.0 4,129.3 157.3          Oct 
... ... 1,800.7 2,685.3 1,014.3 4.9 1,631.2 − 2,667.8 5,206.0 6,119.7 4,145.7 158.1          Nov ... ... 1,785.4 2,634.0 1,010.6 8.9 1,597.8 − 2,729.2 5,297.9 6,180.8 4,144.7 162.9          Dec 
... ... 1,807.9 2,749.4 1,008.7 17.1 1,649.8 − 2,702.9 5,271.7 6,173.6 4,166.2 161.8 2004          Jan 
... ... 1,816.6 2,765.3 1,008.0 21.6 1,670.5 − 2,703.3 5,273.5 6,198.4 4,181.5 166.4          Feb 
... ... 1,856.8 2,856.2 1,025.8 21.1 1,699.3 − 2,745.5 5,310.2 6,226.7 4,247.0 168.2          Mar 
... ... 1,876.4 2,936.8 1,021.8 16.2 1,710.0 − 2,770.7 5,344.5 6,280.5 4,272.0 166.4          Apr 
... ... 1,890.2 2,930.9 1,019.2 17.3 1,689.1 − 2,788.7 5,377.4 6,304.5 4,287.3 167.0          May... ... 1,899.8 2,893.8 1,024.1 16.0 1,713.7 − 2,833.4 5,408.0 6,335.0 4,311.4 163.2          June
... ... 1,919.4 2,897.7 1,031.6 19.8 1,698.1 − 2,834.8 5,428.5 6,362.3 4,345.5 170.8          July
... ... 1,926.8 2,902.7 1,038.3 21.0 1,729.9 − 2,795.7 5,398.0 6,347.3 4,365.1 173.2          Aug ... ... 1,948.7 2,861.6 1,044.7 15.0 1,808.9 − 2,857.1 5,451.1 6,378.4 4,396.4 176.0          Sep 
... ... 1,958.5 2,847.4 1,047.0 20.7 1,843.5 − 2,866.0 5,490.4 6,437.1 4,416.3 177.7          Oct 
... ... 1,956.1 2,905.1 1,055.8 44.3 1,921.4 − 2,913.7 5,528.9 6,470.5 4,438.9 185.9          Nov ... ... 1,958.1 2,842.1 1,053.7 34.0 1,841.6 − 2,948.8 5,634.0 6,569.4 4,466.2 192.8          Dec 
... ... 1,984.6 2,993.9 1,054.7 28.8 1,900.0 − 2,967.3 5,640.7 6,585.5 4,496.3 194.6 2005          Jan 
... ... 2,007.1 3,029.3 1,059.3 20.8 1,903.8 − 2,971.4 5,647.0 6,605.8 4,531.1 196.4          Feb 
... ... 2,035.1 3,105.4 1,065.4 6.0 1,964.7 − 2,998.2 5,681.7 6,636.1 4,582.6 194.5          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
34.6 37.7 753.4 679.1 279.5 − 63.2 440.5 31.9 579.5 1,347.5 1,467.5 1,811.1 − 2003          Feb 
31.9 36.5 751.0 682.6 280.3 − 48.9 437.6 33.3 586.5 1,350.9 1,467.7 1,809.6 −          Mar 
33.5 36.3 748.9 686.4 281.1 − 55.5 444.9 34.2 594.5 1,357.8 1,476.1 1,803.5 −          Apr 
32.2 34.1 747.7 666.8 277.5 − 43.6 447.0 36.6 600.7 1,371.8 1,488.0 1,795.1 −          May33.0 31.6 754.9 661.1 279.0 − 42.6 451.8 37.3 617.5 1,377.9 1,490.5 1,802.6 −          June
30.6 31.7 760.4 668.9 280.4 − 63.1 451.5 38.4 605.0 1,366.0 1,476.0 1,812.5 −          July
25.7 29.5 766.7 640.5 285.5 − 67.4 450.4 40.8 607.2 1,374.0 1,477.8 1,825.8 −          Aug 26.4 29.3 770.0 639.8 279.8 − 60.1 459.3 42.2 617.3 1,370.9 1,478.4 1,820.9 −          Sep 
25.7 30.1 773.9 638.2 279.6 − 63.5 457.6 43.4 620.7 1,371.7 1,484.4 1,825.0 −          Oct 
28.6 31.5 773.1 635.5 279.6 − 70.8 465.2 44.4 643.2 1,394.3 1,509.6 1,824.4 −          Nov 30.0 31.3 765.1 625.4 279.6 − 67.8 464.3 44.6 631.9 1,395.2 1,505.9 1,818.7 −          Dec 
31.2 29.8 775.4 642.8 276.3 − 47.1 446.8 48.1 640.5 1,391.1 1,503.6 1,824.6 − 2004          Jan 
26.7 31.3 775.8 663.0 270.2 − 60.8 452.6 49.2 645.3 1,392.7 1,502.9 1,819.0 −          Feb 
29.6 31.4 790.6 680.7 273.8 − 54.5 460.7 50.4 646.8 1,394.2 1,507.6 1,837.3 −          Mar 
29.8 31.1 797.7 690.9 274.2 − 52.8 472.2 52.3 652.7 1,395.8 1,508.3 1,848.3 −          Apr 
27.6 32.3 801.5 671.6 270.6 − 61.3 471.9 53.3 649.8 1,401.8 1,513.4 1,851.8 −          May29.5 29.7 799.9 642.5 276.7 − 54.5 474.3 53.9 653.5 1,395.1 1,504.8 1,860.1 −          June
27.2 27.7 805.2 638.2 280.6 − 59.0 478.3 55.6 644.8 1,391.0 1,501.1 1,871.1 −          July
29.2 26.5 809.4 636.6 278.9 − 69.5 480.2 58.6 646.4 1,394.0 1,503.5 1,874.5 −          Aug 27.5 26.1 815.9 654.3 277.5 − 80.2 493.1 60.9 660.7 1,403.1 1,512.3 1,880.2 −          Sep 
27.2 25.1 813.3 639.6 278.9 − 58.8 502.5 62.3 656.9 1,402.1 1,511.7 1,882.2 −          Oct 
29.5 22.7 808.7 669.7 277.1 − 73.6 510.9 63.1 685.2 1,420.6 1,529.0 1,879.6 −          Nov 27.5 22.5 800.2 627.6 277.6 − 69.5 516.2 63.4 655.4 1,423.3 1,518.6 1,875.2 −          Dec 
27.6 21.2 805.8 667.8 279.2 − 76.0 506.0 64.5 679.0 1,432.3 1,536.4 1,883.1 − 2005          Jan 
27.2 26.5 802.8 676.7 275.0 − 77.0 501.8 65.8 684.0 1,431.9 1,543.3 1,880.3 −          Feb 
23.4 26.1 812.5 695.3 276.1 − 95.6 510.3 67.9 684.1 1,425.8 1,535.7 1,893.9 −          Mar 
between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central govern-
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen ments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetaryby the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo transactions, money
III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding central governments’ deposits), market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities up to 2
and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments’ years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2003          Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3
         June 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         July 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
         Aug 315.8 213.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 391.6 51.5 − 1.6 132.8 524.6
         Sep 315.0 214.0 45.0 0.1 − 0.6 − 391.7 54.4 − 4.4 132.0 524.2
         Oct 321.3 208.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 395.5 48.3 − 1.1 131.9 527.5
         Nov 321.8 205.8 45.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 399.4 43.4 − 2.2 131.8 531.4
         Dec 320.1 235.5 45.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 416.1 57.0 − 4.5 132.6 548.7
2004          Jan 309.2 232.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 427.6 37.0 − 11.2 133.6 561.4
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 303.3 219.4 56.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 418.0 48.6 − 21.1 134.1 552.3
         Apr 301.4 217.9 67.1 0.4 − 0.4 − 425.3 51.5 − 25.7 135.3 561.0
         May 310.7 213.2 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 436.4 46.0 − 18.9 135.0 571.5         June 311.3 224.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.5 − 442.5 52.2 − 21.1 137.1 580.1
         July 308.2 245.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 449.1 65.0 − 24.1 138.8 588.1
         Aug 300.8 253.6 75.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 460.9 61.1 − 31.8 139.1 600.1
         Sep 299.4 251.6 75.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 462.8 56.3 − 32.4 139.3 602.3
         Oct 298.8 256.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 465.1 58.2 − 32.1 139.3 604.4
         Nov 298.3 257.9 75.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 − 469.7 55.1 − 32.1 138.4 608.4
         Dec 298.0 265.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.5 475.4 60.2 − 36.0 138.5 614.1
2005          Jan 290.3 272.9 75.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 496.0 45.3 − 41.9 139.1 635.2
         Feb 280.6 276.6 78.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 487.1 63.8 − 55.5 140.0 627.2
         Mar 280.2 277.8 82.2 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 489.5 68.5 − 59.2 141.3 630.9
         Apr 282.1 278.2 86.9 0.2 − 0.1 − 498.6 67.4 − 62.1 143.3 642.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
2003          Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7
         June 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         July 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
         Aug 73.7 111.0 29.6 0.2 − 0.1 − 109.6 0.1 66.5 38.2 147.9
         Sep 73.9 114.0 29.1 0.1 − 0.4 − 109.8 0.1 69.2 37.7 147.9
         Oct 75.7 106.5 29.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 110.8 0.1 63.4 37.5 148.4
         Nov 76.1 102.3 30.8 0.0 − 0.2 − 111.5 0.1 60.0 37.5 149.1
         Dec 76.1 118.3 30.9 0.3 − 0.1 − 115.9 0.1 72.2 37.4 153.4
2004          Jan 73.1 119.5 32.3 0.2 − 0.1 − 116.2 0.1 70.9 37.9 154.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 72.4 109.7 41.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 113.5 0.1 72.0 37.9 151.5
         Apr 72.9 97.9 48.7 0.2 − 0.3 − 115.8 0.1 65.7 37.8 153.9
         May 75.4 100.7 51.8 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 119.3 0.1 70.9 37.7 157.0         June 75.6 115.6 49.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.2 0.1 80.9 38.3 159.9
         July 74.6 127.9 49.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 122.7 0.1 91.1 38.5 161.1
         Aug 72.1 136.9 50.3 0.0 − 0.1 − 126.2 0.1 94.7 38.3 164.6
         Sep 72.2 131.7 50.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 127.5 0.1 88.8 37.9 165.4
         Oct 72.1 129.8 48.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 127.7 0.1 84.8 37.5 165.3
         Nov 72.2 136.0 46.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 − 128.3 0.1 88.4 37.5 166.0
         Dec 72.2 142.4 46.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 129.9 0.1 93.4 37.6 167.5
2005          Jan 70.2 144.7 46.9 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 135.2 0.1 89.1 37.4 172.7
         Feb 67.7 137.7 49.4 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 133.2 0.1 83.8 37.9 171.1
         Mar 67.6 145.3 52.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.0 134.0 0.1 93.5 37.5 171.5
         Apr 68.1 133.3 53.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 136.6 0.0 79.8 38.0 174.7
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem forof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 10.6 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan 
− 4.5 − 7.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − − 13.2 + 6.5 − 5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb 
− 3.9 + 10.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 − 7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar 
− 15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 − 20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr 
− 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 − 5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May
− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 − 2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          June
− 10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 − 10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          July
− 4.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 8.9 − 0.9 − 4.5 + 0.6 + 9.4          Aug 
− 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 6.3 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.4 − + 3.8 − 6.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.3          Oct 
+ 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 3.9 − 4.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.9          Nov 
− 1.7 + 29.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − + 16.7 + 13.6 − 2.3 + 0.8 + 17.3          Dec 
− 10.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − + 11.5 − 20.0 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 12.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 5.9 − 13.2 + 11.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 9.6 + 11.6 − 9.9 + 0.5 − 9.1          Mar 
− 1.9 − 1.5 + 10.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 7.3 + 2.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.7          Apr 
+ 9.3 − 4.7 + 7.9 − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 5.5 + 6.8 − 0.3 + 10.5          May+ 0.6 + 11.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − 0.4 + 6.1 + 6.2 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 8.6          June
− 3.1 + 20.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 12.8 − 3.0 + 1.7 + 8.0          July
− 7.4 + 8.2
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 11.8 − 3.9 − 7.7 + 0.3 + 12.0          Aug 
− 1.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 − 4.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.2          Sep 
− 0.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.1          Oct 
− 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − + 4.6 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 4.0          Nov 
− 0.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.7 + 5.1 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 5.7          Dec 
− 7.7 + 7.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 20.6 − 14.9 − 5.9 + 0.6 + 21.1 2005          Jan 
− 9.7 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 8.9 + 18.5 − 13.6 + 0.9 − 8.0          Feb 
− 0.4 + 1.2 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 4.7 − 3.7 + 1.3 + 3.7          Mar 
+ 1.9 + 0.4 + 4.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 − 1.1 − 2.9 + 2.0 + 11.1          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.0 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan 
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − − 2.8 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb 
+ 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar 
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr 
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May
− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          June
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          July
− 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 2.5 + 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.1 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.8 − 7.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 − − 0.2 − + 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.2 + 0.6          Oct 
+ 0.4 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.7          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 16.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.1 − + 4.4 + 0.0 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 4.2          Dec 
− 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 0.8 − 9.8 + 9.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 2.6          Mar 
+ 0.5 − 11.8 + 7.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 2.4 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 2.5 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 3.1          May+ 0.2 + 14.9 − 2.4 + 0.1 − + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 2.9          June
− 1.0 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 1.3          July
− 2.5 + 9.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 3.5          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.3 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 + 0.8          Sep 
− 0.1 − 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.7          Nov 
− 0.0 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 1.6          Dec 
− 2.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 5.1 2005          Jan 
− 2.5 − 6.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 2.0 + 0.0 − 5.3 + 0.4 − 1.6          Feb 
− 0.0 + 7.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.7 − 0.4 + 0.4          Mar 
+ 0.4 − 12.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 13.7 + 0.5 + 3.2          Apr 
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingeuro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2004 Aug                27 881.9 127.4 170.0 27.8 142.3 16.8 7.8 7.8 −
         Sep                  3 876.6 127.4 168.8 27.6 141.2 17.9 7.7 7.7 −
                              10 874.6 127.4 167.5 27.4 140.1 17.6 7.9 7.9 −
                              17 875.2 127.4 167.7 27.5 140.2 17.5 7.6 7.6 −
                              24 885.8 127.4 168.8 27.2 141.6 17.3 8.1 8.1 −
         Oct                  1 3 882.3 3 130.7 3 165.3 26.5 3 138.8 17.1 7.6 7.6 −
                                8 880.6 130.6 166.4 26.4 139.9 17.4 6.9 6.9 −
                              15 868.4 130.6 163.4 26.3 137.2 19.2 7.5 7.5 −
                              22 875.4 130.6 162.3 26.1 136.2 18.5 7.5 7.5 −
                              29 893.8 130.6 164.9 26.0 138.9 17.6 7.7 7.7 −
         Nov                  5 893.2 130.4 166.1 25.9 140.2 17.9 7.4 7.4 −
                              12 887.1 130.4 165.9 25.9 140.0 17.6 7.6 7.6 −
                              19 893.8 130.4 167.7 25.8 142.0 17.5 7.7 7.7 −
                              26 899.1 130.3 164.9 25.6 139.3 18.1 7.4 7.4 −
         Dec                  3 905.5 130.3 165.8 25.6 140.2 18.3 8.0 8.0 −
                              10 914.2 130.3 166.0 25.3 140.6 18.6 7.4 7.4 −
                              17 909.2 129.9 167.8 25.4 142.5 18.3 7.3 7.3 −
                              24 915.7 129.9 167.1 25.1 142.0 17.9 7.5 7.5 −
                              31 3 884.2 3 125.7 3 153.8 3 23.9 3 129.9 3 17.0 6.8 6.8 −
2005 Jan                  7 873.6 125.7 156.5 23.9 132.5 16.4 7.4 7.4 −
                              14 881.0 125.7 156.1 23.7 132.4 17.2 7.1 7.1 −
                              21 896.2 125.6 154.7 23.7 131.0 17.1 7.3 7.3 −
                              28 894.8 125.6 154.4 23.7 130.7 17.6 6.7 6.7 −
         Feb                  4 899.5 125.5 155.2 23.6 131.6 17.1 6.5 6.5 −
                              11 897.1 125.4 151.3 23.7 127.7 18.8 7.7 7.7 −
                              18 900.3 125.3 152.6 23.7 128.9 16.8 8.2 8.2 −
                              25 913.8 125.2 151.1 23.4 127.7 17.2 8.3 8.3 −
         Mar                  4 906.9 125.2 151.8 23.1 128.6 18.2 7.9 7.9 −
                              11 905.4 125.1 151.9 22.9 129.0 18.3 7.6 7.6 −
                              18 912.7 125.0 151.8 22.4 129.4 19.3 8.1 8.1 −
                              24 926.4 124.9 150.1 22.4 127.7 18.8 8.9 8.9 −
         Apr                  1 3 927.2 3 128.1 3 155.9 3 22.9 3 133.0 3 19.1 9.3 9.3 −
                                8 927.2 128.0 156.5 22.8 133.7 19.6 8.7 8.7 −
                              15 922.2 128.0 154.9 22.7 132.2 20.0 8.7 8.7 −
                              22 934.5 128.0 154.6 22.6 132.0 20.5 9.1 9.1 −
                              29 934.5 127.4 155.9 22.5 133.4 20.5 9.7 9.7 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2003          June 3 258.2 3 33.4 3 45.0 8.3 3 36.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 246.9 33.4 44.8 8.3 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 248.9 33.4 45.5 8.3 37.1 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 257.5 3 36.5 3 44.7 8.5 3 36.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 257.6 36.5 45.0 8.5 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 254.4 36.5 44.5 8.5 36.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 267.7 36.5 3 40.1 7.6 3 32.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2004          Jan 258.1 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 258.2 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 256.2 3 38.3 3 41.5 7.6 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 268.0 38.3 42.1 7.9 34.2 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 276.6 38.3 41.5 7.8 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 290.3 3 35.8 3 41.2 7.4 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 295.9 35.8 40.4 7.4 33.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 284.2 35.8 39.8 7.4 32.4 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 283.6
3 36.7 3 39.1 7.0 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 293.7 36.7 38.2 7.0 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 298.6 36.7 38.4 6.9 31.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 293.5 3 35.5 3 35.8 6.5 3 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
2005          Jan 287.9 35.5 36.2 6.5 29.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 300.1 35.5 35.7 6.4 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 294.6 3 36.4 3 37.4 6.1 3 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 299.0 36.4 37.0 6.1 30.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
334.0 259.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 67.9 42.1 114.6 2004 Aug                27
329.0 254.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.5 67.9 42.1 114.3          Sep                  3
327.6 252.5 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 1.5 67.9 42.1 115.2                               10
328.0 253.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.6 68.0 42.1 115.4                               17
337.5 262.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.6 67.6 42.1 115.4                               24
334.0 259.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.8 67.4 42.1 3 116.3          Oct                  1
330.5 255.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.0 68.0 42.1 116.7                                 8
319.5 244.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.8 67.5 42.1 116.8                               15
328.0 253.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.8 67.6 42.1 117.1                               22
343.0 268.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 1.9 68.5 42.1 117.6                               29
339.5 264.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.2 69.5 42.1 118.1          Nov                  5
333.1 258.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.9 70.3 42.0 118.3                               12
337.5 262.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.6 71.0 42.0 118.3                               19
345.0 270.0 75.0 − − − 0.0 1.7 71.2 42.0 118.5                               26
348.6 273.5 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 1.8 71.2 42.0 119.4          Dec                  3
357.1 282.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.1 2.2 71.0 42.0 119.7                               10
351.3 276.0 75.0 − − 0.3 0.0 3.0 70.1 41.9 119.6                               17
358.7 283.5 75.0 − − 0.2 0.0 3.7 69.8 41.5 119.5                               24
345.1 270.0 75.0 − − 0.1 0.0 3.8 70.2 41.3 3 120.4                               31
334.0 259.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.2 70.5 41.3 118.7 2005 Jan                  7
340.0 265.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.4 71.0 41.3 119.2                               14
354.5 279.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.5 71.8 41.3 120.3                               21
353.0 273.0 80.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.6 72.6 41.3 120.0                               28
357.5 277.5 80.0 − − − 0.0 3.4 72.8 41.3 120.1          Feb                  4
355.5 275.5 80.0 − − − 0.0 3.1 73.5 41.3 120.6                               11
356.7 276.5 80.0 − − 0.2 0.0 3.5 74.8 41.3 121.2                               18
369.5 284.5 85.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.3 75.4 41.3 122.6                               25
360.0 275.0 85.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.2 76.4 41.3 123.0          Mar                  4
357.5 272.5 85.0 − − − 0.0 3.2 77.7 41.3 122.9                               11
361.5 276.5 85.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.5 78.8 41.3 123.4                               18
376.1 291.0 85.0 − − 0.1 0.0 2.9 79.7 41.3 123.7                               24
366.8 276.0 90.0 − − 0.7 0.0 2.7 79.7 41.2 3 124.4          Apr                  1
365.0 275.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.0 80.7 41.2 124.5                                 8
360.5 270.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.1 80.7 41.2 125.2                               15
372.0 282.0 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.0 80.1 41.2 126.0                               22
370.5 280.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 2.9 79.8 41.2 126.5                               29
 Deutsche Bundesbank
155.0 122.5 32.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1 2003          June
144.0 115.1 28.8 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.9          July
145.2 116.0 29.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Aug 151.4 121.5 29.7 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4
3 20.1          Sep 
133.0 101.9 31.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 38.4          Oct 145.4 115.0 30.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 23.3          Nov 162.3 129.9 32.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Dec 
157.4 117.4 40.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0 2004          Jan 
157.6 109.9 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 
141.7 94.1 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 30.1          Mar 
153.7 104.3 49.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.1          Apr 
173.2 123.7 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          May189.4 139.9 49.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          June
196.0 145.1 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
184.8 135.3 49.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Aug 173.6 127.4 45.6 − − 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.5          Sep 
195.1 148.1 46.9 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0          Oct 
199.8 153.5 46.0 − − 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0          Nov 190.4 143.0 47.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Dec 
185.1 134.3 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.3 2005          Jan 
205.2 151.7 53.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 
184.4 129.9 52.1 − − 2.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 31.7          Mar 
201.7 148.2 53.5 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Apr 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2004 Aug                27 881.9 460.0 137.9 137.9 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 74.0 68.4 5.6
         Sep                  3 876.6 464.3 137.7 137.6 0.1 − − − 0.1 1.1 64.1 58.3 5.8
                              10 874.6 465.3 137.4 137.4 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 62.9 57.1 5.8
                              17 875.2 463.9 138.5 138.4 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 61.6 55.7 5.9
                              24 885.8 462.6 137.2 137.2 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 73.9 68.0 5.9
         Oct                  1 5 882.3 466.8 142.5 142.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 60.9 54.9 6.0
                                8 880.6 469.9 137.5 137.3 0.2 − − − 0.1 1.1 59.8 53.7 6.1
                              15 868.4 469.1 138.8 138.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 1.1 47.6 41.7 5.9
                              22 875.4 467.3 137.8 137.8 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 58.7 52.5 6.2
                              29 893.8 471.3 122.0 122.0 0.0 − − − 0.1 1.1 84.3 78.1 6.3
         Nov                  5 893.2 474.0 142.5 141.3 1.2 − − − 0.1 − 62.5 56.8 5.7
                              12 887.1 473.4 138.3 138.2 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 61.9 55.5 6.4
                              19 893.8 472.0 137.0 136.9 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 68.9 62.9 6.0
                              26 899.1 473.6 137.7 137.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 73.7 67.9 5.9
         Dec                  3 905.5 485.2 137.2 137.1 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 66.9 60.1 6.8
                              10 914.2 490.7 135.6 135.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 70.4 64.1 6.3
                              17 909.2 496.2 145.4 145.3 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 48.2 41.7 6.5
                              24 915.7 504.6 140.6 140.4 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 50.5 44.3 6.2
                              31 5 884.2 501.3 138.7 138.6 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 42.2 36.0 6.2
2005 Jan                  7 873.6 497.2 132.5 132.4 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 45.3 38.8 6.4
                              14 881.0 491.0 143.7 143.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 46.4 39.9 6.5
                              21 896.2 486.9 141.1 141.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 70.1 63.4 6.7
                              28 894.8 486.1 139.7 139.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 69.8 63.3 6.5
         Feb                  4 899.5 490.0 138.6 138.6 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 71.8 65.3 6.6
                              11 897.1 489.8 142.2 142.2 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 68.1 61.0 7.1
                              18 900.3 488.2 145.1 145.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 69.9 62.5 7.4
                              25 913.8 488.2 140.9 140.8 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 88.0 81.0 7.0
         Mar                  4 906.9 493.6 142.4 142.3 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 72.4 65.5 6.9
                              11 905.4 494.6 144.6 144.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 67.6 60.8 6.8
                              18 912.7 495.5 147.1 146.7 0.4 − − − 0.1 − 69.8 62.9 6.8
                              24 926.4 501.7 144.0 144.0 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 81.9 74.9 7.1
         Apr                  1 5 927.2 500.9 142.2 142.1 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 75.1 68.1 7.0
                                8 927.2 502.9 142.2 142.1 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 72.4 65.4 7.0
                              15 922.2 502.3 143.4 143.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 67.7 60.6 7.0
                              22 934.5 502.1 143.7 143.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 79.6 72.5 7.1
                              29 934.5 507.0 139.3 138.9 0.4 − − 0.0 0.1 − 77.6 70.6 7.0
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2003          June 5 258.2 105.2 38.8 38.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 246.9 108.5 39.6 39.5 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Aug 248.9 108.6 41.0 41.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 
5 257.5 109.2 41.7 41.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 257.6 110.8 42.0 42.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         Nov 254.4 112.7 36.4 36.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5         Dec 
5 267.7 121.4 44.6 44.5 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.6 0.1 0.5
2004          Jan 258.1 112.4 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Feb 258.2 113.3 36.8 36.7 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Mar 
5 256.2 115.0 31.0 31.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.4 0.4
         Apr 268.0 117.7 38.3 38.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         May 276.6 120.8 43.4 43.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         June
5 290.3 122.3 36.6 36.6 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 295.9 126.0 39.3 39.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Aug 284.2 125.2 41.4 40.9 0.4 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 283.6 126.5 40.1 40.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 293.7 128.2 35.5 35.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov 298.6 129.5 48.3 48.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Dec 
5 293.5 136.3 41.3 41.2 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2005          Jan 287.9 132.3 40.8 40.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Feb 300.1 133.0 40.2 40.2 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Mar 
5 294.6 136.1 38.1 38.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.3
         Apr 299.0 137.9 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of thisfinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
9.0 0.2 8.8 8.8 − 5.9 55.0 − 70.2 59.8 2004 Aug                27
9.3 0.3 8.9 8.9 − 5.9 55.1 − 70.2 59.8          Sep                  3
9.1 0.3 7.4 7.4 − 5.9 55.2 − 70.2 59.8                               10
9.1 0.4 7.4 7.4 − 5.9 57.3 − 70.2 59.8                               17
9.3 0.4 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 56.9 − 70.2 59.8                               24
9.2 0.3 8.2 8.2 − 5.8 5 56.9 − 70.7 59.9          Oct                  1
9.2 0.3 9.6 9.6 − 5.8 56.8 − 70.7 59.9                                 8
9.1 0.3 8.6 8.6 − 5.8 57.3 − 70.7 59.9                               15
9.0 0.2 6.9 6.9 − 5.8 57.9 − 70.7 59.9                               22
9.4 0.3 8.8 8.8 − 5.8 60.2 − 70.7 59.9                               29
9.4 0.3 10.3 10.3 − 5.8 57.7 − 70.7 59.9          Nov                  5
9.3 0.3 9.9 9.9 − 5.8 57.5 − 70.7 59.9                               12
9.4 0.3 11.4 11.4 − 5.8 58.4 − 70.7 59.9                               19
9.6 0.3 9.3 9.3 − 5.8 58.3 − 70.7 59.9                               26
10.4 0.3 10.4 10.4 − 5.8 58.7 − 70.7 59.9          Dec                  3
10.7 0.3 10.9 10.9 − 5.8 59.1 − 70.7 59.9                               10
10.2 0.3 13.2 13.2 − 5.8 59.3 − 70.7 59.9                               17
11.2 0.3 13.2 13.2 − 5.8 58.8 − 70.7 59.9                               24
10.9 0.2 5 10.7 5 10.7 − 5.6 5 51.4 − 5 64.8 5 58.2                               31
8.0 0.2 11.5 11.5 − 5.6 50.4 − 64.8 58.1 2005 Jan                  7
8.1 0.2 12.6 12.6 − 5.6 50.3 . 64.8 58.1                               14
8.3 0.3 10.1 10.1 − 5.6 51.0 − 64.8 57.8                               21
8.3 0.2 11.3 11.3 − 5.6 50.9 − 64.8 57.8                               28
8.0 0.3 11.6 11.6 − 5.6 50.7 − 64.8 57.8          Feb                  4
8.2 0.3 9.3 9.3 − 5.6 50.8 − 64.8 57.8                               11
8.2 0.3 8.4 8.4 − 5.6 51.1 − 64.8 58.6                               18
8.5 0.3 7.5 7.5 − 5.6 51.6 − 64.8 58.3                               25
8.3 0.3 9.4 9.4 − 5.6 51.6 − 64.8 58.3          Mar                  4
8.2 0.4 9.8 9.8 − 5.6 51.3 − 64.8 58.4                               11
8.4 0.4 11.2 11.2 − 5.6 51.6 − 64.8 58.1                               18
9.0 0.4 9.2 9.2 − 5.6 51.5 − 64.8 58.1                               24
8.9 0.2 9.8 9.8 − 5.7 5 54.0 − 5 72.0 58.2          Apr                  1
8.9 0.2 10.9 10.9 − 5.7 53.7 − 72.0 58.2                                 8
8.9 0.3 9.6 9.6 − 5.7 54.0 − 72.0 58.2                               15
8.9 0.3 10.0 10.0 − 5.7 54.0 − 72.0 58.2                               22
9.2 0.4 10.9 10.9 − 5.7 54.2 − 72.0 58.2                               29
 Deutsche Bundesbank
7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 31.3 37.3 5 28.2 5.0 2003          June
7.3 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 14.9 38.4 28.2 5.0          July
7.4 0.0 3.5 3.5 − 1.5 12.4 40.8 28.2 5.0          Aug 7.3 0.0 3.6 3.6 − 1.5 16.2 42.2
5 30.2 5.0          Sep 
7.4 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.5 12.9 43.4 30.2 5.0          Oct 7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 12.9 44.4 30.2 5.0          Nov 7.7 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.4
5 10.5 44.6 5 29.1 5.0          Dec 
7.3 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 11.4 48.1 29.1 5.0 2004          Jan 
7.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.4 12.7 49.2 29.1 5.0          Feb 6.5 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.5 10.8 50.4
5 32.2 5.0          Mar 
6.2 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 10.9 52.3 32.2 5.0          Apr 5.8 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 11.5 53.3 32.2 5.0          May5.6 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 32.2 53.9
5 29.3 5.0          June
5.9 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.5 30.3 55.6 29.3 5.0          July5.8 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 15.2 58.6 29.3 5.0          Aug 5.6 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4 12.0 60.9 29.6 5.0          Sep 
5.9 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 24.1 62.3 29.6 5.0          Oct 
5.6 0.0 1.5 1.5 − 1.4 13.9 63.1 29.6 5.0          Nov 5.9 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4
5 9.7 63.4 5 27.8 5.0          Dec 
3.5 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 64.5 27.8 5.0 2005          Jan 
3.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.4 21.0 65.8 27.8 5.0          Feb 3.2 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 9.4 67.9
5 30.1 5.0          Mar 
3.4 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 68.8 30.1 5.0          Apr 
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.0
1997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.22004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2003          June 6,472.9 13.3 2,139.0 1,748.0 1,137.1 610.9 390.9 305.4 85.5 3,330.2 3,089.9 2,502.9 2,239.7         July 6,425.7 13.3 2,113.5 1,728.1 1,109.7 618.4 385.3 297.4 88.0 3,330.2 3,093.7 2,494.1 2,231.1
         Aug 6,395.1 13.5 2,105.5 1,720.3 1,104.5 615.8 385.2 296.8 88.3 3,318.3 3,084.7 2,495.6 2,231.4         Sep 6,403.1 13.3 2,099.4 1,712.2 1,095.3 616.9 387.2 297.5 89.7 3,332.6 3,089.6 2,504.9 2,245.2
         Oct 6,399.3 13.6 2,092.9 1,715.9 1,096.1 619.9 376.9 285.3 91.7 3,328.9 3,086.1 2,496.9 2,242.9
         Nov 6,456.1 13.1 2,126.2 1,742.4 1,117.5 624.9 383.7 292.5 91.3 3,350.9 3,103.5 2,505.0 2,246.9         Dec 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004          Jan 6,424.2 13.2 2,084.1 1,713.6 1,101.3 612.4 370.4 278.3 92.1 3,329.8 3,078.3 2,489.0 2,230.4
         Feb 6,448.7 13.2 2,100.2 1,722.7 1,101.9 620.8 377.5 282.5 94.9 3,341.8 3,081.9 2,483.5 2,230.2         Mar 6,506.7 12.7 2,106.5 1,725.6 1,098.7 626.9 380.9 282.2 98.7 3,370.4 3,102.9 2,491.9 2,228.9
         Apr 6,568.8 12.9 2,132.5 1,749.7 1,115.1 634.6 382.9 282.4 100.4 3,381.2 3,110.1 2,506.6 2,230.4
         May 6,583.5 13.8 2,163.3 1,771.6 1,127.6 644.0 391.7 289.0 102.7 3,369.7 3,101.0 2,497.0 2,229.7         June 6,551.3 13.1 2,150.2 1,746.3 1,112.7 633.6 404.0 299.5 104.4 3,360.1 3,090.4 2,483.2 2,229.4
         July 6,574.9 13.2 2,171.4 1,765.1 1,130.4 634.7 406.3 303.2 103.0 3,368.3 3,093.3 2,477.1 2,225.1
         Aug 6,567.5 13.2 2,167.2 1,759.6 1,126.4 633.2 407.6 301.7 105.9 3,357.7 3,086.1 2,470.3 2,221.8         Sep 6,597.6 13.2 2,165.1 1,759.6 1,123.8 635.8 405.6 295.9 109.6 3,361.1 3,091.0 2,478.1 2,229.6
         Oct 6,627.7 13.9 2,178.3 1,759.5 1,128.1 631.4 418.7 306.4 112.4 3,371.9 3,094.1 2,475.6 2,226.8
         Nov 6,683.4 13.3 2,197.3 1,771.7 1,137.6 634.1 425.6 310.6 115.1 3,376.5 3,098.8 2,482.9 2,233.7         Dec 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005          Jan 6,672.1 13.2 2,182.9 1,749.0 1,124.6 624.4 433.9 312.6 121.4 3,377.2 3,092.4 2,478.8 2,216.8
         Feb 6,717.4 12.8 2,220.8 1,752.4 1,124.4 628.1 468.3 339.6 128.7 3,372.3 3,080.6 2,474.4 2,219.9         Mar 6,723.0 13.6 2,215.6 1,757.1 1,123.7 633.4 458.5 325.4 133.1 3,379.7 3,084.0 2,475.2 2,216.6
 Changes 1
1997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 − 0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.21999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.12002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.42004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2003          July − 49.6 − 0.1 − 25.7 − 20.1 − 27.4 7.3 − 5.6 − 8.0 2.4 0.6 4.5 − 8.1 − 8.1
         Aug − 43.7 0.3 − 8.1 − 7.9 − 5.2 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 − 13.6 − 10.0 0.5 − 0.6         Sep 26.2 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 8.1 − 9.2 1.2 2.1 0.7 1.4 17.7 7.4 11.8 16.2
         Oct − 5.0 0.3 − 6.5 4.1 0.8 3.3 − 10.6 − 12.6 2.0 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 1.7
         Nov 67.6 − 0.5 33.6 26.6 21.4 5.1 7.1 7.2 − 0.1 24.5 19.2 9.8 5.6         Dec − 8.6 4.2 − 14.4 − 10.3 − 0.7 − 9.6 − 4.1 − 4.7 0.7 − 10.1 − 13.7 − 1.4 0.3
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 4.1 − 26.5 − 18.1 − 15.5 − 2.6 − 8.5 − 9.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 4.6 − 6.6
         Feb 26.4 0.0 17.3 9.0 0.4 8.6 8.3 4.2 4.1 16.6 8.0 − 1.1 2.5         Mar 47.2 − 0.5 6.2 2.8 − 3.2 6.0 3.4 − 0.3 3.7 28.7 21.7 9.0 − 0.9
         Apr 57.9 0.1 26.1 24.1 16.4 7.7 1.9 0.2 1.7 10.8 7.1 14.6 1.4
         May 19.5 1.0 30.7 21.9 12.5 9.3 8.9 6.5 2.3 − 10.4 − 8.2 − 8.8 0.1         June − 33.2 − 0.7 − 13.0 − 25.2 − 14.9 − 10.3 12.2 10.6 1.7 − 9.2 − 10.1 − 13.2 0.2
         July 21.8 0.1 23.4 18.8 17.7 1.2 4.6 3.7 0.9 6.4 3.3 − 5.7 − 3.8
         Aug − 5.3 − 0.1 − 7.0 − 5.5 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 4.3 2.9 − 7.4 − 6.8 − 6.4 − 2.9         Sep 39.6 0.0 − 1.7 0.3 − 2.6 2.9 − 1.9 − 5.8 3.8 5.3 6.3 9.2 9.4
         Oct 36.3 0.7 13.2 0.0 4.3 − 4.3 13.2 10.4 2.7 11.7 3.9 − 1.8 − 2.0
         Nov 67.8 − 0.6 19.3 12.2 9.5 2.7 7.1 4.2 2.9 6.1 5.7 8.3 7.9         Dec − 55.0 1.9 − 19.2 − 17.8 − 11.2 − 6.6 − 1.4 − 4.2 2.9 − 14.0 − 12.4 0.2 − 6.6
2005          Jan 40.4 − 2.0 8.2 − 1.2 1.7 − 2.9 9.4 6.2 3.2 20.9 11.7 1.9 − 4.1
         Feb 50.7 − 0.4 38.0 3.6 − 0.2 3.8 34.5 27.1 7.4 − 2.2 − 9.4 − 2.0 5.4         Mar 5.6 0.8 − 4.9 5.0 − 0.6 5.6 − 9.8 − 14.2 4.4 9.0 5.1 2.5 − 1.6
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996
300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
263.2 587.0 434.6 152.4 240.2 126.9 61.9 113.4 24.6 88.7 827.6 668.9 162.8 2003          June
263.0 599.6 444.9 154.7 236.5 126.7 62.3 109.8 24.9 84.9 811.5 651.6 157.3          July
264.1 589.1 440.6 148.5 233.6 129.2 65.0 104.4 24.1 80.3 801.2 642.0 156.6          Aug 259.8 584.6 435.2 149.4 243.1 129.7 64.7 113.4 23.4 90.0 795.8 642.4 161.9          Sep 
254.0 589.2 436.6 152.6 242.8 127.6 60.6 115.2 25.1 90.1 800.6 643.9 163.3          Oct 
258.1 598.5 442.5 156.0 247.4 132.9 64.7 114.5 25.6 89.0 803.7 648.2 162.2          Nov 256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6          Dec 
258.6 589.2 440.2 149.0 251.5 132.0 61.2 119.5 25.6 93.9 843.7 683.0 153.4 2004          Jan 
253.3 598.3 432.1 166.2 260.0 136.0 65.2 124.0 25.0 99.0 839.5 680.6 154.0          Feb 
263.0 611.0 444.9 166.2 267.4 137.6 67.0 129.8 24.9 104.9 859.1 697.2 158.0          Mar 
276.2 603.5 437.2 166.3 271.1 139.4 68.8 131.7 25.8 105.9 884.1 722.1 158.1          Apr 
267.2 604.1 431.4 172.7 268.7 137.6 66.3 131.1 25.8 105.3 875.0 707.5 161.6          May253.9 607.2 426.2 181.0 269.7 138.4 66.5 131.3 25.7 105.6 867.0 695.6 160.8          June
252.0 616.2 434.4 181.8 275.0 142.3 67.7 132.8 26.4 106.4 860.7 687.7 161.3          July
248.4 615.8 429.9 186.0 271.6 137.7 65.0 133.9 26.2 107.6 871.6 696.5 157.9          Aug 248.5 612.9 425.8 187.1 270.1 138.8 65.3 131.3 25.7 105.6 898.6 725.5 159.6          Sep 
248.7 618.5 430.9 187.7 277.8 139.9 65.1 137.9 25.5 112.4 901.8 727.5 161.9          Oct 
249.1 615.9 426.6 189.3 277.7 143.1 67.5 134.6 25.7 108.9 931.8 756.6 164.6          Nov 255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4          Dec 
262.0 613.6 427.5 186.2 284.9 145.2 66.3 139.7 25.8 113.9 935.8 762.7 163.1 2005          Jan 
254.5 606.2 422.2 184.0 291.7 147.6 66.6 144.1 26.5 117.5 945.4 771.9 166.2          Feb 
258.6 608.8 420.7 188.2 295.7 144.6 61.4 151.2 28.0 123.2 955.0 780.7 159.1          Mar 
Changes 1
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 − 2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 199830.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
0.0 12.6 10.3 2.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 0.3 − 3.6 0.3 − 3.9 − 18.6 − 19.0 − 5.9 2003          July
1.1 − 10.5 − 4.3 − 6.2 − 3.6 2.2 2.4 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 4.8 − 21.0 − 19.0 − 1.2          Aug 
− 4.3 − 4.4 − 5.4 0.9 10.3 1.0 0.3 9.3 − 0.5 9.9 10.2 14.5 4.4          Sep − 5.6 5.3 1.4 3.9 0.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 2.2 1.6 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 3.5          Oct 
4.1 9.4 6.0 3.4 5.3 5.7 4.3 − 0.4 0.6 − 1.0 13.0 12.4 − 3.0          Nov 
− 1.7 − 12.4 − 2.9 − 9.5 3.6 1.4 − 1.4 2.2 0.5 1.7 16.2 9.4 − 4.5          Dec 
2.1 3.6 0.6 3.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 2.7 − 0.4 3.1 31.9 32.1 − 16.1 2004          Jan 
− 3.7 9.1 − 8.0 17.2 8.6 4.0 4.0 4.6 − 0.6 5.2 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 4.8          Feb 
9.8 12.7 12.7 − 0.0 7.0 1.4 1.6 5.6 − 0.1 5.8 10.7 8.6 2.1          Mar 
13.2 − 7.5 − 7.6 0.1 3.6 1.8 1.7 1.9 0.9 1.0 21.3 21.2 − 0.4          Apr 
− 8.9 0.6 − 5.9 6.5 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 2.4 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.4 − 10.4 2.6          May
− 13.4 3.1 − 5.2 8.3 0.9 0.8 0.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.2 − 8.9 − 14.1 − 1.5          June
− 1.8 9.0 8.2 0.8 3.1 1.6 1.2 1.5 0.8 0.8 − 8.2 − 9.8 0.1          July
− 3.6 − 0.3 − 4.5 4.2 − 0.6 − 1.7 0.1 1.1 − 0.1 1.2 12.6 10.6 − 3.6          Aug − 0.2 − 2.9 − 4.1 1.1 − 0.9 1.5 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 34.9 36.0 0.9          Sep 
0.2 5.7 5.1 0.6 7.9 1.3 − 0.0 6.6 − 0.1 6.7 9.0 7.5 1.7          Oct 0.4 − 2.6 − 4.2 1.6 0.4 3.5 2.7 − 3.1 0.3 − 3.4 41.1 38.9 1.9          Nov 6.8 − 12.5 − 4.1 − 8.4 − 1.7 − 2.0 − 5.1 0.3 0.0 0.3 − 26.1 − 19.1 2.4          Dec 
6.0 9.8 4.4 5.4 9.1 4.4 4.1 4.8 − 0.0 4.8 25.6 21.0 − 12.4 2005          Jan 
− 7.4 − 7.4 − 5.2 − 2.2 7.2 2.6 0.4 4.6 0.8 3.8 14.6 13.6 0.7          Feb 
4.1 2.7 − 1.5 4.2 3.9 − 3.1 − 5.3 7.0 1.4 5.6 9.6 8.9 − 9.0          Mar 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 End of year or month
 
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.5
1997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.32004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2003          June 6,472.9 1,509.2 1,252.8 256.4 2,194.2 2,059.3 608.2 874.5 260.2 576.7 484.4 86.7 9.0         July 6,425.7 1,457.9 1,207.6 250.3 2,182.5 2,051.4 595.2 879.5 259.0 576.8 486.5 85.7 9.3
         Aug 6,395.1 1,450.5 1,198.0 252.5 2,193.0 2,061.5 597.8 885.7 261.3 578.0 489.3 85.5 8.9         Sep 6,403.1 1,451.2 1,188.3 262.9 2,187.8 2,057.4 607.3 871.8 248.1 578.3 490.2 84.2 9.6
         Oct 6,399.3 1,439.5 1,179.5 260.0 2,188.2 2,057.3 609.5 868.5 243.9 579.4 491.2 85.4 10.7
         Nov 6,456.1 1,463.6 1,214.6 249.0 2,211.2 2,082.4 632.7 869.4 244.7 580.3 491.9 83.1 9.9         Dec 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004          Jan 6,424.2 1,461.1 1,212.6 248.5 2,209.5 2,082.6 630.5 861.5 233.5 590.6 502.1 80.9 9.5
         Feb 6,448.7 1,454.4 1,215.7 238.7 2,212.3 2,085.6 633.8 860.3 230.1 591.5 503.3 79.5 10.8         Mar 6,506.7 1,459.9 1,203.6 256.3 2,214.3 2,088.7 632.9 864.4 230.9 591.4 503.5 77.8 13.1
         Apr 6,568.8 1,482.1 1,227.2 254.9 2,219.0 2,097.2 641.7 864.4 225.6 591.2 504.3 74.5 10.6
         May 6,583.5 1,496.5 1,251.2 245.4 2,229.4 2,105.3 640.0 874.8 232.1 590.6 504.6 75.8 9.4         June 6,551.3 1,501.5 1,256.7 244.8 2,228.7 2,101.4 640.7 870.7 224.0 590.0 504.3 76.7 12.4
         July 6,574.9 1,524.1 1,274.6 249.6 2,225.5 2,103.0 634.7 877.7 228.7 590.6 504.9 72.9 9.7
         Aug 6,567.5 1,510.2 1,259.4 250.8 2,231.7 2,105.7 636.2 878.2 228.9 591.3 505.6 74.0 9.8         Sep 6,597.6 1,495.3 1,242.0 253.3 2,237.6 2,113.6 645.8 876.6 225.6 591.2 505.7 76.0 14.4
         Oct 6,627.7 1,534.8 1,277.0 257.7 2,237.1 2,118.1 646.8 879.0 225.7 592.3 506.3 73.5 9.6
         Nov 6,683.4 1,536.2 1,285.2 250.9 2,257.3 2,140.2 672.5 874.6 218.3 593.0 506.2 73.4 11.9         Dec 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005          Jan 6,672.1 1,524.6 1,258.7 265.9 2,275.1 2,155.3 665.1 886.0 225.7 604.1 516.4 74.7 13.5
         Feb 6,717.4 1,552.6 1,282.7 269.8 2,278.4 2,160.3 670.4 885.0 220.6 605.0 516.7 73.7 13.2         Mar 6,723.0 1,524.3 1,255.2 269.1 2,271.6 2,159.7 672.3 882.2 214.5 605.2 516.5 70.9 11.5
 Changes 1
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 − 3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 − 0.31998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.42004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2003          July − 49.6 − 52.1 − 45.6 − 6.4 − 11.8 − 7.9 − 13.0 5.1 − 1.1 0.1 2.1 − 1.1 0.5
         Aug − 43.7 − 10.0 − 10.5 0.5 9.7 9.6 2.3 6.1 2.3 1.3 2.8 − 0.5 − 0.5         Sep 26.2 4.5 − 8.4 12.9 − 4.0 − 3.5 10.0 − 13.7 − 13.1 0.2 0.9 − 0.8 0.8
         Oct − 5.0 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 0.3 − 0.1 2.2 − 3.4 − 4.2 1.1 1.0 1.1 1.1
         Nov 67.6 26.1 35.8 − 9.7 23.6 25.4 23.5 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7         Dec − 8.6 10.4 15.9 − 5.5 4.4 5.1 − 10.2 5.3 3.4 10.0 8.9 − 1.0 − 0.5
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 11.1 − 17.2 6.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 8.2 − 13.1 − 14.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 0.2
         Feb 26.4 − 6.3 3.3 − 9.6 3.0 3.1 4.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 0.9 1.2 − 1.4 1.3         Mar 47.2 4.0 − 12.6 16.6 1.6 2.8 − 1.1 4.0 0.7 − 0.1 0.1 − 1.8 2.3
         Apr 57.9 21.5 23.2 − 1.7 4.7 8.7 8.6 0.3 − 5.1 − 0.2 0.9 − 3.5 − 2.6
         May 19.5 15.3 24.2 − 8.9 10.7 8.3 − 1.5 10.4 6.6 − 0.6 0.3 1.4 − 1.2         June − 33.2 4.8 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 4.0 0.3 − 3.7 − 7.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.8 3.0
         July 21.8 22.3 17.8 4.6 − 3.3 1.5 − 5.7 6.6 4.3 0.7 0.5 − 3.9 − 2.7
         Aug − 5.3 − 13.5 − 15.0 1.4 7.3 3.7 1.5 1.5 0.2 0.7 0.7 1.2 0.1         Sep 39.6 − 13.1 − 16.8 3.6 6.5 8.2 9.9 − 1.5 − 3.2 − 0.1 0.1 2.2 4.7
         Oct 36.3 41.0 35.4 5.6 − 0.1 4.8 1.3 2.4 0.1 1.1 0.5 − 2.3 − 4.8
         Nov 67.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.4 20.9 22.6 26.6 − 4.8 − 7.2 0.8 − 0.1 0.2 2.4         Dec − 55.0 − 5.9 − 13.7 7.8 8.5 9.6 − 26.1 25.3 21.7 10.4 9.3 − 1.3 − 3.1
2005          Jan 40.4 − 6.2 − 12.9 6.7 10.0 6.2 18.6 − 13.0 − 14.4 0.7 0.9 2.4 4.6
         Feb 50.7 28.8 24.3 4.5 3.6 5.3 5.4 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.8 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2         Mar 5.6 − 28.5 − 27.8 − 0.7 − 6.4 − 0.3 2.0 − 1.7 − 5.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.8 − 1.8
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  
7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 200359.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
73.4 12.2 4.4 3.5 48.1 44.6 10.8 38.7 1,470.0 128.7 594.8 348.2 307.0 2003          June
72.1 12.1 4.3 3.4 45.3 43.8 10.9 38.4 1,482.8 133.0 603.6 348.1 301.6          July
72.4 12.8 4.2 3.4 45.9 43.8 12.4 38.1 1,480.0 122.1 579.2 344.0 298.0          Aug 70.5 12.0 4.1 3.3 46.2 43.4 15.6 38.0 1,485.5 124.4 579.7 341.0 304.3          Sep 
70.6 12.7 4.0 3.3 45.5 43.0 21.1 37.6 1,494.1 126.2 574.2 344.6 299.9          Oct 
69.3 11.4 4.0 3.2 45.7 43.6 20.0 37.1 1,502.7 131.5 574.6 343.0 304.0          Nov 68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8          Dec 
67.5 11.9 3.8 3.1 45.9 45.2 16.6 36.4 1,493.9 128.6 585.4 336.8 284.5 2004          Jan 
64.9 10.9 3.8 3.1 47.3 45.8 17.5 36.2 1,503.7 127.3 604.4 332.1 288.0          Feb 
60.9 10.1 3.7 3.1 47.8 46.2 18.2 35.8 1,532.3 134.7 623.1 330.1 292.8          Mar 
60.2 10.2 3.7 3.1 47.2 46.2 17.3 35.7 1,549.0 135.3 632.3 333.7 299.7          Apr 
62.7 12.3 3.7 3.0 48.3 45.8 17.0 36.1 1,559.8 132.3 612.5 336.4 295.8          May60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 50.7 47.1 16.1 36.0 1,554.2 123.6 582.1 337.5 295.2          June
59.6 9.7 3.6 3.0 49.7 47.2 16.8 39.9 1,558.7 120.0 576.6 339.4 293.9          July
60.6 10.2 3.6 3.0 52.1 47.6 14.2 41.1 1,562.9 120.7 577.2 336.9 293.3          Aug 58.0 8.2 3.5 2.9 48.1 46.0 18.1 38.7 1,575.0 119.7 595.6 335.1 302.2          Sep 
60.4 10.3 3.5 2.9 45.6 42.6 21.2 37.4 1,569.6 118.0 582.7 335.5 309.3          Oct 
58.1 8.0 3.4 2.8 43.7 41.3 22.0 35.6 1,569.6 116.1 616.1 332.3 314.4          Nov 59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2          Dec 
58.0 8.5 3.2 2.7 45.2 41.8 25.1 31.3 1,559.9 110.2 615.0 333.1 308.1 2005          Jan 
57.3 8.0 3.2 2.7 44.3 41.5 27.3 31.6 1,570.4 117.3 623.3 332.7 301.2          Feb 
56.3 8.0 3.1 2.6 41.0 40.5 28.3 34.0 1,585.1 114.6 639.3 334.8 305.7          Mar 
Changes 1
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 − 6.2 − 6.2 − − 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 199724.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.8 0.2 − 0.4 12.1 4.3 7.0 − 0.2 − 4.6 2003          July
0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.0 1.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 − 10.9 − 32.4 − 4.9 − 0.2          Aug 
− 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.4 3.2 − 0.1 11.6 2.4 12.3 − 1.9 0.7          Sep 
0.1 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 5.6 − 0.5 7.8 1.8 − 10.3 3.4 − 1.1          Oct 
− 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 12.3 5.3 6.8 − 1.0 1.3          Nov 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 0.6 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 10.6 − 0.1 3.2 − 1.8 − 7.9          Dec 
− 1.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.9 2.5 − 0.3 4.2 − 2.7 12.7 − 3.9 − 13.9 2004          Jan 
− 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.6 0.9 − 0.2 10.0 − 1.3 19.6 − 4.6 4.1          Feb 
− 4.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.8 − 0.5 23.2 7.5 14.0 − 2.5 6.7          Mar 
− 0.8 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 15.5 0.3 6.1 3.5 7.7          Apr 
2.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.3 12.0 − 3.0 − 16.7 2.8 − 4.6          May
− 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 8.6 − 31.0 1.1 − 0.6          June− 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 0.0 0.6 3.9 3.8 − 3.6 − 7.0 1.8 − 0.4          July
1.1 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.4 0.4 − 2.5 1.2 5.2 0.6 2.1 − 3.3 − 1.8          Aug 
− 2.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.6 3.9 − 2.4 15.6 − 1.0 23.8 − 1.2 6.4          Sep 
2.5 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 3.4 3.1 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 9.2 0.8 5.3          Oct 
− 2.1 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.3 0.8 − 1.8 3.8 − 1.9 40.6 − 2.6 2.6          Nov 
1.9 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 7.2 − 4.1 − 11.3 0.7 − 33.4 − 2.4 0.7          Dec 
− 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.3 10.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.6 29.6 2.9 − 5.9 2005          Jan 
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.2 0.3 12.3 0.9 11.5 − 0.0 − 7.9          Feb 
− 1.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 1.0 1.0 2.4 15.1 − 2.3 15.8 1.7 4.5          Mar 
footnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than four with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data collected the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published together with money
separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the deposits market fund shares. 
with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt securities
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2004          Oct 2,150 6,667.4 50.8 2,560.2 1,835.1 716.4 3,648.9 461.4 2,563.7 3.4 603.8 140.6 266.9
         Nov 2,148 6,725.3 60.9 2,587.5 1,855.9 722.7 3,667.3 485.7 2,557.4 3.4 604.6 139.9 269.7         Dec 2,147 6,663.8 56.4 2,565.7 1,836.0 719.3 3,630.8 451.5 2,554.4 3.3 607.1 138.9 272.0
2005          Jan 2,142 6,719.0 57.8 2,590.6 1,859.7 720.3 3,666.2 469.5 2,552.3 3.2 627.8 140.3 264.0
         Feb 2,141 6,764.5 57.0 2,638.5 1,896.5 730.7 3,663.2 472.5 2,547.7 3.1 628.8 137.5 268.3         Mar 2,141 6,767.3 52.9 2,653.6 1,899.4 741.1 3,663.2 460.3 2,546.0 3.1 646.3 137.2 260.5
Commercial banks 5
2005          Feb 251 1,947.3 19.0 753.2 615.7 134.4 1,000.1 268.8 542.2 1.6 179.5 71.8 103.2         Mar 251 1,925.9 16.6 746.8 608.0 135.8 992.8 254.6 543.6 1.6 188.7 72.1 97.7
   Big banks 6
2005          Feb 5 1,262.8 10.0 485.3 409.2 74.1 627.0 184.3 308.1 1.2 126.9 62.8 77.6         Mar 5 1,236.4 4.8 478.2 401.5 74.4 617.7 169.7 308.1 1.2 135.8 62.7 73.0
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2005          Feb 162 586.6 8.1 212.5 155.3 56.3 334.3 67.8 216.9 0.4 48.2 8.9 22.7         Mar 162 591.4 10.4 214.0 154.7 58.5 336.0 67.4 218.1 0.4 48.9 9.4 21.6
   Branches of foreign banks
2005          Feb 84 97.9 0.8 55.3 51.3 3.9 38.7 16.8 17.2 0.0 4.4 0.0 3.0         Mar 84 98.1 1.4 54.6 51.7 2.9 39.0 17.5 17.4 0.0 4.0 0.0 3.1
Landesbanken
2005          Feb 12 1,295.9 3.6 709.0 552.2 151.9 517.7 64.0 359.2 0.3 91.8 26.3 39.4         Mar 12 1,310.8 3.1 727.2 565.4 155.5 515.0 62.3 359.9 0.3 90.0 25.9 39.5
Savings banks
2005          Feb 472 989.4 17.9 231.1 76.7 154.0 702.2 69.0 538.7 0.8 93.6 15.4 22.8         Mar 472 985.5 18.1 227.0 71.8 154.8 702.7 69.4 537.6 0.8 94.9 15.4 22.4
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2005          Feb 2 206.6 2.4 140.3 95.6 43.5 45.4 10.7 18.7 0.0 15.9 11.4 7.1         Mar 2 209.0 2.0 139.8 92.3 45.9 48.4 11.5 19.5 0.0 17.3 11.5 7.3
Credit cooperatives
2005          Feb 1,336 572.5 11.7 149.3 64.3 83.9 388.3 40.2 306.2 0.4 41.2 6.1 17.0         Mar 1,336 573.1 11.6 148.9 62.2 85.5 389.5 41.0 305.8 0.4 41.9 6.1 17.0
Mortgage banks
2005          Feb 25 866.4 0.7 229.5 136.2 92.9 617.9 10.8 475.6 − 131.6 0.8 17.5         Mar 25 872.1 0.8 231.2 138.2 92.7 622.2 12.0 474.3 − 135.8 0.8 17.1
Building and loan associations
2005          Feb 27 184.8 0.1 46.0 34.1 11.8 121.5 1.4 105.5 . 14.6 0.4 16.8         Mar 27 188.2 0.1 49.4 36.8 12.5 120.0 1.4 103.7 . 14.9 0.4 18.4
Special purpose banks
2005          Feb 16 701.6 1.6 380.0 321.7 58.2 270.1 7.6 201.6 − 60.6 5.3 44.6         Mar 16 702.7 0.6 383.3 324.8 58.3 272.6 8.0 201.5 − 62.8 5.0 41.2
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2005          Feb 126 435.3 4.2 191.8 141.2 50.3 225.7 38.9 131.9 0.2 54.4 0.7 12.8         Mar 125 438.5 5.3 191.4 141.5 49.9 228.7 39.4 134.0 0.2 55.1 0.7 12.4
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2005          Feb 42 337.3 3.3 136.5 90.0 46.4 187.0 22.1 114.7 0.1 50.0 0.7 9.9         Mar 41 340.4 3.9 136.8 89.7 47.0 189.7 21.9 116.6 0.1 51.1 0.7 9.3
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,880.9 248.4 1,632.3 2,496.2 702.3 324.6 761.7 85.7 601.9 514.0 105.7 1,615.1 287.1 388.1 2004          Oct 
1,904.1 289.3 1,614.6 2,528.9 735.3 323.9 761.1 99.3 602.6 513.9 106.0 1,611.8 287.0 393.5          Nov 
1,874.5 206.7 1,667.7 2,511.2 683.5 350.6 758.3 87.6 613.0 523.1 105.8 1,593.3 288.1 396.7          Dec 
1,885.9 285.1 1,600.7 2,555.0 733.0 340.1 763.0 112.8 613.7 524.0 105.2 1,602.6 287.8 387.7 2005          Jan 
1,913.0 261.8 1,651.1 2,569.6 744.1 339.9 766.6 125.0 614.4 524.3 104.6 1,614.3 286.2 381.4          Feb 
1,912.7 281.3 1,631.3 2,551.9 741.1 323.6 769.7 110.5 614.6 524.1 102.9 1,631.0 286.4 385.4          Mar 
Commercial banks 5
731.4 150.5 580.7 782.8 359.2 177.7 129.1 112.4 107.1 97.2 9.8 209.5 87.9 135.7 2005          Feb 
735.6 155.2 580.3 756.5 353.4 159.1 128.5 93.8 106.9 97.1 8.5 209.1 88.0 136.8          Mar 
Big banks 6
470.7 110.8 359.9 491.8 194.2 135.3 89.4 107.4 71.3 69.2 1.6 158.7 50.3 91.2 2005          Feb 
470.5 108.9 361.7 463.8 185.8 117.5 89.1 87.9 70.9 68.8 0.4 158.9 49.9 93.3          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
186.3 27.6 158.6 275.4 154.8 38.7 38.1 5.0 35.8 28.0 8.1 50.7 34.9 39.3 2005          Feb 
189.5 31.2 158.2 276.9 156.8 38.3 37.8 5.8 36.0 28.3 8.0 50.2 35.3 39.5          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
74.4 12.2 62.2 15.6 10.2 3.7 1.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 2.8 5.2 2005          Feb 
75.5 15.1 60.4 15.8 10.8 3.3 1.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 2.8 4.1          Mar 
Landesbanken
433.4 58.8 374.6 305.8 49.0 37.8 203.2 7.4 15.2 14.4 0.6 448.2 54.9 53.6 2005          Feb 
439.9 69.6 370.3 308.4 51.1 36.9 204.6 8.8 15.1 14.3 0.6 453.5 54.9 54.0          Mar 
Savings banks
218.2 4.7 213.5 636.9 199.1 49.0 11.8 − 307.7 254.7 69.3 43.4 47.9 43.1 2005          Feb 
215.5 6.0 209.6 634.9 197.1 48.9 11.5 − 308.3 254.8 69.1 43.2 48.0 44.0          Mar 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
123.4 34.9 88.5 32.3 6.7 8.8 16.0 5.1 − − 0.8 30.5 10.2 10.2 2005          Feb 
119.9 34.5 85.4 36.7 8.8 10.6 16.6 7.8 − − 0.8 31.6 10.2 10.6          Mar 
Credit cooperatives
74.7 1.0 73.7 411.5 126.9 51.7 25.3 − 184.1 157.7 23.4 31.3 31.5 23.4 2005          Feb 
74.8 1.8 73.0 410.9 127.5 51.0 25.3 − 183.9 157.6 23.2 31.7 31.6 24.1          Mar 
Mortgage banks
153.4 5.5 147.9 153.2 1.0 5.1 147.0 0.2 − − 0.2 515.3 21.6 23.0 2005          Feb 
154.8 5.9 148.9 154.7 1.1 5.0 148.4 0.2 − − 0.2 517.3 21.8 23.5          Mar 
Building and loan associations
28.2 1.4 26.7 118.8 0.5 0.8 116.9 − 0.4 0.4 0.3 6.3 7.4 24.0 2005          Feb 
28.3 1.4 26.9 119.7 0.3 0.8 117.9 − 0.4 0.4 0.3 6.2 7.4 26.6          Mar 
Special purpose banks
150.4 4.9 145.5 128.3 1.8 8.9 117.3 − − − 0.2 329.8 24.9 68.2 2005          Feb 
143.7 6.9 136.8 130.2 1.9 11.2 117.0 − − − 0.2 338.4 24.6 65.8          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
164.0 25.2 138.8 142.5 89.5 14.3 28.6 0.3 6.7 6.6 3.4 92.6 13.9 22.2 2005          Feb 
163.6 29.2 134.4 145.1 92.9 13.5 28.5 0.3 6.8 6.6 3.4 94.9 14.2 20.6          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
89.6 13.0 76.6 127.0 79.3 10.6 27.0 0.3 6.7 6.6 3.4 92.6 11.1 17.0 2005          Feb 
88.1 14.1 74.0 129.4 82.1 10.2 26.9 0.3 6.7 6.6 3.3 94.9 11.5 16.6          Mar 
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Commercial by foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. —
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank 8Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- included in the categories ”Regional banks and other commercial banks”bank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum of the banks majority-owned and ”Mortgage banks”. 
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2003          Oct 13.3 44.3 1,630.0 1,046.2 0.0 9.7 574.1 2.4 2,992.9 2,675.4 3.9 3.1 308.4
         Nov 12.8 38.2 1,663.1 1,073.8 0.0 10.5 578.8 2.3 3,012.2 2,685.5 3.7 3.4 317.5         Dec 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004          Jan 12.9 39.5 1,632.9 1,055.9 0.0 8.4 568.5 2.3 2,992.0 2,667.0 3.5 2.6 316.8
         Feb 12.9 37.6 1,645.1 1,058.5 0.0 8.5 578.0 2.3 2,994.8 2,658.8 3.4 2.5 328.1         Mar 12.4 31.1 1,656.6 1,062.0 0.0 8.1 586.4 2.4 3,015.7 2,670.4 3.2 2.1 338.0
         Apr 12.6 39.4 1,673.5 1,070.7 0.0 8.6 594.1 2.4 3,022.9 2,664.3 3.2 3.0 350.5
         May 13.5 41.4 1,693.0 1,081.2 0.0 7.7 604.1 2.4 3,013.6 2,657.8 3.2 2.9 347.8         June 12.8 37.3 1,671.7 1,070.0 0.0 7.7 594.0 2.3 3,003.5 2,652.5 3.0 3.6 342.6
         July 12.8 39.9 1,687.1 1,082.3 0.0 6.9 597.9 2.3 3,007.5 2,656.4 3.0 6.8 340.2
         Aug 12.8 41.6 1,679.0 1,075.6 0.0 7.4 596.0 2.3 3,001.8 2,648.6 3.0 5.9 343.3         Sep 12.9 41.4 1,680.5 1,073.4 0.0 7.9 599.2 2.1 3,006.1 2,652.3 2.9 3.9 345.9
         Oct 13.5 37.0 1,686.4 1,083.4 0.0 6.5 596.4 2.2 3,009.8 2,654.8 2.8 4.5 346.7
         Nov 12.8 47.5 1,688.7 1,083.2 0.0 6.7 598.8 2.2 3,014.6 2,657.4 2.8 3.9 349.4         Dec 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005          Jan 12.9 44.6 1,671.9 1,075.0 0.0 7.2 589.7 2.2 3,009.9 2,641.6 2.6 2.6 362.1
         Feb 12.5 44.1 1,676.1 1,075.3 0.0 7.7 593.0 2.2 3,000.5 2,639.5 2.5 2.5 355.0         Mar 13.2 39.3 1,684.2 1,077.9 0.0 8.5 597.7 2.2 3,003.9 2,634.7 2.5 1.4 364.2
Changes *
1996 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 − 2.0 + 4.7 + 10.61997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 − 1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 36.51998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.11999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2003          Oct + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.5 − 6.1 + 33.1 + 27.6 − + 1.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 + 19.3 + 10.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 9.1         Dec + 4.2 + 8.5 − 19.3 − 9.8 − − 1.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 16.1 − 8.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 7.4
2004          Jan − 4.1 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 8.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 7.2
         Feb + 0.1 − 1.9 + 12.0 + 2.4 − + 0.1 + 9.5 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 8.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 11.3         Mar − 0.5 − 6.5 + 11.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.4 + 0.1 + 20.9 + 11.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 9.9
         Apr + 0.1 + 8.3 + 16.9 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 7.7 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 12.6
         May + 0.9 + 2.0 + 19.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7         June − 0.7 − 4.1 − 21.3 − 11.2 − − 0.1 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 10.1 − 5.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 5.2
         July + 0.1 + 2.5 + 15.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 3.9 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 2.3
         Aug − 0.0 + 1.7 − 8.1 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 3.1         Sep + 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 2.2 − + 0.6 + 3.4 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Oct + 0.7 − 4.5 + 5.9 + 10.0 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.8
         Nov − 0.7 + 10.5 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.7         Dec + 2.1 − 6.3 − 9.0 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 15.4 − 15.5 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.6
2005          Jan − 2.1 + 3.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 − − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.1 + 8.6 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 11.1
         Feb − 0.3 − 0.5 + 4.2 + 0.4 − + 0.5 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 9.3 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 7.1         Mar + 0.7 − 4.8 + 8.1 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 4.6 − 0.0 + 3.3 − 4.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 9.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). — 5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). — 6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. — 7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). — 8Up to December
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). — 4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. — 11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month *
 
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
2.0 53.9 115.0 1,179.6 122.1 1,057.4 0.1 25.3 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 579.4 100.0 40.7 2003          Oct 
2.0 54.1 113.3 1,214.5 135.3 1,079.1 0.1 25.5 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 580.3 100.1 40.7          Nov 
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5          Dec 
2.0 57.2 108.9 1,213.2 142.0 1,071.1 0.1 28.3 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 590.6 100.3 40.3 2004          Jan 
2.0 56.6 108.8 1,215.7 134.0 1,081.6 0.1 28.2 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 591.5 100.1 40.5          Feb 
2.0 54.9 107.2 1,204.3 140.0 1,064.2 0.1 27.8 2,145.8 635.3 819.2 591.4 99.8 39.3          Mar 
2.0 54.4 106.6 1,227.8 143.2 1,084.5 0.1 27.7 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 591.2 99.2 39.0          Apr 
2.0 54.3 107.1 1,252.0 134.2 1,117.7 0.1 27.6 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 590.6 98.9 39.0          May2.0 54.9 106.7 1,257.3 129.2 1,128.0 0.1 28.4 2,158.3 643.5 826.2 590.0 98.7 38.8          June
1.0 55.9 103.5 1,275.2 125.7 1,149.4 0.1 29.5 2,160.4 637.6 833.6 590.6 98.6 38.7          July
1.0 55.8 102.2 1,260.2 122.4 1,137.7 0.1 29.4 2,161.3 639.1 832.2 591.3 98.7 38.6          Aug 1.0 57.0 102.6 1,243.1 124.4 1,118.6 0.1 30.7 2,169.7 649.5 830.4 591.2 98.6 38.5          Sep 
1.0 59.9 101.8 1,278.0 129.8 1,148.1 0.1 30.5 2,172.9 647.2 834.6 592.3 98.8 41.8          Oct 
1.0 60.2 101.8 1,286.4 148.4 1,137.9 0.1 30.4 2,195.4 673.0 830.7 593.1 98.7 42.1          Nov 1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7          Dec 
1.0 61.7 100.9 1,259.0 141.3 1,117.6 0.1 30.2 2,209.2 665.9 841.3 604.1 97.8 43.7 2005          Jan 
1.0 61.3 98.3 1,282.7 130.4 1,152.2 0.1 29.7 2,216.1 670.9 843.1 605.0 97.2 43.7          Feb 
1.0 60.9 98.0 1,255.8 131.9 1,123.9 0.1 29.6 2,218.8 673.0 845.2 605.2 95.5 43.4          Mar 
Changes *
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996− 5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 8.6 + 6.1 − 14.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 2003          Oct 
− + 0.2 − 1.7 + 34.9 + 13.2 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 2.7 − 4.1 + 15.1 − 18.6 + 33.6 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 10.0 + 0.1 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 16.3 + 25.3 − 41.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Jan 
− − 0.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 − 8.0 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.4 + 6.0 − 17.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2          Mar − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 23.2 + 3.2 + 20.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 24.2 − 9.0 + 33.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          May
− + 0.6 − 0.4 + 5.3 − 5.0 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2          June
− 0.9 + 1.1 − 3.1 + 17.9 − 3.4 + 21.4 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 5.5 + 7.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1          July+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 3.4 − 11.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1          Aug 
− + 1.2 + 0.4 − 17.1 + 2.0 − 19.1 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 8.3 + 10.4 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− + 3.0 − 0.8 + 34.9 + 5.4 + 29.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 4.2 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 3.3          Oct 
− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 8.4 + 18.6 − 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 22.5 + 26.4 − 4.5 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.3          Nov 
− 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 15.3 − 28.8 + 13.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 26.0 + 21.5 + 10.4 − 0.3 − 0.4          Dec 
− − 0.1 + 1.3 − 12.1 + 21.7 − 33.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.2 + 19.0 − 9.9 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.1 2005          Jan 
− − 0.2 − 2.6 + 23.7 − 10.9 + 34.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 7.0 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 27.1 + 1.5 − 28.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.1 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.3          Mar 
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. — 17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. — 13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). — 20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer
one month. — 16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2003          Oct 0.4 757.0 664.9 502.0 162.9 0.9 91.2 1.6 576.6 348.6 106.0 242.6 8.0 219.9
         Nov 0.3 764.6 672.3 512.8 159.5 1.3 91.1 1.6 583.8 357.5 118.0 239.6 6.4 219.8         Dec 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004          Jan 0.3 788.7 693.8 531.9 161.9 1.2 93.6 1.6 588.4 353.0 118.0 235.0 5.5 229.8
         Feb 0.3 790.5 691.5 530.7 160.8 1.3 97.7 1.6 598.7 360.7 126.1 234.6 6.0 232.0         Mar 0.3 803.2 700.1 538.5 161.6 1.7 101.4 1.7 617.6 370.2 133.9 236.4 4.8 242.5
         Apr 0.3 825.5 720.4 557.5 162.9 2.2 102.8 1.7 625.8 376.7 137.2 239.5 5.0 244.0
         May 0.3 836.2 725.7 570.5 155.2 1.9 108.7 1.7 613.1 361.8 123.6 238.2 5.0 246.3         June 0.4 835.5 722.1 566.9 155.2 2.1 111.3 1.7 618.9 363.8 124.6 239.1 7.3 247.8
         July 0.4 829.1 717.3 557.4 159.9 1.7 110.1 1.6 626.0 366.1 127.6 238.5 9.7 250.2
         Aug 0.4 828.3 714.6 557.9 156.7 1.8 112.0 1.6 635.0 372.4 134.6 237.7 12.1 250.5         Sep 0.3 854.3 735.7 578.0 157.7 2.0 116.6 1.7 634.5 375.5 141.8 233.6 10.6 248.4
         Oct 0.3 873.8 751.8 595.5 156.3 2.0 120.0 1.7 639.0 370.9 139.0 231.8 11.1 257.1
         Nov 0.4 898.7 772.7 619.1 153.7 2.0 124.0 1.6 652.7 386.3 158.1 228.2 11.3 255.2         Dec 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005          Jan 0.3 918.7 784.9 627.9 156.9 3.3 130.5 1.5 656.3 380.8 151.7 229.1 9.8 265.7
         Feb 0.3 962.5 821.3 660.8 160.5 3.5 137.7 1.5 662.7 381.2 152.9 228.3 7.7 273.8         Mar 0.4 969.4 821.6 657.3 164.3 4.5 143.4 1.5 659.3 372.1 139.4 232.7 5.1 282.0
Changes *
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.41997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 − 0.1 + 10.4 − 1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.91998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.01999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2003          Oct − 0.0 − 14.4 − 17.0 − 18.8 + 1.8 − 0.4 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 4.2
         Nov − 0.0 + 12.5 + 12.1 + 14.3 − 2.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 13.3 + 12.9 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.0         Dec − 0.0 + 11.7 + 9.9 + 7.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 6.0 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.8
2004          Jan + 0.0 + 16.3 + 14.8 + 14.0 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 5.3 + 6.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 2.9
         Feb − 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 11.1 + 8.0 + 8.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.5         Mar + 0.0 + 6.1 + 2.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 15.6 + 7.4 + 7.0 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 9.4
         Apr − + 20.3 + 18.4 + 17.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 5.6 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.3
         May + 0.0 + 13.0 + 7.5 + 14.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 + 5.8 − 0.0 − 9.7 − 12.7 − 13.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.0         June + 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.7
         July + 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.9 − 10.2 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.8 − 1.6 + 2.4 + 0.1
         Aug − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.5 − 1.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.5         Sep − 0.0 + 30.2 + 25.1 + 23.0 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 4.2 + 6.6 + 8.2 − 1.6 − 1.3 − 1.2
         Oct − 0.0 + 22.7 + 19.3 + 19.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 8.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 9.2
         Nov + 0.1 + 30.6 + 26.3 + 26.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 0.0 + 20.0 + 20.6 + 20.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.0         Dec − 0.2 − 4.9 − 8.3 − 9.4 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 18.6 − 20.1 − 20.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.8
2005          Jan + 0.1 + 21.8 + 17.6 + 16.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 19.7 + 12.6 + 13.5 − 0.9 − 1.3 + 8.4
         Feb − 0.0 + 46.4 + 39.0 + 34.9 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 7.2 − 0.0 + 9.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 8.7         Mar + 0.1 + 4.1 − 2.6 − 5.6 + 3.0 + 1.0 + 5.6 − − 6.5 − 11.7 − 14.2 + 2.5 − 2.5 + 7.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
11.7 43.0 597.1 129.1 468.0 360.1 107.9 0.3 332.0 38.2 293.8 116.4 177.5 3.4 2003          Oct 
11.7 41.3 583.1 113.9 469.2 361.3 107.9 0.3 333.5 38.8 294.7 121.6 173.1 3.3          Nov 11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6          Dec 
11.7 40.9 606.8 138.7 468.2 359.1 109.0 0.5 315.6 44.8 270.8 99.6 171.2 3.7 2004          Jan 
12.0 39.7 602.9 122.7 480.2 368.1 112.1 0.5 328.7 55.9 272.8 104.6 168.2 3.4          Feb 
9.5 39.8 640.2 136.3 503.8 389.4 114.4 0.5 326.2 61.8 264.4 103.0 161.4 0.9          Mar 9.6 39.3 646.0 127.7 518.3 403.7 114.6 0.5 323.8 56.9 266.8 106.6 160.2 0.9          Apr 
9.6 39.4 616.9 114.2 502.7 389.0 113.8 0.5 325.2 62.9 262.4 102.3 160.0 0.9          May9.6 38.9 603.8 129.4 474.4 360.2 114.2 0.5 310.2 60.6 249.6 90.0 159.7 0.9          June
9.7 39.2 598.6 123.8 474.8 359.8 115.1 0.5 309.9 54.1 255.8 96.6 159.1 0.9          July
9.7 39.3 594.3 106.8 487.5 371.5 116.0 0.5 318.7 57.2 261.5 102.7 158.8 0.9          Aug 9.7 38.8 609.9 128.7 481.2 366.3 115.0 0.5 325.3 64.8 260.5 98.6 161.9 0.8          Sep 
9.6 38.8 602.8 118.6 484.2 368.7 115.5 0.5 323.3 55.1 268.2 108.7 159.5 0.8          Oct 
9.7 38.1 617.6 140.9 476.7 363.1 113.6 0.5 333.5 62.3 271.2 114.8 156.4 0.8          Nov 9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8          Dec 
9.9 39.4 626.8 143.8 483.0 367.2 115.8 0.6 345.9 67.1 278.7 124.8 153.9 0.8 2005          Jan 
10.8 39.2 630.3 131.4 498.9 385.2 113.6 0.6 353.5 73.3 280.2 127.3 153.0 1.8          Feb 
10.8 39.2 656.8 149.4 507.4 393.9 113.5 0.6 333.1 68.1 264.9 111.9 153.0 1.8          Mar 
Changes *
− 2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 − 1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 − 2.0 1996+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.8 − 15.4 + 3.6 − 1.5 + 5.1 − + 1.4 − 1.8 + 3.2 + 6.7 − 3.6 + 0.0 2003          Oct 
− 0.0 − 1.3 − 9.2 − 14.2 + 5.1 + 4.0 + 1.0 − + 4.9 + 0.9 + 4.0 + 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.1          Nov 
− 0.1 + 0.6 + 14.9 − 17.7 + 32.6 + 31.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 − 21.2 − 6.2 − 15.0 − 17.7 + 2.7 + 0.3          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 12.9 + 43.2 − 30.2 − 30.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 5.8 + 12.5 − 6.7 − 3.5 − 3.2 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 15.9 + 12.7 + 9.4 + 3.2 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 11.1 + 2.2 + 5.1 − 2.9 − 0.3          Feb 
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.7 + 13.1 + 17.6 + 19.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 5.8 − 7.3 − 2.2 − 5.1 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 − 0.6 + 3.8 − 9.1 + 12.8 + 13.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 5.1 + 1.3 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 26.7 − 13.1 − 13.6 − 13.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 − 3.3 − 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0          May+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 13.5 + 15.2 − 28.7 − 29.1 + 0.3 − − 15.1 − 2.3 − 12.8 − 12.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          June
+ 0.1 + 0.1 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 6.6 + 5.4 + 6.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 16.9 + 13.5 + 12.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 3.1 + 6.4 + 6.2 + 0.2 − 0.0          Aug + 0.0 − 0.2 + 19.5 + 22.5 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 7.9 + 1.4 − 3.3 + 4.7 − 0.1          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 3.8 − 9.5 + 5.6 + 4.0 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 9.4 + 9.0 + 10.5 − 1.4 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 19.8 + 23.2 − 3.4 − 2.6 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 13.6 + 7.6 + 6.0 + 7.2 − 1.2 + 0.0          Nov + 0.2 + 1.5 − 10.2 − 53.1 + 42.8 + 42.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 19.3 − 25.4 + 6.1 + 9.5 − 3.4 + 0.0          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.3 + 17.4 + 55.9 − 38.4 − 40.0 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 30.7 + 30.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 2005          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 11.9 + 17.5 + 19.2 − 1.7 − + 9.0 + 6.3 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.9          Feb 
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 23.7 + 17.5 + 6.2 + 7.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 22.3 − 5.3 − 16.9 − 15.4 − 1.6 + 0.0          Mar 
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). — 5Up capital supplied to branches abroad. — 8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 9Up to December 1998,
registered debt securities. — 6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). — 7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2003          Oct 2,992.9 2,679.3 353.7 317.2 316.1 1.0 36.6 34.5 2.1 2,639.1 2,087.7
         Nov 3,012.2 2,689.2 360.7 317.5 316.6 0.9 43.2 40.6 2.6 2,651.5 2,097.0         Dec 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004          Jan 2,992.0 2,670.5 346.6 305.7 304.4 1.3 41.0 39.6 1.4 2,645.3 2,097.7
         Feb 2,994.8 2,662.2 339.5 306.0 304.8 1.1 33.6 32.2 1.3 2,655.2 2,091.2         Mar 3,015.7 2,673.6 353.0 306.8 305.9 0.8 46.3 45.0 1.3 2,662.7 2,098.5
         Apr 3,022.9 2,667.5 346.1 304.0 303.3 0.7 42.2 39.9 2.3 2,676.8 2,116.1
         May 3,013.6 2,661.0 335.4 297.1 296.2 0.9 38.3 36.3 2.0 2,678.2 2,113.0         June 3,003.5 2,655.4 331.5 294.9 294.2 0.7 36.7 33.8 2.9 2,672.0 2,102.1
         July 3,007.5 2,659.4 335.7 287.6 287.0 0.6 48.2 42.0 6.2 2,671.7 2,104.4
         Aug 3,001.8 2,651.6 324.8 281.2 280.5 0.6 43.6 38.4 5.2 2,677.0 2,105.5         Sep 3,006.1 2,655.2 325.1 287.2 286.7 0.5 37.9 34.5 3.4 2,681.0 2,106.8
         Oct 3,009.8 2,657.6 330.2 283.5 282.9 0.6 46.8 42.8 3.9 2,679.6 2,108.6
         Nov 3,014.6 2,660.3 335.0 293.1 292.0 1.1 41.9 39.0 2.8 2,679.6 2,106.4         Dec 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005          Jan 3,009.9 2,644.2 323.6 279.1 278.5 0.6 44.4 42.5 2.0 2,686.3 2,117.7
         Feb 3,000.5 2,642.1 325.2 285.2 284.6 0.6 40.0 38.1 1.9 2,675.3 2,109.7         Mar 3,003.9 2,637.2 325.3 287.8 286.8 1.0 37.5 37.1 0.4 2,678.5 2,107.7
Changes *
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 282.5 + 219.91998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.31999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.02004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2003          Oct − 2.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.6
         Nov + 19.3 + 9.9 + 6.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 12.4 + 9.3         Dec − 16.1 − 8.6 − 5.4 − 2.4 − 3.2 + 0.8 − 3.0 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 10.7 − 0.9
2004          Jan − 3.7 − 10.1 − 8.6 − 9.4 − 9.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.0 + 1.7
         Feb + 2.8 − 8.3 − 7.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 − 6.5         Mar + 20.9 + 11.4 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 12.7 + 12.8 − 0.1 + 7.1 + 7.1
         Apr + 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.0 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 + 0.9 + 14.3 + 17.6
         May − 9.4 − 6.5 − 10.4 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 3.4         June − 10.1 − 5.6 − 3.7 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 + 0.9 − 6.4 − 11.2
         July + 4.0 + 4.0 + 4.2 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 11.5 + 8.2 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 2.3
         Aug − 5.7 − 7.9 − 10.9 − 6.4 − 6.5 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 3.6 − 0.9 + 5.3 + 1.1         Sep + 4.1 + 3.7 + 2.2 + 6.0 + 6.2 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.1
         Oct + 3.8 + 2.3 + 5.2 − 3.7 − 3.8 + 0.1 + 8.9 + 8.3 + 0.6 − 1.4 + 1.9
         Nov + 4.8 + 2.7 + 4.7 + 9.6 + 9.2 + 0.5 − 4.9 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 2.2         Dec − 15.4 − 15.6 − 14.1 − 9.3 − 9.0 − 0.2 − 4.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 1.4 + 6.2
2005          Jan + 8.6 − 2.5 + 2.7 − 4.7 − 4.5 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 7.2 + 0.2 + 5.9 + 3.4
         Feb − 9.3 − 2.2 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 6.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 8.0         Mar + 3.3 − 4.8 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 3.2 − 2.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,6 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,926.8 195.7 1,731.1 160.9 46.8 551.4 402.0 32.5 369.4 147.5 2.0 7.2 2003          Oct 
1,930.3 195.9 1,734.3 166.7 47.0 554.5 401.7 33.1 368.6 150.8 2.0 7.1          Nov 
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0          Dec 
1,926.0 195.0 1,731.0 171.7 50.1 547.6 400.5 33.9 366.5 145.1 2.0 7.1 2004          Jan 
1,925.4 194.3 1,731.1 165.8 49.6 564.1 399.8 34.8 365.0 162.3 2.0 7.0          Feb 
1,922.9 193.9 1,729.1 175.6 47.9 564.1 399.7 35.4 364.4 162.4 2.0 7.0          Mar 
1,927.1 194.7 1,732.5 189.0 47.4 560.7 397.2 34.9 362.3 161.5 2.0 7.0          Apr 
1,933.6 197.1 1,736.4 179.5 47.4 565.1 394.9 34.6 360.3 168.3 2.0 6.9          May1,935.2 198.2 1,737.0 166.9 48.1 569.9 392.3 34.4 357.9 175.7 2.0 6.8          June
1,938.2 199.0 1,739.2 166.2 49.2 567.3 392.3 34.1 358.2 174.0 1.0 6.7          July
1,941.3 200.2 1,741.1 164.2 49.1 571.5 391.3 33.9 357.4 179.1 1.0 6.7          Aug 1,942.9 199.2 1,743.7 163.9 50.3 574.2 391.2 34.5 356.7 182.0 1.0 6.7          Sep 
1,944.0 198.0 1,746.0 164.7 53.3 571.0 387.9 32.9 354.9 182.0 1.0 6.7          Oct 
1,941.7 195.6 1,746.1 164.7 53.5 573.2 387.5 32.9 354.6 184.7 1.0 6.7          Nov 1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5          Dec 
1,938.3 194.0 1,744.3 179.4 55.3 568.6 385.0 32.1 352.8 182.7 1.0 6.4 2005          Jan 
1,935.3 193.0 1,742.3 174.4 54.9 565.6 384.1 30.9 353.2 180.6 1.0 6.4          Feb 
1,929.8 193.3 1,736.5 178.0 54.6 570.8 383.5 31.7 351.8 186.3 1.0 6.3          Mar 
Changes *
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 − 18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 4.5 + 0.7 + 3.8 − 5.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2003          Oct 
+ 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 3.3 − − 0.0          Nov 
− 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 9.7 − 0.7 + 1.5 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.1          Dec 
− 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
− 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 0.5 + 16.4 − 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 17.1 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.7 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 9.8 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 13.4 − 0.5 − 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.1 + 2.5 + 3.7 − 9.5 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 6.8 − − 0.0          May+ 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 12.6 + 0.8 + 4.8 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 7.4 − − 0.2          June
+ 3.0 + 0.8 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.0          July
+ 3.1 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 5.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Aug + 1.6 − 0.9 + 2.6 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.1 − 0.9 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 3.0 − 3.2 − 3.3 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Oct 
− 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.7 − + 0.0          Nov − 2.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 8.8 − 0.1 − 7.6 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 − 0.2          Dec 
− 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.0 + 2.5 − 2.7 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 5.2 − − 0.1 2005          Jan 
− 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 4.9 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 2.1 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 5.5 + 0.3 − 5.8 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 5.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.1          Mar 
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. — 6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. — 9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). — 10Excluding
possible. — 7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). — 11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. — 8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2001 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2004          Mar 2,229.2 1,124.8 1,075.2 861.7 213.5 1,242.1 329.3 149.3 37.7 58.4 148.6 31.9 56.3 57.5
         June 2,229.7 1,125.6 1,081.5 865.7 215.9 1,235.2 329.0 145.9 37.8 57.5 147.0 32.3 57.6 53.8         Sep 2,229.9 1,129.0 1,087.8 869.9 217.9 1,226.6 326.8 142.3 37.7 56.2 144.6 32.7 56.6 56.1         Dec 2,224.2 1,127.7 1,086.0 869.7 216.3 1,211.6 320.4 136.7 37.1 53.0 141.4 31.9 56.1 60.0
2005          Mar 2,216.9 1,120.6 1,081.3 867.0 214.3 1,209.7 316.5 135.7 37.0 53.1 137.9 31.1 57.0 67.3
 Short-term lending
2001 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.2
2002 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2004          Mar 306.3 − 13.2 − 13.2 261.4 8.0 47.0 4.0 13.5 53.8 4.1 8.6 27.6
         June 294.6 − 12.4 − 12.4 250.0 7.4 44.8 4.1 13.1 52.8 4.4 6.9 24.0         Sep 287.0 − 12.0 − 12.0 241.9 7.0 43.0 3.8 12.6 52.1 4.4 6.5 23.3         Dec 283.4 − 12.5 − 12.5 239.3 7.6 40.9 3.5 11.1 52.9 3.6 5.9 26.4
2005          Mar 287.1 − 11.9 − 11.9 245.0 7.3 41.7 3.9 12.1 51.0 3.7 6.0 33.3
 Medium-term lending
2001 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.7
2002 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2004          Mar 193.9 − 37.2 − 37.2 121.0 11.5 17.2 3.0 5.8 11.6 3.3 11.3 6.9
         June 198.2 − 38.7 − 38.7 124.0 12.2 17.4 3.0 5.9 11.8 3.3 11.6 7.2         Sep 199.2 − 39.2 − 39.2 124.2 12.2 17.6 2.7 5.8 11.7 3.3 11.8 7.2         Dec 194.3 − 38.8 − 38.8 119.9 11.8 16.4 2.5 5.6 11.1 3.2 11.3 7.6
2005          Mar 193.3 − 39.4 − 39.4 118.9 11.7 16.0 2.1 5.4 11.0 3.0 11.4 7.9
 Long-term lending
2001 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.1
2002 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2004          Mar 1,729.0 1,124.8 1,024.8 861.7 163.0 859.7 309.8 85.0 30.6 39.1 83.3 24.5 36.4 23.0
         June 1,737.0 1,125.6 1,030.4 865.7 164.8 861.2 309.4 83.6 30.8 38.5 82.4 24.6 39.1 22.6         Sep 1,743.7 1,129.0 1,036.5 869.9 166.7 860.5 307.6 81.6 31.2 37.8 80.8 24.9 38.3 25.7         Dec 1,746.5 1,127.7 1,034.7 869.7 165.0 852.4 301.0 79.4 31.2 36.2 77.3 25.0 38.9 26.0
2005          Mar 1,736.5 1,120.6 1,030.0 867.0 163.1 845.7 297.6 78.0 31.0 35.6 75.9 24.4 39.6 26.0
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2004          Q1 − 12.4 − 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.9
         Q2 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 5.2 + 2.0 + 3.2 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 3.6         Q3 + 0.2 + 4.5 + 6.1 + 5.2 + 1.0 − 8.6 − 2.3 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.9         Q4 − 7.4 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 1.7 − 1.2 − 10.2 − 4.3 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 2.7 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 3.6
2005          Q1 − 7.3 − 9.2 − 4.6 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.5 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 6.4
 Short-term lending
2004          Q1 − 7.3 − − 0.9 − − 0.9 − 5.1 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.0
         Q2 − 11.3 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 − 10.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.5         Q3 − 7.5 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 8.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.8         Q4 − 3.6 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.6 + 3.1
2005          Q1 + 3.7 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 5.7 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 6.9
 Medium-term lending
2004          Q1 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0
         Q2 + 4.2 − + 1.5 − + 1.5 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0         Q3 + 0.7 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1         Q4 − 4.3 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 3.5 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.5
2005          Q1 − 1.0 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1
 Long-term lending
2004          Q1 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 4.1 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
         Q2 + 7.6 + 1.8 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 2.6 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1         Q3 + 7.1 + 4.5 + 6.0 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 2.8         Q4 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 4.1 − 3.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
2005          Q1 − 10.0 − 9.2 − 4.6 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 6.7 − 3.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.4
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001
729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5 2002
702.5 158.7 43.6 206.2 429.5 66.5 973.4 742.6 230.9 119.1 20.1 13.7 3.3 2004          Mar 
703.2 165.6 45.3 200.7 428.4 66.2 981.2 749.2 232.0 120.9 20.1 13.3 3.3          June
700.4 166.5 43.9 203.0 426.8 64.6 989.9 757.8 232.1 122.5 20.4 13.4 3.2          Sep 695.5 163.7 42.5 204.2 419.0 61.7 999.4 762.4 237.0 129.2 19.9 13.2 3.2          Dec 
690.5 161.6 42.3 201.1 413.7 61.5 994.2 761.7 232.5 129.2 18.7 13.1 3.0 2005          Mar 
Short-term lending
130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001
123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0 2002
102.7 17.2 14.2 29.4 47.2 13.0 43.5 5.2 38.4 2.2 20.1 1.4 0.0 2004          Mar 
99.9 17.2 14.9 27.4 46.5 12.7 43.5 5.0 38.5 2.3 20.1 1.1 0.0          June
96.2 16.8 12.3 27.5 45.8 12.4 43.7 5.0 38.7 2.3 20.4 1.4 0.0          Sep 95.0 15.8 11.5 27.6 44.4 11.4 43.0 4.9 38.0 2.3 19.9 1.1 0.0          Dec 
93.3 15.2 10.9 26.1 43.3 12.0 41.0 4.6 36.4 2.4 18.7 1.1 0.0 2005          Mar 
Medium-term lending
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1 2002
61.9 5.5 5.8 18.1 29.6 4.2 72.3 25.6 46.7 37.3 − 0.6 0.1 2004          Mar 
63.7 6.8 6.4 17.5 30.0 4.1 73.7 26.5 47.2 38.1 − 0.5 0.1          June
63.9 6.7 6.7 17.7 30.0 4.0 74.5 26.9 47.6 38.3 − 0.5 0.1          Sep 62.3 6.5 6.5 17.2 29.6 3.9 73.8 26.9 46.9 37.7 − 0.5 0.1          Dec 
62.1 6.3 6.8 16.4 29.2 3.8 73.8 27.6 46.2 37.4 − 0.5 0.1 2005          Mar 
Long-term lending
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4 2002
537.9 136.0 23.6 158.6 352.7 49.3 857.6 711.8 145.8 79.6 − 11.7 3.2 2004          Mar 
539.6 141.5 24.0 155.8 352.0 49.3 864.1 717.8 146.3 80.6 − 11.7 3.2          June
540.3 143.0 24.9 157.8 351.1 48.2 871.7 725.8 145.8 82.0 − 11.5 3.1          Sep 538.2 141.5 24.5 159.5 345.0 46.4 882.6 730.6 152.0 89.2 − 11.5 3.1          Dec 
535.2 140.0 24.6 158.6 341.3 45.7 879.3 729.5 149.8 89.4 − 11.5 3.0 2005          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 8.8 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 6.6 − 1.2 − 3.1 + 0.6 − 3.7 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Q1
+ 0.5 + 2.4 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 7.4 + 5.8 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          Q2
− 2.8 + 1.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 − 1.8 − 1.6 + 8.7 + 8.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1          Q3− 2.4 − 2.2 − 1.3 + 1.8 − 4.8 − 1.6 + 3.1 + 4.9 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1          Q4
− 4.2 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 5.3 − 0.2 − 5.2 − 0.6 − 4.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 2005          Q1
Short-term lending
− 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 2004          Q1
− 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0          Q2
− 3.7 − 0.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0          Q3− 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 −          Q4
− 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 1.1 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2005          Q1
Medium-term lending
− 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2004          Q1
+ 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.8 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3− 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2005          Q1
Long-term lending
− 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − 0.2 2004          Q1
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
+ 0.7 + 2.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 7.8 + 8.1 − 0.3 + 1.5 − − 0.2 − 0.1          Q3− 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.8 − 0.5 + 4.6 + 5.1 − 0.5 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.1          Q4
− 2.7 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.1 2005          Q1
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. — loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2003 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.32004 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.1
2004          Apr 2,154.0 644.0 819.6 220.8 598.8 8.5 590.3 591.2 99.2 39.0 31.3 10.6
         May 2,162.4 642.7 830.2 227.9 602.3 8.4 593.9 590.6 98.9 39.0 31.3 11.4         June 2,158.3 643.5 826.2 220.4 605.8 8.2 597.5 590.0 98.7 38.8 31.4 9.9
         July 2,160.4 637.6 833.6 225.8 607.7 8.2 599.5 590.6 98.6 38.7 31.5 10.3
         Aug 2,161.3 639.1 832.2 224.5 607.7 8.0 599.7 591.3 98.7 38.6 31.9 8.2         Sep 2,169.7 649.5 830.4 222.1 608.3 8.0 600.3 591.2 98.6 38.5 32.0 10.2
         Oct 2,172.9 647.2 834.6 223.8 610.8 8.1 602.6 592.3 98.8 41.8 32.1 12.3
         Nov 2,195.4 673.0 830.7 216.9 613.8 8.1 605.6 593.1 98.7 42.1 32.1 14.0         Dec 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.1
2005          Jan 2,209.2 665.9 841.3 223.1 618.1 8.1 610.1 604.1 97.8 43.7 32.1 12.2
         Feb 2,216.1 670.9 843.1 220.4 622.7 8.1 614.6 605.0 97.2 43.7 32.1 14.4         Mar 2,218.8 673.0 845.2 219.3 625.8 7.5 618.3 605.2 95.5 43.4 31.5 18.7
Changes *
2003 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 − 20.3 + 15.6 − 0.5 + 16.1 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 + 2.0 + 7.82004 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 − 3.7 + 29.7 − 0.3 + 29.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 0.9
2004          Apr + 8.5 + 8.7 + 0.3 − 4.4 + 4.8 − 0.1 + 4.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 8.4 − 1.4 + 10.6 + 7.1 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 3.5 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 4.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 7.1 + 3.5 − 0.2 + 3.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.5
         July + 2.1 − 5.5 + 7.0 + 5.1 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Aug + 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.2         Sep + 8.3 + 10.4 − 1.8 − 2.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1
         Oct + 3.2 − 2.3 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 22.5 + 26.4 − 4.5 − 6.9 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec + 5.6 − 26.0 + 21.5 + 18.1 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 10.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 3.8
2005          Jan + 9.2 + 19.0 − 9.9 − 11.9 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.1
         Feb + 7.0 + 5.0 + 1.8 − 2.7 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2         Mar + 3.1 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 0.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 4.3
Domestic government End of year or month *
2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −2003 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −2004 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −
2004          Apr 105.8 17.3 84.7 28.6 56.2 0.9 55.3 2.2 1.6 33.3 1.1 −
         May 108.9 18.5 86.6 30.6 56.0 0.9 55.0 2.2 1.6 33.2 1.0 −         June 111.4 20.0 87.5 32.1 55.4 0.9 54.5 2.2 1.6 33.1 1.1 −
         July 109.5 18.5 87.0 31.5 55.5 0.9 54.6 2.4 1.6 33.0 1.0 −
         Aug 108.6 18.7 85.8 31.2 54.7 0.9 53.8 2.4 1.6 33.0 1.0 −         Sep 109.5 19.6 85.8 32.5 53.4 0.9 52.5 2.5 1.6 33.0 1.1 −
         Oct 101.9 15.4 82.4 28.7 53.7 1.0 52.7 2.6 1.5 32.9 1.0 −
         Nov 102.1 17.0 81.0 27.4 53.6 1.0 52.6 2.6 1.6 33.1 1.1 −         Dec 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −
2005          Jan 104.7 18.7 81.9 30.0 51.9 0.9 51.0 2.6 1.5 34.5 1.1 −
         Feb 105.0 19.7 81.2 29.4 51.8 0.9 50.8 2.5 1.5 34.5 1.1 −         Mar 101.7 18.2 79.5 29.4 50.2 0.5 49.6 2.4 1.5 34.2 1.1 −
Changes *
2003 − 4.8 + 1.2 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 −2004 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.4 − 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.1 −
2004          Apr − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         May + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −         June + 2.6 + 1.6 + 1.0 + 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         July − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −         Sep + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Oct − 7.6 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Nov + 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −         Dec + 2.9 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 −
2005          Jan + 1.1 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 0.3 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −         Mar − 3.3 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2003 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.32004 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.1
2004          Apr 2,048.2 626.8 734.9 192.3 542.7 7.6 535.0 589.0 97.5 5.8 30.2 10.6
         May 2,053.5 624.2 743.6 197.3 546.3 7.5 538.8 588.3 97.3 5.8 30.2 11.4         June 2,046.8 623.4 738.7 188.3 550.4 7.4 543.0 587.7 97.1 5.7 30.4 9.9
         July 2,050.9 619.0 746.6 194.3 552.2 7.3 545.0 588.3 97.0 5.7 30.5 10.3
         Aug 2,052.8 620.4 746.4 193.4 553.0 7.1 545.9 588.9 97.2 5.6 30.9 8.2         Sep 2,060.2 629.9 744.6 189.6 555.0 7.1 547.9 588.7 97.0 5.5 30.9 10.2
         Oct 2,070.9 631.8 752.2 195.1 557.1 7.2 550.0 589.6 97.3 8.9 31.0 12.3
         Nov 2,093.4 656.0 749.7 189.5 560.2 7.1 553.1 590.5 97.1 9.0 31.1 14.0         Dec 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.1
2005          Jan 2,104.5 647.2 759.4 193.1 566.2 7.1 559.1 601.6 96.3 9.2 31.0 12.2
         Feb 2,111.2 651.2 761.9 191.0 570.9 7.2 563.7 602.4 95.7 9.3 31.0 14.4         Mar 2,117.1 654.8 765.6 190.0 575.6 6.9 568.7 602.8 94.0 9.2 30.4 18.7
Changes *
2003 + 58.7 + 47.2 + 1.0 − 18.7 + 19.7 − 0.1 + 19.8 + 15.1 − 4.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 7.82004 + 63.9 + 25.3 + 27.4 − 5.1 + 32.5 − 0.7 + 33.1 + 12.5 − 1.3 + 3.4 + 1.8 + 0.9
2004          Apr + 9.1 + 9.0 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 5.0 − 0.1 + 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 5.3 − 2.6 + 8.7 + 5.0 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 6.7 − 1.2 − 4.6 − 8.6 + 4.1 − 0.1 + 4.2 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
         July + 4.1 − 4.0 + 7.5 + 5.7 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Aug + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.2         Sep + 7.1 + 9.6 − 2.1 − 3.7 + 1.6 − + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1
         Oct + 10.8 + 1.9 + 7.6 + 5.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 22.4 + 24.8 − 3.1 − 5.6 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec + 2.7 − 25.9 + 18.6 + 15.0 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 10.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.8
2005          Jan + 8.0 + 17.1 − 9.3 − 11.4 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 2.1
         Feb + 6.7 + 3.9 + 2.5 − 2.2 + 4.7 + 0.0 + 4.6 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2         Mar + 6.3 + 4.1 + 3.7 − 0.7 + 4.4 + 0.1 + 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.3
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.52003 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.32004 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.1
2004          Apr 740.0 213.5 499.5 92.7 406.8 2.0 404.9 5.2 21.8 5.5 17.8 10.6
         May 741.6 205.6 509.0 98.2 410.8 1.9 408.9 5.3 21.8 5.5 17.8 11.4         June 737.6 204.6 506.2 91.6 414.5 1.9 412.7 5.1 21.7 5.5 18.0 9.9
         July 742.9 200.6 515.4 99.0 416.4 1.9 414.5 5.2 21.8 5.4 18.0 10.3
         Aug 746.1 203.8 515.3 98.7 416.6 1.8 414.8 5.2 21.8 5.3 18.1 8.2         Sep 753.0 212.1 513.9 95.7 418.2 1.9 416.4 5.2 21.8 5.3 18.1 10.2
         Oct 759.4 210.3 522.0 101.9 420.1 1.8 418.3 5.2 21.9 8.6 18.2 12.3
         Nov 769.4 221.5 520.9 97.3 423.6 1.7 421.9 5.1 21.9 8.7 18.3 14.0         Dec 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.1
2005          Jan 771.2 218.2 525.9 101.4 424.5 1.8 422.8 5.2 21.9 8.8 18.3 12.2
         Feb 772.7 217.3 528.5 99.6 428.9 1.9 427.0 5.2 21.8 8.8 18.3 14.4         Mar 778.8 218.4 533.3 100.2 433.2 1.9 431.2 5.3 21.8 8.8 18.9 18.7
Changes *
2003 + 29.6 + 11.2 + 17.9 + 2.9 + 15.0 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 7.82004 + 31.1 − 2.3 + 33.0 + 7.3 + 25.7 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 1.0 + 0.9
2004          Apr + 9.5 + 6.1 + 3.0 − 1.9 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3
         May + 1.6 − 7.9 + 9.4 + 5.5 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7         June − 4.1 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 6.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
         July + 5.3 − 4.1 + 9.2 + 7.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5
         Aug + 3.4 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.2         Sep + 6.6 + 8.3 − 1.8 − 3.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1
         Oct + 6.2 − 1.8 + 7.9 + 6.2 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 2.0
         Nov + 10.0 + 11.7 − 1.7 − 4.6 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7         Dec − 7.4 − 19.4 + 12.1 + 12.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.8
2005          Jan + 9.0 + 16.2 − 7.4 − 8.8 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.1
         Feb + 1.5 − 1.0 + 2.5 − 1.8 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.2         Mar + 5.3 + 1.1 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.3
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.6
2003 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.42004 1,334.2 428.1 414.8 71.7 283.5 59.6 13.2 235.3 216.9 25.7 175.1 16.2
2004          Oct 1,311.6 421.5 408.3 71.3 278.6 58.5 13.2 230.2 213.7 26.3 171.2 16.3
         Nov 1,324.0 434.6 420.9 73.8 286.9 60.3 13.6 228.8 212.2 25.4 170.9 15.9         Dec 1,334.2 428.1 414.8 71.7 283.5 59.6 13.2 235.3 216.9 25.7 175.1 16.2
2005          Jan 1,333.2 429.0 415.2 73.3 283.3 58.6 13.8 233.4 216.2 25.6 174.7 15.8
         Feb 1,338.4 433.9 419.5 73.4 286.9 59.3 14.4 233.4 216.1 25.4 175.0 15.7         Mar 1,338.3 436.4 421.6 71.8 289.9 59.8 14.8 232.3 215.3 25.1 174.8 15.4
Changes *
2003 + 29.2 + 36.0 + 35.3 + 5.6 + 23.7 + 6.0 + 0.6 − 16.9 − 16.2 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 4.22004 + 32.8 + 27.6 + 26.7 + 4.8 + 19.2 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 5.6 − 5.1 − 3.5 + 0.6 − 2.2
2004          Oct + 4.6 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Nov + 12.4 + 13.0 + 12.6 + 2.5 + 8.7 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.4         Dec + 10.2 − 6.5 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 6.5 + 4.7 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.3
2005          Jan − 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3
         Feb + 5.2 + 4.9 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2         Mar + 1.1 + 3.0 + 2.5 − 1.5 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.6
2003 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 21.92004 103.6 41.4 0.8 5.8 34.8 0.0 12.9 15.1 2.7 2.2 10.2 0.1 21.5
2004          Oct 101.9 42.6 0.5 6.9 35.2 0.0 12.7 16.8 2.5 2.6 11.7 0.1 20.0
         Nov 102.1 41.3 0.5 5.7 35.1 0.0 12.9 16.0 2.3 1.9 11.7 0.1 19.9         Dec 103.6 41.4 0.8 5.8 34.8 0.0 12.9 15.1 2.7 2.2 10.2 0.1 21.5
2005          Jan 104.7 41.8 0.8 6.2 34.7 0.0 12.8 18.9 5.4 3.2 10.2 0.1 21.4
         Feb 105.0 41.5 0.6 6.4 34.6 0.0 12.8 18.4 4.8 3.5 10.1 0.1 21.4         Mar 101.7 40.5 0.8 6.8 33.0 0.0 12.8 18.5 4.4 4.0 10.1 0.1 21.1
Changes *
2003 − 4.8 − 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.72004 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 2.4
2004          Oct − 7.6 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Nov + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0         Dec + 2.9 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4
2005          Jan + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 2.8 + 1.0 − 0.0 − − 0.1
         Feb + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0         Mar − 3.3 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 − 2002
18.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 − 200318.4 94.3 141.0 5.5 135.6 595.7 586.3 9.5 75.1 0.3 12.8 − 2004
16.5 93.2 137.1 5.4 131.7 584.4 574.9 9.5 75.4 0.3 12.8 − 2004          Oct 
16.6 92.2 136.6 5.5 131.2 585.3 576.0 9.3 75.2 0.3 12.8 −          Nov 
18.4 94.3 141.0 5.5 135.6 595.7 586.3 9.5 75.1 0.3 12.8 −          Dec 
17.3 91.7 141.7 5.4 136.3 596.4 586.9 9.5 74.4 0.4 12.7 − 2005          Jan 
17.4 91.4 142.1 5.3 136.7 597.3 587.5 9.7 73.9 0.4 12.7 −          Feb 
17.0 89.8 142.5 5.0 137.5 597.5 587.7 9.8 72.2 0.4 11.5 −          Mar 
Changes *
− 0.7 − 21.6 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 14.7 + 14.4 + 0.3 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2003− 0.5 − 12.3 + 6.7 − 0.7 + 7.4 + 12.2 + 12.0 + 0.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 2004
− 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2004          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 1.8 + 2.1 + 4.4 − + 4.4 + 10.4 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Dec 
− 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 2005          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Feb 
− 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
 
   
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
27.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 2002
24.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0 200325.7 10.5 9.6 2.3 3.3 0.3 21.4 2.9 12.9 4.8 0.8 0.0 2004
23.9 9.5 9.1 2.1 3.1 0.3 18.6 3.0 10.1 4.7 0.9 0.0 2004          Oct 
25.7 10.6 9.7 2.2 3.2 0.3 19.2 3.4 10.2 4.7 0.9 0.0          Nov 
25.7 10.5 9.6 2.3 3.3 0.3 21.4 2.9 12.9 4.8 0.8 0.0          Dec 
23.3 8.9 8.8 2.3 3.2 0.3 20.8 3.5 11.8 4.7 0.8 0.0 2005          Jan 
25.1 10.3 9.1 2.4 3.3 0.3 19.9 4.0 10.5 4.8 0.7 0.0          Feb 
24.4 9.5 9.3 2.4 3.2 0.3 18.3 3.5 9.3 4.8 0.7 0.0          Mar 
Changes *
− 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 2003+ 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 2004
− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 2004          Oct 
+ 1.8 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Nov 
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Dec 
− 2.4 − 1.5 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2005          Jan 
+ 1.8 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          Feb 
− 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.9
2003 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 16.0 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.02004 613.0 603.5 515.5 397.9 88.0 76.7 9.6 7.7 14.2 105.8 98.4 85.2 7.4
2004          Nov 602.6 593.1 506.2 390.1 86.9 75.2 9.6 7.7 0.5 106.0 98.7 85.3 7.3
         Dec 613.0 603.5 515.5 397.9 88.0 76.7 9.6 7.7 10.1 105.8 98.4 85.2 7.4
2005          Jan 613.7 604.1 516.4 398.2 87.8 77.1 9.5 7.6 0.5 105.2 97.8 84.6 7.3
         Feb 614.4 605.0 516.7 398.5 88.2 77.7 9.5 7.6 0.4 104.6 97.2 84.1 7.3         Mar 614.6 605.2 516.5 401.1 88.7 78.2 9.4 7.6 0.3 102.9 95.5 82.4 7.4
Changes *
2003 + 14.2 + 15.1 + 28.0 + 23.8 − 12.9 − 12.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 . − 4.6 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.12004 + 12.6 + 13.1 + 14.7 + 20.1 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.4
2004          Nov + 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5
         Dec + 10.4 + 10.4 + 9.3 + 7.8 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1
2005          Jan + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1
         Feb + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0         Mar − 1.1 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.3
2003 1,490.1 353.4 20.8 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.22004 1,550.0 382.6 22.9 214.6 36.5 62.1 94.2 1,393.7 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.7
2004          Nov 1,569.8 387.7 23.6 219.6 37.4 65.6 93.6 1,410.6 2.7 0.7 0.4 1.5 42.1 3.6
         Dec 1,550.0 382.6 22.9 214.6 36.5 62.1 94.2 1,393.7 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.7
2005          Jan 1,559.1 377.1 22.7 228.4 41.1 67.8 85.9 1,405.3 2.4 0.4 0.5 1.5 43.5 3.7
         Feb 1,570.9 385.4 23.5 233.9 41.5 69.3 92.7 1,408.9 2.4 0.4 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.7         Mar 1,587.3 391.0 24.6 241.4 41.2 68.3 93.0 1,426.0 2.4 0.4 0.5 1.5 43.6 2.5
Changes *
2003 + 19.6 + 7.0 + 4.7 + 13.2 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 14.9 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.32004 + 57.4 + 27.9 + 1.8 + 34.7 − 7.9 − 8.0 − 11.0 + 76.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.5
2004          Nov − 3.9 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 3.7 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 4.4 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.0
         Dec − 19.8 − 5.1 − 0.7 − 5.0 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 0.5 − 16.8 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.1
2005          Jan + 9.1 − 5.6 + 0.8 + 13.8 + 3.7 + 5.7 − 8.2 + 11.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0
         Feb + 11.8 + 8.3 + 0.8 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 9.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Mar + 16.4 + 5.8 + 1.1 + 7.6 − 0.6 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 17.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. — 3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. — 4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. — 5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. — 6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2004 27 183.9 32.9 0.1 11.6 34.5 63.8 9.3 14.2 0.4 27.5 113.2 4.6 6.8 7.4 96.4
2005          Jan 27 184.7 34.3 0.1 11.7 34.3 63.7 9.2 14.1 0.4 27.8 113.6 4.7 6.8 7.4 6.9
         Feb 27 184.8 34.1 0.1 11.9 33.7 63.9 9.2 14.6 0.4 27.7 114.1 4.7 6.3 7.4 7.2         Mar 27 188.2 36.8 0.1 12.6 33.4 62.5 9.2 14.9 0.4 27.9 115.1 4.7 6.2 7.4 8.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005          Jan 16 135.2 27.0 0.0 5.5 21.8 45.9 8.4 10.0 0.3 20.6 77.1 4.5 6.8 4.8 4.3         Feb 16 135.0 26.7 0.0 5.5 21.4 46.1 8.4 10.4 0.3 20.5 77.4 4.5 6.3 4.8 4.5         Mar 16 137.9 29.0 0.0 5.8 21.2 44.7 8.4 10.6 0.3 20.5 78.0 4.5 6.2 4.8 4.9
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005          Jan 11 49.5 7.3 0.0 6.2 12.5 17.9 0.8 4.1 0.1 7.2 36.5 0.2 − 2.6 2.6         Feb 11 49.8 7.4 0.0 6.4 12.3 17.8 0.8 4.2 0.1 7.3 36.7 0.2 − 2.6 2.7         Mar 11 50.4 7.8 0.0 6.8 12.2 17.8 0.8 4.3 0.1 7.3 37.1 0.2 − 2.6 3.1
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2004 26.0 3.1 5.4 42.0 28.3 40.3 17.1 4.2 7.8 3.5 15.4 10.4 7.7 13.3 11.0 0.6
2005          Jan 2.2 0.0 0.4 3.0 2.1 2.8 1.3 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.9 10.3 7.6 1.0 0.0
         Feb 2.0 0.0 0.4 2.9 2.1 2.4 1.1 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.9 10.5 7.8 1.1 0.0         Mar 2.9 0.0 0.5 3.5 2.2 3.0 1.4 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.0 10.7 7.7 1.2 ... 0.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005          Jan 1.4 0.0 0.2 2.2 1.4 2.1 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.7 6.0 3.7 0.7 0.0         Feb 1.3 0.0 0.3 1.9 1.2 1.7 0.7 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.7 6.1 3.8 0.8 0.0         Mar 1.8 0.0 0.3 2.4 1.4 2.2 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.8 6.3 3.7 0.8 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2005          Jan 0.8 − 0.2 0.9 0.7 0.7 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.9 0.3 0.0         Feb 0.7 − 0.2 1.0 0.9 0.7 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.1 0.4 0.0         Mar 1.0 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.0 0.4 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.0
2003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.52004 52 203 1,452.7 681.0 595.7 170.2 425.6 85.2 671.0 477.3 17.1 15.8 460.2 193.7 100.7
2004          May 55 206 1,435.9 672.9 591.4 199.1 392.3 81.5 691.9 506.0 18.1 16.0 487.9 185.9 71.2
         June 55 205 1,435.5 670.2 588.8 190.3 398.5 81.5 681.9 486.5 18.3 16.7 468.1 195.4 83.3
         July 54 204 1,447.9 675.6 589.2 177.6 411.6 86.4 686.8 500.5 17.1 15.7 483.4 186.3 85.6
         Aug 54 206 1,451.9 676.3 588.8 174.4 414.3 87.6 686.5 492.2 17.6 16.3 474.7 194.3 89.1         Sep 53 205 1,452.0 684.1 597.8 179.7 418.0 86.3 680.6 484.4 17.7 16.3 466.8 196.2 87.3
         Oct 53 206 1,454.2 667.4 577.6 171.6 405.9 89.9 693.2 492.1 16.5 15.1 475.6 201.1 93.6
         Nov 53 205 1,483.9 691.7 602.1 176.7 425.4 89.6 692.1 492.1 16.9 15.6 475.1 200.1 100.1         Dec 52 203 1,452.7 681.0 595.7 170.2 425.6 85.2 671.0 477.3 17.1 15.8 460.2 193.7 100.7
2005          Jan 52 203 1,499.6 692.2 607.9 174.9 433.0 84.3 698.6 501.7 18.9 17.5 482.8 196.9 108.9
         Feb 52 203 1,512.5 690.2 609.9 171.0 438.9 80.3 713.4 510.9 18.9 17.6 492.0 202.5 108.8
Changes *
2003 − 5 − 3 − 6.8 − 45.3 − 17.4 − 12.7 − 4.7 − 27.9 + 22.5 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.7 + 24.9 + 15.92004 − 3 + 1 +207.5 +100.7 + 90.1 − 15.4 +105.5 + 10.6 + 64.2 + 57.8 − 1.9 − 1.0 + 59.7 + 6.4 + 42.7
2004          May − + 1 − 44.9 − 36.0 − 35.8 − 8.5 − 27.4 − 0.1 − 13.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 13.7 + 4.0
         June − − 1 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 3.2 − 8.8 + 5.6 − 0.1 − 10.7 − 19.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 20.1 + 9.2 + 12.0
         July − 1 − 1 + 5.9 + 3.3 − 1.4 − 12.7 + 11.2 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 11.2 − 1.3 − 1.0 + 12.4 − 9.8 + 1.3
         Aug − + 2 + 9.3 + 2.8 + 1.4 − 3.1 + 4.5 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 5.7 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 6.2 + 8.4 + 3.8         Sep − 1 − 1 + 20.3 + 15.0 + 15.7 + 5.3 + 10.4 − 0.6 + 4.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 4.8 + 0.8
         Oct − + 1 + 16.5 − 11.0 − 15.0 − 8.1 − 6.9 + 4.0 + 20.7 + 14.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 15.2 + 6.7 + 6.8
         Nov − − 1 + 53.8 + 33.4 + 32.9 + 5.1 + 27.8 + 0.5 + 13.1 + 10.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 9.6 + 3.0 + 7.3         Dec − 1 − 2 − 13.4 − 3.6 + 0.2 − 6.5 + 6.7 − 3.8 − 11.1 − 7.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 7.7 − 3.6 + 1.3
2005          Jan − − + 16.2 − 0.9 + 0.9 + 4.7 − 3.8 − 1.8 + 10.5 + 12.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 10.4 − 1.7 + 6.7
         Feb − − + 23.7 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 3.9 + 9.8 − 3.7 + 21.2 + 13.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 13.6 + 7.5 + 0.4
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.4
2003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.62004 45 170 647.7 304.4 236.1 117.1 119.0 68.3 282.1 211.9 38.6 35.0 173.3 70.2 61.2
2004          May 46 175 629.3 280.2 218.7 106.5 112.1 61.5 275.1 206.6 39.5 37.9 167.1 68.5 74.0
         June 45 173 628.6 283.0 220.9 110.7 110.2 62.1 278.9 210.0 40.3 37.3 169.7 68.9 66.7
         July 45 173 636.3 292.3 229.6 116.4 113.2 62.7 279.0 209.7 39.6 36.7 170.1 69.2 65.0
         Aug 45 173 627.9 289.0 224.3 115.2 109.1 64.7 278.1 208.5 38.1 36.2 170.3 69.6 60.8         Sep 45 171 634.1 292.8 226.3 114.0 112.4 66.5 279.9 210.6 37.9 35.5 172.8 69.2 61.4
         Oct 45 170 636.6 294.8 228.1 116.1 112.0 66.7 280.4 210.4 36.5 34.9 173.9 70.0 61.4
         Nov 45 170 644.4 297.7 230.2 114.9 115.3 67.5 284.4 212.6 37.8 35.0 174.8 71.8 62.3         Dec 45 170 647.7 304.4 236.1 117.1 119.0 68.3 282.1 211.9 38.6 35.0 173.3 70.2 61.2
2005          Jan 45 170 648.0 299.9 229.9 110.3 119.6 70.0 284.9 211.1 37.4 34.7 173.7 73.9 63.2
         Feb 45 171 658.3 305.7 233.5 112.6 120.9 72.1 285.2 207.3 37.0 35.2 170.3 78.0 67.4
Changes *
2003 − 1 − 21 − 32.8 − 14.0 − 10.7 + 1.6 − 12.3 − 3.3 − 11.9 − 14.2 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 9.0 + 2.3 − 6.92004 − 1 − 9 + 9.3 + 0.8 − 8.1 − 10.2 + 2.0 + 9.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 2.8 + 4.2 + 7.0 + 0.1
2004          May − − 1 − 32.5 − 17.3 − 17.3 − 4.6 − 12.8 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 16.2
         June − 1 − 2 − 0.9 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 4.2 − 2.0 + 0.5 + 3.7 + 3.3 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 2.5 + 0.4 − 7.2
         July − − + 6.9 + 8.9 + 8.5 + 5.7 + 2.8 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.7
         Aug − − − 7.6 − 2.8 − 5.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 + 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 4.2         Sep − − 2 + 9.3 + 5.5 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 4.3 + 2.4 + 3.1 + 3.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 3.7 − 0.4 + 0.8
         Oct − − 1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.2
         Nov − − + 11.9 + 5.1 + 3.5 − 1.2 + 4.7 + 1.6 + 5.7 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.8 + 1.1         Dec − − + 6.8 + 8.5 + 7.1 + 2.2 + 4.9 + 1.4 − 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.0
2005          Jan − − − 4.8 − 7.4 − 8.1 − 6.8 − 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 1.6 + 3.6 + 1.7
         Feb − + 1 + 12.1 + 6.8 + 4.3 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 3.2 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 2.8 + 4.1 + 4.4
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarde da s
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 2002
1,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 20031,226.9 798.4 295.2 503.2 428.4 61.8 55.7 52.4 6.1 5.8 366.6 139.9 21.7 64.3 2004
1,193.8 776.0 268.5 507.5 417.9 65.0 58.3 54.4 6.7 6.3 352.9 155.3 27.8 59.0 2004          May
1,187.6 775.6 267.1 508.5 412.0 65.9 59.2 55.8 6.7 6.4 346.1 160.2 28.0 59.7          June
1,199.1 774.5 261.5 513.0 424.6 69.2 62.0 58.9 7.1 6.8 355.4 161.9 28.0 58.9          July
1,209.8 785.8 266.7 519.0 424.1 70.0 62.8 59.7 7.2 6.8 354.1 153.6 27.0 61.5          Aug 1,212.4 803.1 280.4 522.7 409.4 69.0 61.8 59.1 7.1 6.8 340.4 147.6 27.1 64.8          Sep 
1,217.4 797.9 280.9 516.9 419.6 71.8 64.9 62.1 6.9 6.6 347.8 144.6 27.2 65.0          Oct 
1,251.2 804.4 280.2 524.3 446.8 64.4 58.2 55.2 6.2 5.9 382.3 139.4 27.2 66.2          Nov 1,226.9 798.4 295.2 503.2 428.4 61.8 55.7 52.4 6.1 5.8 366.6 139.9 21.7 64.3          Dec 
1,266.5 814.2 293.4 520.8 452.3 70.0 63.8 60.6 6.3 5.9 382.3 143.6 21.8 67.7 2005          Jan 
1,288.0 815.9 294.8 521.1 472.2 70.6 64.5 61.3 6.2 5.9 401.5 136.5 22.9 65.1          Feb 
Changes *
+ 34.4 + 12.6 + 17.0 − 4.4 + 21.8 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 18.1 − 72.6 + 4.6 + 26.8 2003
+ 186.4 + 93.2 + 28.1 + 65.1 + 93.3 − 4.4 − 4.8 − 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 97.7 + 0.4 − 8.7 + 29.4 2004
− 47.3 − 41.3 − 6.7 − 34.6 − 6.0 − 4.1 − 4.6 − 4.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 4.7 2004          May
− 7.2 − 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 6.0 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 7.0 + 4.9 + 0.2 + 0.0          June
+ 6.4 − 3.9 − 5.7 + 1.8 + 10.2 + 3.2 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 7.0 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 2.2          July
+ 15.0 + 13.5 + 5.3 + 8.2 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 8.3 − 1.0 + 3.5          Aug + 16.6 + 25.8 + 13.6 + 12.2 − 9.2 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.2 − 6.0 + 0.1 + 9.6          Sep 
+ 17.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 15.1 + 2.9 + 3.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 12.2 − 3.0 + 0.1 + 2.4          Oct 
+ 53.0 + 18.4 − 0.8 + 19.2 + 34.6 − 7.4 − 6.7 − 7.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 42.0 − 5.3 − 0.0 + 6.1          Nov − 10.1 + 2.6 + 15.0 − 12.4 − 12.7 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.1 + 0.5 − 5.4 + 1.6          Dec 
+ 15.8 + 1.5 − 1.8 + 3.3 + 14.3 + 8.2 + 8.1 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.0 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 3.4 2005          Jan 
+ 29.7 + 6.7 + 1.4 + 5.3 + 23.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 22.4 − 7.1 + 1.0 + 0.0          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002
467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003462.3 277.5 83.4 194.1 184.9 31.8 27.3 26.5 4.5 4.3 153.1 73.5 39.1 72.7 2004
451.1 271.9 75.7 196.3 179.2 28.5 24.7 24.2 3.8 3.7 150.7 70.6 39.2 68.5 2004          May
449.2 273.7 81.0 192.6 175.5 29.4 25.6 25.1 3.8 3.7 146.1 70.3 39.5 69.6          June
457.0 279.0 83.1 195.9 178.0 30.0 26.1 25.3 3.9 3.9 148.0 71.4 39.9 68.0          July
447.8 273.3 80.9 192.3 174.5 28.5 24.2 23.3 4.3 4.2 146.0 72.0 39.7 68.4          Aug 454.1 279.6 84.1 195.5 174.5 28.0 23.6 23.4 4.3 4.3 146.5 71.6 39.4 69.0          Sep 
455.8 276.8 82.8 194.1 179.0 26.6 22.2 21.3 4.4 4.4 152.3 71.2 39.5 70.1          Oct 
458.7 279.8 83.1 196.7 178.9 26.3 21.9 21.0 4.4 4.3 152.6 72.5 39.0 74.2          Nov 462.3 277.5 83.4 194.1 184.9 31.8 27.3 26.5 4.5 4.3 153.1 73.5 39.1 72.7          Dec 
460.0 272.0 74.9 197.1 188.0 28.9 24.4 23.0 4.6 4.4 159.0 73.8 39.5 74.7 2005          Jan 
470.1 283.8 79.7 204.1 186.3 28.7 24.1 22.5 4.6 4.4 157.6 73.7 40.3 74.2          Feb 
Changes *
− 13.8 − 10.3 + 0.3 − 10.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 6.3 − 10.3 − 1.6 − 7.2 2003
+ 1.4 − 0.7 − 16.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 5.4 − 2.2 + 4.7 2004
− 28.0 − 24.1 + 0.1 − 24.2 − 3.9 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 4.0 2004          May
− 2.1 + 1.6 + 5.4 − 3.8 − 3.7 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 1.1          June
+ 7.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 + 2.9 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 1.6          July
− 8.3 − 5.2 − 2.2 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.4          Aug + 9.0 + 8.0 + 3.1 + 4.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.1          Sep 
+ 3.9 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.2 + 5.3 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.7 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.2          Oct 
+ 6.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 − 0.5 + 4.6          Nov + 6.6 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 7.0 + 5.5 + 5.4 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1          Dec 
− 6.7 − 8.1 − 8.4 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 2.9 − 3.0 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.4 2005          Jan 
+ 11.6 + 12.8 + 4.8 + 8.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.3          Feb 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market
securities. — 3Including own debt securities. — 4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2004          Sep 6,960.0 139.2 0.5 138.7 139.3 0.6 0.0
         Oct 6,916.7 138.3 0.5 137.8 138.4 0.6 0.0
         Nov 6,923.3 138.5 0.5 137.9 138.5 0.6 0.0         Dec 6,945.1 138.9 0.5 138.4 139.1 0.7 0.0
2005          Jan 6,988.4 139.8 0.5 139.3 140.0 0.8 0.0
         Feb 7,051.8 141.0 0.5 140.5 141.3 0.8 0.0         Mar 7,156.6 143.1 0.5 142.6 143.3 0.6 0.0
         Apr  
p ... ... ... 143.1 ... ... ...
         May ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2004          Sep 1,875,073 37,501 212 37,290 37,543 253 1
         Oct 1,870,662 37,413 211 37,203 37,503 300 3
         Nov 1,877,711 37,554 210 37,345 37,608 263 2         Dec 1,864,666 37,293 210 37,084 37,436 352 20
2005          Jan 1,886,330 37,727 209 37,517 37,850 333 2
         Feb 1,870,260 37,405 209 37,196 37,467 271 0         Mar 1,896,128 37,923 209 37,713 37,981 268 6
         Apr  
p 1,894,850 37,897 209 37,688 ... ... ...
         May  p 1,914,823 38,296 209 38,088 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. 
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
         Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.71 2005 Jan                  1 1.21
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          to
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
 
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2005 Apr                  6 292,103 275,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
         Apr                13 313,575 270,500 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
         Apr                20 328,593 282,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
         Apr                27 329,984 280,500 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
         May                 4 339,182 273,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
         May               11 349,569 267,500 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2005 Jan                27 58,133 30,000 − − 2.09 2.10 91
         Feb                24 40,340 30,000 − − 2.08 2.09 91
         Mar                31 38,462 30,000 − − 2.09 2.10 91
         Apr                28 47,958 30,000 − − 2.08 2.09 91
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2004          Oct 2.11 2.03 − 2.95 2.13 2.11 − 2.15 2.11 2.08 2.09 2.15 2.19 2.25 2.32
         Nov 2.09 2.05 − 2.40 2.15 2.12 − 2.17 2.09 2.09 2.11 2.17 2.22 2.27 2.33         Dec 2.05
4 1.70 − 2.12 2.15 2.12 − 2.17 2.05 2.13 2.17 2.17 2.21 2.25 2.30
2005          Jan 2.07 1.92 − 2.20 2.12 2.10 − 2.15 2.08 2.10 2.11 2.15 2.19 2.25 2.31         Feb 2.06 1.98 − 2.11 2.12 2.10 − 2.14 2.06 2.09 2.10 2.14 2.18 2.24 2.31         Mar 2.06 1.97 − 2.15 2.12 2.10 − 2.14 2.06 2.09 2.10 2.14 2.19 2.26 2.33
         Apr 2.08 2.05 − 2.45 2.12 2.09 − 2.14 2.08 2.09 2.10 2.14 2.17 2.21 2.27
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. — 4 At end-December, 2.08% to 2.11%. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2004          June 1.88 3.28 2.09 4.03 4.84 4.71 4.97 8.13 7.15 5.90 4.44 4.00 4.54
         July 1.89 3.26 2.09 4.03 4.84 4.64 4.94 8.16 7.11 5.85 4.44 4.00 4.52
         Aug 1.90 3.24 2.10 3.99 4.81 4.60 4.91 8.17 7.07 5.86 4.43 3.97 4.51         Sep 1.90 3.22 2.12 3.97 4.82 4.58 4.90 8.05 7.14 5.85 4.46 3.99 4.52
         Oct 1.90 3.27 2.10 3.89 4.69 4.53 4.88 8.04 7.08 5.80 4.42 3.97 4.48
         Nov 1.90 3.26 2.12 3.86 4.67 4.52 4.86 7.93 6.99 5.82 4.41 3.96 4.48         Dec 1.92 3.24 2.16 3.78 4.72 4.49 4.83 7.94 7.02 5.80 4.35 3.97 4.44
2005          Jan 1.90 3.23 2.13 3.68 4.66 4.45 4.79 8.07 6.97 5.77 4.42 3.90 4.41
         Feb 1.91 3.25 2.13 3.67 4.62 4.45 4.76 8.06 7.02 5.76 4.40 3.92 4.46
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2004          June 0.70 1.87 2.21 2.42 1.96 2.55 0.87 1.99 2.27 3.76
         July 0.70 1.90 2.21 2.54 1.94 2.55 0.86 1.99 2.59 4.00
         Aug 0.72 1.91 2.18 2.67 1.95 2.53 0.87 1.98 2.36 3.99         Sep 0.72 1.90 2.20 2.48 2.00 2.52 0.90 2.00 2.31 3.68
         Oct 0.72 1.92 2.29 2.48 2.00 2.52 0.89 2.04 2.32 3.56
         Nov 0.73 1.94 2.20 2.50 2.01 2.51 0.90 2.04 2.22 3.39         Dec 0.73 1.95 2.19 2.32 2.00 2.52 0.90 2.08 2.68 3.52
2005          Jan 0.73 1.95 2.29 2.53 1.98 2.49 0.92 2.04 2.25 3.26
         Feb 0.74 1.94 2.19 2.32 1.97 2.49 0.92 2.04 2.25 3.52
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2004          June 9.79 7.87 6.58 6.74 8.42 4.17 3.42 4.12 4.82 4.69 3.93 4.97 5.01
         July 9.79 7.97 6.63 6.86 8.52 4.20 3.47 4.16 4.81 4.69 4.04 4.94 5.01
         Aug 9.86 8.15 7.07 6.89 8.58 4.29 3.50 4.19 4.87 4.65 3.91 5.07 5.02         Sep 9.60 8.07 6.91 6.96 8.45 4.24 3.49 4.14 4.82 4.66 3.90 4.98 5.00
         Oct 9.53 7.87 6.79 6.87 8.34 4.18 3.50 4.12 4.77 4.64 4.08 4.87 4.92
         Nov 9.48 7.85 6.88 6.85 8.23 4.09 3.45 4.07 4.66 4.58 3.96 4.89 4.82         Dec 9.52 7.59 6.73 6.60 7.67 4.07 3.43 3.95 4.49 4.41 3.82 4.59 4.65
2005          Jan 9.61 8.01 6.97 6.81 8.32 4.07 3.44 3.97 4.43 4.45 3.96 4.64 4.62
         Feb 9.66 7.77 6.20 6.84 8.19 3.98 3.40 3.94 4.39 4.33 3.99 4.73 4.49
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2004          June 5.40 3.97 4.81 4.71 2.99 3.26 4.08
         July 5.42 4.02 4.85 4.65 3.02 3.28 4.27
         Aug 5.44 4.06 4.89 4.73 2.99 3.12 4.30         Sep 5.37 4.00 4.85 4.68 2.99 3.37 4.46
         Oct 5.39 4.02 4.87 4.64 2.98 3.30 4.27
         Nov 5.37 4.02 4.79 4.55 2.95 3.35 4.31         Dec 5.26 3.97 4.67 4.46 3.05 3.55 4.10
2005          Jan 5.40 3.97 4.69 4.47 3.02 3.30 4.08
         Feb 5.32 3.91 4.77 4.36 3.02 3.34 3.82
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Mar 1.94 122,662 3.11 192,728 1.98 71,568 4.96 29,211
         Apr 1.92 119,413 3.07 192,985 1.97 71,450 4.93 29,591
         May 1.90 118,543 3.05 192,822 1.98 73,261 4.93 29,523         June 1.89 115,574 3.03 193,431 1.98 71,355 4.88 29,376
         July 1.91 113,816 3.03 193,684 1.99 72,644 4.86 29,709
         Aug 1.91 112,858 3.03 194,631 2.00 70,573 4.82 29,760         Sep 1.90 111,909 2.97 194,950 2.00 69,114 4.81 29,936
         Oct 1.91 111,286 2.96 195,397 2.01 72,291 4.74 28,853
         Nov 1.90 110,334 2.95 194,704 2.01 69,413 4.71 29,239         Dec 1.94 112,266 2.92 199,018 2.07 73,428 4.62 29,684
2005          Jan 1.94 109,623 2.91 198,936 2.05 71,982 4.61 28,809
         Feb 1.92 109,099 2.89 198,918 2.01 70,218 4.56 28,550         Mar 1.94 107,146 2.87 198,059 2.03 69,440 4.54 28,190
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2004          Mar 5.32 7,690 4.90 32,180 5.75 880,980 8.74 84,319 6.27 69,587 6.25 331,220
         Apr 5.29 7,401 4.87 32,148 5.74 881,832 8.81 82,911 6.19 70,268 6.22 331,533
         May 5.27 7,501 4.84 32,268 5.73 882,795 8.74 81,301 6.15 70,586 6.21 331,611         June 5.23 7,635 4.83 33,008 5.71 886,304 8.88 83,204 6.14 70,479 6.21 331,013
         July 5.24 7,577 4.77 33,072 5.69 888,736 8.80 81,277 6.10 71,134 6.21 331,665
         Aug 5.24 7,478 4.75 33,203 5.68 890,887 8.77 80,999 6.07 71,478 6.20 331,010         Sep 5.27 7,597 4.72 33,360 5.67 894,787 8.83 83,016 6.04 70,960 6.20 329,461
         Oct 5.14 7,649 4.67 33,775 5.66 895,414 8.79 80,415 5.95 71,660 6.18 330,628
         Nov 5.12 7,586 4.65 33,278 5.65 896,510 8.72 77,971 5.94 70,561 6.17 328,982         Dec 5.25 7,637 4.63 33,190 5.63 897,826 8.72 80,598 5.91 70,109 6.23 331,682
2005          Jan 5.20 7,201 4.60 32,930 5.61 896,162 8.72 79,153 5.88 69,565 6.21 330,629
         Feb 5.14 7,107 4.58 32,852 5.60 895,869 8.77 77,215 5.91 69,138 6.20 329,691         Mar 5.13 7,153 4.50 33,786 5.58 894,888 8.81 77,974 5.88 69,159 6.20 327,547
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Mar 4.76 183,464 4.34 87,519 5.27 487,244
         Apr 4.75 179,606 4.32 87,478 5.25 489,214
         May 4.77 174,716 4.28 89,876 5.23 491,825         June 4.79 176,791 4.32 90,154 5.22 488,805
         July 4.72 171,094 4.26 90,072 5.21 487,135
         Aug 4.68 170,136 4.21 90,723 5.19 487,903         Sep 4.75 171,070 4.25 89,980 5.25 485,483
         Oct 4.68 169,423 4.18 87,915 5.23 485,720
         Nov 4.61 174,233 4.14 87,256 5.20 486,256         Dec 4.64 166,976 4.15 87,044 5.19 483,878
2005          Jan 4.65 163,146 4.12 86,960 5.15 483,211
         Feb 4.69 164,658 4.09 86,165 5.14 483,024         Mar 4.67 164,367 4.05 85,401 5.12 480,353
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by the end of the month. — 1The effective interest rates may always be
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments onhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and deposits and loans but not any other related charges which may occur fornon-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarante es and
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. —
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a home improvements; including loans granted by building and loansample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics 4Consumer credits are loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting System / consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these statistics,
Banking statistics / EWU-Zinsstatistik). This information is currently available other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business , debt
in German only. — oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at consolidation, education etc. — 6 Including overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2004          Mar 1.12 410,717 2.03 28,021 2.31 840 2.66 2,357 2.10 504,583 2.62 87,863
         Apr 1.13 412,968 2.01 32,020 2.30 1,243 2.76 2,061 2.13 505,420 2.60 86,706
         May 1.13 418,859 1.88 30,506 2.33 1,097 2.74 2,404 2.10 505,649 2.58 85,838         June 1.13 419,073 1.88 25,696 2.46 838 2.71 1,725 2.13 505,366 2.57 85,480
         July 1.14 418,729 1.90 25,693 2.43 1,071 2.86 2,113 2.10 505,800 2.57 85,562
         Aug 1.16 416,996 1.96 24,546 2.50 701 3.12 2,459 2.11 506,415 2.56 85,491         Sep 1.17 418,189 1.89 23,981 2.50 913 2.78 2,724 2.13 506,492 2.55 85,177
         Oct 1.17 421,839 1.92 22,905 2.67 960 3.03 2,649 2.13 506,856 2.54 85,738
         Nov 1.15 434,898 1.92 23,384 2.41 856 3.04 2,839 2.16 506,807 2.54 86,549         Dec 1.17 428,606 1.90 25,470 2.39 929 2.59 2,791 2.13 515,840 2.55 87,804
2005          Jan 1.19 429,342 1.93 26,734 2.72 1,647 2.89 4,284 2.09 516,803 2.51 87,540
         Feb 1.20 434,050 1.93 22,719 2.52 1,089 2.69 1,796 2.11 517,068 2.51 88,103         Mar 1.20 436,542 1.96 22,809 2.53 957 2.76 4,236 2.06 516,937 2.49 88,481
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Mar 1.11 130,095 1.92 34,914 2.28 201 3.82 1,274
         Apr 1.10 134,285 1.90 30,589 1.85 222 3.93 1,075
         May 1.10 131,703 1.92 32,753 2.44 115 4.24 1,535         June 1.09 134,255 1.92 31,971 2.59 163 4.22 1,273
         July 1.08 131,254 1.95 32,273 3.10 334 4.25 2,601
         Aug 1.08 135,739 1.94 30,356 2.56 102 4.29 1,823         Sep 1.11 138,157 1.95 30,538 2.51 274 3.94 2,033
         Oct 1.13 137,992 1.97 29,266 2.56 258 4.13 1,151
         Nov 1.13 142,752 1.95 29,259 2.24 176 4.04 2,678         Dec 1.14 144,569 2.02 51,843 2.39 211 3.81 2,215
2005          Jan 1.19 140,648 2.03 39,113 2.50 181 3.50 1,526
         Feb 1.20 140,178 1.97 33,053 2.24 134 3.93 1,055         Mar 1.21 140,864 1.98 32,399 2.57 236 3.58 1,000
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2004          Mar 7.83 5.28 1,553 6.29 5,806 8.88 4,494 3.69 8,974 5.11 2,037 5.00 3,549
         Apr 7.56 5.05 1,664 6.08 6,345 8.86 4,074 3.50 9,264 4.92 1,658 5.00 2,903
         May 7.77 5.21 1,147 6.21 5,257 8.94 3,147 3.94 5,901 4.85 1,552 5.10 1,725         June 7.87 5.34 1,402 6.21 5,371 9.11 3,794 3.48 8,704 5.00 2,816 5.07 3,278
         July 8.02 5.25 1,492 6.34 5,020 9.27 3,792 3.64 9,119 4.90 1,908 5.15 2,018
         Aug 8.13 5.42 1,090 6.44 5,187 9.16 3,038 3.52 8,837 5.07 1,379 5.17 1,365         Sep 8.03 5.09 1,365 6.41 4,878 9.19 3,058 3.42 9,097 4.88 1,474 5.07 2,577
         Oct 7.95 4.77 1,210 6.30 4,579 9.17 2,927 3.74 7,395 4.80 1,590 4.90 1,415
         Nov 7.70 4.86 1,251 6.20 4,159 8.88 3,133 3.46 8,436 4.84 1,164 4.75 1,989         Dec 7.18 4.90 1,550 5.95 4,551 8.04 2,846 3.44 10,026 4.54 2,853 4.68 2,967
2005          Jan 7.94 4.98 1,347 6.38 4,289 9.05 2,847 3.68 9,059 4.64 1,578 4.67 2,251
         Feb 7.92 4.85 1,531 6.35 3,720 8.98 2,743 3.66 4,633 4.68 1,182 4.38 1,653         Mar 7.80 4.73 1,656 6.26 4,179 8.88 3,365 3.70 7,094 4.67 1,687 4.51 2,202
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volumeweighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Mar 10.38 57,884 4.85 4.43 2,504 4.48 3,240 4.99 5,417 4.98 2,983
         Apr 10.36 56,755 4.76 4.26 2,706 4.32 3,127 4.91 5,106 4.95 2,964
         May 10.35 55,144 4.80 4.49 2,079 4.37 2,736 4.91 4,497 4.94 2,865         June 10.38 56,024 4.83 4.49 2,314 4.32 3,479 4.96 5,292 5.09 2,934
         July 10.35 54,012 4.84 4.26 3,233 4.51 3,279 4.92 5,963 5.11 2,873
         Aug 10.33 53,601 4.88 4.37 2,071 4.59 2,291 5.04 3,844 4.99 2,648         Sep 10.33 55,219 4.87 4.44 2,058 4.53 2,371 4.96 4,139 4.97 2,551
         Oct 10.26 53,107 4.78 4.30 3,091 4.48 2,343 4.89 4,077 4.88 2,730
         Nov 10.22 50,788 4.72 4.45 1,887 4.40 2,131 4.78 3,961 4.76 3,164         Dec 10.30 52,435 4.61 4.37 2,292 4.29 2,682 4.63 5,217 4.67 3,598
2005          Jan 10.32 50,978 4.55 4.37 2,467 4.20 2,321 4.56 4,631 4.62 3,507
         Feb 10.30 50,158 4.49 4.35 1,668 4.20 1,962 4.51 3,504 4.48 2,816         Mar 10.33 51,229 4.48 4.29 2,078 4.14 2,216 4.46 4,854 4.52 3,625
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Mar 6.22 87,095 4.44 7,140 5.00 1,262 5.20 1,385
         Apr 6.11 84,844 4.43 6,733 4.89 1,419 5.04 1,211
         May 6.27 81,810 4.52 6,616 5.00 987 4.93 1,186         June 6.23 84,291 4.54 7,185 4.98 1,268 5.19 1,509
         July 6.21 80,484 4.62 7,193 5.01 1,360 5.05 1,171
         Aug 6.25 77,547 4.42 6,177 5.08 1,030 5.00 1,098         Sep 6.25 81,220 4.51 7,522 4.92 1,207 4.97 1,216
         Oct 6.11 79,457 4.55 7,213 4.96 1,238 4.92 1,200
         Nov 5.96 80,969 4.61 6,218 4.83 1,336 4.62 1,141         Dec 6.01 76,804 4.50 6,458 4.75 1,520 4.64 2,147
2005          Jan 5.89 74,567 4.44 5,388 4.82 1,205 4.59 1,497
         Feb 5.88 78,066 4.34 5,232 4.84 1,094 4.58 1,160         Mar 5.91 76,642 4.42 6,537 4.70 1,260 4.71 1,344
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2004          Mar 3.20 35,662 3.85 3,509 4.85 5,627
         Apr 3.25 30,662 3.79 3,034 4.57 5,536
         May 3.26 26,670 3.93 3,403 4.79 4,593         June 3.26 32,704 3.93 3,754 4.63 5,444
         July 3.27 35,348 3.91 4,012 4.89 4,475
         Aug 3.26 28,221 3.60 3,766 4.70 3,971         Sep 3.31 31,752 3.65 4,204 4.41 5,135
         Oct 3.26 30,755 3.85 3,246 4.51 4,502
         Nov 3.16 30,886 3.68 3,855 4.46 4,913         Dec 3.34 43,091 3.95 7,061 4.33 8,560
2005          Jan 3.35 34,508 3.75 4,041 4.27 4,889
         Feb 3.40 26,543 3.66 3,928 3.99 5,083         Mar 3.25 42,024 3.68 4,875 4.23 6,185
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,9151994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,1091997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,9462002 175,219 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,184 63,734 13,536 50,198 − 111,4852003 185,193 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,738 95,252 35,748 59,504 − 89,9412004 240,861 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 107,150 107,071 121,841 − 14,770 − 133,790
2005          Jan 43,572 28,578 3,200 1,988 23,390 14,994 17,407 14,068 3,339 − 26,165
         Feb 38,051 16,801 14,072 5,382 − 2,652 21,250 19,029 12,555 6,474 − 19,022         Mar 32,905 15,540 14,291 − 681 1,930 17,365 24,388 19,812 4,576 − 8,517
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,932
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6781998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,728 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,193
2001 82,665 17,575 65,090 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,9172002 37,404 9,232 28,172 16,472 − 23,236 39,708 20,9322003 14,046 16,838 − 2,791 − 14,631 7,056 − 21,687 28,6782004 3,157 10,157 − 7,002 7,783 5,045 2,738 − 4,627
2005          Jan − 4,488 239 − 4,727 1,888 3,079 − 1,191 − 6,376
         Feb 4,725 875 3,850 − 4,841 − 4,559 − 282 9,566         Mar 1,888 924 964 1,407 2,973 − 1,566 481
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2004          Dec 61,917 46,740 2,531 4,219 8,133 31,857 1,197 13,980 1702005          Jan 106,569 71,089 2,157 12,000 22,548 34,384 888 34,592 −
         Feb 85,012 68,537 5,375 9,898 17,138 36,126 1,006 15,469 −         Mar 85,097 65,104 3,181 7,335 16,753 37,834 1,933 18,060 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,9391993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2004          Dec 16,456 13,639 1,051 2,406 1,632 8,550 1,074 1,743 1702005          Jan 54,336 32,585 1,649 9,924 8,607 12,404 878 20,873 −
         Feb 39,990 30,612 4,179 5,340 5,170 15,922 570 8,809 −         Mar 31,316 26,765 2,126 3,720 5,619 15,300 1,300 3,251 −
Net sales  6 
1992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,1141993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,7011994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2004          Dec − 20,863 − 11,571 − 407 − 11,147 − 1,645 1,629 − 1,637 − 7,655 − 7512005          Jan 21,981 5,179 − 867 − 6,949 8,920 4,074 − 207 17,009 − 2,305
         Feb 15,026 14,199 1,920 − 5,675 8,666 9,289 953 − 126 − 5,676         Mar 16,543 17,680 1,894 − 1,255 6,818 10,224 1,737 − 2,874 − 4,134
*For definitions, see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to Monthly Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Report 2, Capital market statistics. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,873
1993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005          Jan 2,794,988 1,690,945 158,494 546,978 325,665 659,808 73,637 1,030,406 168,238
         Feb 2,810,014 1,705,145 160,414 541,303 334,331 669,097 74,590 1,030,280 162,562         Mar 2,826,557 1,722,825 162,307 540,048 341,149 679,320 76,326 1,027,407 158,428
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-March 2005 
975,350 637,833 59,506 213,867 108,497 255,964 21,707 315,810 47,290    less than 2
657,250 450,023 50,066 167,681 95,651 136,625 14,830 192,396 61,714 2 to less than 4
453,111 271,522 24,094 95,682 58,556 93,190 11,003 170,587 31,081 4 to less than 6
256,800 123,797 22,074 38,690 19,534 43,499 10,366 122,637 5,399 6 to less than 8
219,251 95,515 6,289 11,819 20,948 56,458 12,029 111,707 5,507 8 to less than 10
105,410 92,944 242 7,525 11,590 73,586 2,211 10,255 3,597 10 to less than 15
27,206 13,257 35 937 9,027 3,259 656 13,293 2,076 15 to less than 20
132,177 37,933 − 3,849 17,344 16,740 3,523 90,721 1,766 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .1994o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .19963 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005          Jan 164,680 − 122 72 1 13 7 − 125 − 15 − 75 894,366
         Feb 164,352 − 328 111 10 0 45 − 191 − 260 − 45 921,002         Mar 164,387 34 109 57 0 50 24 − 162 − 42 923,089
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — oFrom January was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose shares are traded
1994, including the shares of east German companies (resultant increase in on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
share circulation: DM7,771 million). — 1Including shares issued out of Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse
company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on the Official Mar- AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
ket, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock market segment
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German Germanmore than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.05
1993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005          Jan 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.6 3.2 3.8 3.9 3.5 120.97 100.80 269.10 4,254.85
         Feb 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.5 3.2 3.7 3.9 3.4 120.25 99.90 276.05 4,350.49         Mar 3.4 3.5 3.5 3.7 3.3 3.8 4.1 3.4 120.25 100.14 275.69 4,348.77
         Apr 3.2 3.3 3.3 3.5 3.1 3.6 3.9 3.3 121.89 101.36 261.90 4,184.84
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1992 81,514 20,474 − 3,102 − − 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,0011994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,3181997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 48,016 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 4,073 49,860 − 2,658 734 52,518 3,339 − 1,8442004 13,404 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 11,951 8,340 8,446 3,796 − 106 8,155 5,064
2005          Jan 11,032 4,717 873 − 154 − 172 1,138 3,845 6,315 12,520 1,850 674 10,670 5,641 − 1,488
         Feb 5,455 − 98 − 2,317 415 − 1,827 − 958 2,219 5,553 5,979 2,749 1,846 3,230 3,707 − 524         Mar 7,319 4,679 1,805 1,746 839 − 780 2,874 2,640 5,207 2,624 1,004 2,583 1,636 2,112
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
operat- Fixed Compen-
of ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex- sation
which pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend- of em-
Period Total Taxes Total  3 ployees iture grants Interest tion aid  4 Balance venue  5 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 − 12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 − 14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.11997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 − 94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 − 91.71998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 − 56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 − 53.41999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 − 26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 − 23.4
2000  
p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  6,p 555.8 446.2 599.9 169.9 69.8 213.8 66.6 40.1 39.2 − 44.1 445.0 449.1 − 4.1 923.5 971.7 − 48.2
2002  pe 550.9 441.7 608.0 173.3 69.5 225.9 66.1 38.7 33.5 − 57.1 457.9 466.4 − 8.5 924.1 989.7 − 65.6
2003  pe 546.6 442.2 615.2 174.0 68.8 236.4 65.7 36.3 32.5 − 68.6 466.8 473.3 − 6.5 924.5 999.6 − 75.1
2003          Q1 117.2 96.3 154.5 40.9 15.6 61.8 23.6 5.6 6.5 − 37.3 116.3 116.8 − 0.5 207.7 245.5 − 37.8
         Q2 135.8 108.9 143.8 40.9 15.5 61.3 10.8 7.5 7.5 − 8.0 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 228.2 239.1 − 10.9         Q3 131.2 109.6 155.8 42.4 16.6 58.5 21.6 9.2 7.4 − 24.6 115.1 117.8 − 2.7 225.0 252.3 − 27.4         Q4  
p 160.7 127.4 159.8 48.1 20.5 55.2 9.5 12.9 13.7 + 0.9 119.0 120.4 − 1.5 261.1 261.7 − 0.6
2004          Q1  p 116.1 97.0 157.9 41.7 15.4 62.8 25.3 5.4 6.3 − 41.8 116.4 116.8 − 0.4 206.1 248.3 − 42.2
         Q2  p 133.1 112.8 141.8 41.3 15.7 59.6 10.0 6.8 6.4 − 8.7 115.8 116.4 − 0.6 226.1 235.5 − 9.3
         Q3  p 133.7 107.9 152.7 41.9 16.1 57.5 20.4 8.5 6.9 − 19.0 114.0 116.0 − 2.1 226.6 247.7 − 21.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly f igures
Office. — *The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed for some insurance sectors are estimated. — 3Including discrepancies in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the clearing transactions between central, state and local government. —
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — 4Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the interests. — 5Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly Federal Labour Office. — 6Owing to modifications of the system of
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between other operatin g
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, expenditure and current grants. see footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. — 2The annual figures differ from the sum of
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  p 240.6 261.3 184.6 207.1 50.4 52.6 119.5 123.2 24.8 25.2
2002  pe 238.9 271.6 183.5 207.5 48.0 53.3 119.9 124.5 25.1 25.3
2003  pe 239.6 278.8 182.9 208.8 49.1 53.5 117.1 125.0 24.7 25.5
2004  pe 233.8 273.6 186.4 207.8 48.4 52.1 120.8 124.7 25.0 25.1
2003          Q1 46.6 71.9 42.2 51.1 9.7 12.6 25.2 29.4 5.3 5.6
         Q2 59.1 64.6 44.4 50.2 12.0 12.0 26.7 29.1 5.6 5.8         Q3 57.6 74.5 45.3 50.5 12.2 13.1 29.3 30.6 6.1 6.3         Q4  
p 76.3 67.8 50.5 56.5 14.7 15.6 35.6 35.3 7.6 7.6
2004          Q1  p 44.8 73.4 42.4 51.5 11.1 12.8 25.8 29.7 5.4 5.5
         Q2  p 56.4 62.3 46.5 51.2 11.3 11.5 28.8 29.0 5.7 5.8
         Q3  p 58.3 71.2 45.1 50.5 12.5 12.5 29.9 30.5 6.2 6.2
         Q4  p 74.4 66.7 51.8 54.1 13.1 15.0 35.9 34.9 7.6 7.5
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. — *See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. — 1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. — 4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Item 1997 1998 1999 2000  1 2001 2002 2003 2004  pe 
Revenue 1,731.7 1,779.3 945.0 967.0 952.3 955.7 963.3 958.1
of which
Taxes 857.2 897.3 490.5 511.7 488.3 486.0 489.8 488.0Social contributions 720.2 727.8 375.4 378.4 383.6 389.2 394.8 396.5
Expenditure 1,830.7 1,862.9 974.3 990.7 1,011.0 1,033.1 1,044.8 1,038.2of which
Intermediate consumption 150.6 154.3 83.5 82.4 85.2 89.2 88.4 89.4Compensation of employees 319.4 319.8 165.6 166.1 165.9 168.2 168.2 166.6Interest 126.7 129.0 63.2 65.1 64.5 62.6 63.8 63.5Social benefits  
2 984.7 998.4 523.1 532.7 549.2 573.1 587.1 588.5
Gross capital formation 69.0 69.4 37.6 36.8 36.8 35.8 31.9 30.5
Net lending/net borrowing − 99.0 − 83.6 − 29.3 − 23.7 − 58.7 − 77.5 − 81.4 − 80.1
as a percentage of GDP − 2.6 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 2.8 − 3.6 − 3.8 − 3.6
Memo itemDebt as defined in theMaastricht Treaty 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.5 1,283.6 1,366.4 1,437.2
as a percentage of GDP 59.6 59.8 60.2 59.2 58.3 59.7 63.1 65.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office record such
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include proceeds (
€50.85 billion) under "net increase in non-produced assets", with
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus ( €22.8 billion
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. — 1Adjusted for proceeds from the sale or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. — 2 Including social benefits in kind. 
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 581993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 7141997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 1171998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 122002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 512003 442,235 390,437 214,002 155,510 . 20,925 51,671 4,751 + 1272004 ... 386,459 208,920 157,898 . 19,641 ... ... ...
2004          Q4 ... 110,996 64,161 43,261 . 3,574 ... ... ...
2005          Q1 ... 85,690 42,005 35,976 . 7,708 ... ... ...
2004          Nov . 28,001 15,539 11,172 . 1,291 . . .
         Dec . 56,342 34,076 21,343 . 922 . . .
2005          Jan . 26,540 9,271 12,570 . 4,699 . . .
         Feb . 29,621 16,459 11,726 . 1,436 . . .         Mar . 29,529 16,275 11,681 . 1,573 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Including receipts from the 1988. — 4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  — 2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. — 5Difference between the local government’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
remitted to state government. — 3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,1702002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,8462003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,4092004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2004          Q4 117,958 46,282 35,455 4,999 3,728 2,100 35,478 27,261 8,217 2,773 28,117 4,496 812 6,962
2005          Q1 90,403 34,325 27,867 − 3,761 4,416 5,804 34,909 28,031 6,878 222 15,206 5,005 736 4,713
2004          Nov 29,511 8,278 8,887 − 866 − 336 593 12,392 9,627 2,765 440 6,628 1,527 247 1,510
         Dec 60,345 29,955 17,704 6,877 4,632 742 12,094 9,133 2,961 1,351 15,101 1,548 297 4,003
2005          Jan 28,503 12,644 10,055 − 292 − 183 3,064 11,943 9,653 2,290 66 1,919 1,705 226 1,963
         Feb 31,229 9,713 9,123 − 677 4 1,263 13,082 10,798 2,284 141 6,474 1,576 243 1,608         Mar 30,671 11,969 8,689 − 2,792 4,595 1,477 9,884 7,580 2,304 14 6,814 1,724 266 1,142
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table the statutory pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, to local government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to ce ntral
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% was
central and state government), the real property taxes and other local allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; sincegovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2From 2002 49.6% has been allocated to central government and 50.4% to state
1980, the revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax has been government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedallocated to central, state and local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15, central government share. — 6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
and revenue from corporation tax and investment income tax has been and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beenallocated to central and state government in the ratio of 50:50. — 3From affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —
1996, after deducting child benefit. — 4From February 1993, including 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
revenue from the withholding tax on interest income, in which local government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. — 8For the breakdown, see
government has a share of 12%. — 5In 1998, 3.64% and from 1999, 5.63% Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
was allocated to central government to finance the supplementary grant to
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness tax  2 taxes taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 6962003 43,188 14,094 2,204 8,870 6,531 11,722 7,336 230 3,373 786 6,989 24,146 9,658 6712004 41,782 13,630 2,195 8,750 6,597 11,601 7,740 80 4,284 788 6,883 ... ... ...
2004          Q4 16,612 4,292 780 1,546 1,715 3,174 1,691 9 908 185 1,703 ... ... ...
2005          Q1 4,407 2,499 335 3,854 1,200 2,912 2,149 6 905 168 1,777 ... ... ...
2004          Nov 3,503 1,249 173 555 462 686 572 6 327 57 564 . . .
         Dec 9,778 1,800 402 615 655 1,851 547 2 327 61 612 . . .
2005          Jan −222 334 31 449 487 840 732 − 8 369 66 546 . . .
         Feb 1,460 1,099 83 2,882 198 752 612 12 236 52 665 . . .         Mar 3,169 1,066 222 523 515 1,320 805 2 301 51 566 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. — 2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
General government
1999 1,199,975 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 105
2000 1,211,439 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 1082002 1,277,630 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 29 7,845 972003 1,358,121 36,022 246,414 153,616 12,810 471,129 396,832 341 34,163 − 1 6,711 86
2004          Mar 1,403,438 37,209 260,445 159,735 11,245 485,920 400,897 371 40,863 − 45 6,711 88
         June 1,411,658 37,307 269,972 162,642 10,590 488,668 391,296 371 44,057 − 45 6,711 88         Sep 1,429,216 37,494 276,918 166,711 10,568 494,621 390,436 413 46,434 − 38 5,572 87         Dec 
pe 1,430,095 35,722 279,949 168,958 10,817 495,472 380,779 488 52,293 − 38 5,572 84
Central government 7,8,9 
1999 714,069 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 1042000 715,819 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2004          Mar 802,690 36,463 88,901 150,050 11,245 450,711 49,888 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
         June 803,991 35,630 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88         Sep 814,356 35,866 95,200 157,026 10,568 459,482 39,864 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86         Dec 812,086 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,381 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
2005          Mar 
p 871,557 36,385 102,996 162,780 11,009 496,479 45,176 363 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
State government (western)
1999 274,208 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000 282,431 − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 12001 305,788 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 12002 328,390 250 97,556 . . . 217,333 5 13,246 . . 12003 355,661 472 125,356 . . . 207,880 4 21,949 . . 1
2004          Mar 363,202 222 136,105 . . . 200,366 4 26,504 . . 1
         June 368,240 900 141,270 . . . 197,032 4 29,033 . . 1         Sep 374,415 900 145,136 . . . 198,760 0 29,618 . . 1         Dec 
p 376,661 750 148,219 . . . 192,809 0 34,882 . . 1
State government (eastern)
1999 53,200 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .2000 55,712 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .2001 58,771 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .2002 63,782 338 23,838 . . . 37,739 − 1,867 . . .2003 68,076 315 28,833 . . . 37,022 − 1,906 . . .
2004          Mar 69,661 524 30,752 . . . 35,314 27 3,044 . . .
         June 71,252 777 31,897 . . . 35,530 27 3,021 . . .         Sep 71,512 729 31,967 . . . 35,295 27 3,495 . . .         Dec 
p 72,026 533 31,476 . . . 36,179 37 3,801 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont’d)
  
  
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Local government (western) 10 
1999 81,511 . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .
2000 81,414 . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .2002 84,097 . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .2003 90,906 . 77 . . 603 87,868 19 2,339 . . .
2004          Mar 92,400 . 77 . . 732 89,231 20 2,340 . . .
         June 93,250 . 77 . . 707 90,106 20 2,340 . . .         Sep 93,800 . 77 . . 656 90,707 20 2,340 . . .         Dec 
pe 94,725 . 77 . . 605 91,684 20 2,340 . . .
Local government (eastern) 10 
1999 20,726 . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .2002 16,745 . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .2003 16,951 . − . . 131 16,601 87 132 . . .
2004          Mar 16,900 . − . . 131 16,549 90 130 . . .
         June 16,900 . − . . 131 16,549 90 130 . . .         Sep 17,000 . − . . 131 16,649 90 130 . . .         Dec 
pe 17,345 . − . . 131 16,994 90 130 . . .
ERP Special Fund 7 
1999 16,028 . . − . 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .2000 18,386 . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .2001 19,161 . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .2002 19,400 . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .2003 19,261 . . 51 . 10,169 8,522 8 512 . . .
2004          Mar 18,576 . . 51 . 10,169 7,960 8 389 . . .
         June 18,525 . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .         Sep 18,525 . . 51 . 10,169 7,909 8 389 . . .         Dec 18,200 . . 51 . 10,169 7,584 8 389 . . .
2005          Mar 18,098 . . 51 . 10,169 7,482 8 389 . . .
Indemnification Fund 
1999 132 .... 1 3 2 ......
2000 204 .... 2 0 4 ......
2001 285 .... 2 8 5 ......
2002 369 .... 3 6 9 ......
2003 469 .... 4 6 9 ......
2004          Mar 391 .... 3 9 1 ......
         June 396 .... 3 9 6 ......
         Sep 398 .... 3 9 8 ......
         Dec 400 .... 4 0 0 ......
2005          Mar 302 .... 3 0 2 ......
German Unity Fund 7,9 
1999 40,102 − 275 500 . 28,846 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000 40,425 − 275 2,634 . 29,593 7,790 − 133 . . .2001 39,638 − 3,748 10,134 . 21,292 4,315 − 149 . . .2002 39,441 − 3,820 10,134 . 22,315 3,146 − 26 . . .2003 39,099 − 4,610 10,134 . 23,563 793 − − . . .
2004          Mar 39,620 . 4,610 9,634 . 23,787 1,589 − − . . .
         June 39,103 . 4,538 9,634 . 23,787 1,144 − − . . .         Sep 39,210 . 4,538 9,634 . 23,787 1,251 − − . . .         Dec 38,653 . 4,538 9,634 . 23,787 694 − − . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Predominantly Treasury joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
discount paper (Bubills). — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
securities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term ratios. — 8On 1 July 1999 central government assumed joint responsibility
paper. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes. Including loans raised for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal
abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from supplementary Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal.
public pension funds and liabilities arising from the investment assistance As from July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded under centr al
levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabilities government. — 9On 1 January 2005 central government assumed joint
arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and responsibility for the debts of the German Unity Fund. As from January, thefrom housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of aforementioned special fund is recorded under central government. —the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to their home country. — 10Data other than year-end figures have been estimated. Including debt of
6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the municipal special purpose associations. 
London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2003 2004
2003 2004  pe Total 1st hf Q3 Q4 Total  pe 1st hf Q3 Q4  pe 
Item € million
Borrowers
Central government  2 767,697 812,086 + 42,292 + 24,515 + 16,293 + 1,484 + 44,388 + 36,294 + 10,365 − 2,270
German Unity Fund 39,099 38,653 − 342 + 85 + 131 − 558 − 447 + 4 + 107 − 558
ERP Special Fund 19,261 18,200 − 139 − 1 − − 138 − 1,061 − 736 − − 325Indemnification Fund 469 400 + 100 + 47 + 26 + 27 − 69 − 73 + 1 + 2
State government (western) 355,661 376,661 + 27,271 + 17,000 + 2,616 + 7,655 + 21,000 + 12,579 + 6,175 + 2,246
State government (eastern) 68,076 72,026 + 4,294 + 3,128 − 315 + 1,481 + 3,950 + 3,176 + 260 + 513Local government (western)  
3 90,906 94,725 + 7,439 + 3,742 + 1,154 + 2,543 + 4,702 + 3,075 + 491 + 1,136
Local government (eastern)  3 16,951 17,345 + 249 + 17 + 111 + 121 + 348 − 26 + 110 + 264
Total 1,358,121 1,430,095 + 81,164 + 48,533 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 72,811 + 54,293 + 17,509 + 1,009
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 36,022 35,722 + 5,207 + 350 + 2,258 + 2,598 − 299 + 1,286 + 187 − 1,772 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 246,414 279,949 + 42,463 + 28,422 + 5,075 + 8,965 + 33,535 + 23,558 + 6,946 + 3,031
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 153,616 168,958 + 15,947 + 12,958 − 3,898 + 6,887 + 15,342 + 9,026 + 4,070 + 2,246
Federal savings notes 12,810 10,817 − 5,088 − 3,614 − 530 − 944 − 1,993 − 2,220 − 22 + 249Bonds  
5 471,129 495,472 + 14,829 + 6,339 + 6,481 + 2,008 + 24,343 + 17,540 + 5,953 + 850
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 396,832 380,779 − 6,541 − 2,499 + 4,977 − 9,019 − 15,216 − 4,780 − 910 − 9,527
Loans from social security funds 341 488 + 204 − 1 + 181 + 24 + 147 + 31 + 42 + 75Other loans  
6 34,122 52,253 + 15,319 + 6,616 + 6,611 + 2,092 + 18,130 + 9,894 + 2,377 + 5,859
Old debt  7 85 46 − 41 − 39 − 3 + 0 − 39 − 42 + 6 − 3
Equalisation claims 6,711 5,572 − 1,134 + 0 − 1,139 + 5 − 1,138 − − 1,139 + 1Investment assistance levy 41 41 − 0 + 0 − 0 + 0 − − − −
Total 1,358,121 1,430,095 + 81,164 + 48,533 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 72,811 + 54,293 + 17,509 + 1,009
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 − − −−−−−−
Credit institutions 524,800 542,600 − 7,127 + 4,351 + 2,215 − 13,693 + 18,637 + 29,856 + 3,451 − 14,670
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 341 488 + 204 − 1 + 181 + 24 + 147 + 31 + 42 + 75
Other  8 289,840 300,967 + 61,187 + 12,382 + 17,919 + 30,885 + 11,127 + 11,106 − 4,584 + 4,604
Foreign creditors  pe 538,700 581,600 + 26,900 + 31,800 − 300 − 4,600 + 42,900 + 13,300 + 18,600 + 11,000
Total 1,358,121 1,430,095 + 81,164 + 48,533 + 20,015 + 12,616 + 72,811 + 54,293 + 17,509 + 1,009
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. — 6Including loans raised abroad. — 7Old liabilities arising
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Net borrowing differs from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer of construction of the former GDR’s armed forces and from housing
debts. — 2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt inassociations. — 4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. — 8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 5Excluding issuers’ holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 − − −2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 − − −2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 − − −2002 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 − − −
2003 Dec 399,304 38,410 793 9,042 260,046 91,013 − − −
2004 Mar 396,842 38,307 793 8,357 258,808 90,578 − − −
June 397,237 37,827 690 8,305 259,854 90,560 − − −
Sep 399,706 38,664 690 8,305 261,515 90,531 − − −Dec
pe 398,504 36,791 694 7,981 262,009 91,030 − − −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. — 1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. — 2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Schätze)  2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 852004 812,086 34,440 1,074 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,381 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
2004          Apr 798,786 35,616 1,128 95,468 150,031 10,786 449,577 41,875 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 88
         May 804,270 36,639 1,096 95,913 152,810 10,575 452,391 40,513 223 8,456 − 46 6,708 88         June 803,991 35,630 1,105 92,190 152,957 10,590 453,479 43,026 223 9,144 − 45 6,711 88
         July 821,291 35,744 1,111 97,599 153,362 10,439 461,338 47,829 223 9,144 − 45 5,572 88
         Aug 824,560 35,362 1,104 98,350 155,852 10,558 468,445 41,013 223 9,144 − 45 5,572 87         Sep 814,356 35,866 1,091 95,200 157,026 10,568 459,482 39,864 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86
         Oct 827,013 35,341 1,087 102,894 161,759 10,570 460,206 39,892 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 86
         Nov 820,571 34,819 1,085 104,060 160,102 10,731 460,112 34,399 268 10,463 − 38 5,572 83         Dec 812,086 34,440 1,074 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,381 34,835 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
2005          Jan  
10,r 874,505 34,968 1,090 106,345 169,269 10,895 490,938 45,389 333 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
         Feb r 876,329 34,936 1,099 107,310 162,504 10,951 495,304 48,593 363 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
         Mar p 871,557 36,385 1,095 102,996 162,780 11,009 496,479 45,176 363 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
         Apr p 879,569 36,530 1,097 109,496 168,981 10,999 497,611 39,221 363 10,751 − 38 5,572 83
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including Germany to their home country. — 8Commutation and compensation debt
cash bills. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. — and old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency. — 9On 1 July 1999
3Including loans raised abroad. — 4Including money market loans. — central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and
employees. — 6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. — 10On 1 January
levy. — 7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
former GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection German Unity Fund. 
with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 9402001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,4952002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 − 10,155 + 2,221 + 222003 + 227,078 + 42,292 + 62,535 + 13,636 + 42,327 + 15,947 + 109,500 + 8,874 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,2182004 + 228,122 + 44,389 + 52,701 + 24,187 + 35,589 + 15,842 + 130,801 + 5,313 + 7,186 − 1,620 + 1,844 + 802
2004          Jan-Apr + 84,511 + 31,089 + 17,464 + 13,382 + 14,075 + 6,601 + 44,682 + 6,287 + 2,821 − 610 + 5,470 − 767
2005          Jan-Apr 
p + 83,028 + 28,831 + 19,717 + 13,443 + 7,052 + 75 + 47,914 + 11,591 + 782 − 3,838 + 7,559 + 632
2004          Apr + 3,991 − 3,904 − 1,135 − 1,135 − 19 − 19 + 11,797 + 5,262 + 855 − 507 − 7,507 − 5,683         May + 17,688 + 5,484 + 6,903 + 2,815 + 4,133 + 2,779 + 7,549 + 1,257 + 448 − 17 − 1,345 + 3,254         June + 17,741 − 279 + 1,087 + 1,087 + 146 + 146 + 13,163 − 4,717 + 187 + 44 + 3,157 + 87
         July + 30,551 + 17,300 + 12,942 + 7,859 + 405 + 405 + 11,629 + 5,371 + 1,111 + 340 + 4,464 + 7,072
         Aug + 14,595 + 3,269 + 7,108 + 7,108 + 7,463 + 2,490 + 6,575 + 489 + 335 + 70 − 6,886 + 2,285         Sep + 18,757 − 10,204 + 1,200 − 8,964 + 1,175 + 1,175 + 15,619 − 2,637 + 977 + 428 − 213 − 11,104
         Oct + 20,064 + 12,657 + 724 + 724 + 4,733 + 4,733 + 13,443 + 7,172 + 303 − 834 + 861 + 8,203
         Nov + 11,485 − 6,442 + 5,004 − 94 + 4,289 − 1,657 + 6,808 + 804 + 640 − 237 − 5,256 − 8,455         Dec + 12,730 − 8,485 + 269 + 269 − 830 − 830 + 11,333 − 8,714 + 365 − 803 + 1,593 + 226
2005          Jan 
r + 37,004 + 23,768 + 13,043 + 6,770 + 362 + 362 + 12,951 + 6,774 + 285 − 502 + 10,362 + 4,588
         Feb r + 14,998 + 1,824 + 4,366 + 4,366 + 213 − 6,765 + 7,107 + 990 + 177 + 100 + 3,134 − 1,756
         Mar p + 14,424 − 4,772 + 1,176 + 1,176 + 276 + 276 + 15,151 − 2,807 + 224 − 1,014 − 2,404 − 7,798
         Apr p + 16,602 + 8,012 + 1,132 + 1,132 + 6,201 + 6,201 + 12,708 + 6,635 + 95 − 2,422 − 3,533 + 5,598
1After deduction of repurchases. — 2Federal Treasury notes (Schätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the German
pension insurance fund
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Germany
1993 290,393 232,408 52,671 298,065 252,920 15,898 − 7,672 39,786 29,957 8,499 1,100 229 6,297
1994 322,335 256,662 61,891 324,323 273,880 17,751 − 1,988 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,8901995 338,185 270,294 64,387 348,115 294,034 20,285 − 9,930 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,8001996  
8 353,672 282,616 68,388 362,667 305,780 21,660 − 8,995 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 374,853 297,402 74,961 372,955 316,511 23,280 + 1,898 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 389,101 297,827 88,755 385,707 327,823 24,393 + 3,394 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,5731999 208,173 152,206 54,628 203,295 172,919 12,950 + 4,878 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,9042000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,8782003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,8622004  
9,p 231,199 156,524 71,304 232,602 198,838 14,228 − 1,403 5,171 4,984 19 41 127 4,904
2003          Q1 55,374 37,289 17,761 57,255 48,883 3,727 − 1,881 8,686 5,649 1,230 1,685 122 4,874         Q2 56,442 38,349 17,749 57,396 48,763 3,735 − 954 7,698 4,906 980 1,686 126 4,867         Q3 57,241 39,085 17,830 58,256 49,409 3,858 − 1,015 6,348 3,822 727 1,683 116 4,855         Q4 59,796 41,772 17,703 58,269 49,363 3,916 + 1,527 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004          Q1 55,431 37,289 17,846 58,350 49,858 3,873 − 2,919 5,879 3,375 696 1,681 127 4,862
         Q2 56,665 38,446 17,873 57,794 49,437 3,416 − 1,129 3,752 1,914 28 1,682 128 4,877         Q3 56,766 38,664 17,779 58,107 49,719 3,456 − 1,341 2,561 731 22 1,681 127 4,889         Q4  
9 62,336 42,126 17,807 58,350 49,824 3,484 + 3,986 5,171 4,984 19 41 127 4,904
2005          Q1 55,160 36,897 17,996 58,001 50,031 3,390 − 2,841 2,607 2,432 16 41 118 4,827
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of deducted from pension payments. — 4From 1995, including long-term care
German Pension Insurance Funds. — 1The annual figures do not tally with insurance for pensioners. — 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993, reserves. End of year or quarter. — 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending other social security funds; including participating interests. — 8Excluding
and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government income arising from the revaluation of participating interests. — 9Revenue
cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance includes proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Employment Agency
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
Promo- loans
Unemployment support  4,5 Job promotion  5,6 tion of fromwinter central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction Balance ment
Germany
1993 85,109 79,895 1,829 109,536 48,005 34,149 13,856 36,891 15,895 20,996 1,919 − 24,426 24,419
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 − 10,205 10,1421995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 − 6,892 6,8871996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 − 13,763 13,7561997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 − 9,574 9,5741998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 − 7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 − 3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 8672001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 − 1,931 1,9312002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 − 5,623 5,6232003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 272 − 6,215 6,2152004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 217 − 4,176 4,175
2003          Q1 11,617 11,281 48 14,408 7,647 5,422 2,225 4,785 2,576 2,209 180 − 2,790 5,151
         Q2 12,272 11,487 536 14,667 7,975 5,708 2,267 4,721 2,623 2,098 84 − 2,395 2,408         Q3 12,828 11,797 619 13,645 7,251 5,313 1,938 4,453 2,462 1,991 7 − 817 514         Q4 13,917 12,773 878 14,131 6,863 5,086 1,777 5,196 2,903 2,293 1 − 214 − 1,858
2004          Q1 11,524 11,261 47 14,448 8,200 6,001 2,199 4,389 2,491 1,898 144 − 2,924 5,244
         Q2 12,042 11,419 394 13,949 7,782 5,673 2,109 4,268 2,510 1,758 67 − 1,907 1,946         Q3 12,516 11,709 481 12,818 7,044 5,189 1,855 3,919 2,309 1,610 4 − 303 166         Q4 14,233 12,821 753 13,275 6,721 4,958 1,762 4,267 2,522 1,745 3 + 958 − 3,181
2005          Q1 11,934 11,072 40 14,775 7,983 5,805 2,178 3,332 2,083 1,249 139 − 2,842 5,532
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government the January contributions to the statutory pension insurance scheme for
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- recipients of wage substitutes are paid in January instead of in
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a December. — 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up,
compensatory amount to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit, rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service
short-time working benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory Agencies (PSAs), compensation top-up payments and business start-up
health insurance funds and statutory pension insurance sheme. From 2003, grants. 
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
  2003   2004
  2002   2003   2004   2002   2003   2004   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 99.8 99.9 104.1 − 1.3 0.0 4.3 − 1.5 − 1.0 0.3 3.3 6.1 4.4 3.4Construction 90.6 86.2 83.8 − 4.3 − 4.9 − 2.7 − 4.8 − 3.0 − 3.4 0.4 − 2.0 − 5.2 − 3.6Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 101.7 100.9 102.5 0.0 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 1.7 1.9 0.9 1.6
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 105.1 106.3 108.8 1.5 1.2 2.4 0.8 1.4 0.9 2.0 3.1 1.9 2.5
Public and private services  3 103.3 103.8 104.1 2.8 0.5 0.3 − 0.4 0.1 2.6 0.5 0.4 − 0.1 0.2
Gross value added 101.9 102.0 104.0 0.4 0.1 2.0 − 0.5 0.0 0.6 1.8 2.8 1.5 1.8
Gross domestic product  4 101.4 101.4 102.9 0.2 0.0 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.4 0.4 1.8 1.9 1.2 1.3
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 101.4 101.7 101.6 − 0.4 0.3 − 0.1 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 0.5
Government consumption 102.6 102.1 101.4 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.9
Machinery and equipment 89.1 88.9 91.0 − 7.5 − 0.2 2.3 − 3.2 − 0.3 1.4 − 2.6 2.0 4.9 4.2Premises 89.8 86.8 84.6 − 5.8 − 3.3 − 2.6 − 3.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 0.6 − 2.2 − 4.6 − 3.5Other investment  
6 107.7 111.5 112.7 1.4 3.6 1.0 3.1 3.5 4.3 1.7 1.6 1.3 − 0.4
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . − 0.6 0.9 0.8 1.1 − 0.1 0.9 0.3 0.2 2.1 0.5
Domestic use 97.7 98.4 98.9 − 1.8 0.7 0.5 0.8 − 0.5 1.2 0.2 − 0.6 1.7 0.7Net exports  
8 . . . 1.9 − 0.7 1.1 − 1.3 0.1 − 0.8 1.6 2.4 − 0.5 0.6
Exports 111.2 113.2 123.4 4.6 1.8 9.0 − 1.1 2.0 1.4 7.1 13.3 6.6 8.9Imports 100.2 104.5 111.5 − 1.0 4.2 6.7 2.8 1.9 4.0 2.8 7.1 8.9 8.0
Gross domestic product  
4 101.4 101.4 102.9 0.2 0.0 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.4 0.4 1.8 1.9 1.2 1.3
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,266.7 1,286.3 1,304.2 0.7 1.5 1.4 1.9 1.2 1.1 1.2 1.0 1.2 2.1
Government consumption 411.8 414.6 412.9 2.9 0.7 − 0.4 0.8 2.3 − 0.9 0.0 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.6Machinery and equipment 151.9 146.9 148.4 − 9.3 − 3.2 1.0 − 5.6 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 3.9 0.2 3.6 3.5Premises 216.5 209.2 206.3 − 6.1 − 3.4 − 1.4 − 3.8 − 2.2 − 0.5 0.8 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.8Other investment  
6 24.6 24.6 24.7 − 1.4 0.0 0.8 0.2 0.7 0.2 0.3 0.7 1.1 0.9
Changes in inventories  7 − 18.8 − 3.4 1.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,052.6 2,078.2 2,098.4 − 0.9 1.2 1.0 1.1 0.6 1.4 0.2 0.1 1.9 1.6Net exports 96.2 86.6 108.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 767.3 768.8 838.6 4.4 0.2 9.1 − 2.5 0.2 − 0.8 6.1 13.3 7.2 9.8Imports 671.1 682.2 729.7 − 3.2 1.6 7.0 − 0.6 − 0.7 0.7 − 0.3 6.7 10.4 11.0
Gross domestic product  
4 2,148.8 2,164.9 2,207.2 1.7 0.7 2.0 0.4 0.9 0.8 2.5 2.7 1.2 1.6
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 102.9 104.2 105.8 1.2 1.2 1.5 1.0 1.3 1.3 1.0 1.7 1.6 1.6Gross domestic product 102.8 103.6 104.0 1.5 0.7 0.4 0.8 1.2 0.3 0.7 0.8 − 0.1 0.2Terms of trade 101.9 102.9 102.8 2.0 1.0 − 0.1 2.0 0.8 0.9 2.1 0.3 − 0.8 − 1.9
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,129.3 1,131.8 1,134.3 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 − 0.2 0.6 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.1Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 452.0 469.0 501.8 3.1 3.8 7.0 − 1.6 5.0 5.6 6.3 14.1 2.4 5.8
National income 1,581.4 1,600.9 1,636.1 1.4 1.2 2.2 − 0.2 1.7 1.2 2.4 4.6 0.6 1.4
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,123.1 2,150.3 2,196.7 1.6 1.3 2.2 0.6 0.9 1.4 2.4 3.5 1.2 1.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in April 2005. — 1Includ- ucts). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangi-
ing communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- ble fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment,
ties, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home services. — literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net increase
4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on prod- in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-total tion  
2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
2000 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9
2001 99.5 92.5 97.3 100.4 99.4 102.3 100.4 98.8 98.0 101.1 102.1 104.02002 98.3 89.0 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.42003 98.4 85.1 99.8 99.5 99.5 101.9 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.62004 100.8 80.4 102.6 102.5 103.4 105.7 87.4 97.9 104.5 103.7 101.2 111.9
 
2003          July 100.4 102.2 90.5 101.3 102.5 103.1 85.8 98.6 105.0 101.7 98.9 108.7         Aug 90.0 90.0 90.4 90.0 93.1 86.5 67.2 95.4 98.9 88.2 85.5 80.0         Sep 102.3 100.8 92.2 103.5 103.3 106.7 97.2 99.2 97.6 101.5 104.5 110.8
         Oct 105.1 99.3 102.2 106.0 106.9 106.3 97.9 105.2 104.0 107.2 98.2 112.4
         Nov 106.4 93.2 104.6 107.8 105.3 113.8 100.1 103.1 101.4 103.3 105.8 125.0         Dec 95.0 67.1 107.0 96.2 87.1 108.8 82.9 94.2 92.7 83.0 117.8 97.5
2004          Jan 92.0 49.3 116.2 93.3 96.6 90.6 83.4 93.6 101.9 104.6 82.5 97.4
         Feb 94.1 56.7 106.4 96.2 98.7 96.9 86.5 92.0 101.6 103.1 87.7 110.1         Mar 105.1 76.2 110.2 107.2 107.9 111.7 96.0 99.5 107.3 111.6 106.2 121.6
         Apr 100.6 85.9 101.0 101.9 104.4 103.8 88.1 96.3 107.6 104.1 98.5 114.3
         May 99.8 86.8 97.6 101.3 103.5 104.0 86.2 94.8 102.5 105.4 98.5 115.3         June 103.5 93.0 91.0 105.9 107.2 111.0 87.0 97.2 103.4 111.3 106.4 120.6
         July 103.3 95.5 92.6 105.2 107.1 108.3 87.0 99.1 105.7 106.6 105.4 112.1
         Aug 93.8 85.5 90.7 94.9 98.6 93.5 68.1 95.8 103.6 94.0 89.5 90.6         Sep 106.8 95.0 95.3 109.1 109.1 114.6 96.8 101.3 105.9 107.3 112.8 120.7
         Oct 108.2 93.3 104.9 109.9 109.9 113.8 96.6 105.4 108.0 106.8 104.0 127.0
         Nov 106.7 85.7 110.0 108.3 107.7 112.2 94.4 104.9 107.5 105.2 104.2 120.4         Dec 95.9 61.9 115.5 96.9 89.5 107.9 78.8 95.4 99.0 84.3 118.3 92.9
2005          Jan  
+ 95.5 49.3 112.8 97.8 102.3 95.0 83.5 96.9 112.7 105.1 86.4 103.0
         Feb  + 95.7 43.5 108.4 99.1 100.7 100.1 87.3 96.2 111.1 101.9 92.9 108.6
         Mar  + 7 107.0 7 61.0 108.6 111.0 109.8 117.3 98.2 104.1 117.8 108.5 113.6 122.0
Annual percentage change  
  
2000 + 4.8 − 3.5 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 9.7 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 8.2 + 7.1 + 11.2
2001 − 0.4 − 7.5 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 2.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.1 + 2.2 + 4.12002 − 1.2 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.32003 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 5.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 + 2.12004 + 2.4 − 5.5 + 2.8 + 3.0 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 3.5 + 4.0
 
2003          July + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 6.6         Aug − 2.6 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 3.9 − 9.2 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 7.3 + 0.4 − 12.8         Sep − 2.3 − 3.5
+ 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.3 − 2.0 − 6.4 − 2.9 − 5.4 − 6.0 − 4.0 − 3.2
         Oct + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.9 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.9         Nov + 0.7 − 3.1 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 2.7 − 3.3 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 4.3         Dec + 2.7 + 5.3 + 0.4 + 2.8 + 3.2 + 3.3 − 0.5 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 7.7
2004          Jan + 1.9 − 4.8 + 5.3 + 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 3.7 + 2.1 − 4.4
         Feb + 1.8 + 10.1 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 4.8 − 1.4 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 + 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.7         Mar + 0.5 − 9.2 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 2.7 + 0.2
         Apr + 2.2 − 6.7 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 4.0 + 4.4 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 5.6 + 5.0
         May + 4.0 − 4.7 + 2.4 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 6.9 + 8.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 7.2 + 7.9         June + 3.5 − 5.8 − 0.7 + 4.9 + 4.7 + 7.5 + 4.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 13.8 + 4.4 + 13.0
         July + 2.9 − 6.6 + 2.3 + 3.8 + 4.5 + 5.0 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 4.8 + 6.6 + 3.1
         Aug + 4.2 − 5.0 + 0.3 + 5.4 + 5.9 + 8.1 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 6.6 + 4.7 + 13.3         Sep + 4.4 − 5.8 + 3.4 + 5.4 + 5.6 + 7.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 + 8.5 + 5.7 + 7.9 + 8.9
         Oct + 2.9 − 6.0 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 2.8 + 7.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 + 3.8 − 0.4 + 5.9 + 13.0
         Nov + 0.3 − 8.0 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 2.3 − 1.4 − 5.7 + 1.7 + 6.0 + 1.8 − 1.5 − 3.7         Dec + 0.9 − 7.7 + 7.9 + 0.7 + 2.8 − 0.8 − 4.9 + 1.3 + 6.8 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 4.7
2005          Jan  
+ + 3.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 4.8 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 10.6 + 0.5 + 4.7 + 5.7
         Feb  + + 1.7 − 23.3 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 0.9 + 4.6 + 9.4 − 1.2 + 5.9 − 1.4
         Mar  + 7 + 1.8 7 − 19.9 − 1.5 + 3.5 + 1.8 + 5.0 + 2.3 + 4.6 + 9.8 − 2.8 + 7.0 + 0.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — oUsing the quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities related to prin-
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The ting. — 7Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of es-
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Build- timates, to the results of the annual overall survey in the constructio n sector
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — (average +3%). — +Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statis-
3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in particular, mining of tical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Producti on
coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas and manu- Survey for the first quarter (industry: on average -2.6%). 
facture of refined petroleum products. — 4Including mining and
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 Durable goods Non-durable goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
total  
  
2001 98.3 − 1.6 95.9 − 4.0 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.5 99.8 − 0.1 102.4 + 2.5
2002 98.3 + 0.0 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 99.0 − 2.4 95.7 − 4.1 101.0 − 1.4
2003 99.0 + 0.7 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.1 95.4 − 3.6 89.9 − 6.1 98.9 − 2.12004 104.8 + 5.9 104.9 + 7.3 107.2 + 6.5 94.7 − 0.7 89.1 − 0.9 98.2 − 0.7
 
2004          Mar 111.2 + 5.4 110.9 + 5.5 113.2 + 6.9 103.8 − 1.0 97.5 − 1.4 107.6 − 0.9
         Apr 104.2 + 7.2 106.3 + 9.1 105.2 + 6.8 92.7 + 1.5 89.2 + 0.9 95.0 + 2.2
         May 104.0 + 11.7 105.0 + 12.3 107.1 + 13.3 88.2 + 2.2 87.7 + 3.4 88.6 + 1.4         June 105.6 + 4.9 107.4 + 9.0 108.3 + 2.9 89.3 + 0.1 89.6 + 3.7 89.1 − 2.1
         July 105.4 + 8.0 107.0 + 9.1 106.7 + 8.9 95.2 + 1.4 88.2 + 0.6 99.6 + 1.8
         Aug 95.9 + 6.7 98.9 + 10.6 94.5 + 5.6 91.8 − 1.2 73.8 + 1.0 102.9 − 2.1         Sep 108.3 + 5.2 108.1 + 7.1 110.4 + 5.7 100.8 − 1.9 94.0 − 4.3 105.0 − 0.8
         Oct 108.2 + 5.4 109.0 + 6.3 109.7 + 6.6 99.4 − 3.4 96.4 − 4.6 101.4 − 2.5
         Nov 105.3 + 2.8 106.8 + 4.6 106.1 + 1.6 97.2 + 1.7 95.2 − 2.2 98.5 + 4.2         Dec 108.2 + 10.4 95.0 + 4.3 124.0 + 16.5 86.5 − 0.5 78.0 − 4.3 91.8 + 1.8
2005          Jan 106.7 + 6.9 109.3 + 7.3 107.1 + 7.3 96.5 + 3.9 88.1 − 2.5 101.6 + 7.4
         Feb 105.0 + 3.8 104.4 + 2.3 106.1 + 4.8 102.3 + 4.1 87.8 − 1.8 111.1 + 6.8         Mar  
p 117.0 + 5.2 114.6 + 3.3 121.2 + 7.1 107.9 + 3.9 97.2 − 0.3 114.5 + 6.4
from the domestic market  
  
2001 97.6 − 2.3 96.4 − 3.5 98.0 − 2.0 99.9 + 0.0 99.5 − 0.4 100.2 + 0.4
2002 94.6 − 3.1 94.6 − 1.9 94.6 − 3.5 94.6 − 5.3 92.0 − 7.5 96.3 − 3.92003 94.7 + 0.1 95.0 + 0.4 95.9 + 1.4 90.0 − 4.9 86.7 − 5.8 92.1 − 4.42004 98.3 + 3.8 100.5 + 5.8 100.0 + 4.3 86.9 − 3.4 83.3 − 3.9 89.2 − 3.1
 
2004          Mar 105.3 + 5.3 106.8 + 5.7 107.0 + 8.0 96.1 − 3.2 93.7 − 3.5 97.5 − 3.1
         Apr 98.0 + 5.4 101.5 + 6.3 99.0 + 7.0 85.1 − 2.2 83.0 − 4.4 86.6 − 0.5
         May 95.1 + 4.5 100.2 + 8.3 95.0 + 2.6 80.8 − 1.5 81.1 − 1.8 80.7 − 1.3         June 98.4 + 3.5 101.9 + 6.7 100.9 + 2.0 81.8 − 2.2 81.9 + 0.5 81.7 − 3.8
         July 99.5 + 4.8 104.5 + 7.6 99.7 + 4.7 85.0 − 2.7 80.0 − 3.6 88.2 − 2.2
         Aug 92.3 + 5.7 97.1 + 9.6 90.1 + 4.9 85.1 − 2.6 70.4 + 0.4 94.2 − 4.0         Sep 99.9 + 1.5 102.7 + 6.4 99.9 − 0.7 92.2 − 5.1 86.1 − 7.2 96.0 − 4.1
         Oct 102.4 + 3.3 105.1 + 4.7 103.2 + 4.6 92.3 − 4.7 89.7 − 7.6 94.0 − 2.8
         Nov 99.9 + 0.7 104.0 + 3.8 99.4 − 1.4 89.7 − 2.3 89.2 − 4.9 89.9 − 0.8         Dec 98.9 + 10.3 89.5 + 5.0 115.3 + 19.0 79.3 − 3.8 72.5 − 6.2 83.6 − 2.3
2005          Jan 96.9 + 3.3 103.0 + 6.4 94.1 + 1.0 87.4 + 1.2 82.4 − 5.7 90.4 + 5.2
         Feb 95.8 − 0.1 97.6 + 1.2 95.2 − 2.7 92.3 + 3.7 83.1 − 1.9 97.9 + 6.6         Mar  
p 106.6 + 1.2 107.1 + 0.3 108.7 + 1.6 99.5 + 3.5 92.5 − 1.3 103.9 + 6.6
from abroad  
  
2001 99.1 − 0.9 95.1 − 4.9 100.7 + 0.8 104.8 + 4.8 100.5 + 0.5 107.5 + 7.62002 102.8 + 3.7 99.1 + 4.2 104.1 + 3.4 108.6 + 3.6 103.9 + 3.4 111.5 + 3.72003 104.4 + 1.6 102.3 + 3.2 105.1 + 1.0 107.5 − 1.0 97.2 − 6.4 113.9 + 2.22004 112.9 + 8.1 111.6 + 9.1 113.8 + 8.3 112.2 + 4.4 102.4 + 5.3 118.1 + 3.7
 
2004          Mar 118.5 + 5.4 117.3 + 5.1 119.0 + 6.1 121.0 + 3.0 106.2 + 3.1 129.9 + 2.8
         Apr 111.9 + 9.2 113.9 + 13.6 110.9 + 6.6 109.8 + 8.8 103.4 + 12.3 113.7 + 7.0
         May 115.1 + 20.1 112.5 + 18.4 118.2 + 22.9 104.9 + 9.4 102.8 + 14.6 106.2 + 6.5         June 114.7 + 6.6 115.9 + 12.2 115.2 + 3.7 106.2 + 4.2 107.2 + 9.7 105.5 + 1.0
         July 112.8 + 11.8 111.0 + 11.3 113.1 + 12.5 118.0 + 8.8 106.8 + 8.6 124.8 + 8.9
         Aug 100.4 + 7.7 101.8 + 12.4 98.6 + 6.1 106.9 + 1.6 81.6 + 2.3 122.2 + 1.2         Sep 118.9 + 9.6 116.6 + 8.2 120.1 + 11.3 120.1 + 4.1 111.9 + 1.4 125.1 + 5.6
         Oct 115.4 + 7.5 115.0 + 8.6 115.7 + 8.3 115.5 − 0.7 111.7 + 1.3 117.9 − 1.8
         Nov 112.0 + 5.2 111.2 + 5.8 112.2 + 4.1 114.2 + 9.8 108.9 + 3.3 117.5 + 13.9         Dec 119.9 + 10.5 103.6 + 3.3 132.0 + 14.7 102.6 + 5.9 90.6 − 0.7 110.0 + 9.6
2005          Jan 118.9 + 10.8 119.1 + 8.4 119.0 + 12.5 116.9 + 8.7 101.0 + 3.9 126.4 + 11.1
         Feb 116.5 + 8.1 115.0 + 3.6 116.1 + 11.3 124.6 + 4.4 98.6 − 1.5 140.5 + 7.3         Mar  
p 130.0 + 9.7 126.2 + 7.6 132.7 + 11.5 126.7 + 4.7 107.8 + 1.5 138.2 + 6.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany  1 Eastern Germany  2 
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2001 94.6 − 5.4 82.9 97.0 99.1 98.9 − 1.1 88.6 102.2 101.6 82.6 − 17.3 67.2 81.9 92.4
2002 88.8 − 6.1 72.8 91.5 95.7 92.1 − 6.9 80.5 94.8 96.4 79.6 − 3.6 51.6 82.0 94.02003 79.3 − 10.7 67.5 78.6 87.5 82.0 − 11.0 75.6 79.6 88.7 72.0 − 9.5 45.2 75.4 84.42004 74.4 − 6.2 61.2 72.8 84.2 77.0 − 6.1 70.5 74.6 83.8 67.1 − 6.8 35.7 67.7 85.2
   
2004          Feb 66.2 + 2.8 58.3 75.3 60.8 67.5 − 0.6 64.9 80.1 54.6 62.5 + 14.1 40.1 61.4 76.9         Mar 81.6 − 7.8 70.8 72.8 98.3 84.3 − 8.8 82.6 72.3 99.2 74.2 − 4.5 38.3 74.0 95.8
         Apr 77.1 − 6.5 62.9 72.5 91.2 80.0 − 6.7 72.6 75.1 90.2 69.3 − 6.4 36.3 65.0 93.6
         May 75.9 − 8.3 66.6 65.1 93.9 78.9 − 4.9 75.1 66.6 95.6 67.7 − 17.7 43.2 60.9 89.4         June 89.9 − 5.3 73.2 83.2 107.9 94.5 − 4.0 83.4 87.2 109.9 77.4 − 9.3 45.2 71.6 102.6
         July 79.0 − 12.8 63.5 71.8 96.6 82.1 − 10.1 71.6 73.6 98.8 70.2 − 20.8 41.0 66.8 91.2
         Aug 77.5 − 4.3 60.5 74.2 91.8 78.1 − 5.3 69.9 73.9 88.2 75.8 − 1.7 34.7 74.9 101.2         Sep 85.9 − 5.8 71.3 80.2 101.4 89.2 − 3.7 84.0 81.9 100.9 76.8 − 11.9 36.2 75.3 102.6
         Oct 74.5 − 6.5 59.0 72.0 86.9 78.8 − 7.0 70.1 75.0 88.8 62.5 − 5.0 28.4 63.4 82.0
         Nov 61.8 − 11.5 51.3 62.4 67.6 64.3 − 11.9 59.2 64.8 66.8 55.0 − 10.1 29.6 55.6 69.5         Dec 69.5 + 0.3 56.1 78.7 67.3 71.8 − 0.7 64.1 79.8 67.4 63.0 + 3.3 33.9 75.8 67.1
2005          Jan 46.6 − 12.6 39.7 50.4 46.8 50.0 − 7.9 46.8 54.7 46.6 37.3 − 26.4 20.2 37.6 47.1
         Feb 52.1 − 21.3 45.3 54.3 53.7 55.2 − 18.2 54.6 53.8 57.3 43.4 − 30.6 19.7 55.8 44.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications 0.2.8. — 1Excluding West Berlin. — 2Including West Berlin. — 3Including
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there- the railways and post office. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  By enterprises’ main product range of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco  2 products  2 leather goods  2 ing materials  2 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100
1997 96.1 − 0.7 − 1.4 95.8 − 0.8 83.4 + 2.2 101.4 − 1.6 95.3 − 0.9 96.0 + 0.1 − 0.5 94.4 + 3.7
1998 97.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 97.3 + 1.6 88.1 + 5.6 100.2 − 1.2 98.4 + 3.3 97.6 + 1.7 + 1.5 98.9 + 4.81999 97.6 + 0.6 + 0.3 98.0 + 0.7 94.4 + 7.2 99.9 − 0.3 97.4 − 1.0 98.5 + 0.9 + 0.4 102.2 + 3.3
2000 100.0 + 2.5 + 1.3 99.9 + 1.9 100.1 + 6.0 99.9
+ 0.0 99.9 + 2.6 100.0 + 1.5 + 0.4 100.0 − 2.2
2001 101.8 + 1.8 . 104.6 + 4.7 107.4 + 7.3 99.5 − 0.4 96.6 − 3.3 102.0 + 2.0 . 102.9 + 2.9
2002 100.2 − 1.6 − 2.1 107.3 + 2.6 111.2 + 3.5 94.5 − 5.0 89.0 − 7.9 101.2 − 0.8 − 1.4 105.9 + 2.92003 99.9 − 0.3 − 0.5 109.4 + 2.0 114.0 + 2.5 89.5 − 5.3 88.3 − 0.8 101.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 108.5 + 2.52004 97.7 − 2.2 − 2.2 107.5 − 1.7 113.0 − 0.9 88.2 − 1.5 87.6 − 0.8 99.1 − 2.4 − 2.8 105.0 − 3.2
 
2004          Jan 90.1 − 2.1 − 2.0 100.5 + 1.7 100.9 − 8.0 74.3 − 6.7 79.2 + 0.9 89.0 − 2.2 − 2.3 86.0 − 2.8         Feb 85.7 − 3.6 − 2.9 97.3 − 1.5 100.2 − 5.1 67.8 − 1.7 77.5 − 0.6 86.7 − 3.6 − 3.4 91.4 − 3.4         Mar 100.5 − 2.0 − 1.5 111.4 − 1.9 112.8 + 1.2 87.9 − 6.9 92.9 − 2.3 103.0 − 3.2 − 3.2 113.3 − 6.5
         Apr 99.7 − 2.0 − 2.0 110.1 − 0.9 112.3 + 0.3 95.4 + 3.5 91.6 − 0.5 103.0 − 1.8 − 2.3 115.4 − 1.6
         May 95.7 − 2.8 − 3.4 108.1 + 0.1 108.0 − 2.1 85.4 − 6.5 86.5 − 2.0 99.3 − 2.8 − 3.9 112.8 − 2.8         June 93.6 − 2.6 − 3.0 105.4 − 2.9 110.6 + 0.2 81.2 − 4.5 83.6 + 0.7 97.1 − 3.3 − 4.0 110.2 − 5.4
         July 95.9 − 1.7 − 2.1 107.7 − 1.5 116.5 + 0.3 86.0 + 0.1 84.4 − 0.5 99.4 − 2.5 − 3.0 112.9 − 4.2
         Aug 92.9 − 0.1 − 0.5 105.2 − 2.4 109.0 + 2.4 78.1 + 3.4 82.1 + 1.5 93.5 − 1.4 − 2.0 95.2 − 5.9         Sep 95.4 − 2.4 − 2.7 101.2 − 3.8 110.7 + 0.9 92.7 − 2.4 84.8 − 0.1 96.3 − 2.8 − 3.3 100.6 − 4.4
         Oct 102.7 − 1.7 − 2.0 108.1 − 3.7 119.9 + 3.7 105.7 + 0.2 93.9 + 0.5 104.1 − 1.7 − 2.1 110.9 − 1.7
         Nov 102.1 − 2.3 − 2.4 109.6 − 2.4 115.1 − 1.0 93.1 + 3.7 92.6 − 3.3 103.6 − 1.4 − 1.6 111.0 + 1.5         Dec 118.3 − 2.3 − 2.7 125.4 − 1.5 139.7 − 3.2 110.6 + 0.4 101.5 − 2.7 113.9 − 2.1 − 2.4 99.8 − 1.2
2005          Jan  
5 e 89.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 100.5 + 0.0 104.9 + 4.0 74.5 + 0.3 78.5 − 0.9 89.8 + 0.9 + 0.7 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding ding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of auto-
value-added tax; figures from 2004 provisional, partly revised and, judging motive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor vehicle parts and
by past experience, subject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent accessories.— 4Up to (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices; from 2001, at
months. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Exclu- 2000 prices. — 5 Working-day-adjustment subject to great uncertainty. 
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1 Employees  1  r employment  2 Persons Unemployed  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-manu- ment pro- goingfactur- Short- motion vocationaling Con- time schemes further Unem-
Annual change Annual sector  
3 6  7 Annual ploy- Vacan- training  7 workers  5 struction  4 
percen- change, ment cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- thou- rate 7  8 
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands in % sands
Germany  
  
2002 39,092 − 0.6 − 224 35,090 − 0.7 6,217 883 207 193 340 4,061 + 209 9.8 452
2003 38,723 − 0.9 − 369 34,650 − 1.3 9 6,136 817 195 143 260 4,377 + 315 10.5 355
2004 38,860 + 0.4 + 137 34,630 − 0.1 6,019 769 151 117 184 10 4,381 10 +9 3 10 10.5 286
2004          Apr 38,701 + 0.4 + 170 6,011 778 177 105 199 4,443 + 32 10.7 324         May 38,842 + 0.4 + 160 34,606 + 0.1 6,001 782 171 108 197 4,293 + 43
11 10.3 319
         June 38,935 + 0.4 + 171 6,005 786 162 113 185 4,233 + 62 10.2 305
         July 38,897 + 0.4 + 170 6,015 786 138 118 165 4,360 + 83 10.5 297
         Aug 38,900 + 0.5 + 175 34,716 + 0.0 6,040 788 107 122 158 4,347 + 110 10.5 287         Sep 39,145 + 0.5 + 186 6,049 788 115 124 166 4,257 + 160 10.3 269
         Oct 39,304 + 0.5 + 199 6,024 778 125 122 167 4,207 + 187 10.1 245
         Nov 39,321 + 0.6 + 218 34,958 + 0.1 6,008 768 133 114 163 4,257 + 208 10.3 229         Dec 39,148 + 0.6 + 233 5,978 744 133 100 149 4,464 + 244 10.8 225
2005          Jan 38,514 + 0.6 + 216 5,949 684
p 148 p 85p 135 13 5,039 13 + 442 13 12.1 p 268
         Feb 38,554 + 0.6 + 213 ... ... 5,930 660 p 168 12 7712 122 13 5,216 13 + 575 13 12.6 p 333
         Mar 14 38,656 14 + 0.4 14 + 164 ... ... p 174 12 6712 118 13 5,176 13 + 628 13 12.5 p 394
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 5712 113 13 4,968 13 + 524 13 12.0 p 434
Western Germany o 
  
2002 . . . . . 5,593 639 162 45 198 2,498 + 178 7.7 378
2003 . . . . . 9 5,503 594 160 31 161 2,753 + 255 8.4 292
2004 . . . . . 5,380 562 122 24 121 10 2,781 10 +8 7 10 8.5 239
2004          Apr . . . . . 5,374 569 143 22 130 2,805 + 50 8.5 274         May . . . . . 5,365 571 139 24 130 2,710 + 58
11 8.2 265
         June . . . . . 5,367 574 133 25 123 2,669 + 65 8.1 253
         July . . . . . 5,375 572 112 26 110 2,760 + 79 8.4 247
         Aug . . . . . 5,395 573 84 26 105 2,764 + 92 8.4 239         Sep . . . . . 5,402 574 92 27 111 2,700 + 119 8.2 222
         Oct . . . . . 5,378 567 102 26 112 2,692 + 140 8.2 204
         Nov . . . . . 5,362 560 105 25 109 2,727 + 149 8.3 191         Dec . . . . . 5,337 546 105 23 99 2,860 + 173 8.7 192
2005          Jan . . . . . 5,234 505
p 118 p 19p 8913 3,267 13 + 340 13 9.9 p 228
         Feb . . . . . 5,215 490 p 133 12 1812 8013 3,421 13 + 476 13 10.4 p 279
         Mar . . . . . ... ... p 137 12 1612 7913 3,396 13 + 524 13 10.3 p 320
         Apr . . . . . ... ... ... 12 1312 7513 3,262 13 + 458 13 9.9 p 345
Eastern Germany +  
  
2002 . . . . . 624 244 45 148 142 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2003 . . . . . 9 632 223 35 112 99 1,624 + 61 18.5 63
2004 . . . . . 639 207 29 93 63 10 1,600 10 +6 10 18.4 47
2004          Apr . . . . . 636 209 34 83 69 1,639 − 18 18.8 51         May . . . . . 637 211 32 85 67 1,583 − 15
11 18.3 54
         June . . . . . 638 212 29 88 62 1,565 − 3 18.1 53
         July . . . . . 640 213 26 93 55 1,600 + 4 18.5 50
         Aug . . . . . 645 214 24 96 54 1,582 + 18 18.3 48         Sep . . . . . 647 215 24 98 55 1,557 + 41 18.0 47
         Oct . . . . . 647 211 23 96 55 1,514 + 47 17.5 42
         Nov . . . . . 645 208 27 89 54 1,530 + 59 17.7 38         Dec . . . . . 641 199 28 77 50 1,604 + 71 18.5 33
2005          Jan . . . . . 715 179
p 30p 65p 4613 1,772 13 + 102 13 20.5 p 40
         Feb . . . . . 715 170 p 3512 5912 4213 1,795 13 + 100 13 20.7 p 54
         Mar . . . . . ... ... p 3612 5112 4013 1,780 13 + 104 13 20.6 p 74
         Apr . . . . . ... ... ... 12 4412 3813 1,705 13 +6 7 13 19.7 p 89
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual 9The figures from 2003 onwards are positively affected by the first-time in-
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- clusion of firms which are required to report and which have been iden-
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- tified in the course of drawing up the corporate register. — 10From
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Work-place concept; aver- January 2004, unemployed persons excluding all those participating in
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — occupational aptitude testing and training schemes. — 11From May 2004,
3Up to December 2004, western Germany including West Berlin and east- calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. — 12Annualised data
ern Germany excluding West Berlin. — 4The figures refer to the economic from the Federal Employment Agency based on information received so
classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or far. — 13Provisional; increase relative to the previous year affected by the in-
parts thereof; civil engineering”. — 5Mid-month level. — 6Employees in- clusion of persons receiving social assistance but able to work who were not
volved in job creation schemes and structural adjustment measures (SAM); previously registered as unemployed. — 14Initial preliminary estimate by
provisional and partly revised data. — 7Mid-month level; end of month fig- the Federal Statistical Office. 
ures up to January 2005. — 8Relative to the total civilian labour force. —
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index HWWA
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
2000 = 100  
  
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.4 101.2 100.3 103.0 107.3 101.0 100.6 91.4 91.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 104.9 102.6 100.2 102.4 100.4 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.12003 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 104.1 101.4 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.92004 106.2 105.7 102.9 114.8 108.9 104.8 101.4 105.8 99.9 101.1 97.2 101.4 96.3
 
2003          July 104.6 106.3 101.1 109.2 107.4 103.8 104.1 98.4 100.3 95.2 81.5 82.7         Aug 104.6 105.1 101.0 110.4 107.7 103.9 100.3 104.1 100.8 100.4 95.8 86.4 85.2         Sep 104.5 105.6 101.4 109.7 106.7 103.9 104.2 104.8 100.5 95.7 78.7 87.5
         Oct 104.5 105.7 101.4 110.0 106.4 103.9 104.2 103.2 100.4 95.5 81.0 88.7
         Nov 104.3 105.5 101.4 109.5 105.8 104.1 100.3 104.2 104.9 100.4 95.5 81.7 91.0         Dec 105.1 105.7 101.4 109.4 109.0 104.1 104.2 103.2 100.2 95.1 80.7 89.4
2004          Jan 105.2 106.9 102.1 110.5 107.2 104.4 104.0 103.8 100.2 95.2 82.6 92.8
         Feb 105.4 106.4 101.9 110.2 108.3 104.5 100.5 104.1 105.3 100.3 95.3 82.2 96.2         Mar 105.7 106.1 103.1 111.4 108.0 104.6 104.7 105.3 100.8 96.4 91.2 103.5
         Apr 106.0 106.3 103.3 113.1 108.1 104.7 105.1 104.6 101.1 96.9 94.9 105.1
         May 106.2 106.6 103.1 116.1 108.1 104.7 101.4 105.6 104.3 101.3 97.6 104.5 101.1         June 106.2 106.7 103.1 114.2 108.6 104.8 105.5 107.4 101.1 97.0 100.8 99.1
         July 106.5 106.0 102.8 115.5 109.9 104.8 106.1 105.1 101.2 97.3 104.7 97.6
         Aug 106.7 104.9 102.8 117.3 110.3 105.0 101.8 106.4 99.8 101.5 98.2 114.3 94.6         Sep 106.4 104.3 102.9 116.6 109.2 105.0 106.6 99.4 101.5 98.3 112.7 93.5
         Oct 106.6 104.2 102.9 120.4 108.9 105.1 107.6 97.6 101.7 99.4 123.0 92.0
         Nov 106.2 104.1 103.0 117.2 108.4 105.2 102.0 107.1 98.8 101.6 98.1 108.1 91.4         Dec 107.3 105.3 103.7 114.5 111.7 105.2 107.2 99.0 101.2 97.2 96.8 89.2
2005          Jan 106.9 105.7 103.5 116.4 109.8 105.4 108.1
p 97.8 101.5 98.0 107.5 95.7
         Feb 107.3 106.3 103.6 117.5 110.5 105.6 102.5 108.5 p 99.0 101.8 98.8 111.4 99.2
         Mar 107.6 106.6 103.7 120.7 110.3 105.6 109.1 ... 102.1 100.1 125.3 103.1         Apr 107.7 106.4 103.7 123.3 109.7 105.7 ... ... ... ... 128.2 103.1
Annual percentage change  
  
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 2 + 3.1 + 5.9 + 3.1 + 10.1 + 73.6 + 20.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 7.3 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.1
2002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 6.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.92003 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.62004 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.5 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 22.3 + 10.8
 
2003          July + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 7.5         Aug + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.1
+ 0.0 + 2.0 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 5.2
         Sep + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 4.6 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 15.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 3.9 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 10.5 − 3.7
         Nov + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 4.2 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 4.9 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.2         Dec + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 7.5 − 0.2
2004          Jan + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 4.0 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 10.4 + 5.1
         Feb + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 15.5 + 7.2         Mar + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.5 − 2.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.9 + 17.2
         Apr + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 4.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 24.9 + 19.7
         May + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 7.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 6.0 + 0.8 + 2.5 + 44.1 + 21.1         June + 1.7 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 5.0 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 1.5 + 5.7 + 0.8 + 2.0 + 30.9 + 21.9
         July + 1.8 − 0.3 + 1.7 + 5.8 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 28.5 + 18.0
         Aug + 2.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 32.3 + 11.0         Sep + 1.8 − 1.2 + 1.5 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 2.3 − 5.2 + 1.0 + 2.7 + 43.2 + 6.9
         Oct + 2.0 − 1.4 + 1.5 + 9.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 3.3 − 5.4 + 1.3 + 4.1 + 51.9 + 3.7
         Nov + 1.8 − 1.3 + 1.6 + 7.0 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 2.8 − 5.8 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 32.3 + 0.4         Dec + 2.1 − 0.4 + 2.3 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 2.9 − 4.1 + 1.0 + 2.2 + 20.0 − 0.2
2005          Jan + 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.4 + 5.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.9
p − 5.8 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 30.1 + 3.1
         Feb + 1.8 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 6.6 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 4.2 p − 6.0 + 1.5 + 3.7 + 35.5 + 3.1
         Mar + 1.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 8.3 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 4.2 ... + 1.3 + 3.8 + 37.4 − 0.4         Apr + 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 9.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... + 35.1 − 1.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWA Index of World Market Prices. — tion price level. — 4Excluding value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Previously: Overall construc- industrial raw materials. 
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999 € billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM / 
€ change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change %
1991 1,355.4 . 940.9 . 426.1 . 1,367.0 . 1,975.5 . 254.7 . 12.9
1992 1,466.6 8.2 1,001.9 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,475.8 8.0 2,120.2 7.3 268.8 5.6 12.71993 1,504.2 2.6 1,030.5 2.9 511.2 7.9 1,541.7 4.5 2,194.0 3.5 264.5 − 1.6 12.11994 1,526.0 1.4 1,026.6 − 0.4 529.3 3.5 1,555.9 0.9 2,275.7 3.7 259.1 − 2.1 11.4
1995 1,575.1 3.2 1,034.9 0.8 553.5 4.6 1,588.4 2.1 2,344.9 3.0 257.6 − 0.6 11.0
1996 1,592.5 1.1 1,029.9 − 0.5 599.0 8.2 1,629.0 2.6 2,386.5 1.8 251.7 − 2.3 10.51997 1,589.7 − 0.2 1,012.9 − 1.7 613.2 2.4 1,626.1 − 0.2 2,427.6 1.7 245.4 − 2.5 10.11998 1,623.0 2.1 1,036.3 2.3 625.0 1.9 1,661.3 2.2 2,474.2 1.9 249.4 1.7 10.11999 854.6 3.0 547.5 3.3 330.5 3.4 878.0 3.4 1,297.7 2.6 122.7 − 3.8 9.5
2000 883.4 3.4 569.6 4.0 339.9 2.8 909.5 3.6 1,337.4 3.1 123.2 0.4 9.2
2001 902.2 2.1 590.1 3.6 351.6 3.4 941.7 3.5 1,388.0 3.8 130.5 5.9 9.42002 909.0 0.8 592.1 0.3 367.5 4.5 959.6 1.9 1,406.9 1.4 140.2 7.4 10.02003 909.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 377.0 2.6 966.0 0.7 1,440.3 2.4 154.1 9.9 10.72004 912.3 0.3 600.7 2.0 377.8 0.2 978.5 1.3 1,459.5 1.3 155.3 0.8 10.6
2003          Q1 212.1 0.3 137.7 − 0.5 94.8 3.1 232.6 1.0 361.9 4.0 51.6 16.9 14.2
         Q2 218.3 0.1 138.2 − 0.8 93.5 2.8 231.7 0.6 355.8 2.6 36.1 10.2 10.2         Q3 226.7 0.1 150.8 − 0.4 93.9 1.7 244.8 0.4 355.5 1.7 32.6 6.7 9.2         Q4 252.2 − 0.4 162.2 − 0.5 94.8 2.8 257.0 0.7 367.1 1.3 33.7 3.3 9.2
2004          Q1 213.7 0.8 140.5 2.0 96.2 1.4 236.7 1.8 365.3 0.9 51.2 − 0.7 14.0
         Q2 220.1 0.9 142.7 3.2 93.5 0.0 236.2 1.9 359.2 0.9 36.3 0.6 10.1         Q3 226.6 − 0.1 153.2 1.6 93.5 − 0.4 246.7 0.8 359.4 1.1 32.6 − 0.2 9.1         Q4 251.9 − 0.1 164.3 1.3 94.6 − 0.2 258.9 0.8 375.6 2.3 35.2 4.2 9.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in April 2005. — *House- plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
holds including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Residence surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — 3Social cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state and fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 6In-
local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), private cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (workplace concept)  2 (workplace concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change change 1995 = 100
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.1 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.6 0.2 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.0 1.9 105.7 1.8 102.5 0.9 107.7 1.8 106.3 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.7 2.8 104.0 1.4 111.0 3.1 109.6 3.0 108.3 1.8
2000 111.4 2.0 110.9 2.0 105.5 1.5 113.3 2.0 111.8 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.5 2.0 113.0 1.9 107.4 1.8 115.3 1.8 113.6 1.7 113.7 2.22002 116.6 2.7 116.0 2.7 108.9 1.4 118.9 3.2 117.2 3.1 116.0 2.02003 118.8 1.9 118.4 2.0 110.3 1.3 121.9 2.5 120.0 2.4 . .2004 120.3 1.2 120.1 1.4 110.7 0.4 124.2 1.9 122.4 2.0 . .
2003          Q2 109.9 2.2 109.5 2.2 106.3 1.6 111.8 2.5 110.0 2.4 . .
         Q3 122.7 1.9 122.2 2.0 110.0 1.2 131.0 2.2 128.9 2.1 . .         Q4 133.5 1.1 133.0 1.2 121.4 0.4 135.2 2.3 133.1 2.2 . .
2004          Q1 111.1 1.8 110.9 1.9 104.8 1.1 113.1 3.2 111.4 3.2 . .
         Q2 111.6 1.5 111.3 1.6 107.1 0.8 113.4 1.4 111.7 1.5 . .         Q3 123.9 1.0 123.6 1.2 109.9 − 0.1 132.1 0.9 130.2 0.9 . .         Q4 134.7 0.9 134.5 1.2 121.1 − 0.2 138.3 2.3 136.2 2.3 . .
2005          Q1 112.5 1.3 112.4 1.4 . . 114.9 1.6 113.2 1.6 . .
2004          Sep 112.1 1.1 111.9 1.3 . . 113.4 − 0.3 111.7 − 0.3 . .
         Oct 112.9 2.3 112.8 2.6 . . 116.3 3.9 114.5 3.9 . .
         Nov 178.9 − 0.4 178.7 − 0.1 . . 185.1 1.9 182.4 2.0 . .         Dec 112.3 1.5 112.2 1.8 . . 113.5 1.3 111.8 1.4 . .
2005          Jan 112.1 1.1 112.0 1.3 . . 113.5 1.2 111.8 1.2 . .
         Feb 112.2 1.2 112.1 1.4 . . 113.7 1.4 112.0 1.3 . .         Mar 113.4 1.5 113.3 1.6 . . 117.4 2.1 115.7 2.1 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. — 2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in April by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2005. — 3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
X External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2004 2005
Item 2002 2003 2004 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb
Current account + 64,483 + 20,409 + 45,246 + 3,374 + 11,411 + 14,269 + 5,457 − 7,246 + 8,013A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,062,129 1,039,689 1,130,010 284,993 279,642 299,227 97,757 87,265 91,030
Imports (fob) 933,580 936,951 1,026,561 253,613 256,093 278,415 90,482 87,032 84,881
Balance + 128,548 + 102,736 + 103,448 + 31,379 + 23,549 + 20,811 + 7,275 + 234 + 6,149
2 Services
Receipts 332,095 329,269 355,063 89,789 96,357 91,722 31,608 26,492 25,726
Expenditure 315,711 309,619 327,859 79,429 87,517 85,558 30,828 26,010 25,089
Balance + 16,381 + 19,653 + 27,201 + 10,360 + 8,840 + 6,163 + 780 + 482 + 637
3 Income − 31,876 − 45,833 − 29,788 − 21,687 − 2,971 + 1,235 + 1,386 − 4,731 + 3,439
4 Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 85,358 80,830 80,190 15,046 15,382 18,219 8,344 17,580 7,669
Transfer payments to non-residents 133,930 136,978 135,803 31,724 33,388 32,159 12,328 20,810 9,880
Balance − 48,571 − 56,146 − 55,616 − 16,679 − 18,007 − 13,941 − 3,984 − 3,230 − 2,212
Capital account + 10,166 + 13,110 + 17,204 + 3,985 + 4,065 + 5,728 + 4,132 − 792 + 1,108B
Financial account (net capital exports: −) − 43,935 − 5,942 + 24,478 + 11,270 + 3,115 + 4,566 + 9,420 + 25,852 + 21,557C
1 Direct investment + 618 + 5,398 − 47,905 − 12,102 + 1,140 − 13,955 + 5,096 − 11,384 − 4,622
By resident units abroad − 179,948 − 136,003 − 116,911 − 27,893 − 16,438 − 44,182 + 6,932 − 11,192 − 6,329By non-resident units in the euro area + 180,568 + 141,400 + 69,006 + 15,791 + 17,579 + 30,226 − 1,836 − 193 + 1,706
2 Portfolio investment + 127,765 + 43,396 + 68,631 + 26,993 + 7,188 + 23,113 + 38,267 − 17,071 + 22,607
By resident units abroad − 176,158 − 276,701 − 282,210 − 52,617 − 64,315 − 69,707 + 1,674 − 53,073 − 24,281
Equity − 38,795 − 67,002 − 73,599 − 16,264 − 6,434 − 20,312 + 8,390 − 15,918 − 19,488
Bonds and notes − 88,690 − 182,318 − 149,542 − 27,951 − 37,339 − 40,076 − 7,051 − 29,208 − 19,990
Money market instruments − 48,671 − 27,382 − 59,069 − 8,401 − 20,541 − 9,320 + 335 − 7,947 + 15,197
By non-resident units in the euro area + 303,924 + 320,099 + 350,841 + 79,608 + 71,503 + 92,820 + 36,593 + 36,002 + 46,888
Equity + 86,237 + 117,235 + 121,572 − 4,104 + 38,507 + 66,571 + 28,775 + 10,013 + 5,179
Bonds and notes + 157,873 + 170,415 + 211,317 + 85,444 + 39,920 + 31,896 + 14,154 + 5,488 + 39,357
Money market instruments + 59,815 + 32,451 + 17,953 − 1,730 − 6,925 − 5,648 − 6,337 + 20,501 + 2,352
3 Financial derivatives − 10,954 − 12,175 − 2,043 − 1,247 − 1,041 − 5,074 − 2,446 − 3,807 − 389
4 Other investment − 159,089 − 72,521 − 6,625 + 414 − 7,650 − 1,970 − 33,076 + 59,670 − 1,026
Eurosystem + 18,443 + 9,145 + 7,712 + 2,578 + 1,668 + 5,395 + 1,492 + 4,591 − 3,269
General government − 8,203 − 4,469 − 4,578 − 1,877 + 2,468 + 1,726 − 1,108 + 1,290 − 5,738
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 142,185 − 18,536 − 13,382 + 16,923 − 17,741 − 14,974 − 42,093 + 63,803 + 1,990
Long-term + 17,128 + 4,559 − 19,247 + 4,430 − 13,487 − 44 − 16,627 + 1,486 − 7,476Short-term − 159,316 − 23,094 + 5,864 + 12,493 − 4,253 − 14,932 − 25,467 + 62,317 + 9,466
Other sectors  
1 − 27,143 − 58,662 + 3,624 − 17,210 + 5,954 + 5,884 + 8,633 − 10,014 + 5,991
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 2,277 + 29,957 + 12,422 − 2,787 + 3,478 + 2,453 + 1,579 − 1,556 + 4,987
Errors and omissions − 30,714 − 27,576 − 86,927 − 18,628 − 18,590 − 24,563 − 19,009 − 17,813 − 30,677D
* Source: European Central Bank. — 1 Enterprises and households.  
  
67*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
X External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item Capital trans-
fers and Change in
the Bundes- acquisition/disposal of Change in bank’s net
Supple- non- the foreign external
Balance mentary produced reserves at Balance of assets aton current External trade Current Financial transaction transaction non-financial unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4,5 Services  6 Income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1,2,3 transactions
DM million
1991 − 40,182 + 21,899 − 2,804 − 30,724 + 29,260 − 57,812 − 4,565 + 12,715 + 9,605 + 22,427 − 319
1992 − 35,363 + 33,656 − 1,426 − 44,983 + 28,611 − 51,222 − 1,963 + 69,462 − 52,888 + 20,753 − 68,7451993 − 31,162 + 60,304 − 3,038 − 52,549 + 19,272 − 55,151 − 1,915 + 20,652 + 22,795 − 10,370 + 35,7661994 − 49,143 + 71,762 − 1,104 − 62,803 + 2,457 − 59,455 − 2,637 + 57,861 + 2,846 − 8,927 − 12,242
1995 − 42,682 + 85,303 − 4,722 − 63,985 − 3,863 − 55,416 − 3,845 + 60,472 − 10,355 − 3,590 − 17,754
1996 − 21,263 + 98,538 − 5,264 − 64,743 + 1,195 − 50,989 − 3,283 + 22,407 + 1,882 + 256 + 1,6101997 − 16,463 + 116,467 − 7,360 − 68,692 − 4,139 − 52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 9,740 + 8,4681998 − 26,738 + 126,970 − 7,315 − 75,053 − 18,036 − 53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 − 7,128 − 234 − 8,231
1999 − 46,941 + 127,542 − 14,355 − 90,036 − 21,215 − 48,877 − 301 − 44,849 + 24,517 + 67,574 − 72,364
2000 − 63,909 + 115,645 − 14,019 − 95,848 − 14,232 − 55,456 + 13,345 + 55,434 + 11,429 − 16,299 + 94,3292001 + 6,486 + 186,771 − 10,615 − 97,521 − 18,529 − 53,621 − 756 − 34,865 + 11,797 + 17,338 + 63,911
€ million
1999 − 24,001 + 65,211 − 7,340 − 46,035 − 10,847 − 24,990 − 154 − 22,931 + 12,535 + 34,550 − 36,9992000 − 32,676 + 59,128 − 7,168 − 49,006 − 7,276 − 28,354 + 6,823 + 28,343 + 5,844 − 8,333 + 48,2302001 + 3,316 + 95,495 − 5,427 − 49,862 − 9,474 − 27,416 − 387 − 17,826 + 6,032 + 8,865 + 32,6772002 + 48,155 + 132,788 − 6,357 − 35,473 − 14,742 − 28,061 − 212 − 42,825 + 2,065 − 7,184 − 33,2922003 + 45,249 + 129,921 − 8,310 − 33,970 − 13,707 − 28,684 + 312 − 46,284 + 445 + 279 + 2,6582004 + 83,967 + 156,704 − 12,466 − 31,966 + 117 − 28,423 + 430 − 99,769 + 1,470 + 13,902 − 3,906
2002          Q2 + 7,888 + 31,721 − 1,260 − 8,376 − 5,555 − 8,643 − 75 − 402 + 2,432 − 9,843 + 1,694
         Q3 + 11,552 + 35,543 − 1,780 − 12,417 − 3,523 − 6,271 + 62 − 13,331 + 87 + 1,630 − 17,588         Q4 + 15,536 + 32,195 − 2,126 − 4,296 − 2,737 − 7,501 − 359 − 35,738 + 898 + 19,662 + 1,099
2003          Q1 + 11,078 + 29,835 − 2,170 − 8,008 − 2,826 − 5,752 − 30 − 4,733 − 1,495 − 4,820 + 3,444
         Q2 + 5,082 + 29,841 − 2,001 − 8,008 − 6,968 − 7,782 + 149 − 25,063 + 1,505 + 18,327 + 22,123         Q3 + 12,156 + 38,430 − 1,671 − 13,364 − 2,440 − 8,800 + 208 + 3,058 − 751 − 14,671 − 15,902         Q4 + 16,933 + 31,815 − 2,469 − 4,590 − 1,472 − 6,351 − 16 − 19,545 + 1,186 + 1,442 − 7,008
2004          Q1 + 25,532 + 41,293 − 2,552 − 7,036 − 463 − 5,711 + 280 + 6,175 + 205 − 32,193 − 6,821
         Q2 + 24,273 + 43,233 − 2,835 − 6,171 − 2,401 − 7,553 + 177 − 57,979 − 339 + 33,868 + 30,993         Q3 + 14,765 + 36,871 − 3,567 − 11,404 + 1,471 − 8,605 + 191 − 24,556 + 1,568 + 8,032 − 31,266         Q4 + 19,396 + 35,307 − 3,513 − 7,355 + 1,511 − 6,554 − 218 − 23,409 + 37 + 4,195 + 3,189
2005          Q1  
p + 27,892 + 43,204 − 3,408 − 6,481 + 1,859 − 7,281 − 1,498 − 19,281 − 181 − 6,932 − 6,813
2002          Oct + 3,097 + 11,529 − 450 − 3,703 − 990 − 3,289 − 82 − 20,661 + 570 + 17,076 − 5,279
         Nov + 7,071 + 12,283 − 642 − 1,262 − 1,005 − 2,302 − 137 − 2,270 − 842 − 3,822 + 4,265         Dec + 5,367 + 8,383 − 1,033 + 669 − 742 − 1,910 − 139 − 12,806 + 1,171 + 6,407 + 2,112
2003          Jan + 2,631 + 9,269 − 1,140 − 3,167 − 1,239 − 1,093 + 461 − 3,005 − 97 + 10 + 6,799
         Feb + 3,193 + 10,667 − 605 − 2,880 − 1,325 − 2,665 − 504 − 21,790 − 320 + 19,420 + 677         Mar + 5,253 + 9,898 − 426 − 1,962 − 263 − 1,995 + 13 + 20,061 − 1,078 − 24,250 − 4,032
         Apr + 673 + 9,111 − 830 − 2,178 − 2,811 − 2,620 − 126 − 4,040 + 1,449 + 2,044 + 1,477
         May + 1,633 + 10,400 − 560 − 2,644 − 3,038 − 2,524 + 156 − 7,235 − 854 + 6,301 + 22,684         June + 2,777 + 10,330 − 610 − 3,186 − 1,119 − 2,638 + 119 − 13,788 + 910 + 9,982 − 2,037
         July + 5,262 + 13,844 − 762 − 3,796 − 1,081 − 2,943 + 62 + 5,563 + 225 − 11,113 − 16,353
         Aug + 456 + 10,170 − 341 − 5,423 − 967 − 2,983 + 224 − 8,356 − 717 + 8,393 − 3,057         Sep + 6,438 + 14,416 − 568 − 4,144 − 393 − 2,873 − 78 + 5,851 − 259 − 11,951 + 3,508
         Oct + 4,280 + 10,996 − 581 − 3,529 − 754 − 1,853 − 27 − 4,279 − 255 + 281 − 21,689
         Nov + 4,540 + 10,235 − 702 − 1,150 − 945 − 2,898 + 49 − 3,907 + 521 − 1,204 + 14,870         Dec + 8,112 + 10,584 − 1,187 + 88 + 226 − 1,600 − 38 − 11,360 + 921 + 2,365 − 190
2004          Jan + 6,421 + 12,531 − 1,089 − 3,823 − 639 − 560 + 13 + 5,677 − 206 − 11,904 + 5,619
         Feb + 6,755 + 12,160 − 729 − 1,923 − 76 − 2,677 − 179 + 8,179 − 26 − 14,728 + 556         Mar + 12,357 + 16,602 − 734 − 1,289 + 251 − 2,474 + 447 − 7,680 + 437 − 5,561 − 12,996
         Apr + 8,350 + 14,343 − 737 − 2,149 − 1,252 − 1,855 + 84 − 34,669 − 628 + 26,862 + 315
         May + 7,892 + 14,147 − 991 − 1,475 − 1,091 − 2,699 − 30 − 9,159 + 607 + 690 + 9,981         June + 8,030 + 14,743 − 1,107 − 2,547 − 59 − 2,999 + 123 − 14,152 − 318 + 6,316 + 20,697
         July + 6,682 + 13,647 − 1,398 − 2,487 + 277 − 3,356 + 164 + 2,603 + 847 − 10,295 − 1,588
         Aug + 2,969 + 11,107 − 1,249 − 4,737 + 314 − 2,467 + 80 − 4,982 + 517 + 1,416 − 15,748         Sep + 5,115 + 12,117 − 920 − 4,180 + 880 − 2,782 − 53 − 22,177 + 204 + 16,911 − 13,931
         Oct + 6,315 + 12,651 − 1,164 − 2,990 + 342 − 2,524 − 22 + 2,553 + 839 − 9,685 + 23,124
         Nov + 7,038 + 11,979 − 1,231 − 1,783 + 453 − 2,380 − 186 − 17,862 − 182 + 11,192 − 10,787         Dec + 6,043 + 10,677 − 1,118 − 2,582 + 716 − 1,650 − 10 − 8,100 − 621 + 2,687 − 9,147
2005          Jan  
r + 6,811 + 13,333 − 1,464 − 2,652 + 215 − 2,621 − 1,218 + 11,994 − 353 − 17,234 − 1,641
         Feb + 9,085 + 13,571 − 944 − 1,796 + 618 − 2,363 − 106 − 9,437 + 494 − 36 + 18,279
         Mar  p + 11,995 + 16,300 − 1,000 − 2,033 + 1,025 − 2,297 − 174 − 21,837 − 322 + 10,338 − 23,451
1From the beginning of 1993, figures subject to significant uncertainty included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. —
owing to changes in the method of data collection for foreign trade. — 4Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, goods returned. — 5See footnote 3. — 6Excluding the expenditure on
exports fob. — 3From January 1993, including additional estimates for freight and insurance included in the cif import figure. — 7Capital
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are exports: −. — 8 Increase: −. 
68*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
X External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2004 1  2005
Country / group of countries  2002  2003  2004 1 Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar  p 
All countries  2 Exports 651,320 664,455 731,092 64,055 66,488 59,706 60,556 59,720 65,275
Imports 518,532 534,534 574,388 51,404 54,509 49,029 47,223 46,149 48,975Balance + 132,788 + 129,921 + 156,704 + 12,651 + 11,979 + 10,677 + 13,333 + 13,571 + 16,300
I Exports 470,873 490,672 543,755 48,443 50,685 43,226 44,716 44,857 ...European countries
Imports 372,955 384,939 413,069 36,274 38,887 35,042 33,545 33,617 ...Balance + 97,918 + 105,733 + 130,686 + 12,169 + 11,798 + 8,185 + 11,171 + 11,240 ...
Exports 408,286 426,342 468,644 41,968 44,081 36,283 38,477 38,958 ... 1 EU member states (25)
Imports 314,981 324,043 346,518 30,590 32,356 28,483 27,706 27,893 ...
Balance + 93,304 + 102,299 + 122,126 + 11,377 + 11,725 + 7,800 + 10,771 + 11,064 ...
Memo item
Exports 354,813 369,776 407,249 36,503 38,313 31,820 33,627 34,080 ...  EU member states (15)
Imports 262,849 266,404 288,331 25,476 27,021 23,814 23,355 23,490 ...Balance + 91,964 + 103,372 + 118,918 + 11,027 + 11,292 + 8,006 + 10,272 + 10,589 ...
Euro-area Exports 276,270 288,668 319,048 28,666 30,057 25,034 26,446 26,633 ...countries Imports 211,642 215,705 234,506 20,463 21,641 19,607 18,696 18,985 ...
Balance + 64,628 + 72,963 + 84,542 + 8,203 + 8,415 + 5,427 + 7,750 + 7,648 ...
of which
Austria Exports 33,863 35,857 39,434 3,649 3,845 3,147 3,197 3,130 ...
Imports 21,047 21,453 24,237 2,167 2,286 1,882 1,804 1,952 ...Balance + 12,816 + 14,404 + 15,198 + 1,482 + 1,558 + 1,265 + 1,393 + 1,178 ...
Belgium and Exports 34,108 38,413 44,659 3,907 4,217 3,627 3,619 3,938 ...Luxembourg Imports 26,505 26,132 30,699 2,799 2,827 2,561 2,456 2,758 ...
Balance + 7,603 + 12,282 + 13,960 + 1,108 + 1,390 + 1,067 + 1,163 + 1,181 ...
France Exports 68,721 69,025 75,301 6,724 6,969 5,894 6,450 6,239 ...
Imports 48,200 48,545 52,204 4,553 4,497 4,461 4,205 4,071 ...Balance + 20,521 + 20,480 + 23,097 + 2,171 + 2,471 + 1,432 + 2,245 + 2,167 ...
Italy Exports 47,335 48,414 52,441 4,639 4,950 3,926 4,241 4,314 ...
Imports 33,482 34,259 34,963 3,108 3,204 2,887 2,764 2,798 ...Balance + 13,853 + 14,156 + 17,478 + 1,531 + 1,745 + 1,039 + 1,476 + 1,516 ...
Netherlands Exports 40,463 42,219 45,491 4,319 4,239 3,672 3,699 3,635 ...
Imports 40,751 42,301 47,865 4,190 4,837 4,262 4,009 3,904 ...Balance − 288 − 83 − 2,373 + 129 − 598 − 589 − 310 − 269 ...
Spain Exports 29,436 32,364 36,810 3,232 3,532 2,798 3,115 3,153 ...
Imports 15,532 16,518 17,312 1,484 1,641 1,398 1,479 1,433 ...Balance + 13,903 + 15,846 + 19,497 + 1,748 + 1,891 + 1,401 + 1,636 + 1,721 ...
Other EU member Exports 132,016 137,674 149,596 13,302 14,024 11,249 12,031 12,325 ...states Imports 103,339 108,337 112,011 10,128 10,715 8,876 9,010 8,908 ...
Balance + 28,677 + 29,336 + 37,584 + 3,174 + 3,309 + 2,373 + 3,021 + 3,417 ...
of which
United Exports 53,761 55,597 61,058 5,231 5,698 4,602 4,985 5,173 ...Kingdom Imports 33,075 31,712 34,313 3,170 3,495 2,760 3,055 3,047 ...
Balance + 20,685 + 23,885 + 26,745 + 2,061 + 2,203 + 1,843 + 1,930 + 2,126 ...
Exports 62,588 64,331 75,111 6,475 6,604 6,944 6,239 5,899 ... 2 Other European
Imports 57,974 60,897 66,551 5,683 6,531 6,559 5,839 5,723 ... countries
Balance + 4,614 + 3,434 + 8,560 + 792 + 73 + 385 + 400 + 176 ...
II Exports 178,818 172,329 188,334 15,720 15,722 16,301 15,748 14,789 ...Non-European
Imports 144,950 148,895 163,688 15,422 15,567 13,935 13,631 12,486 ... countries
Balance + 33,869 + 23,434 + 24,646 + 298 + 155 + 2,366 + 2,117 + 2,303 ...Exports 11,797 12,072 13,603 1,100 1,131 1,245 1,148 1,044 ... 1 Africa
Imports 10,248 10,239 10,498 1,321 931 881 890 769 ...
Balance + 1,549 + 1,832 + 3,104 − 222 + 200 + 364 + 258 + 274 ...
Exports 89,081 79,629 84,514 7,168 7,072 7,314 6,756 6,794 ... 2 America
Imports 52,822 51,948 53,965 4,673 4,678 4,424 4,204 4,193 ...
Balance + 36,259 + 27,681 + 30,549 + 2,496 + 2,394 + 2,890 + 2,552 + 2,601 ...
of which
Exports 68,263 61,654 64,802 5,565 5,545 5,380 5,082 5,159 ... United States
Imports 40,376 39,231 40,265 3,469 3,532 3,317 3,117 3,146 ...Balance + 27,887 + 22,423 + 24,538 + 2,097 + 2,013 + 2,063 + 1,965 + 2,013 ...
Exports 72,915 75,620 84,727 6,979 7,032 7,255 7,372 6,492 ... 3 Asia
Imports 79,892 84,783 97,190 9,266 9,772 8,473 8,383 7,403 ...
Balance − 6,977 − 9,162 − 12,462 − 2,287 − 2,739 − 1,218 − 1,011 − 911 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 15,045 15,511 17,351 1,465 1,603 1,643 1,746 1,420 ...
Imports 4,696 4,469 4,382 423 439 380 375 304 ...Balance + 10,349 + 11,043 + 12,969 + 1,042 + 1,165 + 1,262 + 1,372 + 1,116 ...
Japan Exports 12,576 11,889 12,693 1,053 1,066 1,058 1,146 1,105 ...
Imports 19,896 19,684 21,094 1,716 1,929 1,827 1,684 1,489 ...Balance − 7,320 − 7,795 − 8,401 − 663 − 862 − 769 − 539 − 384 ...
Exports 14,571 18,265 20,995 1,713 1,682 1,708 1,590 1,412 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 21,338 25,681 32,455 3,577 3,599 2,932 2,971 2,761 ... of China  
3 
Balance − 6,768 − 7,417 − 11,460 − 1,863 − 1,917 − 1,224 − 1,382 − 1,349 ...
Exports 5,026 5,008 5,490 474 487 487 472 460 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 1,988 1,925 2,035 163 186 157 154 121 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,038 + 3,083 + 3,454 + 311 + 300 + 330 + 318 + 339 ...
Memo item
Exports 25,282 24,515 26,814 2,122 2,104 2,185 2,228 2,028 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 26,660 27,119 29,989 2,774 2,982 2,626 2,614 2,086 ... South-East Asia  4 
Balance − 1,377 − 2,603 − 3,175 − 652 − 878 − 440 − 386 − 58 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, yet been broken down by region. — 2Including fuel and other supplies for
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. — 3Excluding
countries according to the current position. — 1The figures for “All Hong Kong. — 4Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia,
countries” include revisions from January until October 2004 which have not Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand . 
69*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
X External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2000 − 49,006 − 37,188 + 3,386 + 1,668 − 3,012 + 2,221 − 16,081 − 2,757 − 753 − 651 − 6,625
2001 − 49,862 − 37,821 + 4,254 + 1,080 − 2,431 + 3,488 − 18,433 − 2,544 − 591 − 359 − 9,1152002 − 35,473 − 35,154 + 2,771 + 1,418 − 1,556 + 5,237 − 8,188 − 2,028 + 497 − 30 − 14,7122003 − 33,970 − 36,761 + 1,719 + 1,624 − 755 + 5,086 − 4,884 − 1,814 + 1,440 − 155 − 13,5512004 − 31,966 − 35,824 + 4,318 + 1,626 − 531 + 5,316 − 6,870 − 1,342 + 819 + 262 − 145
2003          Q3 − 13,364 − 13,969 + 207 + 338 − 320 + 1,326 − 945 − 411 + 389 − 260 − 2,180
         Q4 − 4,590 − 6,823 + 582 + 443 + 23 + 1,266 − 81 − 344 + 374 − 1 − 1,471
2004          Q1 − 7,036 − 6,441 + 590 + 389 − 167 + 1,275 − 2,681 − 336 + 267 + 308 − 771
         Q2 − 6,171 − 8,947 + 1,532 + 306 − 291 + 1,442 − 213 − 368 + 71 − 11 − 2,390         Q3 − 11,404 − 13,587 + 1,011 + 464 + 21 + 1,425 − 738 − 294 + 220 − 161 + 1,632         Q4 − 7,355 − 6,848 + 1,184 + 466 − 94 + 1,174 − 3,238 − 344 + 261 + 127 + 1,384
2005          Q1 − 6,481 − 6,924 + 1,133 + 395 + 1,022 + 1,077 − 3,184 − 331 + 61 + 246 + 1,613
2004          May − 1,475 − 2,518 + 279 + 70 − 23 + 454 + 264 − 173 + 93 − 9 − 1,082
         June − 2,547 − 4,228 + 687 + 87 − 201 + 516 + 592 − 114 + 5 + 3 − 62
         July − 2,487 − 3,096 + 320 + 154 + 88 + 482 − 437 − 100 + 180 − 52 + 329
         Aug − 4,737 − 5,597 + 518 + 142 − 8 + 441 − 233 − 85 + 47 − 62 + 376         Sep − 4,180 − 4,895 + 173 + 168 − 59 + 501 − 68 − 109 − 7 − 48 + 927
         Oct − 2,990 − 3,637 + 410 + 124 − 2 + 381 − 266 − 77 + 111 + 37 + 304
         Nov − 1,783 − 2,137 + 381 + 128 − 38 + 371 − 489 − 119 + 5 + 36 + 417         Dec − 2,582 − 1,074 + 394 + 214 − 55 + 421 − 2,483 − 148 + 144 + 54 + 662
2005          Jan − 2,652 − 2,346 + 252 + 140 + 1,175 + 379 − 2,253 − 136 − 5 + 87 + 129
         Feb − 1,796 − 2,104 + 476 + 74 + 22 + 343 − 608 − 89 − 76 + 74 + 544         Mar − 2,033 − 2,474 + 405 + 181 − 175 + 355 − 324 − 106 + 142 + 85 + 940
1From January 2002, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Remittances Other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2000 − 28,354 − 19,094 − 17,100 − 15,398 − 1,995 − 9,260 − 3,458 − 5,802 − 1,599 − 1,189 − 410
2001 − 27,416 − 16,927 − 14,257 − 12,587 − 2,670 − 10,489 − 3,520 − 6,969 − 387 − 1,361 + 9742002 − 28,061 − 16,286 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 3,241 − 11,776 − 3,470 − 8,305 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,2042003 − 28,684 − 18,730 − 15,426 − 13,730 − 3,304 − 9,954 − 3,332 − 6,622 + 312 − 1,238 + 1,5502004 − 28,423 − 17,570 − 14,216 − 12,739 − 3,354 − 10,853 − 3,180 − 7,673 + 430 − 1,094 + 1,524
2003          Q3 − 8,800 − 6,017 − 4,896 − 4,650 − 1,121 − 2,783 − 833 − 1,950 + 208 − 249 + 457
         Q4 − 6,351 − 4,099 − 2,859 − 2,662 − 1,240 − 2,251 − 833 − 1,418 − 16 − 461 + 445
2004          Q1 − 5,711 − 3,169 − 2,316 − 1,672 − 853 − 2,541 − 795 − 1,747 + 280 − 254 + 535
         Q2 − 7,553 − 4,457 − 4,469 − 4,162 + 12 − 3,096 − 795 − 2,301 + 177 − 239 + 416         Q3 − 8,605 − 5,714 − 4,434 − 4,142 − 1,280 − 2,891 − 795 − 2,096 + 191 − 261 + 451         Q4 − 6,554 − 4,229 − 2,996 − 2,763 − 1,233 − 2,324 − 795 − 1,529 − 218 − 340 + 122
2005          Q1 − 7,281 − 4,690 − 3,700 − 3,189 − 990 − 2,591 − 732 − 1,860 − 1,498 − 2,041 + 543
2004          May − 2,699 − 1,510 − 1,538 − 1,422 + 28 − 1,189 − 265 − 924 − 30 − 91 + 61
         June − 2,999 − 2,055 − 1,970 − 1,881 − 84 − 944 − 265 − 679 + 123 − 77 + 200
         July − 3,356 − 2,201 − 1,617 − 1,496 − 584 − 1,155 − 265 − 890 + 164 − 102 + 266
         Aug − 2,467 − 1,634 − 1,193 − 1,086 − 441 − 833 − 265 − 568 + 80 − 80 + 160         Sep − 2,782 − 1,879 − 1,624 − 1,561 − 255 − 903 − 265 − 638 − 53 − 79 + 26
         Oct − 2,524 − 1,739 − 1,285 − 1,224 − 454 − 785 − 265 − 520 − 22 − 95 + 73
         Nov − 2,380 − 1,666 − 1,213 − 1,126 − 453 − 715 − 265 − 450 − 186 − 117 − 69         Dec − 1,650 − 825 − 498 − 413 − 327 − 825 − 265 − 560 − 10 − 128 + 118
2005          Jan − 2,621 − 1,739 − 1,456 − 1,156 − 283 − 881 − 244 − 638 − 1,218 − 1,896 + 678
         Feb − 2,363 − 1,484 − 1,059 − 901 − 426 − 879 − 244 − 635 − 106 − 63 − 43         Mar − 2,297 − 1,466 − 1,185 − 1,132 − 281 − 831 − 244 − 587 − 174 − 82 − 92
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
X External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2004 2005
Item 2002 2003 2004 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Jan Feb Mar
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 254,047 − 199,412 − 238,065 − 11,419 − 100,738 − 44,435 − 150,360 − 53,005 − 57,920 − 39,434
1 Direct investment  1 − 16,120 + 3,163 + 5,853 − 2,688 − 9,741 + 8,734 − 10,249 − 3,013 − 2,438 − 4,799
Equity capital − 38,612 − 14,801 + 25,938 − 1,205 + 4,075 + 1,188 − 2,823 − 1,066 − 1,142 − 614
Reinvested earnings  2 + 9,740 + 3,858 + 899 + 1,083 + 145 + 925 − 220 − 447 − 383 + 610
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors + 21,345 + 24,060 − 13,415 − 6 − 12,044 + 8,209 − 6,329 − 1,308 − 653 − 4,368Other capital − 8,594 − 9,954 − 7,570 − 2,560 − 1,917 − 1,587 − 878 − 192 − 259 − 427
2 Portfolio investment − 62,944 − 47,377 − 112,900 − 35,041 − 25,620 − 19,534 − 67,272 − 16,019 − 30,548 − 20,705
Equity
3 − 4,674 + 7,434 + 6,199 + 917 + 6,014 − 2,127 + 845 + 5,291 − 3,746 − 700
Mutual fund shares  4 − 7,088 − 4,073 − 11,951 − 2,559 − 3,133 + 780 − 14,508 − 6,315 − 5,553 − 2,640
Bonds and notes  5 − 47,456 − 54,045 − 99,938 − 29,032 − 20,990 − 20,222 − 55,352 − 13,522 − 22,412 − 19,418
Money market instruments − 3,726 + 3,307 − 7,210 − 4,367 − 7,510 + 2,035 + 1,743 − 1,472 + 1,162 + 2,053
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 942 − 63 − 4,193 + 836 + 426 − 3,427 − 3,444 − 2,462 − 687 − 296
4 Credit transactions − 172,354 − 152,053 − 123,240 + 26,315 − 65,090 − 29,211 − 68,194 − 30,968 − 23,863 − 13,362
MFIs  7,8 − 132,536 − 122,305 − 121,390 − 14,365 − 33,208 − 37,222 − 57,496 − 30,476 − 41,678 + 14,658
Long-term − 33,790 − 32,555 + 6,297 + 5,597 − 1,007 − 1,864 − 11,076 − 769 − 4,906 − 5,401
Short-term − 98,746 − 89,750 − 127,687 − 19,962 − 32,201 − 35,358 − 46,420 − 29,707 − 36,773 + 20,059
Enterprises and households − 10,976 − 31,245 − 1,577 + 8,687 − 1,642 + 5,159 − 14,551 − 3,054 − 307 − 11,190
Long-term − 1,396 − 2,880 − 3,363 − 836 − 1,040 − 845 − 1,150 − 389 − 373 − 388
Short-term  7 − 9,580 − 28,365 + 1,787 + 9,523 − 602 + 6,004 − 13,401 − 2,666 + 66 − 10,802
General government + 7,168 + 1,267 + 2,578 + 64 + 1,191 + 165 + 8,686 + 2,099 − 401 + 6,987
Long-term + 218 + 694 + 781 + 7 + 183 + 285 + 2,200 + 1,893 + 4 + 302Short-term  
7 + 6,950 + 572 + 1,798 + 57 + 1,008 − 120 + 6,486 + 207 − 405 + 6,685
Bundesbank − 36,010 + 230 − 2,851 + 31,928 − 31,431 + 2,687 − 4,833 + 462 + 18,523 − 23,818
5 Other investment  9 − 1,686 − 3,083 − 3,586 − 840 − 713 − 996 − 1,201 − 544 − 384 − 273
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 211,222 + 153,128 + 138,296 − 46,560 + 76,182 + 21,026 + 131,079 + 64,999 + 48,483 + 17,597
1 Direct investment  1 + 53,679 + 24,157 − 31,054 − 4,298 − 540 + 1,042 + 2,455 − 2,378 − 387 + 5,220
Equity capital + 35,874 + 40,475 + 21,585 − 2,029 + 7,235 + 11,385 + 838 + 799 + 38 + 1Reinvested earnings  
2 − 7,080 − 7,352 − 6,415 − 1,801 − 264 − 1,152 − 621 − 861 + 214 + 26
Credit transactions of
foreign direct investors + 25,081 − 8,780 − 46,242 − 482 − 7,498 − 9,155 + 2,236 − 2,311 − 658 + 5,205Other capital − 197 − 186 + 19 + 15 − 13 − 37 + 2 − 4 + 19 − 12
2 Portfolio investment + 126,710 + 112,285 + 133,656 + 9,819 + 48,341 + 24,233 + 57,323 + 18,252 + 27,961 + 11,110
Equity  
3 + 15,907 + 24,188 − 5,198 − 11,481 + 6,557 + 491 + 3,519 − 6,425 + 9,463 + 481
Mutual fund shares − 682 − 1,844 + 5,064 − 981 + 4,035 + 1,181 + 100 − 1,488 − 524 + 2,112
Bonds and notes  5 + 82,880 + 67,141 + 147,724 + 24,628 + 44,516 + 22,575 + 41,941 + 18,797 + 16,654 + 6,490
Money market instruments + 28,605 + 22,799 − 13,934 − 2,348 − 6,766 − 13 + 11,763 + 7,368 + 2,368 + 2,027
3 Credit transactions + 30,751 + 16,647 + 35,476 − 52,160 + 28,360 − 4,314 + 71,371 + 49,131 + 20,922 + 1,319
MFIs  7,8 + 28,453 + 10,701 + 32,357 − 52,845 + 28,076 − 749 + 64,383 + 47,937 + 14,291 + 2,155
Long-term + 18,379 − 5,972 − 10,060 − 1,543 + 5,492 − 5,154 − 2,253 + 1,975 − 1,926 − 2,303
Short-term + 10,075 + 16,672 + 42,417 − 51,302 + 22,584 + 4,405 + 66,636 + 45,961 + 16,217 + 4,458
Enterprises and households + 3,270 + 283 + 7,188 − 1,384 − 312 − 1,990 + 3,605 − 44 + 3,322 + 327
Long-term + 5,188 − 545 + 3,919 + 868 − 490 − 325 + 3,487 + 1,452 + 2,138 − 103
Short-term  7 − 1,918 + 828 + 3,269 − 2,252 + 177 − 1,665 + 119 − 1,496 + 1,184 + 430
General government − 1,625 + 3,680 − 1,619 + 2,634 + 1,950 − 2,044 + 5,152 + 2,968 + 4,047 − 1,862
Long-term − 125 + 4,859 − 385 + 1,458 + 1,180 − 845 + 3,015 + 1,608 + 273 + 1,134Short-term  
7 − 1,500 − 1,179 − 1,233 + 1,176 + 770 − 1,199 + 2,137 + 1,360 + 3,774 − 2,996
Bundesbank + 653 + 1,983 − 2,451 − 564 − 1,354 + 469 − 1,769 − 1,730 − 739 + 700
4 Other investment + 83 + 40 + 218 + 79 + 21 + 65 − 70 − 6 − 13 − 51
III Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) − 42,825 − 46,284 − 99,769 − 57,979 − 24,556 − 23,409 − 19,281 + 11,994 − 9,437 − 21,837
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including accumulated statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9In particular, subscriptions of the Federal
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- Government to international organisations. 
71*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
X External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,9512004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2003          Nov 97,130 79,624 36,705 8,374 34,545 312 16,742 452 10,518 86,612
         Dec 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004          Jan 89,895 76,992 35,834 7,726 33,432 312 12,135 456 10,522 79,374
         Feb 87,987 76,089 34,930 7,736 33,423 312 11,140 446 10,078 77,910         Mar 104,464 79,717 38,266 7,610 33,841 312 23,981 454 9,545 94,920
         Apr 102,021 78,143 35,849 7,880 34,414 312 23,134 432 9,694 92,327
         May 89,877 76,473 35,705 7,685 33,083 312 12,641 451 8,537 81,340         June 69,837 76,996 35,793 7,390 33,813 312 − 7,951 480 9,003 60,834
         July 70,865 76,076 35,721 7,395 32,960 312 − 6,009 486 8,545 62,320
         Aug 87,570 77,171 37,195 7,395 32,581 312 9,455 632 7,755 79,815         Sep 100,176 75,729 36,680 6,996 32,054 312 23,480 655 7,625 92,552
         Oct 76,043 74,334 36,935 6,889 30,510 312 740 656 7,128 68,915
         Nov 85,702 73,506 37,527 6,685 29,294 312 11,233 651 6,937 78,765         Dec 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005          Jan 94,895 73,556 35,888 6,634 31,034 312 20,327 699 6,315 88,580
         Feb 75,603 72,794 36,348 6,538 29,908 312 1,809 687 5,542 70,061         Mar 100,452 73,813 36,399 6,143 31,271 312 25,627 699 6,322 94,131
         Apr 87,967 74,123 36,905 6,096 31,123 312 12,782 750 6,123 81,845
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
72*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
X External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,585
2002  4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003 357,399 86,627 270,772 154,953 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,4692004 372,840 98,632 274,208 155,064 119,144 112,342 6,802 503,434 50,211 453,223 358,111 95,112 63,762 31,350
2004          Oct 390,774 99,532 291,242 167,586 123,656 116,361 7,295 510,418 51,815 458,603 364,522 94,081 62,145 31,936
         Nov 385,639 97,981 287,658 161,505 126,153 118,880 7,273 507,165 51,266 455,899 360,739 95,160 63,123 32,037         Dec 372,840 98,632 274,208 155,064 119,144 112,342 6,802 503,434 50,211 453,223 358,111 95,112 63,762 31,350
2005          Jan 377,805 104,285 273,520 156,139 117,381 110,265 7,116 493,674 51,400 442,274 351,672 90,602 58,810 31,792
         Feb  
r 382,389 102,739 279,650 161,239 118,411 111,224 7,187 498,113 53,974 444,139 353,171 90,968 58,674 32,294
         Mar 399,437 110,865 288,572 164,676 123,896 116,685 7,211 506,424 53,104 453,320 358,183 95,137 62,334 32,803
Industrial countries 2
 
2001 298,904 61,403 237,501 151,047 86,454 79,453 7,001 466,206 57,861 408,345 340,344 68,001 54,364 13,6372002  
4 278,074 62,861 215,213 133,509 81,704 75,996 5,708 493,155 55,770 437,385 372,464 64,921 50,731 14,190
2003 305,754 85,390 220,364 140,280 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,2202004 331,109 97,485 233,624 143,949 89,675 84,903 4,772 465,592 48,304 417,288 346,293 70,995 53,480 17,515
2004          Oct 348,162 98,053 250,109 156,888 93,221 88,176 5,045 472,794 49,840 422,954 351,882 71,072 53,127 17,945
         Nov 343,410 96,661 246,749 150,954 95,795 90,756 5,039 469,173 49,330 419,843 348,217 71,626 53,497 18,129         Dec 331,109 97,485 233,624 143,949 89,675 84,903 4,772 465,592 48,304 417,288 346,293 70,995 53,480 17,515
2005          Jan 337,033 103,044 233,989 145,116 88,873 83,868 5,005 457,164 49,485 407,679 340,771 66,908 48,880 18,028
         Feb  
r 340,660 101,484 239,176 149,637 89,539 84,497 5,042 461,670 52,100 409,570 342,421 67,149 48,875 18,274
         Mar 356,554 109,428 247,126 153,154 93,972 88,895 5,077 469,315 51,298 418,017 347,601 70,416 52,030 18,386
EU member states 2
 
2001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003 225,973 81,430 144,543 89,392 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,6422004 254,780 92,867 161,913 96,554 65,359 61,563 3,796 373,461 43,838 329,623 281,173 48,450 36,494 11,956
2004          Oct 268,631 93,157 175,474 108,073 67,401 63,424 3,977 381,735 45,273 336,462 287,728 48,734 36,391 12,343
         Nov 263,212 91,620 171,592 101,868 69,724 65,773 3,951 379,050 44,947 334,103 284,695 49,408 36,965 12,443         Dec 254,780 92,867 161,913 96,554 65,359 61,563 3,796 373,461 43,838 329,623 281,173 48,450 36,494 11,956
2005          Jan 261,365 98,539 162,826 97,830 64,996 61,056 3,940 370,837 45,051 325,786 280,179 45,607 33,293 12,314
         Feb  
r 264,938 98,394 166,544 101,337 65,207 61,256 3,951 375,635 47,769 327,866 281,655 46,211 33,724 12,487
         Mar 276,439 105,827 170,612 102,185 68,427 64,450 3,977 380,898 46,856 334,042 285,647 48,395 35,454 12,941
of which:  Euro-area member states 1
 
2001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,4042004 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 302,864 28,295 274,569 241,860 32,709 24,258 8,451
2004          Oct 164,409 51,756 112,653 67,201 45,452 42,652 2,800 311,309 29,948 281,361 248,696 32,665 23,847 8,818
         Nov 163,387 50,458 112,929 65,585 47,344 44,579 2,765 309,154 29,166 279,988 247,189 32,799 23,918 8,881         Dec 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 302,864 28,295 274,569 241,860 32,709 24,258 8,451
2005          Jan 165,116 56,084 109,032 64,130 44,902 42,203 2,699 304,084 29,126 274,958 244,197 30,761 22,135 8,626
         Feb 166,587 55,628 110,959 65,954 45,005 42,277 2,728 306,669 30,129 276,540 245,658 30,882 22,141 8,741         Mar 175,685 60,865 114,820 68,111 46,709 43,953 2,756 312,147 29,092 283,055 250,656 32,399 23,270 9,129
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2001 59,216 1,031 58,185 20,892 37,293 35,404 1,889 39,060 2,271 36,789 14,217 22,572 11,624 10,9482002  
4 53,597 956 52,641 15,404 37,237 35,410 1,827 40,268 1,926 38,342 15,386 22,956 11,891 11,065
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,2492004 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,835
2004          Oct 42,612 1,479 41,133 10,698 30,435 28,185 2,250 37,624 1,975 35,649 12,640 23,009 9,018 13,991
         Nov 42,229 1,320 40,909 10,551 30,358 28,124 2,234 37,992 1,936 36,056 12,522 23,534 9,626 13,908         Dec 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,835
2005          Jan 40,772 1,241 39,531 11,023 28,508 26,397 2,111 36,510 1,915 34,595 10,901 23,694 9,930 13,764
         Feb 41,729 1,255 40,474 11,602 28,872 26,727 2,145 36,443 1,874 34,569 10,750 23,819 9,799 14,020         Mar 42,883 1,437 41,446 11,522 29,924 27,790 2,134 37,109 1,806 35,303 10,582 24,721 10,304 14,417
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in January 2001, including Greece. — 2From May 2004, including the new
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in member states: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia ,
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia. — 3All
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. — 4Change in the
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X.7. — 1From reporting population owing to an increase in the exemption limit. 
73*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
X External sector
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Switzerland Norway Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK GBP SEK CHF NOK CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 2.926  27.421 115.740 25.580 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 2.753  26.912 111.198 25.143 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 2.483  21.248 111.949 23.303 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 2.4816 21.013 118.712 22.982 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 2.2620 20.116 121.240 22.614 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 2.3478 22.434 121.891 23.292 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 2.8410 22.718 119.508 24.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 2.9142 22.128 121.414 23.297 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 0.65874 8.8075 1.6003 8.3104 1.5840 1.6523 2.0145
2000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 0.60948 8.4452 1.5579 8.1129 1.3706 1.5889 2.0288
2001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 0.62187 9.2551 1.5105 8.0484 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 0.62883 9.1611 1.4670 7.5086 1.4838 1.7376 2.03662003 1.1312 130.97 7.4307 0.69199 9.1242 1.5212 8.0033 1.5817 1.7379 1.94382004 1.2439 134.44 7.4399 0.67866 9.1243 1.5438 8.3697 1.6167 1.6905 1.8731
2003          Sep 1.1222 128.94 7.4273 0.69693 9.0682 1.5474 8.1952 1.5330 1.6967 1.9227         Oct 1.1692 128.12 7.4301 0.69763 9.0105 1.5485 8.2274 1.5489 1.6867 1.9446
         Nov 1.1702 127.84 7.4370 0.69278 8.9939 1.5590 8.1969 1.5361 1.6337 1.8608         Dec 1.2286 132.43 7.4419 0.70196 9.0228 1.5544 8.2421 1.6131 1.6626 1.8982
2004          Jan 1.2613 134.13 7.4481 0.69215 9.1368 1.5657 8.5925 1.6346 1.6374 1.8751
         Feb 1.2646 134.78 7.4511 0.67690 9.1763 1.5734 8.7752 1.6817 1.6260 1.8262         Mar 1.2262 133.13 7.4493 0.67124 9.2346 1.5670 8.5407 1.6314 1.6370 1.8566
         Apr 1.1985 129.08 7.4436 0.66533 9.1653 1.5547 8.2976 1.6068 1.6142 1.8727
         May 1.2007 134.48 7.4405 0.67157 9.1277 1.5400 8.2074 1.6541 1.7033 1.9484         June 1.2138 132.86 7.4342 0.66428 9.1430 1.5192 8.2856 1.6492 1.7483 1.9301
         July 1.2266 134.08 7.4355 0.66576 9.1962 1.5270 8.4751 1.6220 1.7135 1.8961
         Aug 1.2176 134.54 7.4365 0.66942 9.1861 1.5387 8.3315 1.6007 1.7147 1.8604         Sep 1.2218 134.51 7.4381 0.68130 9.0920 1.5431 8.3604 1.5767 1.7396 1.8538
         Oct 1.2490 135.97 7.4379 0.69144 9.0620 1.5426 8.2349 1.5600 1.7049 1.8280
         Nov 1.2991 136.09 7.4313 0.69862 8.9981 1.5216 8.1412 1.5540 1.6867 1.8540         Dec 1.3408 139.14 7.4338 0.69500 8.9819 1.5364 8.2207 1.6333 1.7462 1.8737
2005          Jan 1.3119 135.63 7.4405 0.69867 9.0476 1.5469 8.2125 1.6060 1.7147 1.8620
         Feb 1.3014 136.55 7.4427 0.68968 9.0852 1.5501 8.3199 1.6128 1.6670 1.8192         Mar 1.3201 138.83 7.4466 0.69233 9.0884 1.5494 8.1880 1.6064 1.6806 1.8081
         Apr 1.2938 138.84 7.4499 0.68293 9.1670 1.5475 8.1763 1.5991 1.6738 1.7967
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 14.15. For additional euro reference exchange rates of the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. — 2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics.
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the euro-area member states, the Deutsche Mark value of
the ECU * and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.05076
1992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1As per data from the European exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). — 3Applicable from 1 January
Commission. — 2Up to 1998, reciprocal values of the exchange rates for the 1999. — 4Applicable from 1 January 2001. — 5Deutsche Mark conversion
Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999, euro reference rate. 
74*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
X External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item Effective nominal exchange rates of
Indicators of the German economy’s selected foreign currencies against the
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3,4 currencies of 19 industrial countries  3,5 
EER-23  1 EER-42  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  6 
In real terms
based on the
In real terms unit labour In real termsbased on the In real terms costs of the based on the based
 on the
consumer national consumer Pound Japanese based on the deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices US dollar sterling yen GDP deflator  7 economy  7 total sales  7 based on consumer prices
1999 95.9 95.9 95.8 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.8 98.2 97.7 100.8 102.3 105.1
2000 86.1 86.0 85.8 85.3 87.9 85.8 91.7 92.8 91.1 105.4 105.2 117.9
2001 86.7 86.8 86.8 85.2 90.4 87.0 91.9 93.2 91.5 112.0 103.6 106.72002 89.2 90.3 90.2 88.4 94.8 90.8 93.0 94.2 92.6 110.7 104.2 100.82003 99.9 101.7 101.5 99.5 106.6 101.5 96.5 97.9 97.2 97.7 99.2 99.92004 103.8 105.8 105.9 102.9 111.0 105.4
p 96.8 99.3 98.8 89.8 103.4 101.7
1999          Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0         Q2 96.2 96.1 96.2 97.4 96.4 95.9 98.6 98.6 98.0 102.8 102.8 99.0         Q3 94.8 94.7 94.5 95.1 95.5 94.6 97.0 97.7 97.1 101.4 102.3 106.2         Q4 92.9 92.7 92.6 93.3 94.3 92.7 95.6 96.3 95.8 99.1 104.1 115.2
2000          Q1 89.5 89.4 89.1 88.3 91.0 89.2 93.6 94.8 93.4 101.5 106.4 114.9
         Q2 86.5 86.3 86.2 85.9 88.2 86.1 91.9 92.7 91.4 104.3 105.4 118.4         Q3 85.1 85.0 84.8 84.4 87.0 84.8 91.2 92.1 90.3 106.2 103.9 119.2         Q4 83.2 83.2 83.0 82.5 85.5 83.0 90.1 91.4 89.5 109.4 105.0 119.2
2001          Q1 88.3 88.0 88.2 86.1 90.9 87.8 92.7 93.8 92.0 109.3 102.4 108.1
         Q2 85.3 85.4 85.3 83.8 88.8 85.6 91.3 92.7 90.8 113.4 104.1 106.9         Q3 86.4 86.5 86.5 84.8 90.5 87.0 91.4 93.1 91.5 112.2 103.9 106.8         Q4 86.8 87.2 87.3 86.1 91.2 87.6 92.1 93.2 91.5 113.1 104.0 104.9
2002          Jan 86.5 87.5 . . 90.7 87.3 . 93.6 91.2 116.4 104.9 98.3
         Feb 85.7 86.5 86.9 84.8 90.1 86.5 92.2 93.2 90.9 117.3 105.3 98.2         Mar 85.7 86.8 . . 90.3 86.7 . 93.2 90.9 116.1 104.6 99.8
         Apr 86.1 87.1 . . 90.7 87.0 . 93.1 90.6 115.3 105.2 99.4
         May 87.7 88.7 88.7 87.0 92.8 88.9 92.6 93.5 91.5 112.0 103.5 101.2         June 89.8 90.9 . . 95.5 91.5 . 94.5 92.9 109.0 101.9 101.7
         July 91.2 92.4 . . 97.5 93.4 . 95.0 94.0 106.0 103.5 104.3
         Aug 90.7 91.8 92.1 90.4 96.9 92.8 93.3 94.5 93.5 107.3 103.5 104.3         Sep 90.7 92.0 . . 97.2 93.0 . 94.6 93.5 107.6 104.7 102.5
         Oct 91.1 92.4 . . 97.7 93.5 . 94.7 93.9 108.5 105.0 99.8
         Nov 91.9 93.1 93.3 91.4 98.5 93.9 93.9 94.7 93.6 106.8 104.3 100.8         Dec 92.9 94.4 . . 99.6 95.2 . 95.5 94.5 106.0 104.0 99.6
2003          Jan 95.3 96.8 . . 102.3 97.6 . 96.2 95.5 103.0 102.6 100.4
         Feb 96.6 98.2 97.6 95.9 103.7 98.9 95.4 96.8 96.3 102.2 101.2 99.2         Mar 97.4 98.9 . . 104.4 99.5 . 97.1 96.5 101.4 99.3 99.8
         Apr 97.9 99.5 . . 104.6 99.5 . 97.2 96.4 101.4 98.7 98.6
         May 101.8 103.5 102.3 100.3 108.5 103.3 97.1 98.7 98.0 96.7 96.9 97.7         June 102.2 104.1 . . 108.8 103.7 . 99.0 98.3 96.1 98.9 96.3
         July 101.0 102.9 . . 107.2 102.2 . 98.4 97.5 97.8 98.5 97.3
         Aug 99.8 101.7 101.8 100.2 106.0 101.1 96.6 97.9 96.8 99.1 98.1 98.3         Sep 99.6 101.6 . . 105.9 101.0 . 97.6 96.8 97.2 98.2 101.1
         Oct 101.3 103.3 . . 108.0 102.9 . 98.1 97.6 93.3 98.8 103.7
         Nov 101.2 103.3 104.2 101.6 108.0 102.9 96.8 98.0 97.5 93.0 99.5 103.9         Dec 104.2 106.3 . . 111.2 106.0 . 99.2 99.1 90.6 99.5 102.9
2004          Jan 105.4 107.4 . . 112.5 106.9 . 99.8 99.6 88.9 101.6 102.9
         Feb 105.3 107.3 106.5 104.3 112.3 106.8
p 97.6 99.5 99.5 89.3 104.1 102.4
         Mar 103.4 105.4 . . 110.2 104.7 . 99.0 98.6 90.9 104.2 102.1
         Apr 101.6 103.6 . . 108.3 103.0 . 98.5 97.7 91.8 104.3 104.0
         May 102.4 104.4 104.3 101.4 109.5 104.1 p 96.3 98.7 98.3 93.4 103.7 100.0
         June 102.3 104.2 . . 109.6 104.0 . 98.5 98.1 91.9 104.9 101.6
         July 102.8 104.8 . . 110.1 104.5 . 98.9 98.3 90.9 105.0 101.2
         Aug 102.7 104.8 104.9 101.7 109.9 104.4 p 96.3 99.1 98.5 91.3 104.6 100.5
         Sep 103.0 105.1 . . 110.3 104.6 . 99.2 98.4 90.7 102.8 100.8
         Oct 104.2 106.3 . . 111.5 105.8 . 99.6 99.0 88.9 101.8 100.8
         Nov 105.6 107.7 107.7 104.2 113.1 107.1 p 97.0 99.9 99.3 85.4 101.4 102.6
         Dec 107.1 109.4 . . 114.4 108.5 . 100.9 100.2 84.3 102.8 102.0
2005          Jan 105.8 107.9 . . 112.9 106.8 . 100.3 99.2 85.3 101.7 103.6
         Feb 105.1 107.2 ... ... 111.9 105.8 p 97.0 100.1 98.8 86.1 102.9 102.4
         Mar 106.0 108.2 . . 112.9 106.9 . 100.4 99.0 85.3 103.0 101.4
         Apr 105.1 107.4 . . 111.9 105.9 . 99.9 98.5 86.8 104.0 100.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of to the EER-23 group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the fo llowing
the currency concerned. — 1ECB calculations based on the weighted countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, India, Indonesia,
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro against the currencies Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Romania,
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. — 3The
Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, method of calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB toNorway, Poland, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Sweden, compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin,
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these November 2001, pp 51−65). In contrast to footnote 1, the weights used arecalculations are based on manufactured goods trade between 1999 and based on the relevant trade in the period from 1995 to 1997. — 4Decline in
2001 and capture third-market effects. Where consumer prices were not yet the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. — 5Euro-area countries
available, estimates have been used. For details of the methodology, see as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, UnitedECB, Monthly Bulletin, September 2004, pp 69−72 and the ECB’s Occasional Kingdom and United States. — 6Euro-area countries and countries
Paper No 2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website belonging to the EER-42 group except Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania and(www.ecb.int). — 2ECB calculations. In addition to the countries belonging Malta. — 7 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X External sector

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the External Communica-tion Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or CD-ROM from the Div-ision Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2004 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2005 Monthly Report.
June 2004
– Monetary policy under uncertainty
– Purchasing power parity theory as a concept
for evaluating price competitiveness
– Overall financial flows in 2003
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005

July 2004
– Financial development and outlook of the
statutory health insurance scheme
– Regulation of the European securites markets
– Initial experience with the new monetary
policy framework and the Bundesbank’s contri-bution to liquidity management by the Euro-
system
August 2004
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2004
September 2004
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2003
– Greater flexibility on the German labour
market
– How the Bundesbank analyses enterprises’
creditworthiness
– New capital requirements for credit institutions
(Basel II)
October 2004
– Report on the stability of the German financial
system
– Stress tests at German banks – methods and
results
November 2004
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2004December 2004
– Demographic burdens on growth and wealth
in Germany
– The insurance sector as a financial intermediary
– Credit default swaps – functions, importance
and information content
January 2005
– The relationship between money and prices– German banks’ foreign direct investment and
cross-border services
– Comments on reforming the Stability and
Growth Pact
February 2005
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2004-05
March 2005
– Credit growth, bank capital and economic
activity
– German balance of payments in 2004
April 2005
– The changes to the Stability and Growth Pact
– Deficit-limiting budgetary rules and a national
stability pact in Germany
– Supervision of financial conglomerates in Ger-
many
May 2005
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2005
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20033
European economic and monetary union,February 2004
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, January 200542 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, March 20053,5
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2003,
September 20046
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 2000 and 2002, Novem-ber 2004
6
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, February 20053
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
September 2004
10 International capital links,
May 20041, 6
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2004
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20043
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Solely available on the internet, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Stat-istics”, “External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.6Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2005
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
7/2005
Multinational enterprises, international trade, andproductivity growth: Firm-level evidence from theUnited States
8/2005
Location choice and employment decisions: a com-
parison of German and Swedish multinationals
9/2005
Business cycles and FDI: evidence from Germansectoral data
10/2005
Multinational firms, exclusivity, and the degree ofbackward linkages
11/2005
Firm-level evidence on international stock market
comovement
12/2005
The determinants of intra-firm trade: in search for
export-import magnification effects
13/2005
Foreign direct investment, spillovers and absorptivecapacity: evidence from quantile regressions
14/2005
Learning on the quick and cheap: gains from tradethrough imported expertise
15/2005
Discriminatory auctions with seller discretion: evi-
dence from German treasury auctions
16/2005
Consumption, wealth and business cycles: why isGermany different?Series 2
Banking and Financial Studies
4/2004
German bank lending during emerging market
crises: A bank level analysis
5/2004
How will Basel II affect bank lending to emergingmarkets? An analysis based on German bank level
data
6/2004
Estimating probabilities of default for Germansavings banks and credit cooperatives
1/2005
Measurement matters – Input price proxies andbank efficiency in Germany
2/2005
The supervisor’s portfolio: the market price risk of
German banks from 2001 to 2003 – Analysis and
models for risk aggregation
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the internet.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

