MONTHLY REPORT
NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH
2006
Vol 58
No 11

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566-1Fax +49 69 5601071Telex 41227within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862-1325 (internet edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 17 November 2006.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on theinternet.
TheMonthlyReport is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in autumn 2006 5
Overview 6Global and European setting 11Monetary policy and banking business 21
Moneymarketmanagementandliquidityneeds 22
Financial markets 30Economic conditions in Germany 38
Howrobustistheempiricalrelation-shipbetweentheIfobusinessclimateindicatorandoveralleconomicactivity? 40
TheWorldCupeffectontravelreceiptsinGermany 43
Publicfinanc es 51
Thedevelopmentofprofit-relatedtaxes 55
CapitalrevenuefromtheERPSpecialFundinthecentralgovernmentbudget 58
Plannedchangestohealthcareregulation 63
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
Interest rates 43*
Capital market 48*Publicfinanc es in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*External sector 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
5Theeconomicscene
inGermany
inautumn2006

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
6OverviewEconomicupswingbroadlybased
The global economy continued to grow in the
third quarter of 2006. Its momentum, how-ever, was somewhat weaker, and the regionalgrowth centres had shifted. This applied par-ticularly to the industrial countries. While theUS economy lost momentum, the Japaneseeconomy continued to pursue the more mod-erate expansionary course begun in the previ-ous quarter. The euro area saw a furtherstrengthening of the recovery process. Here,however, the high second-quarter growthrate could not be fully sustained. Of course, itmust be remembered that there were specialfactors influencing the very rapid accelerationin macroeconomic activity in the secondquarter.
The financial markets operated amid appar-
ently contradictory trends. While some stockmarkets attained multi-year highs as a resultof favourable profit forecasts, vigorous acqui-sition activity and a relaxation of tensions inthe crude oil markets, developments in thebond and foreign exchange markets were in-creasingly determined by changing expect-ations about inflation and general economicactivity, especially in the United States. Long-term interest rates in both the dollar area andthe euro area fell by approximately
1W(H52per-
centage point between the beginning of Julyand the middle of November. At the end ofthe period under review the yield on ten-yeargovernment bonds in the European capitalmarket was 3
3W(H54%. The euro had been appre-
ciating against the dollar until the third quar-ter as a result of more favourable economicprospects for the euro area and market fearsInternational
setting

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
7that the US economy may be cooling. How-
ever, falling oil prices subsequently provided acertain counterweight as market playershoped that this would have a positive effect,especially on the US economy. Consequently,the exchange rate movements were generallymore restrained.
Price developments in the euro area during
recent months were determined by thedecline in oil prices, and this, together with afavourable baseline effect, resulted in asignificant fall in the inflation rate to 1.6% inOctober. This, however, did not lead to asignificant reduction in the somewhat longer-term risks to stability policy. Hence, the gen-erally favourable course of economic devel-opment in the euro area might mean thatprice and cost rises such as the recent oilprice rises or the planned VAT increase in Ger-many in 2007 will be passed through to agreater degree. There is also the persistentdanger of second-round effects on wagedevelopments, which may undermine pricestability. More importantly, however, the con-tinued strong monetary expansion in the euroarea, which increased still further in the thirdquarter owing to robust credit growth, indi-cates longer-term inflation risks. Althoughmonetary policy was tightened further at thebeginning of October, central bank rates arestill decidedly low, with the main refinancingrate at 3.25%. This is all the more true con-sidering the fact that the now well-advancedupturn requires no further monetary policysupport.
Germany’s cyclical upturn continued at a
brisk rate after the middle of the year.According to initial calculations by the Federal
Statistical Office, overall output in thethird quarter of 2006, which had alreadybeen at a fairly high level in the first andsecond quarters, after corrections, wasup by 0.6% on the previous three-monthperiod after seasonal and working-day adjust-ment. This means that economic growth inGermany was somewhat slower in the thirdquarter than in the second quarter whengross domestic product, under the impactof favourable special factors (following afurther upward revision of the figures), hadincreased by 1.1%. However, after adjust-ment for the volatility in construction work,which had been strongly influenced by theweather, and for the temporary surge indemand in connection with the FIFA WorldCup, the rate of economic momentum hashardly changed so far this year. Since thefourth quarter of last year, overall economicgrowth has amounted to approximately3
1W(H52% on an annualised basis. Germany is
therefore also helping to give a considerableboost to the euro area, especially as thedemand profile is now significantly morebalanced. Furthermore, it is becoming in-creasingly evident that the labour market,too, is now benefiting from the strengtheningof economic activity.
Even though, as usual, important disaggre-
gated information is still missing for the thirdquarter, there are many signs that investmentin the period under review exceeded the levelof the second quarter. In view of the increas-ing capacity utilisation, the incentive to ex-pand played a greater role in spending onmachinery and equipment. This is suggestedMonetary
policy
German
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
8not only by the high degree of industrial con-
fidence but also by the more positiveresponse in surveys among craftsmen. Con-struction investment also rose significantly inthe third quarter, albeit to a somewhat lesserextent than in the second quarter whencatch-up effects had played a role. All in all,investment has now established itself as animportant mainstay of economic activityalongside foreign trade.
Exports again imparted positive stimuli in the
third quarter of 2006 after moving at a some-what more subdued pace in the second quar-ter. Exports of goods expanded particularlyfast. In terms of value, seasonally adjusted ex-ports of goods were 5% up on the previousquarter. Most of the growth in export salesoccurred in trade with partners outside theeuro area. Economic growth in Germany istherefore also fostering growth in the entireeuro area.
The cyclical recovery in the third quarter of
2006 also had a stimulating effect on em-ployment again. There was a further increasein the number of persons employed. Year onyear, the increase now amounts to 340,000persons. A similarly strong increase was lastrecorded at the beginning of 2001 when the“new economy” boom was tailing off. Thelatest increase chiefly concerned employeessubject to social security contributions. Thetrend in the number of reported job vacanciesalso suggests an improvement in the labourmarket. The year-on-year increase in thenumber of job vacancies has now gone up byone-third to a seasonally adjusted 600,000.The seasonally adjusted number of persons
officially registered as unemployed in thethird quarter fell to 4.43 million. That is about430,000 or more than 1% fewer members ofthe workforce than last year. While the de-cline was previously due, first and foremost,to labour market structural reforms, it is nowprimarily attributable to the increased de-mand for labour. The decline in unemploy-ment continued in October. The unemploy-ment rate as defined by the Federal Employ-ment Agency fell from 10.6% to 10.4%. Themoderation in wage policy during the pastfew years is therefore beginning to pay off. Itis important not to jeopardise this during thenow accelerating upturn. That is required notonly by stability-policy considerations. Thesustained growth in consumer demand whichis essential if the upswing is to be maintainedalso depends on an improvement in the la-bour market. It is therefore encouraging thatthe generally moderate growth in wage costsin Germany continued in the third quarter ofthe year even though the emerging tendencyto shorten the duration of wage agreementsis to be seen as a warning signal on the anti-inflation front.
As in the euro area as a whole, consumer
prices in Germany in the third quarter wereinfluenced by the significantly calmer oil mar-kets. Fuel became cheaper, and there was amarked deceleration in the rate at which theprices of heating oil rose. If energy is ex-cluded, however, the consumer price index inthe third quarter increased more sharply thanin the second quarter. In keeping with this,there was a slightly sharper upward move-ment in seasonally adjusted prices in October,
Labour market
Prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
9too, although the cost of fuel and heating oil
declined somewhat and food became mar-ginally cheaper again. The year-on-year in-crease in both the national consumer priceindex and the Harmonised Index of Con-sumer Prices (HICP) widened from 1.0% to1.1%.
In view of the fact that industrial activity is
still buoyant and a number of commercial ser-vice providers are enjoying generally morestable business prospects, the underlyingcyclical trend in Germany is likely to remainon an upward course. Owing to their im-proved competitiveness, German exporterswill continue to benefit substantially fromglobal economic growth. As a result of theincreased investment in expanding capacityin the machinery and equipment sector andin construction, however, domestic demandhas become a second pillar of overalleconomic developments. This is particularlytrue now that the contraction of theconstruction sector that has persisted for adecade appears to have ended and a discern-ible improvement has emerged in the em-ployment situation.
Public finances are currently progressing
much more favourably than expected. Theimproved economic recovery and the unex-pected growth in the generally very volatileprofit-related taxes, which was even stronger,were the main reasons for this development.The general government deficit, whichamounted to 3.2% of gross domestic productin 2005, will fall well below the 3% ceiling inthe current year. The decline is predominantlyattributable to the positive influences men-tioned above and a generally moderate
growth in spending.
The general government deficit is likely to
show another significant decline in the com-ing year. This is firstly the result of the FederalGovernment’s fiscal package, which, if takenas a whole, will lead to an improvement inthe financial situation, especially through in-creased taxes and levies. Secondly, expend-iture growth has so far been moderate, par-ticularly in the areas of personnel, old-ageprovision and the labour market.
Undershooting the 3% ceiling in 2006 is a
positive development. However, the achieve-ment of this major milestone must not beallowed under any circumstances to lessenthe sensitivity to the need to further reducethe deficit. The present favourable economiccycle should be used for a speedy reductionof the structural deficits. It is widely agreedthat fiscal consolidation should be stepped upduring good times. It would therefore be lo-gical actually to intensify retrenchment effortsand not to repeat the mistake frequentlymade in the past of using unexpected add-itional revenue for other purposes. It is im-portant here not to yield to the many vestedinterests. The year 2001 showed just howquickly favourable economic developmentscoupled with a boom in volatile profit-relatedtaxes can turn and instead lead to extensivedeficits, a rapidly increasing debt ratio and aviolation of budgetary limits unless soundfoundations have been laid. It is thereforegratifying that the Federal Government hasannounced its intention to use the additionalrevenue to reduce new borrowing in particu-
Further outlook
Public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
10lar. Consequently, another immediate aim
should be for central government and the in-dividual state governments, too, to achievebalanced budgets in line with the existing re-
quirement for general government.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
11GlobalandEuropean
settingWorldeconomicactivity
While the world economy remained on its
growth path in summer 2006, regional ex-pansionary forces continued to shift. Thepace, however, has slackened compared withthe very strong spring performance. This ap-plies particularly to the industrial countries.For instance, the third-quarter real gross do-mestic product (GDP) of the triad of industrialeconomies was
1qMP%2% up on the period (after
seasonal adjustment) following rises in thefirst two quarters of the year of 1% and
3qMP%4%
respectively. One reason is that total output inthe United States – where residential con-struction has continued to cool down sharply– grew much more weakly. In essence, how-ever, the US economy continued to pointupwards; private consumption, commercialinvestment and exports all picked up notice-ably once again. The other is that euro-areagrowth, which was particularly buoyant inspring owing, among other things, to variousspecial effects, fell off in the third quarter. Bycontrast, the Japanese economy remained onthe flatter growth path which it had begun tofollow in the second quarter.
The preceding rise in short and long-term
interest rates in the industrial countries is onefactor that is likely to have helped makeglobal growth more moderate in the thirdquarter. Another factor was the dampeningimpact of the sharp rises (which lasted intothe summer) in energy prices. In the firsteight months of 2006, the price of Brentcrude oil, quoted in US dollars, rose by28
1qMP%2%. The rising prices of industrial raw ma-
terials, which in fact increased by well overWorldeconomy
growing
somewhat
moreslowly...
...butstillona
stablepath

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
12one-third over the aforementioned period,
put an additional strain on the economy. Thesharp falls in prices on the oil markets inAugust and September, however, lent add-itional support to the global economy inautumn. In addition, the favourable shareprice developments in some countries arelikely to have positively influenced domesticdemand. Above all, most of the current indi-cators point to a continuation of the process
of global growth at a measured pace.
Economic developments in the emerging
market economies continue to show a posi-tive picture. In the south and east Asian emer-ging market economies, economic momen-tum seems to have slowed down only verylittle. Real GDP growth in China, for instance,was once again very strong (up 10
1qMP%2%o n
the year), yet failed to match its springpace (+11
1qMP%4%). The economies of the oil-
producing countries in the Middle East andthe Commonwealth of Independent States(CIS) continued to run at a rapid pace.Throughout the reporting period, most SouthAmerican countries, especially oil producersVenezuela and Mexico, likewise profited fromhigh commodity prices. However, theBrazilian economy was throttled in the thirdquarter by monetary policy which – despitenumerous interest rate reductions – was stillrestrictive and by the preceding sharp appre-ciation of the real. This resulted in a reductionin consumer price inflation by three percent-age points to 3.3% in the January to October2006 period.
Oil market developments abruptly reversed
themselves in the third quarter. Prices fellfrom their early August peak of US$78 toUS$60 (for a barrel of Brent) in the secondhalf of September. This represents a declineof one-quarter. In October and the first halfof November, oil prices fluctuated around theUS$60 mark. Euro-denominated prices fell ata similarly sharp rate in the past few months.As this report went to press, a barrel wastrading at 347. Various factors which causedLog scale
US$
or €World market prices for
crude oil *
Sources: Thomson Financial Datastream and
Global Insight. — * Price for a barrel of
Brent crude oil.
Deutsche BundesbankUS$Futures prices
15 Nov 200631 July 2006
Spot 3 M 6 M 9 M 12 M 15 M 18 M80
75
70
65
60
55Spot prices
in US dollars
in euro70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Continuedfast
paceofgrowth
inemerging
market
economies
Oilmarkets
calmerfromthe
beginningof
August

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
13the high risk premium previously included in
the quotations to shrink drastically were keyto the distinct fall in oil prices. The easing oftensions in various Middle Eastern flashpointswas one such factor. Another was that the re-newed severe hurricane season forecast forthe Gulf of Mexico failed to materialise. Add-itional factors included quite ample inventorystocks in the United States and only relativelyminor disruptions to oil supplies from Alaska,where oil pipelines had sustained damageduring the summer months. Industrial rawmaterials, by contrast, traded at a new recordhigh level on average for the month of Octo-ber. This was due mainly to increased pricesfor non-ferrous metals, which were up byfour-fifths on the year. As of late, cereal cropfailure, in particular, has also caused a visibleupturn in the global market prices for foods.
The decline in oil prices has visibly curbed in-
flation in the industrial countries in the pastfew months. In addition, the year-on-yearrate of change in consumer prices waspushed downwards by the sharp rise inenergy prices in the third quarter of 2005,which was primarily attributable to the hurri-cane damage to the oil rigs in the Gulf ofMexico. Both factors, in concert, led to en-ergy prices in the industrial countries beingsomewhat down on the year in the Septem-ber to October period. Annual headline infla-tion therefore fell from 2.9% in August to1.8% in September and 1.5% in October.Core inflation (excluding energy and food),by contrast, held steady at 1.8% in Septem-ber (more current information is not yet avail-able). On account of the slide in oil prices ayear ago, among other factors, energy pricesand thus the year-on-year rate of change in
overall consumer prices appear to be headingback up in the November to Decemberperiod.
The current state of calm in the oil markets
also represents a considerable gain in pur-chasing power for consumers in the oil-consuming countries. Enterprises have seentheir cost pressures abate appreciably. Al-though this contrasts with a decline in the oil-producing countries’ oil revenue, this is notlikely to limit demand accordingly, at least notin the short term; a reduction in the high sav-ing ratio is the more likely outcome. Forwardquotations, however, appear to indicate thata renewed rise in oil prices should beexpected in the medium term. This is alsoconsistent with forecasts of a further increasein the global demand for oil.
However, were the oil price to hold steady at
its current level of around US$60, this wouldprotect the IMF’s September 2006 globalgrowth forecast – which had still assumedthat oil prices would hit US$75
1qMP%2in 2007 –
against downside risks. The IMF projects aminimal decline in global GDP growth fromjust over 5% in the current year to just under5% in 2007. Real global trade is expected togrow by 7
1qMP%2% in 2007 compared with 9% in
2006. The IMF’s September forecast expectsthe advanced economies to see growth slowdown from 3% to 2
3qMP%4%. Consumer price in-
flation is forecast to fall by1qMP%4percentage
point to 21qMP%4% next year. Given the current
state of oil prices, external price pressures arelikely to be weaker than the IMF expects; bycontrast, however, home-grown price pres-Pricedevelop-
mentsinindus-
trialcountries
influencedby
loweroilpricesFallingoilprices
boostingthe
worldeconomy
IMFautumn
forecast

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
14sures could potentially become stronger given
the cyclical stability, the rather high capacityutilisation in some sectors and favourablelabour market developments. The falling oilprices will probably also either slow down orstop the rise in the US current account deficitthat has been persisting since 2001. Never-theless, the large external imbalances repre-sent a significant source of risk to the globaleconomy. The unpredictability in the oil mar-kets is another factor. In addition, the correc-tions in the property markets of some indus-trial countries, most prominently the UnitedStates, could turn out to be larger thanhitherto suggested.
According to preliminary calculations, real
GDP in the United States grew only moder-ately – by just under
1qMP%2% – in the third quar-
ter of 2006 after seasonal and working-dayadjustment. It was up by slightly less than 3%on the year. The main reason for the slowerpace of growth was that the decline in hous-ing investment accelerated from -3% in thespring to -4
3qMP%4%. The year-on-year decrease
was 73qMP%4%. Although the rapid adjustment of
new housing construction to reduced de-mand for housing is currently putting a strainon US growth, it could help to stabilise theailing property market and, in particular, toprevent a major slide in house prices, whichwould have more severe consequences forthe US economy. The US domestic economyreceived a continued boost from private con-sumption and commercial investment in thethird quarter. Real consumption expenditureonce again grew faster than in the past, at aseasonally adjusted
3qMP%4%. Increased car pur-
chases owing to new discount offers by USSeasonally adjusted,
quarter-on-quarter change
%
%
%
%
%
Euro areaUnited KingdomJapanUnited StatesIndustrial countriesGrowth trends in
industrial countries *
*The United States, Japan, the United
Kingdom and the euro area.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
02.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−2.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006USA

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
15car manufacturers after the middle of the
year had a significant impact. At -1qMP%2%, the
saving ratio remained virtually unchanged.Commercial investment grew by a seasonallyadjusted 2% and thus at around double itssecond-quarter pace. Demand for buildingsas well as for new machinery and equipment(including software) contributed in equalmeasure to this growth. The positive earningstrend and continued favourable financingconditions are particular indicators that in-vestment activity will remain brisk.
An additional perceptible boost to growth
was provided by exports which, after theelimination of seasonal influences, were upby a further 1
1qMP%2% on the period. However,
this was offset by an acceleration in importgrowth from
1qMP%2% in the second quarter to
2% in the third. This consequently led to arenewed expansion of the deficit in real netexports, which reached a new all-time high interms of value. As in the two preceding quar-ters already, it made up 5
1qMP%2% of GDP.
Owing to the fall in energy prices, consumer
prices in the USA were down in both Septem-ber and October by 0.5% on the month afterseasonal adjustment. On account of the infla-tionary surge in 2005 in connection with thehurricane damage sustained by the oil pro-duction facilities in the Gulf of Mexico, year-on-year headline inflation even went downfrom 3.8% in August to 2.1% in Septemberand 1.3% in October. Core inflation (exclud-ing energy and food), however, remainedquite high, averaging 2.8% over the twomonths. This was due in large part to thesharp rise in rents (including imputed rentsfor owner-occupied housing) and the percep-
tible increase in private healthcare costs. Bycontrast, the core personal consumption ex-penditure deflator, which is the US FederalReserve’s preferred instrument for price analy-sis, fell slightly to 2.4% in September.
In the third quarter, growth in the Japanese
economy was once again
1qMP%2% higher (after
seasonal adjustment) than in the previousperiod and thus slightly more than its poten-tial rate. It was up by 2
3qMP%4% on the year. The
main reason for the increase in total outputwas the sharp rise in exports (by a seasonallyadjusted 2
3qMP%4%), which is also likely to have
been connected with the perceptible depreci-ation of the yen. With imports remaining vir-tually unchanged, foreign trade contributed –on balance – nearly
1qMP%2percentage point to
GDP growth. In addition, inventory stockswere increased significantly. By contrast, thenet stimuli from domestic final demand werenegative. The expansion of commercial in-vestment, which continued to be quitestrong, was offset by a significant decline inprivate consumption and government invest-ment. Private sector expenditure on new resi-dential construction stagnated. The decline inthe GDP deflator slowed down from -1
1qMP%4%i n
the second quarter to -3qMP%4% in the third. The
most important outcome of the conversion ofthe consumer price index from the previousbase year (2000) to 2005 was that the rate ofinflation over the past few years was reviseddownwards considerably. For the secondquarter of 2006, inflation was pushed downby
1qMP%2percentage point to +0.2%. On an aver-
age of the July to August period, however, in-flation in Japan grew to 0.6%. It remained atJapan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
16this level in September, too. The fall in US
dollar-denominated oil prices had a less pro-nounced impact on overall inflation than inother industrial countries owing interalia to
the yen’s depreciation.
In the United Kingdom, real GDP – which was
up by
3qMP%4% on the period according to initial
calculations and after seasonal and working-day adjustment – continued its brisk growthin the third quarter. It was up by 2
3qMP%4% on the
year. The services sector, which saw its realvalue added likewise go up by
3qMP%4%, again
provided strong stimuli. Manufacturing out-put and energy production increased at thesame pace. Construction output grew by
1qMP%2%. The buoyant growth in real retail sales
(excluding motor vehicles) in the third quarter– information on demand components is notyet available – suggests that private con-sumption continued to drive the UK econ-omy. Headline inflation decelerated onlyslightly in the September to October periodto 2.4%, thus remaining above the UK gov-ernment’s inflation target of 2%. In terms ofthe overall index, the sharp drop in energyprices was partly offset by an increase in coreinflation (excluding energy and unprocessedfood) from 1.4% in August to 1.6% in theSeptember to October period. According tothe Halifax index, house prices picked upagain in seasonally adjusted terms after hav-ing fallen in May and June. In the August toOctober period, housing prices were 8
1qMP%2%u p
on the year. To stem the home-grown infla-tionary pressures, the Bank of England raisedits bank rate by an additional 25 basis pointsto 5.0% in early November.Economic activity slackened in the summer
months in the new EU member states. Forinstance, industrial output slumped to 1
1qMP%2%
in the third quarter, having stood at 21qMP%4%
and 4% respectively in the two precedingquarters; nevertheless, its year-on-yeargrowth was 11
1qMP%4%. This suggests that, in the
third quarter, real GDP also no longer grew asstrongly as in the two preceding quarters.Despite slower productivity growth, the newmember states still continued to make goodprogress in reducing unemployment. In theJuly to August period, the unemploymentrate, at just over 12%, was
1qMP%4percentage
point lower than in the second quarter. Head-line inflation hit 2.8% in August, its highestlevel since the second quarter of 2005. Loweroil prices caused the inflation rate to godown to 2.5% in the September to Octoberperiod. One of the main reasons why the de-cline was not more pronounced was that in-flation in Hungary picked up from 4.7% inAugust to 6.1% in the September to Octoberperiod owing to the depreciation of the forintas well as increases in administered prices.
Macroeconomictrendsintheeuroarea
Cyclical growth in the euro area continued to
solidify in the summer quarter. Although itwas not quite possible to keep up the fastsecond-quarter pace, output growth, at
1qMP%2%
after seasonal adjustment, was still more orless at its potential rate. Year-on-year GDPgrowth stood at 2
1qMP%2%. The somewhat slower
pace is due chiefly to a slackening of overalloutput in Germany and a lull in growth inFrance. It must be borne in mind that the veryUnited
KingdomNewEU
memberstates
GDPgrowth
downslightly
inthesummer
quarter

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
17rapid acceleration of euro-area GDP in the
second quarter was influenced by special fac-tors. Chief among these was the sharp rise inconstruction output in various member statesfollowing considerable weather-related dis-ruptions in early 2006. For the fourth quarterof 2006 and the first quarter of 2007, theEuropean Commission, in its short-term pro-jection, presumes that the slowdown willcontinue, with a growth dip forecast for early2007 owing to the expected decline indemand in Germany following the plannedVAT increase.
The expansion of industrial output once again
made a significant contribution to euro-areacountries’ GDP growth in the summermonths. On average for the July to Septem-ber period, output was up by 1% on thequarter after seasonal adjustment and by 4%on the year. The production of non-durablegoods stagnated over this time, whereas out-put growth in the other areas of productionwas above average. Compared with the firsthalf of 2006, however, industrial outputgrowth has lost some of its momentum. Cap-acity utilisation in manufacturing continuedto rise after mid-year; in October, it had al-most returned to its very high level of January2001. Industrial orders received in the July toAugust period were up by 3
1qMP%2% on the quar-
ter after seasonal adjustment and by 12% onthe year. Excluding other transport equip-ment, where large orders (especially of air-craft) have a strong impact, orders were upby just over 2% after seasonal adjustment.
In the July to October period, manufacturing
confidence once again tended to improve,with the positive balance of responses stand-
ing at a level just slightly below the all-timehigh of May 2000; this is consistent with theimage of a continuation of sound industrialactivity. The favourable business climate wasbolstered by all three sub-components: high-er output expectations and an improved as-sessment of the orders situation and ware-house stocks. The export outlook, whichforms part of the quarterly survey of firms,Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
July/
AugLog scale
New orders received by
manufacturers working
on orders
2000 = 100
Total
Of which
Excluding
heavy trans-
port equipment01994-2005averageLin scale
Capacity utilisationLog scale
Industrial output
2000 = 100Selected indicators of
industrial activity
in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank125
120
115
110
105
100
9586
848280
78110
105
100
95
- - 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Industrial
activitystill
lively
Outlookstill
assessed
favourably

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
18was assessed with as much confidence in Oc-
tober as it had already been in July and April.The indicators of sentiment in the servicessector, retail trade and construction industrylikewise continued to rise after mid-yearamidst, at times, perceptible monthly fluctu-ations. This contrasts to a degree with thelack of further improvement in consumerconfidence between July and October, eventhough it remained higher than its average ofthe second-quarter months.
From a demand-side perspective, domestic
demand – according to the available partialdata (information on the national accountscomponents is not yet available) – was prob-ably once again the main driver of third-quarter economic growth in the euro area.For instance, real retail sales (excluding motorvehicles) in the euro area rose by
1qMP%2% (after
seasonal adjustment) in the third quarter fol-lowing an identical rise in the second quarter.The year-on-year increase was 1
3qMP%4%. Dur-
ables were in particular demand, while salesof food tended to be sluggish. The ratherstrong growth in demand in the retail tradesector contrasted with a visible decline in thedemand for cars, however; in the July to Oc-tober period, new registrations were down by2% (after seasonal adjustment) on theirsecond-quarter level and by 1
1qMP%2% on the
year. According to the EU survey, euro-areaconstruction investment remained on a dis-tinct upward trend in the summer months.
Nominal exports grew quite sharply in the
July to August period, up by a seasonallyadjusted 1
1qMP%2% on their second-quarter level.Seasonally adjusted
%
2005 Q3
2006 Q3
FR GR 1 BE DE FI ES PT IT 1 LU AT NLEuro-area averageUnemployment *in the euro area
*Standardised unemployment rates as defined by the ILO. — 1Figures available only for 2006 Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank11
10
9
8
7654
3
2
10
Buoyant
domestic
demand
Highdegreeof
momentumin
foreigntrade

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
19Buoyant foreign business thus remained a key
pillar of euro-area economic growth through-out the reporting period. At the same time,however, imports rose by 5
1qMP%4%; consequent-
ly, the balance of trade over the combinedtwo-month period closed with a deficit of35 billion after seasonal adjustment. The
sharp increase in the value of imports is cer-tainly largely attributable to rising energyprices, which hit a new all-time high in Au-gust. Real imports of goods, however, arealso likely to have picked up distinctly.
The economic upswing is having an increas-
ingly positive impact on euro-area countries’labour markets. In the second quarter of2006 – more recent information is not yetavailable – the number of employed personsrose by
1qMP%2% after seasonal adjustment. Year-
on-year growth stood at 11qMP%4%. Although the
decline in unemployment – which is meas-ured using the international standard ILOdefinition – decelerated somewhat in thesummer months, the unemployment rate inthe third quarter, at 7
3qMP%4% after seasonal ad-
justment, was much lower than a year earlier(8
1qMP%2%), however. Despite the improvement in
labour market conditions, wage growth re-mained subdued. In the second quarter of2006, the most recent period for which infor-mation is available, it stood at a seasonallyadjusted
1qMP%2%. Year-on-year wage growth
held steady at 21qMP%2%.
Following the relatively strong price surge in
the early months of the year (+0.8% com-pared with the first quarter after seasonal ad-justment), euro-area consumer prices againgrew somewhat more slowly in the thirdquarter of 2006 (+0.5%). Year-on-year
growth in the Harmonised Index of ConsumerPrices (HICP) accordingly fell by 0.4 percent-age point to 2.1%. The much weaker growthof energy prices was the chief reason for thisdecline. Although the rise in the prices ofunprocessed food, which was exceptionallysharp for the season, formed a counter-weight of sorts, it was not enough to offsetthe decline in the overall index. Excluding therelatively volatile energy and unprocessedfood components, prices rose by a seasonallyadjusted 0.4% in the summer months – arate similar to that of the preceding quarters.The year-on-year rate of increase remainedunchanged at 1.5%. The moderate price ten-dencies of the past few months persisted inthe case of processed food, industrial goodsand services alike. Year-on-year HICP infla-2006 Q3
− 1.0 − 0.5 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Percentage
pointsFinland
Germany
Netherlands
AustriaFrance
Belgium
Italy
Luxembourg
IrelandPortugal
Greece
SpainInflation differentials
in the euro area *
* Change in the Harmonised Index of Con-
sumer Prices compared with 2005 Q3; devi-
ation of the national rate of inflation from
the euro-area average.
Deutsche BundesbankRisingemploy-
ment–falling
unemployment
Decelerating
priceincreases

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
20tion, having already dropped to 1.7% in Sep-
tember owing to falling oil prices and thecountervailing price movements of a yearearlier, went down further to 1.6% in Oc-tober. Over the somewhat longer term,
however, this tendency is not expected tocontinue.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
21Monetarypolicyand
bankingbusinessInterestratepolicyandthemoney
market
In raising interest rates by1CJkx4percentage point
in early October, the Governing Council ofthe ECB further reined back its monetarypolicy. With effect from 11 October, main re-financing operations have been conducted asfixed-rate tenders with a minimum bid rate of3
1CJkx4%, and the interest rates on the marginal
lending facility and the deposit facility havebeen 4
1CJkx4% and 21CJkx4% respectively.
The renewed interest rate rise had become
necessary as risks to price stability remainedon the upside. While the decline in crude oilprices since August, coupled with a favour-able baseline effect, has triggered a tempor-ary marked fall in the current inflation rate,this has not significantly affected the some-what longer-term risks to price stability.Hence, the favourable economic develop-ments in the euro area could result in priceand cost increases, such as the recent in-crease in oil prices or the planned VAT in-crease in Germany in 2007, being passedthrough to a greater degree. There is also thepersistent danger of second-round effects onwage developments, which may underminestability. More importantly, however, the con-tinued strong monetary expansion in the euroarea – which increased still further in the thirdquarter owing to robust credit growth –heralds longer-term inflation risks.
Like the four previous interest rate rises, the
latest monetary policy measures, which mar-ket participants had been expecting, weremainly implemented smoothly in the moneyInterestrates
riseinOctober
Moneymarket
rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
22Moneymarketmanagementandliquidityneeds
During the three reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 12 July and10 October 2006, euro-areacredit institutions’ need for central bank liquiditydetermined by autonomous liquidity factors fell by57.6billioninnetterms.Theincreaseinthevolume
of banknotes in circulation was similar to that ofthecorrespondingreservemaintenanceperiodslastyear andabsorbed 59.7 billion, the main rise being
in the July-August period. However, the remainingautonomous factors more than offset this need.The decline in general government deposits withtheEurosystem,whichshouldbeseeninconnectionwiththefairlyhighlevelsoftheprecedingperiods,ledtoanet 57.9billionfallinliquidityneeds.Ifthe
netforeignreservesandtheotherfactorsaretakentogether, a movewhicheliminatesliquidity-neutralvaluation effects, there is a 59.4 billion decline in
the banks’ liquidity needs over the three periods.This was causedby Eurosystem purchases of finan-cialassetswhichwereunrelatedtomonetarypolicy.
TheEurosystemtookaccountofthechangesinthe
liquidity needs arising from autonomous factors byadjustingthevolumesofitsmainrefinancingoper-ations (MROs). These were initially expanded dur-ing the July-August periodby 513.2 billion but the
average allotment amount was reduced by 515.7
billion and 55.3 billion, respectively, in the follow-
ing two periods. After a marked increase in theminimum reserve requirements in the precedingthree periods, the reserve requirement in theperiodunderreviewincreasedonlyslightly(by 50.7
billion)andwasmetbythecreditinstitutionswith-outdifficulty.
The money market rate (EONIA) stoodmostly at
between 2.80% and2.83% until the key interestrate rise took effect on 9 August. With the newminimumbidrateof3.00%,EONIAstoodmostlyatbetween 3.04% and3.07% until the GoverningCounciloftheECBraisedthemainrefinancingrateto3.25%witheffectfrom11October.
The ECB continuedits generous allotment policy in
the July-August andAugust-September period s,allotting 52.0 billion above the benchmark in each
oftheMROs.Hence,thespreadbetweentheEONIAandthe minimum bidrate (EONIA spread ) was re-duced from being mostly 8 basis points to beingmostly between 6 and7 basis points. Owing to thedeclining EONIA spread in the course of the periodunder review, the ECB reduced the allotment to51.0 billion above the benchmark in the first three
MROs of the September-October reserve mainten-ance period. As the EONIA spread fell further, theECB decided to allocate only the benchmarkamount in the final two MROs of the September-October periodandinformedthe market accord -ingly.
TheoutcomeoftheECB’sgenerallylooseallotment
approach was that the overnight rates declinedslightly for a time towards the end of the July-August andAugust-September reserve mainten-ance periods. Liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning oper-ations ensuredthat the EONIA rate was very close
to the minimum bidrate at the endof the reservemaintenance period. In the September-October re-servemaintenanceperiod,theendoftheincreasedallotment ledto a rise in the rates in the last fewdays of the period. A liquidity-providing fine-tuning operation resultedin EONIA stand ing at3.09% on the last day of the reserve maintenanceperiod.
The liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operations
amountedto 518.0 billion and 511.5 billion, and
the liquidity-providing operation 59.5 billion. In all
three operations, the desired volume was fullyachieved.
DeutscheBundesbankFactorsdeterminingbankliquidity1
5billion;changesinthedailyaveragesofthereserve
maintenanceperiodsvis-fP99j-visthepreviousperiod
2006
Item12July
to8Aug9Aug
to5Sep6Sep
to10Oct
I Provision(+)orabsorption(–)of
centralbankbalancesduetochangesinautonomousfactors
1 Banknotesincirculation
(increase:–) – 9.4 – 0.5 +0.2
2 Generalgovernmentdeposits
withtheEurosystem(increase:–) – 6.0 +11.6 +2.3
3 Netforeignreserves
2– 6.7 – 0.3 –0.6
4 Otherfactors2+ 9.4 + 4.1 +3.5
Total –12.7 +14.9 +5.4
II Monetarypolicyoperations
oftheEurosystem
1 Openmarketoperations
(a)Mainrefinancing
operations +13.2 –15.7 –5.3
(b)Longer-termrefinancing
operations € 0.0 + 0.0 €0.0
(c)Otheroperations – 0.3 + 0.2 +0.7
2 Standingfacilities
(a)Marginallendingfacility + 0.0 – 0.1 +0.0
(b)Depositfacility(increase:–) + 0.5 + 0.0 –0.1
Total +13.4 –15.6 –4.7
III Changeincreditinstitutions’
currentaccounts(I+II) + 0.8 – 0.7 +0.6
IV Changeintheminimumreserve
requirement(increase:–) – 0.9 + 0.7 –0.5
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s
contribution, see pages 14* and15* of the Statistical Sec-tionofthis Monthly Report .—2Includingend-of-quarter
valuationadjustmentswithnoimpactonliquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
23market. For the most part, the EONIA over-
night rate between the start of August andthe beginning of November was slightlyabove the marginal allotment rate which, inturn, was only a few basis points higher thanthe minimum bid rate. The remaining moneymarket rates also tended to go up somewhatin the period under review. After the keyinterest rate hike in October, they rose acrossthe board by up to 10 basis points until mid-November, although the money market yieldcurve has recently steepened somewhat. Therecent remuneration for 12-month funds wasaround
1CJkx2percentage point higher than for
overnight money. The three-month forwardrates, which also express interest rate expect-ations, rose slightly, too. The market haspriced in at least one further increase in theovernight rate of
1CJkx4percentage point over a
six-month time horizon.
Monetarydevelopmentsintheeuroarea
The broad monetary aggregate M3 continued
to grow very strongly in the euro area in thethird quarter of 2006. With an annualisedseasonally-adjusted growth rate of 10
1CJkx2%,
the pace of M3 expansion even slightly ex-ceeded the very rapid rate seen in the secondquarter (9%). Given that interest rates remainlow, growth was driven mainly by the pro-longed heavy demand for credit in the privatesector. Although this was offset by continuingstrong monetary capital formation, the latterlost some momentum in the period under re-view. General government borrowing or sav-ing has also exerted a dampening effect onmonetary growth of late.Of the components of M3, the short-term
time deposits remunerated at market ratesand marketable instruments were increasedvery sharply in the third quarter. The formerattracted much attention, especially fromhouseholds. By contrast, there was very littledemand for the traditional low-yield depositcomponents of M3 in view of the higher op-portunity costs. Hence, short-term savingsdeposits (with an agreed period of notice ofup to three months) increased only slightly.Overnight deposits did not expand much ei-ther: their annualised, seasonally-adjustedgrowth rate from July to September was1
1CJkx2%, down from 8% in the second quarter.
Only cash holdings continued to increase rap-idly. Overall, the especially liquid componentsof the monetary aggregate M1 rose in thethird quarter at a seasonally-adjusted annualSeasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
Reference value: 4 ½ %Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
6
5
4
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Steeprisein
moneystock
continuesStronggrowth
inM3
components
remuneratedat
marketrates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
24rate of only 3%, the smallest rise since early
2001.
In the third quarter, lending to the private sec-
tor in the euro area continued to generatestrong stimuli for monetary developments.Credit growth has accelerated noticeably oflate, picking up to a seasonally-adjusted an-nual rate of just over 12
1CJkx2% after tapering
off somewhat for a period in the secondquarter. Alongside housing loans, there wasalso increased demand for loans to enter-prises. As in the preceding quarters, shortand medium-term loans were also topped upheavily despite the continuing rise in bankinterest rates. In addition, banks acquired aconsiderable amount of securities issued byenterprises resident in the euro area. In sodoing, they indirectly provided funds to thecorporate sector.
In contrast to the domestic private sector, the
euro-area public sector scaled back theirloans from domestic banks in the third quar-ter. In addition, the banks further reducedtheir stocks of public sector securities, con-tinuing their net sales of such paper in bothof the preceding two quarters. At the sametime, central government deposits (which arenot part of M3) increased sharply, consider-ably accentuating the dampening effect ofgeneral government borrowing or saving onM3.
Moreover, continuing strong monetary capital
formation again had a dampening effect onmonetary growth of late. However, the vol-ume of additional longer-term investmentwith banks in the euro area was somewhat€ billion, seasonally adjusted
change over the period indicated
€ billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet counterparts 1
Credit to
enterprises
and
households
General
government
borrowing
or saving2
Net externalassets
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counterparts
of M3
3Money stock
Apr to June 2006
Increase
in M3
July to Sep 2006Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts are
shown in terms of whether they expand (+)
or contract (−) the money stock. — 2Bank
loans to general government less euro-area
central government deposits with MFIs and
holdings of securities issued by the MFIsector. — 3Calculated as a residual of the
other items of the consolidated balance
sheet of the MFI sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank400+ 300+ 200+ 100+ 0 100− 200−Heavylending
toprivate
sector
continues
Creditto
general
government
declines
Strong
monetary
capital
formation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
25smaller in the third quarter than in the first
and second quarters. The seasonally adjustedannual growth rate stood at 6
1CJkx2% at the end
of the period under review, as against 81CJkx2%
in the two preceding quarters. In addition,the flattening of the yield curve in the capitalmarket evidently reduced the appeal oflonger-term time deposits and bank debt se-curities remunerated at market rates. Al-though both of these components remainedrobust in the third quarter, overall they at-tracted a noticeably lower level of investmentthan they had in the preceding two quarters.There was muted demand, especially fromhouseholds, for deposits with an agreed ma-turity of over two years. They indicated apreference not only for short-term time de-posits, but also for longer-term savings de-posits, which are likely to be more liquid at asimilar remuneration, even if the period ofnotice is more than three months.
DepositandlendingbusinessofGerman
bankswithdomesticcustomers
In contrast to the strong monetary expansion
throughout the euro area, bank deposits inGermany grew only moderately in the thirdquarter. The seasonally adjusted annualisedgrowth rate of these deposits slipped from6
1CJkx2% in the second quarter to just under 4%
in the third quarter. In this context, the rela-tively moderate growth in domestic privatedemand for credit continued. At the sametime, domestic non-banks received consider-able inflows of funds from abroad. Unlike thesituation in the euro area, however, it wasmainly longer-term bank deposits that experi-enced stronger growth, while investment in
shorter-term deposits was only moderate.
As in the whole of the euro area, short-term
time deposits remunerated at market rateswere topped up particularly heavily betweenJuly and September. However, the rise waslargely fuelled by shifts away from overnightdeposits and short-term savings deposits.Households, in particular, evidently attempt-ed to benefit from the rise in money marketrates in this manner. The reason was that re-tail banking interest rates for new depositswith an agreed maturity of up to two yearsrecently rose considerably faster than ratesfor overnight money or short-term savingsdeposits (see page 28–29). As a corollary ofthese shifts, domestic non-banks’ overnightbalances (excluding Federal Government de-Lendinganddepositsofmonetary
financialinstitutions(MFIs)inGermany
*
5billion
2006 2005
ItemJulyto
SepJulyto
Sep
Depositsofdomesticnon-MFIs 1
Overnight –13.0 +11.4
Withagreedmaturities
ofupto2years +24.0 + 3.2ofover2years + 5.7 + 1.7
Redeemableatagreednotice
ofupto3months –12.2 – 0.5ofover3months + 3.8 – 3.2
Lending
todomesticenterprisesandhouseholds
Unsecuritised+17.3 +16.8Securitised– 2.1 + 7.6
todomesticgovernment
Unsecuritised– 3.0 – 5.4Securitised– 8.7 – 0.7
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations,butexcludingtheBundesbank),monetaryfinan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds;seealsoTableIV.1intheStatisticalSectionoftheMonthly Report .—1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernmentexcludingcentralgovernment.
DeutscheBundesbank
Moderaterise
inbank
depositsPortfolioshifts
behindsharp
riseinshort-
termtime
deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
26posits) fell by an annualised and seasonally
adjusted rate of 11CJkx2% in the third quarter. On
an annual basis, short-term savings depositsactually shrank by just under 8%.
In addition to short-term time deposits, do-
mestic bank customers again built up longer-term balances in the period under review.There was renewed demand, in particular, fordeposits redeemable at a period of noticeover three months. Large-scale shifts awayfrom short-term savings deposits evidentlyoccurred here as well. As in the precedingquarter, domestic insurance corporations(which traditionally constitute the most im-portant group of depositors) were alone in in-creasing their time deposits with an agreedmaturity of over two years.Lending by German banks to domestic non-
banks remained almost unchanged in theperiod under review. However, this picturemasks very heterogeneous developments.Whereas lending to domestic enterprises andhouseholds (including securitised lending) ex-panded by a seasonally adjusted annualisedrate of 2% in the third quarter, lending to thepublic sector in Germany fell by just under7
1CJkx2% over the same period. The decline af-
fected both lending and, even more so,banks’ holdings of public sector securities.
Once more, a sharp rise in short-term lending
to other financial intermediaries contributedto the increase in lending to enterprises andhouseholds in the period under review. Secur-ities transactions with banks (reverse repos)accounted for the majority of the loans,which do not entail a flow of funds to thenon-bank sector. The increase in lending todomestic enterprises and households is lowerstill if one excludes these interbank transac-tions settled with the aid of other financialintermediaries (especially securities tradinghouses).
Other financial intermediaries aside, non-
financial corporations also recently increasedtheir loans from German banks. By contrast,lending to households increased only margin-ally. For example, housing loans, which areparticularly prevalent, increased only fraction-ally more than usual in the third quarter.This somewhat heterogeneous lendingpattern in the private sector is in line with ob-servations made by German credit institu-tions participating in the Eurosystem’s BankSeasonally adjusted
€b n
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank5
4
3
2
1
02330
2300
2270
2240
2210
2180
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Renewed
demandfor
longer-term
bankdepositsLendingalmost
unchanged
overall
Slightincrease
inlendingto
privatesector...
...infaceof
furtherincrease
inlendingto
domestic
enterprises

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
27Lending Survey.1Whereas according to these
data lending to enterprises picked up againslightly, household demand for housingloans in the third quarter was slightly downon the preceding quarter. By contrast, thebanks surveyed reported an increase indemand for consumer loans, a developmentwhich they attributed to a rise in consumerconfidence and signs of anticipatory effectsahead of the increase in VAT. The banksexpect demand to increase further in thefourth quarter across all the lending cate-gories reviewed here, although housing loansare expected to be somewhat less buoyantthan the rest.
In terms of loan supply, enterprises benefited
from an easing of credit standards in the thirdquarter of 2006, as did households for theirhousing and consumer financing.
2According
to the Bank Lending Survey data, the re-spondent banks ascribed this to a brighteningof the general economic outlook and increas-ing competition. At the same time, participat-ing institutions also reduced their margins foraverage exposures across all credit categories,leaving those for riskier loans largely un-changed. Hence, the margin spread, observ-able for some time, continued to widen inthe reporting period. On balance, respond-%
%
%%
%
%
1
2002Consumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in loan margins
Loans to enterprises
Average
loansRiskier loansConsumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in credit standards
Loans to enterprisesBank Lending Survey *
*Percentage difference between the num-
bers of respondents reporting “tightened
considerably” and “tightened somewhat”
and the numbers of respondents reporting
“eased somewhat” and “eased consider-
ably”. — 1Expectations for Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−100+
80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−40+
20+
0
20−40+
20+
0
20−60+
40+
20+
0
20−
2003 2004 2005 20061All the aggregate survey results for Germany are avail-
able at http://www.bundesbank.de/volkswirtschaft/vo_ver
oeffentlichungen.en.php.
2In respect of loans to enterprises in particular, the Ger-
man results point to supply conditions that are slightly
more expansionary than indicated by the results for the
euro area as a whole. At the same time, the assessment
of demand for loans to enterprises was somewhat less
positive in Germany than the euro-area average. Con-
versely, developments with regard to retail customers
broadly matched those indicated in the euro-area survey
results. See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin,
November 2006, p 22.Easingofcredit
standards

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
28ents expect the moderate easing of credit
standards across all lending categories to con-tinue in the final quarter of 2006.
The trend towards a reduction in margins for
average-risk loans runs counter to the generalincrease in banks’ lending rates, throughwhich the institutions pass on the gradualtightening in Eurosystem monetary policy totheir customers. However, interest rates onnew loans from German institutions werestill higher across virtually all product cate-gories and maturities than at the end of thepreceding quarter; only on mid-term con-sumer loans were banks charging somewhatless than they had three months earlier.Moreover, the short-term lending rates wererevised upwards more strongly than rates forlonger-term loans. It is likely that develop-ments in the capital markets also played apart here; they saw a sharp decline in long-term yields in the reporting period, and thiscaused the yield curve to flatten further.Overall, the German banks’ rates for long-term loans to enterprises recently stood atbetween 4.6% and 4.9% depending on theloan amount, while banks charged 4.7% and8.9% for long-term housing and consumerloans respectively.
There was also an increase in the remuner-
ation for households’ deposits in the quarterunder review. Depending on the maturity, therate of interest paid on households’ time de-posits ranged between 2.5% and 3.4%,though here, too, the discernible upwardtrend was stronger for shorter maturities thanfor longer ones; the remuneration rate forovernight deposits was 1.4%. The rate ofNew business
% p.a.
% p.a.% p.a.
... over €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year... up to €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
... over €1 million
    with an initial    rate fixation of
    over 5 yearsLoans to non-financial
corporations ...Loans to households
Consumer credit 1
2
Housing loans3Households’ deposits...
...overnight...redeemable at agreed notice
   of up to 3 months
...with an agreed maturity
   of up to 1 yearBank interest
rates in Germany
1 With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year
and up to 5 years. — 2 Decline owing to
special effect. — 3 With an initial rate
fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years.
Deutsche Bundesbank5.5
5.2
4.9
4.64.34.03.7
3.4
3.12.87.0
6.76.4
6.1
5.85.55.24.9
4.6
4.34.02.7
2.4
2.1
1.8
1.5
1.2
0.9
2003 2004 2005 2006Lendingrates
continuetorise
Depositrates
mainly
increasing

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
29interest on savings deposits with a notice
period of up to three months did not change,at 2.1%, while German banks were recently
offering 2.7% for longer notice periods.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
30Financial marketsTrends in the financial markets
Against a backdrop of falling oil prices, rising
corporate earning forecasts and vigorous ac-quisition activity, the stock markets have beendecidedly benign in recent months, in somecases even reaching record highs. By contrast,developmentsin the bond and foreign ex-change marketshave been influenced mainlyby the changing growth and inflation expect-ationsfor the US economy. In thiss etting, thelong-term interest rates in the major econ-omiesfell, while exchange ratesmos tlymoved “sideways” with only moderate fluc-tuations. Central bank interest rate decisionson both sides of the Atlantic had been largelyexpected and therefore had only a limitedshort-term effect on the financial markets.
Exchange rates
In the light of the described changes in the
international money and capital market inter-est rates, movements in the foreign exchangemarketswere comparatively calm in late s um-mer and autumn. The euro did initially makesome gains against the currencies of majortrading partnersasthe market playerswereexpecting further interest rate increases bythe ECB following surprisingly positive quar-terly data on euro-area GDP. However, theeuro depreciated somewhat again on balancelater in the reporting period.
In mid-August, the euro initially again
reached levelsagains t the dollar that wereclos e to itspeak thisyear of US$1.30; how-ever, it then fell below thismark. The emer-Financial
markettrends
Euroexchange
rate
movements...
againstthe
USdollar...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
31ging correction in the US real estate market
and the resulting expectation by the marketsthat there would be a cooling of the US econ-omy ultimately benefited the euro given themore favourable outlook for economicgrowth in the euro area. However, in Septem-ber the fall in oil pricesformed a certaincounterweight with market playersanticipat-ing that thiswould have a pos itive impact onthe US economy and the US current accountdeficit. The euro made up some ground againin November and, at US$1.28 at the end ofthe period under review, was8
1m’jC2% up on its
level at the beginning of the year.
The pick-up in economic activity in Europe
and the accompanying expectationsof higherinterest rates on the part of market playersled to gainsfor the euro agains t the yen.While the Bank of Japan discontinued its zerointerest rate policy against a backdrop of abrightening economic outlook in July, furtherinterest rate moves were, at first, mostly con-sidered to be very unlikely. This pushed theeuro-yen exchange rate to over ¥150 pereuro at the end of August. The announce-ment that central bank presidents andfinance ministers would be discussing theyen’sexchange rate and cons idering monet-ary policy measures at the G7 meeting inSingapore subsequently led to notable gainsby the Japanese currency. However, a sus-tained recovery failed to emerge when thepublication of the official G7 communiqum’jITmade it clear that no specific conclusions hadbeen reached. The yen’sexchange rate thenfluctuated within a narrow band around¥149 against the euro before reaching a newrecord high of over ¥151 in early November.At the time this report went to press, the ex-
change rate wasat jus t over ¥151 to theeuro, which wasapproximately 9% higherthan at the beginning of the year.
Largely, the euro hasbeen s lightly weaker
against the pound sterling since the height ofsummer. It is possible that the British currencyhas at times been supported by some centralbanks stepping up their sterling reserves. AtDaily data, log scale
US$
£¥
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.20  1... pound sterling
0.7110 £  1... yen
133.73 ¥  1against the ...
... US dollar
1.1789 $  1Exchange rate of the euro
1Rate at the beginning of monetary union
on 4 January 1999. — 2As calculated by the
ECB against the currencies of 23 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank106
103
1000.72
0.70
0.68
0.66142
139
136
1331451481511.30
1.27
1.24
1.21
1.18
1.15
ND J FMAMJ J ASON
2005 2006...againstthe
yen...
...andagainst
thepound
sterling

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
32least, this is suggested by the latest IMF
figurespublis hed on the denomination offoreign exchange reserves.
1The robust eco-
nomic situation has undoubtedly played apart in thisdevelopment of the euro-poundsterling exchange rate as it was seen as an in-dicator of a further tightening of UK monet-ary policy. The Bank of England left itskeyinterest rate unchanged in September andOctober in the wake of its surprising interestrate move in August, but it raised its keyinterest rate to 5.0% at the beginning ofNovember against a backdrop of heightenedinflation risks. At the end of the reportingperiod, the pound sterling’s exchange rateagainst the euro stood at GBP 0.68. whichwasaround 1% below itsvalue at the begin-ning of the year.In the period under review, the euro weak-
ened on average slightly vis-m’jj”-vis the curren-ciesof the 23 major trading partnersincludedin the exchange rate index. Asthisarticlewent to press, the effective exchange ratestood at just over 3
1m’jC2% above the level at the
start of this year and 1% below its level atthe start of monetary union. In real terms, ietaking into account the prevailing inflationdifferentialsbetween the euro area and itsmajor trading partners, the euro’s effectiveexchange rate hasgone up by approximately3% since the final quarter of 2005.
Securities markets and
portfolio transactions
Following their record highsfor thisyear in
early July, capital market ratesin the majoreconomiesfell noticeably again in the s um-mer and autumn. At 3.8% most recently,ten-year government bond yieldsin the euroarea were almost 40 basis points lower.
The fall in yieldsin the major capital markets
wasinitially driven by the correction in theinterest-rate and growth prospects for theUnited States. Added to this was the fact thatoil prices have declined sharply since mid-August. This has dampened inflation expect-ations, particularly in the United States, thusmaking a significant contribution to the de-cline in US interest rates. By contrast, ten-yearinflation-protected bond yields, which are in-terpreted as long-term real interest rates, hav-Weekly average
%
Per-
centage
pointsSpread of US bond yields
over the German
bond market
2003 2004 2005 2006Yield on ten-year governmentbonds outstanding
GermanyUSABond yields in Germany
and the USA
Deutsche Bundesbank1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
1In the first half of 2006, foreign exchange reserves de-
nominated in pound sterling grew from US$102.6 billion
to US$129.4 billion. Thisrefersto reported res ervesonly.Effectiveeuro
exchangerate
Overalldecline
incapital
marketrates
ineuroarea
Declinein
interestrates
duetoexpect-
ationsof
weakerUS
growthand
lessinflation
compensation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
33ing likewise declined in August and Septem-
ber, were, overall, virtually unchanged fromtheir early-July level. The corresponding nom-inal yieldsin Europe and Japan als o fell owingto the international linksbetween interes trates. However, against a backdrop of robustbusiness cycle data for the euro area, interestrate developmentsin the euro area movedaway from the pattern set in the UnitedStatesfor a time. On balance, however, theyield advantage of ten-year US governmentbondsover European government bondsremained at around 90 basis points.
The German term structure of interest rates
reflects the shifting influences on short andclearly long-term interest rates in the report-ing period. While interest rates with matur-ities of up to two years rose as a consequenceof the ECB Governing Council’sdecis ion of5 October to increase the minimum bid rateof the main refinancing operationsandowing to sustained expectations of higherinterest rates in the money market, the long-term yieldsof German government bonds(Bunds) fell in line with developments in theUnited States. As a result, the German yieldcurve in the maturity range of up to fouryears inverted. It has since also flattenedsignificantly across the entire maturity spec-trum, with a spread of 3 basis points betweenone and ten-year interest rates.
In the autumn, the yieldsof BBB-rated cor-
porate bondsin the euro area fell even moresharply than the yields of government bondswith comparable maturity. The interest ratepremiumsfor thes e corporate bondswith thelowest investment grade rating declined byaround 20 basis points to just under 1
1m’jC4per-
centage points. This means that they arecurrently back at the same level as at thebeginning of the year. The more favourablefinancing conditionsfor the corporate s ectorare probably mainly a result of the positiveeconomic s ituation aswell asimproved earn-ings prospects, fuelled in large part by fallingoil prices. Furthermore, abating uncertaintyabout future developmentsin the bond andstock markets
2may also have had a positive
effect on the price development of corporatebonds.
Despite the low interest rate level, issuing ac-
tivity remained weak in the German bondmarket. At 3248 billion, third-quarter gross%
0123456789 1 0
Residual maturity in years16 November
2006
5 October 2006 130 June 2006Yield curve
in the German bond market *
*Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-cou-
pon bonds (Svensson method), based on
listed Federal securities. — 1Before the
interest rate increase of 25 basis points by
the Governing Council of the ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank4.4
4.24.03.8
3.6
3.43.23.02.8
2Measured in terms of the implied volatility of options
on stock price indices and Bund futures.Termstructure
ofinterestrates
clearlyflatter
Favourable
financial
conditionsMarkedlylower
bondsales

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
34sales of domestic debt securities were down
on the previousquarter ( 32671m’jC2billion). At
just 36 billion, net sales after deducting
redemptions and changes in issuers’ holdingsof their own bondsand noteswere als o clear-ly below the level of the second quarter(327
1m’jC2billion). At 316 billion, there wasals o
significantly less investment in foreign bondsin Germany between July and Septemberthan in the previousthree months( 344
1m’jC2bil-
lion). As a result, total funds raised throughthe sale of domestic and foreign bondsamounted to 322 billion compared with
371
1m’jC2billion in the preceding quarter.
The smaller inflow of funds to the domestic
bond market primarily reflectsthe netredemptions of credit institutions, whichreduced their bonded debt by 310
1m’jC2billionafter positive net sales of 3121m’jC2billion in the
previousquarter. Public Pfandbriefswereredeemed on balance for 34
1m’jC2billion, con-
tinuing the trend of the preceeding quarters.The maturing of the large-volume JumboPfandbriefs, which were first issued about tenyearsago, had a major influence on this .However, mortgage Pfandbriefs, debt secur-ities issued by specialised credit institutionsand other bank bondswere als o redeemedfor a total of 36 billion.
By contrast, the general government sector
borrowed more on the bond market ( 320 bil-
lion) than in the previousquarter ( 36
1m’jC2bil-
lion). Central government issued 3211m’jC2billion
(net) worth of debt securities. In the longer-term maturity segment it issued ten-yearBundsfor 321 billion net and 30-year Bunds
for35
1m’jC2billion net. At the shorter end of the
market, it placed Federal Treasury financingpaper totalling 3
1m’jC2billion. By contrast, five-
year Federal notesand two-year FederalTreasury notes were redeemed for 34
1m’jC2billion
and 31 billion net respectively. State govern-
ment also redeemed issues in the amount of31
1m’jC2billion.
While companies made use of the low costs
of financing in the long-term segment andissued 38 billions’ worth of corporate bonds,
they redeemed shorter-term commercialpaper totalling 312 billion net. Overall, do-
mestic enterprises’ bonded debt fell by 34 bil-
lion. This suggests that companies active inthe capital market continue to be in a goodfinancial position.Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2005 2006
I t e m Q 3Q 2Q 3Debt securities
Residents 4.7 60.9 2.6
Credit institutions – 10.2 23.6 – 0.8of which
Foreign debt securities – 0.9 25.5 10.0
Non-banks 14.9 37.3 3.5of which
Domestic debt securities 0.3 18.4 – 2.5
Non-residents 25.3 10.8 19.3
Shares
Residents – 3.4 – 13.3 16.1
Credit institutions 6.0 – 8.2 3.7of which
Domestic shares 4.5 – 5.1 – 2.5
Non-banks – 9.5 – 5.1 12.5of which
Domestic shares – 8.5 – 2.0 4.6
Non-residents 7.7 9.1 2.0
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 6.3 9.7 5.7
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 6.2 – 2.1 – 3.9of which: Share-based funds 1.2 – 3.0 – 1.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
Credit
institutions’net
redemptionsHigherpublic
sector
borrowing
Enterprises
reducebond
market
liabilities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
35In the third quarter, foreign investors were
the main purchasers in the German bondmarket. They acquired German paper fromprivate and public sector issuers in nearlyequal amounts(in total 319
1m’jC2billion). Domes-
tic non-banksinves ted 331m’jC2billion in the
bond market, which was used exclusively forforeign debt securities ( 36 billion). Credit in-
stitutions reduced their bond investments by31 billion. Although they invested 310 billion
in foreign paper, which usually offers slightyield advantages, they removed 311 billion in
domestic debt securities from their portfolios.
After suffering a temporary setback in May
and June in the wake of major uncertainty,the stock markets performed very well fromsummer into November, thus matching theupward movement at the beginning of theyear. All the major stock exchanges experi-enced a broadly based price recovery in asetting of favourable growth expectations forthe world economy. Measured against thebroad Dow JonesEuro Stoxx and CDAXindices, equities of European and Germanpublic limited companiesreached a five-yearhigh in mid-November and the S&P 500 re-corded its highest levels since 2000. US andEuropean indicesgained 11% and 17%respectively on the beginning of the year. Itwasonly on Japan’sNikkei index that thegains were more modest at +1% since Janu-ary, although the Nikkei had already madevery large gainsin the previousyear. In termsof the fundamentals, the upward trend in theeuro-area equity market wass upported byenterprises’ positive 12-month-ahead earn-ingsgrowth expectations , particularly asanalysts have revised their forecasts furtherMonthly data
Lin scale
Price-earnings ratio3
DAX
Dow Jones EuroStoxxAverage expected earnings 1, 3
for enterprises
listed on the ...
... DAX
... Dow Jones EuroStoxxLog scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx 1, 2
DAX 1, 2Price movements and
earnings estimates for
European and German
public limited companies
1January 2002 = 100. — 2Source: Deutsche
Börse AG. — 3Based on year-on-year
I / B / E / S analyst estimates (“earnings before
goodwill”). Source: Thomson Financial Data-
stream.
Deutsche Bundesbank20
18
16
1412
10180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
45
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Purchasesof
debtsecurities
Buoyantequity
markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
36upwardsin recent monthsin the light of fall-
ing oil prices. Declining long-term interestrates (and thus also falling discount factors)as well as corporate acquisitions also contrib-uted to the upsurge on the market. At thesame time, uncertainty regarding futuredevelopments in stock market prices alsoeased again after increasing suddenly alongwith sharp price mark-downs in late spring.At the end of the period under review, themeasures of volatility were back to near pre-turbulence valuesand were therefore at anexceptionally low level measured by the long-term average.
Given the favourable financial market envir-
onment, issuing activity in the German sharemarket showed a further slight upturn. Do-mestic enterprises sold shares in the amountof34 billion in the third quarter, thereby
doubling the placement volume of the previ-ousquarter. At 31 billion, the injection of
equity by an already listed chemicals enter-price had a sizeable impact. Nearly 31 billion
was also raised by the IPO listing of an energycorporation. Just under 32 billions’ worth of
unquoted equitieswere s old in the periodfrom July to September. In Germany, pur-chases of foreign shares amounted to 314 bil-
lion, compared with sales in the amount of36 billion in the second quarter. However, the
main reason for the turnaround was a largecross-border corporate acquisition withoutwhich the volume of foreign shares held inGermany would have declined yet again.
3
The majority of German equitieswere pur-chased by domestic non-banks ( 34
1m’jC2billion),Major items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2005 2006
I t e m Q 3Q 2Q 3
I Current account 1,2 + 19.5 + 21.6 + 19.1
Foreign trade 1,3 + 41.1 + 37.6 + 40.1
Services 1 – 12.0 – 4.1 – 11.4
Income 1 + 3.3 – 2.1 + 3.2
Current transfers 1 –7 . 6 –4 . 8 –7 . 5
II Capital transfers 1,4 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.2
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 15.6 – 52.3 – 5.8
1 Direct investment – 6.5 – 4.5 – 6.3
German investmentabroad – 7.4 – 10.3 – 10.2Foreign investment inGermany + 0.9 + 5.8 + 3.9
2 Portfolio investment + 6.4 – 9.6 + 8.0
German investmentabroad – 29.1 – 30.4 – 19.0
Shares – 3.4 + 11.3 – 1.9Mutual fund shares – 12.0 + 2.7 – 1.1Debt securities – 13.7 – 44.4 – 16.0
Bonds and notes
5 – 9.5 – 36.4 – 15.4
of which:Euro-denominatedbonds and notes – 4.0 – 30.9 – 13.5
Money marketinstruments – 4.2 – 8.0 – 0.5
Foreign investmentin Germany + 35.6 + 20.8 + 27.0
Shares + 8.4 + 8.6 + 6.4Mutual fund shares + 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.3Debt securities + 25.3 + 10.8 + 19.3
Bonds and notes
5 + 26.8 + 8.2 + 23.1
of which:Public bonds andnotes + 17.0 + 1.1 + 10.4
Money marketinstruments – 1.6 + 2.6 – 3.9
3 Financial derivatives
6 + 4.4 + 2.0 – 0.2
4 Other investment 7 – 19.0 – 40.6 – 8.2
Monetary financialinstitutions
8 – 16.0 – 56.0 + 13.0
of which: short-term + 6.1 – 38.9 + 28.3
Enterprises andindividuals + 4.5 + 16.5 + 0.9
of which: short-term + 1.7 + 10.0 + 4.1
General government + 0.3 – 15.1 + 5.9
of which: short-term – 5.0 – 15.1 – 1.0
Bundesbank – 7.9 + 14.0 – 28.0
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values(increase: –)
9 – 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.8
IV Errors and omissions – 4.0 + 30.7 – 13.1
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments. Discrepancies due to roundingof figures.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3See opposite page for direct investment.Raisingfunds
inthestock
markets...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
37which also added foreign shares worth 38 bil-
lion to their portfoliosasa part of the directinvestment mentioned above. In addition,non-residents invested 32 billion in German
equities. Domestic credit institutions pur-chased shares in non-resident enterprises for36 billion, while selling domestic paper worth
32
1m’jC2billion net.
Despite the benign stock market climate, the
inflow of resources to domestic investmentfunds, at 32 billion net in the third quarter,
wasdown perceptibly on the period fromApril to June ( 37
1m’jC2billion). The resources
were channelled solely into specialised fundswhich are open only to institutional investors(35
1m’jC2billion), whereasmutual fundsopen to
the general public, asin the preceding twoquarters, had to redeem shares to the valueof34 billion net. Almost all asset classes were
affected by thisdecline in inves tment. While31 billion was withdrawn from share-based
funds, money-market and bond-based funds(31
1m’jC2billion each) sustained the greatest out-
flows of funds. Investors also liquidatedshares in open-end real estate funds on asmall scale ( 3
1m’jC2billion). However, there wasa
further slowdown in the outflow of fundsthat followed three open-end real estatefunds temporarily suspending the redemptionof shares in the first quarter. In the case ofspecialised funds, share-based funds, bond-based funds and money market funds lost in-vestable funds ( 36,32
1m’jC2and 31m’jC2billion re-
spectively). At the same time, mixed funds(314 billion) enjoyed widespread popularity,
which enabled specialised funds to achievean overall inflow of resources amounting to35
1m’jC2billion. By contrast, the sale of foreignmutual fund shares, at 31 billion, wasquite
subdued.
Mutual fund shares were purchased on bal-
ance by domestic banks ( 32 billion), which in-
vested exclusively in foreign mutual funds. Bycontrast, German non-banks reduced their in-vestment in mutual fund shares, in somecases switching between foreign (- 31 billion)
and German investment products ( 3
1m’jC2bil-
lion), although they evidently preferred directinvestment in the relevant markets in the re-porting quarter. Foreign investors purchasedjust over 31
1m’jC2billion in mutual fund shares in
the German market.
Direct investment
In the third quarter, net capital exports
amounting to 361m’jC2billion were recorded in
the field of direct investment following netoutflowsof fundsin the two preceding quar-ters. German investors continued to expandtheir foreign investment ( 310 billion), al-
though, asmentioned above, one largecorporate takeover in the gass ector wasofparticular importance. German acquisitionsof participating interests abroad focused onthe United Kingdom.
In the period from July to September, non-
residents’ direct investment in Germany, at34 billion, waslower than German inves t-
ment abroad. Direct investment was dividedin roughly equal partsbetween an expans ionof domestic equity capital and reinvestmentof earnings.Salesofmutual
fundsharesPurchasesof
mutualfund
shares
Netcapital
exportsindirect
investment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
38Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
Germany’scyclical upturn continued at a
brisk pace after the middle of the year. Ac-cording to initial calculationsby the FederalStatistical Office, overall output, which hadalready been at a high level in the secondquarter after data revisions, grew by 0.6% inthe third quarter in seasonal and calendar-adjusted terms. Output was 2.8% up on thecorresponding figure last year after adjust-ment for the varying number of workingdays.
Economic growth thus slowed somewhat
compared with the second quarter, whenGDP had increased by just over 1% accordingto the latest revised figures – in part owing tofavourable exceptional factors. Adjusted forthe catch-up effectsin cons truction activity,which had been greatly hampered by adverseweather conditionsat the beginning of theyear, and for the temporary surge in demandin connection with the FIFA World Cup, how-ever, the underlying cyclical momentum re-mained fairly steady during the first threequartersof the current year. Anticipatory ef-fectsin connection with the ris e in VATat thebeginning of next year have probably playedonly a minor role up to now. Calculated fromthe fourth quarter of 2005, the annualisedrate of overall economic growth amountstoapproximately 3
1FJqE2%. Thismeansthat Ger-
many is also providing considerable impulsesto the euro area asa whole, es pecially astheGerman economy’sdemand profile isnowlooking far more balanced. Furthermore, thelabour market, too, isnow benefiting increas -ingly from the strengthening of business ac-Brisk growth
again in Q3

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
39tivity. Both the hard indicatorsand the res ults
of the Ifo business survey (see box onpages 40 and 41) suggest a continuation ofthe positive underlying trend in the comingmonths. It should also be noted that in manyareasof the handicraft s ector – which con-tainsmany s mall and relatively labour-intensive companies – a clear turnaround insentiment has emerged and the enterprisesoperating in this sector are increasingly re-porting that they are hiring more staff.
Even though – asisoften the cas e – import-
ant disaggregated information is still missingfor the third quarter, there is still much to sug-gest that the growth in domestic output wasattributable to domes tic aswell asforeign de-mand. For example, investment during theperiod under review wasup on the s econd-quarter level. Given the growing level of cap-acity utilisation, plant expansion measures arelikely to have assumed a more prominent rolein the rising expenditure trend for machineryand equipment. Thisisborne out primarily bythe high level of both confidence and cap-acity utilisation in industry. Construction in-vestment also rose significantly in the thirdquarter, albeit to a somewhat lesser extentthan in the second quarter, when weather-induced catch-up effectswere exerting a s ig-nificant impact. The quite high level of invest-ment seen so far this year indicates that it hasnow become a second mainstay of economicactivity alongside foreign trade. By contrast,private consumption still showed no clear-cutpicture. Modest sales figures recorded by con-ventional retail trade outletsin the periodfrom July to September contrasted withgrowth in the sales of motor vehicles andmotorcycles. If the favourable trend in the
purchases of services are included, realhousehold consumption is likely to have in-creased during the reporting period.
Exportsimparted renewed pos itive s timuli in
the third quarter of 2006 after they hadslowed to a somewhat more subdued pace inthe second quarter. Although cross-borderservice income was down sharply on the pre-vious quarter, which had benefited substan-tially from the higher revenue from tourismduring the FIFA World Cup (see box onpage 43), exportsof goodsexpanded s tronglyagain. In terms of value, seasonally adjustedgoodsexportswere 5% up on the previousperiod. There was a particularly sharp rise inexportsof intermediate goodsin July and Au-gust, up to when disaggregated sectoral fig-
Seasonally adjusted
% Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale  
Real GDP
2000 = 100Economic growth in Germany
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−106
104
102
100
98
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Rise in domestic
demand
Buoyant
foreign trade

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
40Deutsche BundesbankHow robust is the empirical relationship between the Ifo business climate indicator and overall 
economic activity?
Since the second quarter of this year, the Ifo Institute‘s 
closely observed business climate index has maintained a level that was last reached during the reuniﬁ  cation 
boom in the early 1990s. Whether or not this ﬁ  nding sug-
gests a continued strong upturn of the German economy depends on whether the empirical relationship between the Ifo business climate and overall economic activity can be regarded as sufﬁ  ciently robust. This has recently been 
called into question on occasion. Sustained by its expect-
ations component, the Ifo business climate, for example, 
showed a sharp upswing during the winter term 2001/2002 and in the year 2003. However, since the economy‘s 
recovery at that time was moderate at most, these were 
later interpreted as “expectation bubbles”. Recently, the indicator again appeared to have overshot the economic reality at ﬁ  rst, until the summer and autumn revisions of 
the national accounts showed a clearly more favourable 
picture of past cyclical developments.
The year-on-year growth rate of calendar-adjusted real 
gross domestic product (GDP) is used as the reference vari-
able for the survey balances from industry and trade con-sidered here. Besides the overall index, which is referred 
to as the “business climate“, its two components “business 
situation“ and “business expectations“ are also included in the study. The seasonally adjusted data that are available on a monthly basis are aggregated to quarterly series. The 
period under review covers the time from the ﬁ  rst quarter 
of 1992 to the third quarter of 2006.
The adjacent chart shows the time series of the Ifo survey 
indicators along with the year-on-year change in GDP in a standardised format. In particular up to 2001, the business climate index as well as the individual indicators show a 
very high degree of cyclical co-movement with the annual 
percentage change of real GDP. This synchronicity is by no means inevitable since statements made by enterprises concerning their business climate presumably do not relate 
only to production activity but are generally more broadly 
based. It should also be noted that industry and trade gen-erate only about one-third of total value added.
A study of the cross-correlations points to the conclusion 
that the overall index ﬂ  uctuates coincidentally with the 
year-on-year change in GDP.
1 The same applies to the assessments of the business situation, whereas the business 
expectations component – in accordance with its design – runs somewhat ahead of the reference variable. In the 
period as a whole, the maximum correlation between the 
year-on-year change in GDP and each indicator is about ¾, considering a lead of one quarter in the case of business expectations.
1 The capacity of the Ifo business climate index to be a leading indica-
tor is therefore based not so much on a statistical lead property, but 
rather on its early availability. — 2 Mean-adjusted and normalised to a 
standard deviation ( σ). — 3 Real, calendar-adjusted. — 4 This causality concept based on predictive properties was ﬁ  rst presented in C W J 
Granger (1969), Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models 
and Cross-Spectral Methods, Econometrica 37, 3, pp 424-438. — 5 The 
statistics of the test for empirical Granger non-causality are asymp-Quarterly, standardised time series 2
σ
σσ
Ifo business expectations
Year-on-year GDP3Ifo business situation
Year-on-year GDP3Ifo business climate
Year-on-year GDP3Ifo indicators compared with GDP
3+
2+
1+
0
1–
2–
3–3+
2+
1+
0
1–
2–
3–3+
2+
1+
0
1–
2–
3–
1992 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 2006 05

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
41In order to answer the question whether the empirical 
relationship between the survey indicators and overall eco-nomic activity is robust, it is also necessary to analyse the time pattern of correlation. As can be seen in the adjacent chart, the contemporaneous correlation between business climate and the year-on-year change in GDP – based on rolling samples of a constant length of 40 quarters – has fallen by about one-tenth since 2002. In the light of the statistical margins of uncertainty which accompany the correlation estimation, this decline, by itself, is not unusual, but it is interesting when compared with the correlation time patterns of the components. While the correspond-ing results for the business situation are largely constant and always remain within the margin of uncertainty of the correlation estimations for the overall business climate, there is a marked decline in the case of business expect-ations. Starting from a level of over 0.7 in 2002, the rolling correlation estimator has shown a value of only just over 0.5 since 2005. This means that the co-movement between business expectations and the year-on-year change in GDP 
has been signiﬁ  cantly reduced over the past few years 
owing to the phenomenon of temporary expectation outliers as discussed above. However, for the overall index, 
this also means that the slight decline in synchronicity with 
the reference series which can be observed for the business climate can be solely attributed to the decreasing correl-ation of the expectation component.
The evidence of a signiﬁ  cant correlation does not neces-
sarily imply that the indicator has predictive ability for the 
reference variable. Provided that this property is econo-
metrically speciﬁ  ed as Granger causality, it can be tested 
empirically.
4 The tests for Granger non-causality are carried 
out individually for each indicator in three bivariate vector 
autoregressions, which contain the year-on-year change in 
GDP as an additional variable. As can be seen from the table, the null hypothesis can be clearly rejected both for the business climate and for the individual indicators over 
the entire period. It follows that each one of these sur-
vey balances provides information that is meaningful for short-term projections of overall economic activity.
The Ifo Institute‘s business climate index thus still shows a 
statistically veriﬁ  able close relationship with the general 
cyclical development, which can be used for making pre-dictive statements. In order to obtain robust assessments 
it is advisable to take a comprehensive view, which also 
includes “hard“ indicators, encompassing not only the 
overall index but also its two components. The sharp increase in the business climate at the current end is sup-ported not merely by optimistic expectations but especially 
by extremely positive ratings of ﬁ  rms‘ current business situ-
ation. In view of the continued quite high correlation with overall economic activity, which is documented for the indicator of the business situation, the survey results of the 
Ifo Institute thus provide further evidence of the favour-
able macroeconomic situation of the German economy.
totically χ²-distributed; see, for example, H Lütkepohl (2005), New 
Introduction to Multiple Time Series Analysis, chapter 3.6.1. In the cases at hand, the number of the degrees of freedom is equal to the speciﬁ  ed 
lag order of the underlying vector autoregression, which is determined on the basis of Akaike‘s information criterion. — ** Indicates the rejec-
tion of the null hypothesis at the 1% level. — 6 ± 1 standard error of 
the rolling correlation estimator for the Ifo business climate index.Margin of uncertainty6
Ifo business expectationsCorrelation of the Ifo indicators
with year-on-year GDP
1,0
0,9
0,8
0,7
0,6
0,5
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Ifo business climate
Ifo business situationGranger causality analysis5
Indicator Lag order Test statistic
Business climate 5 17.7**Business situation 5 18.4**Business expectations 6 20.0**

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
42uresare available. Exportersof chemical prod-
ucts , in particular, aswell asexportersofmetalsand metal productsrecorded highsales figures abroad. Exports of consumergoods likewise expanded sharply. Capitalgoods producers were also able to step uptheir exports. This was accompanied by a sig-nificant rise in imports. At 4
3FJqE4%, however,
the rise in imports did not quite match that ofexports. Imports of intermediate and capitalgoodsgrew particularly s trongly. On balance,
however, foreign trade made a significantcontribution to overall economic growth inthe third quarter.
Output and sales
At the sectoral level, industry continued to be
the main driver of macroeconomic growth inthe third quarter, just as it had been in thesecond quarter. Output went up by 2% inseasonally and calendar-adjusted terms com-pared with the second quarter, the figures forwhich were revised significantly upwards bythe Federal Statistical Office. The degree ofcapacity utilisation also increased. Accordingto the Ifo Institute, utilisation in Septemberwas3
3FJqE4percentage pointsup on the year
and 23FJqE4percentage pointsgreater than the
medium-term average. Investment in capacityextensions is therefore likely to become evenmore significant.
Manufacturersof intermediate goodsrecord-
ed further sizeable increases in production.For example, manufacturersof machinesused to generate and distribute electricity re-corded perceptible increases. The chemicalsindustry also recorded a growth in output fol-lowing a lull in the first half of the year. Out-put in the manufacture of basic metals didnot grow ass trongly in the third quarter asinthe previousquarter. Suppliersof capitalgoodsrecorded s izeable growth in output inthe third quarter. Thiswasparticularly thecase for orders of machinery and equipment.There was also significant growth in the pro-duction of computersand other information2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−105
100
95
90
85
80
75
7010+
5+
0
5−115
110
105
100
95
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Continued
major stimuli
from industry

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
43Deutsche BundesbankThe World Cup effect on travel receipts in Germany
Germany’s expenditure on cross-border travel 
usually considerably exceeds the corresponding receipts. While there is a huge demand from German consumers for holidays abroad, there is noticeably less demand from foreign tourists for holidays in Germany. In 2005, German residents spent €58½ billion on private and business travel, whereas only €23½ billion worth of revenue was generated from cross-border travel. In previous years, too, the balance on German travel was in deep deﬁ  cit.
In the second and third quarters of 2006, how-
ever, the FIFA World Cup in Germany had a posi-
tive effect on travel receipts. They were boosted, in particular, by spending on overnight stays and consumption by visitors to the World Cup in Germany from abroad, including purchases of tickets for the individual football matches and expenditure on journeys within Germany.
1 
According to provisional data, the overall effect of the 2006 World Cup on Germany’s rev-
enue from travel, which was essentially spread 
between May and July, totalled just under €1½ billion.
2 Two-thirds of this amount came from 
EU countries and one-third from the rest of the world, with the percentage of revenue from some non-European countries (such as Ghana, Trinidad and Tobago, and Togo) – which do not generally play a part in tourism in Germany – ris-ing exceptionally sharply.
As early as May (the World Cup itself began on 
9 June and ended on 9 July) there was a year-on-year increase in revenue, albeit a small one. Among other things, this can be attributed to the 
fact that some teams of the participating football associations, including staff and relatives as well as the players themselves, travelled to Germany relatively early on. Around half of the additional revenue was raised in June, the month in which 
most of the matches were played. In total, the 
World Cup effect contributed just under ¼ percentage point to GDP growth in the second quarter.
In July, travel receipts rose only slightly on the 
year. They had no signiﬁ  cant effect on GDP in 
the third quarter. The relatively small increases in July can be attributed mainly to the fact that only a few games were played that month. In 
addition, day trips, which are generally less costly, 
were a major factor, since the teams involved in the semi-ﬁ  nals and the ﬁ  nal were all European.
1 The additional revenue raised by domestic airlines from ﬂ  y-
ing World Cup visitors into and out of Germany, which was considerable, has to be added to the World Cup effect on travel receipts described here. However, this must be off-set against the fact that FIFA headquarters in Switzerland is entitled to part of the revenue from ticket sales and that German television companies, as well as German ﬁ  rms which 
advertised at or with the World Cup, had to pay licence fees to FIFA. These payments are booked not under the travel account, but under other sub-balances of the services account. — 2 For more information on how the Bundesbank 
processes data on the collection of revenue from travel, see Deutsche Bundesbank, “Capturing foreign travel in the bal-ance of payments statistics from January 2001”, Monthly Report, March 2003, pp 60-61. When assessing the World Cup effect, information on the distribution of tickets to the par-ticipating football associations was also taken into account. The ﬁ  nal data on travel receipts in 2006 will be published in 
March 2007.€b n
2006
2005
2004Travel receipts
in Germany
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.61.4
JF M A M A D JJ S O N

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
44processing equipment compared with the
prior period. Manufacturersof cons umer dur-ables, in particular, recorded a marked expan-sion of output after having already registeredstrong growth rates in the second quarter. Bycontrast, the output of non-durable goods re-mained virtually unchanged.
The recovery in the construction sector con-
tinued in the third quarter following thestrong weather-induced catch-up effects inthe previousquarter, with net output growthin thiss ector amounting to 3% on the quar-ter. The corresponding year-on-year figurewasa marked increas e of 6
3FJqE4%. Substantial
increases were achieved in the constructionof buildings, in particular.Commercial service providers are likely to
have made a further contribution to thebuoyant dynamicsof indus trial activity. Al-though the enterprises questioned as part ofthe Ifo business survey assessed their com-mercial situation in the third quarter some-what less favourably than in the second quar-ter, on balance, the positive assessments con-siderably outweighed the negative assess-ments. Furthermore, the indicator in Octobershowed a further boost in sentiment com-pared with September. In line with the fa-vourable momentum in industry, the trans-port sector is also likely to have performedstrongly. In the third quarter, the hotel andcatering industry recorded a slight increaseon the already high result of the second quar-ter when it had substantially benefited fromthe FIFA World Cup.
Real turnover in the retail trade sector re-
mained unchanged in the third quarter afteradjustment for seasonal fluctuations and vari-ationsin the number of working daysafter in-creasing by
1FJqE2% in the period from April to
June. While there was a slight increase in thesales of furniture and furnishings, home im-provement materialsand other cons umerdurables, there was a sharp decline in theturnover of textiles. Retail sales of motor ve-hicleswere up perceptibly on the s econdquarter in termsof volume, which islikely tobe partly related to forestalling the pendingrise in VAT. The course of development in thewholesale trade was also somewhat more fa-vourable in the third quarter.Foreign trade by category of goods
Percentage change
Average of July–Aug 2006
compared with
Q2 2006;
seasonallyadjustedJuly–Aug 2005;
unadjustedfigures
Item Exports Imports Exports Imports
Total + 2.7 + 3.5 + 11.4 + 15.9
Selected main
categories
Intermediate goods + 4.5 + 5.9 + 16.1 + 22.0Capital goods + 0.9 + 5.3 + 7.6 + 14.8Consumer goods + 3.0 – 0.1 + 12.8 + 5.8Energy . – 1.5 . + 28.0
Selected categories
Chemicals + 5.9 + 1.3 + 15.6 + 9.6Machinery + 6.3 + 4.1 + 11.7 + 15.9Motor vehicles andmotor vehicle parts + 1.4 + 2.5 + 7.1 + 10.5Information tech-nology + 1.6 + 4.3 + 2.9 + 5.1Metals and metalproducts + 7.7 + 9.2 + 27.6 + 40.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
Recovery in
construction
sector
continuesLargely positive
situation for
service
providers
Mixed picture
in trade

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
45Employment and unemployment
The cyclical revival of the labour market con-
tinued in the third quarter of 2006. The num-ber of persons in employment rose by150,000 or 0.4% to a seasonally adjusted39.14 million. The year-on-year increase isnow at 0.9% or 340,000 persons. A similarlysharp rise was last recorded at the beginningof 2001 asthe “new economy” boom wastailing off. This latest increase concerned em-ployees subject to social security contribu-tions. According to estimates made by theFederal Employment Agency, their number inthe July-August period was a seasonally ad-justed 0.5% higher than the second-quarteraverage. Reports from the social securityschemes suggest that this positive trend hascontinued.
Developmentsin the number of job vacancies
reported also suggests an improved labourmarket situation. The year-on-year increase inthe number of job vacancieshasnow goneup by a third to a seasonally adjusted600,000. By contrast, the stagnation in thenumber of self-employed persons was duenot least to the amendment of the govern-ment promotion policy in thiss egment whichcame into effect in August. At the same time,the promotion of paid employment picked upsignificantly following the end of the summerholidays. Some 315,000 persons were em-ployed in workfare placements(one-eurojobs) at the end of the reporting period. Oneparticularly striking feature is the growing im-portance of reintegration grants, which havedoubled in number compared with the lowlevel recorded at the beginning of the year.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Millions
Millions
Thou-
sands
Millions
Thou-
sands
%
0
12Unemployment rate
OctOctLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed
- 
OctLin scale
Employed
Year-on-year changeof which
Employees
subject to
social security
contributions - July-
AugLog scale
EmployedLabour market
1From January 2004, unemployed ex-
cluding participants in aptitude testing and
training measures. — 2From January 2005,
unemployed including persons formerly
receiving social assistance but able to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9
8
7600+
300+
0
300−
600−5.0
4.4
4.1
3.84.7500+
0
500−28.0
27.5
27.0
26.5
26.039.5
39.0
38.5
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Labour market
buoyed by
economic
upturn

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
46The seasonally adjusted number of persons
officially registered as unemployed fell by165,000 in the third quarter to 4.43 million.Thisisapproximately 430,000 fewer thanduring the same period of last year. The sea-sonally adjusted unemployment rate (as de-fined by the Federal Employment Agency)went down from 11.0% in the second quar-ter to 10.6% and by 1.1 percentage pointsover twelve months. Whereas the declinewas previously due, first and foremost, to thelabour market structural reforms, it is nowprimarily attributable to an increase in de-mand for labour. The decline in unemploy-ment continued in October. The seasonallyadjusted month-on-month decrease amount-ed to 67,000 persons, while the unemploy-ment rate went down to 10.4%.
Wages and prices
Only a few new collective wage agreements
were concluded in the third quarter. In thesteel industry in the north-west of Germany,management and trade unionsagreed to in-creas e wagesby 3.8% asof 1 January 2007.Furthermore, the new collective agreementprovides for substantial one-off payments,which are to be disbursed before the end ofthisyear. In addition, agreementswerereached with regard to the employment ofolder workers. The previous labour agreementexpired in August 2006, which means thatthe new agreement will run for 17 monthsbefore expiring in January 2008. The relativelyhigh overall volume of the wage agreementreflects the particular situation of the industry,which isbenefiting from the s trong inter-national demand for steel products. By con-
trast, the negotiations regarding thecompany-wide labour agreement for Volks-wagen were focused on reducing labour costswith the aim of ensuring the future viability ofproduction sites. The most significant aspectof the new labour agreement isthe newworking time corridor. Instead of the previous28.8-hour fixed working week, the newagreement allowsthe employer to deploy em-ployeesbetween 25 and 33 hoursper week,depending on company requirements, for thesame fixed monthly salary. As compensationfor the increased number of working hours,and instead of awarding general wage in-creases for 2006 and 2007, it was agreed thata one-off payment of 31,000 shall be paid out
in November 2006. In addition, employeeshave been given the option of either taking afurther one-off payment of 35,000 in cash or
having 36,300 credited to their company pen-
sion plan. Other conditions of the new com-pany labour agreement include the couplingof future monthly wage adjustments to thosein the metalworking industry in Lower Saxony,a virtual promise of no compulsory redundan-ciesand an extens ion of the validity of thenew agreement to the end of 2011.
On an average of all sectors, the monthly ne-
gotiated ratesof pay in the third quarter of2006 were 0.5% up on the year. Thisincreas ewass maller than in the previousquarter, afact which isprimarily attributable to excep-tional factors. For example, it was agreed thatemployeesof public s ector bankswould notreceive any holiday pay in July 2006. Flat-rateovertime payments were also abolished. InJuly 2006, employeesworking for central and
Further
decline in
unemployment
Wage policy
Aggregate level
of negotiated
wages

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
47local government likewise received no holiday
pay for the first time. On the whole, the mod-erate growth in wage costs in the Germaneconomy thuscontinued, although the gen-eral trend towardss hortening the duration ofwage agreements should be seen as a warn-ing signal from an anti-inflation perspective.
The external upward pressure on prices weak-
ened somewhat in the third quarter. Season-ally adjusted import prices rose by 0.7% inthe third quarter of 2006, compared with1.7% in the previousquarter, and the year-on-year increase went down from 6.7% to5.2%. Thiswasdue primarily to the decline inenergy prices, whereas the rising price trendfor other raw materialscontinued. Excludingenergy, seasonally adjusted import priceswere up almost 1% on the quarter; the year-on-year increase widened from 2.5% to3.3%. Thiswasdue to further s harp price in-creases for agricultural and forestry productsas well as for industrial intermediate goods.By contrast, the prices of consumer goodsrose less sharply, and the decline in prices forcapital goodseven accelerated.
At the domestic producer level, too, price
pressures on industrial products weakenedconsiderably in the third quarter. The season-ally adjusted price level of goods intended fordomestic sale went up by 0.9% in the thirdquarter, compared with 1.7% in the secondquarter. The year-on-year increase fell from6.1% to 5.7%. Thiswasals o due primarily tothe sharp decline in energy prices. Excludingenergy, the seasonally adjusted price increaseof +0.8% wasalmos t ashigh asin the previ-ousquarter, while the year-on-year increas e2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
%
OctLin scale
Year-on-year changeConsumer prices2Construction prices 1Producer prices
of agricultural productsProducer prices
of industrial productsLog scale
Import pricesImport, producer and
consumer prices
1Not seasonally adjusted, quarterly. —
2 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
2+
1+
0112
109
106
103
100
97106
103
100112
109
106
103
100
97
94118
115
112
109
106
103
100
97109
106
103
100
97
94
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Decelerating
price increases
for imports ...
... and at
domestic
producer level

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
48widened from 2.2% to 3.0%. Asin the cas e
of imports, the rise in the price of intermedi-ate goods, at almost 6%, was particularlysharp. However, the upward price thrust ondomestically produced capital and consumergoods has likewise intensified of late.
Owing to the unusual weather conditions
during the course of 2006 so far, agriculturalproducer prices have been rising sharply eversince the beginning of the year. The farm-gate price of potatoesdoubled in the s paceof twelve months; the price of cereals wentup by more than 15% and the price of bothfruit and vegetables rose by just under 30%.The price of animal productsat the producerlevel was5% up on the year.
The increase in construction prices intensified
again in the third quarter. The year-on-yearincrease widened from 1.9% in the secondquarter to 3.1%. Such a sharp rise in priceshasnot been recorded s ince 1993. Thisup-ward trend isapparent in all areasof con-struction and in almost all individual construc-tion services. This was particularly marked inthe case of road construction where the year-on-year rate of increase stood at 5%. The in-crease in the cost of intermediate goodsowing to the ris e in oil pricesaswell asthegeneral upturn in construction activity arelikely to have contributed to this. Construc-tion pricesof res idential buildingswere 2.7%up on the year in the third quarter of 2006.Here, too, there was a sharp rise in prices forvirtually all individual construction services,which, given the moderate wage develop-ments in the construction sector, cannot beattributed solely to rising costs.The recent lower oil prices also shaped con-
sumer price developments in the third quar-ter. Thus, fuel became cheaper, while therewas a sharp slowing of the rise in the price ofheating oil. But excluding energy, the con-sumer price index in the third quarter, at0.5%, increased more sharply than in thesecond quarter (+0.3%). Food products, inparticular, recorded further price increases asa result of the sharp rise in agricultural produ-cer prices. Consumers had to pay an averageof almost 13% more for vegetables (includingpotatoes) than during the same period lastyear. The corresponding figure for fruit wasover 4%. The price of meat and fish rose by2%. The cost of services also went up some-what faster of late. Price developments forgoods(excluding energy), on the other hand,were somewhat more favourable. Increasesin housing rents, at just over 1%, remainedmoderate on average. On the whole, con-sumer prices were 1.6% up on the year in thethird quarter. The corresponding figure in thesecond quarter was 2.0%.
Seasonally adjusted price pressure intensified
again somewhat in October, even thoughfuel and heating oil pricesdeclined and foodproductsbecame s omewhat cheaper again.This was due to two main reasons. First, therewasa price increas e for tobacco productsahead of the forthcoming rise in VAT, whichcontributed around 0.1 percentage point tothe overall rate. Second, package holidayswere unusually expensive in October and thepricesof indus trial products(excluding energyand tobacco) rose sharply. Anticipatory ef-fects of the rise in VAT may also have playeda role in this. The year-on-year increase in
Weather-
induced
increase of
agricultural
producer prices
Cost and
demand-
induced price
rises in
constructionSlower rise
in consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
49both the national consumer price index and
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices(HICP) widened from 1.0% to 1.1%.
Orders received and outlook
The level of industrial orders received main-
tained a markedly positive trend in the thirdquarter. For the period from July to Septem-ber, ordersreceived were 3
3FJqE4%u po nt h e
second quarter after adjustment for seasonaland calendar effects. This was considerablymore than in the second quarter when ordersrose by 2
3FJqE4%. The year-on-year increase re-
mained virtually unchanged at 101FJqE2%. This
wasprimarily attributable to a number oflarge orders in the shipbuilding industry. Evenexcluding the manufacture of other transportequipment, orders received still showed asharp rise in demand of 2
1FJqE4%.
The growth stimuli came in equal measures
from both domestic and foreign demand,with foreign demand being generated exclu-sively by non-euro-area countries. By con-trast, there was a decline in orders receivedfrom euro-area countries. Producers of capitalgoods, who had booked few new orders inthe second quarter, made a very notable con-tribution to the increase in demand in thethird quarter. The computersand electricalequipment sectors were the principal benefi-ciaries of this. Demand for machinery also re-mained very buoyant. Growth in intermediategoods, on the other hand, was more sub-dued. Manufacturersof cons umer goodsre-corded marked growth in export businessonly, whereasdomes tic demand wasweak.Volume, 2000 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeJuly-
Aug
2000 01 02 03 04 05 2006Total construction orders
July-AugDomesticLog scale
ForeignLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Total industrial ordersDemand for industrial goods
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−10+105
90100
8595
8090
75
70
65110
105
100
95
90110125
105120
100115
95110
9013013514015+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−125
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
- Dynamic
demand for
industrial goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
50Construction orders in the two-month period
of July and August – official data beyond thisperiod are not available – were 1% up on thesecond quarter. Growth was therefore dis-tinctly weaker than in the second quarter,when demand had been heavily influencedby catch-up effectsfollowing the wintermonths. In this respect, the recent develop-ments in the construction industry are fullyconsistent with the picture of an ongoinggradual upswing in this sector. This is borneout, firstly, by the favourable level of invest-ment, which isbeing increas ingly influencedby capacity extensions and the associatedcommercial construction orders. Secondly, ex-ceptional factors, such as the abolition of thegrant to homebuyersat the end of las t year,which led to an increase in housing construc-tion orders, are also likely to have played arole. Much the same applies, to a certain ex-tent, to the increase in VAT, which may havetriggered private individuals, in particular, tobring their construction orders forward. Thisappearsto have had an even greater impacton the order situation in the finishing trades.
Business prospects in the services sector were
assessed less favourably in the third quarterthan in the second quarter. According to theIfo Institute’s survey, commercial service pro-viders, in particular, did not rate their outlookin the third quarter quite asoptimis tically asbefore. Business prospects in the trade sectorin the coming monthsare likely to be influ-enced by the effectsof the ris e in VAT. Thiscould especially be the case for motor ve-hicles and other consumer durables. So far,however, advanced purchases have been ra-ther limited in this area. Nevertheless, con-sumers’ general propensity to purchase has
increased again and income prospects havealso improved. The extent to which all ofthese factors actually stimulate demand islikely to depend to some extent on the dur-ability of the recent oil price cuts, which haveboosted the scope for expenditure in otherareas. This would also act as a counterbal-ance to the hampering effect of the increasein VAT. In particular, the improved situation inthe labour market can provide a solid basisfor a gradual revival of consumer demand.
In view of the fact that industrial activity is
still buoyant and many commercial serviceprovidersare enjoying a more s table outlook,the underlying cyclical trend in Germany islikely to remain on an upward course. Owingto its improved competitiveness, the Germaneconomy will continue to benefit substantiallyfrom global economic growth. Furthermore,as a result of the increased investment in cap-acity extensions in the machinery and equip-ment sector and in construction, domesticdemand has now become a second mainstayof overall economic activity. Thisisparticularlytrue now that the decline in the constructionsector that has persisted over a decade ap-pearsto have come to an end and a dis cern-ible improvement hasemerged in the em-ployment situation. However, there is still nosign of a broadly based upswing in consump-tion. Given the favourable employmenttrend, there is cause to hope that – despitethe increase in VAT that will come into effectin January 2007 – the conditionsare nowlargely in place for a widespread recovery pro-cess.
Further pick-up
in demand for
construction
work
Service
providers and
retail trade
more subduedEconomic
outlook positive
overall

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
51Publicfinanc esGeneral government budget
Public finances are currently developing much
more favourably than had been anticipated inthe original budget draft. This is largely dueto the economic recovery, which is provingstronger than expected, and to the surprisegrowth in revenue from profit-related taxes,which are generally extremely volatile. Thegeneral government deficit amounted to3.2% of GDP in 2005 but will fall well shortof the 3% ceiling in 2006 thanks to the posi-tive influences cited above. The current gen-erally moderate expenditure patterns havealso contributed to this decline. The debtratio may remain at more or less the samelevel as in the previous year (67.9%). It isbeing curtailed by, among other things, therelatively sharp growth in nominal GDP,which may reach the highest level seen in thepast decade.
A noticeable change in the general govern-
ment revenue ratio is not likely to be ob-served this year. The tax ratio will grow sig-nificantly, particularly as a result of the ex-tremely dynamic development of profit-related taxes. However, social contributionswill increase only slightly due to the moderategrowth in gross wages and salaries,
1and
non-tax revenue will actually decrease. Thisyear there will be a further marked fall in theexpenditure ratio. In addition to an easing inlabour market spending resulting predomin-antly from positive macroeconomic develop-
1Excluding the one-off receipts in connection with bring-
ing forward the transfer deadline which cannot be post-
ed as additional revenue in the national accounts as a re-
sult of the accruals principle of accounting.Deficit ratio
below 3% limit
for 2006
Generally
constant
revenue ratio
and decreasing
expenditure
ratio

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
52ments,2other key factors curbing the ratio in-
clude the weak rise in spending on old-ageprovision, the further decrease in personnelexpenditure, but also the relatively stronggrowth in nominal GDP.
The general government deficit is also expect-
ed to drop significantly in 2007. This is partlythe result of the Federal Government’s fiscalpackage which, when taken as a whole, willimprove the financial situation by increasingtaxes and social security contributions. Fur-thermore, the development in spending hasso far been restrained, particularly in theareas of personnel, old-age provision and la-bour market. Macroeconomic wage develop-ments, which are expected to remain relative-ly moderate, have slowed the growth in bothgovernment revenue as well as expenditure,causing the corresponding ratios to decreasebecause of the sharper increase in GDP. In2007, this will be intensified by the effect ofraising consumption taxes on nominal GDP.On the revenue side, these ratio-decreasinginfluences are offset by rises in taxes and so-cial security contributions meaning that therevenue ratio could remain largely stable onbalance. By contrast, the expenditure ratiowill fall perceptibly.
3
Undershooting the 3% ceiling in 2006 is apositive development. However, the successof completing this first step of the journeymust not detract from the need to continuereducing the deficit. Indeed, the debt ratiohas merely stabilised at a very high level. Thismeans that the significant level of structuralconsolidation of approximately 1% of GDPthat central government reported to the EUfor 2007 is appropriate. This is true not only
in light of European obligations but also giventhe requirements under national budgetarylaw. The current positive economic climateshould be used to reduce structural deficits asquickly as possible. There is a common con-sensus that consolidation should be greaterduring good times. It would therefore be lo-gical to intensify retrenchment efforts and tonot repeat the mistake that has often beenmade in the past of using unexpected add-itional revenue for other purposes. It is im-portant to resist the wide range of specialinterests. The experience in 2001 proved justhow rapidly favourable economic conditionscoupled with a boom in volatile profit-relatedtaxes can turn and instead lead to extensivedeficits, a racing debt ratio and a violation ofbudgetary ceilings if no sound underlyingposition has been achieved. Thus, central andthe individual state governments should alsoaim to balance their budgets as soon as pos-sible.
As regards the consolidation strategy, it
would have been preferable to restrict ex-penditure further and to curtail tax privilegesto a greater degree rather than to raise taxand contribution rates in connection with themeasures to promote the economy in theshort term. Stabilising the revenue ratio,which is structurally declining due to shiftsaway from highly “revenue-yielding” GDPcomponents, by raising tax and contribution
2See Deutsche Bundesbank, The evolution of labour
market-related expenditure, Monthly Report, September
2006, pp 59-83.
3For a detailed explanation of the developments in the
government revenue and expenditure ratio up to 2007,
see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, August
2006, pp 52-53.Further clear
decline in
deficit ratio
in 2007
Increased
consolidation
in good timesIncreases
in tax and
contribution
rates
problematical

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
53rates poses problems. Although the revenue
ratio may thus remain the same, this still en-tails additional distortions that may not bebeneficial to the underlying economic condi-tions.
Budgetary development of central, state
and local government
4
Tax revenue
The third quarter saw a further sharp increase
of 81GC7I2%(381GC7I2billion) in tax revenue5on the
year (for more information, see the table onpage 54). Revenue from profit-related taxesin particular went up significantly ( 35 billion)
as did revenue from wage and turnover tax(together 33 billion). This clearly reflects the
more favourable macroeconomic develop-ment. Another factor behind the increase inassessed taxes was that net payments for pre-vious years were relatively small mainly due tolower employee refunds. Although revenuefrom energy tax
6also grew noticeably (almost
3%), after adjustment for a payment thatwas brought forward from the fourth to thethird quarter, this revenue in fact decreased.Revenue from tobacco tax fell by 6
1GC7I2% des-
pite the tax rise in September 2005. However,the figure for the previous year climbedowing to anticipatory effects.
According to the new official tax estimate,
tax revenue (including receipts from localgovernment taxes) is expected to rise by justover 7% for the whole of 2006. The tax ratioas defined in the government’s financial stat-istics would therefore rise from 20.2% to21.0%. Although the positive effects of pro-
gression and changes in legislation play theirpart, the increase in the ratio reflects aboveall the strong growth in profit-related taxes.Tax receipts as a whole are expected to bemuch higher ( 319
1GC7I2billion) than was last esti-
mated in May. On the one hand, the macro-seconomic reference variables grew moresharply than had been anticipated in theYear-on-year change
%Tax revenue *
*Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes, which are not yet
known for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−
2004 2005 2006
4The following report is based on the budgetary defin-
ition (as defined in the government’s financial statistics).
5Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the last quarter recorded.
6Under the Act revising the taxation of energy products
and amending the Electricity Tax Act ( Stromsteuergesetz )
of 12 July 2006, the Mineral Oil Tax Act ( MineralRCLK6lsteuer-
gesetz ) was replaced by the Energy Tax Act ( Energie-
steuergesetz ). The previous term “mineral oil tax” has
been replaced by “energy tax”.Marked
increase in tax
revenue in third
quarter
Tax estimate for
2006 revised
substantially
upwards

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
54second quarter.7In addition, to date the
growth of cash receipts has been significantlystronger than had been expected givenmacroeconomic developments and changesin legislation. This holds particularly true forprofit-related taxes for which the estimatewas revised upwards by 313 billion. Revenue
forecasts for wage tax ( 32 billion) and turn-
over tax ( 34 billion) were also increased con-
siderably. Around the turn of the millennium,revenue from turnover tax grew at a muchweaker rate than its assessment base (prob-ably partly due to turnover tax evasion be-coming more prevalent), however, the tidehas now turned.
Tax revenue is expected to go up by 6% in
2007. The additional rise in the tax ratio to21.7% is attributable to the effect of changesin legislation, especially the increase in VAT.
Compared with the May estimate, at 318
1GC7I2
billion (adjusted to account for recent amend-
ments in tax legislation) similarly high add-itional revenue is expected in 2007 as in2006. On the one hand, the revised forecastsof assessment bases for wage and turnovertax leads to greater upward adjustments. Onthe other hand, it is assumed that there willbe a decline in momentum for profit-relatedtaxes. Revenue from profit-related taxes isgenerally only loosely connected to the devel-opment of corporate and investment income,which is used as a macroeconomic referencevariable – in the absence of better informa-Overall tax revenue and major individual taxes
Q1–Q3 Q3Estimate
for2006
3
2005 2006 2005 2006
Year-on-year
changeYear-on-year
change
Type of tax 5billion in 5bnas a per-
centage 5billion in 5bnas a per-
centageYear-on-
yearpercent-agechange
Overall tax revenue
1 294.4 317.3 + 22.9 + 7.8 101.8 110.3 + 8.5 + 8.3 + 6.6
ofwhich
Wage tax 85.1 87.1 + 2.0 + 2.4 28.2 29.2 + 1.1 + 3.8 + 2.6Assessed income tax 3.7 10.0 + 6.3 . 4.2 6.3 + 2.1 + 51.0 + 75.6Investmentincome tax
2 14.3 15.8 + 1.6 + 11.0 2.8 3.4 + 0.5 + 19.4 + 9.8
Corporation tax 10.9 16.4 + 5.5 + 50.4 3.8 6.1 + 2.3 + 60.1 + 41.7Turnover tax 103.2 108.2 + 5.0 + 4.8 35.3 37.1 + 1.8 + 5.0 + 4.6Energy tax 24.1 24.3 + 0.2 + 0.6 9.8 10.0 + 0.3 + 2.8 – 1.0Tobacco tax 10.1 10.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 4.0 3.7 – 0.3 – 6.4 – 0.5
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are notyet known for the last quarter recorded. — 2Non-assessed taxes on earnings and withholding tax on
interest income. — 3According to official tax estimate
of November 2006, excluding local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank
7Central Government projects overall nominal GDP
growth of 2.9% for 2006 (May estimate: 2.0%) and
2.6% for 2007 (May estimate: 2.3%). Real GDP growth
is now forecast at 2.3% (1.6%) and 1.4% (1.0%), re-
spectively.Stronger
increase in
revenue
expected for
2007, too

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
55Deutsche BundesbankThe development of proﬁ  t-related taxes
Revenue from proﬁ  t-related taxes is subject to 
sharp ﬂ  uctuations. Even adjusted for the effects 
of legislative changes, it is far more volatile than entrepreneurial and investment income calcu-lated as a residual in the national accounts, which is usually taken as the macroeconomic reference variable (see chart below).
1 First, systemic devia-
tions between entrepreneurial and investment 
income and the actual tax assessment base exist, 
for instance because provisions are taken into 
account when determining the tax base. This may 
have contributed to the fact that in 2001 and 2002 
the development of tax receipts after adjustment 
for legislative changes was far weaker than that of 
entrepreneurial and investment income.2 Sharper 
ﬂ uctuations in revenue from assessed taxes also 
occur because in any one year advance tax pay-
ments are determined on the basis of estimated proﬁ ts, with any deviations from the actual tax liability only being settled in the following years. 
In particular when the advance payments are determined by past proﬁ  t trends, a situation may 
arise in which large advance payments are accom-panied by large back payments, for example, during periods of stronger growth in proﬁ  ts. This 
effect may be partly responsible for the current 
sharp growth. Finally, the extent and the duration 
of the effects of legislative changes are also difﬁ  -
cult to estimate because of the above-mentioned 
uncertainties regarding the assessment base and 
the date on which they are reﬂ  ected in the cash 
positions. Thus, for example, the additional tax 
receipts arising from the restriction of the facility 
to offset losses, which came into force in 2004, 
may have been underestimated. The problems 
mentioned impede not only the interpretation 
of past revenue trends but also the revenue forecast.
1 The revenue ﬂ  uctuations are recorded as cyclically-induced 
under the standard cyclical adjustment procedure only if they can be explained by the cyclical developments of the relevant underlying macroeconomic assessment base. Thus, other sharp temporary ﬂ  uctuations affect the cyclic-
ally-adjusted deﬁ  cit recorded under this procedure. See 
Deutsche Bundesbank, The development of public ﬁ  nances 
in Germany following qualiﬁ  cation for European monetary union, Monthly Report, April 2003, p 15. — 2 In addition, 
various special factors in connection with the business tax reform, which came into force in 2001, also played a role, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Recent tax revenue trends, Monthly Report, December 2002 pp 15-36. — 3 As deﬁ  ned in the 
na tional accounts. Employee refunds deducted from assessed 
income tax revenue. Adjusted for the impact of changes in tax legislation in accordance with government estimates.€b n
Withholding tax on
interest incomeNon-assessed
taxes on earningsCorporation taxLocal business taxAssessed
income taxTotal
revenue
of which:
October to
December
(estimated)
January to
September
1997 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 2006Proft-related taxes3
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
56tion – and, moreover, this revenue is much
more volatile. The margins of uncertainty aretherefore especially large here (see also thecomments on page 55) meaning that a cau-tious budget estimate is appropriate.
Central government budgetIn the third quarter, central government re-
corded a deficit of 39 billion, which was
twice as high as in the same period last year.The main reason for this was the 6% de-crease in revenue (- 34 billion). Although tax
revenue increased by 7% (just over 33
1GC7I2bil-
lion), the decline in earnings on the capitalaccount was greater (- 36
1GC7I2billion). However,
at35 billion, loan repayments and the sale of
participating interests continued to make asignificant contribution to budget financing.In addition, the compensatory amount paidby the Federal Employment Agency and themotorway tolls for heavy goods vehicles –which were posted in a highly erratic way lastyear – were both 3
1GC7I2billion lower. By con-
trast, expenditure rose by 1% (just over 31GC7I2
billion). In the case of interest, in particular,
the discounts on the issuance of debt secur-ities led to an increase of 7% ( 31 billion). Ex-
penditure in connection with the Hartz IV re-form also went up by 5% ( 3
1GC7I2billion). Al-
though payments in connection with un-employment benefit II have recently beensomewhat lower, integration benefits ex-panded noticeably. There was, however, a fallin grants to the pension insurance scheme. In2005, these payments were brought forwardto cover a liquidity shortfall.By the end of September, central government
had recorded a deficit of 329 billion. The
2006 Federal budget plan, which was not ap-proved by the Bundestag until June, envis-ages 338
1GC7I2billion for the entire year. In recent
years, surpluses were regularly recorded inthe final quarter. Revenue from asset realisa-tions and repayments of liquidity assistancegranted to the Federal Employment Agencyduring the year both played a role in this. Bycontrast, the deficit may increase somewhatbefore the end of this year as no such repay-ments are expected and indications havebeen made that only a minimal amount ofrevenue is to be achieved from the sale ofparticipating interests. The budget outturnshould still, however, be better than expectedand fall below the previous year’s figure of331
1GC7I2billion.
Following an adjustment meeting of the
Budget Committee, the Federal budget def-icit is to be reduced to just under 320 billion
in 2007. With investment expenditure of 324
billion, the constitutional ceiling for new bor-rowing pursuant to Article 115 of the BasicLaw of the Federal Republic of Germany(Grundgesetz ) should be observed. However,
in addition to extensive tax increases, this isalso to be achieved by shifting burdens toother government budgets – in particular, thecut in contributions to the pension insurancescheme for recipients of unemploymentbenefit II. In the latest tax estimate, tax rev-enue is estimated at 36 billion higher than in
this summer’s draft budget. In addition to thereduction of 32
1GC7I2billion in deficit, almost
321GC7I2billion has been earmarked for central
government’s contribution – agreed withHigher deficit in
third quarter
owing to lower
earnings on
capital accountBudget
development
more
favourable than
planned
In 2007, only
formal
compliance
with borrowing
limit is planned

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
57state government – to accommodation costs
for the recipients of unemployment benefit II.This figure is much higher than the amountenvisaged in the summer budget draft. Justover 31 billion is needed to offset the com-
pensatory amount paid by the Federal Em-ployment Agency which is now lower thaninitially estimated. The Federal grant to statu-tory health insurance institutions has alsobeen increased by 31 billion compared to the
original budget draft to limit the increase incontribution rates. However, seeing as coun-terfinancing for this is planned in the budget,this measure should, on balance, not place aburden on central government. All in all, lessthan half of the additional tax revenue is tobe used to achieve the necessary reduction inthe Federal deficit. Although, according tothe traditional interpretation, borrowing willfall below the limit defined in Article 115 ofthe Basic Law, relief of approximately 316 bil-
lion is planned through asset realisation, in-cluding the securitisation of Post Office pen-sion fund claims (see the comments on theERP special fund on page 58). In keeping withthe intention behind an investment-orientedloan ceiling (golden rule), this revenue at leastshould be deducted from investment expend-iture in the same way as depreciations. If theloan ceiling is adjusted in this way, a balancedbudget is necessary. The structural overbur-dening of the budget is ongoing meaningthat steps to consolidate are urgently needed.
State government budgets
8
In the third quarter, the state government
budgets recorded a deficit of 32 billion com-
pared with 361GC7I2billion in the third quarter of2005. The substantial growth in revenue
(+381GC7I2%) is attributable to the continued fa-
vourable development of tax revenue. At
1GC7I2%, the increase in expenditure was much
more moderate. Personnel expenditure was1% less than in the same quarter of 2005owing to outsourcing, in particular of a largenumber of universities in North Rhine-Westphalia. However, other expenditure roseby 2% on the year as a result of this changein the method of funding universities. Thebudgets envisage a deficit of 323 billion for
the year as a whole (actual deficit in 2005:324 billion). According to the results of the
latest tax estimate, which increased stategovernment’s revenue expectations by 37
1GC7I2€b n
€b n Cumulative
200420052006
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
200420052006Central government
balance of revenue and
expenditure since 2004
Deutsche Bundesbank20−
25−
30−
35−
40−
45−
50−10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
30−
8The most recently published data on local government
finances is analysed in the short articles in the Bundes-
bank Monthly Report of October 2006.Sharp decrease
in state
government
deficits in Q3
and ...
... clear
undershooting
of budget over
entire year

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
58Capital revenue from the ERP Special Fund in the central government budget
The origins of the ERP Special Fund ( ERP
Sonderverm/C246gen ) lie in the USA’s Euro-
pean reconstruction programme afterthe Second World War (Marshall Plan),under which Germany received goodsworth approximately US$1
17C–.2billion. Reci-
pients paid the invoices in DeutscheMark to counterpart accounts held at theDeutsche Bundesbank. It was agreed in atreaty with the United States of Americato deposit these financial resources in aspecial fund in order to use them togrant revolving loans to boost the econ-omy. As a result of the debt reliefgranted in connection with this, Ger-many had to repay only US$1 billion, anobligation that it fulfilled during the1960s. Nevertheless, under the treaty,Germany has to obtain the approval ofthe United States of America before itmakes any fundamental changes to theSpecial Fund.
At the end of 2005, the ERP Special Fund
reported provisions of 51 billion, liabil-
ities of 515 billion and assets of almost
529 billion. During final discussions
about the 2007 Federal budget, theFederal Government evidently reachedan agreement to restructure the ERPSpecial Fund. As well as transferring thecapital base to the Reconstruction LoanCorporation ( Kreditanstalt f/C252r Wieder-
aufbau), among other things equity
in the amount of 52 billion is to be
transferred to the central governmentbudget. Compensatory measures are tobe taken to prevent this resulting in arestriction of lending capacity. In addi-
tion, it is understood that central govern-ment is intending to take on receivablesand liabilities of 514
17C–.2billion.
Leaving aside any efficiency gains which
may arise as a result of reorganising theERP Special Fund, the plan should beviewed with a critical eye given thebudgetary rules which restrict borrow-ing. This procedure is a prime example ofhow to circumvent existing budgetaryrules.
1The assumption of liabilities
means that the level of central govern-ment debt rises without this being re-corded as borrowing under budgetarylaw. However, the respective claims takenover are to be used specifically to financethe budget – probably in the form ofasset disposals. This then bypasses thefundamental intention behind Article115 of the BasicLaw, ie to restric t debt.In view of the moderate gap betweeninvestment and net new borrowing, thisultimately means that it will be possibleto finance current expenditure by debtassumption.
2
The Federal Government is rightly com-mitted to a comprehensive consolidationof the government budget. A timely re-form to give renewed vigour to the rulesrestricting central government indebted-ness could be a key component of theconsolidation strategy. This also appliesto state government whose budgetaryregulations have also proven to be unsa-tisfactory.
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, Deficit-limiting budgetary
rules and a national stability pact in Germany, MonthlyReport, April 2005, pp 27–30. — 2By contrast, these trans-actions do not have a direct effect on the Maastricht deficit
because the realisation of financial assets is not recorded asrevenue.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
59billion, the financial position is expected to be
much more favourable. In the first three quar-ters of 2006, the deficit declined by 39 billion
on the year. In addition, the absence of one-off burdens from the recapitalisation of enter-prises in the final quarter of 2005 shouldmean that the year-on-year improvement iseven better still.
Before the results of the tax estimate were
known, the state government budget plansenvisaged that, compared with the target val-ues for 2006, deficits would decline by ap-proximately 34 billion to 319 billion. Even as-
suming the lowest results for 2006, the def-icit should fall by this amount at the veryleast. Therefore, the target of reducing thedeficit to below 310 billion is certainly realis-
tic. Nevertheless, a number of state govern-ments still have difficulties observing theirconstitutional borrowing limits. These limitshave been overshot in Bremen, Saarland andSchleswig-Holstein. Some eastern Germanstates, and Berlin in particular, may again failto prove that they have used the special sup-plementary Federal grants for the reconstruc-tion of eastern Germany for entirely appropri-ate purposes. Overall, there is still a clearneed for budget consolidation as the object-ive of a balanced budget is anchored both innational and EU law. To avoid additional taxincreases, it is essential to consistently limitexpenditure.
This is particularly true for state governments
with a high budget deficit, such as Berlin. TheFederal Constitutional Court rejected Berlin’sapplication for a judicial review of constitu-tional law aimed at obtaining restructuringaid. The judges stressed that all other possible
consolidation measures must be tried beforeturning to this type of aid. Due to the highlevel of spending in Berlin compared to otherstate governments and to its potential for in-creasing revenue, it was found not to havefulfilled this requirement. This ruling signifi-cantly increases each state’s responsibility forits own budget and lowers the problematicincentive associated with the federal principleof relying on the help of other public author-ities rather than taking unpopular consolida-tion measures. In addition, a national proced-ure to monitor budgets would be necessaryto recognise a potential budgetary crisis asearly as possible and to initiate appropriatecountermeasures. This could be implementedas part of the planned second phase of re-forming the federal structure. The Europeanbudgetary surveillance procedure with its har-monised reporting and analysis of budgetarydevelopments and budget planning couldserve as a rough example. The Financial Plan-ning Council could then assume a particularlyimportant role with regard to evaluations anddirectives.
9
Social security funds
Statutory pension insurance schemeIn the third quarter, the statutory pension in-
surance scheme recorded a deficit for the firsttime this year ( 3
1GC7I2billion). This was only mar-
ginally lower than the deficit recorded in thesame period last year although in 2005 the
9See Deutsche Bundesbank, State government finances
in Germany, Monthly Report, July 2006, p 47.Further
consolidation
efforts required
Berlin ruling
increases
individual
responsibility
and ...... could be
supplemented
with fiscal
monitoring
system
Deficit in third
quarter reveals
persisting
severe
structural
problems

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
60deficit had been improved by bringing for-
ward a Federal grant of 31 billion due to li-
quidity problems. In 2006, bringing forwardthe transfer deadline for contributions hadled to an unusually high level of revenue upto July, however, the situation returned tonormal in the following two months. The pre-carious financial situation within the statutorypension insurance scheme once again be-came evident despite the positive effects offavourable development of employment sub-ject to social security contributions. After ad-justment for the phase shifts
10brought about
by the earlier transfer of contributions, rev-enue from contributions nevertheless in-creased by 2
1GC7I2% for August and September
together. At 31GC7I2%, compulsory contributions
grew at a much faster pace. By contrast, in-flows for recipients of wage substitutes fell.The overall growth in revenue was only just
over
1GC7I2% because the figure from the previ-
ous year had been pushed up by the earliertransfer of Federal funds. The increase in ex-penditure was only slight. Pensions were notput up mid year and the number of pensionsrose only slightly.
In the first nine months of the year, the sur-
plus of the pension insurance schemeamounted to almost 34
1GC7I2billion. If there had
been no special effect on the contributionside, however, there would have been a def-icit of around 36 billion. A surplus is expected
for the final quarter as a result of seasonalfactors. Due to the fact that at the end of theyear the reserves will clearly exceed the statu-tory minimum of 0.2 month’s expenditure,the contribution rate for 2007 could havebeen set at a lower level than 19.9%. How-ever, this would have meant that the reserveswhich were built up as a one-off this yearwould then be used up straight away andthat the contribution rate would have to beraised even further for 2008.
The Act increasing the retirement age for the
pension insurance scheme ( RV-Altersgrenzen-
anpassungsgesetz ) is to raise the statutory re-
tirement age from 65 to 67 by the end of2029. This takes account of increasing life ex-pectancy and the associated continued ex-pansion of the benefits granted under thepension insurance scheme and sends outclear signals to employees and employersQuarterly
€b n
€b nLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
ExpenditureRevenueFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−64
62
60
58
56
54
2004 2005 2006
10The August contributions for 2006 refer to the wages
and salaries subject to compulsory contributions that
were paid in August. In the previous year the contribu-
tions related to August pay were, for the most part, not
transferred until September.Larger increase
in 2007
smoothes
development of
contribution
rate
Rise in statutory
retirement age
with more
concessions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
61that working lives need to be longer. How-
ever, favourable treatment of people whohave paid contributions for 45 years
11has
cancelled out a considerable portion of thedesired curbing of contribution rates. Thisregulation means that if the total amount ofcontributions paid and retirement age of in-sured persons are the same, one will receive ahigher pension simply because the contribu-tions were paid over a longer period of time.To ensure that the pension insurance schemeremains sound in spite of ever increasing lifeexpectancy, it would be advantageous toforgo exemptions and to automatically linkretirement age to life expectancy.
In previous years, a safeguard clause prevent-
ed pensions from being cut. Therefore, thereduction in the relative pension level thatwas passed by the government and con-sidered necessary to stabilise the contributionrate did not take place. This also presents aproblematic nominal rigidity. A modified safe-guard clause is to halve pension increasesfrom 2011 until the cuts which the govern-ment refrained from making have been madein full. By not rectifying the situation withsharper and more rapid measures, there is,however, a greater risk that in future eco-nomically weak phases, the statutorily fixedupper limit of 20% for the contribution ratewill be overstepped before 2020.
Federal Employment AgencyThe Federal Employment Agency’s surplus
reached just over 32
1GC7I2billion in the third
quarter compared to less than 31GC7I2billion in
the same period in the previous year. The keyfactor in this improvement is the economic
recovery which results in lower spending butalso higher revenue. Contribution receiptswere almost 3% up on the year. Bringing for-ward the transfer deadlines played its part inthis up to July. The underlying trend probablyreached just over 1
1GC7I2%. However, overall rev-
enue decreased by1GC7I2% as insolvency contri-
butions and reimbursements of administra-tive costs were lower, although these wereoffset by declining corresponding items onthe expenditure side. Spending on unemploy-ment benefit I fell by 19%. A major factorhere was the decrease of 9% in the numberof unemployed persons. Although the declinein the number of people receiving unemploy-ment benefits was probably less significant inabsolute terms, as a percentage it is likely tohave fallen much more sharply. This was alsothe case in the second quarter. The decliningratio of recipients
12is not – as suggested by
the year-on-year decrease of 31GC7I2billion in the
compensatory amount – necessarily attribut-able to the switch from unemployment bene-fit I to unemployment benefit II but rather tothe cyclically-induced decline in the numberof short-term unemployed. Spending on ac-tive labour market policy was 13
1GC7I2% lower.
However, no further savings were recordedcompared with the previous quarter.
In the first nine months of the year, the sur-
plus of the Federal Employment Agencyamounted to 36
1GC7I2billion. This is an improve-
11Periods spent caring for relatives and raising children
are also counted alongside years in paid employment
with compulsory contributions.
12Approximately 30% of persons registered as un-
employed received unemployment benefit I in the third
quarter.Outstanding
pension cuts to
be implement-
ed
Surplus again in
third quarterSurplus over
and above the
amount
expected for
2006 as a
whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
62ment of 391GC7I2billion on the year. Approxi-
mately 331GC7I2billion is likely to be attributable
to bringing forward the transfer date for so-cial security contributions. The large remain-ing amount is predominantly due to the eco-nomic recovery but also to the toning downof the active labour market policy. Over thecourse of the year, the surplus could exceed310 billion. With this as a starting point and
with the new central government grant fi-nanced by VAT as well as further decreases in
spending, the agency will also be able tocope with the large drop in contribution ratesfrom 6.5% to 4.2% over the next – good –year. However, it should be carefully exam-ined whether this contribution rate is com-patible with a balanced budgetary positionfor the Federal Employment Agency in themedium-term in order to prevent a procyclicalincrease of contribution rates or the renewedneed for larger Federal resources during fu-ture downturns assuming the level of benefitsremains the same. Further expansion of therange of benefits granted by the Federal Em-ployment Agency – such as extending theperiod for receiving unemployment benefit Ifor older claimants – would most likely stepup the pressure on contribution rates and istherefore not a suitable method for promot-ing employment.
13
Statutory health insurance scheme
The financial situation of the statutory health
insurance scheme was mainly balanced untilthe middle of the year. In the second half ofthe year, a surplus is expected particularlyowing to the typically high contributions re-ceipts at the end of the year.
14Federal re-
sources are to be reduced by 311GC7I2billion to
321GC7I2billion in 2007. Moreover, spending by
health insurance institutions will be higherowing to the rise in VAT. These measures willmean a burden of 32
1GC7I2billion for the statu-Quarterly
€b n
€b n€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefit and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding central government liquidity
assistance. — 2Sharp decline in 2005
caused by shifting responsibility for train-
ing for recipients of unemployment
benefit II to central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−8.8
8.0
7.2
6.4
5.6
4.8
4.0
3.2
2.4
2.016.0
14.0
12.0
10.0
2004 2005 2006
13See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The evolution of la-
bour market-related expenditure, Monthly Report, Sep-
tember 2006, p 76.
14The latest financial development of the statutory
health and long-term care insurance schemes is analysed
in greater detail in the short articles of the Monthly Re-
port of September 2006.Relatively
favourable
financial
situation in
2006

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
63Planned changes to healthcare regulation
In the draft Act to promote competition among statutory
health insurance institutions ( GKV Wettbewerbsst/C228rkungs-
gesetz) the Federal Government has set out the details of
its plans to amend health insurance law. The key elementsinclude:
Introductionofahealthfundfrom1January2009
– The health fund is to be financed from income-based
employee and employer contributions and tax resourceswhereby the employee’s special contribution is to re-main at 0.9% of his/her income subject to compulsoryinsurance contributions. Health insurance institutionsare to receive risk-adjusted insurance premiums. Thefunction of redistributing income between insured per-sons would shift from the health insurance institutionsto the health fund.
– The contribution rate to the health insurance fund in
2009 is to be set in such a way that the revenue – to-gether with the tax grant – is sufficient to finance totalspending by the health insurance institutions. In thelong-term, resources from the health fund are to coveron average at least 95% of expenditure by the health in-surance institutions. The contribution rate will then beadjusted by Federal Government regulation.
–A g r a n t o f 51.5 billion from the 2008 Federal budget has
been earmarked. This amount is to increase to 53 billion
in 2009 and thereafter will increase at a rate that has yetto be defined. One of the main purposes of the grant isto finance the non-contributory co-insurance of childrenin the statutory scheme out of general taxation.
– If the resources from the fund are insufficient for indivi-
dual health insurance institutions to cover their expendi-ture then they may demand an additional contributionof no more than 1% of income subject to compulsory in-surance contributions from their members. Means testingcan be avoided only if the contribution is less than 58p e r
month. Any excess payments can be refunded to mem-bers.
Private health insurance institutions obliged to offer a
basetarifffrom1January2008
– A base tariff should offer services similar to those under
the statutory health insurance scheme at no more thanthe average maximum statutory contribution (currentlyjust over 5500 per month). This rate should be offered to
all persons who are currently, or who were previously,privately insured. Persons who are voluntarily insuredunder the statutory scheme are to be granted a one-offright to join the private insurance scheme.
– If the person insured is not able to pay the base tariff
premium, then this premium is to be halved. To ensurethat private health insurance institutions do not adopt a
risk selection policy, they shall be obliged to set up afinancial equalisation scheme.
– Ageing reserves which, in mathematical terms, are
attributable to the base tariff are to be passed on if theperson insured changes his/her insurance scheme. Thisapplies to all persons privately insured.
– In the future, a change from statutory to private health
insurance will be possible only if the individual’s incomeis above the threshold for opting out of the statutoryhealth insurance scheme (currently 547,250 per year) for
three consecutive years. Currently, it is possible tochange after only one year.
Other key regulations, some of which are due to come
intoforceon1April2007
– Extension of the benefits granted by statutory health in-
surance: treatments at health spas for older insured per-sons and for parents together with their children as wellas recommended vaccinations are to become a manda-tory service rather than an optional one.
– Resident doctors are to be remunerated according to
fixed rather than variable service charges. In the future,contractual agreements will replace strict budgetinglinked to the development of income subject to compul-sory contributions. If the agreed volume of services isexceeded, then a retrogressive graduation of prices willcome into effect.
– If individuals do not have regular medical check-ups, in
the event that they become chronically ill their maxi-mum own contribution rises from 1% to 2% of theirhousehold income.
– Spending on pharmaceuticals is to be limited by price
negotiations between statutory insurance institutions,dispensing chemists and the pharmacy industry and bychanging the current fixed-amount system to one basedon maximum amounts. Special and, as a rule, expensivepharmaceuticals are to be financed by insurance institu-tions only after a second opinion has been obtained.
– Invoices issued by hospitals to insurance institutions for
patients that were discharged after 31 December 2006are to be reduced by 0.7% across the board.
– Instead of the current seven associations of the statutory
health insurance scheme, in the future there is to beonly one association at Federal level. Health insuranceinstitutions are to be allowed to merge freely with eachother and are to be subject to insolvency law.
– Health insurance institutions will be allowed to offer a
choice of rates with different retained amounts.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2006
64tory health insurance institutions, which
alone will force them to increase contributionrates (currently 14.3% on average) by 0.25percentage point. Although, in exceptionalcases, the deadline for clearing debts hasbeen pushed back for one year until the endof 2008, the health insurance institutions as awhole should still strive for a surplus in 2007.
The health reform introduced into the parlia-
mentary legislative process in the form of theAct to promote competition among statutoryhealth insurance institutions ( GKV Wettbe-
werbsstRCLL8rkungsgesetz ) will not have any sig-
nificant impact on the current upward pres-sure on contribution rates. The act that, ac-cording to plan, is to be implemented on1 April 2007 will bring with it measures ef-fective in the short-term (see overview onpage 63) which should lead to financial reliefof31.4 billion in 2007 and 31.8 billion per
year in the following years. However, it isquestionable whether these savings will actu-ally be achieved as they are mainly based onchanging the regulations governing the rela-tionship between service providers and healthinsurance institutions and the effect of thesechanges is difficult to gauge. Thus, overall,noticeable increases in contribution rates arelikely in 2007.
From 1 January 2009, the financing system
for statutory health insurance is to bechanged. The health insurance fund is to beraised from employer and employee contribu-
tions as well as from tax resources. The healthinsurance institutions receive risk-adjusted in-surance premiums and are thereby organisa-tionally freed from the responsibility for theredistribution of income. However, a further-reaching decoupling of financing for thestatutory health insurance scheme from em-ployment will be prevented by the fact thattight ceilings are envisaged for the flat-ratetop-up contribution that individual institu-tions can charge if they run out of funds. Thismeans that competition among health insur-ance institutions is likely to be intensified onlyto a limited degree. However, limiting thetop-up contribution could increase the pres-sure to reduce spending because the stand-ard contribution rate will be set by the FederalGovernment and the health insurance institu-tions will not have any other way of obtainingadditional revenue. Of course such an effectassumes, with an eye to the contributionpayers, that the institutions will refrain fromcalling for higher contribution rates. As awhole, in this area, which is characterised bya large number of particularly dynamic inter-est groups, the objective should still be to in-tensify competition and to promote the indi-vidual responsibility of those insured. It is alsoimportant to record the desired redistributionof income in a transparent way so that thiscan, if necessary, be financed in a compre-hensive and regulated manner by tax re-sources.
Health system
reform will not
prevent rise in
contribution
rates in 2007Health fund
creates clear
organisational
structure,
however,
makes
practically no
contribution to
intensifying
competition
among health
insurance
institutions

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006

ContentsIKeyeconomicdatafortheeuroarea
1 Monetarydevelopmentsandinterest
rates 6*
2 Externaltransactionsandpositions 6*
3 Generaleconomicindicators 7*
IIOverallmonetarysurveyinthe
euroarea
1 Themoneystockanditscounterparts 8*2 Consolidatedbalancesheetofmon-
etaryfinancialinstitutions(MFIs) 10*
3 Bankingsystem’sliquidityposition 14*
IIIConsolidatedfinancialstatement
oftheEurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IVBanks
1 Assetsandliabilitiesofmonetary
financialinstitutions(excludingtheBundesbank)inGermany 20*
2 Principalassetsandliabilitiesofbanks
(MFIs)inGermany,bycategoryofbanks 24*
3 Assetsandliabilitiesofbanks(MFIs)
inGermanyvis-PC559-visresidents 26*
4 Assetsandliabilitiesofbanks(MFIs)
inGermanyvis-PC559-visnon-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006

5 Lendingbybanks(MFIs)inGermany
todomesticnon-banks(non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lendingbybanks(MFIs)inGermany
todomesticenterprisesandhouse-
holds,housingloans,sectorsofeconomicactivity 32*
7 Depositsofdomesticnon-banks
(non-MFIs)atbanks(MFIs)inGermany 34*
8 Depositsofdomestichouseholds
andnon-profitinstitutionsatbanks(MFIs)inGermany 36*
9 Depositsofdomesticgovernment
atbanks(MFIs)inGermany,bycreditorgroup 36*
10 Savingsdepositsandbanksavings
bondsofbanks(MFIs)inGermanysoldtonon-banks(non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debtsecuritiesandmoneymarket
paperoutstandingofbanks(MFIs)inGermany 38*
12 Buildingandloanassociations(MFIs)
inGermany 39*
13 Assetsandliabilitiesoftheforeign
branchesandforeignsubsidiariesofGermanbanks(MFIs) 40*
VMinimumreserves
1 Reserveratios 42*2 ReservemaintenanceinGermanyup
totheendof1998 42*
3 Reservemaintenanceintheeuro
area 42*VIInterestrates
1 ECBinterestrates 43*2 Baserates 43*3 Eurosystemmonetarypolicyoper-
ationsallottedthroughtenders 43*
4 Moneymarketrates,bymonth 43*5 Interestratesforoutstanding
amountsandnewbusinessofbanks(MFIs)intheEuropeanmonetaryunion 44*
6 Interestratesandvolumesforout-
standingamountsandnewbusinessofGermanbanks(MFIs) 45*
VIICapitalmarket
1 Salesandpurchasesofdebtsecurities
andsharesinGermany 48*
2 Salesofdebtsecuritiesissuedby
residents 49*
3 Amountsoutstandingofdebt
securitiesissuedbyresidents 50*
4 Sharesincirculationissuedby
residents 50*
5 YieldsandindicesonGerman
securities 51*
6 Salesandpurchasesofmutual
fundsharesinGermany 51*
VIIIPublicfinancesinGermany
1 Generalgovernmentbudgetary
position 52*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006

2 Budgetarypositionofcentral,
stateandlocalgovernment 52*
3 Governmentfiscalpositionas
definedinthenationalaccounts 53*
4 Taxrevenueofcentral,stateand
localgovernment 53*
5 Taxrevenue,bytype 54*
6 Specifictaxesleviedbycentral,
stateandlocalgovernment 54*
7 Generalgovernmentdebt 55*8 Changeingeneralgovernment
debt 57*
9 Loansraisedbygeneralgovern-
mentagainstborrowers’notes 57*
10 Centralgovernmentdebt 58*11 Centralgovernmentborrowing
inthemarket 58*
12 Revenue,expenditureandassets
oftheGermanpensioninsurancefund 59*
13 Revenueandexpenditureofthe
FederalEmploymentAgency 59*
IXEconomicconditions
1 Originanduseofdomesticproduct,
distributionofnationalincome 60*
2 Outputintheproductionsector 61*3 Ordersreceivedbyindustry 62*4 Ordersreceivedbyconstruction 63*5 Retailtradeturnover 63*6 Labourmarket 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’income 66*9 Payratesandactualearnings 66*XExternalsector
1 Majoritemsofthebalanceof
paymentsoftheeuroarea 67*
2 Majoritemsofthebalanceof
paymentsoftheFederalRepublicofGermany 68*
3 Foreigntrade(specialtrade)ofthe
FederalRepublicofGermany,bycountryandgroupofcountries 69*
4 Servicesandincomeofthe
FederalRepublicofGermany 70*
5 CurrenttransfersoftheFederal
RepublicofGermany 70*
6 Capitaltransfers 70*7 FinancialaccountoftheFederal
RepublicofGermany 71*
8 ExternalpositionoftheBundesbank 72*9 ExternalpositionoftheBundesbank
intheeuroarea 72*
10 Assetsandliabilitiesofenterprises
inGermany(otherthanbanks)vis-PC559-visnon-residents 73*
11 DeutscheMarkandeuroexchange
ratesofselectedcurrencies 74*
12 Exchangeratesforthenational
currenciesoftheeuro-areamemberstates,theDeutscheMarkvalueoftheECUandeuroconversionrates 74*
13 Effectiveexchangeratesoftheeuro
andselectedforeigncurrencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006

Abbreviationsandsymbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartlyestimated
rRevised
...Dataavailableatalaterdate
.Dataunknown,nottobepublishedor
notmeaningful
0Lessthan0.5butmorethannil
–Nil
Discrepanciesinthetotalsareduetoround-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2005          Mar 9.2 7.1 6.5 6.6 6.3 7.4 8.7 2.06 2.14 3.7
         Apr 9.3 7.4 6.8 6.9 6.7 7.8 8.3 2.08 2.14 3.5
         May 10.2 7.6 7.3 7.3 6.5 7.9 8.4 2.07 2.13 3.4         June 10.9 8.0 7.6 7.6 6.7 8.2 9.6 2.06 2.11 3.2
         July 11.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 6.9 8.4 9.2 2.07 2.12 3.3
         Aug 11.6 8.6 8.1 8.1 7.0 8.7 9.2 2.06 2.13 3.3         Sep 11.1 8.8 8.4 8.1 7.4 9.1 8.7 2.09 2.14 3.1
         Oct 11.1 8.6 7.9 8.0 7.8 9.4 9.0 2.07 2.20 3.3
         Nov 10.5 8.2 7.6 7.6 8.2 9.5 8.8 2.09 2.36 3.5         Dec 11.4 8.5 7.3 7.5 8.3 9.5 8.8 2.28 2.47 3.4
2006          Jan 10.3 8.4 7.7 7.6 8.5 10.0 8.7 2.33 2.51 3.4
         Feb 9.9 8.7 7.9 8.0 8.7 10.7 8.8 2.35 2.60 3.5         Mar 10.1 9.0 8.5 8.4 9.5 11.5 8.7 2.52 2.72 3.7
         Apr 9.8 9.3 8.7 8.7 9.6 11.8 8.9 2.63 2.79 4.0
         May 10.2 9.1 8.8 8.6 9.4 11.8 8.9 2.58 2.89 4.0         June 9.3 9.1 8.5 8.3 9.1 11.5 8.1 2.70 2.99 4.1
         July 7.4 8.2 7.8 8.1 9.2 11.8 8.7 2.81 3.10 4.1
         Aug 7.2 8.4 8.2 8.2 9.1 11.9 8.4 2.97 3.23 4.0         Sep 7.1 8.4 8.5 ... 9.4 12.2 8.1 3.04 3.34 3.8
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.28 3.50 3.9
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2005          Mar + 4,285 + 8,062 − 21,291 − 8,829 − 6,748 − 7,228 + 1,514 1.3201 106.0 108.2
         Apr − 10,455 + 3,516 − 5,483 − 13,710 − 8,366 + 17,417 − 825 1.2938 105.1 107.2
         May − 2,861 + 5,732 + 41,516 + 6,704 + 19,779 + 12,482 + 2,551 1.2694 104.0 106.2         June + 2,162 + 8,847 + 13,452 − 7,712 + 97,713 − 77,930 + 1,380 1.2165 101.2 103.5
         July + 2,983 + 9,525 + 1,017 − 85,054 + 78,470 + 5,023 + 2,577 1.2037 101.7 104.0
         Aug − 2,736 + 966 + 412 − 12,033 − 14,000 + 26,521 − 76 1.2292 102.3 104.6         Sep − 1,612 + 5,487 + 33,151 − 526 + 24,875 + 9,263 − 461 1.2256 101.8 104.1
         Oct − 7,523 + 1,732 − 12,781 − 7,858 − 6,161 + 1,014 + 224 1.2015 101.4 103.6
         Nov − 5,579 + 1,467 + 2,199 − 3,867 − 44,034 + 48,906 + 1,194 1.1786 100.7 102.9         Dec + 273 + 1,746 − 13,162 − 8,485 − 7,755 − 4,278 + 7,356 1.1856 100.7 102.9
2006          Jan − 10,158 − 6,320 − 3,213 − 2,677 − 39,367 + 41,147 − 2,316 1.2103 101.4 103.7
         Feb − 599 + 517 + 19,462 − 29,122 + 18,076 + 28,568 + 1,940 1.1938 100.7 103.0         Mar − 2,086 + 2,977 + 49,491 + 259 + 35,636 + 7,088 + 6,509 1.2020 101.5 103.9
         Apr − 7,481 + 553 + 25,089 + 8,331 − 11,645 + 29,536 − 1,133 1.2271 102.7 105.1
         May − 10,921 + 562 + 31,930 − 4,592 + 46,416 − 8,212 − 1,682 1.2770 103.8 106.1         June + 10,776 + 5,218 − 5,901 − 15,885 + 62,408 − 53,838 + 1,414 1.2650 103.9 106.2
         July + 2,450 + 5,641 + 12,259 − 9,378 + 2,776 + 19,649 − 788 1.2684 104.3 106.6
         Aug − 3,934 − 3,762 − 3,933 − 2,838 − 19,343 + 19,077 − 829 1.2811 104.4 106.7         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2727 104.2 106.5
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2611 103.7 105.9
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables X.12 and 13, pp 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-23 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area
Real gross domestic product 1 
2003 0.9 − 0.2 1.8 1.1 4.8 4.3 0.0 1.3 0.3 1.4 − 1.1 3.0 0.8
2004 2.6 1.2 3.5 2.3 4.7 4.3 1.1 3.6 1.9 2.5 1.2 3.2 1.9
2005 1.2 0.9 2.9 1.2 3.7 5.5 0.0 4.0 1.5 1.9 0.4 3.5 1.42005          Q2 1.6 1.7 2.9 1.7 3.7 5.6 0.2 2.9 1.9 2.3 0.4 4.2 1.3
         Q3 1.3 1.4 3.4 1.1 3.8 5.9 0.1 4.8 2.0 2.1 0.3 3.0 1.7         Q4 0.6 1.1 2.2 0.8 3.7 6.5 0.1 6.2 1.9 2.6 1.0 3.3 1.8
2006          Q1 3.3 3.2 5.9 2.2 4.1 5.8 2.1 6.6 2.9 2.9 1.1 3.7 2.2
         Q2 2.8 1.3 5.9 1.7 4.1 ... 1.0 5.4 2.8 3.3 0.9 4.0 2.7         Q3 2.4 2.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.3 ... ... 2.6
Industrial production 1,2 
2003 0.7 0.4 1.2 − 0.4 0.3 4.7 − 0.5 3.6 − 1.4 2.1 0.1 1.4 0.32004 3.2 3.0 5.0 2.0 1.2 0.3 − 0.6 3.9 2.5 6.2 − 2.7 1.6 2.0
2005 − 0.3 3.4 − 2.4 0.3 − 0.9 3.0 − 0.8 0.1 − 1.2 4.2 0.3 0.7 1.22005          Q2 0.5 2.3 − 6.8 0.4 − 2.6 2.0 − 1.2 − 2.0 − 0.1 5.2 0.0 0.1 0.7
         Q3 − 1.8 3.5 − 2.1 0.5 − 0.7 3.0 0.4 3.6 − 2.3 3.4 0.7 0.7 1.4         Q4 1.0 5.1 − 0.7 − 0.7 1.3 5.8 0.5 1.7 − 1.6 3.7 2.3 1.6 2.1
2006          Q1 6.2 4.9 4.4 0.4 1.2 2.6 3.0 5.1 3.0 5.6 1.6 2.6 3.4
         Q2 5.6
r 5.9 15.1 1.7 0.6 6.6 1.3 0.9 0.8 7.6 1.6 4.0 4.1
         Q3 3.9 6p 6.3 8.9 0.4 p 0.4 p 6.4 1.1 p − 1.5 0.0 ... 2.5 4.0 e 3.9
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.8 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 79.0 78.9 80.82004 80.4 83.2 84.5 84.1 75.6 75.6 76.4 85.6 82.7 81.3 80.4 79.0 81.4
2005 79.4 82.9 84.9 83.2 72.1 74.2 76.4 82.3 82.0 81.7 80.0 80.2 81.22005          Q3 78.2 82.7 82.4 82.5 71.9 78.2 75.9 79.8 81.7 81.3 79.9 80.6 80.8
         Q4 79.1 82.9 84.3 81.8 72.2 76.8 76.7 81.4 82.1 81.3 79.2 80.1 81.0
2006          Q1 80.4 84.2 85.2 83.6 74.2 74.0 76.8 82.8 81.5 81.9 78.7 80.7 81.9
         Q2 82.8 84.4 85.1 84.5 74.6 76.1 77.3 84.0 81.9 83.2 78.0 81.1 82.4         Q3 83.9 86.4 88.1 85.7 77.2 76.3 78.0 86.7 81.4 84.0 79.4 79.4 83.6         Q4 83.5 86.8 85.4 86.5 76.7 76.5 78.1 87.2 83.0 84.3 77.4 80.6 83.9
Unemployment rate 4 
2003 8.2 9.0 9.0 9.5 9.7 4.7 8.4 3.7 3.7 4.3 6.3 11.1 8.72004 8.4 9.5 8.8 9.6 10.5 4.5 8.0 5.1 4.6 4.8 6.7 10.6 8.9
2005 8.4 9.5 8.4 9.9 9.8 4.4 7.7 4.5 4.7 5.2 7.6 9.2 8.62006          Apr 8.7 8.2 7.8 9.4 4.5 6.8 4.8 4.0 4.9 7.5 8.6 7.9
         May 8.7 8.4 7.7 9.3 4.5 6.8 4.7 3.9 4.9 7.4 8.5 7.8         June 8.6 8.3 7.8 9.2 4.5 6.8 4.7 3.9 4.8 7.4 8.5 7.8
         July 8.5 8.3 7.8 9.1 4.5 ... 4.8 3.8 4.9 7.3 8.3 7.8
         Aug 8.5 8.6 7.8 9.0 4.5 ... 4.8 4.0 4.8 7.2 8.3 7.8         Sep 8.6 8.7 7.9 8.9 4.2 ... 4.9 4.0 4.7 7.2 8.3 7.8
         Oct 8.3 ... ... ... 4.2 ... ... ... 4.7 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2003 1.5 1.0 1.3 2.2 3.5 4.0 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.1 2.1
2004 1.9 1.8 0.1 2.3 3.0 2.3 2.3 3.2 1.4 2.0 2.5 3.1 2.1
2005 2.5 1.9 0.8 1.9 3.5 2.2 2.2 3.8 1.5 2.1 2.1 3.4 2.22006          Apr 2.6 2.3 1.5 2.0 3.5 2.7 2.3 3.5 1.8 2.1 3.7 3.9 2.5
         May 2.8 2.1 1.7 2.4 3.3 3.0 2.3 3.6 1.8 2.1 3.7 4.1 2.5         June 2.5 2.0 1.5 2.2 3.5 2.9 2.4 3.9 1.8 1.9 3.5 4.0 2.5
         July 2.4 2.1 1.4 2.2 3.9 2.9 2.3 3.4 1.7 2.0 3.0 4.0 2.4
         Aug 2.3 1.8 1.3 2.1 3.4 3.2 2.3 3.1 1.9 2.1 2.7 3.8 2.3         Sep 1.9 1.0 0.8 1.5 3.1 2.2 2.4 2.0 1.5 1.3 3.0 2.9 1.7
         Oct 1.7 1.1 0.9 1.2 3.2 2.2
p 1.9 0.6 p 1.3 p 1.2 2.6 2.6 p 1.6
General government financial balance 5 
2003 0.1 − 4.0 2.5 − 4.2 − 5.8 0.2 − 3.4 0.2 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 2.9 0.0 − 3.1
2004 0.0 − 3.7 2.3 − 3.7 − 6.9 1.5 − 3.4 − 1.1 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 2.8
2005 0.1 − 3.2 2.6 − 2.9 − 4.5 1.0 − 4.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 6.0 1.1 − 2.4
General government debt 5 
2003 98.5 63.9 44.3 62.4 107.8 31.1 104.2 6.3 51.9 64.4 57.0 48.9 69.3
2004 94.7 65.7 44.3 64.4 108.5 29.4 103.8 6.6 52.6 63.6 58.7 46.4 69.9
2005 93.3 67.9 41.1 66.8 107.5 27.6 106.4 6.2 52.9 62.9 63.9 43.2 70.7
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central sonally adjusted. — 5  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — Euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank, member states: European
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece, Portugal and the Euro−area Commission, referring to German deficit and GDP according to the revised
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and national accounts of August 2006. — 6  Provisional; adjusted in advance by
energy; adjusted for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the
seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and Quarterly Production Survey for the third quarter. October. — 4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; sea-
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2005          Feb 61.0 37.7 10.9 23.2 32.5 13.8 66.2 52.4 46.6 7.5 0.5 32.6 6.0
         Mar 48.4 53.9 6.7 − 5.6 − 4.5 − 22.5 37.4 59.9 47.0 15.3 − 0.1 23.8 8.0
         Apr 136.5 120.2 68.2 16.2 11.6 2.7 110.0 107.3 17.5 5.4 − 0.5 15.3 − 2.7
         May 55.4 62.0 2.7 − 6.6 − 4.2 − 39.0 − 6.2 32.8 26.3 0.2 − 0.4 21.7 4.8         June 79.6 71.2 − 24.4 8.4 8.3 100.7 21.6 − 79.2 77.8 27.6 − 0.7 30.0 20.9
         July 53.8 54.0 − 7.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 0.0 44.5 44.5 14.8 5.6 − 1.0 6.7 3.5
         Aug − 5.9 3.3 − 1.4 − 9.2 − 5.7 1.9 − 1.1 − 3.0 17.9 1.6 − 1.0 12.5 4.8         Sep 97.7 98.1 11.7 − 0.4 − 6.1 − 21.1 65.8 86.9 29.8 2.5 − 1.6 14.7 14.2
         Oct 103.3 90.3 23.6 13.0 15.8 − 5.2 57.8 62.9 41.9 9.6 − 0.5 31.1 1.8
         Nov 143.0 104.8 19.9 38.2 44.0 − 44.9 25.7 70.6 23.8 12.5 0.2 6.3 4.8         Dec 42.9 76.2 1.9 − 33.3 − 56.4 34.9 − 54.9 − 89.8 43.9 27.9 0.8 − 7.5 22.6
2006          Jan 125.4 103.2 18.2 22.1 27.0 5.7 130.3 124.6 8.3 6.2 0.7 0.7 0.8
         Feb 92.6 109.3 28.0 − 16.8 − 7.2 − 19.2 25.5 44.7 56.0 12.4 0.3 25.0 18.3         Mar 141.9 129.0 44.6 12.8 8.7 − 20.6 50.6 71.2 48.2 17.6 0.8 21.8 8.0
         Apr 162.7 161.8 64.4 0.9 0.2 − 7.3 88.6 95.9 27.3 14.9 0.4 17.8 − 5.8
         May 43.4 71.5 4.1 − 28.1 − 17.6 11.2 54.6 43.4 30.5 10.4 1.3 21.8 − 3.0         June 52.3 47.9 − 30.0 4.4 1.8 62.9 − 57.1 − 120.0 47.1 10.9 1.2 21.8 13.2
         July 70.1 90.8 14.5 − 20.7 − 16.9 4.4 84.2 79.8 47.5 9.0 1.2 16.4 21.0
         Aug − 15.1 12.7 − 5.0 − 27.8 − 22.5 − 11.4 10.8 22.2 6.0 3.1 1.5 5.9 − 4.4         Sep 131.4 135.2 26.9 − 3.8 − 9.8 20.2 123.3 103.1 18.3 4.3 1.4 13.5 − 0.8
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2005          Feb − 2.2 0.6 − 5.1 − 2.8 1.6 1.7 14.0 12.3 4.9 4.1 0.5 4.8 − 4.5
         Mar 8.5 − 1.1 6.2 9.6 9.8 − 10.4 4.0 14.3 10.6 2.6 − 0.0 7.8 0.3
         Apr 63.2 50.8 45.3 12.4 7.5 15.6 56.3 40.7 11.8 − 2.8 − 0.5 10.8 4.2
         May − 21.7 − 15.0 − 17.7 − 6.6 − 5.7 − 22.7 − 25.5 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 0.5 2.0 0.7         June − 27.7 − 9.3 − 16.0 − 18.4 − 12.8 49.9 − 6.3 − 56.2 9.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 4.9 5.3
         July 3.9 2.9 4.5 1.0 − 3.0 3.7 14.3 10.6 6.8 1.8 − 0.7 2.8 2.9
         Aug 2.8 2.7 2.3 0.2 3.4 − 3.4 − 10.4 − 7.0 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.0 0.6         Sep 5.1 17.1 1.9 − 12.0 − 7.2 − 0.1 16.2 16.3 − 5.6 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 2.0 − 1.7
         Oct 10.3 11.0 2.7 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 4.2 2.9 7.1 3.7 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.7 4.2
         Nov 4.2 1.9 5.4 2.3 10.0 − 7.0 2.3 9.3 2.5 2.0 0.2 − 2.4 2.8         Dec − 7.7 − 3.4 11.2 − 4.3 − 6.6 16.8 − 38.3 − 55.1 − 5.0 4.0 0.7 − 10.7 0.9
2006          Jan 38.3 30.0 13.0 8.3 6.2 9.1 36.9 27.8 6.7 0.9 0.7 4.7 0.4
         Feb 0.2 12.8 4.7 − 12.6 − 3.2 − 7.1 6.9 14.0 17.0 5.3 0.3 6.2 5.2         Mar 19.0 16.8 9.3 2.1 2.0 2.9 17.9 14.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.8 − 4.1 3.2
         Apr 44.8 45.1 30.1 − 0.4 − 1.6 9.7 10.3 0.6 2.4 4.2 0.2 − 3.3 1.2
         May − 3.7 − 9.6 − 6.9 5.9 13.4 − 4.6 6.2 10.8 3.1 1.7 1.1 4.9 − 4.6         June − 31.3 − 16.3 − 18.3 − 15.0 − 11.3 58.4 39.5 − 18.9 7.5 1.5 1.3 0.2 4.5
         July − 6.9 − 5.4 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 2.5 2.7 − 11.0 − 13.7 14.6 2.2 1.1 2.4 8.9
         Aug − 4.3 3.9 0.6 − 8.2 − 4.2 − 4.9 1.1 6.1 − 3.1 2.9 1.5 − 4.9 − 2.6         Sep 23.7 32.8 9.5 − 9.1 − 7.9 15.0 32.8 17.8 − 5.8 0.4 1.2 − 4.2 − 3.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
29.5 − 11.2 − 9.8 4.4 4.4 3.7 0.8 − 5.3 5.2 − 1.7 − 1.9 8.9 2005          Feb 
− 22.7 − 26.0 − 27.5 35.0 26.9 8.2 18.7 4.1 4.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 6.5          Mar 
− 6.5 43.2 − 85.0 57.1 33.1 9.3 23.8 16.7 7.3 − 0.6 13.8 14.7          Apr 
− 7.4 − 49.2 − 46.7 34.1 30.1 4.8 25.4 − 1.9 5.9 12.8 7.3 − 7.6          May
38.0 5.3 − 59.2 68.1 76.8 10.7 66.1 − 12.5 3.8 − 0.3 − 14.5 5.9          June
− 0.7 − 12.6 − 52.2 39.0 17.8 9.9 8.0 15.6 5.6 − 0.3 12.9 0.7          July− 44.3 41.4 − − 19.1 − 35.6 − 52.0 − 5.5 − 46.5 12.1 4.3 10.6 4.1 1.9          Aug 
15.7 − 25.0 − 56.2 78.3 53.2 6.2 47.0 23.1 2.0 − 14.8 − 6.9 − 0.4          Sep 
− 3.0 20.1 − 39.1 37.0 27.2 3.4 23.8 9.5 0.2 7.0 − 6.0 1.1          Oct 
5.7 51.8 − 16.8 23.6 28.2 4.0 24.2 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 2.1 − 9.3 4.6          Nov 
− 11.6 − 68.3 − 113.7 149.5 91.9 18.3 73.6 38.0 19.5 − 18.2 − 14.2 − 3.4          Dec 
18.0 90.7 − 14.1 − 18.6 − 27.1 − 11.9 − 15.2 − 7.9 16.4 15.2 6.6 11.0 2006          Jan 
8.0 − 16.7 − 26.2 16.2 − 6.6 4.0 − 10.6 19.4 3.4 − 2.1 3.2 8.8          Feb 
− 6.5 12.4 − 67.2 56.8 25.6 7.4 18.2 29.3 1.8 1.0 − 0.8 10.3          Mar 
− 10.5 20.1 − 118.5 94.1 53.9 8.1 45.9 41.7 − 1.5 13.9 10.1 0.4          Apr 
− 15.4 − 3.3 − 42.8 12.1 23.6 3.3 20.4 − 10.7 − 0.7 7.8 9.9 12.9          May
41.1 − 16.7 − 43.6 70.1 53.8 10.1 43.7 19.1 − 2.8 − 11.6 − 5.1 − 9.8          June
− 13.1 25.5 − 14.6 − 3.3 − 25.1 9.0 − 34.0 25.0 − 3.2 5.3 12.6 − 0.1          July− 9.5 − 36.8 − 13.9 − 22.3 − 57.2 − 3.7 − 53.5 34.8 0.2 14.5 2.9 18.8          Aug 
17.9 21.8 − 93.6 94.3 61.9 4.2 57.7 36.2 − 3.7 − 2.0 − 1.9 3.1          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 0.8 − 5.6 1.3 1.0 1.0 5.2 − 5.6 0.3 2.2 0.3 − 1.4 2005          Feb 
− 3.3 − 1.7 2.1 2.5 − 7.4 0.4 − 5.5 − 1.0 1.0 1.6 − 3.9          Mar 
0.8 54.2 0.9 2.3 12.0 2.4 6.9 0.1 0.3 0.4 1.8          Apr 
− 1.3 − 50.1 2.4 1.0 9.0 9.0 3.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.9          May
0.8 6.6 0.7 3.4 5.7 10.0 − 5.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 0.2 2.5          June
0.4 1.0 0.6 2.2 − 0.6 0.6 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.5 1.4 − 2.0          July
− 0.4 − 7.9 1.6 − 1.2 9.0 1.7 1.1 − 0.5 3.9 0.2 2.7          Aug 
0.5 4.1 2.3 1.0 6.0 7.1 0.1 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.5 1.8          Sep 
− 1.2 − 3.6 0.0 1.0 7.2 3.4 2.1 − 1.1 4.3 − 2.4 0.9          Oct 
− 0.3 − 17.9 − 0.1 2.1 12.8 15.5 0.8 − 1.4 0.9 − 1.0 − 1.9          Nov 
0.9 18.5 − 1.2 4.2 − 5.3 − 8.6 10.2 6.6 − 13.6 − 0.0 0.1          Dec 
2.0 30.8 0.7 − 2.9 7.9 2.7 0.3 − 1.3 7.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 2006          Jan 
− 6.2 − 15.9 2.0 0.5 − 1.8 − 2.8 0.7 − 0.4 2.2 0.6 − 2.1          Feb 
1.8 3.8 0.5 2.4 16.4 8.1 1.3 − 2.0 7.4 − 0.1 1.7          Mar 
− 0.2 34.1 0.4 2.0 18.1 9.3 12.7 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.7          Apr 
1.7 − 17.8 0.8 1.2 4.8 4.5 0.5 − 3.5 0.6 0.4 2.2          May
1.9 14.5 1.1 2.7 3.3 3.4 4.9 − 2.6 − 1.4 0.9 − 1.9          June
1.0 − 3.3 0.6 2.6 − 16.5 − 9.8 4.6 − 4.0 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 1.0          July
3.0 − 16.6 2.7 − 1.0 7.5 − 6.8 9.8 − 4.5 4.8 − 0.2 4.4          Aug 2.3 29.4 2.0 0.4 12.7 0.7 10.5 − 3.8 3.2 − 0.6 2.8          Sep 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2004          Aug 15,384.7 10,763.5 8,445.7 7,347.6 451.0 647.1 2,317.8 838.0 1,479.8 3,226.1 1,395.1
         Sep 15,487.1 10,810.5 8,498.5 7,401.7 449.6 647.2 2,312.0 830.9 1,481.1 3,214.6 1,461.9
         Oct 15,585.4 10,865.1 8,553.2 7,449.7 452.4 651.2 2,311.9 831.2 1,480.6 3,219.5 1,500.8
         Nov 15,777.3 10,950.1 8,634.6 7,512.7 457.8 664.0 2,315.5 827.7 1,487.8 3,282.6 1,544.6         Dec 15,723.6 10,966.7 8,693.4 7,556.3 467.2 669.9 2,273.3 833.4 1,439.9 3,237.4 1,519.5
2005          Jan 15,991.7 11,071.4 8,749.9 7,596.6 471.4 681.9 2,321.5 838.0 1,483.4 3,373.2 1,547.2
         Feb 16,103.5 11,130.7 8,787.6 7,622.8 481.5 683.2 2,343.1 828.7 1,514.4 3,421.3 1,551.5         Mar 16,264.7 11,178.0 8,840.1 7,669.4 483.0 687.6 2,337.9 827.5 1,510.4 3,483.9 1,602.8
         Apr 16,571.7 11,316.7 8,959.1 7,721.5 493.6 744.1 2,357.6 832.1 1,525.4 3,603.2 1,651.7
         May 16,759.8 11,385.6 9,030.0 7,785.7 501.1 743.3 2,355.6 830.0 1,525.6 3,661.9 1,712.2         June 17,040.5 11,519.7 9,146.7 7,924.1 508.0 714.5 2,373.0 830.4 1,542.7 3,722.2 1,798.5
         July 17,130.3 11,572.0 9,202.8 7,982.2 507.2 713.4 2,369.1 830.8 1,538.3 3,755.5 1,802.9
         Aug 17,100.6 11,566.3 9,205.2 7,984.8 506.0 714.4 2,361.1 827.2 1,533.9 3,748.6 1,785.7         Sep 17,323.8 11,669.2 9,310.1 8,073.4 507.0 729.7 2,359.1 832.9 1,526.2 3,846.4 1,808.3
         Oct 17,462.7 11,766.5 9,370.1 8,140.3 523.6 706.2 2,396.5 830.1 1,566.4 3,905.8 1,790.4
         Nov 17,891.0 11,958.3 9,482.3 8,225.9 544.6 711.8 2,476.0 824.4 1,651.6 4,057.6 1,875.0         Dec 17,892.2 11,993.0 9,550.4 8,288.1 553.6 708.8 2,442.5 847.5 1,595.0 4,008.8 1,890.4
2006          Jan 18,201.4 12,127.9 9,668.2 8,386.5 558.0 723.7 2,459.7 842.5 1,617.2 4,125.8 1,947.7
         Feb 18,344.5 12,225.2 9,782.1 8,469.1 569.6 743.3 2,443.1 833.0 1,610.0 4,184.4 1,935.0         Mar 18,475.2 12,353.5 9,908.0 8,552.1 575.8 780.1 2,445.4 837.0 1,608.4 4,199.0 1,922.8
         Apr 18,704.2 12,504.1 10,063.4 8,644.7 587.0 831.7 2,440.7 837.5 1,603.2 4,248.1 1,952.0
         May 18,782.5 12,531.2 10,125.4 8,708.5 595.4 821.6 2,405.8 826.9 1,578.8 4,279.1 1,972.3         June 18,738.1 12,572.3 10,169.6 8,785.0 602.4 782.3 2,402.7 829.6 1,573.1 4,216.4 1,949.3
         July 18,867.6 12,648.1 10,262.8 8,859.7 614.9 788.2 2,385.3 826.5 1,558.7 4,309.3 1,910.3
         Aug 18,884.2 12,635.5 10,273.6 8,874.7 611.7 787.2 2,361.9 821.2 1,540.7 4,312.1 1,936.6         Sep 19,261.2 12,761.7 10,402.8 8,980.1 620.5 802.2 2,358.9 824.5 1,534.4 4,454.3 2,045.2
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2004          Aug 4,477.2 3,362.1 2,608.0 2,286.8 69.1 252.1 754.2 460.6 293.6 949.3 165.8         Sep 4,507.8 3,365.6 2,616.9 2,294.9 69.5 252.6 748.6 455.9 292.7 974.8 167.4
         Oct 4,522.7 3,376.3 2,615.4 2,291.9 69.3 254.3 760.9 460.8 300.0 976.6 169.8
         Nov 4,559.3 3,380.9 2,626.0 2,301.2 68.5 256.2 754.9 456.8 298.2 1,005.9 172.4         Dec 4,511.9 3,363.1 2,620.3 2,285.7 68.7 265.9 742.9 453.1 289.7 969.6 179.2
2005          Jan 4,562.3 3,381.7 2,623.9 2,283.1 68.7 272.0 757.7 457.7 300.1 1,009.8 170.8
         Feb 4,569.3 3,376.7 2,622.0 2,286.5 69.6 266.0 754.7 453.2 301.5 1,018.7 173.9         Mar 4,580.5 3,384.2 2,619.8 2,278.0 71.6 270.1 764.4 453.1 311.4 1,029.4 166.9
         Apr 4,706.9 3,446.9 2,670.0 2,283.0 74.7 312.2 776.9 458.0 318.9 1,087.9 172.2
         May 4,682.9 3,426.6 2,656.1 2,286.6 76.1 293.4 770.5 457.3 313.2 1,078.6 177.8         June 4,650.4 3,397.3 2,644.9 2,291.2 80.8 272.9 752.4 451.9 300.5 1,080.5 172.5
         July 4,665.0 3,400.1 2,646.8 2,288.6 80.4 277.9 753.2 455.8 297.4 1,091.8 173.1
         Aug 4,654.8 3,402.2 2,648.8 2,288.2 80.1 280.4 753.4 452.6 300.8 1,079.7 172.9         Sep 4,684.5 3,407.5 2,666.3 2,303.8 80.2 282.3 741.2 447.7 293.5 1,103.6 173.4
         Oct 4,699.9 3,417.0 2,676.6 2,311.6 82.1 282.9 740.4 449.3 291.1 1,106.4 176.5
         Nov 4,722.5 3,421.6 2,678.8 2,308.0 83.5 287.3 742.8 441.6 301.2 1,117.8 183.1         Dec 4,667.4 3,412.0 2,673.6 2,291.3 87.7 294.6 738.4 443.8 294.6 1,080.6 174.8
2006          Jan 4,754.2 3,463.2 2,717.0 2,321.5 88.4 307.1 746.2 445.9 300.3 1,120.2 170.8
         Feb 4,765.6 3,463.1 2,729.4 2,329.2 91.1 309.1 733.7 436.5 297.2 1,134.2 168.3         Mar 4,791.8 3,478.9 2,743.5 2,334.6 93.4 315.5 735.4 436.5 298.9 1,145.0 167.9
         Apr 4,843.7 3,522.5 2,787.6 2,348.9 94.5 344.2 734.8 437.6 297.2 1,146.9 174.3
         May 4,843.9 3,518.0 2,777.3 2,346.0 95.5 335.8 740.7 430.1 310.6 1,145.4 180.5         June 4,844.8 3,486.3 2,760.6 2,347.5 103.3 309.8 725.7 426.5 299.2 1,183.7 174.8
         July 4,829.6 3,481.0 2,755.7 2,342.0 103.9 309.7 725.3 428.3 297.0 1,174.3 174.3
         Aug 4,821.6 3,477.1 2,759.4 2,344.8 103.6 310.9 717.7 424.2 293.5 1,172.0 172.5         Sep 4,884.7 3,497.1 2,788.4 2,367.7 108.4 312.3 708.7 420.2 288.5 1,209.8 177.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
433.4 6,384.5 6,000.9 6,045.8 2,223.8 892.2 69.3 1,289.6 1,482.9 88.0 2004          Aug 
438.0 6,444.1 6,051.3 6,088.9 2,275.5 881.2 67.8 1,293.0 1,483.7 87.7          Sep 
444.4 6,476.5 6,087.4 6,126.5 2,275.2 906.3 69.7 1,300.1 1,486.6 88.6          Oct 
448.8 6,504.0 6,128.7 6,165.8 2,305.9 893.7 69.4 1,315.4 1,492.0 89.4          Nov 468.4 6,589.6 6,245.0 6,274.3 2,321.0 925.0 71.6 1,344.8 1,521.5 90.5          Dec 
459.9 6,624.1 6,248.9 6,284.3 2,340.9 901.5 71.4 1,347.7 1,532.6 90.2 2005          Jan 
463.6 6,660.8 6,254.4 6,291.8 2,340.3 900.0 70.9 1,354.9 1,534.9 90.8          Feb 
471.8 6,684.3 6,294.8 6,343.6 2,367.2 905.4 70.7 1,370.4 1,538.7 91.2          Mar 
481.1 6,730.8 6,347.1 6,396.8 2,391.8 922.5 71.6 1,375.9 1,544.3 90.7          Apr 
485.8 6,760.3 6,372.7 6,428.5 2,419.0 920.4 72.2 1,377.1 1,549.5 90.3          May496.6 6,917.7 6,492.1 6,543.2 2,643.8 904.5 78.2 1,436.0 1,390.2 90.5          June
506.4 6,942.6 6,510.2 6,577.6 2,654.9 922.2 77.7 1,438.9 1,394.4 89.5          July
500.9 6,866.4 6,473.6 6,543.2 2,605.8 933.7 78.0 1,440.7 1,396.6 88.4          Aug 507.1 6,956.1 6,545.1 6,614.2 2,653.1 950.0 83.3 1,443.5 1,397.4 86.9          Sep 
510.5 6,994.2 6,582.5 6,649.0 2,667.4 962.3 83.5 1,453.2 1,396.3 86.2          Oct 
514.5 7,028.0 6,604.5 6,672.0 2,683.8 955.2 86.9 1,465.8 1,393.8 86.4          Nov 532.8 7,180.4 6,779.1 6,835.8 2,761.4 985.8 90.2 1,500.8 1,410.4 87.3          Dec 
520.9 7,193.1 6,763.2 6,829.8 2,745.8 974.5 91.1 1,506.5 1,424.0 87.9 2006          Jan 
524.9 7,226.8 6,775.3 6,853.1 2,734.7 990.4 94.8 1,519.5 1,425.5 88.2          Feb 
532.3 7,294.3 6,851.2 6,931.1 2,761.2 1,009.9 97.9 1,546.6 1,426.4 89.0          Mar 
540.3 7,380.7 6,944.3 7,020.6 2,802.8 1,044.5 99.7 1,560.3 1,423.9 89.4          Apr 
543.6 7,383.7 6,960.3 7,029.5 2,818.9 1,025.1 102.1 1,570.1 1,422.6 90.7          May553.7 7,496.5 7,033.3 7,096.8 2,860.6 1,039.0 104.6 1,581.4 1,419.4 91.9          June
562.7 7,480.7 7,028.4 7,094.6 2,827.7 1,059.7 108.3 1,590.4 1,415.6 93.1          July
559.0 7,456.9 7,010.8 7,083.2 2,780.7 1,090.7 109.5 1,593.4 1,414.3 94.6          Aug 563.2 7,570.9 7,093.2 7,175.6 2,837.0 1,122.3 113.4 1,596.4 1,410.5 95.9          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
116.7 2,232.2 2,153.1 2,119.1 630.6 199.7 16.0 680.3 506.6 85.8 2004          Aug 
118.0 2,238.1 2,162.0 2,126.3 644.8 191.9 15.9 681.5 506.7 85.5          Sep 
119.0 2,237.6 2,164.0 2,132.6 642.0 197.5 16.0 684.1 507.0 86.1          Oct 
121.1 2,258.0 2,187.6 2,153.3 668.5 188.1 15.7 687.1 507.0 86.9          Nov 125.9 2,264.6 2,193.8 2,158.6 639.4 208.7 15.7 690.9 516.0 88.0          Dec 
123.9 2,275.5 2,203.9 2,167.3 661.1 193.9 15.7 691.8 517.0 87.8 2005          Jan 
124.9 2,278.8 2,208.6 2,170.9 664.8 189.0 15.7 695.8 517.3 88.3          Feb 
127.4 2,272.0 2,204.8 2,169.7 666.7 183.6 15.5 698.0 517.2 88.7          Mar 
129.7 2,279.1 2,210.9 2,177.8 669.1 192.2 15.7 695.3 517.3 88.2          Apr 
130.7 2,285.8 2,217.2 2,182.7 677.7 193.6 15.7 691.4 516.7 87.7          May134.1 2,288.9 2,220.6 2,182.8 686.7 186.4 16.1 691.0 515.4 87.1          June
136.3 2,289.1 2,221.5 2,185.0 688.3 189.1 16.0 690.0 515.3 86.4          July
135.2 2,290.5 2,224.1 2,185.3 689.5 189.8 15.7 690.5 514.4 85.4          Aug 136.2 2,296.5 2,229.3 2,191.8 697.8 189.7 15.9 690.1 514.4 83.9          Sep 
137.2 2,298.5 2,231.2 2,195.7 699.1 194.3 16.3 689.4 513.4 83.2          Oct 
139.3 2,315.7 2,249.4 2,211.4 714.1 193.8 16.6 691.3 512.2 83.5          Nov 143.5 2,329.5 2,260.2 2,222.9 706.0 201.4 17.0 695.1 519.2 84.2          Dec 
140.6 2,334.4 2,263.0 2,225.0 709.0 199.9 17.3 695.9 518.0 84.9 2006          Jan 
141.1 2,331.8 2,266.9 2,225.6 704.7 199.3 17.6 701.3 517.5 85.2          Feb 
143.5 2,341.2 2,273.7 2,232.7 714.4 197.9 17.8 701.1 515.5 86.0          Mar 
145.5 2,365.1 2,296.3 2,255.8 723.6 209.2 18.1 705.1 513.7 86.2          Apr 
146.8 2,370.8 2,302.7 2,252.2 725.2 204.7 18.5 706.4 510.2 87.3          May149.5 2,381.2 2,310.1 2,255.7 727.5 205.4 18.9 707.8 507.5 88.6          June
152.1 2,376.3 2,306.2 2,251.2 718.5 209.9 19.4 710.2 503.6 89.7          July
151.1 2,382.7 2,308.9 2,254.5 712.8 218.4 19.9 713.1 499.1 91.2          Aug 151.5 2,392.8 2,315.6 2,261.1 714.0 227.0 20.5 711.9 495.3 92.4          Sep 
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2004          Aug 193.0 145.7 78.0 40.7 1.0 22.1 3.5 0.5 224.3 220.2 624.1 2,027.5 1,618.8
         Sep 204.1 151.0 81.5 42.8 1.0 21.8 3.5 0.5 215.9 212.5 609.5 2,049.8 1,637.4
         Oct 197.4 152.6 83.7 41.9 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 229.7 226.7 617.1 2,059.0 1,643.0
         Nov 182.8 155.4 89.2 39.2 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 223.9 220.9 613.3 2,061.5 1,646.8         Dec 162.4 152.9 84.8 42.0 1.3 20.3 3.8 0.5 228.8 225.9 604.9 2,061.7 1,654.8
2005          Jan 180.6 159.3 92.4 41.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 228.7 225.5 616.4 2,086.6 1,663.7
         Feb 210.1 158.9 92.4 40.6 1.4 20.2 3.9 0.4 227.0 224.2 615.4 2,123.6 1,693.3         Mar 187.4 153.3 87.4 40.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 226.9 223.2 614.5 2,145.5 1,702.8
         Apr 180.9 153.2 88.2 39.0 1.5 20.3 3.8 0.5 226.3 222.5 627.8 2,176.8 1,714.0
         May 173.5 158.2 90.6 41.3 1.5 20.4 4.0 0.5 239.2 235.2 634.8 2,203.7 1,721.3         June 211.5 163.0 93.8 42.9 1.5 20.4 3.9 0.4 238.9 234.5 621.3 2,243.3 1,742.9
         July 210.8 154.3 87.2 40.8 1.6 20.3 3.9 0.5 238.6 235.3 635.1 2,249.8 1,742.0
         Aug 166.8 156.4 89.4 40.8 1.5 20.0 4.2 0.4 249.2 245.4 639.7 2,263.5 1,745.9         Sep 182.4 159.4 90.8 42.5 1.5 19.9 4.2 0.4 234.4 230.8 631.5 2,284.1 1,755.1
         Oct 179.4 165.8 100.0 40.0 1.3 19.9 4.2 0.4 241.4 237.7 629.0 2,316.0 1,776.2
         Nov 185.1 170.9 104.4 40.5 1.3 20.2 4.0 0.4 239.3 235.9 629.6 2,334.1 1,774.6         Dec 173.6 171.0 100.5 44.4 1.1 20.9 3.7 0.4 221.9 219.1 615.8 2,322.6 1,760.6
2006          Jan 191.6 171.7 101.4 44.3 1.1 20.8 3.6 0.4 237.0 233.7 608.4 2,337.1 1,772.6
         Feb 199.6 174.1 103.1 45.1 1.1 20.7 3.6 0.4 235.0 231.4 610.2 2,380.6 1,799.4         Mar 193.1 170.1 94.8 49.3 1.2 20.9 3.6 0.4 235.9 231.6 603.1 2,402.7 1,827.1
         Apr 182.6 177.5 99.6 51.8 1.2 21.0 3.4 0.4 249.7 246.0 613.1 2,411.4 1,836.6
         May 167.2 187.0 104.2 56.2 1.3 21.4 3.5 0.4 258.2 253.7 621.6 2,437.0 1,852.7         June 207.4 192.4 106.7 59.0 1.3 21.5 3.4 0.4 245.1 241.4 616.7 2,455.4 1,864.1
         July 194.3 191.8 106.2 59.3 1.2 21.4 3.2 0.4 250.5 246.7 627.4 2,470.2 1,872.8
         Aug 184.8 188.8 101.6 60.9 1.3 21.4 3.2 0.4 264.9 260.7 631.2 2,490.5 1,888.2         Sep 202.7 192.6 103.9 61.8 1.6 21.6 3.2 0.4 263.0 259.0 639.5 2,511.0 1,898.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2004          Aug 52.1 61.0 15.7 22.8 0.6 19.5 2.0 0.5 14.2 14.2 39.6 865.1 696.9         Sep 48.1 63.6 15.8 25.4 0.6 19.3 2.0 0.5 18.1 18.1 37.5 869.5 699.7
         Oct 45.6 59.4 15.0 21.9 0.7 19.2 2.1 0.5 21.2 21.2 36.2 865.5 691.2
         Nov 43.7 61.1 16.7 21.8 0.7 19.3 2.0 0.5 22.0 22.0 34.3 860.8 687.5         Dec 43.8 62.2 16.0 24.8 0.6 18.1 2.2 0.5 14.8 14.8 30.5 850.2 678.1
2005          Jan 45.2 63.0 17.9 23.9 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 25.1 25.1 30.2 854.7 673.7
         Feb 44.3 63.5 19.2 23.2 0.6 18.0 2.1 0.4 27.3 27.3 30.5 856.4 671.1         Mar 41.0 61.2 17.5 22.7 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 862.2 671.6
         Apr 41.8 59.4 17.5 20.9 0.6 18.0 1.9 0.5 28.6 28.6 32.6 875.9 676.5
         May 40.5 62.5 18.4 22.8 0.7 18.1 2.1 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 880.9 676.1         June 41.3 64.9 19.6 23.9 0.7 18.1 2.2 0.4 28.3 28.3 32.4 890.3 681.5
         July 41.7 62.4 18.5 22.4 0.6 18.1 2.3 0.5 26.7 26.7 33.8 892.6 682.4
         Aug 41.6 63.6 19.1 23.1 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 30.6 30.6 34.0 893.4 678.4         Sep 42.1 62.6 18.0 23.2 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 28.0 28.0 33.5 894.6 678.1
         Oct 40.9 61.9 19.6 20.9 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 32.3 32.3 31.1 896.4 679.9
         Nov 40.7 63.6 20.3 21.9 0.6 18.0 2.3 0.4 33.2 33.2 30.1 894.0 668.9         Dec 41.6 65.1 19.8 24.1 0.6 18.2 2.0 0.4 19.5 19.5 30.1 883.3 660.2
2006          Jan 43.6 65.8 19.2 25.4 0.7 18.3 1.9 0.4 27.4 27.4 29.4 889.1 664.7
         Feb 37.5 68.7 20.9 26.5 0.7 18.3 1.9 0.4 29.6 29.6 30.0 896.4 665.8         Mar 39.3 69.2 19.1 28.9 0.7 18.4 1.8 0.4 37.0 37.0 29.9 890.1 663.4
         Apr 39.1 70.2 18.9 29.8 0.8 18.5 1.8 0.4 35.6 35.6 29.8 882.1 656.5
         May 40.8 77.8 21.7 34.2 0.8 18.8 1.9 0.4 37.0 37.0 30.3 886.4 657.8         June 42.7 82.9 22.8 38.0 0.9 18.9 1.9 0.4 35.7 35.7 31.2 893.5 663.3
         July 43.7 81.4 22.0 37.7 0.8 18.7 1.8 0.4 30.1 30.1 30.5 895.0 662.6
         Aug 46.7 81.4 21.2 38.3 0.9 18.8 1.9 0.4 34.9 34.9 30.3 893.6 661.1         Sep 49.1 82.6 20.9 39.3 1.1 18.9 1.9 0.4 38.1 38.1 29.7 896.9 663.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
75.8 25.0 1,926.7 2,902.7 1,038.0 20.4 1,729.9 − 2,795.7 5,398.0 6,345.6 4,364.8 173.2 2004          Aug 
75.9 25.2 1,948.7 2,861.6 1,044.6 14.6 1,808.9 − 2,857.1 5,451.1 6,376.7 4,396.2 176.0          Sep 
73.1 27.6 1,958.4 2,847.5 1,047.0 20.8 1,843.5 − 2,866.0 5,490.4 6,436.1 4,416.2 177.7          Oct 
78.3 27.0 1,956.1 2,904.7 1,055.7 44.1 1,921.4 − 2,913.7 5,528.9 6,469.7 4,438.6 185.9          Nov 76.5 27.2 1,958.0 2,842.2 1,051.6 33.6 1,842.9 − 2,948.9 5,632.3 6,568.2 4,465.7 192.8          Dec 
74.0 26.3 1,986.4 2,993.4 1,054.4 29.3 1,899.0 − 2,966.0 5,637.3 6,581.6 4,499.5 192.6 2005          Jan 
81.0 33.9 2,008.7 3,029.0 1,058.9 21.9 1,903.2 − 2,970.1 5,643.4 6,599.9 4,534.0 195.5          Feb 
75.1 31.5 2,038.9 3,110.5 1,068.0 0.4 1,942.9 − 2,997.6 5,680.4 6,627.8 4,589.2 194.2          Mar 
89.1 31.9 2,055.8 3,224.7 1,068.8 15.5 2,020.0 − 3,031.1 5,738.4 6,713.4 4,612.0 194.8          Apr 
84.4 29.9 2,089.4 3,310.2 1,081.1 − 12.2 2,056.9 − 3,064.1 5,778.4 6,766.0 4,658.8 194.1          May87.2 32.5 2,123.6 3,251.9 1,133.2 − 14.7 2,152.4 − 3,304.4 5,851.9 6,830.7 4,804.1 196.6          June
87.5 32.3 2,130.0 3,288.1 1,136.2 − 15.6 2,149.1 − 3,321.8 5,890.0 6,882.9 4,815.3 200.9          July
87.2 34.8 2,141.5 3,279.6 1,143.0 1.9 2,156.3 − 3,268.6 5,852.9 6,862.8 4,834.0 201.9          Aug 87.5 34.8 2,161.8 3,381.1 1,166.2 − 17.8 2,181.2 − 3,322.5 5,933.0 6,918.7 4,878.8 203.0          Sep 
92.7 30.1 2,193.2 3,446.6 1,163.5 − 11.2 2,172.6 − 3,349.3 5,970.3 6,962.0 4,916.5 204.7          Oct 
99.2 32.0 2,202.9 3,638.9 1,178.6 − 5.0 2,332.8 − 3,378.5 5,995.7 6,994.7 4,954.4 211.3          Nov 94.7 32.1 2,195.9 3,545.6 1,200.6 13.6 2,258.9 − 3,479.6 6,152.9 7,116.8 5,005.8 222.6          Dec 
109.5 33.9 2,193.7 3,646.9 1,225.6 − 4.3 2,436.7 − 3,451.0 6,130.7 7,119.5 5,034.9 223.9 2006          Jan 
120.7 32.0 2,227.9 3,726.5 1,246.8 − 4.4 2,398.2 − 3,445.9 6,150.1 7,148.0 5,103.6 227.0          Feb 129.8 33.3 2,239.6 3,764.0 1,255.2 22.5 2,365.3 − 3,469.8 6,202.9 7,205.0 5,151.7 226.4          Mar 
130.2 33.6 2,247.5 3,818.6 1,250.7 8.9 2,430.7 − 3,522.0 6,292.9 7,319.6 5,169.4 225.6          Apr 
137.8 36.0 2,263.3 3,843.2 1,239.3 4.7 2,451.3 − 3,544.5 6,302.2 7,355.7 5,185.1 224.8          May125.5 36.3 2,293.6 3,731.9 1,243.5 13.8 2,381.4 − 3,598.7 6,373.2 7,396.8 5,232.3 225.6          June
120.9 39.6 2,309.7 3,810.3 1,274.0 15.1 2,376.7 − 3,573.6 6,369.8 7,408.1 5,289.0 226.0          July
137.7 41.2 2,311.6 3,826.7 1,271.8 9.1 2,374.2 − 3,516.5 6,347.1 7,422.2 5,293.1 225.8          Aug 139.0 41.4 2,330.5 3,935.2 1,269.2 − 1.0 2,510.0 − 3,579.1 6,443.2 7,526.2 5,314.1 226.2          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
29.2 26.5 809.4 636.6 278.9 − 69.5 480.2 58.6 646.4 1,394.0 1,503.5 1,874.5 − 2004          Aug 
27.5 26.1 815.9 654.3 277.5 − 80.2 493.1 60.9 660.7 1,403.1 1,512.3 1,880.2 −          Sep 
27.2 25.1 813.3 639.6 278.9 − 58.8 502.5 62.3 656.9 1,402.1 1,511.7 1,882.2 −          Oct 
29.5 22.7 808.7 669.7 277.1 − 73.6 510.9 63.1 685.2 1,420.6 1,529.0 1,879.6 −          Nov 27.5 22.5 800.2 627.6 277.6 − 69.5 516.2 63.4 655.4 1,423.3 1,518.6 1,875.2 −          Dec 
27.6 21.2 805.8 667.8 279.2 − 76.0 506.0 64.5 679.0 1,432.3 1,536.4 1,883.1 − 2005          Jan 
27.2 26.5 802.8 676.7 275.0 − 77.0 501.8 65.8 684.0 1,431.9 1,543.3 1,880.3 −          Feb 
23.6 26.1 812.6 695.2 276.1 − 95.6 510.3 67.9 684.1 1,425.8 1,535.8 1,893.9 −          Mar 
24.9 26.6 824.5 737.1 281.0 − 43.8 516.5 68.8 686.6 1,435.3 1,547.9 1,907.4 −          Apr 
25.1 24.4 831.5 745.4 282.5 − 89.5 517.3 71.3 696.1 1,447.7 1,557.5 1,911.5 −          May27.0 25.0 838.4 693.3 290.0 − 95.1 522.3 72.0 706.3 1,451.0 1,563.7 1,925.0 −          June
25.2 24.8 842.6 702.5 291.6 − 98.3 526.9 72.6 706.8 1,452.5 1,563.0 1,929.1 −          July
27.0 25.7 840.7 694.3 292.3 − 111.5 531.3 74.1 708.5 1,454.8 1,572.1 1,927.1 −          Aug 28.8 25.7 840.1 713.1 294.7 − 120.9 545.1 76.4 715.8 1,462.3 1,578.3 1,926.9 −          Sep 
28.8 26.5 841.0 720.5 298.7 − 131.6 554.0 76.5 718.8 1,466.8 1,585.5 1,930.5 −          Oct 
26.8 27.0 840.2 733.8 304.7 − 154.4 565.6 76.4 734.4 1,481.9 1,598.9 1,938.0 −          Nov 26.2 27.7 829.4 678.1 306.9 − 134.4 554.4 75.1 725.8 1,490.1 1,593.6 1,934.2 −          Dec 
24.5 28.8 835.8 701.4 327.5 − 107.9 552.8 75.8 728.2 1,491.3 1,601.5 1,962.8 − 2006          Jan 
23.5 27.7 845.2 720.2 332.3 − 126.0 551.4 77.8 725.6 1,489.2 1,600.0 1,982.6 −          Feb 
23.8 29.2 837.2 729.6 336.7 − 134.5 561.8 78.2 733.4 1,496.1 1,616.0 1,979.6 −          Mar 
22.8 29.5 829.7 723.2 340.8 − 104.1 571.1 78.7 742.5 1,515.9 1,633.7 1,980.6 −          Apr 
23.0 31.5 831.9 729.4 336.0 − 122.8 576.7 79.5 746.9 1,517.1 1,639.0 1,980.8 −          May20.8 33.4 839.4 712.3 336.5 − 114.0 568.3 80.6 750.3 1,522.8 1,643.8 1,991.6 −          June
18.9 34.3 841.9 698.3 348.5 − 118.1 569.0 81.2 740.4 1,513.6 1,627.3 2,009.4 −          July
20.8 36.8 836.0 703.2 344.1 − 137.3 570.2 83.9 734.1 1,512.5 1,635.3 2,003.5 −          Aug 20.6 38.8 837.5 723.5 336.2 − 121.3 588.9 85.9 735.0 1,520.1 1,647.2 1,997.4 −          Sep 
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2004          Apr 301.4 217.9 67.1 0.4 − 0.4 − 425.3 51.5 − 25.7 135.3 561.0
         May 310.7 213.2 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 436.4 46.0 − 18.9 135.0 571.5         June 311.3 224.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.5 − 442.5 52.2 − 21.1 137.1 580.1
         July 308.2 245.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 449.1 65.0 − 24.1 138.8 588.1
         Aug 300.8 253.6 75.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 460.9 61.1 − 31.8 139.1 600.1         Sep 299.4 251.6 75.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 462.8 56.3 − 32.4 139.3 602.3
         Oct 298.8 256.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 465.1 58.2 − 32.1 139.3 604.4
         Nov 298.3 257.9 75.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 − 469.7 55.1 − 32.1 138.4 608.4
         Dec 298.0 265.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.5 475.4 60.2 − 36.0 138.5 614.1
2005          Jan 290.3 272.9 75.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 496.0 45.3 − 41.9 139.1 635.2
         Feb 280.6 276.6 78.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 487.1 63.8 − 55.5 140.0 627.2
         Mar 280.2 277.8 82.2 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 489.5 68.5 − 59.2 141.3 630.9
         Apr 282.1 278.2 86.9 0.2 − 0.1 − 498.6 67.4 − 62.1 143.3 642.0
         May 287.0 276.5 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 505.5 62.9 − 58.9 144.0 649.7         June 286.8 273.1 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 512.8 53.5 − 62.0 145.5 658.5
         July 293.3 297.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.3 522.6 67.4 − 57.3 147.9 670.6
         Aug 305.5 309.5 90.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.0 532.6 67.4 − 45.0 149.8 682.7         Sep 304.8 303.5 90.0 − 0.3 0.1 − 531.5 63.1 − 46.2 150.2 681.8
         Oct 307.9 288.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 531.6 47.9 − 44.6 151.4 683.1
         Nov 315.1 293.4 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 535.6 50.4 − 37.9 150.2 686.0         Dec 313.2 301.3 90.0 0.0 − 0.1 0.3 539.8 51.0 − 39.6 153.0 692.9
2006          Jan 317.6 316.4 89.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 559.2 44.2 − 33.5 154.1 713.3
         Feb 325.2 310.0 96.2 0.0 0.3 0.1 − 548.4 56.6 − 28.7 155.4 703.9
         Mar 324.7 299.3 104.7 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 550.8 53.3 − 34.0 158.3 709.2
         Apr 327.9 290.1 113.7 0.1 0.7 0.3 − 556.4 51.6 − 35.2 159.5 716.2
         May 337.0 291.3 120.0 0.2 − 0.2 0.4 569.1 51.1 − 33.5 161.2 730.5
         June 336.9 287.0 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 572.0 45.5 − 37.0 163.3 735.4
         July 334.3 316.5 120.0 0.2 − 0.6 0.3 578.8 67.0 − 42.1 166.3 745.7
         Aug 327.6 329.7 120.0 0.2 − 0.1 0.6 588.2 73.0 − 51.5 167.1 755.4         Sep 327.3 314.0 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 588.7 61.4 − 55.6 166.4 755.2
         Oct 326.7 308.7 120.0 0.1 0.3 0.2 − 588.5 59.1 − 59.1 167.0 755.7
Deutsche Bundesbank
2004          Apr 72.9 97.9 48.7 0.2 − 0.3 − 115.8 0.1 65.7 37.8 153.9
         May 75.4 100.7 51.8 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 119.3 0.1 70.9 37.7 157.0         June 75.6 115.6 49.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.2 0.1 80.9 38.3 159.9
         July 74.6 127.9 49.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 122.7 0.1 91.1 38.5 161.1
         Aug 72.1 136.9 50.3 0.0 − 0.1 − 126.2 0.1 94.7 38.3 164.6
         Sep 72.2 131.7 50.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 127.5 0.1 88.8 37.9 165.4
         Oct 72.1 129.8 48.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 127.7 0.1 84.8 37.5 165.3
         Nov 72.2 136.0 46.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 − 128.3 0.1 88.4 37.5 166.0
         Dec 72.2 142.4 46.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 129.9 0.1 93.4 37.6 167.5
2005          Jan 70.2 144.7 46.9 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 135.2 0.1 89.1 37.4 172.7
         Feb 67.7 137.7 49.4 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 133.2 0.1 83.8 37.9 171.1         Mar 67.6 145.3 52.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.0 134.0 0.1 93.5 37.5 171.5
         Apr 68.1 133.3 53.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 136.6 0.0 79.8 38.0 174.7
         May 69.3 140.3 52.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 138.4 0.1 85.9 38.1 176.5         June 69.5 139.3 52.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 141.2 0.1 81.5 38.5 179.7
         July 71.1 149.5 53.0 0.1 − 0.0 0.1 142.6 0.1 92.0 38.9 181.6
         Aug 74.1 155.6 53.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 145.2 0.0 98.9 39.4 184.7         Sep 74.0 148.4 52.6 0.0 0.2 0.0 − 145.2 0.0 90.9 39.0 184.3
         Oct 75.1 149.4 55.1 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 145.1 0.1 95.2 39.0 184.2
         Nov 77.2 145.0 54.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 145.4 0.0 92.6 38.8 184.2
         Dec 77.2 140.9 54.4 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 146.9 0.0 86.0 39.3 186.3
2006          Jan 79.1 154.1 55.7 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 151.9 0.0 97.9 39.2 191.2
         Feb 81.6 158.1 61.6 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 149.7 0.1 112.1 39.6 189.3
         Mar 81.0 145.8 68.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 150.7 0.1 104.7 39.6 190.4
         Apr 82.5 137.8 74.3 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 151.5 0.0 103.6 39.7 191.3
         May 85.2 152.2 76.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 154.8 0.0 118.5 40.2 195.0         June 84.9 153.9 73.7 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 156.2 0.1 115.5 40.6 197.0
         July 84.0 162.4 71.6 0.1 − 0.4 0.1 157.9 0.1 118.6 41.0 199.3
         Aug 82.3 171.6 72.1 0.1 − 0.0 0.5 160.1 0.1 124.3 41.2 201.3         Sep 82.3 156.8 73.4 0.1 − 0.0 0.2 160.9 0.0 110.2 41.2 202.2
         Oct 82.6 155.6 76.7 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 160.5 0.1 113.7 40.9 201.5
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem forof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 1.9 − 1.5 + 10.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 7.3 + 2.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.7 2004          Apr 
+ 9.3 − 4.7 + 7.9 − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 5.5 + 6.8 − 0.3 + 10.5          May
+ 0.6 + 11.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − 0.4 + 6.1 + 6.2 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 8.6          June
− 3.1 + 20.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 12.8 − 3.0 + 1.7 + 8.0          July
− 7.4 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 11.8 − 3.9 − 7.7 + 0.3 + 12.0          Aug 
− 1.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 − 4.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.2          Sep 
− 0.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.1          Oct 
− 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − + 4.6 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 4.0          Nov 
− 0.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.7 + 5.1 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 5.7          Dec 
− 7.7 + 7.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 20.6 − 14.9 − 5.9 + 0.6 + 21.1 2005          Jan 
− 9.7 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 8.9 + 18.5 − 13.6 + 0.9 − 8.0          Feb 
− 0.4 + 1.2 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 4.7 − 3.7 + 1.3 + 3.7          Mar 
+ 1.9 + 0.4 + 4.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 − 1.1 − 2.9 + 2.0 + 11.1          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 6.9 − 4.5 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 7.7          May− 0.2 − 3.4
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.3 − 9.4 − 3.1 + 1.5 + 8.8          June
+ 6.5 + 24.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 9.8 + 13.9 + 4.7 + 2.4 + 12.1          July
+ 12.2 + 11.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 12.3 + 1.9 + 12.1          Aug − 0.7 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.9          Sep 
+ 3.1 − 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 15.2 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 1.3          Oct 
+ 7.2 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.0 + 2.5 + 6.7 − 1.2 + 2.9          Nov − 1.9 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.8 + 6.9          Dec 
+ 4.4 + 15.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 19.4 − 6.8 + 6.1 + 1.1 + 20.4 2006          Jan 
+ 7.6 − 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 10.8 + 12.4 + 4.8 + 1.3 − 9.4          Feb 
− 0.5 − 10.7 + 8.5 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.9 + 5.3          Mar 
+ 3.2 − 9.2 + 9.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 1.2 + 7.0          Apr 
+ 9.1 + 1.2 + 6.3 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 12.7 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 14.3          May
− 0.1 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 2.9 − 5.6 − 3.5 + 2.1 + 4.9          June
− 2.6 + 29.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 21.5 − 5.1 + 3.0 + 10.3          July
− 6.7 + 13.2
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.5 + 0.3 + 9.4 + 6.0 − 9.4 + 0.8 + 9.7          Aug 
− 0.3 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 11.6 − 4.1 − 0.7 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.6 − 5.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.5          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.5 − 11.8 + 7.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 2.4 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 2.4 2004          Apr 
+ 2.5 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 3.1          May
+ 0.2 + 14.9 − 2.4 + 0.1 − + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 2.9          June
− 1.0 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 1.3          July
− 2.5 + 9.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 3.5          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.3 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 + 0.8          Sep 
− 0.1 − 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.7          Nov 
− 0.0 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 1.6          Dec 
− 2.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 5.1 2005          Jan 
− 2.5 − 6.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 2.0 + 0.0 − 5.3 + 0.4 − 1.6          Feb 
− 0.0 + 7.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.7 − 0.4 + 0.4          Mar 
+ 0.4 − 12.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 13.7 + 0.5 + 3.2          Apr 
+ 1.3 + 7.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.7 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 0.1 + 1.8          May+ 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 0.4 + 3.3          June
+ 1.7 + 10.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.4 + 1.8          July
+ 3.0 + 6.1 + 0.9 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.5 + 3.1          Aug − 0.2 − 7.2 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.4 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 2.1 − 4.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 + 0.1          Nov 
− 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 6.6 + 0.5 + 2.1          Dec 
+ 1.9 + 13.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 − 0.1 + 4.9 2006          Jan 
+ 2.5 + 4.0 + 5.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 2.3 + 0.0 + 14.2 + 0.3 − 1.9          Feb 
− 0.6 − 12.3 + 6.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 1.1          Mar 
+ 1.5 − 8.0 + 6.0
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9          Apr 
+ 2.7 + 14.4 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 14.9 + 0.5 + 3.7          May
− 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.6 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 0.9 + 8.4 − 2.1 − 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.4          July
− 1.7 + 9.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 2.0          Aug + 0.0 − 14.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 14.1 + 0.1 + 0.8          Sep 
+ 0.3 − 1.2 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.4 − 0.7          Oct 
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingeuro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2006 Mar                  3 1 055.8 163.4 152.6 12.5 140.1 24.1 11.6 11.6 −
                              10 1 052.3 163.3 151.6 12.5 139.1 25.3 11.2 11.2 −
                              17 1 044.0 163.2 150.1 12.5 137.6 25.8 11.9 11.9 −
                              24 1 056.1 163.1 151.0 12.5 138.6 26.9 11.8 11.8 −
                              31 3 1 067.5 3 180.8 3 144.7 12.1 3 132.6 3 25.8 11.4 11.4 −
         Apr                  7 1 067.0 180.7 147.0 12.1 134.9 26.5 12.0 12.0 −
                              13 1 075.1 180.7 145.8 12.1 133.7 25.5 12.5 12.5 −
                              21 1 084.8 180.6 145.2 12.1 133.1 24.7 12.1 12.1 −
                              28 1 080.4 180.5 146.0 12.1 134.0 24.4 13.0 13.0 −
         May                 5 1 079.3 179.6 149.5 11.7 137.9 25.2 12.4 12.4 −
                              12 1 075.7 179.6 147.0 11.7 135.3 25.3 12.7 12.7 −
                              19 1 076.4 179.5 148.2 11.7 136.5 25.9 12.8 12.8 −
                              26 1 084.1 179.5 147.0 11.7 135.3 25.3 13.3 13.3 −
         June                 2 1 084.5 179.5 148.0 11.7 136.3 26.1 13.5 13.5 −
                                9 1 080.5 179.5 147.6 11.7 135.9 25.5 13.2 13.2 −
                              16 1 087.3 179.4 149.3 11.7 137.6 25.1 12.4 12.4 −
                              23 1 112.5 179.4 149.7 14.1 135.6 26.2 13.3 13.3 −
                              30 3 1 112.8 3 175.5 3 142.1 12.9 3 129.2 3 25.7 13.5 13.5 −
2006 July                 7 1 111.4 175.3 143.1 12.9 130.2 25.1 13.3 13.3 −
                              14 1 107.8 175.2 142.6 12.9 129.8 24.6 13.5 13.5 −
                              21 1 125.2 175.2 143.8 12.8 130.9 24.8 12.9 12.9 −
                              28 1 128.3 175.1 142.7 12.7 130.1 24.7 13.2 13.2 −
         Aug                  4 1 114.6 175.1 141.1 12.9 128.2 25.7 13.7 13.7 −
                              11 1 112.7 175.1 142.6 12.8 129.8 25.5 13.1 13.1 −
                              18 1 103.9 175.1 143.4 12.8 130.6 24.9 13.1 13.1 −
                              25 1 113.0 175.1 143.5 12.7 130.8 24.4 12.4 12.4 −
         Sep                  1 1 107.3 175.0 142.7 12.7 130.0 25.3 12.0 12.0 −
                                8 1 105.4 174.9 142.4 12.6 129.8 26.3 11.9 11.9 −
                              15 1 102.2 174.4 143.4 12.5 130.9 26.8 10.7 10.7 −
                              22 1 112.5 174.2 142.2 12.4 129.8 27.0 10.9 10.9 −
                              29 3 1 118.3 3 175.4 3 144.6 12.4 3 132.3 25.6 10.7 10.7 −
         Oct                  6 1 114.6 175.3 143.0 12.3 130.6 24.4 10.5 10.5 −
                              13 1 110.2 175.3 141.6 11.8 129.7 23.8 9.9 9.9 −
                              20 1 121.3 175.2 142.0 11.3 130.8 23.0 10.8 10.8 −
                              27 1 118.7 175.1 142.4 11.2 131.2 22.1 10.2 10.2 −
         Nov                  3 1 113.2 175.0 142.0 11.2 130.8 23.5 10.9 10.9 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2004          Dec 3 293.5 3 35.5 3 35.8 6.5 3 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
2005          Jan 287.9 35.5 36.2 6.5 29.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 300.1 35.5 35.7 6.4 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 294.6 3 36.4 3 37.4 6.1 3 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 299.0 36.4 37.0 6.1 30.9 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 304.6 36.4 37.2 6.2 31.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 310.7 3 39.8 3 38.9 5.8 3 33.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 317.5 39.8 38.6 5.0 33.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 315.3 39.8 37.6 5.0 32.6 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 325.0 3 43.3 39.5 5.0 34.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 324.6 43.3 39.3 5.0 34.3 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 329.2 43.3 38.2 5.0 33.2 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 344.1 3 47.9 3 38.3 4.5 3 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
2006          Jan 338.9 47.9 38.3 4.5 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 335.1 47.9 36.7 3.8 32.9 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 340.5 3 53.2 3 36.0 3.8 3 32.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 344.9 53.2 34.5 3.7 30.8 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 357.5 53.1 35.6 3.4 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 359.1 3 52.0 3 33.9 3.6 3 30.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 364.4 52.0 34.3 3.5 30.8 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 358.2 52.0 33.6 3.5 30.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 362.4 52.3 33.6 3.4 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 366.4 52.3 33.2 3.1 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
411.5 301.5 110.0 − − 0.0 − 3.6 95.5 40.6 153.0 2006 Mar                  3
408.0 298.0 110.0 − − 0.0 − 4.3 94.6 40.6 153.3                               10
400.6 290.5 110.0 − − 0.0 − 5.1 93.8 40.6 152.8                               17
408.0 298.0 110.0 − − − 0.0 5.1 95.3 40.6 154.3                               24
404.1 284.0 120.0 − − 0.1 − 5.9 3 94.8 40.6 3 159.5                               31
400.0 280.0 120.0 − − − − 5.3 95.8 40.6 159.3          Apr                  7
408.5 288.5 120.0 − − 0.0 − 5.4 94.9 40.6 161.3                               13
418.2 298.0 120.0 − − 0.2 − 5.3 95.1 40.6 163.1                               21
411.1 291.0 120.0 − − 0.1 − 5.7 93.8 40.6 165.4                               28
406.0 286.0 120.0 − − 0.0 − 6.1 94.0 40.6 165.9          May                  5
404.0 284.0 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 5.4 95.0 40.6 166.1                               12
403.3 283.0 120.0 − − 0.3 − 5.8 93.6 40.6 166.8                               19
411.5 291.5 120.0 − − − 0.0 5.8 93.5 40.6 167.6                               26
410.5 290.5 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 5.6 93.3 40.6 167.4          June                  2
406.2 286.0 120.0 − − 0.2 − 5.5 94.2 40.6 168.3                                 9
412.0 292.0 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 6.1 93.8 40.6 168.5                               16
436.0 316.0 120.0 − − − − 6.1 92.1 40.6 169.1                               23
448.6 328.5 120.0 − − 0.1 0.0 6.1 91.6 40.0 3 169.6                               30
446.0 326.0 120.0 − − − − 5.9 91.5 40.0 171.1 2006 July                  7
441.5 321.5 120.0 − − − − 5.9 89.6 40.0 174.9                               14
455.3 335.0 120.0 − − 0.3 0.0 6.4 88.7 40.0 178.1                               21
458.0 338.0 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 6.1 87.1 40.1 181.2                               28
444.0 324.0 120.0 − − − 0.0 6.3 85.9 40.1 182.8          Aug                  4
438.2 318.0 120.0 − − 0.1 − 6.6 85.8 40.1 185.7                               11
431.0 311.0 120.0 − − − 0.0 6.6 84.3 40.1 185.5                               18
437.5 317.5 120.0 − − − 0.0 7.6 84.7 40.0 187.8                               25
430.5 310.5 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 8.3 83.8 40.0 189.6          Sep                  1
427.0 307.0 120.0 − − − − 8.4 83.9 40.0 190.6                                 8
420.6 300.5 120.0 − − 0.1 − 9.3 83.9 40.0 193.0                               15
431.0 311.0 120.0 − − 0.0 − 9.1 83.1 40.0 194.9                               22
433.5 313.0 120.0 − − 0.5 0.0 9.2 81.6 40.0 197.7                               29
432.0 312.0 120.0 − − 0.0 − 9.4 81.6 40.0 198.4          Oct                  6
428.0 308.0 120.0 − − 0.0 − 9.1 81.4 40.0 201.1                               13
438.5 318.5 120.0 − − − 0.0 8.9 81.0 40.0 201.9                               20
434.0 314.0 120.0 − − 0.0 − 10.1 80.9 40.0 203.9                               27
427.0 307.0 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 9.1 79.3 40.0 206.3          Nov                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
190.4 143.0 47.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9 2004          Dec 
185.1 134.3 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.3 2005          Jan 
205.2 151.7 53.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 184.4 129.9 52.1 − − 2.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 31.7          Mar 
201.7 148.2 53.5 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Apr 
190.8 139.3 51.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 35.6          May208.1 151.2 55.6 − − 1.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2          June
215.3 163.4 51.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
194.5 142.6 51.9 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 38.6          Aug 211.2 156.0 54.8 − − 0.4 − 0.1 − 4.4 26.1          Sep 
203.0 148.6 54.2 − − 0.2 − 0.1 − 4.4 34.2          Oct 
195.0 140.8 54.2 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 47.8          Nov 203.9 146.5 56.4 − − 0.9 − 0.1 − 4.4 49.2          Dec 
227.2 162.5 64.7 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 20.6 2006          Jan 
218.9 146.4 72.5 − − 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.4 26.6          Feb 
224.5 147.1 77.4 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 21.7          Mar 
233.0 158.0 74.9 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.2          Apr 
227.6 152.6 74.9 − − 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.4 36.2          May248.8 177.3 71.5 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3          June
253.8 177.9 72.8 − − 3.2 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3          July
223.0 147.3 75.7 − − 0.0 − 1.6 − 4.4 43.4          Aug 234.1 155.2 78.5 − − 0.5 − 3.0 − 4.4 34.7          Sep 
243.3 164.0 79.3 − − 0.0 − 3.0 − 4.4 29.9          Oct 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2006 Mar                  3 1 055.8 555.2 159.0 158.9 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 64.5 56.8 7.6
                              10 1 052.3 555.5 159.7 159.7 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 60.0 52.1 7.8
                              17 1 044.0 554.7 160.3 160.2 0.0 − − − 0.2 − 52.0 44.2 7.8
                              24 1 056.1 553.3 159.9 159.9 0.0 − − − 0.2 − 66.1 58.4 7.8
                              31 5 1 067.5 557.2 156.1 155.8 0.4 − − 0.0 0.1 − 63.1 55.3 7.8
         Apr                  7 1 067.0 563.4 156.8 156.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 55.8 48.1 7.7
                              13 1 075.1 571.6 159.6 159.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 54.4 46.8 7.6
                              21 1 084.8 565.9 161.8 161.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 68.1 60.8 7.3
                              28 1 080.4 568.8 154.5 153.9 0.6 − − − 0.1 − 66.2 58.8 7.4
         May                 5 1 079.3 572.7 160.5 160.5 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 51.6 44.1 7.5
                              12 1 075.7 570.4 167.1 167.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 48.0 40.5 7.5
                              19 1 076.4 568.6 160.0 160.0 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 55.3 47.8 7.5
                              26 1 084.1 570.3 162.5 162.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 59.9 52.4 7.6
         June                 2 1 084.5 575.9 160.4 160.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 55.7 47.8 7.9
                                9 1 080.5 576.5 160.6 159.9 0.7 − − − 0.1 − 52.7 44.6 8.1
                              16 1 087.3 576.4 165.8 165.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 52.2 44.4 7.8
                              23 1 112.5 575.2 162.6 162.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 83.4 75.3 8.1
                              30 5 1 112.8 580.1 158.5 157.4 1.2 − − 0.0 0.1 − 94.0 86.2 7.9
2006 July                 7 1 111.4 585.3 168.6 168.5 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 77.5 69.5 7.9
                              14 1 107.8 586.6 168.3 168.2 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 72.9 64.9 8.0
                              21 1 125.2 586.2 168.3 168.3 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 87.5 79.6 7.9
                              28 1 128.3 588.4 162.3 162.2 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 94.8 86.8 8.0
         Aug                  4 1 114.6 593.9 167.9 167.8 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 70.4 62.3 8.1
                              11 1 112.7 594.2 167.4 167.4 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 66.8 58.7 8.1
                              18 1 103.9 590.7 169.2 169.1 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 61.1 53.1 8.1
                              25 1 113.0 584.9 166.1 166.1 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 78.4 70.4 8.0
         Sep                  1 1 107.3 587.2 170.3 170.2 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 65.2 57.1 8.1
                                8 1 105.4 589.2 165.1 165.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 65.8 57.9 7.9
                              15 1 102.2 587.9 168.0 167.5 0.5 − − 0.0 0.1 − 58.6 50.6 8.0
                              22 1 112.5 585.9 167.1 167.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 71.0 63.0 8.1
                              29 5 1 118.3 589.2 163.2 162.0 1.3 − − 0.0 0.1 − 74.5 66.4 8.1
         Oct                  6 1 114.6 592.9 165.8 165.8 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 68.5 60.3 8.2
                              13 1 110.2 592.9 166.0 166.0 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 65.0 57.1 7.9
                              20 1 121.3 591.0 168.2 168.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 75.3 66.9 8.4
                              27 1 118.7 592.0 165.5 165.4 0.0 − − 0.1 0.1 − 73.9 65.3 8.6
         Nov                  3 1 113.2 597.0 170.2 170.2 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 57.0 48.5 8.5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2004          Dec 5 293.5 136.3 41.3 41.2 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2005          Jan 287.9 132.3 40.8 40.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Feb 300.1 133.0 40.2 40.2 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Mar 
5 294.6 136.1 38.1 38.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.3
         Apr 299.0 137.9 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         May 304.6 139.4 41.3 41.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         June
5 310.7 142.6 34.6 33.7 0.8 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         July 317.5 145.2 39.7 39.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Aug 315.3 143.5 39.0 39.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Sep 
5 325.0 145.0 38.8 38.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Oct 324.6 146.2 37.4 37.3 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Nov 329.2 147.3 41.9 41.7 0.2 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Dec 
5 344.1 153.7 46.3 46.3 0.0 − − − 0.2 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2006          Jan 338.9 148.8 45.4 45.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Feb 335.1 149.9 38.5 38.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.0 0.6         Mar 
5 340.5 151.5 39.7 39.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Apr 344.9 154.7 38.8 38.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4         May 357.5 155.3 51.4 51.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         June
5 359.1 157.8 39.9 39.4 0.5 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 364.4 160.3 52.4 52.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Aug 358.2 159.3 46.0 45.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4         Sep 
5 362.4 160.3 46.2 45.5 0.7 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 366.4 161.8 48.0 47.8 0.2 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of thisfinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
13.1 0.2 9.8 9.8 − 5.9 66.9 − 119.1 62.0 2006 Mar                  3
13.2 0.3 10.3 10.3 − 5.9 66.1 − 119.1 62.0                               10
13.7 0.2 9.6 9.6 − 5.9 66.3 − 119.1 62.1                               17
13.8 0.1 11.8 11.8 − 5.9 63.7 − 119.1 62.1                               24
14.7 0.1 9.2 9.2 − 5.8 5 66.7 − 5 132.4 62.0                               31
13.9 0.2 11.0 11.0 − 5.8 65.6 − 132.4 62.0          Apr                  7
13.6 0.2 9.0 9.0 − 5.8 66.4 − 132.4 62.0                               13
13.6 0.2 7.6 7.6 − 5.8 67.3 − 132.4 62.0                               21
14.1 0.2 8.1 8.1 − 5.8 68.1 − 132.4 62.0                               28
14.3 0.2 11.4 11.4 − 5.8 68.0 − 132.4 62.1          May                  5
14.1 0.2 9.2 9.2 − 5.8 65.6 − 132.4 62.8                               12
14.3 0.2 10.6 10.6 − 5.8 66.1 − 132.4 62.8                               19
14.8 0.2 8.9 8.9 − 5.8 66.2 − 132.4 62.8                               26
14.5 0.2 10.6 10.6 − 5.8 65.9 − 132.4 62.8          June                  2
14.3 0.1 9.5 9.5 − 5.8 65.7 − 132.4 62.8                                 9
14.5 0.1 10.9 10.9 − 5.8 66.0 − 132.4 62.8                               16
14.5 0.1 10.0 10.0 − 5.8 65.7 − 132.4 62.8                               23
14.5 0.1 8.7 8.7 − 5.7 5 66.2 − 5 122.0 62.8                               30
14.5 0.1 9.2 9.2 − 5.7 65.6 − 122.0 62.8 2006 July                  7
14.8 0.1 8.5 8.5 − 5.7 66.0 − 122.0 62.9                               14
15.3 0.1 10.3 10.3 − 5.7 66.7 − 122.0 62.9                               21
15.4 0.1 9.6 9.6 − 5.7 67.0 − 122.0 62.9                               28
15.3 0.1 9.1 9.1 − 5.7 67.2 − 122.0 62.9          Aug                  4
15.7 0.1 10.3 10.3 − 5.7 67.5 − 122.0 62.9                               11
16.0 0.1 10.3 10.3 − 5.7 64.4 − 122.0 64.4                               18
16.2 0.1 9.9 9.9 − 5.7 65.3 − 122.0 64.4                               25
16.2 0.1 9.9 9.9 − 5.7 66.2 − 122.0 64.4          Sep                  1
16.1 0.1 10.7 10.7 − 5.7 66.1 − 122.0 64.4                                 8
15.7 0.1 12.4 12.4 − 5.7 67.0 − 122.0 64.6                               15
16.9 0.1 12.2 12.2 − 5.7 67.0 − 122.0 64.6                               22
15.7 0.1 11.6 11.6 − 5.7 5 69.9 − 5 123.7 64.6                               29
15.9 0.2 8.3 8.3 − 5.7 68.7 − 123.7 64.6          Oct                  6
16.1 0.1 6.8 6.8 − 5.7 69.1 − 123.7 64.6                               13
15.9 0.1 7.1 7.1 − 5.7 69.5 − 123.7 64.6                               20
16.1 0.1 6.7 6.7 − 5.7 70.3 − 123.7 64.6                               27
16.4 0.1 7.5 7.5 − 5.7 70.8 − 123.7 64.6          Nov                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
5.9 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4 5 9.7 63.4 5 27.8 5.0 2004          Dec 
3.5 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 64.5 27.8 5.0 2005          Jan 
3.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.4 21.0 65.8 27.8 5.0          Feb 
3.2 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 9.4 67.9 5 30.1 5.0          Mar 
3.4 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 68.8 30.1 5.0          Apr 3.5 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.4 9.6 71.3 30.1 5.0          May3.3 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.5 13.0 72.0
5 35.9 5.0          June
3.5 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 10.8 72.6 35.9 5.0          July3.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.5 10.5 74.1 35.9 5.0          Aug 3.5 0.0 4.1 4.1 − 1.5 11.0 76.4
5 39.2 5.0          Sep 
3.4 0.0 4.0 4.0 − 1.5 11.0 76.5 39.2 5.0          Oct 3.4 0.0 2.9 2.9 − 1.5 11.2 76.4 39.2 5.0          Nov 3.4 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.5 11.3 75.1
5 44.3 5.0          Dec 
3.4 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 11.5 75.8 44.3 5.0 2006          Jan 
3.5 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.5 12.0 77.8 44.3 5.0          Feb 3.8 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.4 9.4 78.2
5 48.5 5.0          Mar 
3.6 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 1.4 12.7 78.7 48.5 5.0          Apr 3.8 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.4 9.8 79.5 48.5 5.0          May3.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.4 22.3 80.6
5 45.8 5.0          June
3.6 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.4 11.6 81.2 45.8 5.0          July3.6 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.4 11.1 83.9 45.8 5.0          Aug 3.6 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 11.8 85.9
5 46.4 5.0          Sep 
3.7 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 11.9 86.5 46.4 5.0          Oct 
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.8
1998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.22004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.32004          Dec 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.82005          Jan 6,672.1 13.2 2,182.9 1,749.0 1,124.6 624.4 433.9 312.6 121.4 3,377.2 3,092.4 2,478.8 2,216.8
         Feb 6,717.4 12.8 2,220.8 1,752.4 1,124.4 628.1 468.3 339.6 128.7 3,372.3 3,080.6 2,474.4 2,219.9         Mar 6,723.0 13.6 2,215.6 1,757.1 1,123.7 633.4 458.5 325.4 133.0 3,379.8 3,084.0 2,475.2 2,216.6
         Apr 6,908.4 13.1 2,275.5 1,814.0 1,174.8 639.1 461.6 325.9 135.6 3,442.4 3,127.8 2,518.2 2,217.5
         May 6,892.0 13.8 2,284.9 1,808.0 1,167.1 640.9 477.0 338.3 138.6 3,422.1 3,107.1 2,500.9 2,220.6         June 6,851.3 13.6 2,279.3 1,788.0 1,141.2 646.8 491.4 348.5 142.8 3,392.9 3,073.3 2,482.3 2,222.8
         July 6,871.3 14.0 2,282.1 1,797.8 1,149.9 647.8 484.3 342.6 141.7 3,395.6 3,082.2 2,488.3 2,224.4
         Aug 6,849.5 13.5 2,270.8 1,787.5 1,143.7 643.8 483.3 338.5 144.8 3,397.7 3,085.8 2,491.0 2,225.3         Sep 6,873.8 14.0 2,271.5 1,770.2 1,129.9 640.3 501.3 353.7 147.6 3,403.1 3,089.8 2,505.3 2,238.3
         Oct 6,888.8 14.1 2,270.7 1,754.8 1,123.5 631.3 515.9 368.7 147.2 3,412.5 3,098.7 2,512.0 2,244.5
         Nov 6,924.1 13.3 2,287.0 1,760.4 1,133.3 627.1 526.6 373.7 152.9 3,417.1 3,093.2 2,510.3 2,240.3         Dec 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006          Jan 6,940.6 13.3 2,275.4 1,739.2 1,128.2 610.9 536.2 374.0 162.3 3,458.7 3,123.8 2,542.5 2,251.5
         Feb 6,967.7 14.1 2,289.3 1,745.9 1,132.6 613.4 543.4 376.9 166.4 3,458.7 3,117.1 2,546.9 2,255.5         Mar 7,004.8 13.3 2,302.4 1,736.7 1,123.2 613.4 565.7 392.7 172.9 3,474.5 3,127.4 2,556.8 2,258.4
         Apr 7,075.7 14.5 2,320.4 1,768.4 1,156.7 611.7 552.1 379.5 172.6 3,518.0 3,161.1 2,590.8 2,264.9
         May 7,102.2 14.0 2,347.5 1,787.1 1,170.6 616.5 560.4 381.7 178.7 3,513.5 3,160.4 2,584.0 2,264.5         June 7,075.1 13.8 2,316.3 1,738.4 1,130.8 607.6 577.9 391.7 186.2 3,481.8 3,122.7 2,560.2 2,265.4
         July 7,040.0 13.7 2,299.7 1,733.4 1,133.2 600.1 566.3 379.1 187.2 3,476.6 3,119.5 2,555.2 2,261.1
         Aug 7,034.6 13.6 2,300.0 1,732.6 1,136.0 596.7 567.3 376.8 190.5 3,472.6 3,117.7 2,558.7 2,263.2         Sep 7,077.2 14.2 2,278.0 1,705.0 1,111.7 593.3 573.0 374.8 198.2 3,492.6 3,122.1 2,571.2 2,280.7
 Changes 1
1998 1,001.0 − 0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.21999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.12002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.42004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2005 197.2 0.1 101.8 13.2 25.7 − 12.5 88.6 50.5 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.52005          Jan 40.4 − 2.0 8.2 − 1.2 1.7 − 2.9 9.4 6.2 3.2 20.9 11.7 1.9 − 4.1
         Feb 50.7 − 0.4 38.0 3.6 − 0.2 3.8 34.5 27.1 7.4 − 2.2 − 9.4 − 2.0 5.4         Mar − 0.5 0.8 − 4.9 4.9 − 0.6 5.6 − 9.9 − 14.2 4.3 8.5 4.8 2.2 − 1.9
         Apr 183.0 − 0.5 59.4 56.8 51.1 5.7 2.6 0.5 2.1 63.2 44.4 43.7 1.4
         May − 32.5 0.7 9.2 − 6.1 − 7.7 1.6 15.3 12.4 2.9 − 21.7 − 21.4 − 18.0 2.6         June − 46.3 − 0.2 − 5.5 − 19.8 − 25.9 6.1 14.4 10.2 4.2 − 27.7 − 32.1 − 16.7 4.4
         July 22.1 0.4 2.9 10.0 8.8 1.2 − 7.0 − 5.9 − 1.1 3.9 10.0 7.0 2.7
         Aug − 19.9 − 0.5 − 11.3 − 10.5 − 6.2 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 3.6 2.7 2.8 4.3 3.4 1.3         Sep 20.2 0.5 0.7 − 17.3 − 13.8 − 3.5 18.0 15.2 2.8 5.1 4.0 14.0 12.8
         Oct 14.7 0.1 − 0.8 − 15.4 − 6.4 − 9.0 14.6 15.1 − 0.5 10.3 9.6 7.4 6.8
         Nov 29.4 − 0.8 16.6 5.9 9.8 − 3.8 10.7 4.9 5.7 4.2 − 5.7 − 1.8 − 4.0         Dec − 64.0 2.0 − 10.8 2.3 15.2 − 12.9 − 13.1 − 17.4 4.3 − 7.7 − 6.1 − 3.9 − 11.8
2006          Jan 62.7 − 2.1 − 4.5 − 22.4 − 20.2 − 2.3 18.0 14.2 3.8 38.3 25.3 24.7 12.2
         Feb 19.1 0.8 13.8 6.7 4.4 2.4 7.1 2.9 4.1 0.2 − 6.0 5.1 4.7         Mar 46.6 − 0.8 13.4 − 9.1 − 9.3 0.3 22.4 15.8 6.6 19.0 12.8 12.4 4.8
         Apr 81.7 1.2 18.2 31.8 33.4 − 1.7 − 13.5 − 13.3 − 0.2 44.8 34.4 34.6 6.8
         May 34.1 − 0.5 27.9 19.5 14.6 4.8 8.4 2.3 6.1 − 3.7 − 0.2 − 6.3 − 0.3         June − 29.8 − 0.2 − 31.2 − 49.0 − 40.3 − 8.8 17.9 10.3 7.6 − 31.3 − 37.2 − 23.3 1.3
         July − 34.3 − 0.1 − 16.4 − 5.1 2.4 − 7.5 − 11.4 − 12.6 1.3 − 6.9 − 3.4 − 5.2 − 3.6
         Aug − 2.2 − 0.0 1.4 0.3 3.6 − 3.2 1.0 − 2.3 3.3 − 4.3 − 1.6 3.8 2.7         Sep 81.3 0.6 14.7 9.1 7.3 1.7 5.6 − 2.0 7.6 24.1 8.6 16.6 18.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997
394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004          Dec 
262.0 613.6 427.5 186.2 284.9 145.2 66.3 139.7 25.8 113.9 935.8 762.7 163.1 2005          Jan 
254.5 606.2 422.2 184.0 291.7 147.6 66.6 144.1 26.5 117.5 945.4 771.9 166.2          Feb 
258.6 608.8 420.7 188.2 295.8 144.6 61.4 151.2 28.0 123.2 955.0 780.7 159.1          Mar 
300.7 609.6 422.8 186.8 314.6 151.8 65.5 162.9 30.7 132.1 1,013.1 835.4 164.2          Apr 
280.3 606.2 421.7 184.5 315.0 155.2 66.0 159.8 31.1 128.7 1,001.3 821.1 169.8          May259.5 591.0 416.2 174.7 319.6 162.6 68.4 157.0 31.2 125.8 1,001.0 815.4 164.5          June
263.9 593.9 418.9 175.0 313.4 158.5 64.2 154.9 32.4 122.5 1,014.5 830.9 165.1          July
265.8 594.8 417.0 177.8 311.9 157.7 62.9 154.2 31.1 123.0 1,002.5 815.7 164.9          Aug 267.0 584.6 410.7 173.9 313.2 161.0 65.5 152.2 32.6 119.6 1,020.0 829.8 165.2          Sep 
267.5 586.7 413.2 173.6 313.8 164.6 67.0 149.2 31.7 117.5 1,023.2 832.3 168.2          Oct 
270.0 582.9 406.9 176.0 324.0 168.5 67.7 155.4 30.2 125.2 1,031.7 837.8 174.9          Nov 278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7          Dec 
291.0 581.2 409.8 171.4 334.9 174.4 69.9 160.5 31.6 128.9 1,030.5 831.4 162.8 2006          Jan 
291.4 570.2 401.1 169.1 341.5 182.5 73.6 159.1 31.0 128.1 1,045.4 846.5 160.2          Feb 
298.5 570.5 401.3 169.2 347.1 186.7 76.2 160.4 30.8 129.6 1,055.1 856.0 159.6          Mar 
325.9 570.3 402.8 167.4 356.9 196.8 84.1 160.1 30.4 129.8 1,056.7 859.5 166.0          Apr 
319.5 576.4 394.9 181.4 353.2 193.3 81.5 159.9 30.7 129.2 1,055.0 854.9 172.0          May294.9 562.5 391.0 171.5 359.1 200.3 82.2 158.8 31.1 127.7 1,097.0 892.0 166.1          June
294.0 564.3 392.1 172.2 357.1 200.6 80.9 156.6 31.8 124.8 1,084.4 880.4 165.6          July
295.5 559.0 389.0 170.0 354.9 200.6 81.6 154.3 30.8 123.5 1,084.5 880.1 163.8          Aug 290.5 550.9 387.9 163.0 370.5 217.2 87.0 153.3 27.8 125.5 1,123.3 904.0 169.2          Sep 
Changes 1
92.3 25.8 28.1 − 2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 199830.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.1 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.7 31.6 − 22.2 2005
6.0 9.8 4.4 5.4 9.1 4.4 4.1 4.8 − 0.0 4.8 25.6 21.0 − 12.4 2005          Jan 
− 7.4 − 7.4 − 5.2 − 2.2 7.2 2.6 0.4 4.6 0.8 3.8 14.6 13.6 0.7          Feb 
4.1 2.6 − 1.6 4.2 3.7 − 3.3 − 5.4 7.0 1.4 5.6 4.1 3.7 − 9.0          Mar 
42.2 0.8 2.2 − 1.4 18.8 7.2 4.1 11.6 2.8 8.9 56.7 53.5 4.2          Apr 
− 20.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 2.3 − 0.3 2.9 0.1 − 3.2 0.3 − 3.5 − 25.7 − 27.2 5.0          May− 21.0 − 15.4 − 5.7 − 9.8 4.4 7.3 2.3 − 2.9 0.1 − 3.0 − 5.5 − 10.6 − 7.4          June
4.3 3.0 2.7 0.3 − 6.1 − 4.1 − 4.2 − 2.0 1.2 − 3.2 15.0 16.9 − 0.2          July2.1 0.9 − 1.9 2.8 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 1.3 0.5 − 10.2 − 12.8 − 0.7          Aug 1.2 − 10.0 − 6.2 − 3.9 1.2 3.1 2.4 − 2.0 1.4 − 3.4 14.3 11.1 − 0.4          Sep 
0.6 2.2 2.5 − 0.3 0.7 3.6 1.6 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 2.0 3.1 2.3 1.9          Oct 
2.2 − 3.9 − 6.3 2.4 9.9 3.8 0.5 6.1 − 1.5 7.6 3.2 0.7 6.3          Nov 7.9 − 2.2 1.9 − 4.0 − 1.6 0.6 − 2.7 − 2.1 0.4 − 2.6 − 37.4 − 40.5 − 10.2          Dec 
12.5 0.6 0.9 − 0.3 13.0 5.3 4.8 7.7 1.2 6.5 36.8 34.4 − 5.9 2006          Jan 
0.4 − 11.0 − 8.7 − 2.3 6.1 7.7 3.4 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 8.1 9.1 − 3.8          Feb 7.6 0.4 0.2 0.2 6.2 4.5 2.8 1.7 − 0.1 1.8 17.5 16.4 − 2.4          Mar 
27.7 − 0.2 1.6 − 1.8 10.4 10.6 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.2 11.8 12.9 5.7          Apr 
− 6.0 6.1 − 7.9 14.0 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 2.3 − 0.2 0.4 − 0.6 5.1 1.6 5.3          May− 24.7 − 13.9 − 4.0 − 9.9 5.9 7.0 0.6 − 1.1 0.4 − 1.4 39.6 34.8 − 6.7          June
− 1.7 1.8 1.1 0.7 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 11.2 − 11.6 0.3          July
1.2 − 5.4 − 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.7 0.1 0.7 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.8 1.8 1.2 − 1.0          Aug 
− 1.6 − 8.1 − 1.0 − 7.0 15.5 16.5 5.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 37.2 26.7 4.7          Sep 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 End of year or month
 
1997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.3
1998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.32004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.62004          Nov 6,683.4 1,536.2 1,285.2 250.9 2,257.3 2,140.2 672.5 874.6 218.3 593.0 506.2 73.4 11.9
         Dec 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005          Jan 6,672.1 1,524.6 1,258.7 265.9 2,275.1 2,155.3 665.1 886.0 225.7 604.1 516.4 74.7 13.5
         Feb 6,717.4 1,552.6 1,282.7 269.8 2,278.4 2,160.3 670.4 885.0 220.6 605.0 516.7 73.7 13.2         Mar 6,723.0 1,524.3 1,255.2 269.1 2,271.6 2,159.7 672.3 882.2 214.5 605.2 516.5 70.9 11.5
         Apr 6,908.4 1,630.5 1,328.3 302.2 2,278.7 2,170.3 675.5 890.0 220.1 604.8 516.6 66.5 10.7
         May 6,892.0 1,593.7 1,303.3 290.5 2,285.4 2,177.0 683.3 889.6 223.2 604.1 516.4 67.9 12.4         June 6,851.3 1,577.1 1,301.4 275.7 2,288.5 2,179.8 691.4 885.7 218.6 602.7 515.6 67.4 14.5
         July 6,871.3 1,581.0 1,311.5 269.5 2,288.7 2,185.9 694.8 889.3 220.8 601.9 515.5 61.1 11.6
         Aug 6,849.5 1,557.4 1,290.4 267.0 2,290.1 2,188.2 697.1 890.7 221.6 600.4 515.0 60.2 11.0         Sep 6,873.8 1,553.7 1,290.8 262.9 2,296.1 2,192.6 703.0 890.7 221.8 598.9 515.0 61.5 12.4
         Oct 6,888.8 1,553.0 1,276.7 276.3 2,298.0 2,196.8 706.7 892.9 223.8 597.2 513.9 60.3 11.6
         Nov 6,924.1 1,546.0 1,273.1 272.9 2,315.2 2,213.4 722.5 894.9 224.6 596.0 512.5 61.2 11.5         Dec 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006          Jan 6,940.6 1,589.6 1,306.9 282.7 2,334.0 2,227.0 716.1 908.1 233.7 602.8 517.9 63.4 11.8
         Feb 6,967.7 1,583.4 1,303.2 280.2 2,331.2 2,233.0 714.3 916.1 235.7 602.6 517.4 60.7 10.8         Mar 7,004.8 1,581.0 1,303.4 277.6 2,340.8 2,241.4 720.9 919.1 237.5 601.4 515.4 60.1 12.1
         Apr 7,075.7 1,635.0 1,340.8 294.3 2,364.7 2,257.5 725.7 932.0 246.2 599.8 513.6 68.1 16.3
         May 7,102.2 1,634.7 1,338.6 296.1 2,370.4 2,269.4 734.6 937.4 249.9 597.4 510.1 60.2 11.8         June 7,075.1 1,617.7 1,334.0 283.6 2,380.7 2,276.8 735.1 945.6 256.2 596.1 507.5 61.3 14.8
         July 7,040.0 1,606.6 1,334.3 272.3 2,375.8 2,274.0 728.0 952.7 261.5 593.2 503.5 58.2 11.9
         Aug 7,034.6 1,589.9 1,310.8 279.1 2,382.3 2,278.6 723.0 965.3 271.0 590.3 499.1 57.0 10.7
 Changes 1
1998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.42004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 197.2 32.8 26.9 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.52004          Dec − 55.0 − 5.9 − 13.7 7.8 8.5 9.6 − 26.1 25.3 21.7 10.4 9.3 − 1.3 − 3.12005          Jan 40.4 − 6.2 − 12.9 6.7 10.0 6.2 18.6 − 13.0 − 14.4 0.7 0.9 2.4 4.6
         Feb 50.7 28.8 24.3 4.5 3.6 5.3 5.4 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.8 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2         Mar − 0.5 − 29.7 − 28.1 − 1.5 − 6.9 − 0.5 2.3 − 1.7 − 5.5 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.8
         Apr 183.0 105.9 73.0 32.9 7.0 10.6 3.2 7.7 5.6 − 0.3 0.1 − 4.4 − 0.8
         May − 32.5 − 39.7 − 26.1 − 13.6 5.8 6.1 7.4 − 0.5 2.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 1.0 1.6         June − 46.3 − 17.7 − 2.2 − 15.5 2.8 2.6 7.9 − 4.0 − 4.6 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 2.0
         July 22.1 4.3 10.2 − 6.0 3.0 6.2 3.4 3.6 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 2.8
         Aug − 19.9 − 23.2 − 21.0 − 2.3 1.0 2.3 2.3 1.5 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6         Sep 20.2 − 4.4 0.2 − 4.5 5.8 4.2 5.8 − 0.1 0.2 − 1.5 0.1 1.2 1.4
         Oct 14.7 − 0.9 − 14.2 13.3 1.9 4.2 4.2 1.6 1.5 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.8
         Nov 29.4 − 8.2 − 4.1 − 4.1 16.9 16.4 15.7 1.9 0.7 − 1.2 − 1.4 0.8 − 0.1         Dec − 64.0 23.8 27.8 − 4.0 13.9 12.0 − 6.6 11.3 8.8 7.4 6.6 1.0 − 1.9
2006          Jan 62.7 17.5 2.9 14.6 5.3 1.8 0.5 2.0 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 1.4 2.2
         Feb 19.1 − 7.6 − 4.3 − 3.3 − 3.3 5.7 − 2.0 7.9 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 1.0         Mar 46.6 − 0.5 1.1 − 1.6 10.1 8.8 6.9 3.1 1.9 − 1.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 1.4
         Apr 81.7 55.5 37.7 17.8 24.5 16.4 5.1 12.9 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.9 8.2 4.2
         May 34.1 1.7 − 0.9 2.6 6.1 12.2 9.0 5.6 3.8 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 7.8 − 4.5         June − 29.8 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 12.8 10.2 7.3 0.4 8.1 6.3 − 1.3 − 2.6 1.1 2.9
         July − 34.3 − 10.9 0.3 − 11.2 − 4.9 − 2.8 − 7.0 7.2 5.2 − 2.9 − 4.0 − 3.2 − 2.8
         Aug − 2.2 − 15.5 − 22.5 6.9 6.0 4.1 − 5.5 12.6 9.5 − 2.9 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  
7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 200359.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 200558.1 8.0 3.4 2.8 43.7 41.3 22.0 35.6 1,569.6 116.1 616.1 332.3 314.4 2004          Nov 
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2          Dec 58.0 8.5 3.2 2.7 45.2 41.8 25.1 31.3 1,559.9 110.2 615.0 333.1 308.1 2005          Jan 
57.3 8.0 3.2 2.7 44.3 41.5 27.3 31.6 1,570.4 117.3 623.3 332.7 301.2          Feb 
56.3 8.0 3.1 2.6 41.0 40.5 28.3 34.0 1,585.3 114.8 639.3 334.6 305.7          Mar 
52.8 9.3 3.1 2.5 41.8 39.4 28.6 34.4 1,606.5 117.7 680.0 341.0 308.7          Apr 
52.5 9.5 2.9 2.5 40.5 39.2 28.3 33.9 1,614.2 115.8 686.9 343.8 305.7          May50.4 8.5 2.5 2.1 41.3 39.7 28.3 34.2 1,637.1 118.2 636.2 343.9 306.0          June
47.0 7.4 2.5 2.1 41.7 41.4 26.7 35.7 1,640.1 116.2 645.0 346.2 307.9          July
46.8 7.7 2.4 2.0 41.6 40.5 30.6 35.8 1,639.6 118.1 640.3 344.0 311.6          Aug 46.6 7.6 2.4 2.0 42.1 40.8 28.0 35.6 1,637.1 117.9 657.6 344.2 321.5          Sep 
46.3 8.3 2.4 2.0 40.9 39.7 32.3 32.8 1,634.0 116.2 662.6 346.8 329.3          Oct 
47.3 8.4 2.4 2.0 40.7 38.7 33.2 31.8 1,631.2 113.8 679.3 348.6 338.8          Nov 50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5          Dec 
49.3 9.6 2.4 2.0 43.6 40.4 27.4 31.2 1,617.4 112.2 646.3 369.7 325.0 2006          Jan 
47.6 8.5 2.4 2.0 37.4 35.8 29.6 31.7 1,630.9 113.9 662.9 377.3 320.6          Feb 
45.6 7.8 2.4 2.0 39.3 37.0 37.0 31.6 1,632.1 119.8 667.6 384.1 330.7          Mar 
49.5 11.7 2.4 2.0 39.1 37.6 35.6 31.5 1,623.9 121.1 662.7 384.6 337.5          Apr 
46.0 8.3 2.3 1.9 40.8 37.0 37.0 32.1 1,632.9 125.9 667.8 386.5 340.7          May44.2 6.9 2.3 1.9 42.6 39.3 35.7 33.0 1,641.1 126.7 652.0 387.2 327.8          June
43.9 6.3 2.3 1.9 43.7 40.3 30.1 32.4 1,641.7 124.8 640.2 387.9 325.2          July
44.0 6.5 2.3 1.9 46.7 44.1 34.9 32.2 1,638.1 127.2 646.0 387.2 324.1          Aug 
Changes 1
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.3 − 9.4 22.4 14.4 18.5 2005
1.9 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 7.2 − 4.1 − 11.3 0.7 − 33.4 − 2.4 0.7 2004          Dec 
− 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.3 10.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.6 29.6 2.9 − 5.9 2005          Jan 
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.2 0.3 12.3 0.9 11.5 − 0.0 − 7.9          Feb 
− 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 1.0 1.0 2.4 12.9 − 2.5 12.2 1.5 6.0          Mar 
− 3.6 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.8 − 1.1 0.3 0.4 20.1 3.0 39.7 5.7 3.9          Apr 
− 0.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 2.4 − 1.9 − 3.1 1.7 1.1          May− 2.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.8 0.5 − 0.1 0.3 21.0 2.4 − 54.2 − 0.3 1.9          June
− 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.4 1.7 − 1.5 1.5 1.5 − 2.1 10.0 2.5 0.8          July
− 0.2 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.2 3.9 0.1 0.0 1.9 − 3.6 − 2.1 4.0          Aug − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 0.2 15.1 0.0 10.5          Sep 
− 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.1 4.3 − 2.9 − 3.2 − 1.6 4.7 2.6 8.1          Oct 
0.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 1.0 0.9 − 1.0 − 4.7 − 2.7 13.1 1.5 10.8          Nov 
2.9 1.3 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.0 − 13.6 − 0.1 − 19.1 − 0.1 − 52.6 − 1.7 − 14.8          Dec 
− 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.0 1.7 7.9 − 0.5 4.4 − 1.9 24.3 5.3 − 1.5 2006          Jan 
− 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 6.2 − 4.6 2.2 0.6 10.3 1.8 12.4 7.1 − 2.6          Feb − 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 1.3 7.4 − 0.1 5.5 5.9 9.4 7.5 7.4          Mar 
4.0 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 4.0 1.3 1.3 1.3 4.6          Apr 
− 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.7 − 0.6 0.6 0.6 11.8 4.8 9.2 2.3 1.8          May− 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 2.3 − 1.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 17.5 0.6 − 4.6          June
− 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 1.0 − 5.6 − 0.6 0.7 − 1.9 − 11.4 0.7 − 2.4          July
0.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 3.9 4.8 − 0.2 − 2.5 2.4 6.7 − 0.1 − 1.3          Aug 
footnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than four with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data collected the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published together with money
separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the deposits market fund shares. 
with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt securities
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2006          Apr 2,081 7,112.9 54.9 2,834.5 2,047.5 767.5 3,813.3 492.9 2,591.5 2.5 716.4 153.1 257.2
         May 2,081 7,137.8 67.8 2,847.6 2,049.1 778.6 3,805.4 478.0 2,591.9 2.5 723.7 154.3 262.8         June 2,076 7,109.3 57.2 2,867.4 2,066.4 779.1 3,774.1 473.4 2,594.9 2.5 691.9 154.1 256.5
         July 2,068 7,074.2 65.9 2,824.9 2,029.4 773.1 3,773.0 472.1 2,598.9 2.5 687.2 154.9 255.6
         Aug 2,062 7,069.4 59.7 2,824.8 2,030.8 773.2 3,775.9 473.9 2,600.8 2.4 686.1 155.0 254.1         Sep 2,055 7,113.3 61.5 2,828.3 2,028.8 776.9 3,802.2 490.5 2,602.4 2.4 696.4 155.9 265.4
Commercial banks 5
2006          Aug 253 2,017.4 25.4 788.9 655.3 129.9 1,025.9 264.4 567.3 1.3 183.6 81.9 95.3         Sep 252 2,002.7 25.1 769.8 645.7 120.2 1,028.0 271.0 568.2 1.3 180.2 81.4 98.4
   Big banks 6
2006          Aug 5 1,259.6 15.4 485.7 419.4 64.8 620.7 180.0 302.4 1.1 129.3 69.9 67.9         Sep 5 1,287.5 15.1 499.6 427.6 70.2 627.6 188.5 301.5 1.0 130.6 71.3 73.8
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2006          Aug 158 629.5 8.9 235.5 171.6 61.7 349.3 59.2 240.2 0.2 48.3 11.9 24.0         Sep 157 583.6 9.2 196.8 148.8 45.9 347.1 60.1 240.6 0.2 44.9 9.9 20.6
   Branches of foreign banks
2006          Aug 90 128.3 1.1 67.7 64.2 3.4 56.0 25.3 24.7 0.0 6.0 0.1 3.4         Sep 90 131.5 0.8 73.3 69.2 4.1 53.3 22.5 26.1 0.0 4.7 0.2 3.9
Landesbanken
2006          Aug 12 1,401.1 1.9 772.7 585.9 174.0 557.3 77.4 382.2 0.2 94.6 26.2 43.0         Sep 12 1,445.3 4.1 794.9 596.2 185.0 569.9 83.7 385.8 0.2 97.7 27.4 49.0
Savings banks
2006          Aug 458 1,006.5 17.7 231.6 84.0 147.0 721.2 63.0 550.9 0.6 106.7 15.9 20.0         Sep 458 1,007.7 17.9 231.8 85.5 145.0 721.8 64.0 550.3 0.6 107.0 16.1 20.1
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2006          Aug 2 230.0 0.3 154.8 102.6 52.0 53.8 12.0 19.1 0.0 22.7 12.6 8.5         Sep 2 236.7 0.6 158.7 105.1 53.3 56.7 12.4 16.5 0.0 27.6 12.6 8.1
Credit cooperatives
2006          Aug 1,272 597.3 12.0 149.6 63.0 84.2 408.8 36.6 322.5 0.3 49.2 9.4 17.4         Sep 1,266 599.3 12.1 149.8 62.8 84.5 410.4 37.8 322.6 0.3 49.5 9.5 17.5
Mortgage banks
2006          Aug 23 872.2 0.9 254.7 153.7 100.2 595.5 11.7 438.8 − 145.0 2.5 18.6         Sep 23 875.5 0.7 254.6 152.9 100.9 598.6 12.4 438.5 − 147.7 2.5 19.1
Building and loan associations
2006          Aug 26 193.6 0.0 55.8 42.8 13.1 119.6 1.3 103.3 . 15.0 0.4 17.7         Sep 26 194.2 0.0 56.0 42.2 13.8 119.9 1.4 103.6 . 14.9 0.4 17.9
Special purpose banks
2006          Aug 16 751.5 1.3 416.7 343.6 72.8 293.7 7.5 216.8 − 69.2 6.1 33.6         Sep 16 752.1 0.9 412.8 338.3 74.1 296.9 7.9 217.0 − 71.8 6.1 35.4
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2006          Aug 137 759.7 7.0 282.5 219.9 60.8 434.9 69.4 275.5 0.3 89.0 12.2 23.0         Sep 137 776.6 8.5 292.7 228.9 61.9 439.1 71.3 275.5 0.4 91.5 12.3 24.0
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2006          Aug 47 631.4 5.9 214.8 155.7 57.4 378.9 44.2 250.8 0.3 83.0 12.1 19.6         Sep 47 645.1 7.7 219.4 159.6 57.9 385.8 48.8 249.5 0.3 86.7 12.1 20.1
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,052.4 279.2 1,773.1 2,646.3 803.4 367.2 767.2 125.9 608.2 520.3 100.3 1,676.7 330.2 407.4 2006          Apr 
2,053.4 297.1 1,756.3 2,656.9 830.3 353.0 767.3 137.3 605.8 516.8 100.6 1,685.4 332.4 409.6          May
2,022.6 281.9 1,740.6 2,663.7 831.2 354.3 773.0 130.4 604.5 514.2 100.8 1,692.8 334.0 396.2          June
1,992.9 269.2 1,723.7 2,660.1 814.7 366.6 776.0 128.9 601.6 510.2 101.2 1,690.7 337.4 393.1          July
1,968.8 264.9 1,703.8 2,684.5 821.4 378.7 784.0 142.8 598.6 505.6 101.8 1,687.0 336.8 392.3          Aug 1,983.4 290.6 1,692.7 2,695.4 810.7 402.5 784.7 148.0 596.0 501.8 101.5 1,690.4 335.7 408.4          Sep 
Commercial banks 5
731.2 141.8 589.3 813.6 399.6 187.4 119.4 114.5 97.8 88.6 9.3 228.4 103.0 141.3 2006          Aug 
718.5 154.4 564.0 809.0 383.2 201.5 119.2 111.9 97.1 87.7 8.0 228.0 100.9 146.2          Sep 
Big banks 6
450.0 98.5 351.6 490.1 214.0 134.9 76.4 108.8 64.5 62.5 0.3 164.4 59.7 95.4 2006          Aug 
473.4 112.1 361.3 487.6 204.5 142.8 76.2 105.9 63.9 61.9 0.3 167.2 59.8 99.5          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
186.3 24.8 161.5 298.0 169.3 46.3 40.0 5.8 33.3 26.1 9.0 64.0 40.1 41.2 2006          Aug 
146.3 23.2 123.0 296.8 162.2 53.5 40.2 6.0 33.2 25.8 7.7 60.8 38.0 41.8          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
94.8 18.5 76.3 25.5 16.3 6.2 2.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 3.3 4.7 2006          Aug 
98.8 19.1 79.7 24.7 16.5 5.2 2.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 3.1 5.0          Sep 
Landesbanken
486.9 73.5 413.4 335.7 57.8 55.6 205.5 20.2 16.2 15.6 0.7 458.6 61.8 58.1 2006          Aug 
515.1 84.3 430.8 346.7 65.8 58.0 206.0 25.4 16.1 15.4 0.7 457.6 62.7 63.2          Sep 
Savings banks
212.0 5.3 206.8 649.1 211.2 54.1 12.9 − 303.0 246.1 67.9 44.3 51.9 49.1 2006          Aug 
211.7 6.5 205.2 648.3 210.0 54.8 12.9 − 302.0 244.3 68.6 44.5 52.0 51.2          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
132.8 31.0 101.7 38.6 7.2 12.2 18.0 7.9 − − 1.3 36.8 11.1 10.7 2006          Aug 
134.9 28.9 106.1 42.3 7.7 15.0 18.2 10.4 − − 1.4 37.6 11.1 10.8          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
78.1 2.3 75.8 422.3 139.2 54.4 26.3 − 180.3 154.2 22.1 34.8 35.0 27.1 2006          Aug 
79.3 2.9 76.5 421.8 137.9 55.7 26.4 − 179.6 153.2 22.2 34.9 35.0 28.2          Sep 
Mortgage banks
152.4 4.0 148.4 176.3 2.1 6.1 167.1 0.1 0.9 0.8 0.1 495.7 23.7 24.1 2006          Aug 
155.4 5.9 149.4 177.3 2.7 6.2 167.5 0.1 0.9 0.8 0.0 494.1 23.7 25.0          Sep 
Building and loan associations
30.2 1.7 28.5 126.3 0.3 1.1 124.2 − 0.4 0.3 0.4 3.7 7.4 25.9 2006          Aug 
30.2 2.0 28.2 126.3 0.3 1.1 124.2 − 0.4 0.3 0.4 3.7 7.4 26.5          Sep 
Special purpose banks
145.3 5.5 139.9 122.6 4.0 7.8 110.6 0.1 − − 0.2 384.8 42.8 56.0 2006          Aug 
138.4 5.8 132.6 123.6 3.1 10.1 110.2 0.2 − − 0.2 390.0 42.9 57.3          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
242.1 46.8 195.3 280.7 146.4 40.7 68.2 9.5 21.0 20.6 4.5 156.8 30.7 49.4 2006          Aug 
253.5 45.3 208.3 280.8 144.8 42.6 67.9 8.7 20.8 20.4 4.6 157.5 30.8 54.0          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
147.3 28.4 119.0 255.2 130.1 34.6 65.2 9.5 21.0 20.6 4.4 156.7 27.4 44.7 2006          Aug 
154.8 26.2 128.6 256.1 128.3 37.5 65.0 8.7 20.7 20.4 4.5 157.5 27.7 49.0          Sep 
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.2
1997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2005          Apr 12.7 39.9 1,739.1 1,127.1 0.1 8.8 603.1 2.2 3,042.4 2,637.8 2.5 1.9 399.2
         May 13.3 41.4 1,732.2 1,118.4 0.1 8.1 605.7 2.1 3,022.1 2,639.8 2.4 2.2 376.7         June 13.1 36.9 1,716.9 1,097.2 0.0 8.3 611.4 2.1 2,988.9 2,636.7 2.3 1.5 347.5
         July 13.5 41.7 1,719.7 1,100.0 0.0 8.7 611.0 2.1 2,998.0 2,640.9 2.5 2.1 352.6
         Aug 13.0 39.7 1,712.2 1,095.9 0.0 9.8 606.5 2.1 3,001.1 2,639.8 2.4 2.0 356.9         Sep 13.6 40.7 1,693.9 1,081.2 0.1 10.5 602.2 2.1 3,004.7 2,646.6 2.3 1.1 354.5
         Oct 13.7 37.7 1,684.9 1,081.2 0.0 9.9 593.8 2.1 3,012.9 2,655.3 2.4 4.2 351.0
         Nov 12.8 42.1 1,687.2 1,087.7 0.0 9.8 589.7 2.1 3,004.8 2,644.9 2.3 3.5 354.0         Dec 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006          Jan 13.0 45.5 1,663.1 1,079.4 0.0 8.1 575.6 2.0 3,032.2 2,659.1 2.3 2.7 368.2
         Feb 13.7 42.4 1,672.9 1,086.9 0.0 8.5 577.5 2.0 3,023.3 2,654.5 2.1 1.5 365.1         Mar 12.9 39.0 1,667.9 1,081.2 0.0 10.0 576.7 1.9 3,030.2 2,657.6 2.1 1.5 369.1
         Apr 14.1 40.3 1,698.4 1,113.6 0.0 10.9 573.9 2.7 3,066.0 2,665.6 2.1 1.9 396.5
         May 13.5 53.7 1,703.5 1,113.6 − 10.5 579.3 2.0 3,065.4 2,657.3 2.1 1.4 404.6         June 13.4 43.3 1,665.7 1,085.0 − 9.7 571.0 1.9 3,028.2 2,654.0 2.1 2.0 370.0
         July 13.3 52.2 1,652.0 1,078.6 − 9.5 563.8 1.9 3,024.4 2,651.1 2.1 2.0 369.2
         Aug 13.2 46.0 1,657.3 1,087.1 − 9.1 561.1 1.9 3,022.5 2,650.1 2.1 1.3 369.0         Sep 13.8 47.3 1,626.3 1,062.0 − 10.4 553.9 1.9 3,035.2 2,666.7 2.0 1.0 365.5
Changes *
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 − 1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 36.51998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.11999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2005          Apr − 0.5 + 0.7 + 54.9 + 49.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 38.5 + 3.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 35.0
         May + 0.6 + 1.5 − 6.9 − 8.7 − − 0.7 + 2.5 − 0.0 − 20.2 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.5         June − 0.2 − 4.5 − 15.2 − 21.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 5.9 − 0.0 − 33.4 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 29.3
         July + 0.4 + 4.8 + 2.8 + 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 5.1
         Aug − 0.6 − 2.0 − 7.5 − 4.1 − + 1.1 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.3         Sep + 0.6 + 1.0 − 18.3 − 14.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 4.3 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 6.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 2.3
         Oct + 0.2 − 2.9 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 8.4 + 0.0 + 8.3 + 8.6 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 3.5
         Nov − 0.9 + 4.4 + 2.3 + 6.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 8.1 − 10.4 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 3.1         Dec + 2.3 + 5.8 − 2.8 + 9.2 − − 3.1 − 8.8 + 0.0 − 9.7 − 12.2 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 3.6
2006          Jan − 2.1 − 2.4 − 21.4 − 17.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 5.4 − 0.1 + 19.6 + 8.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 10.5
         Feb + 0.7 − 3.1 + 9.8 + 7.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 8.9 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 3.1         Mar − 0.7 − 3.4 − 5.0 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 6.9 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.0
         Apr + 1.2 + 1.3 + 30.5 + 32.3 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 35.3 + 7.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 27.4
         May − 0.6 + 13.4 + 5.8 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 5.4 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.1         June − 0.2 − 10.4 − 38.2 − 29.0 − − 0.8 − 8.4 − 0.1 − 37.2 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 34.6
         July − 0.1 + 8.9 − 13.7 − 6.5 − − 0.2 − 7.1 − 0.0 − 3.8 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8
         Aug − 0.1 − 6.2 + 6.3 + 9.5 − − 0.4 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3         Sep + 0.6 + 1.3 + 9.3 + 6.5 − + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.7 + 16.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 1996
76.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
1.0 60.7 103.6 1,328.8 163.2 1,165.5 0.1 29.5 2,226.4 675.9 850.4 604.9 95.2 43.3 2005          Apr 
1.0 60.7 103.2 1,303.9 151.6 1,152.3 0.1 29.7 2,232.9 683.9 850.1 604.1 94.8 43.0          May1.0 58.5 102.8 1,301.6 139.3 1,162.3 0.1 27.0 2,238.9 692.5 849.3 602.7 94.5 43.5          June
0.0 58.2 104.0 1,312.0 121.9 1,190.0 0.1 26.9 2,245.4 695.2 854.4 601.9 93.8 43.4          July
0.0 58.2 103.7 1,290.1 128.7 1,161.3 0.1 27.3 2,250.3 698.1 858.8 600.4 93.0 43.5          Aug 
− 56.6 104.7 1,290.6 121.0 1,169.6 0.1 27.2 2,254.2 704.0 858.9 598.9 92.4 42.0          Sep 
− 56.5 105.3 1,276.3 121.3 1,154.9 0.1 27.1 2,258.1 707.7 861.1 597.2 92.1 41.7          Oct 
− 56.7 107.9 1,272.8 126.0 1,146.6 0.1 26.8 2,274.6 723.6 863.2 596.0 91.9 42.1          Nov − 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4          Dec 
− 56.2 110.8 1,306.0 118.4 1,187.5 0.1 26.2 2,285.7 718.1 872.9 602.8 91.9 38.9 2006          Jan 
− 55.1 113.2 1,302.1 115.2 1,186.8 0.1 25.1 2,287.7 715.3 877.7 602.6 92.1 38.2          Feb 
− 54.0 115.8 1,302.7 110.3 1,192.3 0.1 23.2 2,303.4 722.4 887.1 601.4 92.4 37.8          Mar 
− 53.9 113.7 1,340.4 128.1 1,212.2 0.1 23.5 2,322.4 726.5 903.1 599.8 93.0 38.1          Apr 
− 53.8 113.6 1,338.3 132.3 1,205.9 0.1 22.7 2,333.8 742.5 900.6 597.4 93.3 37.9          May− 53.7 113.2 1,333.2 116.2 1,216.9 0.1 22.5 2,342.7 742.0 911.0 596.1 93.6 37.4          June
− 53.3 113.8 1,333.5 117.5 1,216.0 0.0 22.1 2,336.9 730.6 919.0 593.2 94.1 37.5          July
− 53.4 113.9 1,310.4 114.2 1,196.2 0.0 22.3 2,347.5 725.6 936.9 590.3 94.7 37.5          Aug − 53.7 108.2 1,299.3 120.7 1,178.6 0.0 22.3 2,356.4 724.2 950.0 587.7 94.5 37.9          Sep 
Changes *
− 5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 0.2 + 5.6 + 72.9 + 31.8 + 41.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 2.9 + 5.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 2005          Apr 
− + 0.0 − 0.3 − 24.8 − 11.6 − 13.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 8.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.3          May
− 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 2.3 − 12.3 + 10.0 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 6.1 + 8.6 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
− 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 10.6 − 17.4 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 6.4 + 2.7 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1          July
− − 0.0 − 0.2 − 21.9 + 6.8 − 28.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 4.4 − 1.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          Aug 
− 0.0 − 1.6 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 7.7 + 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 5.9 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.4          Sep 
− − 0.1 + 0.6 − 14.3 + 0.3 − 14.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.9 + 4.1 + 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4          Oct 
− + 0.3 + 2.5 − 3.6 + 4.7 − 8.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 16.5 + 15.9 + 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.4          Nov − − 0.1 + 0.6 + 27.2 − 5.5 + 32.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.0 − 6.6 + 1.2 + 7.4 − 0.0 + 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.4 + 2.3 + 2.2 − 2.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 9.0 + 1.1 + 8.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 3.6 2006          Jan 
− − 1.1 + 2.4 − 3.9 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.0 − 2.8 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 1.1 + 2.7 + 0.8 − 4.9 + 5.7 − 0.0 − 2.0 + 15.7 + 7.1 + 9.5 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.4          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 2.1 + 37.1 + 17.7 + 19.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 19.0 + 4.0 + 16.0 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.3          Apr 
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.4 − 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 10.6 + 16.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.2          May− − 0.1 − 0.4 − 5.1 − 15.9 + 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.9 − 0.5 + 10.4 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4          June
− − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 11.4 + 8.0 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.0          July
− + 0.1 + 0.1 − 22.2 − 2.7 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.0 − 5.6 + 17.9 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.1          Aug − + 0.3 − 5.7 + 20.5 + 7.5 + 13.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 10.4 − 1.4 + 13.1 − 2.6 + 1.2 + 0.4          Sep 
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.9
1997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2005          Apr 0.4 1,001.7 850.2 679.8 170.4 5.8 145.7 1.5 707.4 405.6 168.8 236.8 6.5 295.3
         May 0.4 1,014.5 858.7 681.6 177.1 5.4 150.4 1.5 698.2 396.5 155.0 241.5 4.3 297.3         June 0.5 1,040.0 877.6 693.9 183.7 6.2 156.2 1.5 690.0 385.1 141.2 243.9 4.0 300.9
         July 0.4 1,040.0 880.0 691.0 188.9 6.6 153.4 1.4 689.8 389.2 145.4 243.8 3.4 297.2
         Aug 0.5 1,023.0 860.2 668.5 191.7 7.0 155.8 1.5 691.9 387.1 144.0 243.0 4.8 300.0         Sep 0.4 1,057.2 889.0 690.2 198.8 7.1 161.1 1.5 694.1 391.4 142.7 248.7 5.4 297.4
         Oct 0.4 1,073.5 905.2 704.2 201.0 6.9 161.4 1.5 697.3 392.8 144.1 248.7 5.5 298.9
         Nov 0.5 1,079.5 905.2 707.3 197.9 6.3 167.9 1.5 723.2 403.0 150.0 253.0 7.9 312.3         Dec 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006          Jan 0.3 1,079.3 895.3 678.6 216.7 6.0 178.0 1.5 741.6 411.1 154.8 256.2 9.5 320.9
         Feb 0.4 1,111.4 920.5 701.9 218.6 6.7 184.2 1.5 736.8 406.7 144.3 262.5 7.5 322.6         Mar 0.4 1,153.7 952.8 729.0 223.8 7.6 193.3 1.4 732.4 402.7 140.1 262.6 6.9 322.8
         Apr 0.4 1,136.1 933.9 710.2 223.8 8.6 193.6 1.4 747.2 419.3 160.6 258.7 8.0 319.9
         May 0.5 1,144.1 935.5 709.1 226.5 9.3 199.3 1.4 740.0 412.9 155.5 257.4 7.9 319.1         June 0.4 1,201.7 981.5 748.5 232.9 12.0 208.2 1.0 745.9 414.7 151.9 262.8 9.3 321.9
         July 0.4 1,172.9 950.8 715.4 235.5 12.8 209.3 1.0 748.6 420.3 155.9 264.4 10.3 318.0
         Aug 0.4 1,167.5 943.7 706.9 236.8 11.7 212.1 0.9 753.4 425.0 159.6 265.4 11.3 317.1         Sep 0.4 1,202.0 966.8 726.1 240.7 12.2 223.0 0.8 767.0 426.7 160.9 265.8 9.4 331.0
Changes *
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 − 0.1 + 10.4 − 1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.91998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.01999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2005          Apr − 0.0 + 31.5 + 27.8 + 21.9 + 5.8 + 1.3 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 47.4 + 33.2 + 29.3 + 3.8 + 1.3 + 12.9
         May + 0.1 + 4.7 + 0.7 − 4.1 + 4.8 − 0.5 + 4.4 + 0.0 − 17.7 − 16.0 − 16.0 + 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.5         June + 0.0 + 22.6 + 16.0 + 10.2 + 5.7 + 0.9 + 5.8 − 0.0 − 11.1 − 13.9 − 14.5 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 3.1
         July − 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.4 − 2.2 + 5.6 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 3.5
         Aug + 0.0 − 15.9 − 18.1 − 21.7 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 2.1         Sep − 0.1 + 32.2 + 26.8 + 20.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.6 − 1.8 + 4.5 + 0.6 − 3.0
         Oct − 0.0 + 16.4 + 16.2 + 14.1 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.6
         Nov + 0.2 + 3.1 − 2.7 + 1.2 − 3.9 − 0.6 + 6.4 + 0.0 + 22.7 + 7.5 + 5.1 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 12.9         Dec − 0.3 − 40.5 − 45.0 − 58.8 + 13.7 − 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.0 − 11.0 − 14.8 − 17.1 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 2.5
2006          Jan + 0.1 + 35.3 + 29.9 + 32.9 − 3.0 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 0.0 + 32.8 + 25.5 + 23.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 6.8
         Feb + 0.1 + 28.2 + 21.5 + 20.6 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 6.1 + 0.0 − 8.8 − 7.3 − 11.4 + 4.2 − 2.2 + 0.7         Mar − 0.0 + 46.9 + 36.6 + 30.1 + 6.5 + 1.0 + 9.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 − 0.5 + 1.2
         Apr + 0.0 − 11.7 − 13.0 − 14.8 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 20.4 + 20.8 + 21.3 − 0.5 + 1.2 − 1.6
         May + 0.1 + 11.9 + 4.9 + 1.2 + 3.8 + 0.7 + 6.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.0 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.5         June − 0.1 + 56.8 + 45.3 + 38.9 + 6.4 + 2.8 + 8.8 − 0.4 + 4.4 + 0.4 − 3.9 + 4.4 + 1.3 + 2.6
         July − 0.1 − 28.3 − 30.4 − 33.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.3 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 4.6 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 2.7
         Aug + 0.0 − 4.4 − 6.2 − 7.8 + 1.6 − 1.1 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 5.9 + 5.4 + 3.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.6         Sep − 0.0 + 30.8 + 21.1 + 17.8 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 9.2 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 4.5 − 1.9 + 7.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 1996
15.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
10.7 39.3 706.7 154.6 552.1 436.1 116.0 0.6 356.9 73.5 283.4 137.5 145.9 1.7 2005          Apr 
10.6 39.2 703.7 167.7 536.0 419.3 116.7 0.7 354.9 70.5 284.4 136.9 147.5 1.6          May
10.5 39.8 660.4 160.3 500.1 373.2 126.9 0.6 330.1 67.2 262.9 112.7 150.2 1.5          June
10.4 39.8 655.2 141.9 513.3 387.5 125.8 0.8 329.8 65.2 264.6 115.8 148.8 1.1          July
10.7 39.8 655.0 143.1 511.9 385.9 126.0 0.7 323.7 61.7 262.0 115.5 146.5 1.0          Aug 10.7 39.8 655.2 146.5 508.7 381.8 127.0 0.7 335.8 68.6 267.2 120.7 146.5 0.9          Sep 
10.6 39.2 680.8 142.4 538.4 410.2 128.2 0.6 330.9 65.8 265.0 122.5 142.6 1.3          Oct 
10.5 37.2 681.2 150.5 530.8 402.1 128.7 0.6 345.3 82.1 263.2 124.5 138.6 1.3          Nov 10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2          Dec 
7.0 38.8 666.4 143.6 522.7 397.4 125.3 0.6 339.5 86.0 253.5 119.6 134.0 1.1 2006          Jan 
7.1 39.5 691.3 136.8 554.5 428.8 125.7 0.6 326.4 79.4 247.0 114.1 133.0 1.7          Feb 5.9 38.9 699.4 144.6 554.8 426.3 128.5 0.5 321.3 81.2 240.1 110.1 130.0 1.7          Mar 
5.8 39.4 712.0 151.1 560.9 433.7 127.2 0.5 323.9 76.9 247.0 119.0 128.0 1.7          Apr 
5.5 40.7 715.1 164.8 550.4 424.8 125.5 0.5 323.1 87.8 235.3 109.7 125.6 1.7          May5.6 40.9 689.4 165.7 523.7 398.0 125.7 0.6 321.0 89.2 231.9 102.7 129.2 1.7          June
5.6 41.1 659.4 151.7 507.6 381.5 126.2 0.6 323.2 84.1 239.1 109.9 129.2 1.7          July
5.8 41.1 658.4 150.7 507.6 384.4 123.2 0.6 337.0 95.8 241.2 111.8 129.4 1.7          Aug 6.0 47.8 684.1 169.9 514.1 389.1 125.0 0.5 339.0 86.5 252.5 123.3 129.2 1.7          Sep 
Changes *
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 49.2 + 5.0 + 44.2 + 41.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 23.4 + 5.4 + 18.0 + 25.5 − 7.5 − 0.0 2005          Apr 
− 0.1 − 0.6 − 10.1 + 12.0 − 22.1 − 21.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 6.9 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.1          May
− 0.1 + 0.4 − 46.0 − 8.1 − 37.9 − 47.6 + 9.7 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 3.6 − 22.9 − 24.8 + 1.9 − 0.1          June
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 18.2 + 13.7 + 14.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 1.9 + 5.0 + 3.2 + 1.8 − 0.4          July
+ 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 3.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.0          Aug + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 3.0 − 4.5 − 5.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 11.1 + 6.8 + 4.3 + 4.9 − 0.7 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.1 − 0.6 + 25.3 − 4.1 + 29.4 + 28.3 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 2.9 − 2.2 + 1.8 − 4.0 + 0.4          Oct 
− 0.1 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 7.6 − 9.8 − 9.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 12.9 + 16.0 − 3.1 + 1.6 − 4.7 + 0.0          Nov + 0.0 + 0.1 − 29.1 − 47.5 + 18.3 + 18.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 28.6 − 20.1 − 8.6 − 5.0 − 3.5 − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 + 1.3 + 17.7 + 40.9 − 23.2 − 20.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 24.9 + 24.3 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 2006          Jan 
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 21.9 − 7.6 + 29.5 + 29.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 15.1 − 6.9 − 8.2 − 6.1 − 2.2 + 0.0          Feb 
− 1.2 − 0.2 + 11.8 + 8.6 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 3.8 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 2.1 − 4.9 − 3.3 − 1.7 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 + 0.8 + 17.2 + 7.5 + 9.7 + 10.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 5.1 − 4.0 + 9.1 + 9.7 − 0.6 − 0.1          Apr 
− 0.3 + 1.4 + 6.3 + 14.4 − 8.1 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 11.1 − 10.3 − 8.8 − 1.5 + 0.0          May+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 27.0 + 0.6 − 27.6 − 27.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.3 − 4.0 − 7.2 + 3.3 + 0.1          June
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 29.6 − 13.9 − 15.8 − 16.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 5.0 + 7.3 + 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 3.2 − 2.7 − + 14.0 + 11.8 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.0          Aug + 0.2 + 6.5 + 24.0 + 18.7 + 5.2 + 3.8 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 9.5 + 10.5 + 11.2 − 0.7 − 0.0          Sep 
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 
3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.2
1997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2005          Apr 3,042.4 2,640.3 328.8 285.7 284.6 1.1 43.1 42.3 0.8 2,713.6 2,147.6
         May 3,022.1 2,642.3 331.0 286.3 285.1 1.2 44.7 43.7 1.0 2,691.2 2,130.1         June 2,988.9 2,639.0 325.7 289.1 288.2 1.0 36.5 36.0 0.5 2,663.3 2,109.2
         July 2,998.0 2,643.3 323.1 284.0 283.0 1.0 39.1 38.0 1.1 2,674.9 2,120.4
         Aug 3,001.1 2,642.3 318.5 280.5 279.3 1.3 37.9 37.2 0.7 2,682.7 2,126.2         Sep 3,004.7 2,649.0 326.2 293.5 292.9 0.6 32.7 32.2 0.5 2,678.4 2,126.9
         Oct 3,012.9 2,657.7 339.3 298.0 297.0 1.0 41.3 38.1 3.2 2,673.6 2,128.6
         Nov 3,004.8 2,647.2 325.1 288.7 288.1 0.6 36.4 33.5 2.9 2,679.7 2,133.6         Dec 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006          Jan 3,032.2 2,661.3 325.0 282.8 282.0 0.8 42.2 40.3 1.9 2,707.3 2,168.5
         Feb 3,023.3 2,656.6 316.7 283.3 282.6 0.7 33.4 32.6 0.8 2,706.5 2,170.1         Mar 3,030.2 2,659.7 329.2 292.7 291.7 0.9 36.5 35.9 0.6 2,701.1 2,167.3
         Apr 3,066.0 2,667.7 336.7 297.1 296.0 1.0 39.7 38.8 0.8 2,729.3 2,199.0
         May 3,065.4 2,659.4 326.4 293.2 292.4 0.7 33.2 32.5 0.7 2,739.0 2,196.1         June 3,028.2 2,656.1 326.0 292.7 291.7 1.0 33.3 32.3 1.1 2,702.1 2,173.3
         July 3,024.4 2,653.2 320.7 285.5 284.6 0.9 35.2 34.1 1.1 2,703.7 2,175.1
         Aug 3,022.5 2,652.2 318.1 285.5 284.8 0.7 32.6 32.0 0.6 2,704.4 2,178.5         Sep 3,035.2 2,668.7 333.0 301.3 300.5 0.8 31.8 31.5 0.3 2,702.1 2,183.5
Changes *
1997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 282.5 + 219.91998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.31999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.02004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2005          Apr + 38.5 + 3.0 + 3.5 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 5.6 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 35.0 + 39.8
         May − 20.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 22.4 − 17.4         June − 33.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − 8.1 − 7.7 − 0.5 − 28.1 − 20.9
         July + 9.1 + 4.3 − 2.6 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 11.6 + 11.2
         Aug + 3.1 − 1.1 − 4.6 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 7.8 + 5.8         Sep + 3.1 + 6.3 + 7.4 + 12.6 + 13.2 − 0.6 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.6
         Oct + 8.3 + 8.7 + 13.0 + 4.5 + 4.1 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 5.8 + 2.7 − 4.8 + 1.6
         Nov − 8.1 − 10.5 − 14.0 − 9.1 − 8.8 − 0.4 − 4.9 − 4.6 − 0.3 + 5.9 + 4.9         Dec − 9.7 − 12.2 − 15.5 − 15.2 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 5.7 + 7.7
2006          Jan + 19.6 + 8.8 + 15.3 + 9.3 + 9.1 + 0.2 + 6.0 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 4.3 + 9.9
         Feb − 8.9 − 4.7 − 8.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 8.8 − 7.6 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 1.5         Mar + 6.9 + 3.0 + 12.4 + 9.3 + 9.2 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.3 − 0.2 − 5.5 − 2.7
         Apr + 35.3 + 7.5 + 7.6 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 27.6 + 31.3
         May − 1.4 − 9.0 − 11.0 − 4.6 − 4.3 − 0.3 − 6.4 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 9.7 − 2.9         June − 37.2 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 36.9 − 22.8
         July − 3.8 − 3.0 − 5.3 − 7.2 − 7.1 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.8
         Aug − 1.9 − 1.0 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 3.4         Sep + 12.7 + 16.5 + 14.9 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 2.2 + 5.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 1996
2,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,932.9 191.0 1,741.8 214.7 54.5 566.0 380.5 31.9 348.7 184.5 1.0 6.2 2005          Apr 
1,935.5 191.0 1,744.5 194.6 54.5 561.1 378.0 31.2 346.8 182.1 1.0 6.2          May
1,934.6 190.9 1,743.7 174.6 52.5 554.1 380.2 32.1 348.1 172.9 1.0 6.0          June
1,941.4 192.5 1,748.9 179.0 52.3 554.5 380.9 32.6 348.3 173.5 0.0 5.9          July
1,946.0 195.4 1,750.6 180.2 52.3 556.5 379.8 33.1 346.6 176.7 0.0 5.9          Aug 1,945.4 195.1 1,750.3 181.5 52.0 551.5 378.4 33.2 345.3 173.0 − 4.6          Sep 
1,947.5 194.3 1,753.2 181.0 51.9 545.1 375.1 33.1 342.0 169.9 − 4.6          Oct 
1,952.2 195.1 1,757.1 181.4 52.2 546.1 373.4 32.1 341.3 172.7 − 4.5          Nov 1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5          Dec 
1,969.5 193.0 1,776.5 199.0 51.8 538.7 369.6 31.8 337.8 169.2 − 4.4 2006          Jan 
1,972.9 193.5 1,779.4 197.1 50.7 536.5 368.5 32.2 336.3 168.0 − 4.4          Feb 
1,966.6 193.2 1,773.5 200.7 49.6 533.7 365.3 31.9 333.4 168.4 − 4.4          Mar 
1,968.9 192.6 1,776.3 230.2 49.4 530.3 364.0 31.9 332.2 166.3 − 4.5          Apr 
1,972.0 194.3 1,777.8 224.1 49.3 542.9 362.4 30.9 331.6 180.5 − 4.5          May1,973.4 196.3 1,777.2 199.9 49.3 528.8 358.7 30.8 327.9 170.1 − 4.4          June
1,976.5 198.7 1,777.9 198.6 48.9 528.6 358.0 31.4 326.5 170.7 − 4.4          July
1,978.4 197.0 1,781.4 200.0 49.1 525.9 357.0 31.6 325.3 168.9 − 4.4          Aug 1,980.2 198.9 1,781.3 203.3 49.0 518.7 356.4 30.8 325.6 162.2 − 4.7          Sep 
Changes *
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 − 18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 3.1 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 36.7 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 3.1 − 1.8 − − 0.1 2005          Apr 
+ 2.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 − 20.1 + 0.0 − 4.9 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 2.4 − − 0.0          May
− 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 2.0 − 7.2 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 9.2 − 0.0 − 0.2          June
+ 6.8 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 4.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1          July
+ 4.6 + 2.9 + 1.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 3.2 − − 0.0          Aug − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 4.9 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 1.3          Sep 
+ 2.1 − 0.8 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.3 − 3.1 − − 0.1          Oct 
+ 4.5 + 0.8 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 2.7 − − 0.0          Nov + 1.2 − 0.4 + 1.6 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 2.9 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.2 − 1.7 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 0.3 − 5.6 − 5.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 0.6 − − 0.1 2006          Jan 
+ 3.4 + 0.5 + 2.9 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 2.2 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 6.3 − 0.3 − 6.0 + 3.5 − 1.1 − 2.7 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 2.9 + 0.4 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.8 − 0.6 + 2.4 + 29.5 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.3 − 2.1 − + 0.1          Apr 
+ 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 12.6 − 1.6 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 14.2 − + 0.0          May+ 1.4 + 2.0 − 0.6 − 24.2 − 0.0 − 14.1 − 3.8 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 10.4 − − 0.0          June
+ 3.1 + 2.4 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.5 − − 0.0          July
+ 1.9 − 1.6 + 3.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 2.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.7 − − 0.0          Aug + 1.8 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 6.7 − + 0.4          Sep 
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2003 2,241.6 1,124.5 1,083.3 867.1 216.2 1,252.2 335.1 151.0 37.2 59.0 152.3 32.1 54.4 54.4
2004 2,224.2 1,127.7 1,086.0 869.7 216.3 1,211.6 320.4 136.7 37.1 53.0 141.4 31.9 56.1 60.0
2005          Sep 2,238.5 1,144.2 1,087.9 890.9 197.1 1,217.9 312.8 134.5 37.3 50.9 134.1 32.2 57.6 79.7
         Dec 2,226.6 1,154.5 1,093.3 895.9 197.4 1,199.7 311.3 130.6 37.2 49.4 134.1 31.6 57.8 74.0
2006          Mar 2,258.6 1,172.5 1,109.3 915.2 194.0 1,229.7 320.7 130.3 37.6 50.0 131.2 32.1 59.0 97.7
         June 2,265.4 1,173.1 1,109.8 915.7 194.1 1,232.9 319.0 134.2 38.6 49.8 131.2 32.5 60.1 94.1         Sep 2,281.0 1,180.7 1,114.7 921.4 193.3 1,241.5 318.1 136.3 39.2 49.4 130.1 33.0 61.0 103.3
 Short-term lending
2003 313.9 − 14.1 − 14.1 266.7 8.9 46.6 4.2 13.2 55.9 3.9 8.0 25.82004 283.4 − 12.5 − 12.5 239.3 7.6 40.9 3.5 11.1 52.9 3.6 5.9 26.4
2005          Sep 293.1 − 11.7 − 11.7 250.2 7.1 41.9 4.0 10.9 48.0 4.0 6.5 42.1
         Dec 273.2 − 11.2 − 11.2 230.0 6.7 38.8 3.2 9.7 49.2 3.3 6.1 32.8
2006          Mar 292.0 − 10.7 − 10.7 250.7 6.5 39.9 3.4 10.6 47.0 3.7 6.2 54.8
         June 292.0 − 10.5 − 10.5 250.6 6.4 42.9 3.4 10.4 47.4 3.7 5.9 51.2         Sep 300.8 − 11.0 − 11.0 258.6 6.5 43.3 3.3 10.2 46.6 3.9 6.3 60.5
 Medium-term lending
2003 195.0 − 38.2 − 38.2 121.2 12.0 17.5 2.3 6.0 11.9 3.4 10.9 6.52004 194.3 − 38.8 − 38.8 119.9 11.8 16.4 2.5 5.6 11.1 3.2 11.3 7.6
2005          Sep 195.1 − 35.9 − 35.9 122.9 10.8 16.0 2.1 5.3 11.4 3.1 11.0 9.2
         Dec 194.6 − 35.7 − 35.7 122.5 10.7 15.6 2.1 5.2 11.4 3.0 10.6 10.8
2006          Mar 193.2 − 34.7 − 34.7 123.2 10.4 15.9 2.1 5.2 11.5 3.0 10.5 11.4
         June 196.3 − 34.8 − 34.8 125.5 10.6 17.0 2.2 5.2 11.5 3.0 10.3 11.7         Sep 198.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 127.5 10.5 18.8 2.4 5.3 11.5 3.0 10.5 12.3
 Long-term lending
2003 1,732.8 1,124.5 1,031.0 867.1 164.0 864.3 314.2 86.9 30.6 39.9 84.5 24.7 35.5 22.12004 1,746.5 1,127.7 1,034.7 869.7 165.0 852.4 301.0 79.4 31.2 36.2 77.3 25.0 38.9 26.0
2005          Sep 1,750.3 1,144.2 1,040.3 890.9 149.5 844.8 294.9 76.6 31.3 34.7 74.7 25.0 40.2 28.4
         Dec 1,758.8 1,154.5 1,046.3 895.9 150.4 847.2 293.9 76.2 31.8 34.5 73.5 25.2 41.1 30.4
2006          Mar 1,773.5 1,172.5 1,063.9 915.2 148.7 855.8 303.8 74.5 32.1 34.2 72.7 25.5 42.3 31.5
         June 1,777.2 1,173.1 1,064.5 915.7 148.7 856.8 302.0 74.4 33.0 34.2 72.3 25.8 43.9 31.3         Sep 1,781.3 1,180.7 1,069.1 921.4 147.8 855.4 301.2 74.2 33.5 33.8 72.0 26.1 44.2 30.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2005          Q3 + 14.9 + 5.8 + 5.6 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 7.0 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 2.3 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 9.3         Q4 − 11.9 + 5.4 + 5.1 + 4.7 + 0.4 − 18.3 − 1.9 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 8.2
2006          Q1 + 14.7 − 1.3 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 18.9 − 2.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 23.6
         Q2 + 5.5 − 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 2.3 − 1.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 4.3         Q3 + 15.6 + 4.1 + 4.4 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 8.5 − 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 8.5
 Short-term lending
2005          Q3 + 4.3 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0         Q4 − 19.7 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 20.0 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 9.7
2006          Q1 + 18.8 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 20.6 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 22.0
         Q2 − 0.9 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.4         Q3 + 8.8 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 8.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 9.3
 Medium-term lending
2005          Q3 + 4.0 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 4.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.2         Q4 − 0.5 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.4
2006          Q1 − 1.5 − − 1.1 − − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6
         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3         Q3 + 2.6 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.6
 Long-term lending
2005          Q3 + 6.6 + 5.8 + 5.5 + 5.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.0         Q4 + 8.3 + 5.4 + 5.7 + 4.7 + 1.0 + 2.2 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.1
2006          Q1 − 2.6 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.0
         Q2 + 3.6 − 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.2         Q3 + 4.2 + 4.1 + 4.2 + 4.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.4
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
711.9 160.7 44.0 207.2 437.0 67.7 975.6 744.7 230.9 118.6 21.6 13.7 3.5 2003
695.5 163.7 42.5 204.2 419.0 61.7 999.4 762.4 237.0 129.2 19.9 13.2 3.2 2004
691.6 161.0 44.4 200.8 410.9 60.2 1,006.9 771.9 235.0 132.7 19.5 13.7 3.2 2005          Sep 
685.0 160.3 40.6 199.3 407.5 60.6 1,012.9 778.9 234.0 130.1 18.8 14.1 3.1          Dec 
691.7 167.9 39.2 199.0 406.1 61.3 1,014.8 784.9 229.9 128.6 18.0 14.2 3.7 2006          Mar 
692.2 166.3 39.8 199.7 404.2 61.0 1,018.5 787.2 231.3 130.4 18.3 14.1 3.7          June
689.3 164.9 40.5 199.5 401.0 61.5 1,025.1 792.8 232.3 131.4 18.4 14.3 3.7          Sep 
Short-term lending
109.1 17.9 14.6 31.2 49.4 12.9 45.9 5.1 40.8 2.4 21.6 1.2 0.0 2003
95.0 15.8 11.5 27.6 44.4 11.4 43.0 4.9 38.0 2.3 19.9 1.1 0.0 2004
92.7 14.9 13.1 24.7 41.1 11.1 41.8 4.6 37.3 2.7 19.5 1.1 0.0 2005          Sep 
86.9 14.1 10.3 23.9 40.1 10.6 41.8 4.5 37.3 2.6 18.8 1.4 0.0          Dec 
85.1 13.5 10.0 22.7 39.6 11.5 40.2 4.1 36.0 2.5 18.0 1.2 0.0 2006          Mar 
85.6 13.1 11.0 22.9 39.1 11.4 40.4 4.2 36.2 2.6 18.3 1.1 0.0          June
84.5 13.4 10.3 22.5 38.2 11.1 41.0 4.5 36.5 2.8 18.4 1.2 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
62.7 5.7 5.6 18.0 30.4 4.5 73.2 26.2 47.0 37.1 − 0.6 0.1 200362.3 6.5 6.5 17.2 29.6 3.9 73.8 26.9 46.9 37.7 − 0.5 0.1 2004
64.9 7.1 7.0 17.1 30.2 3.8 71.6 25.0 46.6 38.1 − 0.6 0.1 2005          Sep 
63.7 7.3 6.5 15.9 29.8 3.8 71.5 25.0 46.5 37.2 − 0.7 0.1          Dec 
63.6 7.6 6.0 15.7 29.3 3.7 69.4 24.2 45.2 36.2 − 0.6 0.1 2006          Mar 
64.6 7.8 6.0 16.1 28.8 3.8 70.2 24.1 46.1 37.3 − 0.6 0.1          June
63.8 6.9 6.8 16.1 28.6 3.8 70.8 23.9 46.8 37.9 − 0.6 0.0          Sep 
Long-term lending
540.0 137.1 23.8 158.0 357.2 50.4 856.5 713.4 143.1 79.1 − 11.9 3.4 2003538.2 141.5 24.5 159.5 345.0 46.4 882.6 730.6 152.0 89.2 − 11.5 3.1 2004
534.1 139.0 24.2 159.0 339.5 45.3 893.5 742.3 151.2 91.9 − 12.0 3.1 2005          Sep 
534.4 138.9 23.8 159.6 337.6 46.2 899.6 749.4 150.2 90.3 − 12.0 3.1          Dec 
543.0 146.8 23.2 160.5 337.2 46.1 905.3 756.6 148.7 89.9 − 12.4 3.6 2006          Mar 
541.9 145.4 22.8 160.7 336.3 45.8 907.9 758.9 149.0 90.6 − 12.4 3.6          June
541.1 144.7 23.4 160.8 334.3 46.6 913.3 764.4 149.0 90.7 − 12.6 3.6          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 1.4 − 0.3 + 2.8 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 + 7.2 + 6.6 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.1 2005          Q3
− 4.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 0.8 + 6.0 + 7.1 − 1.1 − 1.6 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1          Q4
− 3.6 − 1.0 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 3.3 + 0.3 − 3.8 + 0.4 − 4.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 2006          Q1
+ 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 2.0 − 0.3 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
− 2.4 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 6.8 + 5.4 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q3
Short-term lending
− 0.7 − 0.4 + 2.4 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 2005          Q3
− 5.3 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
− 1.8 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.0 2006          Q1
+ 0.5 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 −          Q2
− 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 3.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2005          Q3
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 1.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2006          Q1
+ 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
− 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 7.4 + 6.7 + 0.7 + 1.0 − + 0.6 + 0.1 2005          Q3
+ 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.9 + 1.2 + 6.2 + 7.2 − 1.0 − 0.7 − − 0.1 − 0.1          Q4
− 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 1.0 − 2.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.0 2006          Q1
− 1.2 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 5.5 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 0.8 − + 0.2 − 0.0          Q3
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. — loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2003 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.3
2004 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.12005 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 231.3 633.1 8.2 624.9 603.4 91.9 42.4 31.6 12.6
2005          Oct 2,258.1 707.7 861.1 232.8 628.3 7.9 620.5 597.2 92.1 41.7 32.1 21.7
         Nov 2,274.6 723.6 863.2 232.8 630.3 8.0 622.3 596.0 91.9 42.1 31.9 22.6         Dec 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 231.3 633.1 8.2 624.9 603.4 91.9 42.4 31.6 12.6
2006          Jan 2,285.7 718.1 872.9 237.1 635.9 8.4 627.5 602.8 91.9 38.9 31.7 18.4
         Feb 2,287.7 715.3 877.7 235.0 642.7 8.6 634.1 602.6 92.1 38.2 31.7 19.0         Mar 2,303.4 722.4 887.1 243.8 643.4 8.6 634.8 601.4 92.4 37.8 31.6 25.0
         Apr 2,322.4 726.5 903.1 255.1 648.0 8.7 639.4 599.8 93.0 38.1 31.6 27.4
         May 2,333.8 742.5 900.6 250.1 650.4 8.9 641.6 597.4 93.3 37.9 31.5 27.5         June 2,342.7 742.0 911.0 258.4 652.5 9.0 643.5 596.1 93.6 37.4 31.5 26.7
         July 2,336.9 730.6 919.0 263.5 655.5 9.1 646.3 593.2 94.1 37.5 31.2 22.7
         Aug 2,347.5 725.6 936.9 273.7 663.2 10.1 653.1 590.3 94.7 37.5 31.4 24.8         Sep 2,356.4 724.2 950.0 285.9 664.1 10.7 653.5 587.7 94.5 37.9 30.4 26.9
Changes *
2004 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 − 3.7 + 29.7 − 0.3 + 29.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 0.92005 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 3.9 + 16.4 + 0.4 + 16.0 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 2.4
2005          Oct + 3.9 + 4.1 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.7
         Nov + 16.5 + 15.9 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.9         Dec + 2.0 − 6.6 + 1.2 − 1.6 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.6 + 7.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 10.0
2006          Jan + 9.0 + 1.1 + 8.5 + 5.8 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 0.1 + 5.9
         Feb + 2.0 − 2.8 + 4.7 − 2.1 + 6.8 + 0.2 + 6.6 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6         Mar + 15.7 + 7.1 + 9.5 + 8.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 6.0
         Apr + 19.0 + 4.0 + 16.0 + 11.3 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 4.6 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 10.6 + 16.0 − 3.3 − 5.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 2.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8         June + 8.9 − 0.5 + 10.4 + 8.3 + 2.1 + 0.2 + 1.9 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8
         July − 5.8 − 11.4 + 8.0 + 5.1 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.0
         Aug + 10.0 − 5.6 + 17.9 + 10.2 + 7.8 + 1.0 + 6.8 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.2         Sep + 10.4 − 1.4 + 13.1 + 12.2 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 2.6 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 2.0
Domestic government End of year or month *
2003 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −2004 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −2005 103.7 21.0 78.7 31.7 47.0 0.5 46.5 2.4 1.5 32.3 1.0 −
2005          Oct 101.5 20.7 76.3 29.4 46.9 0.5 46.4 3.0 1.5 32.3 1.0 −
         Nov 102.0 21.5 76.3 29.2 47.1 0.5 46.6 2.7 1.5 32.2 1.0 −         Dec 103.7 21.0 78.7 31.7 47.0 0.5 46.5 2.4 1.5 32.3 1.0 −
2006          Jan 106.1 21.2 81.1 33.7 47.3 0.6 46.8 2.3 1.5 29.5 1.0 −
         Feb 104.4 22.0 78.6 31.1 47.5 0.6 47.0 2.3 1.5 29.5 1.0 −         Mar 106.2 20.6 81.9 35.1 46.7 0.6 46.1 2.3 1.5 29.2 1.0 −
         Apr 107.7 19.7 84.3 37.2 47.0 0.7 46.3 2.2 1.5 29.4 1.0 −
         May 114.7 22.6 88.3 40.8 47.4 0.7 46.7 2.3 1.6 29.2 0.9 −         June 122.1 24.8 93.4 46.2 47.2 0.7 46.5 2.3 1.6 28.4 0.9 −
         July 121.6 24.6 93.2 45.8 47.4 0.7 46.7 2.2 1.6 28.4 0.7 −
         Aug 125.5 23.8 97.8 46.1 51.7 1.4 50.2 2.3 1.6 28.4 0.7 −         Sep 128.1 22.5 101.6 50.0 51.6 1.7 49.8 2.3 1.6 28.7 0.7 −
Changes *
2004 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.4 − 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.1 −2005 − 0.2 + 3.9 − 3.8 + 1.2 − 5.1 − 0.4 − 4.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.1 −
2005          Oct − 1.8 + 1.6 − 3.3 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Nov + 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − −         Dec + 1.6 − 0.5 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
2006          Jan + 2.5 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 0.0 −
         Feb − 1.7 + 0.7 − 2.4 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − −         Mar + 1.8 − 1.4 + 3.2 + 4.0 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Apr + 1.4 − 1.0 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −
         May + 7.1 + 3.0 + 4.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −         June + 7.4 + 2.1 + 5.2 + 5.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.0 −
         July − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 −
         Aug + 3.9 − 0.7 + 4.5 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.7 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −         Sep + 2.6 − 1.3 + 3.8 + 3.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2003 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
2004 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.12005 2,173.0 696.0 785.7 199.5 586.1 7.7 578.4 601.0 90.3 10.2 30.7 12.6
2005          Oct 2,156.6 687.0 784.8 203.3 581.5 7.4 574.1 594.2 90.6 9.4 31.1 21.7
         Nov 2,172.6 702.1 786.9 203.6 583.2 7.5 575.7 593.3 90.4 9.9 30.9 22.6         Dec 2,173.0 696.0 785.7 199.5 586.1 7.7 578.4 601.0 90.3 10.2 30.7 12.6
2006          Jan 2,179.6 696.8 791.9 203.3 588.6 7.8 580.7 600.5 90.3 9.3 30.7 18.4
         Feb 2,183.2 693.3 799.0 203.9 595.2 8.0 587.2 600.3 90.6 8.8 30.8 19.0         Mar 2,197.2 701.8 805.3 208.7 596.6 8.0 588.6 599.1 90.9 8.6 30.7 25.0
         Apr 2,214.7 706.8 818.9 217.8 601.0 8.0 593.0 597.6 91.5 8.7 30.6 27.4
         May 2,219.1 719.9 812.3 209.3 603.0 8.1 594.9 595.1 91.7 8.6 30.6 27.5         June 2,220.5 717.2 817.5 212.2 605.3 8.3 597.0 593.8 92.0 9.0 30.6 26.7
         July 2,215.2 706.0 825.7 217.7 608.0 8.4 599.6 591.0 92.5 9.1 30.5 22.7
         Aug 2,222.0 701.7 839.1 227.5 611.6 8.7 602.9 588.0 93.1 9.2 30.7 24.8         Sep 2,228.3 701.6 848.4 235.8 612.5 8.9 603.6 585.4 92.9 9.2 29.7 26.9
Changes *
2004 + 63.9 + 25.3 + 27.4 − 5.1 + 32.5 − 0.7 + 33.1 + 12.5 − 1.3 + 3.4 + 1.8 + 0.92005 + 76.8 + 66.8 + 16.3 − 5.2 + 21.4 + 0.8 + 20.6 − 0.9 − 5.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 2.4
2005          Oct + 5.7 + 2.5 + 4.9 + 4.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.7
         Nov + 16.0 + 15.1 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.9         Dec + 0.4 − 6.1 − 1.2 − 4.1 + 2.9 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 7.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 10.0
2006          Jan + 6.5 + 0.9 + 6.1 + 3.8 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 5.9
         Feb + 3.7 − 3.5 + 7.1 + 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.2 + 6.4 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6         Mar + 13.9 + 8.5 + 6.3 + 4.8 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 6.0
         Apr + 17.5 + 5.0 + 13.6 + 9.1 + 4.4 − 0.0 + 4.4 − 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 3.6 + 13.0 − 7.3 − 9.2 + 2.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8         June + 1.5 − 2.6 + 5.2 + 2.9 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8
         July − 5.3 − 11.2 + 8.2 + 5.5 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 2.6 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.0
         Aug + 6.2 − 4.9 + 13.4 + 9.8 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 3.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.2         Sep + 7.8 − 0.1 + 9.3 + 8.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 2.6 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 2.0
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2003 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.32004 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.12005 809.9 233.2 550.8 108.7 442.0 2.4 439.6 5.0 21.0 9.7 19.4 12.6
2005          Oct 816.6 234.0 556.0 115.5 440.5 2.2 438.3 5.2 21.5 9.0 19.7 21.7
         Nov 821.6 237.6 557.7 115.8 441.9 2.3 439.6 5.1 21.3 9.4 19.5 22.6         Dec 809.9 233.2 550.8 108.7 442.0 2.4 439.6 5.0 21.0 9.7 19.4 12.6
2006          Jan 817.6 235.1 556.5 112.4 444.1 2.6 441.5 5.0 21.0 8.9 19.5 18.4
         Feb 817.6 229.7 561.9 111.6 450.3 2.7 447.6 5.0 21.0 8.3 19.4 19.0         Mar 829.0 237.4 565.7 114.7 451.0 2.6 448.4 5.0 20.8 8.1 19.4 25.0
         Apr 842.3 237.8 578.7 123.6 455.1 2.6 452.5 5.0 20.8 8.2 19.4 27.4
         May 847.7 250.7 571.4 114.3 457.1 2.7 454.4 4.9 20.8 8.2 19.4 27.5         June 848.5 247.5 575.4 116.1 459.3 2.8 456.6 4.9 20.7 8.5 19.4 26.7
         July 846.2 240.7 580.2 117.9 462.3 2.9 459.4 4.7 20.6 8.6 19.3 22.7
         Aug 856.2 241.9 589.1 123.6 465.5 2.9 462.6 4.7 20.5 8.7 19.6 24.8         Sep 864.8 244.3 595.3 129.0 466.2 3.1 463.2 4.7 20.6 8.8 19.9 26.9
Changes *
2004 + 31.1 − 2.3 + 33.0 + 7.3 + 25.7 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 1.0 + 0.92005 + 46.7 + 31.0 + 16.4 − 1.5 + 18.0 + 0.7 + 17.3 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 2.4
2005          Oct + 4.6 − 0.5 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.7
         Nov + 5.0 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.9         Dec − 11.7 − 4.4 − 6.9 − 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 10.0
2006          Jan + 7.6 + 1.9 + 5.7 + 3.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 5.9
         Feb − 0.0 − 5.4 + 5.4 − 0.8 + 6.2 + 0.1 + 6.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6         Mar + 11.4 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 6.0
         Apr + 13.4 + 0.4 + 13.0 + 8.9 + 4.1 − 0.0 + 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 4.6 + 12.8 − 8.0 − 9.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8         June + 0.8 − 3.1 + 4.0 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8
         July − 2.3 − 6.8 + 4.8 + 1.8 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.0
         Aug + 9.3 + 0.6 + 8.9 + 5.6 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.2         Sep + 8.7 + 2.4 + 6.2 + 5.5 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.0
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2003 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.4
2004 1,334.2 428.1 414.8 71.7 283.5 59.6 13.2 235.3 216.9 25.7 175.1 16.22005 1,363.1 462.8 448.1 79.7 305.1 63.2 14.8 234.9 217.0 23.7 179.0 14.2
2006          Apr 1,372.4 469.0 454.2 78.5 310.9 64.7 14.8 240.2 222.4 25.0 182.9 14.5
         May 1,371.4 469.2 453.5 79.6 308.9 65.1 15.7 240.9 223.1 25.2 183.3 14.6         June 1,372.0 469.7 453.6 78.3 309.9 65.4 16.1 242.1 224.4 25.6 184.1 14.6
         July 1,369.0 465.3 449.6 79.1 306.2 64.3 15.7 245.5 228.0 26.4 186.5 15.0
         Aug 1,365.8 459.8 444.6 79.3 301.5 63.8 15.3 250.0 232.0 27.5 189.0 15.5         Sep 1,363.5 457.3 442.1 78.0 300.7 63.5 15.2 253.1 234.7 28.2 190.7 15.8
Changes *
2004 + 32.8 + 27.6 + 26.7 + 4.8 + 19.2 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 5.6 − 5.1 − 3.5 + 0.6 − 2.22005 + 30.1 + 35.8 + 34.2 + 8.0 + 21.5 + 4.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 4.1 − 1.8
2006          Apr + 4.2 + 4.6 + 5.0 + 0.8 + 3.5 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1
         May − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1         June + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0
         July − 3.0 − 4.4 − 3.9 + 0.9 − 4.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 0.4
         Aug − 3.2 − 5.5 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.5 + 4.0 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.5         Sep − 0.9 − 2.5 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 1.7 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2003 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 21.9
2004 103.6 41.4 0.8 5.8 34.8 0.0 12.9 15.1 2.7 2.2 10.2 0.1 21.52005 103.7 38.8 1.3 7.9 29.6 0.0 12.9 16.3 3.9 2.5 9.9 0.1 19.1
2006          Apr 107.7 37.6 0.8 7.6 29.1 0.0 10.4 17.9 3.3 4.9 9.7 0.1 18.7
         May 114.7 37.0 1.0 6.8 29.2 0.0 10.3 18.1 3.2 5.2 9.7 0.1 18.7         June 122.1 39.3 2.0 8.4 28.9 0.0 9.5 22.5 5.6 7.2 9.6 0.1 18.6
         July 121.6 40.3 2.6 8.3 29.3 0.0 9.5 19.9 4.8 5.6 9.4 0.1 18.6
         Aug 125.5 44.1 2.6 8.1 33.4 0.0 9.5 17.5 3.4 4.6 9.4 0.1 18.5         Sep 128.1 45.6 1.7 10.9 32.9 0.0 9.5 19.0 4.0 5.4 9.6 0.1 18.9
Changes *
2004 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 2.42005 − 0.2 − 3.0 + 0.1 + 2.1 − 5.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 2.4
2006          Apr + 1.4 + 0.5 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 7.1 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − − 0.0         June + 7.4 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 4.4 + 2.5 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         July − 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug + 3.9 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.1 − − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0         Sep + 2.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 + 2.9 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
18.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 − 2003
18.4 94.3 141.0 5.5 135.6 595.7 586.3 9.5 75.1 0.3 12.8 − 200417.9 90.8 144.1 5.3 138.8 596.0 586.4 9.6 69.3 0.5 11.3 − 2005
17.8 94.3 145.9 5.4 140.5 592.6 583.1 9.5 70.7 0.5 11.2 − 2006          Apr 
17.8 95.0 146.0 5.5 140.5 590.3 580.9 9.4 71.0 0.5 11.2 −          May
17.7 96.2 145.9 5.5 140.4 589.0 579.6 9.3 71.3 0.5 11.2 −          June
17.5 99.8 145.7 5.6 140.2 586.3 576.9 9.4 71.9 0.5 11.2 −          July
18.1 104.0 146.1 5.7 140.3 583.3 573.9 9.3 72.6 0.5 11.1 −          Aug 18.4 106.8 146.3 5.9 140.4 580.7 571.5 9.3 72.3 0.5 9.8 −          Sep 
Changes *
− 0.5 − 12.3 + 6.7 − 0.7 + 7.4 + 12.2 + 12.0 + 0.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 2004− 0.5 − 3.7 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 4.5 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 2005
− 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2006          Apr 
+ 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          May
− 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
− 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 − − 0.0 −          July
+ 0.5 + 4.2 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug + 0.4 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 −          Sep 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
 
   
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
24.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0 2003
25.7 10.5 9.6 2.3 3.3 0.3 21.4 2.9 12.9 4.8 0.8 0.0 200428.0 11.8 10.4 2.6 3.2 0.3 20.7 4.1 11.0 4.9 0.7 0.0 2005
26.6 9.7 10.9 2.8 3.1 0.3 25.6 5.8 13.8 5.4 0.6 0.0 2006          Apr 
29.3 10.9 12.3 3.0 3.2 0.3 30.3 7.6 16.6 5.6 0.6 0.0          May
27.7 10.0 11.5 3.0 3.2 0.3 32.6 7.1 19.2 5.7 0.6 0.0          June
27.5 10.1 11.3 3.0 3.1 0.3 34.0 7.0 20.6 5.7 0.6 0.0          July
30.4 11.0 13.1 3.1 3.2 0.3 33.4 6.7 20.3 5.7 0.7 0.0          Aug 29.3 10.3 12.6 3.2 3.2 0.3 34.2 6.5 21.1 5.9 0.7 0.0          Sep 
Changes *
+ 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 2004+ 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 2005
+ 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2006          Apr 
+ 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 4.7 + 1.8 + 2.7 + 0.2 − −          May
− 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 2.3 − 0.4 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          June
− 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          July
+ 2.9 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Aug − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Sep 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2003 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 16.0 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.0
2004 613.0 603.5 515.5 397.9 88.0 76.7 9.6 7.7 14.2 105.8 98.4 85.2 7.42005 611.9 603.4 519.2 404.2 84.2 74.4 8.5 6.8 13.3 99.3 91.9 77.5 7.4
2006          May 605.8 597.4 510.1 399.7 87.3 78.1 8.4 6.7 0.3 100.6 93.3 75.1 7.3
         June 604.5 596.1 507.5 397.9 88.6 79.4 8.4 6.7 0.3 100.8 93.6 74.8 7.2
         July 601.6 593.2 503.5 395.8 89.7 80.4 8.4 6.6 0.3 101.2 94.1 74.3 7.1
         Aug 598.6 590.3 499.1 393.0 91.2 82.0 8.3 6.5 0.3 101.8 94.7 73.9 7.1         Sep 596.0 587.7 495.3 389.9 92.4 83.2 8.3 6.5 0.3 101.5 94.5 72.3 7.1
Changes *
2004 + 12.6 + 13.1 + 14.7 + 20.1 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.42005 − 2.2 − 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.5 − 4.0 − 2.6 − 1.1 − 0.8 . − 5.3 − 5.4 − 6.5 + 0.0
2006          May − 2.4 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 2.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0
         June − 1.3 − 1.3 − 2.6 − 1.9 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 . + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1
         July − 3.0 − 2.9 − 4.0 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1
         Aug − 3.0 − 2.9 − 4.4 − 2.8 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.0         Sep − 2.6 − 2.6 − 3.8 − 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 1.2 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2003 1,490.1 353.4 20.8 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.2
2004 1,550.0 382.6 22.9 214.6 36.5 62.1 94.2 1,393.7 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.72005 1,608.7 400.7 25.3 274.5 32.0 61.8 94.8 1,452.1 1.5 0.2 0.5 0.8 45.8 2.5
2006          May 1,637.6 406.2 35.2 288.3 38.0 71.1 107.5 1,459.0 1.6 0.2 0.7 0.7 47.8 2.6
         June 1,645.1 405.7 33.8 289.6 35.8 69.0 109.5 1,466.5 1.5 0.1 0.7 0.7 47.7 2.6
         July 1,642.9 403.0 33.5 289.0 33.6 65.8 108.2 1,468.9 1.5 0.1 0.7 0.7 47.7 2.6
         Aug 1,639.3 399.6 34.4 288.9 32.9 66.6 109.7 1,463.0 1.6 0.2 0.7 0.7 47.7 2.6         Sep 1,639.7 402.8 39.3 291.9 33.7 69.9 110.4 1,459.3 1.5 0.1 0.7 0.7 50.7 1.2
Changes *
2004 + 57.4 + 27.9 + 1.8 + 34.7 − 7.9 − 8.0 − 11.0 + 76.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.52005 + 56.1 + 16.2 + 3.4 + 59.8 − 5.6 − 0.3 − 5.8 + 62.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 2.6 + 0.0
2006          May + 9.0 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 4.0 + 4.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0
         June − 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 2.2 − 2.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         July − 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 2.1 − 3.2 − 1.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Aug − 3.7 − 3.4 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0         Sep + 7.4 − 0.2 + 1.5 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 3.3 + 1.8 + 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2005 26 192.4 38.2 0.0 13.6 29.8 64.5 10.1 17.2 0.5 28.5 120.1 5.0 5.6 7.4 94.2
2006          July 26 193.4 43.0 0.0 12.4 28.1 65.3 11.1 15.4 0.4 29.6 121.3 5.1 3.8 7.4 7.5
         Aug 26 193.6 42.8 0.0 13.1 27.9 65.6 11.1 15.0 0.4 29.7 121.3 5.0 3.7 7.4 7.7         Sep 26 194.2 42.2 0.0 13.8 27.8 65.9 11.2 14.9 0.4 29.8 121.3 5.1 3.7 7.4 7.4
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          July 15 141.3 31.8 0.0 6.2 17.8 48.2 10.1 9.9 0.3 23.1 81.8 4.9 3.8 4.8 4.8         Aug 15 141.4 31.3 0.0 6.9 17.6 48.5 10.2 9.6 0.3 23.3 81.8 4.8 3.7 4.8 4.9         Sep 15 142.0 30.4 0.0 7.9 17.6 48.9 10.2 9.5 0.3 23.4 81.8 4.8 3.7 4.8 4.6
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          July 11 52.1 11.2 0.0 6.2 10.3 17.1 1.0 5.5 0.1 6.5 39.5 0.2 − 2.6 2.8         Aug 11 52.1 11.4 0.0 6.1 10.3 17.1 1.0 5.4 0.1 6.5 39.5 0.2 − 2.6 2.9         Sep 11 52.2 11.7 0.0 6.0 10.2 17.1 1.0 5.4 0.1 6.4 39.5 0.2 − 2.6 2.8
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2005 26.1 3.3 5.7 41.0 27.1 36.5 16.6 4.1 6.5 3.3 13.5 11.1 7.7 13.8 11.5 0.5
2006          July 1.9 0.1 0.6 4.0 2.8 3.6 1.8 0.4 0.7 0.3 1.2 11.5 7.8 0.9 0.0
         Aug 1.9 0.1 0.6 3.4 2.3 3.2 1.5 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.1 11.3 7.7 0.9 0.0         Sep 1.8 0.1 0.5 3.2 2.4 3.2 1.4 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.1 11.0 7.7 0.9 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          July 1.2 0.1 0.3 2.7 1.8 2.6 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.0 7.0 3.7 0.6 0.0         Aug 1.2 0.1 0.3 2.3 1.5 2.3 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.9 6.8 3.7 0.6 0.0         Sep 1.2 0.1 0.3 2.2 1.5 2.3 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.0 6.6 3.7 0.6 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          July 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.1 1.0 0.6 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.5 4.1 0.3 0.0         Aug 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.0 0.3 0.0         Sep 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 4.0 0.3 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.52004 52 203 1,452.7 681.0 595.7 170.2 425.6 85.2 671.0 477.3 17.1 15.8 460.2 193.7 100.72005 54 211 1,626.5 713.1 640.8 180.1 460.7 72.3 805.8 587.7 22.0 21.5 565.7 218.1 107.6
2005          Nov 54 211 1,775.0 791.3 717.6 193.7 523.8 73.7 827.4 608.9 23.3 22.4 585.6 218.5 156.3
         Dec 54 211 1,626.5 713.1 640.8 180.1 460.7 72.3 805.8 587.7 22.0 21.5 565.7 218.1 107.6
2006          Jan 54 214 1,664.5 717.5 645.5 185.0 460.5 72.0 834.8 621.6 22.3 21.7 599.3 213.3 112.2
         Feb 54 215 1,702.8 747.8 673.1 207.5 465.7 74.6 859.3 644.9 21.4 20.9 623.5 214.3 95.8         Mar 54 212 1,713.8 748.6 676.6 214.2 462.4 72.0 870.9 666.5 21.2 20.6 645.3 204.4 94.3
         Apr 54 210 1,721.0 728.9 657.6 215.7 441.9 71.4 899.1 696.3 21.4 20.8 674.9 202.8 93.0
         May 54 212 1,716.6 733.8 665.5 224.3 441.2 68.2 897.3 684.9 19.6 19.0 665.3 212.5 85.5         June 54 213 1,673.1 693.8 627.7 219.7 407.9 66.2 887.3 678.0 20.5 19.5 657.6 209.2 92.1
         July 54 212 1,706.2 717.3 649.0 199.5 449.6 68.3 882.0 665.9 20.7 19.8 645.3 216.1 106.8
         Aug 54 212 1,711.4 718.6 651.8 188.2 463.6 66.7 883.7 671.2 19.5 18.7 651.7 212.5 109.2
Changes *
2004 − 3 + 1 +207.5 +100.7 + 90.1 − 15.4 +105.5 + 10.6 + 64.2 + 57.8 − 1.9 − 1.0 + 59.7 + 6.4 + 42.72005 + 2 + 8 + 74.0 − 4.9 + 10.6 + 10.0 + 0.6 − 15.5 + 80.1 + 70.1 + 4.9 + 5.7 + 65.2 + 10.0 − 1.1
2005          Nov − − + 56.3 + 56.3 + 55.5 + 8.6 + 46.9 + 0.9 − 15.1 − 9.3 + 1.1 + 1.3 − 10.4 − 5.8 + 15.1
         Dec − − −147.3 − 77.8 − 76.4 − 13.6 − 62.8 − 1.4 − 20.8 − 20.6 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 19.3 − 0.2 − 48.7
2006          Jan − + 3 + 58.2 + 12.2 + 12.0 + 4.8 + 7.2 + 0.2 + 40.4 + 42.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 41.9 − 1.8 + 5.6
         Feb − + 1 + 20.9 + 24.1 + 21.9 + 22.5 − 0.6 + 2.2 + 14.2 + 15.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 16.5 − 1.5 − 17.3         Mar − − 3 + 31.1 + 7.9 + 10.0 + 6.8 + 3.3 − 2.1 + 23.6 + 30.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 31.1 − 7.3 − 0.4
         Apr − − 2 + 35.2 − 10.2 − 10.1 + 1.4 − 11.5 − 0.1 + 43.4 + 41.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 41.4 + 1.8 + 2.1
         May − + 2 + 12.8 + 10.9 + 13.7 + 8.6 + 5.1 − 2.8 + 8.6 − 3.2 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 1.4 + 11.8 − 6.7         June − + 1 − 49.7 − 42.2 − 40.0 − 4.6 − 35.4 − 2.2 − 13.5 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 0.5 − 10.4 − 4.0 + 6.0
         July − − 1 + 34.1 + 24.1 + 21.9 − 20.3 + 42.1 + 2.2 − 4.7 − 11.7 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 11.9 + 7.0 + 14.7
         Aug − − + 9.4 + 2.8 + 4.4 − 11.3 + 15.6 − 1.5 + 4.0 + 7.1 − 1.1 − 1.0 + 8.2 − 3.0 + 2.5
    
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.62004 45 170 647.7 304.4 236.1 117.1 119.0 68.3 282.1 211.9 38.6 35.0 173.3 70.2 61.22005 43 153 713.6 320.9 249.4 119.9 129.6 71.4 324.6 224.0 39.0 35.8 185.0 100.6 68.1
2005          Nov 43 156 714.2 326.4 256.1 119.0 137.1 70.4 320.5 217.8 37.1 36.0 180.7 102.7 67.3
         Dec 43 153 713.6 320.9 249.4 119.9 129.6 71.4 324.6 224.0 39.0 35.8 185.0 100.6 68.1
2006          Jan 44 154 730.9 328.7 254.9 120.9 134.0 73.8 332.7 220.3 39.4 36.2 180.9 112.4 69.6
         Feb 44 153 752.3 336.9 259.7 123.4 136.3 77.2 333.0 219.3 37.5 35.8 181.8 113.7 82.4         Mar 43 153 759.2 335.8 260.7 121.8 138.9 75.1 340.6 221.7 37.2 35.5 184.5 118.9 82.8
         Apr 43 152 762.2 338.2 259.7 123.6 136.2 78.4 336.3 218.6 37.6 35.9 181.0 117.7 87.8
         May 43 153 771.2 333.9 255.5 123.3 132.1 78.5 344.7 226.9 39.2 37.4 187.7 117.8 92.5         June 43 151 756.6 330.6 253.4 121.2 132.1 77.2 348.4 227.6 42.4 40.6 185.2 120.9 77.6
         July 43 150 760.3 337.6 258.6 119.1 139.5 78.9 350.5 229.4 48.7 46.8 180.7 121.2 72.2
         Aug 42 149 748.9 331.4 251.6 118.3 133.3 79.8 349.1 227.4 48.2 46.3 179.2 121.6 68.4
Changes *
2004 − 1 − 9 + 9.3 + 0.8 − 8.1 − 10.2 + 2.0 + 9.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 2.8 + 4.2 + 7.0 + 0.12005 − 2 − 17 + 49.9 + 7.0 + 7.6 + 2.7 + 4.9 − 0.6 + 36.8 + 6.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 6.1 + 30.3 + 6.1
2005          Nov − − 6 + 7.7 − 0.2 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 6.7 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 1.2
         Dec − − 3 − 0.3 − 5.4 − 6.5 + 0.9 − 7.4 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 6.4 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 4.5 − 2.1 + 0.8
2006          Jan + 1 + 1 + 20.6 + 9.0 + 6.4 + 1.0 + 5.4 + 2.5 + 10.0 − 2.7 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 12.7 + 1.6
         Feb − − 1 + 18.7 + 6.4 + 4.0 + 2.6 + 1.4 + 2.4 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 12.8         Mar − 1 − + 10.6 + 1.2 + 2.2 − 1.7 + 3.8 − 1.0 + 8.7 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 5.2 + 0.7
         Apr − − 1 + 7.1 + 5.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.5 + 4.8 − 3.2 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.2 + 5.2
         May − + 1 + 11.4 − 2.5 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.3 + 1.1 + 9.1 + 9.0 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 7.3 + 0.1 + 4.8         June − − 2 − 15.5 − 4.0 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 3.2 − 2.8 + 3.1 − 15.0
         July − − 1 + 4.0 + 7.1 + 5.3 − 2.1 + 7.4 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 6.3 + 6.2 − 4.3 + 0.3 − 5.4
         Aug − 1 − 1 − 10.6 − 5.6 − 6.8 − 0.9 − 6.0 + 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 3.8
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 2003
1,226.9 798.4 295.2 503.2 428.4 61.8 55.7 52.4 6.1 5.8 366.6 139.9 21.7 64.3 20041,362.8 912.4 373.6 538.9 450.4 63.9 59.0 55.3 4.9 4.6 386.5 171.9 20.9 70.8 2005
1,490.4 998.6 360.3 638.3 491.8 66.0 61.1 57.5 4.8 4.5 425.8 158.7 21.3 104.6 2005          Nov 
1,362.8 912.4 373.6 538.9 450.4 63.9 59.0 55.3 4.9 4.6 386.5 171.9 20.9 70.8          Dec 1,388.6 925.4 362.6 562.8 463.2 72.4 64.5 61.0 7.8 7.6 390.9 168.3 21.4 86.3 2006          Jan 
1,421.7 924.0 357.9 566.0 497.8 70.5 62.4 58.8 8.1 7.8 427.2 175.7 21.4 84.0          Feb 
1,425.6 941.6 355.5 586.1 484.1 70.0 62.0 59.3 8.0 7.7 414.1 180.3 21.6 86.3          Mar 
1,426.5 922.5 340.2 582.3 504.0 68.6 60.8 58.1 7.8 7.5 435.4 188.1 21.9 84.5          Apr 
1,422.8 911.5 342.4 569.1 511.3 70.1 62.5 59.6 7.6 7.4 441.1 185.0 22.5 86.4          May1,393.7 907.3 391.4 515.9 486.4 64.7 57.1 54.1 7.7 7.4 421.6 168.9 22.5 88.1          June
1,418.7 942.7 358.5 584.2 476.0 67.0 59.0 56.5 8.0 7.3 409.0 173.2 22.5 91.7          July
1,414.9 943.8 356.0 587.8 471.1 67.4 59.5 56.5 8.0 7.3 403.7 180.2 22.5 93.9          Aug 
Changes *
+ 186.4 + 93.2 + 28.1 + 65.1 + 93.3 − 4.4 − 4.8 − 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 97.7 + 0.4 − 8.7 + 29.4 2004+ 59.5 + 69.4 + 78.4 − 8.9 − 10.0 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 12.0 + 32.1 − 0.8 − 16.7 2005
+ 50.0 + 45.9 + 6.4 + 39.5 + 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 2.0 − 0.3 + 4.6 2005          Nov 
− 126.4 − 85.5 + 13.2 − 98.8 − 40.8 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 38.8 + 13.3 − 0.4 − 33.8          Dec + 40.8 + 22.1 − 10.9 + 33.0 + 18.7 + 8.5 + 5.5 + 5.7 + 2.9 + 2.9 + 10.2 − 3.7 + 0.4 + 20.7 2006          Jan 
+ 19.8 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 4.7 + 29.2 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 31.0 + 7.5 + 0.0 − 6.3          Feb 
+ 18.7 + 25.5 − 2.4 + 27.9 − 6.8 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 6.2 + 4.6 + 0.2 + 7.7          Mar 
+ 19.4 − 7.6 − 15.3 + 7.8 + 27.0 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 28.3 + 7.8 + 0.3 + 7.7          Apr 
+ 9.1 − 3.4 + 2.3 − 5.7 + 12.5 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 11.0 − 3.1 + 0.6 + 6.2          May− 33.4 − 6.7 + 48.9 − 55.7 − 26.7 − 5.4 − 5.4 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 21.3 − 16.1 + 0.0 − 0.2          June
+ 26.0 + 36.0 − 32.8 + 68.9 − 10.1 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 12.4 + 4.3 − 0.0 + 3.9          July
− 0.6 + 3.4 − 2.5 + 6.0 − 4.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 + 7.0 − 0.0 + 3.1          Aug 
    
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003462.3 277.5 83.4 194.1 184.9 31.8 27.3 26.5 4.5 4.3 153.1 73.5 39.1 72.7 2004525.4 310.6 103.3 207.3 214.8 36.0 29.1 27.1 7.0 6.8 178.8 79.7 41.0 67.5 2005
526.5 318.9 97.2 221.7 207.7 29.9 23.0 21.6 6.9 6.8 177.7 76.8 40.8 70.0 2005          Nov 
525.4 310.6 103.3 207.3 214.8 36.0 29.1 27.1 7.0 6.8 178.8 79.7 41.0 67.5          Dec 534.6 322.2 101.0 221.3 212.4 33.0 24.7 23.5 8.4 8.1 179.3 84.9 41.0 70.5 2006          Jan 
553.4 329.6 101.2 228.5 223.8 34.4 26.4 25.3 8.0 7.9 189.4 87.9 41.0 70.0          Feb 
557.1 336.0 108.7 227.3 221.1 34.8 26.8 25.7 8.0 7.9 186.3 90.8 41.1 70.3          Mar 
558.1 336.0 109.5 226.4 222.1 33.9 25.7 24.9 8.2 7.9 188.2 91.8 40.8 71.6          Apr 
564.2 341.0 115.4 225.6 223.2 36.5 28.1 27.0 8.3 8.1 186.7 91.8 41.2 74.0          May557.4 333.4 124.8 208.5 224.0 33.9 25.5 24.6 8.4 8.2 190.1 89.2 40.3 69.7          June
559.9 335.0 117.9 217.1 224.9 35.4 27.0 25.3 8.4 8.3 189.5 89.1 40.8 70.5          July
549.3 330.1 115.5 214.6 219.1 35.2 26.8 24.5 8.4 8.3 183.9 88.2 40.7 70.7          Aug 
Changes *
+ 1.4 − 0.7 − 16.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 5.4 − 2.2 + 4.7 2004+ 48.6 + 24.2 + 19.9 + 4.3 + 24.4 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 20.2 + 6.2 + 1.9 − 6.7 2005
+ 6.0 + 4.8 − 0.7 + 5.4 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 2.1 2005          Nov 
− 0.8 − 8.0 + 6.1 − 14.1 + 7.3 + 6.1 + 6.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 0.2 − 2.6          Dec + 11.9 + 13.2 − 2.4 + 15.5 − 1.3 − 3.0 − 4.4 − 3.6 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 5.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 2006          Jan 
+ 16.5 + 6.0 + 0.2 + 5.8 + 10.5 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 9.1 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.8          Feb 
+ 6.9 + 8.2 + 7.6 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − − 1.7 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.8          Mar 
+ 4.5 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 + 2.3 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.2 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 1.8          Apr 
+ 8.3 + 6.6 + 5.9 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.7          May− 7.7 − 8.3 + 9.4 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 2.5 − 2.6 − 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 4.4          June
+ 2.6 + 1.8 − 6.9 + 8.7 + 0.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.0          July
− 10.2 − 4.5 − 2.4 − 2.1 − 5.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.5          Aug 
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2006          Mar 7,969.3 159.4 0.5 158.9 159.5 0.6 0.0
         Apr 8,045.3 160.9 0.5 160.4 161.2 0.8 0.0
         May 8,154.9 163.1 0.5 162.6 163.3 0.7 0.0         June 8,304.2 166.1 0.5 165.6 166.3 0.7 0.0
         July 8,349.2 167.0 0.5 166.5 167.1 0.6 0.0
         Aug 8,315.4 166.3 0.5 165.8 166.4 0.6 0.0         Sep 8,340.7 166.8 0.5 166.3 167.0 0.7 0.0
         Oct  
p,8 8,336.5 166.7 0.5 166.2 167.0 0.8 ...
         Nov  p ... ... ... 172.5 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2006          Mar 1,984,283 39,686 203 39,483 39,699 216 0
         Apr 2,003,934 40,079 203 39,876 40,177 301 0
         May 2,026,250 40,525 203 40,322 40,647 325 0         June 2,050,379 41,008 203 40,805 41,033 228 1
         July 2,060,065 41,201 203 40,999 41,165 166 1
         Aug 2,062,897 41,258 201 41,057 41,241 184 0         Sep 2,043,453 40,869 201 40,668 40,869 201 0
         Oct  
p 2,039,249 40,785 200 40,585 40,812 227 1
         Nov  p 2,068,309 41,366 200 41,166 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. — 8The total number of deficiencies was not availabe when this
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the report went to press. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 2.25 3.25          Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2006 Mar                  8 1.50 2.50 3.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75          June                15 1.75 2.75 3.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          Aug                  9 2.00 3.00 4.00 2002 Jan                  1 2.71 2005 Jan                  1 1.21
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          Oct                11 2.25 3.25 4.25          to          July                  1 1.17
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
 2006 Jan                  1 1.37
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50          July                 1 1.95
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2006 Sep                20 346,764 311,000 − 3.00 3.03 3.04 7
         Sep                27 313,570 313,000 − 3.00 3.00 3.03 6
         Oct                  3 342,164 312,000 − 3.00 3.02 3.04 8
         Oct                11 367,380 308,000 − 3.25 3.29 3.30 7
         Oct                18 378,950 318,500 − 3.25 3.29 3.30 7
         Oct                25 378,282 314,000 − 3.25 3.30 3.31 7
         Nov                  1 382,135 307,000 − 3.25 3.31 3.32 7
         Nov                  8 392,532 303,000 − 3.25 3.31 3.32 7
         Nov                15 403,488 304,000 − 3.25 3.31 3.32 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2006 Aug                31 51,079 40,000 − − 3.20 3.21 91
         Sep                28 49,801 40,000 − − 3.30 3.32 84
         Oct                26 62,854 40,000 − − 3.48 3.50 98
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2006          Apr 2.63 2.57 − 2.74 2.78 2.73 − 2.86 2.63 2.63 2.65 2.79 2.96 3.11 3.22
         May 2.57 2.25 − 2.63 2.87 2.82 − 2.92 2.58 2.62 2.69 2.89 3.06 3.20 3.31         June 2.70 2.43 − 2.92 2.97 2.91 − 3.06 2.70 2.79 2.87 2.99 3.16 3.29 3.40
         July 2.81 2.76 − 2.85 3.08 3.02 − 3.16 2.81 2.84 2.94 3.10 3.29 3.43 3.54
         Aug 2.97 2.66 − 3.09 3.21 3.14 − 3.26 2.97 3.05 3.09 3.23 3.41 3.53 3.62         Sep 3.04 2.97 − 3.12 3.32 3.23 − 3.42 3.04 3.07 3.16 3.34 3.53 3.64 3.72
         Oct 3.28 3.04 − 3.39 3.49 3.39 − 3.56 3.28 3.32 3.35 3.50 3.64 3.74 3.80
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2006          Jan 2.05 3.11 2.32 3.47 4.62 4.14 4.50 7.99 6.78 5.60 4.42 3.88 4.26
         Feb 2.09 3.13 2.38 3.47 4.59 4.17 4.54 7.97 6.79 5.68 4.49 3.95 4.31         Mar 2.16 3.01 2.48 3.46 4.60 4.15 4.52 8.06 6.80 5.73 4.53 3.98 4.31
         Apr 2.21 3.01 2.53 3.51 4.63 4.16 4.52 8.10 6.73 5.75 4.59 4.05 4.34
         May 2.27 3.05 2.59 3.52 4.63 4.16 4.52 8.10 6.70 5.71 4.64 4.10 4.36         June 2.34 3.08 2.72 3.53 4.67 4.20 4.55 8.10 6.75 5.73 4.72 4.19 4.40
         July 2.43 3.03 2.80 3.57 4.68 4.21 4.57 8.15 6.71 5.82 4.81 4.27 4.45
         Aug 2.52 3.05 2.93 3.64 4.72 4.23 4.60 8.21 6.72 5.82 4.85 4.33 4.48         Sep 2.59 3.08 3.00 3.69 4.81 4.27 4.62 8.31 6.81 5.86 4.93 4.40 4.53
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2006          Jan 0.73 2.21 2.47 2.56 2.00 2.32 1.05 2.27 2.40 3.52
         Feb 0.74 2.24 2.52 2.36 1.97 2.34 1.08 2.31 2.69 3.37         Mar 0.76 2.37 2.60 2.45 1.98 2.37 1.14 2.48 2.93 3.28
         Apr 0.79 2.40 2.81 2.49 2.00 2.42 1.16 2.51 2.93 3.71
         May 0.79 2.45 2.86 2.48 2.00 2.48 1.18 2.58 3.18 3.38         June 0.81 2.57 2.88 2.57 2.04 2.53 1.22 2.70 3.22 3.27
         July 0.81 2.70 3.04 2.80 2.08 2.58 1.24 2.78 3.31 3.99
         Aug 0.85 2.79 2.97 2.82 2.23 2.64 1.32 2.92 3.25 3.76         Sep 0.86 2.87 3.15 2.66 2.26 2.68 1.36 2.98 3.45 3.83
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2006          Jan 9.80 7.87 6.94 6.48 8.13 4.09 3.61 3.91 4.14 4.07 4.15 4.59 4.34
         Feb 9.61 7.76 6.88 6.34 7.95 4.08 3.66 3.97 4.14 4.06 4.24 4.66 4.35         Mar 9.90 7.65 6.79 6.28 7.88 4.15 3.73 3.99 4.22 4.10 4.33 4.72 4.49
         Apr 9.76 7.76 7.06 6.31 7.92 4.29 3.84 4.07 4.33 4.17 4.30 4.85 4.62
         May 9.78 7.77 7.24 6.23 7.89 4.34 3.90 4.15 4.40 4.19 4.43 5.05 4.76         June 9.84 7.71 7.11 6.31 7.82 4.42 4.00 4.19 4.48 4.25 4.52 5.09 4.71
         July 9.86 7.87 7.33 6.33 8.02 4.52 4.11 4.23 4.52 4.34 4.55 5.24 4.74
         Aug 9.95 8.11 7.84 6.39 8.15 4.59 4.21 4.33 4.60 4.37 4.64 5.26 4.84         Sep 10.07 7.97 7.86 6.26 8.09 4.65 4.30 4.36 4.61 4.44 4.76 5.30 4.98
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2006          Jan 5.23 4.07 4.59 4.13 3.18 3.72 3.96
         Feb 5.29 4.13 4.69 4.16 3.26 4.36 4.02         Mar 5.30 4.23 4.59 4.16 3.50 3.83 4.18
         Apr 5.40 4.34 4.73 4.15 3.51 3.94 4.22
         May 5.36 4.38 4.83 4.26 3.57 4.13 4.32         June 5.45 4.47 4.84 4.33 3.74 4.12 4.23
         July 5.52 4.57 4.99 4.38 3.84 4.21 4.36
         Aug 5.56 4.69 5.09 4.53 3.97 4.33 4.42         Sep 5.69 4.75 5.02 4.54 4.02 4.41 4.47
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Sep 1.97 104,938 2.77 193,451 2.03 74,966 4.19 24,849
         Oct 1.98 105,488 2.76 192,845 2.05 78,275 4.10 22,472
         Nov 2.01 105,875 2.75 192,758 2.11 76,669 4.07 22,497         Dec 2.10 109,209 2.74 195,206 2.26 78,779 4.05 22,543
2006          Jan 2.13 110,140 2.72 194,850 2.28 78,905 4.04 22,655
         Feb 2.17 112,180 2.71 194,806 2.33 78,055 4.02 22,895         Mar 2.29 114,677 2.69 195,260 2.48 79,671 3.99 22,943
         Apr 2.34 115,934 2.68 195,181 2.53 83,245 3.94 23,474
         May 2.39 117,353 2.67 194,825 2.60 82,547 3.94 23,648         June 2.48 119,134 2.66 194,457 2.71 82,607 3.92 23,866
         July 2.59 123,786 2.65 193,837 2.82 84,840 3.91 23,381
         Aug 2.69 129,030 2.64 193,804 2.96 87,864 3.91 23,319         Sep 2.74 133,242 2.64 192,264 3.03 89,396 3.92 23,920
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2005          Sep 4.95 6,930 4.40 30,916 5.45 906,439 8.74 76,920 5.75 70,882 6.14 328,568
         Oct 4.88 6,746 4.37 30,687 5.42 908,391 8.81 76,284 5.73 70,158 6.12 328,289
         Nov 4.89 6,778 4.35 30,701 5.40 911,024 8.68 73,793 5.68 70,586 6.10 327,736         Dec 5.00 6,674 4.33 30,827 5.36 913,041 8.83 76,436 5.64 70,569 6.07 326,570
2006          Jan 5.07 6,339 4.31 30,241 5.34 920,556 8.91 74,655 5.57 70,145 6.04 326,777
         Feb 5.09 6,296 4.31 30,130 5.33 921,348 8.84 73,963 5.56 69,580 6.03 326,418         Mar 5.17 6,205 4.30 29,959 5.30 921,392 9.01 74,505 5.57 68,684 6.04 323,755
         Apr 5.17 6,108 4.31 29,514 5.28 922,067 8.98 73,506 5.60 68,536 6.04 324,317
         May 5.21 5,999 4.31 29,958 5.27 922,561 9.09 72,925 5.57 69,051 6.04 324,795         June 5.29 6,142 4.32 29,879 5.26 923,622 9.29 74,256 5.55 69,157 6.04 324,024
         July 5.29 6,019 4.32 29,697 5.25 925,008 9.27 73,385 5.55 69,213 6.05 323,342
         Aug 5.34 6,021 4.32 29,598 5.23 927,050 9.31 72,346 5.52 69,592 6.06 323,243         Sep 5.39 6,436 4.33 29,568 5.22 929,103 9.42 73,807 5.53 69,627 6.07 322,588
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Sep 4.58 162,536 3.92 87,116 4.98 477,806
         Oct 4.57 159,761 3.89 87,126 4.96 479,099
         Nov 4.54 157,383 3.92 86,744 4.94 479,951         Dec 4.62 155,094 3.98 85,524 4.91 480,327
2006          Jan 4.65 155,685 3.97 85,081 4.90 490,068
         Feb 4.76 151,426 4.02 86,030 4.89 492,375         Mar 4.88 153,697 4.05 87,248 4.89 490,677
         Apr 4.92 157,411 4.09 87,594 4.88 492,493
         May 4.96 153,940 4.13 88,128 4.88 494,363         June 5.07 157,956 4.14 90,560 4.88 494,890
         July 5.08 159,419 4.23 93,650 4.90 493,519
         Aug 5.15 156,471 4.28 92,296 4.90 496,535         Sep 5.21 158,696 4.32 94,768 4.92 495,304
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates may always be calculated either as annualised agreed intere st
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other relatedhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- balance sheet statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis purchase, including building and home improvements; including loan s
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well assample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name andsional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are for their own account. — 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. —can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2005          Sep 1.18 450,970 1.89 23,194 2.41 1,123 2.16 2,960 2.00 514,247 2.31 83,344
         Oct 1.18 453,497 1.89 22,812 2.72 1,346 2.37 3,124 1.94 513,181 2.28 82,864
         Nov 1.17 465,158 1.92 26,107 2.77 1,372 2.50 2,962 2.02 512,020 2.29 83,107         Dec 1.20 463,399 2.06 31,326 2.73 1,124 2.35 3,036 1.99 518,955 2.31 83,921
2006          Jan 1.22 462,356 2.16 31,502 2.81 2,112 2.69 7,533 2.00 517,768 2.33 84,615
         Feb 1.23 464,324 2.21 27,206 2.72 1,715 2.60 4,571 2.00 517,281 2.35 84,898         Mar 1.26 465,115 2.29 32,612 2.84 1,401 2.46 1,823 1.96 515,333 2.39 85,689
         Apr 1.31 469,686 2.32 28,341 3.09 1,529 2.55 2,024 1.99 513,543 2.43 85,904
         May 1.34 469,841 2.37 29,853 3.14 1,548 2.63 1,690 1.99 509,976 2.49 87,032         June 1.35 470,361 2.49 31,399 3.23 1,592 2.55 1,922 2.05 507,349 2.54 88,337
         July 1.36 465,849 2.63 33,301 3.25 2,190 2.90 2,150 2.05 503,445 2.59 89,399
         Aug 1.41 460,404 2.75 34,694 3.40 1,347 2.78 3,537 2.09 498,932 2.65 90,923         Sep 1.43 457,935 2.82 31,961 3.41 1,691 2.54 2,121 2.10 495,091 2.69 92,142
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Sep 1.25 152,999 2.01 46,851 2.52 234 3.08 1,419
         Oct 1.25 157,054 2.01 39,509 2.85 308 4.09 1,433
         Nov 1.26 162,669 2.06 44,866 2.29 301 3.99 993         Dec 1.30 164,748 2.22 50,870 2.56 501 4.20 1,070
2006          Jan 1.34 156,885 2.24 47,599 2.66 203 4.08 866
         Feb 1.38 153,233 2.29 41,033 2.91 296 3.83 1,366         Mar 1.47 153,285 2.51 47,007 3.10 392 3.56 948
         Apr 1.52 156,243 2.59 45,185 3.09 446 3.96 859
         May 1.51 157,638 2.55 51,722 3.78 252 4.14 529         June 1.57 157,582 2.67 50,441 4.07 321 3.38 1,133
         July 1.61 158,281 2.77 46,614 3.52 554 4.21 1,292
         Aug 1.71 162,279 2.92 54,472 3.57 280 3.98 641         Sep 1.71 160,811 3.00 51,927 3.79 485 4.04 805
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2005          Sep 7.91 5.41 1,203 6.16 5,262 8.71 3,081 3.58 9,626 4.61 1,858 4.30 2,490
         Oct 7.83 5.16 1,295 6.00 4,314 8.98 2,752 3.65 6,797 4.60 1,415 4.32 2,295
         Nov 7.53 5.33 1,102 5.75 4,327 8.63 2,993 3.70 5,719 4.51 1,500 4.44 2,844         Dec 6.98 4.85 1,443 5.64 4,631 7.89 2,778 3.97 9,234 4.69 2,336 4.44 5,586
2006          Jan 7.75 5.18 1,652 5.81 4,330 8.99 2,942 3.93 9,920 4.75 1,922 4.39 3,668
         Feb 7.67 5.35 1,090 5.78 4,294 8.74 2,987 4.05 6,990 4.86 1,316 4.45 2,340         Mar 7.53 5.17 1,368 5.62 5,483 8.64 3,733 4.11 8,250 4.91 2,132 4.62 3,635
         Apr 7.51 5.24 1,449 5.59 5,435 8.69 3,316 4.07 10,032 4.97 1,610 4.74 3,212
         May 7.48 5.49 933 5.49 7,186 8.67 3,338 4.14 8,538 5.19 1,890 4.84 3,161         June 7.26 5.12 1,283 5.35 5,319 8.64 3,105 4.21 10,126 5.24 2,119 4.81 3,148
         July 7.51 5.54 1,271 5.41 5,564 8.98 3,048 4.27 11,070 5.36 1,793 4.94 2,500
         Aug 7.59 5.63 1,007 5.48 4,718 8.85 3,119 4.40 11,083 5.38 1,394 4.98 2,530         Sep 7.43 5.60 1,044 5.29 5,418 8.91 2,854 4.41 10,973 5.30 1,842 5.08 2,288
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Sep 10.42 50,075 4.18 4.21 2,095 3.95 2,331 4.11 5,388 4.16 4,390
         Oct 10.53 49,007 4.19 4.22 2,603 3.94 2,395 4.11 5,674 4.18 3,873
         Nov 10.40 46,684 4.25 4.36 2,062 4.05 2,620 4.14 6,669 4.25 4,629         Dec 10.47 49,066 4.34 4.44 2,522 4.25 3,138 4.19 8,514 4.32 5,545
2006          Jan 10.63 47,574 4.41 4.55 3,199 4.27 2,857 4.29 8,266 4.35 5,913
         Feb 10.54 47,294 4.40 4.58 2,049 4.32 2,275 4.28 6,081 4.31 4,479         Mar 10.59 48,233 4.50 4.71 2,204 4.37 2,588 4.39 6,849 4.39 5,710
         Apr 10.61 46,939 4.60 4.74 3,072 4.42 2,364 4.45 6,204 4.56 4,470
         May 10.77 46,390 4.68 4.82 2,074 4.58 2,435 4.58 6,381 4.56 4,871         June 10.86 47,657 4.75 4.91 2,338 4.61 2,395 4.66 6,108 4.63 4,902
         July 10.92 46,654 4.83 4.92 2,561 4.66 2,415 4.67 6,106 4.80 4,363
         Aug 11.00 45,734 4.87 5.12 2,229 4.80 2,398 4.71 5,777 4.76 4,498         Sep 11.03 46,945 4.85 5.11 2,092 4.81 1,927 4.71 4,624 4.69 4,121
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Sep 5.95 71,180 4.28 7,229 4.46 1,284 4.32 1,533
         Oct 5.93 70,819 4.38 6,822 4.45 1,371 4.39 1,375
         Nov 5.84 69,640 4.52 6,735 4.54 1,075 4.31 1,545         Dec 5.79 69,127 4.57 7,716 4.61 1,321 4.46 2,155
2006          Jan 5.86 68,636 4.49 6,725 4.74 1,206 4.48 1,513
         Feb 6.02 67,921 4.60 5,966 4.80 1,106 4.43 1,787         Mar 6.04 68,216 4.71 8,373 4.82 1,470 4.46 2,130
         Apr 6.14 69,334 4.90 7,905 4.98 1,140 4.43 1,793
         May 6.13 69,129 4.98 8,997 5.08 1,433 4.53 2,132         June 6.26 70,516 5.04 9,035 5.00 1,210 4.80 1,897
         July 6.29 68,078 5.11 8,108 5.14 1,232 4.88 1,895
         Aug 6.36 66,594 5.14 7,170 5.25 1,514 4.96 2,188         Sep 6.37 67,633 5.37 8,172 5.09 1,176 4.93 1,620
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Sep 3.22 41,690 3.51 4,177 4.11 5,925
         Oct 3.15 42,531 3.89 3,182 3.97 5,831
         Nov 3.30 38,132 3.96 3,327 4.14 6,858         Dec 3.46 55,247 3.94 5,163 4.15 11,083
2006          Jan 3.40 44,581 4.04 5,404 4.17 6,838
         Feb 3.41 38,352 4.81 6,422 4.19 6,126         Mar 3.75 48,056 4.03 4,699 4.38 6,675
         Apr 3.61 36,866 4.07 5,379 4.47 4,994
         May 3.76 36,909 4.37 5,659 4.61 6,865         June 3.98 52,421 4.35 5,165 4.45 7,267
         July 4.00 46,079 4.59 4,567 4.74 5,697
         Aug 4.19 42,375 4.56 2,537 4.66 4,578         Sep 4.24 46,897 4.62 5,454 4.64 7,369
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,1091997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,9462002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,9202003 177,847 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 43,392 86,554 35,748 50,806 − 91,2932004 236,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 103,179 108,730 121,841 − 13,111 − 128,160
2005 258,684 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 148,142 102,658 61,740 40,918 − 156,0262006          July 24,709 18,554 − 1,497 − 3,443 23,494 6,155 7,869 − 931 8,800 − 16,840
         Aug − 15,487 − 12,968 − 6,638 − 2,862 − 3,467 − 2,519 − 14,470 − 7,527 − 6,943 − − 1,017         Sep 12,677 345 − 2,292 2,449 189 12,332 9,234 7,620 1,614 − 3,443
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,485
1994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,932
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6781998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,728 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,193
2001 82,665 17,575 65,090 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,9172002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,9412003 15,470 16,838 − 1,367 − 11,829 7,056 − 18,885 27,3002004 3,316 10,157 − 6,842 15,410 5,045 10,365 − 12,094
2005 31,803 13,766 18,037 − 27,039 10,208 − 37,247 58,8422006          July − 4,949 2,005 − 6,954 − 935 − 7,299 6,364 − 4,014
         Aug 4,037 475 3,562 − 250 4,322 − 4,572 4,287         Sep 19,045 1,674 17,371 17,332 6,653 10,679 1,713
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,309
1994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 6002006          June 75,211 54,041 1,396 8,700 12,721 31,225 863 20,307 −         July 70,145 40,810 2,123 6,632 5,871 26,184 503 28,833 −
         Aug 63,430 38,941 603 7,137 7,078 24,123 6,603 17,886 −         Sep 83,796 53,640 1,234 7,055 14,777 30,574 4,164 25,993 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 4002006          June 26,324 18,100 1,017 4,158 3,423 9,502 60 8,164 −         July 27,588 13,082 687 2,962 1,986 7,447 330 14,175 −
         Aug 22,733 12,680 491 5,082 2,093 5,014 72 9,981 −         Sep 29,046 14,221 872 4,074 4,408 4,868 2,488 12,337 −
Net sales  6 
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,7011994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,9632006          June 141 3,584 − 4,555 − 1,415 4,439 5,116 − 1,549 − 1,894 − 5,663         July 19,273 − 223 − 1,786 − 2,079 − 290 3,932 − 1,415 20,911 − 1,683
         Aug − 394 − 1,713 − 483 108 − 5,000 3,663 6,389 − 5,070 − 17         Sep 5,103 4,389 − 2,189 − 2,492 3,154 5,917 3,012 − 2,298 − 1,517
*For definitions, see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to Monthly Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Report 2, Capital market statistics. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006          July 3,019,869 1,801,613 155,954 507,503 361,180 776,976 92,511 1,125,746 120,470
         Aug 3,019,475 1,799,901 155,471 507,611 356,180 780,639 98,899 1,120,676 120,454         Sep 3,024,578 1,804,290 153,282 505,119 359,334 786,555 101,911 1,118,378 118,937
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-September 2006 
1,047,646 680,495 57,782 215,098 129,599 278,016 31,611 335,540 55,414    less than 2
715,754 475,279 40,484 156,667 95,861 182,270 17,068 223,406 39,867 2 to less than 4
454,765 245,209 30,175 71,390 43,457 100,191 18,565 190,990 7,147 4 to less than 6
263,002 135,360 15,629 32,249 22,163 65,318 11,208 116,434 7,720 6 to less than 8
310,156 174,775 8,685 18,970 23,690 123,431 10,752 124,628 2,592 8 to less than 10
44,031 32,846 479 5,582 17,003 9,781 3,155 8,030 2,834 10 to less than 15
25,314 12,364 50 1,752 6,420 4,142 463 12,485 1,657 15 to less than 20
163,911 47,960 − 3,412 21,142 23,407 9,087 106,864 1,705 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 519,280
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 553,110
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 723,077
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 1,040,7691998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006          July 162,727 178 535 93 17 13 − 77 − 169 − 235 1,115,885
         Aug 162,958 231 262 1,148 20 442 − 241 − 192 − 1,208 1,139,273         Sep 163,557 598 304 141 61 108 78 − 68 − 22 1,174,223
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — oFrom January was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose shares are traded
1994, including the shares of east German companies (resultant increase in on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
share circulation: DM7,771 million). — 1Including shares issued out of Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse
company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on the Official Mar- AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
ket, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock market segment
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German Germanmore than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 3.2 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006          July 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.4 117.23 97.18 348.99 5,681.97
         Aug 3.9 3.9 3.9 3.9 3.9 4.1 4.2 4.3 117.67 97.93 359.96 5,859.57         Sep 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.1 4.2 118.39 98.19 369.87 6,004.33
         Oct 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.1 4.2 4.2 117.59 98.09 385.11 6,268.92
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,3181997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 46,738 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 2,795 48,496 − 2,658 734 51,154 2,061 − 1,7582004 12,386 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 10,933 7,715 8,446 3,796 − 731 7,137 4,671
2005 81,581 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 39,863 80,648 21,290 7,761 59,358 32,102 933
2006          July 366 − 126 − 601 − 645 − 180 86 474 492 − 271 489 154 − 760 338 637
         Aug − 1,508 − 1,716 − 1,930 − 256 − 1,633 − 168 214 208 − 2,015 1,366 821 − 3,381 − 613 507         Sep 4,062 3,615 − 1,395 − 402 − 918 − 275 5,010 447 3,879 391 1,229 3,488 − 782 183
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
Person- operat- Fixed
of nel ex- ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex-
which pend- pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend-
Period Total Taxes Total  3 iture iture grants Interest tion aid  4 Balance venue  5 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 − 12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 − 14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.11997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 − 94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 − 91.71998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 − 56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 − 53.41999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 − 26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 − 23.4
2000 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  
6 555.4 446.2 599.6 169.9 69.8 213.9 66.6 40.1 39.2 − 44.2 445.1 449.1 − 4.0 923.3 971.4 − 48.2
2002  p 554.7 441.7 610.9 173.3 70.6 226.9 66.1 38.7 33.5 − 56.2 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 927.7 992.2 − 64.5
2003  pe 547.0 442.2 614.3 174.0 70.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 32.4 − 67.3 467.7 474.3 − 6.6 925.4 999.3 − 73.9
2004  pe 543.9 442.8 609.3 173.5 69.8 236.9 64.7 34.5 28.8 − 65.4 470.3 468.8 + 1.5 925.3 989.3 − 64.0
2005  pe 567.9 452.1 621.2 172.4 72.0 244.9 64.0 33.3 33.4 − 53.2 468.8 471.6 − 2.9 947.1 1,003.2 − 56.1
2005          Q1  p 121.6 99.2 159.8 41.1 15.2 66.3 25.2 4.6 6.6 − 38.2 117.1 117.5 − 0.4 211.2 249.7 − 38.6
         Q2  p 138.9 112.5 144.8 41.2 16.0 62.8 10.1 6.4 6.3 − 6.0 117.3 118.2 − 0.9 233.5 240.4 − 6.9
         Q3  p 144.2 110.6 154.2 41.3 17.1 59.3 19.7 8.6 6.9 − 10.0 114.1 117.0 − 2.9 235.9 248.8 − 12.9
         Q4  p 162.4 129.5 161.9 47.1 21.8 55.4 8.8 12.5 14.4 + 0.5 118.1 118.3 − 0.2 264.3 264.0 + 0.3
2006          Q1  p 131.3 106.3 160.3 40.6 16.2 65.6 25.1 4.8 6.5 − 29.0 120.5 116.6 + 3.9 228.9 254.0 − 25.1
         Q2  p 144.3 121.8 139.9 40.7 16.1 59.9 9.5 6.4 5.9 + 4.5 122.2 117.1 + 5.1 245.1 235.6 + 9.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly f igures
Office. — *The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed for some insurance sectors are estimated. — 3Including discrepancies in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the clearing transactions between central, state and local government. —
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — 4Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the interests. — 5Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly Federal Employment Agency. — 6Owing to modifications of the system of
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between other operatin g
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, expenditure and current grants. see footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. — 2The annual figures differ from the sum of
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001 240.6 261.3 184.6 207.1 50.4 52.6 119.5 123.2 24.8 25.2
2002 240.8 273.5 183.6 207.6 48.1 53.3 121.7 125.0 25.2 25.42003 239.6 278.8 182.9 208.9 49.1 53.5 117.4 124.6 24.7 25.52004  
pe 233.8 273.6 186.8 207.8 48.9 51.8 120.9 124.4 24.9 25.1
2005  pe 250.0 281.5 190.5 211.5 48.8 51.5 125.7 128.2 25.7 25.5
2005          Q1  p 46.0 74.9 45.8 52.9 10.8 12.5 25.7 29.4 5.6 5.5
         Q2  p 61.4 66.0 47.0 50.2 11.6 11.5 29.9 30.4 6.2 5.9
         Q3  p 68.8 73.2 44.4 50.5 12.2 12.4 31.5 31.5 6.3 6.4
         Q4  p 73.8 67.4 52.8 57.4 13.6 15.0 38.0 36.7 7.8 7.6
2006          Q1  p 52.7 74.1 45.9 53.2 12.2 12.5 28.1 30.7 5.7 5.8
         Q2  p 63.0 61.6 49.5 49.8 11.9 11.2 30.7 30.7 7.0 6.0
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. — *See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. — 1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. — 4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Item 1998 1999 2000  1 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 
Revenue 1,779.3 945.0 967.0 952.6 956.5 964.7 959.1 977.6
of which
Taxes 897.3 490.5 511.7 488.3 485.5 489.7 487.3 499.8Social contributions 727.8 375.4 378.4 383.7 390.7 396.1 396.7 397.0
Expenditure 1,862.9 974.3 990.7 1,012.2 1,034.8 1,051.7 1,041.5 1,050.2of which
Intermediate consumption 154.3 83.5 82.4 85.2 88.4 90.3 90.1 96.1Compensation of employees 319.8 165.6 166.1 166.2 168.7 169.0 169.4 167.5Interest 129.0 63.2 65.1 64.5 62.7 64.1 62.5 62.0Social benefits  
2 998.4 523.1 532.7 551.2 579.8 594.2 592.8 597.7
Gross capital formation 69.4 37.6 36.8 36.8 36.0 33.7 31.4 30.2
Net lending/net borrowing − 83.6 − 29.3 − 23.7 − 59.6 − 78.3 − 87.0 − 82.5 − 72.6
Memo item
As defined in the Maastricht TreatyDeficit as % of GDP  
3,4 2.2 1.5 1.1 2.8 3.7 4.0 3.7 3.2
Debt level 2,317.6 1,224.3 1,231.0 1,241.5 1,293.0 1,381.0 1,451.1 1,521.6
as % of GDP  3 60.3 60.9 59.7 58.8 60.3 63.9 65.7 67.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In or 1.3% of GDP) is shown. — 2Including social benefits in kind. — 3GDP
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include including financial intermediation services indirectly measured ( FISIM). —
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share 4Unlike the net lending/net borrowing balance as shown in the national
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. — 1Adjusted for proceeds from the sale accounts, the deficit ratio as defined in the Maastricht Treaty includes
of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office record such interest payments arising from swap transactions and forward rate
proceeds ( €50.8 billion) under "net increase in non-produced assets", with agreements. 
the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus ( €27.1 billion
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 7141997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 1171998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 122002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 512003 442,238 390,437 214,002 155,510 . 20,925 51,673 4,751 + 1272004 442,838 386,459 208,918 157,901 . 19,641 56,237 5,233 + 142
2005 452,078 392,313 211,810 158,792 . 21,711 59,750 5,838 + 16
2006          Q2 121,891 104,964 57,521 43,338 . 4,105 16,120 1,533 + 807
         Q3 ... 104,015 55,601 42,798 . 5,616 ... ... ...
2006          May . 33,819 18,474 13,886 . 1,459 . . .
         June . 41,097 22,856 17,083 . 1,158 . . .
         July . 32,693 17,393 13,625 . 1,676 . . .
         Aug . 30,142 16,084 12,113 . 1,945 . . .         Sep . 41,180 22,124 17,061 . 1,995 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Including receipts from the 4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. —
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  — 2Before deducting supplementary 5Difference between the local government’s share in the income taxes
central government grants and shares in the revenue of energy tax remitted received by the state government cash offices in the period in question (see
to state government. — 3Including the additional (GNP-related) revenue Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government during the
accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from 1988. — same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,1702002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,8462003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,4092004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,712 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006          Q2 111,206 47,844 29,772 5,856 5,173 7,042 35,236 26,345 8,891 1,611 20,438 5,130 949 6,242
         Q3 110,282 44,951 29,229 6,266 6,079 3,376 37,051 28,063 8,988 1,686 20,448 5,158 989 6,267
2006          May 35,589 13,499 9,929 − 342 96 3,817 12,754 9,925 2,829 513 6,717 1,806 300 1,770
         June 43,874 23,193 10,260 6,391 5,041 1,501 11,371 8,331 3,040 8 7,332 1,652 319 2,777
         July 34,570 12,178 10,712 − 369 342 1,492 12,636 9,700 2,936 1,183 6,531 1,734 308 1,876
         Aug 31,832 10,364 9,556 − 411 206 1,014 12,224 9,201 3,023 493 6,611 1,811 329 1,690         Sep 43,881 22,408 8,961 7,046 5,531 870 12,191 9,161 3,030 10 7,305 1,613 353 2,701
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table central government to finance the supplementary grant to the statutory
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing to local
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to centralcentral and state government), the real property taxes and other local government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% wasgovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2The allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; since
revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax is allocated to central, state 2002 49.6% has been allocated to central government and 50.4% to stateand local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15 and the revenue from the government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedwithholding tax on interest income is allocated to central, state and local central government share. — 6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
government in the ratio of 44:44:12, while the revenue from corporation and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beentax and non-assessed taxes on earnings is allocated to central and state affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —government in the ratio of 50:50. — 3From 1996, after deducting child 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
benefit. — 4Non-assessed taxes on earnings and the withholding tax on government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. — 8For the breakdown, see
interest income. — 5In 1998, 3.64% and from 1999, 5.63% was allocated to Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Energy Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness tax  2 taxes taxes  3 
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 6962003 43,188 14,094 2,204 8,870 6,531 11,722 7,336 230 3,373 786 6,989 24,139 9,658 6812004 41,782 13,630 2,195 8,750 6,597 11,601 7,740 80 4,284 788 6,883 28,373 9,939 669
2005 40,101 14,273 2,142 8,750 6,462 11,780 8,673 97 4,097 777 6,935 32,129 10,247 565
2006          Q2 9,727 3,604 505 1,662 1,720 3,220 2,258 3 881 200 1,788 9,365 2,801 129
         Q3 10,045 3,700 536 1,705 1,468 2,994 2,020 11 904 228 1,995 ... ... ...
2006          May 3,429 1,043 186 633 438 989 804 − 1 317 64 622 . . .
         June 3,137 1,286 164 517 782 1,445 751 1 252 77 570 . . .
         July 3,374 1,217 183 431 475 852 719 2 286 78 648 . . .
         Aug 3,094 1,212 201 866 477 762 690 3 335 78 705 . . .         Sep 3,578 1,271 153 409 516 1,380 611 5 283 72 643 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. — 2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  6 Other  7 tion 5,6 
General government
2000 1,211,455 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 301 44,146 108
2001 1,223,966 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 123 8,986 1082002 1,277,667 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 66 7,845 972003 1,358,137 36,022 246,414 153,611 12,810 471,115 396,832 341 34,163 33 6,711 862004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 379,984 430 53,672 2 5,572 82
2005          Mar 1,457,430 37,489 290,175 162,644 11,037 506,670 387,649 474 55,636 2 5,572 84
         June 1,465,639 37,214 295,608 170,389 11,180 507,071 381,343 501 56,673 2 5,572 87         Sep 1,480,384 37,183 299,830 163,335 11,061 525,365 380,021 501 58,558 2 4,443 87         Dec 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 367,056 488 62,687 2 4,443 86
2006          Mar 1,508,932 36,882 320,546 167,403 10,883 530,724 372,680 486 64,799 2 4,443 85
         June 1,524,898 37,450 323,930 177,720 10,399 529,499 374,224 485 66,664 2 4,443 83
Central government 8,9,10  
2000 715,835 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 301 44,146 107
2001 701,115 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 123 8,986 1072002 725,443 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 66 7,845 972003 767,713 35,235 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 38,146 223 7,326 33 6,711 852004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 2 5,572 81
2005          Mar 870,406 36,393 102,959 162,592 11,037 495,478 45,119 373 10,798 2 5,572 83
         June 874,053 36,021 105,227 170,338 11,180 495,879 38,778 408 10,562 2 5,572 86         Sep 885,192 35,989 106,836 163,284 11,061 514,173 38,303 408 10,608 2 4,443 86         Dec 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 29,318 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
2006          Mar 898,780 36,130 111,773 167,352 10,883 519,889 36,917 408 10,899 2 4,443 84
         June 913,018 36,927 108,975 177,669 10,399 518,757 44,284 408 11,073 2 4,443 83         Sep 929,597 37,772 106,419 171,841 10,253 539,023 48,236 408 11,119 2 4,443 83
State government (western)
2000 282,431 − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 12001 305,788 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 12002 328,390 250 97,556 . . . 217,333 5 13,246 . . 12003 355,661 472 125,356 . . . 207,880 4 21,949 . . 12004 376,697 750 148,219 . . . 193,216 3 34,508 . . 1
2005          Mar 382,341 250 154,965 . . . 190,311 3 36,812 . . 1
         June 384,373 0 157,226 . . . 189,089 3 38,055 . . 1         Sep 389,392 0 160,561 . . . 189,037 3 39,791 . . 1         Dec 396,219 0 167,692 . . . 186,698 3 41,826 . . 1
2006          Mar 401,548 31 173,473 . . . 183,497 3 44,543 . . 1
         June 401,612 31 178,027 . . . 177,340 2 46,210 . . 1         Sep 403,482 31 178,940 . . . 177,030 2 47,478 . . 1
State government (eastern)
2000 55,712 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .2001 58,771 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .2002 63,782 338 23,838 . . . 37,739 − 1,867 . . .2003 68,076 315 28,833 . . . 37,022 − 1,906 . . .2004 71,975 533 31,400 . . . 35,428 − 4,614 . . .
2005          Mar 73,190 846 32,251 . . . 35,866 − 4,227 . . .
         June 74,898 1,193 33,154 . . . 36,142 − 4,409 . . .         Sep 74,691 1,194 32,433 . . . 36,553 − 4,511 . . .         Dec 75,157 847 33,454 . . . 34,543 − 6,313 . . .
2006          Mar 76,170 721 35,300 . . . 34,636 − 5,513 . . .
         June 76,935 492 36,927 . . . 33,978 − 5,538 . . .         Sep 75,028 91 34,882 . . . 34,441 − 5,613 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont’d)
  
  
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  6 Other  7 tion 5,6 
Local government (western) 11 
2000 81,414 . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .
2001 82,203 . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .2002 84,097 . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .2003 90,906 . 77 . . 603 87,868 19 2,339 . . .2004 95,186 . − . . 681 91,317 13 3,174 . . .
2005          Mar 95,843 . − . . 591 92,062 15 3,175 . . .
         June 97,493 . − . . 591 93,712 15 3,175 . . .         Sep 97,743 . − . . 591 93,962 15 3,175 . . .         Dec 98,960 . − . . 335 95,261 11 3,352 . . .
2006          Mar 100,234 . − . . 335 96,534 10 3,355 . . .
         June 101,444 . − . . 243 97,836 10 3,355 . . .
Local government (eastern) 11 
2000 17,048 . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .2002 16,745 . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .2003 16,951 . − . . 131 16,601 87 132 . . .2004 17,353 . − . . 131 16,914 73 235 . . .
2005          Mar 17,250 . − . . 131 16,809 75 235 . . .
         June 17,250 . − . . 131 16,809 75 235 . . .         Sep 17,200 . − . . 131 16,759 75 235 . . .         Dec 17,074 . − . . 131 16,628 66 249 . . .
2006          Mar 17,190 . − . . 131 16,744 65 250 . . .
         June 16,879 . − . . 131 16,433 65 250 . . .
ERP Special Fund 8 
2000 18,386 . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .2001 19,161 . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .2002 19,400 . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .2003 19,261 . . 51 . 10,169 8,522 8 512 . . .2004 18,200 . . 51 . 10,169 7,584 8 389 . . .
2005          Mar 18,098 . . 51 . 10,169 7,482 8 389 . . .
         June 17,270 . . 51 . 10,169 6,812 − 238 . . .         Sep 15,864 . . 51 . 10,169 5,406 − 238 . . .         Dec 15,066 . . 51 . 10,169 4,609 − 238 . . .
2006          Mar 14,811 . . 51 . 10,169 4,353 − 238 . . .
         June 14,811 . . 51 . 10,169 4,353 − 238 . . .         Sep 14,661 . . 51 . 10,169 4,253 − 188 . . .
Indemnification Fund 
2000 204 .... 2 0 4 ......
2001 285 .... 2 8 5 ......
2002 369 .... 3 6 9 ......
2003 469 .... 4 6 9 ......
2004 400 .... 4 0 0 ......
2005          Mar 302 .... 3 0 2 ......
         June 302 .... 3 0 2 ......
         Sep 301 .... 3 0 1 ......
         Dec 300 .... 3 0 0 ......
2006          Mar 200 .... 2 0 0 ......
         June 200 .... 2 0 0 ......
         Sep 200 .... 2 0 0 ......
German Unity Fund 8,10 
2000 40,425 − 275 2,634 . 29,593 7,790 − 133 . . .2001 39,638 − 3,748 10,134 . 21,292 4,315 − 149 . . .2002 39,441 − 3,820 10,134 . 22,315 3,146 − 26 . . .2003 39,099 − 4,610 10,134 . 23,563 793 − − . . .2004 38,650 − 4,538 9,634 . 23,787 690 − − . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernment debt. — 1Predominantly 8In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
own securities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
long-term paper. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes. Including ratios. — 9On 1 July 1999 central government assumed joint responsibility
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federalsupplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal.investment assistance levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing As from July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded under central
construction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former government. — 10On 1 January 2005 central government assumed joint
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the responsibility for the debts of the German Unity Fund. As from January, thereturn of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to aforementioned special fund is recorded under central government. —their home country. — 6Excluding offsets against outstanding claims. — 11Data other than year-end figures have been estimated. Including debt of
7Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the municipal special purpose associations. 
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
€ million
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2005 2006
Item 2005 June 2006 Total Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 1st hf Q1 Q2
Borrowers
Central government  2 886,254 913,018 + 35,479 + 19,631 + 3,646 + 11,140 + 1,062 + 26,763 + 12,526 + 14,238
ERP Special Fund 15,066 14,811 − 3,134 − 102 − 828 − 1,406 − 798 − 256 − 256 −
Indemnification Fund 300 200 − 99 − 98 + 0 − 1 − 1 − 100 − 100 − 0
State government (western) 396,219 401,612 + 19,522 + 5,644 + 2,033 + 5,019 + 6,827 + 5,393 + 5,329 + 64
State government (eastern) 75,157 76,935 + 3,182 + 1,216 + 1,707 − 209 + 466 + 1,779 + 1,014 + 765Local government (western)  
3 98,960 101,444 + 4,126 + 1,295 + 1,701 + 220 + 910 + 2,971 + 1,893 + 1,077
Local government (eastern)  3 17,074 16,879 − 105 − 103 + 78 − 30 − 50 − 408 − 101 − 308
Total 1,489,029 1,524,898 + 58,974 + 27,485 + 8,338 + 14,735 + 8,416 + 36,142 + 20,305 + 15,837
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 36,945 37,419 + 1,223 + 1,766 − 275 − 31 − 238 + 474 − 94 + 568 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 310,044 323,961 + 30,248 + 10,379 + 5,433 + 4,222 + 10,214 + 13,916 + 10,533 + 3,384
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 174,423 177,720 + 5,465 − 6,314 + 7,745 − 7,053 + 11,087 + 3,297 − 7,019 + 10,316
Federal savings notes 11,055 10,399 + 238 + 219 + 143 − 119 − 6 − 656 − 172 − 484Bonds  
5 521,801 529,499 + 26,254 + 11,123 + 401 + 18,294 − 3,564 + 7,698 + 8,923 − 1,225
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 367,056 374,224 − 12,402 + 8,302 − 6,177 − 1,332 − 13,195 + 7,441 + 6,026 + 1,415
Loans from social security funds 488 485 + 58 + 44 + 27 − 0 − 13 − 2 − 2 − 0Other loans  
6 62,647 66,623 + 9,015 + 1,963 + 1,038 + 1,884 + 4,130 + 3,977 + 2,111 + 1,865
Old debt  7 88 85 + 4 + 2 + 3 − − 1 − 3 − 1 − 2
Equalisation claims 4,443 4,443 − 1,130 − − − 1,130 − − − −Investment assistance levy 41 41 − − −−−−−−
Total 1,489,029 1,524,898 + 58,974 + 27,485 + 8,338 + 14,735 + 8,416 + 36,142 + 20,305 + 15,837
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 − − −−−−−−
Credit institutions 518,600 528,300 − 25,074 + 9,137 − 21,671 + 4,690 − 17,230 + 9,973 + 4,202 + 5,771
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 488 485 + 58 + 44 + 27 − 0 − 13 − 2 − 2 − 0Other  
8 298,801 306,473 + 2,390 − 5,896 + 1,182 − 1,355 + 8,459 + 7,671 − 4,195 + 11,866
Foreign creditors  pe 666,700 685,200 + 81,600 + 24,200 + 28,800 + 11,400 + 17,200 + 18,500 + 20,300 − 1,800
Total 1,489,029 1,524,898 + 58,974 + 27,485 + 8,338 + 14,735 + 8,416 + 36,142 + 20,305 + 15,837
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. — 6Including loans raised abroad. — 7Old liabilities arising
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernment debt. — 1Net borrowing from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
differs from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer construction of the former GDR’s armed forces and from housing
of debts. — 2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt inassociations. — 4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. — 8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 5Excluding issuers’ holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund  3 Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 − − −2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 − − −2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 − − −2002 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 − − −2003 399,304 38,410 793 9,042 260,046 91,013 − − −2004 399,250 36,791 690 7,981 262,070 91,719 − − −
2005 June 394,307 31,898 − 7,050 264,757 90,601 − − −
Sep 392,741 30,680 − 5,644 265,990 90,427 − − −
Dec 389,505 26,796 − 4,846 266,257 91,606 − − −
2006 Mar 384,789 26,411 − 4,591 263,214 90,573 − − −
June 383,184 26,964 − 4,591 261,217 90,411 − − −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. — 1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. — 2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Schätze)  2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 claims  8 Other  9 tion 7,8 
1998 958,004 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,290 8,684 186
1999  10 714,080 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 488 45,175 104
2000 715,835 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 301 44,146 107
2001 701,115 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 123 8,986 1072002 725,443 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 66 7,845 972003 767,713 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 38,146 223 7,326 33 6,711 852004 812,123 34,440 1,074 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 2 5,572 812005  
11 886,254 36,098 1,155 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 29,318 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
2005          Sep 885,192 35,989 1,076 106,836 163,284 11,061 514,173 38,303 408 10,608 2 4,443 86
         Oct 888,191 35,734 1,073 113,486 168,448 11,088 503,350 40,541 408 10,608 2 4,443 85
         Nov 890,379 35,275 1,118 115,057 169,537 10,981 509,857 34,125 408 10,608 2 4,443 86         Dec 886,254 36,098 1,155 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 29,318 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
2006          Jan 903,024 36,761 1,278 115,718 175,014 10,628 514,676 34,581 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
         Feb 891,427 36,957 1,370 117,185 161,161 10,735 514,768 34,974 408 10,710 2 4,443 85         Mar 898,780 36,130 1,487 111,773 167,352 10,883 519,889 36,917 408 10,899 2 4,443 84
         Apr 905,742 37,200 1,657 117,828 172,470 10,643 512,431 39,336 408 10,899 2 4,443 83
         May 909,441 37,387 1,840 118,528 173,593 10,771 519,098 34,232 408 10,899 2 4,443 82         June 913,018 36,927 2,062 108,975 177,669 10,399 518,757 44,284 408 11,073 2 4,443 83
         July 928,122 37,828 2,297 114,899 177,693 10,526 530,769 40,400 408 11,073 2 4,443 82
         Aug 922,869 38,255 2,583 116,089 164,142 10,599 536,840 40,938 408 11,073 2 4,443 82         Sep 929,597 37,772 2,751 106,419 171,841 10,253 539,023 48,236 408 11,119 2 4,443 83
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including Germany to their home country. — 8Excluding offsets against outstanding
cash bills. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. — claims. — 9Commutation and compensation debt and old debt mainly
3Including loans raised abroad. — 4Including money market loans. — denominated in foreign currency. — 10On 1 July 1999 central government
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for
employees. — 6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund
levy. — 7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. — 11On 1 January 2005 central
former GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the German Unity
with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Fund. 
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1998 + 228,050 + 52,301 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,632 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,755 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 9402001 + 135,018 − 14,719 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,4952002 + 178,203 + 24,327 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 − 10,155 + 2,221 + 222003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 62,513 + 13,623 + 42,422 + 15,942 + 109,834 + 8,874 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,2182004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 52,713 + 24,199 + 35,594 + 15,847 + 130,916 + 5,313 + 7,186 − 1,620 + 1,844 + 8022005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 53,197 + 26,700 + 33,278 + 5,465 + 131,620 + 10,618 + 2,317 − 10,689 + 4,511 + 6,041
2005          Jan-Sep + 178,874 + 34,417 + 46,336 + 30,007 + 22,190 − 5,622 + 99,274 + 8,452 + 1,564 − 6,804 + 9,510 + 3,970
2006          Jan-Sep + 198,921 + 43,343 + 49,759 + 28,157 + 25,517 − 2,531 + 102,037 − 1,608 + 1,025 − 1,256 + 20,583 + 16,265
2005          Sep + 25,105 + 6,376 − 4 − 4 + 6,335 + 6,335 + 14,044 − 4,060 + 176 − 449 + 4,554 + 6,078
         Oct + 20,837 + 2,999 − 654 − 10,823 + 5,164 + 5,164 + 12,434 + 6,421 + 362 − 1,293 + 3,532 − 1,720
         Nov + 10,845 + 2,188 + 6,507 + 6,507 + 1,089 + 1,089 + 7,279 + 1,006 + 159 − 2,226 − 4,189 − 3,840         Dec + 14,366 − 4,124 + 1,009 + 1,009 + 4,834 + 4,834 + 12,632 − 5,261 + 233 − 365 − 4,341 + 7,631
2006          Jan + 31,775 + 16,770 + 11,949 + 3,810 + 643 + 643 + 13,760 + 7,055 + 196 + 36 + 5,227 + 915
         Feb + 14,936 − 11,597 + 6,326 + 92 + 160 − 13,853 + 7,800 + 1,770 + 66 − 192 + 585 − 14,595         Mar + 29,077 + 7,353 + 5,121 + 5,121 + 6,191 + 6,191 + 15,218 − 6,091 + 184 − 229 + 2,362 + 6,384
         Apr + 20,723 + 6,962 − 231 − 7,459 + 5,118 + 5,118 + 13,382 + 6,885 + 48 + 14 + 2,406 + 5,080
         May + 9,983 + 3,699 + 6,667 + 6,667 + 1,123 + 1,123 + 7,022 + 1,015 + 137 − 140 − 4,965 + 4,448         June + 25,739 + 3,577 − 341 − 341 + 4,075 + 4,075 + 11,161 − 10,383 + 56 − 562 + 10,787 + 5,121
         July + 21,350 + 15,105 + 12,013 + 12,013 + 25 + 25 + 12,946 + 6,951 + 123 − 128 − 3,756 + 3,092
         Aug + 14,932 − 5,253 + 6,071 + 6,071 + 484 − 13,552 + 7,707 + 1,689 + 84 − 48 + 587 − 2,698         Sep + 30,407 + 6,728 + 2,183 + 2,183 + 7,699 + 7,699 + 13,042 − 10,499 + 132 − 7 + 7,351 + 8,518
1After deduction of repurchases. — 2Federal Treasury notes (Schätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the German
pension insurance fund *
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
1993 290,393 232,408 52,671 298,065 252,920 15,898 − 7,672 39,786 29,957 8,499 1,100 229 6,297
1994 322,335 256,662 61,891 324,323 273,880 17,751 − 1,988 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,8901995 338,185 270,294 64,387 348,115 294,034 20,285 − 9,930 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,8001996  
8 353,672 282,616 68,388 362,667 305,780 21,660 − 8,995 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 374,853 297,402 74,961 372,955 316,511 23,280 + 1,898 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 389,101 297,827 88,755 385,707 327,823 24,393 + 3,394 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,5731999 208,173 152,206 54,628 203,295 172,919 12,950 + 4,878 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,9042000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,8782003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,8622004  
9 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2005          Q1 55,160 36,897 17,996 58,001 50,031 3,390 − 2,841 2,607 2,432 16 41 118 4,828
         Q2 56,913 38,647 17,911 58,286 49,929 3,413 − 1,373 1,195 1,020 16 42 118 4,874         Q3 57,546 38,492 18,807 58,455 50,150 3,337 − 909 362 187 16 43 117 4,885         Q4 59,408 42,224 16,834 58,412 50,050 3,300 + 996 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006          Q1 60,801 42,622 17,908 57,965 50,110 3,247 + 2,836 4,452 4,293 16 43 101 4,924
         Q2 60,537 42,351 17,877 58,328 50,143 3,257 + 2,209 7,406 7,241 16 45 105 4,956         Q3 57,950 39,741 17,839 58,521 50,297 3,266 − 571 6,845 6,681 16 45 104 4,959
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension deducted from pension payments. — 4Including long-term care insurance
insurance scheme. — *Excluding German pension insurance for the mining, scheme for pensioners from 1995 to 2004 Q1. — 5Largely corresponds to
railroad and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do not tally with the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. — 6Including cash. —
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993, 7Excluding loans to other social security funds; including participating
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending interests. — 8Excluding income arising from the revaluation of
and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government participating interests. — 9Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of
cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance equity interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Employment Agency
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capitalloans
Unemployment support  
4,5 Job promotion  5,6 from
Measures central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern financed govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany by levies  7 Balance ment
1993 85,109 79,895 1,829 109,536 48,005 34,149 13,856 36,891 15,895 20,996 2,840 − 24,426 24,419
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 2,753 − 10,205 10,1421995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 2,627 − 6,892 6,8871996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 2,318 − 13,763 13,7561997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 1,756 − 9,574 9,5741998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 2,540 − 7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 1,349 − 3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 1,330 − 868 8672001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 1,660 − 1,931 1,9312002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 2,215 − 5,623 5,6232003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,2152004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,1752005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2005          Q1 11,934 11,072 40 14,775 7,983 5,805 2,178 3,332 2,083 1,249 410 − 2,842 5,532
         Q2 13,283 11,449 324 13,697 7,394 5,376 2,018 3,062 1,956 1,105 440 − 414 223         Q3 12,924 11,618 420 12,662 6,357 4,720 1,637 2,576 1,670 906 372 + 262 − 458         Q4 14,551 12,850 652 11,954 5,920 4,431 1,489 2,620 1,712 908 228 + 2,597 − 4,900
2006          Q1 14,041 13,057 42 12,320 7,155 5,260 1,894 2,306 1,526 780 388 + 1,721 538
         Q2 13,827 12,848 275 11,742 6,362 4,691 1,670 2,266 1,505 761 300 + 2,084 − 538         Q3 12,860 11,950 302 10,142 5,117 3,879 1,239 2,232 1,486 746 183 + 2,718 0
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government scheme for recipients of wage substitutes are paid in January instead of in
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- December. — 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up,
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service
compensatory amount to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit, Agencies (PSAs), compensation top-up payments and business start-up
short-time working benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory grants. — 7Promotion of winter construction and insolvency compensation
health insurance, pension insurance and long-term care insurance schemes. to employees. 
From 2003, the January contributions to the statutory pension insurance
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
  2004   2005   2006
  2003   2004   2005   2003   2004   2005   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 100.3 103.7 106.8 0.6 3.4 2.9 2.6 0.0 4.6 3.2 3.9 8.1 1.6Construction 86.9 83.0 80.1 − 4.4 − 4.5 − 3.4 − 5.4 − 11.2 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 2.0 0.5Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 101.6 105.1 106.5 − 1.0 3.5 1.3 3.8 − 0.2 2.6 1.9 0.8 3.7 2.1
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 105.6 106.1 107.3 0.7 0.5 1.1 0.2 1.4 1.5 0.8 0.8 1.2 1.4
Public and private services  3 102.4 102.5 102.5 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.2
Gross value added 101.7 103.4 104.5 − 0.1 1.6 1.1 1.3 − 0.1 1.9 1.3 1.2 3.1 1.1
Gross domestic product  4 101.1 102.3 103.2 − 0.2 1.2 0.9 0.9 − 0.6 1.7 1.4 1.1 3.1 1.0
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 101.0 101.1 101.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.8 − 0.6 0.8 1.0 − 0.9 1.5 − 0.2
Government consumption 102.5 101.2 101.8 0.4 − 1.3 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.7 1.2 0.9 1.1 2.1 0.8
Machinery and equipment 89.0 92.8 98.5 − 0.1 4.2 6.1 6.4 5.4 9.6 4.1 5.4 9.5 3.7Premises 88.4 85.0 82.0 − 1.6 − 3.8 − 3.6 − 4.9 − 10.8 − 1.7 − 1.3 − 1.6 1.9 0.4Other investment  
6 110.2 111.6 116.8 2.5 1.2 4.7 0.5 0.9 5.9 6.4 5.5 4.8 3.8
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . 0.7 0.3 0.2 0.5 − 0.1 0.8 − 0.5 0.4 0.4 − 0.1
Domestic use 98.1 98.1 98.6 0.6 0.0 0.5 0.4 − 1.2 2.1 0.5 0.5 2.7 0.4Net exports  
8 . . . − 0.8 1.2 0.4 0.4 0.6 − 0.2 0.9 0.6 0.5 0.6
Exports 113.7 124.6 133.2 2.4 9.6 6.9 9.0 4.5 5.5 9.4 8.0 15.0 9.3Imports 105.1 112.4 119.8 5.4 6.9 6.5 8.7 3.5 7.4 7.7 7.3 16.1 8.9
Gross domestic product  
4 101.1 102.3 103.2 − 0.2 1.2 0.9 0.9 − 0.6 1.7 1.4 1.1 3.1 1.0
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,281.8 1,302.9 1,321.1 1.4 1.7 1.4 2.4 0.6 1.8 2.3 0.8 3.3 1.5
Government consumption 417.2 415.1 419.6 1.3 − 0.5 1.1 − 1.8 0.0 1.8 1.5 1.1 3.5 1.8Machinery and equipment 147.3 151.9 159.4 − 3.0 3.1 5.0 5.5 4.5 8.2 3.2 4.1 8.4 2.7Premises 213.1 207.9 202.3 − 1.6 − 2.5 − 2.7 − 3.0 − 9.0 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.0 2.8 2.1Other investment  
6 24.3 24.7 25.2 − 0.9 1.5 2.1 2.2 0.7 2.3 2.4 2.9 2.2 2.6
Changes in inventories  7 − 7.7 − 6.1 − 2.6 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,076.0 2,096.3 2,125.0 1.5 1.0 1.4 1.5 − 0.2 2.8 1.4 1.4 4.0 1.7Net exports 85.5 110.9 116.0 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 770.7 844.1 912.3 0.7 9.5 8.1 10.0 5.9 6.6 10.3 9.4 17.0 12.3Imports 685.2 733.2 796.3 2.6 7.0 8.6 10.9 5.4 9.1 9.8 9.8 20.8 13.7
Gross domestic product  
4 2,161.5 2,207.2 2,241.0 0.9 2.1 1.5 1.5 0.3 2.2 1.9 1.7 3.6 1.8
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 104.6 106.2 107.6 1.6 1.6 1.3 1.6 1.2 1.0 1.3 1.7 1.7 1.6Gross domestic product 103.7 104.6 105.2 1.0 0.9 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.8Terms of trade 102.9 102.8 101.9 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 2.1 − 1.6
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,131.7 1,136.8 1,129.3 0.3 0.5 − 0.7 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 0.5Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 465.3 513.8 545.9 3.9 10.4 6.2 9.6 3.7 7.7 6.5 7.1 10.4 0.9
National income 1,597.0 1,650.6 1,675.1 1.3 3.4 1.5 2.5 0.8 2.1 1.6 1.5 3.4 0.6
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,145.8 2,209.4 2,248.2 1.4 3.0 1.8 2.5 1.0 2.4 2.1 1.6 3.1 0.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2006. — 1In- products). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6In-
cluding communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate tangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertain-
activities, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home servi- ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net in-
ces. — 4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on crease in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-
Period total tion  2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
2001 99.5 92.7 97.3 100.4 99.4 102.3 100.4 98.8 98.0 101.1 102.1 104.0
2002 98.3 88.7 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.42003 98.4 84.9 99.8 99.5 99.5 102.0 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.62004 100.9 80.6 102.7 102.5 103.3 105.7 87.4 98.0 104.6 103.7 101.2 111.9
2005 103.7 76.1 102.8 106.3 106.5 111.0 87.8 101.0 110.0 104.6 106.1 116.8
 
2005          Jan 94.5 47.9 112.6 96.9 101.0 95.4 81.8 94.6 109.9 104.9 86.3 106.8
         Feb 94.7 43.3 107.8 98.1 99.2 100.5 85.8 94.1 107.0 101.8 93.1 112.2         Mar 106.6 60.3 112.3 110.3 108.7 117.8 95.9 102.5 116.5 109.2 113.8 126.4
         Apr 102.7 80.5 101.3 104.9 106.1 109.4 87.1 97.4 108.6 106.2 101.2 122.5
         May 100.6 83.2 97.8 102.5 105.2 104.6 79.6 97.8 108.6 102.8 99.0 112.1         June 106.3 88.5 92.5 109.5 109.3 117.3 90.5 99.1 108.0 107.7 115.6 122.3
         July 106.8 93.0 96.5 109.1 110.2 114.0 83.9 102.8 112.7 108.3 107.7 122.3
         Aug 95.7 84.2 92.4 97.2 101.5 94.9 70.0 98.7 108.2 96.1 92.0 90.4         Sep 110.8 92.3 93.6 114.3 113.4 121.4 97.8 106.3 111.4 109.6 114.5 129.7
         Oct 113.0 93.2 104.0 115.8 115.6 119.5 100.4 112.8 118.0 112.8 108.0 131.5
         Nov 112.2 85.7 107.8 115.1 113.6 122.1 99.2 108.2 110.7 111.0 113.3 130.0         Dec 100.3 61.3 115.5 102.3 94.4 115.5 81.6 97.9 100.9 84.5 128.6 95.7
2006          Jan 98.0 41.6 119.5 100.9 104.5 101.0 86.0 96.4 113.5 104.4 92.5 107.3
         Feb 100.3 45.6 109.1 104.3 105.2 109.3 89.5 95.8 109.6 106.7 99.4 121.6         Mar 
7 111.5 7 62.8 112.5 115.9 116.3 124.0 98.4 103.0 118.4 116.8 117.3 131.5
         Apr  r 7 107.9 7 85.5 101.9 110.7 113.7 114.1 92.6 101.8 114.0 111.0 108.6 121.0
         May  r 7 107.5 7 87.7 95.7 110.6 114.1 114.6 89.3 100.3 111.9 112.2 110.2 122.4
         June  r 7 112.4 7 93.1 94.2 116.1 119.1 122.9 92.9 101.4 114.8 117.2 119.3 126.4
         July  x r 7 112.5 7 98.7 97.2 115.4 119.0 120.5 90.2 103.6 118.5 112.0 114.3 127.1
         Aug  x r 7 103.1 7 89.7 94.6 105.2 112.5 102.6 78.9 100.7 112.3 104.6 104.7 91.6
         Sep  x p 7 117.6 7 99.3 95.8 121.6 123.4 128.8 106.2 107.3 115.5 118.6 125.9 131.9
Annual percentage change  
  
2001 − 0.5 − 7.7 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 2.4 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.1 + 2.2 + 4.12002 − 1.2 − 4.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.32003 + 0.1 − 4.3 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 5.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 + 2.12004 + 2.5 − 5.1 + 2.9 + 3.0 + 3.8 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 3.5 + 4.0
2005 + 2.8 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 5.0 + 0.5 + 3.1 + 5.2 + 0.9 + 4.8 + 4.4
 
2005          Jan + 2.8 − 1.4 − 3.1 + 3.9 + 4.6 + 5.3 − 1.9 + 1.1 + 7.9 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 9.8
         Feb + 0.6 − 23.2 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 3.7 − 0.8 + 2.3 + 5.3 − 1.3 + 6.2 + 1.9         Mar + 1.1 − 23.1 + 1.8 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 5.4 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 8.3 − 2.2 + 7.1 + 3.9
         Apr + 2.1 − 6.4 + 0.3 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 5.4 − 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 7.2
         May + 0.8 − 4.4 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 − 7.7 + 3.3 + 6.0 − 2.5 + 0.5 − 2.7         June + 2.6 − 4.3 + 1.5 + 3.4 + 2.0 + 5.6 + 4.0 + 2.0 + 4.3 − 3.1 + 8.6 + 1.3
         July + 3.4 − 2.7 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 2.9 + 5.4 − 3.6 + 3.7 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 9.1
         Aug + 2.0 − 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.4 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 2.8 + 3.0 + 4.3 + 2.2 + 2.8 − 0.2         Sep + 3.7 − 2.8 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 4.0 + 5.8 + 1.0 + 4.8 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 7.5
         Oct + 4.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 5.4 + 5.2 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 7.0 + 9.3 + 5.6 + 3.8 + 3.6
         Nov + 5.1 − 1.3 − 2.1 + 6.3 + 5.5 + 8.7 + 5.1 + 3.1 + 2.8 + 5.5 + 8.7 + 8.0         Dec + 4.6 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 5.5 + 7.0 + 3.6 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 2.9
2006          Jan + 3.7 − 13.2 + 6.1 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 5.9 + 5.1 + 1.9 + 3.3 − 0.5 + 7.2 + 0.5
         Feb + 5.9 + 5.3 + 1.2 + 6.3 + 6.0 + 8.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 4.8 + 6.8 + 8.4         Mar 
7 + 4.6 7 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 5.1 + 7.0 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 7.0 + 3.1 + 4.0
         Apr  r 7 + 5.1 7 + 6.2 + 0.6 + 5.5 + 7.2 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 4.5 + 5.0 + 4.5 + 7.3 − 1.2
         May  r 7 + 6.9 7 + 5.4 − 2.1 + 7.9 + 8.5 + 9.6 + 12.2 + 2.6 + 3.0 + 9.1 + 11.3 + 9.2
         June  r 7 + 5.7 7 + 5.2 + 1.8 + 6.0 + 9.0 + 4.8 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 6.3 + 8.8 + 3.2 + 3.4
         July  x r 7 + 5.3 7 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 5.8 + 8.0 + 5.7 + 7.5 + 0.8 + 5.1 + 3.4 + 6.1 + 3.9
         Aug  x r 7 + 7.7 7 + 6.5 + 2.4 + 8.2 + 10.8 + 8.1 + 12.7 + 2.0 + 3.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 1.3
         Sep  x p 7 + 6.1 7 + 7.6 + 2.4 + 6.4 + 8.8 + 6.1 + 8.6 + 0.9 + 3.7 + 8.2 + 10.0 + 1.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — oUsing the quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities related to print-
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The ing. — 7Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of es-
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Build- timates, to the results of the annual overall survey in the constructio n sector
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — (average +3%). — xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statis-
3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in particular, mining of tical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Producti on
coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas and manu- Survey for the third quarter 2006. 
facture of refined petroleum products. — 4Including mining and
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 Durable goods Non-durable goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
total  
  
2001 98.3 − 1.6 95.9 − 4.0 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.5 99.8 − 0.1 102.4 + 2.5
2002 98.2 − 0.1 96.4 + 0.5 99.5 + 0.1 99.0 − 2.4 95.7 − 4.1 101.0 − 1.42003 99.0 + 0.8 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.2 95.6 − 3.4 90.4 − 5.5 98.8 − 2.22004 105.1 + 6.2 105.0 + 7.4 107.6 + 6.9 95.1 − 0.5 89.3 − 1.2 98.7 − 0.1
2005 111.8 + 6.4 110.0 + 4.8 116.2 + 8.0 99.8 + 4.9 91.4 + 2.4 104.9 + 6.3
 
2005          Sep 117.5 + 8.3 114.3 + 5.4 123.1 + 11.4 105.3 + 4.3 99.1 + 4.5 109.2 + 4.1
         Oct 118.7 + 10.0 117.2 + 7.7 122.8 + 12.4 106.6 + 7.7 102.8 + 6.6 108.9 + 8.4
         Nov 121.0 + 13.7 117.8 + 9.3 127.4 + 18.6 104.8 + 7.0 103.5 + 7.5 105.6 + 6.8         Dec 113.8 + 5.5 103.3 + 9.0 127.8 + 3.2 91.0 + 5.6 82.9 + 6.7 96.1 + 5.1
2006          Jan 116.6 + 9.0 115.5 + 5.7 121.3 + 12.7 100.5 + 3.4 91.8 + 4.0 105.8 + 3.1
         Feb 118.2 + 12.3 116.4 + 11.3 122.7 + 15.2 105.9 + 3.0 92.4 + 5.2 114.3 + 2.1         Mar 127.2 + 8.4 125.9 + 10.3 131.7 + 7.9 112.7 + 4.1 103.1 + 6.1 118.7 + 2.9
         Apr 121.0 + 14.9 123.3 + 16.8 124.3 + 15.6 100.7 + 5.9 95.6 + 5.6 103.9 + 6.1
         May 119.1 + 12.7 123.2 + 15.6 121.1 + 11.4 98.1 + 8.0 93.9 + 10.1 100.7 + 6.9         June 124.3 + 9.6 128.9 + 16.1 127.3 + 6.3 97.1 + 2.0 93.7 + 2.1 99.2 + 2.0
         July 125.5 + 9.8 128.2 + 13.0 128.6 + 8.8 104.0 + 2.8 91.3 + 3.0 111.9 + 2.7
         Aug 118.8 + 16.5 119.2 + 16.4 122.1 + 19.2 104.2 + 5.6 87.5 + 10.5 114.5 + 3.5         Sep  
p 130.4 + 11.0 131.1 + 14.7 134.5 + 9.3 111.7 + 6.1 105.2 + 6.2 115.7 + 6.0
from the domestic market  
  
2001 97.6 − 2.3 96.4 − 3.5 98.0 − 2.0 99.9 + 0.0 99.5 − 0.4 100.2 + 0.3
2002 94.6 − 3.1 94.6 − 1.9 94.7 − 3.4 94.6 − 5.3 92.0 − 7.5 96.3 − 3.92003 94.6
+ 0.0 95.0 + 0.4 96.0 + 1.4 89.9 − 5.0 86.3 − 6.2 92.1 − 4.4
2004 98.3 + 3.9 100.4 + 5.7 100.1 + 4.3 87.2 − 3.0 83.0 − 3.8 89.8 − 2.5
2005 101.4 + 3.2 103.6 + 3.2 102.8 + 2.7 91.1 + 4.5 85.2 + 2.7 94.6 + 5.3
 
2005          Sep 105.5 + 5.7 106.9 + 4.2 107.4 + 7.9 96.4 + 4.0 92.3 + 5.4 98.9 + 3.1
         Oct 107.3 + 4.7 111.0 + 5.4 106.7 + 3.3 98.6 + 7.2 95.8 + 6.6 100.3 + 7.5
         Nov 108.3 + 7.7 111.9 + 6.9 108.7 + 8.5 96.7 + 7.1 96.9 + 7.2 96.6 + 7.0         Dec 97.6 − 0.7 95.2 + 7.1 105.5 − 7.9 82.3 + 4.2 75.1 + 4.0 86.8 + 4.3
2006          Jan 102.3 + 5.1 106.9 + 3.9 102.2 + 7.7 89.2 + 1.0 86.3 + 4.0 91.0 − 0.5
         Feb 103.6 + 7.9 107.1 + 9.4 103.0 + 8.1 95.3 + 2.9 86.6 + 4.8 100.6 + 1.8         Mar 112.8 + 5.6 115.6 + 8.4 114.3 + 4.4 100.4 + 0.6 95.3 + 3.7 103.6 − 1.1
         Apr 107.2 + 9.6 114.5 + 14.6 106.1 + 6.5 89.8 + 3.2 86.1 + 2.9 92.1 + 3.5
         May 107.3 + 11.5 115.3 + 15.1 106.3 + 9.7 87.6 + 5.8 86.0 + 9.4 88.6 + 3.7         June 110.5 + 6.5 119.3 + 14.6 110.4 + 0.6 85.7 − 0.8 85.2 + 0.7 86.0 − 1.7
         July 112.6 + 8.7 121.0 + 12.6 112.0 + 7.9 90.4 − 1.4 83.4 − 0.1 94.7 − 2.1
         Aug 108.5 + 12.6 115.1 + 16.3 107.7 + 12.3 92.3 + 2.4 81.1 + 8.6 99.2 − 0.3         Sep  
p 119.7 + 13.5 122.3 + 14.4 123.9 + 15.4 100.6 + 4.4 98.0 + 6.2 102.2 + 3.3
from abroad  
  
2001 99.1 − 0.9 95.1 − 4.9 100.6 + 0.6 104.8 + 4.9 100.4 + 0.4 107.4 + 7.52002 102.7 + 3.6 99.1 + 4.2 104.1 + 3.5 108.6 + 3.6 103.9 + 3.5 111.4 + 3.72003 104.4 + 1.7 102.3 + 3.2 105.1 + 1.0 108.2 − 0.4 99.3 − 4.4 113.8 + 2.22004 113.6 + 8.8 112.2 + 9.7 114.5 + 8.9 112.5 + 4.0 103.1 + 3.8 118.4 + 4.0
2005 124.7 + 9.8 120.0 + 7.0 128.5 + 12.2 119.0 + 5.8 105.0 + 1.8 127.7 + 7.9
 
2005          Sep 132.5 + 11.0 125.9 + 7.2 137.6 + 14.1 125.1 + 4.9 114.0 + 3.1 132.0 + 5.8
         Oct 132.9 + 15.9 127.0 + 11.0 137.7 + 19.8 124.2 + 8.6 118.0 + 6.5 128.0 + 9.8
         Nov 136.8 + 20.3 126.9 + 12.6 144.7 + 26.8 122.6 + 7.0 117.9 + 8.0 125.5 + 6.4         Dec 134.0 + 11.7 115.9 + 11.5 148.3 + 12.2 110.4 + 8.2 100.1 + 11.6 116.8 + 6.6
2006          Jan 134.5 + 12.9 129.0 + 8.1 139.0 + 16.4 125.4 + 7.2 104.0 + 4.0 138.7 + 8.9
         Feb 136.5 + 16.7 130.9 + 13.7 140.9 + 20.5 129.5 + 3.4 105.2 + 5.9 144.7 + 2.3         Mar 145.2 + 11.3 142.0 + 12.9 147.8 + 10.5 140.0 + 10.1 120.3 + 10.7 152.3 + 9.7
         Apr 138.3 + 20.7 137.0 + 19.5 141.1 + 22.9 124.9 + 10.5 116.5 + 10.6 130.1 + 10.5
         May 133.9 + 14.0 135.5 + 16.3 134.8 + 12.8 121.4 + 12.0 111.3 + 11.4 127.7 + 12.3         June 141.5 + 12.9 144.0 + 18.1 142.8 + 10.7 122.3 + 6.6 112.4 + 4.5 128.5 + 8.0
         July 141.7 + 11.0 139.5 + 13.5 144.0 + 9.5 134.2 + 9.8 108.6 + 8.9 150.2 + 10.3
         Aug 131.7 + 20.9 125.7 + 16.8 135.4 + 25.0 130.4 + 10.9 101.4 + 13.7 148.6 + 9.8         Sep  
p 143.7 + 8.5 144.9 + 15.1 144.2 + 4.8 136.3 + 9.0 121.0 + 6.1 145.8 + 10.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany  1 Eastern Germany  2 
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2002 88.8 − 6.1 72.8 91.5 95.7 92.1 − 6.9 80.5 94.8 96.4 79.6 − 3.6 51.6 81.9 94.0
2003 79.3 − 10.7 67.5 78.6 87.5 82.0 − 11.0 75.6 79.7 88.7 72.0 − 9.5 45.1 75.4 84.42004 74.3 − 6.3 61.3 72.8 84.2 77.0 − 6.1 70.5 74.6 83.8 67.1 − 6.8 35.8 67.7 85.2
2005 73.8 − 0.7 56.9 74.5 83.5 77.8 + 1.0 66.5 78.0 84.7 62.6 − 6.7 30.5 64.2 80.1
   
2005          Aug 82.4 + 6.3 57.5 81.7 98.7 86.9 + 11.3 67.3 86.7 99.4 70.2 − 7.4 30.5 67.3 96.8
         Sep 89.1 + 3.8 63.8 88.9 105.2 93.8 + 5.3 74.4 92.5 107.7 76.2 − 0.9 34.6 78.5 98.7
         Oct 74.6 + 0.1 57.1 74.6 85.4 79.3 + 0.5 67.7 78.2 87.9 61.6 − 1.4 28.0 64.2 78.9
         Nov 67.6 + 9.4 51.2 75.2 69.2 72.4 + 12.8 59.5 81.6 70.0 54.2 − 1.5 28.4 56.7 67.1         Dec 74.9 + 7.8 59.3 84.6 73.6 78.6 + 9.5 68.9 87.8 74.2 64.6 + 2.5 32.9 75.5 72.1
2006          Jan 50.3 + 7.7 43.8 53.3 50.9 54.1 + 8.0 53.1 56.4 52.2 39.6 + 6.5 18.0 44.3 47.7
         Feb 59.1 + 13.4 46.9 64.7 60.4 64.9 + 17.6 54.5 70.9 64.5 43.3
+ 0.0 26.0 46.8 50.0
         Mar 82.2 + 4.1 63.0 85.0 91.0 86.3 + 3.6 74.1 87.2 92.9 70.8 + 5.7 32.4 78.3 86.0
         Apr 80.6 + 13.7 63.5 80.9 90.8 84.9 + 14.3 73.5 83.6 93.5 68.8 + 11.9 36.1 73.0 83.9
         May 86.0 + 10.4 64.3 89.5 95.7 93.9 + 14.7 75.8 97.3 101.5 64.4 − 3.6 32.5 67.2 80.6         June 93.5 + 5.6 70.9 87.8 113.9 97.9 + 4.7 82.8 87.2 119.9 81.2 + 8.7 38.2 89.4 98.3
         July 87.5 + 7.4 68.6 84.7 102.4 91.7 + 8.8 79.8 87.1 104.7 75.9 + 2.6 37.8 77.9 96.6
         Aug 84.1 + 2.1 59.9 86.9 96.1 88.3 + 1.6 70.6 89.7 97.9 72.8 + 3.7 30.6 79.0 91.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications 0.2.8. — 1Excluding West Berlin. — 2Including West Berlin. — 3Including
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there- the railways and post office. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  2 of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco products leather goods ing materials sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2003 = 100
1999 97.8 + 0.5 + 0.3 89.7 + 0.7 82.9 + 7.4 111.8 − 0.3 110.6 − 1.0 97.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 94.6 + 3.3
2000 100.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 91.5 + 2.0 87.8 + 5.9 111.7 − 0.1 113.4 + 2.5 98.6 + 1.4 + 0.3 92.6 − 2.1
2001 102.1 + 1.9 . 95.7 + 4.6 94.3 + 7.4 111.3 − 0.4 109.6 − 3.4 100.7 + 2.1 . 95.3 + 2.92002 100.5 − 1.6 − 1.3 98.3 + 2.7 97.6 + 3.5 105.7 − 5.0 100.9 − 7.9 99.9 − 0.8 − 0.8 98.1 + 2.92003  
5 100.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 100.2 + 1.9 100.1 + 2.6 100.2 − 5.2 100.2 − 0.7 100.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 100.5 + 2.4
2004 101.6 + 1.5 + 1.6 103.2 + 3.0 99.6 − 0.5 103.1 + 2.9 103.5 + 3.3 101.9 + 1.7 + 1.3 102.5 + 2.0
2005  6 103.8 + 2.2 + 1.7 106.5 + 3.2 104.7 + 5.1 105.5 + 2.3 101.9 − 1.5 104.2 + 2.3 + 1.7 105.6 + 3.0
 
2005          Sep  6 101.0 + 1.8 + 0.8 100.8 + 2.8 104.3 + 6.1 104.3 − 2.0 98.6 − 1.2 101.9 + 2.9 + 1.6 104.1 + 6.8
         Oct 107.9 + 1.1 + 0.5 106.7 + 2.3 108.3 + 2.6 122.7 + 1.5 108.6 − 1.8 108.2 + 1.6 + 0.5 109.1 + 3.0
         Nov 109.6 + 1.5 + 0.7 108.0 + 1.3 108.0 + 3.9 114.1 + 2.8 109.2 − 2.2 110.4 + 1.8 + 0.7 115.0 + 3.9         Dec 125.6 + 0.8 + 0.5 124.6 + 1.0 123.3 + 2.3 131.9 + 1.5 121.5 − 0.7 119.2 + 0.8 + 0.1 98.9 + 1.3
2006          Jan 98.3 + 2.4 + 1.9 100.2 + 1.9 103.8 + 8.2 94.1 + 4.9 95.4 + 1.0 95.6 + 2.1 + 1.1 86.3 + 0.8
         Feb 92.0 + 1.1 + 0.2 98.3 + 0.7 98.3 + 2.1 78.3 + 3.0 89.2 + 1.0 92.0 + 1.9 + 0.6 92.2 + 3.9         Mar 105.5 − 0.5 − 1.0 108.9 − 0.5 108.8 + 3.1 104.6 + 0.1 106.2 − 0.7 107.9
+ 0.0 − 1.0 117.1 + 1.5
         Apr 105.5 + 2.0 + 1.2 108.2 + 1.2 106.4 + 5.0 115.7 − 1.4 107.2 + 4.7 108.6 + 2.4 + 1.1 119.4 + 3.6         May 104.7 + 0.7 − 0.2 108.3 − 1.5 105.9 + 2.4 112.0 + 6.4 104.0 + 3.2 107.6 + 1.5 + 0.3 116.7 + 3.7         June 101.5 + 2.1 + 1.3 107.5 + 1.6 105.0 + 2.7 102.9 + 5.1 97.8 + 1.7 105.1 + 2.5 + 1.3 116.9 + 3.5
         July 103.2 + 1.2 + 0.4 110.9 + 4.3 108.4 + 0.7 103.3 + 0.5 97.6 − 1.1 106.7 + 1.8 + 0.7 117.2 + 3.3
         Aug 102.8 + 2.6 + 1.9 107.2 + 3.4 102.5 + 2.5 106.0 + 6.9 100.9 + 3.6 103.6 + 3.9 + 2.9 104.9 + 9.2         Sep 100.4 − 0.6 − 1.2 101.4 + 0.6 104.6 + 0.3 102.8 − 1.4 102.1 + 3.5 103.0 + 1.1 + 0.3 111.5 + 7.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding from 2001, at 2000 prices. — 5Figures for 2003 do not include Lower
value-added tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version Saxony. — 6Figures from January 2005 are provisional, some of them have
0.2.8. — 1Excluding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding been revised. Figures for recent months are particularly uncertain owing to
the sale of automotive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor estimates for missing returns. 
vehicle parts and accessories.— 4Up to (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices;
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployed  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-manu- ment pro-
going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cationaling Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  
3 6,7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2003 38,725 − 0.9 − 368 34,651 − 1.3 9 6,136 817 195 143 260 4,377 + 315 10.5 355
2004 38,875 + 0.4 + 150 34,656 + 0.0 6,019 769 151 117 184 10 4,381 10 +9 3 10 10.5 286
2005 38,822 − 0.1 − 53 34,466 − 0.5 5,931 719 126 62 115 11 4,861 11 + 479 11 11.7 12 413
2005          Oct 39,332 − 0.1 − 34 5,937 732 102 58 111 4,555 + 348 11.0 453
         Nov 39,338 − 0.0 − 8 34,906 − 0.3 5,930 729 98 59 128 4,531 + 274 10.9 422         Dec 39,130 + 0.0 + 15 5,900 708 84 55 129 4,605 + 141 11.1 394
2006          Jan 
r 38,366 r − 0.0 r − 7 5,863 655 96 49 120 5,010 − 76 12.1 415
         Feb r 38,365 r − 0.1 r − 21 34,065 − 0.0 5,853 636 101 46 113 5,048 − 241 12.2 464
         Mar r 38,483 r + 0.1 r + 46 5,857 13 651 105 45 110 4,977 − 289 12.0 506
         Apr r 38,714 r + 0.4 r + 153 5,858 13 686 83 45 110 4,790 − 262 11.5 546
         May r 38,948 r + 0.6 r + 226 34,485 + 0.5 5,861 13 698 72 49 114 4,535 − 349 14 10.8 565
         June r 39,101 r + 0.8 r + 297 5,888 13 706 62 51 118 4,399 − 382 10.5 581
         July r 39,111 r + 0.9 r + 340 5,895 13 709 54 51 114 4,386 − 451 10.5 627
         Aug 39,187 + 0.9 + 338 ... ... 5,932 13 718 48 15 5215 110 4,372 − 426 10.5 619
         Sep 16 39,497 16 + 0.9 16 + 334 ... ... 46 15 5215 124 r 4,237 − 409 10.1 621
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 5615 133 4,085 − 471 9.8 626
Western Germany o 
  
2003 . . . . . 9 5,503 594 160 31 161 2,753 + 255 8.4 292
2004 . . . . . 5,380 562 122 24 121 10 2,783 10 +8 9 10 8.5 239
2005 . . . . . 5,214 529 101 13 77 11 3,247 11 + 464 11 9.9 12 325
2005          Oct . . . . . 5,209 535 86 9 74 3,099 + 404 9.4 345
         Nov . . . . . 5,203 535 81 9 85 3,081 + 353 9.4 321         Dec . . . . . 5,176 522 70 9 85 3,120 + 258 9.5 310
2006          Jan . . . . . 5,147 488 79 9 79 3,362 + 52 10.2 327
         Feb . . . . . 5,137 477 81 9 75 3,370 − 116 10.2 367         Mar . . . . . 5,139
13 488 83 9 74 3,317 − 160 10.1 397
         Apr . . . . . 5,139 13 509 67 9 74 3,201 − 139 9.7 419
         May . . . . . 5,139 13 516 58 9 78 3,046 − 196 14 9.2 435
         June . . . . . 5,162 13 520 50 10 81 2,966 − 222 8.9 445
         July . . . . . 5,165 13 521 43 10 78 2,960 − 280 8.9 486
         Aug . . . . . 5,195 13 528 38 15 1015 76 2,941 − 297 8.8 480
         Sep . . . . . ... ... 38 15 1115 87r 2,835 − 305 8.5 478
         Oct . . . . . ... ... ... 15 1215 94 2,739 − 360 8.2 473
Eastern Germany +  
  
2003 . . . . . 9 632 223 35 112 99 1,624 + 61 18.5 63
2004 . . . . . 639 207 29 93 63 10 1,599 10 +4 10 18.4 47
2005 . . . . . 717 189 25 49 38 11 1,614 11 +1 6 11 18.7 12 88
2005          Oct . . . . . 727 196 17 49 37 1,456 − 56 16.9 108         Nov . . . . . 727 194 17 50 43 1,450 − 79 16.9 100         Dec . . . . . 723 186 14 46 44 1,485 − 117 17.3 84
2006          Jan . . . . . 716 167 17 41 41 1,649 − 129 19.2 87
         Feb . . . . . 716 160 19 37 38 1,678 − 124 19.5 97         Mar . . . . . 717
13 164 22 36 36 1,660 − 129 19.3 110
         Apr . . . . . 719 13 177 17 36 36 1,589 − 124 18.5 127
         May . . . . . 722 13 182 14 39 37 1,490 − 153 14 17.4 131
         June . . . . . 725 13 186 11 41 37 1,433 − 160 16.8 135
         July . . . . . 730 13 188 11 41 36 1,426 − 171 16.7 142
         Aug . . . . . 737 13 191 9 15 4115 34 1,431 − 129 16.7 139
         Sep . . . . . ... ... 8 15 4215 36 1,402 − 104 16.4 143
         Oct . . . . . ... ... ... 15 4515 39 1,346 − 111 15.7 153
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual wards are positively affected by the first-time inclusion of firms which are re-
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- quired to report and which have been identified in the course of drawing
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- up the corporate register. — 10From January 2004, unemployed persons ex-
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Work-place concept; aver- cluding all those participating in occupational aptitude testing and training
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — schemes. — 11From January 2005, unemployed persons including recipients
3Up to December 2004, western Germany including West Berlin and east- of social assistance who are able to work. — 12From January 2005, in-
ern Germany excluding West Berlin. — 4The figures refer to the economic cluding offers of job opportunities. — 13Provisional up to adjustment to
classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or the figures of the annual overall survey. — 14From May 2006, calculated on
parts thereof; civil engineering”. — 5Mid-month level. — 6Employees in- the basis of new labour force figures. — 15Annualised data from the
volved in job creation schemes and structural adjustment measures Federal Employment Agency based on information received so far. —(SAM). — 7Mid-month level; end of month figures up to December 2004. — 16 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 
8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — 9The figures from 2003 on-
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index HWWA
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Period Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
2000 = 100  
  
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.4 101.2 100.3 103.0 107.1 101.0 100.6 91.4 91.9
2002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 104.9 102.6 100.2 102.4 100.0 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.12003 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 104.1 101.3 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.92004 106.2 105.7 102.9 114.8 108.9 104.8 101.4 105.8 99.7 101.1 97.2 101.4 96.3
2005 108.3 105.8 103.8 126.6 111.1 105.9 102.7 110.7 98.8 102.4 101.4 139.5 105.4
 
2005          Jan 106.9 105.7 103.5 116.4 109.8 105.4 108.1 97.6 101.5 98.0 107.5 95.7
         Feb 107.3 106.3 103.6 117.5 110.5 105.6 102.5 108.5 98.8 101.8 98.8 111.4 99.2         Mar 107.6 106.6 103.7 120.7 110.3 105.6 109.1 100.0 102.1 100.1 125.3 103.1
         Apr 107.7 106.4 103.7 123.3 109.7 105.7 109.9 98.4 102.1 100.1 128.2 103.1
         May 108.0 107.1 103.6 123.0 110.9 105.8 102.5 109.9 98.4 102.0 99.7 124.3 102.3         June 108.1 107.0 103.5 125.8 110.6 105.9 110.4 98.5 102.2 101.3 144.6 106.6
         July 108.6 105.9 103.2 129.0 112.1 106.0 111.0 97.5 102.4 101.9 151.8 107.0
         Aug 108.7 104.9 103.1 130.9 112.5 106.0 102.7 111.3 98.7 102.4 102.8 160.9 105.9         Sep 109.1 104.8 104.2 135.1 111.3 106.0 111.8 98.4 102.8 103.3 160.5 105.8
         Oct 109.1 104.4 104.3 135.6 111.2 106.1 112.6 98.7 103.0 103.7 154.0 108.0
         Nov 108.6 104.6 104.4 130.9 110.4 106.2 103.0 112.5 100.4 103.0 103.5 148.5 112.0         Dec 109.6 105.5 104.2 131.0 113.7 106.3 112.8 101.4 103.1 103.8 152.0 115.8
2006          Jan 109.1 106.6 103.7 134.4 110.7 106.5 114.1 101.1 103.3 104.7 163.7 120.1
         Feb 109.5 107.1 104.0 134.7 111.6 106.7 103.7 114.9 103.3 103.7 105.1 160.9 124.5         Mar 109.5 107.0 104.4 135.0 111.3 106.7 115.5 104.8 104.0 105.6 163.6 123.7
         Apr 109.9 107.4 104.4 139.2 111.2 106.8 116.6 105.9 104.5 107.0 177.8 129.3
         May 110.1 108.4 104.3 139.8 111.3 106.9 104.4 116.7 106.2 104.8 107.2 171.6 134.5         June 110.3 108.5 104.2 140.7 111.7 107.0 117.1 106.9 104.8 107.0 172.7 130.0
         July 110.7 108.1 103.9 142.1 113.6 107.1 117.7 105.9 105.2 108.3 182.1 135.6
         Aug 110.6 107.7 103.8 141.3 113.3 107.2 105.9 117.9
p 109.9 105.2 108.5 178.5 134.3
         Sep 110.2 108.0 104.4 136.1 112.3 107.2 117.5 p 109.4 105.2 107.1 155.4 133.7
         Oct 110.3 107.5 105.2 135.4 112.2 107.3 ... ... ... ... 146.8 139.0
Annual percentage change  
  
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 7.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.12002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 6.6 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.92003 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.3 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.62004 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.5 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 − 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 22.3 + 10.8
2005 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 10.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.6 − 0.9 + 1.3 + 4.3 + 37.6 + 9.4
 
2005          Jan + 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.4 + 5.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.9 − 5.8 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 30.1 + 3.1
         Feb + 1.8 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 6.6 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 4.2 − 6.1 + 1.5 + 3.7 + 35.5 + 3.1         Mar + 1.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 8.3 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 4.2 − 4.9 + 1.3 + 3.8 + 37.4 − 0.4
         Apr + 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 9.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 4.6 − 5.8 + 1.0 + 3.3 + 35.1 − 1.9
         May + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 2.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 4.1 − 5.6 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 18.9 + 1.2         June + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 10.2 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 4.6 − 8.1 + 1.1 + 4.4 + 43.5 + 7.6
         July + 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 4.6 − 7.1 + 1.2 + 4.7 + 45.0 + 9.6
         Aug + 1.9
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 11.6 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 4.6 − 1.1 + 0.9 + 4.7 + 40.8 + 11.9
         Sep + 2.5 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 15.9 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 4.9 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 5.1 + 42.4 + 13.2
         Oct + 2.3 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 12.6 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 4.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 4.3 + 25.2 + 17.4
         Nov + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 11.7 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.4 + 5.5 + 37.4 + 22.5         Dec + 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 14.4 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 5.2 + 2.7 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 57.0 + 29.8
2006          Jan + 2.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 15.5 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 1.8 + 6.8 + 52.3 + 25.5
         Feb + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 14.6 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 5.9 + 4.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 44.4 + 25.5         Mar + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 4.8 + 1.9 + 5.5 + 30.6 + 20.0
         Apr + 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 12.9 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 6.1 + 7.6 + 2.4 + 6.9 + 38.7 + 25.4
         May + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 13.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 6.2 + 7.9 + 2.7 + 7.5 + 38.1 + 31.5         June + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 6.1 + 8.5 + 2.5 + 5.6 + 19.4 + 22.0
         July + 1.9 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 6.0 + 8.6 + 2.7 + 6.3 + 20.0 + 26.7
         Aug + 1.7 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 7.9 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 5.9
p + 11.3 + 2.7 + 5.5 + 10.9 + 26.8
         Sep + 1.0 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 5.1 p + 11.2 + 2.3 + 3.7 − 3.2 + 26.4
         Oct + 1.1 + 3.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... − 4.7 + 28.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWA Index of World Market Prices. — tion price level. — 4Excluding value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Previously: Overall construc- industrial raw materials. 
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999 € billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM / 
€ change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change %
1995 1,575.1 3.2 1,034.9 0.8 553.5 4.6 1,588.4 2.1 2,344.9 3.0 257.6 − 0.6 11.0
1996 1,592.5 1.1 1,029.9 − 0.5 599.0 8.2 1,629.0 2.6 2,386.5 1.8 251.7 − 2.3 10.51997 1,589.7 − 0.2 1,012.9 − 1.7 613.2 2.4 1,626.1 − 0.2 2,427.6 1.7 245.4 − 2.5 10.11998 1,623.0 2.1 1,036.3 2.3 625.0 1.9 1,661.3 2.2 2,474.2 1.9 249.4 1.7 10.11999 854.6 3.0 547.5 3.3 330.5 3.4 878.0 3.4 1,297.7 2.6 122.7 − 3.8 9.5
2000 883.4 3.4 569.6 4.0 339.9 2.8 909.5 3.6 1,337.4 3.1 123.2 0.4 9.2
2001 902.0 2.1 590.0 3.6 353.8 4.1 943.9 3.8 1,389.5 3.9 130.9 6.2 9.42002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.92003 908.1 − 0.0 588.6 − 0.6 377.7 2.7 966.3 0.7 1,429.1 1.9 147.4 5.8 10.32004 914.3 0.7 603.1 2.5 377.9 0.0 981.0 1.5 1,454.8 1.8 151.9 3.1 10.4
2005 911.4 − 0.3 601.4 − 0.3 377.4 − 0.1 978.8 − 0.2 1,477.9 1.6 156.9 3.3 10.6
2004          Q3 227.2 0.4 153.8 2.1 93.4 − 0.6 247.2 1.0 359.0 1.6 32.4 5.7 9.0
         Q4 252.7 0.2 165.4 1.8 94.1 − 1.1 259.5 0.8 374.0 2.6 33.8 4.9 9.0
2005          Q1 213.6 − 0.2 141.4 0.4 95.0 − 1.6 236.4 − 0.4 367.6 1.0 52.1 3.1 14.2
         Q2 219.6 − 0.4 142.8 − 0.2 94.5 0.8 237.3 0.2 365.2 2.1 36.7 4.2 10.1         Q3 226.2 − 0.5 152.8 − 0.7 93.9 0.5 246.7 − 0.2 367.3 2.3 33.3 2.8 9.1         Q4 251.9 − 0.3 164.4 − 0.6 94.1 − 0.0 258.5 − 0.4 377.8 1.0 34.8 2.9 9.2
2006          Q1 213.5 − 0.0 139.7 − 1.2 96.0 1.1 235.6 − 0.3 378.6 3.0 52.8 1.4 14.0
         Q2 221.6 0.9 141.6 − 0.9 94.6 0.1 236.2 − 0.5 369.6 1.2 36.3 − 1.2 9.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2006. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (workplace concept)  2 (workplace concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change change 2000 = 100
1995 89.8 4.9 90.2 4.6 94.8 3.1 88.3 6.1 89.5 5.5 89.9 4.1
1996 92.1 2.6 92.3 2.4 96.2 1.4 91.7 3.8 92.1 2.9 92.5 2.91997 93.5 1.5 93.7 1.5 96.3 0.2 93.4 1.9 93.6 1.7 94.2 1.71998 95.3 1.9 95.4 1.8 97.2 0.9 95.1 1.8 95.1 1.7 95.7 1.61999 98.0 2.9 98.1 2.8 98.6 1.4 98.0 3.1 98.0 3.0 97.4 1.8
2000 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 1.5 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.7
2001 102.0 2.0 101.9 1.9 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.7 1.7 102.2 2.22002 104.7 2.7 104.6 2.7 103.2 1.3 105.0 3.2 104.9 3.1 104.3 2.02003 106.8 2.0 106.8 2.1 104.5 1.2 107.7 2.5 107.4 2.4 . .2004 108.1 1.2 108.2 1.3 105.1 0.6 109.7 1.8 109.4 1.9 . .
2005 109.2 1.0 109.5 1.1 105.4 0.2 111.3 1.5 111.0 1.5 . .
2004          Q4 120.9 0.7 121.1 0.9 115.0 − 0.1 121.9 2.0 121.6 2.1 . .
2005          Q1 101.1 1.3 101.4 1.4 99.7 0.3 101.5 1.6 101.3 1.5 . .
         Q2 101.3 1.0 101.6 1.2 102.1 0.5 101.4 1.2 101.2 1.2 . .         Q3 112.5 1.0 112.8 1.2 104.6 0.3 118.6 1.6 118.3 1.6 . .         Q4 121.8 0.7 122.1 0.8 115.0 0.0 123.7 1.5 123.4 1.5 . .
2006          Q1 102.1 0.9 102.5 1.1 99.7 0.0 103.2 1.7 103.3 2.0 . .
         Q2 102.9 1.6 103.4 1.8 102.5 0.4 104.0 2.5 104.1 2.8 . .         Q3 112.8 0.3 113.3 0.5 . . 120.4 1.5 120.5 1.8 . .
2006          Mar 102.2 0.3 102.7 0.5 . . 104.0 0.1 104.1 0.4 . .
         Apr 103.8 2.2 104.3 2.4 . . 103.9 2.6 104.0 2.9 . .
         May 102.7 1.5 103.1 1.7 . . 104.7 3.1 104.8 3.4 . .         June 102.2 1.0 102.7 1.2 . . 103.4 1.9 103.4 2.2 . .
         July 133.6 − 0.4 134.3 − 0.2 . . 154.6 1.6 154.7 1.9 . .
         Aug 102.4 0.9 102.9 1.1 . . 103.5 1.6 103.5 1.9 . .         Sep 102.3 0.6 102.8 0.8 . . 103.2 1.4 103.2 1.7 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. — 2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2006. — 3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
X External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2005 2006
Item 2003 2004 2005 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug
Current account + 32,443 + 49,868 − 23,148 − 12,829 − 12,843 − 7,626 + 10,776 + 2,450 − 3,934A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,036,038 1,128,189 1,220,048 327,390 329,749 341,778 118,123 116,030 107,268
Imports (fob) 929,915 1,022,899 1,165,961 322,445 332,574 335,446 112,905 110,389 111,031
Balance + 106,120 + 105,291 + 54,085 + 4,945 − 2,826 + 6,333 + 5,218 + 5,641 − 3,762
2 Services
Receipts 331,810 362,051 397,286 105,770 96,596 106,619 38,001 39,074 36,919
Expenditure 312,293 333,074 362,531 94,985 91,822 94,520 32,682 33,512 37,665
Balance + 19,516 + 28,977 + 34,754 + 10,784 + 4,773 + 12,098 + 5,319 + 5,562 − 746
3 Income − 37,159 − 27,999 − 43,749 − 12,344 + 1,383 − 10,290 + 4,548 − 1,758 + 7,320
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 82,103 81,898 83,598 22,161 29,620 17,309 6,217 4,564 5,895
Transfers to non-residents 138,139 138,299 151,836 38,377 45,792 33,077 10,527 11,557 12,641
Balance − 56,034 − 56,404 − 68,238 − 16,215 − 16,172 − 15,768 − 4,310 − 6,994 − 6,746
Capital account + 12,942 + 17,457 + 12,515 + 4,690 + 2,010 + 989 + 579 + 721 + 1,095B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 1,263 − 10,913 + 79,142 − 23,744 + 65,740 + 51,118 − 5,901 + 12,259 − 3,933C)
1 Direct investment − 12,264 − 41,192 − 156,286 − 20,210 − 31,540 − 12,146 − 15,885 − 9,378 − 2,838
By resident units abroad − 147,166 − 141,722 − 232,665 − 47,203 − 50,546 − 111,032 − 11,981 − 13,055 − 1,785By non-resident units in the euro area + 134,906 + 100,525 + 76,380 + 26,993 + 19,005 + 98,885 − 3,905 + 3,678 − 1,053
2 Portfolio investment + 74,877 + 60,291 + 155,411 − 49,137 + 22,857 + 98,890 + 60,483 + 1,018 − 15,490
By resident units abroad − 276,413 − 338,069 − 442,730 − 118,270 − 194,243 − 40,973 − 1,531 − 40,002 − 23,369
Equity − 78,687 − 103,432 − 140,577 − 58,712 − 97,069 + 19,144 + 5,767 − 5,959 − 9,761Bonds and notes − 175,711 − 177,693 − 286,808 − 64,017 − 89,943 − 49,131 − 9,608 − 14,267 − 16,934
Money market instruments − 22,016 − 56,942 − 15,345 + 4,458 − 7,229 − 10,985 + 2,310 − 19,776 + 3,327
By non-resident units in the euro area + 351,289 + 398,360 + 598,140 + 69,132 + 217,099 + 139,862 + 62,014 + 41,019 + 7,879
Equity + 110,250 + 128,058 + 279,474 + 62,549 + 121,235 + 35,451 + 55,092 + 45,545 − 2,847
Bonds and notes + 198,855 + 254,948 + 255,771 + 26,420 + 80,841 + 115,407 + 23,495 + 629 + 7,398
Money market instruments + 42,183 + 15,351 + 62,892 − 19,838 + 15,024 − 10,995 − 16,573 − 5,155 + 3,328
3 Financial derivatives − 13,009 − 4,986 − 15,245 − 8,813 − 8,512 − 1,711 + 1,925 + 1,758 − 3,853
4 Other investment − 79,085 − 37,545 + 76,491 + 45,642 + 76,803 − 32,514 − 53,838 + 19,649 + 19,077
Eurosystem + 9,147 + 6,771 + 4,928 − 4,215 + 3,289 + 3,084 − 695 + 826 − 1,268
General government − 3,808 − 5,902 + 2,622 − 4,380 + 3,989 − 10,844 − 1,746 + 8,855 − 15
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 17,810 − 12,570 + 91,743 + 39,582 + 85,783 − 47,475 − 60,978 + 21,594 + 26,388
Long-term + 1,553 − 23,755 − 49,034 − 34,483 − 434 − 10,297 − 8,672 − 5,494 − 1,913Short-term − 19,363 + 11,189 + 140,777 + 74,065 + 86,216 − 37,178 − 52,305 + 27,089 + 28,301
Other sectors − 66,613 − 25,848 − 22,798 + 14,655 − 16,258 + 22,720 + 9,581 − 11,626 − 6,029
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 28,217 + 12,522 + 18,768 + 8,774 + 6,133 − 1,401 + 1,414 − 788 − 829
Errors and omissions − 44,124 − 56,414 − 68,510 + 31,883 − 54,910 − 44,481 − 5,453 − 15,431 + 6,772D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
67*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
X External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  
1,2 items  3,4 Services  5 Income transfers assets Total  6 value  7 Omissions
DM million
1992 − 35,438 + 33,656 − 1,426 − 44,983 + 28,481 − 51,167 − 1,963 + 16,574 − 52,888 + 20,827
1993 − 31,450 + 60,304 − 3,217 − 52,549 + 19,095 − 55,083 − 1,915 + 43,448 + 22,795 − 10,0821994 − 49,418 + 71,762 − 1,318 − 62,803 + 2,393 − 59,451 − 2,637 + 60,708 + 2,846 − 8,653
1995 − 42,363 + 85,303 − 4,294 − 63,985 − 3,975 − 55,413 − 3,845 + 50,117 − 10,355 − 3,909
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 791997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,6131998 − 28,695 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,2942001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,7262000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,7752001 + 425 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,7572002 + 43,375 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,328 − 18,022 − 27,511 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,7162003 + 40,291 + 129,921 − 11,149 − 34,274 − 15,925 − 28,282 + 312 − 48,054 + 445 + 7,451
2004 + 81,925 + 156,096 − 15,243 − 31,254 + 635 − 28,309 + 430 − 114,695 + 1,470 + 32,340
2005 + 92,645 + 160,554 − 20,148 − 27,484 + 8,643 − 28,921 − 1,268 − 103,765 + 2,182 + 12,388
2003          Q4 + 15,078 + 31,815 − 2,994 − 4,886 − 2,571 − 6,285 − 16 − 27,506 + 1,186 + 12,444
2004          Q1 + 24,233 + 41,359 − 3,325 − 6,993 − 1,151 − 5,656 + 280 + 482 + 205 − 24,996
         Q2 + 24,091 + 43,303 − 3,510 − 5,945 − 2,401 − 7,357 + 177 − 61,906 − 339 + 37,638         Q3 + 13,814 + 36,436 − 4,269 − 11,476 + 1,555 − 8,432 + 191 − 23,665 + 1,568 + 9,660         Q4 + 19,787 + 34,998 − 4,139 − 6,841 + 2,632 − 6,863 − 218 − 29,606 + 37 + 10,037
2005          Q1 + 29,191 + 43,229 − 4,421 − 5,405 + 3,135 − 7,348 − 1,491 − 22,212 − 181 − 5,487
         Q2 + 23,419 + 41,543 − 4,677 − 5,755 − 1,307 − 6,386 + 107 − 24,952 + 1,230 + 1,426         Q3 + 19,505 + 41,059 − 5,182 − 12,038 + 3,294 − 7,628 + 60 − 15,553 − 783 − 4,012         Q4 + 20,530 + 34,723 − 5,868 − 4,287 + 3,520 − 7,558 + 57 − 41,048 + 1,916 + 20,461
2006          Q1 + 26,486 + 39,887 − 4,657 − 5,983 + 3,276 − 6,037 + 153 − 40,869 + 1,082 + 14,230
         Q2 + 21,622 + 37,556 − 4,872 − 4,111 − 2,113 − 4,837 + 13 − 52,327 + 367 + 30,692         Q3  
p + 19,075 + 40,051 − 5,212 − 11,441 + 3,204 − 7,527 − 242 − 5,753 + 844 − 13,080
2004          Apr + 7,716 + 14,371 − 1,068 − 2,189 − 1,610 − 1,788 + 84 − 40,093 − 628 + 32,293         May + 7,634 + 14,140 − 1,223 − 1,409 − 1,232 − 2,642 − 30 − 7,317 + 607 − 287         June + 8,741 + 14,791 − 1,219 − 2,347 + 442 − 2,926 + 123 − 14,496 − 318 + 5,633
         July + 6,300 + 13,572 − 1,722 − 2,426 + 178 − 3,301 + 164 + 2,957 + 847 − 9,421
         Aug + 2,543 + 10,917 − 1,411 − 4,865 + 300 − 2,398 + 80 − 7,626 + 517 + 5,003         Sep + 4,972 + 11,947 − 1,135 − 4,184 + 1,078 − 2,733 − 52 − 18,996 + 204 + 14,077
         Oct + 6,360 + 12,387 − 1,438 − 2,820 + 709 − 2,478 − 22 − 1,620 + 839 − 4,718
         Nov + 7,293 + 11,763 − 1,336 − 1,592 + 906 − 2,448 − 186 − 19,467 − 182 + 12,360         Dec + 6,134 + 10,848 − 1,365 − 2,429 + 1,017 − 1,938 − 10 − 8,520 − 621 + 2,396
2005          Jan + 7,800 + 13,333 − 1,621 − 1,857 + 581 − 2,637 − 1,221 + 12,632 − 353 − 19,211
         Feb + 9,406 + 13,571 − 1,372 − 1,385 + 963 − 2,372 − 107 − 8,536 + 494 − 763         Mar + 11,985 + 16,325 − 1,428 − 2,163 + 1,591 − 2,340 − 164 − 26,308 − 322 + 14,486
         Apr + 6,307 + 12,719 − 1,474 − 1,737 − 1,809 − 1,392 − 199 − 17,735 + 404 + 11,627
         May + 5,475 + 12,079 − 1,376 − 2,271 − 809 − 2,146 + 272 + 8,006 − 141 − 13,754         June + 11,637 + 16,746 − 1,826 − 1,746 + 1,312 − 2,848 + 34 − 15,223 + 967 + 3,552
         July + 8,341 + 14,466 − 1,662 − 2,913 + 876 − 2,426 + 104 − 5,743 + 324 − 2,702
         Aug + 3,044 + 11,576 − 1,707 − 5,364 + 883 − 2,345 − 86 + 580 + 932 − 3,537         Sep + 8,120 + 15,017 − 1,813 − 3,761 + 1,535 − 2,858 + 42 − 10,389 − 2,039 + 2,227
         Oct + 6,163 + 12,181 − 2,350 − 2,757 + 1,425 − 2,337 + 329 − 7,280 + 207 + 788
         Nov + 8,388 + 13,306 − 1,851 − 1,027 + 1,059 − 3,100 − 108 − 15,291 + 1,059 + 7,011         Dec + 5,980 + 9,236 − 1,668 − 503 + 1,036 − 2,121 − 165 − 18,478 + 650 + 12,663
2006          Jan + 6,254 + 12,583 − 1,714 − 3,043 + 815 − 2,386 + 7 − 11,489 − 26 + 5,227
         Feb + 10,986 + 12,951 − 1,217 − 924 + 1,552 − 1,376 + 283 − 15,867 + 1,534 + 4,599         Mar + 9,246 + 14,354 − 1,726 − 2,016 + 910 − 2,274 − 137 − 13,514 − 426 + 4,404
         Apr + 6,982 + 11,235 − 1,489 − 1,067 + 539 − 2,237 − 144 − 9,868 + 1,475 + 3,030
         May + 3,914 + 12,971 − 1,577 − 1,618 − 4,753 − 1,109 − 282 − 13,147 − 1,067 + 9,515         June + 10,727 + 13,350 − 1,806 − 1,426 + 2,100 − 1,491 + 439 − 29,312 − 41 + 18,147
         July + 7,170 + 13,193 − 1,916 − 2,294 + 785 − 2,598 − 228 + 6,852 − 332 − 13,794
         Aug + 2,469 + 11,223 − 1,575 − 5,670 + 764 − 2,273 + 146 − 10,535 + 698 + 7,921         Sep  
p + 9,437 + 15,635 − 1,720 − 3,478 + 1,656 − 2,656 − 160 − 2,070 + 478 − 7,207
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, goods returned and value of goods for repair. — 4See footnote 2. —
exports fob. — 2From January 1993, including additional estimates for 5Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are import figure. — 6Financial account balance including change in reserve
included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. — assets. Capital exports: − . — 7 Increase: − . 
3Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
68*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
X External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2006
Country / group of countries  2003  2004  2005 Jan / Aug May Jun Jul Aug Sep  p 
All countries  1 Exports 664,455 731,544 786,186 573,927 72,567 73,449 73,058 69,362 4 79,553
Imports 534,534 575,448 625,632 472,068 59,596 60,099 59,865 58,139 63,918
Balance + 129,921 + 156,096 + 160,554 + 101,859 +12,971 +13,350 +13,193 +11,223 4 +15,635
I Exports 490,672 541,395 581,549 425,809 54,387 55,347 53,736 50,370 ...European countries
Imports 384,939 408,698 445,391 333,821 42,595 43,391 42,288 40,072 ...Balance + 105,733 + 132,697 + 136,157 + 91,988 +11,792 +11,956 +11,448 +10,298 ...
Exports 426,342 466,326 498,556 364,194 46,635 47,478 45,413 42,281 ... 1 EU member states (25)
Imports 324,043 342,636 368,831 270,993 34,533 35,518 34,590 32,058 ...
Balance + 102,299 + 123,691 + 129,725 + 93,201 +12,102 +11,960 +10,823 +10,223 ...
Memo item
Exports 369,776 404,770 430,995 310,874 39,684 40,455 38,640 35,470 ...  EU member states (15)
Imports 266,404 285,049 309,453 225,873 28,802 29,824 28,689 26,342 ...Balance + 103,372 + 119,720 + 121,542 + 85,001 +10,882 +10,631 + 9,951 + 9,128 ...
Euro-area Exports 288,668 317,696 339,752 245,966 31,494 32,205 30,609 27,377 ...countries Imports 215,705 230,717 249,162 182,750 23,208 24,395 23,087 21,263 ...
Balance + 72,963 + 86,979 + 90,590 + 63,216 + 8,286 + 7,810 + 7,522 + 6,115 ...
of which
Austria Exports 35,857 40,244 42,533 31,592 4,035 4,084 4,143 3,854 ...
Imports 21,453 24,020 25,292 19,012 2,550 2,458 2,519 2,215 ...Balance + 14,404 + 16,224 + 17,241 + 12,581 + 1,485 + 1,626 + 1,624 + 1,639 ...
Belgium and Exports 38,413 43,992 47,749 35,365 4,654 4,719 4,151 4,166 ...Luxembourg Imports 26,132 28,818 33,687 25,044 3,254 3,362 3,330 3,028 ...
Balance + 12,282 + 15,173 + 14,062 + 10,321 + 1,400 + 1,357 + 821 + 1,138 ...
France Exports 69,025 74,360 79,871 56,153 7,156 7,380 6,823 5,986 ...
Imports 48,545 51,535 54,627 40,382 5,013 5,781 4,881 4,366 ...Balance + 20,480 + 22,825 + 25,244 + 15,772 + 2,143 + 1,600 + 1,942 + 1,620 ...
Italy Exports 48,414 51,479 54,374 39,263 5,043 5,279 5,050 3,822 ...
Imports 34,259 35,676 35,589 25,818 3,312 3,400 3,518 2,978 ...Balance + 14,156 + 15,803 + 18,785 + 13,445 + 1,731 + 1,879 + 1,533 + 844 ...
Netherlands Exports 42,219 46,730 47,799 36,589 4,656 4,501 4,604 4,477 ...
Imports 42,301 46,204 53,371 39,366 4,874 4,898 4,873 4,905 ...Balance − 83 + 526 − 5,573 − 2,777 − 217 − 397 − 269 − 428 ...
Spain Exports 32,364 36,249 40,395 27,446 3,572 3,769 3,495 2,890 ...
Imports 16,518 17,426 17,985 12,576 1,586 1,697 1,614 1,310 ...Balance + 15,846 + 18,823 + 22,410 + 14,870 + 1,986 + 2,072 + 1,882 + 1,580 ...
Other EU member Exports 137,674 148,630 158,804 118,228 15,141 15,273 14,804 14,904 ...states Imports 108,337 111,919 119,669 88,243 11,325 11,123 11,503 10,796 ...
Balance + 29,336 + 36,711 + 39,135 + 29,986 + 3,816 + 4,150 + 3,301 + 4,108 ...
of which
United Exports 55,597 59,986 61,681 43,851 5,403 5,502 5,624 5,437 ...Kingdom Imports 31,712 34,466 39,414 28,346 3,655 3,631 3,703 3,366 ...
Balance + 23,885 + 25,520 + 22,268 + 15,505 + 1,748 + 1,871 + 1,921 + 2,071 ...
Exports 64,331 75,069 82,993 61,615 7,752 7,869 8,323 8,089 ... 2 Other European
Imports 60,897 66,062 76,561 62,828 8,061 7,873 7,699 8,013 ... countries
Balance + 3,434 + 9,007 + 6,432 − 1,213 − 310 − 4 + 625 + 76 ...
II Exports 172,329 188,782 203,210 147,136 17,974 17,925 19,241 18,905 ...Non-European
Imports 148,895 166,132 179,603 137,806 16,947 16,654 17,523 18,010 ... countries
Balance + 23,434 + 22,650 + 23,608 + 9,329 + 1,027 + 1,271 + 1,718 + 895 ...Exports 12,072 13,785 14,785 10,419 1,361 1,246 1,398 1,350 ... 1 Africa
Imports 10,239 11,092 13,208 10,595 1,375 1,228 1,410 1,378 ...
Balance + 1,832 + 2,694 + 1,577 − 177 − 14 + 18 − 13 − 28 ...
Exports 79,629 84,694 91,970 66,046 8,082 8,256 8,521 7,934 ... 2 America
Imports 51,948 54,679 57,443 45,897 5,658 5,716 5,980 6,394 ...
Balance + 27,681 + 30,016 + 34,527 + 20,149 + 2,424 + 2,540 + 2,541 + 1,540 ...
of which
Exports 61,654 64,860 69,311 49,721 6,140 6,179 6,500 5,891 ... United States
Imports 39,231 40,709 41,342 31,496 3,988 3,989 3,966 4,101 ...Balance + 22,423 + 24,151 + 27,969 + 18,224 + 2,152 + 2,189 + 2,534 + 1,790 ...
Exports 75,620 84,789 90,608 66,754 8,045 7,958 8,806 9,083 ... 3 Asia
Imports 84,783 98,177 106,882 79,639 9,715 9,526 9,870 9,989 ...
Balance − 9,162 − 13,388 − 16,275 − 12,884 − 1,670 − 1,568 − 1,064 − 906 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 15,511 17,357 20,478 14,450 1,787 1,697 1,950 1,933 ...
Imports 4,469 4,398 4,967 4,022 490 660 608 492 ...Balance + 11,043 + 12,959 + 15,512 + 10,428 + 1,296 + 1,037 + 1,342 + 1,441 ...
Japan Exports 11,889 12,719 13,330 8,872 992 1,020 1,178 1,081 ...
Imports 19,684 21,583 21,435 15,451 1,826 1,942 1,940 1,881 ...Balance − 7,795 − 8,865 − 8,104 − 6,579 − 834 − 922 − 762 − 800 ...
Exports 18,265 20,992 21,280 16,902 2,023 2,107 2,350 2,445 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 25,681 32,791 39,891 30,243 3,630 3,561 3,740 3,815 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 7,417 − 11,800 − 18,611 − 13,342 − 1,607 − 1,454 − 1,389 − 1,370 ...
Exports 5,008 5,513 5,847 3,917 485 465 516 537 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 1,925 2,184 2,069 1,675 198 184 262 248 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,083 + 3,329 + 3,778 + 2,242 + 287 + 281 + 254 + 289 ...
Memo item
Exports 24,515 26,838 27,542 19,765 2,403 2,373 2,499 2,676 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 27,119 30,012 30,596 21,833 2,700 2,463 2,572 2,795 ... South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 2,603 − 3,174 − 3,054 − 2,068 − 297 − 89 − 73 − 120 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thai-
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other land. 4 Positively influenced by later reports. 
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. —
69*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
X External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2001 − 49,862 − 37,821 + 4,254 + 1,080 − 2,431 + 3,488 − 18,433 − 2,544 − 591 − 1,817 − 9,115
2002 − 35,328 − 35,154 + 2,789 + 1,424 − 1,549 + 5,237 − 8,075 − 2,073 + 506 − 1,418 − 16,6032003 − 34,274 − 36,761 + 1,791 + 1,365 − 748 + 5,088 − 5,009 − 1,836 + 1,485 − 1,241 − 14,6842004 − 31,254 − 34,813 + 3,885 + 1,316 − 480 + 5,349 − 6,511 − 1,364 + 973 − 940 + 1,5752005 − 27,484 − 34,957 + 6,358 + 1,629 + 114 + 3,592 − 4,221 − 1,701 + 832 − 1,618 + 10,262
2005          Q1 − 5,405 − 6,222 + 1,014 + 411 + 1,027 + 1,024 − 2,660 − 334 + 124 + 223 + 2,912
         Q2 − 5,755 − 8,045 + 1,465 + 494 − 246 + 833 − 256 − 398 + 107 − 487 − 819         Q3 − 12,038 − 14,207 + 1,830 + 283 − 323 + 853 − 473 − 420 + 87 − 972 + 4,266         Q4 − 4,287 − 6,482 + 2,049 + 442 − 344 + 882 − 833 − 549 + 514 − 382 + 3,902
2006          Q1 − 5,983 − 6,382 + 1,006 + 451 − 521 + 730 − 1,268 − 414 − 34 + 179 + 3,097
         Q2 − 4,111 − 7,976 + 1,554 + 466 − 229 + 1,016 + 1,058 − 425 + 327 − 461 − 1,653         Q3 − 11,441 − 13,841 + 1,433 + 399 − 584 + 824 + 327 − 427 + 176 − 1,017 + 4,221
2005          Nov − 1,027 − 1,594 + 728 + 127 − 57 + 229 − 460 − 147 + 251 − 141 + 1,201
         Dec − 503 − 948 + 647 + 170 + 22 + 402 − 795 − 258 + 227 − 93 + 1,128
2006          Jan − 3,043 − 2,379 + 311 + 176 − 386 + 185 − 950 − 153 − 103 + 60 + 755
         Feb − 924 − 1,626 + 413 + 162 + 10 + 246 − 131 − 114 + 90 + 60 + 1,492         Mar − 2,016 − 2,377 + 282 + 113 − 145 + 299 − 188 − 146 − 21 + 60 + 850
         Apr − 1,067 − 2,633 + 542 + 88 − 225 + 375 + 786 − 110 + 121 − 146 + 685
         May − 1,618 − 2,637 + 632 + 291 − 33 + 289 − 160 − 175 + 130 − 169 − 4,584         June − 1,426 − 2,706 + 380 + 86 + 29 + 353 + 431 − 140 + 76 − 146 + 2,246
         July − 2,294 − 3,470 + 684 + 111 − 408 + 252 + 536 − 123 + 91 − 341 + 1,126
         Aug − 5,670 − 5,833 + 514 + 121 − 112 + 270 − 629 − 144 + 66 − 341 + 1,104         Sep − 3,478 − 4,538 + 235 + 167 − 64 + 302 + 420 − 159 + 20 − 335 + 1,991
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2001 − 26,856 − 16,367 − 14,257 − 12,587 − 2,110 − 10,489 − 3,520 − 6,969 − 387 − 1,361 + 974
2002 − 27,511 − 15,710 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 2,665 − 11,801 − 3,470 − 8,331 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,2052003 − 28,282 − 18,277 − 15,428 − 13,731 − 2,849 − 10,005 − 3,332 − 6,672 + 312 − 1,238 + 1,5502004 − 28,309 − 17,128 − 14,307 − 12,730 − 2,821 − 11,180 − 3,180 − 8,000 + 430 − 1,094 + 1,5242005 − 28,921 − 17,907 − 16,253 − 14,725 − 1,654 − 11,014 − 2,926 − 8,088 − 1,268 − 3,419 + 2,151
2005          Q1 − 7,348 − 4,671 − 3,739 − 3,194 − 932 − 2,678 − 732 − 1,946 − 1,491 − 2,038 + 547
         Q2 − 6,386 − 3,253 − 3,762 − 3,322 + 509 − 3,134 − 732 − 2,402 + 107 − 315 + 422         Q3 − 7,628 − 4,927 − 4,457 − 4,138 − 470 − 2,702 − 732 − 1,970 + 60 − 331 + 391         Q4 − 7,558 − 5,057 − 4,296 − 4,071 − 762 − 2,501 − 732 − 1,769 + 57 − 734 + 791
2006          Q1 − 6,037 − 3,479 − 2,934 − 2,433 − 545 − 2,558 − 732 − 1,826 + 153 − 310 + 463
         Q2 − 4,837 − 1,762 − 3,575 − 3,234 + 1,813 − 3,075 − 732 − 2,343 + 13 − 663 + 676         Q3 − 7,527 − 5,014 − 4,706 − 4,519 − 307 − 2,513 − 732 − 1,782 − 242 − 421 + 179
2005          Nov − 3,100 − 2,153 − 1,846 − 1,757 − 307 − 947 − 244 − 703 − 108 − 104 − 4
         Dec − 2,121 − 1,465 − 1,393 − 1,317 − 72 − 656 − 244 − 412 − 165 − 521 + 356
2006          Jan − 2,386 − 1,555 − 1,402 − 1,143 − 152 − 832 − 244 − 588 + 7 − 81 + 88
         Feb − 1,376 − 538 − 156 + 22 − 381 − 839 − 244 − 595 + 283 − 77 + 359         Mar − 2,274 − 1,387 − 1,376 − 1,313 − 11 − 887 − 244 − 644 − 137 − 152 + 16
         Apr − 2,237 − 1,327 − 1,480 − 1,375 + 152 − 910 − 244 − 666 − 144 − 80 − 64
         May − 1,109 + 82 − 1,480 − 1,385 + 1,562 − 1,191 − 244 − 947 − 282 − 137 − 145         June − 1,491 − 517 − 615 − 474 + 98 − 974 − 244 − 730 + 439 − 446 + 885
         July − 2,598 − 1,735 − 1,576 − 1,476 − 158 − 864 − 244 − 620 − 228 − 206 − 23
         Aug − 2,273 − 1,395 − 1,258 − 1,204 − 136 − 878 − 244 − 634 + 146 − 107 + 253         Sep − 2,656 − 1,884 − 1,872 − 1,838 − 13 − 771 − 244 − 527 − 160 − 108 − 52
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
X External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2005 2006
Item 2003 2004 2005 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 203,369 − 260,875 − 371,910 − 43,487 − 167,991 − 92,573 − 59,430 + 16,017 − 29,454 − 45,994
1 Direct investment  1 − 5,470 − 1,516 − 36,695 + 4,008 − 16,070 − 10,288 − 10,188 − 4,698 + 3,077 − 8,566
Equity capital − 33,417 + 17,642 − 16,779 − 3,646 − 6,493 − 10,069 − 14,271 − 1,823 − 364 − 12,084
Reinvested earnings  2 + 3,784 − 5,605 − 9,715 − 2,449 − 3,182 − 1,727 − 3,377 − 1,108 − 1,571 − 697
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors + 24,163 − 13,553 − 10,201 + 10,103 − 6,394 + 1,508 + 7,461 − 1,767 + 5,012 + 4,216
2 Portfolio investment − 41,720 − 110,592 − 210,891 − 59,927 − 62,144 − 30,427 − 18,987 + 490 − 1,719 − 17,758
Shares 3 + 4,468 + 3,520 − 22,884 − 20,584 − 1,220 + 11,279 − 1,873 + 7,137 − 4,029 − 4,980
Mutual fund shares  4 − 2,795 − 10,933 − 39,864 − 5,260 − 18,413 + 2,664 − 1,147 − 492 − 208 − 447
Bonds and notes  5 − 53,224 − 90,734 − 143,604 − 32,630 − 42,262 − 36,382 − 15,426 − 4,382 + 2,276 − 13,320
Money market instruments + 9,831 − 12,445 − 4,540 − 1,454 − 250 − 7,988 − 542 − 1,773 + 243 + 989
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 1,901 − 5,412 − 4,697 − 3,159 − 5,457 + 2,001 − 194 − 391 − 731 + 928
4 Other investment − 154,722 − 144,826 − 121,810 + 13,676 − 85,401 − 54,226 − 30,905 + 20,949 − 30,778 − 21,076
MFIs  7,8 − 122,352 − 121,833 − 85,781 + 37,903 − 107,125 − 56,824 + 889 + 25,822 + 1,089 − 26,022
Long-term − 32,602 + 5,854 − 69,977 − 16,496 − 15,280 − 17,094 − 14,278 − 3,221 − 3,247 − 7,811
Short-term − 89,750 − 127,687 − 15,804 + 54,399 − 91,845 − 39,731 + 15,167 + 29,043 + 4,336 − 18,212
Enterprises and households − 33,329 − 22,284 − 17,112 + 6,087 − 13,003 + 1,341 − 5,692 + 4,858 − 5,908 − 4,642
Long-term − 4,920 − 7,482 − 8,924 − 2,085 − 3,220 − 2,825 − 6,152 − 1,538 − 3,125 − 1,489
Short-term  7 − 28,409 − 14,802 − 8,188 + 8,173 − 9,783 + 4,166 + 460 + 6,396 − 2,783 − 3,153
General government + 728 + 2,143 + 3,156 − 7,232 + 7,438 − 13,165 + 1,031 + 1,001 − 873 + 903
Long-term + 156 + 49 + 7,695 + 179 + 244 + 250 + 6,533 + 166 − 61 + 6,428Short-term  
7 + 572 + 2,094 − 4,539 − 7,412 + 7,194 − 13,415 − 5,502 + 835 − 812 − 5,525
Bundesbank + 230 − 2,851 − 22,073 − 23,082 + 27,288 + 14,422 − 27,133 − 10,732 − 25,087 + 8,686
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) + 445 + 1,470 + 2,182 + 1,916 + 1,082 + 367 + 844 − 332 + 698 + 478
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 155,315 + 146,180 + 268,145 + 2,439 + 127,121 + 40,246 + 53,677 − 9,165 + 18,918 + 43,923
1 Direct investment  1 + 25,873 − 12,172 + 26,264 + 16,472 + 297 + 5,813 + 3,911 − 2,849 + 1,169 + 5,591
Equity capital + 44,233 + 27,493 + 12,103 + 4,714 − 487 + 1,370 + 2,218 − 664 + 2,205 + 677Reinvested earnings  
2 − 3,163 + 677 + 6,530 + 2,033 + 1,789 + 946 + 2,196 − 300 + 1,298 + 1,199
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors − 15,197 − 40,343 + 7,632 + 9,725 − 1,006 + 3,496 − 503 − 1,885 − 2,334 + 3,715
2 Portfolio investment + 112,629 + 120,068 + 196,987 + 15,039 + 60,906 + 20,849 + 27,029 + 17,941 + 3,748 + 5,339
Shares  3 + 23,093 − 12,763 + 40,030 + 140 + 656 + 8,550 + 6,436 + 465 + 4,258 + 1,713
Mutual fund shares − 1,757 + 4,671 + 932 − 1,903 + 4,976 + 1,509 + 1,327 + 637 + 507 + 183Bonds and notes  
5 + 69,628 + 142,689 + 158,690 + 24,663 + 45,965 + 8,177 + 23,146 + 18,651 − 2,964 + 7,459
Money market instruments + 21,665 − 14,529 − 2,665 − 7,862 + 9,308 + 2,612 − 3,880 − 1,811 + 1,947 − 4,016
3 Other investment + 16,813 + 38,285 + 44,893 − 29,072 + 65,919 + 13,585 + 22,737 − 24,257 + 14,002 + 32,993
MFIs  7,8 + 10,708 + 32,337 + 22,455 − 27,316 + 58,864 + 833 + 12,142 − 27,575 + 14,390 + 25,327
Long-term − 5,964 − 10,083 − 9,830 − 11,354 − 2,988 + 28 − 950 + 523 − 2,314 + 841Short-term + 16,672 + 42,421 + 32,285 − 15,962 + 61,852 + 805 + 13,091 − 28,098 + 16,704 + 24,486
Enterprises and households + 429 + 11,057 + 20,803 − 1,413 + 9,842 + 15,119 + 6,573 + 1,561 − 778 + 5,790
Long-term − 297 + 7,810 + 7,836 − 3,296 + 79 + 9,316 + 2,911 + 673 + 628 + 1,610Short-term  
7 + 726 + 3,247 + 12,967 + 1,882 + 9,763 + 5,803 + 3,662 + 887 − 1,406 + 4,181
General government + 3,693 − 2,658 + 3,740 + 1,049 − 2,850 − 1,980 + 4,873 + 1,399 + 1,186 + 2,288
Long-term + 4,872 − 1,425 + 2,818 − 381 − 1,264 − 329 + 328 + 470 − 132 − 10Short-term  
7 − 1,179 − 1,233 + 922 + 1,430 − 1,586 − 1,651 + 4,545 + 929 + 1,317 + 2,298
Bundesbank + 1,983 − 2,451 − 2,105 − 1,391 + 63 − 387 − 850 + 358 − 795 − 412
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 48,054 − 114,695 − 103,765 − 41,048 − 40,869 − 52,327 − 5,753 + 6,852 − 10,535 − 2,070
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
71*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
X External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,8711996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2005          May 107,063 76,431 37,282 6,340 32,809 350 29,451 831 6,292 100,771
         June 90,055 78,700 39,816 5,830 33,054 350 10,141 864 5,822 84,232
         July 90,752 77,205 38,927 5,007 33,270 350 12,291 907 6,491 84,261
         Aug 109,966 76,342 39,121 4,990 32,231 350 32,397 878 5,456 104,511         Sep 103,805 82,825 43,325 4,994 34,506 350 19,747 883 7,580 96,225
         Oct 111,515 82,506 43,325 4,979 34,202 350 27,777 882 7,374 104,141
         Nov 127,813 85,143 46,240 5,012 33,890 350 41,420 901 6,411 121,403         Dec 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006          Jan 104,778 89,064 51,820 4,477 32,766 350 14,499 865 6,307 98,471
         Feb 109,677 88,029 51,646 3,829 32,554 350 20,450 847 5,663 104,013         Mar 105,884 89,157 53,173 3,755 32,229 350 15,543 834 6,286 99,598
         Apr 100,233 89,433 56,106 3,685 29,643 350 9,606 844 4,632 95,601
         May 120,684 89,520 55,979 3,356 30,184 350 29,950 865 6,070 114,614         June 88,241 85,905 51,983 3,639 30,284 350 1,121 866 5,839 82,402
         July 102,264 89,167 54,918 3,465 30,784 350 11,852 894 6,183 96,081
         Aug 124,938 86,736 53,253 3,501 29,982 350 36,940 912 5,374 119,564         Sep 115,371 85,854 52,302 3,440 30,111 350 28,254 913 4,980 110,391
         Oct 110,016 85,341 52,080 3,097 30,164 350 23,414 912 5,043 104,973
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
72*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
X External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2002  3 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003 362,099 86,627 275,472 159,653 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2004 377,540 98,632 278,908 159,764 119,144 112,342 6,802 506,434 50,211 456,223 361,111 95,112 63,762 31,3502005 409,493 97,333 312,160 179,738 132,422 125,497 6,925 548,107 65,557 482,550 375,114 107,436 73,270 34,166
2006          Apr  
r 442,254 107,018 335,236 197,825 137,411 129,853 7,558 567,258 76,147 491,111 382,446 108,665 70,879 37,786
         May  r 441,393 108,835 332,558 194,397 138,161 130,536 7,625 579,341 76,630 502,711 393,902 108,809 70,352 38,457
         June  r 441,999 109,025 332,974 192,017 140,957 133,422 7,535 592,303 86,136 506,167 394,466 111,701 72,827 38,874
         July  r 435,078 104,969 330,109 192,538 137,571 129,774 7,797 589,802 88,028 501,774 391,399 110,375 69,899 40,476
         Aug  r 439,317 113,127 326,190 191,936 134,254 126,493 7,761 590,614 91,409 499,205 390,705 108,500 67,259 41,241
         Sep 450,057 117,373 332,684 191,992 140,692 133,037 7,655 609,715 95,945 513,770 399,433 114,337 73,094 41,243
Industrial countries 1
 
2002  3 278,074 62,861 215,213 133,509 81,704 75,996 5,708 493,155 55,770 437,385 372,464 64,921 50,731 14,190
2003 310,454 85,390 225,064 144,980 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,220
2004 335,809 97,485 238,324 148,649 89,675 84,903 4,772 468,592 48,304 420,288 349,293 70,995 53,480 17,5152005 362,704 95,847 266,857 167,314 99,543 94,278 5,265 508,106 63,924 444,182 364,680 79,502 60,907 18,595
2006          Apr  
r 393,119 105,455 287,664 184,169 103,495 97,579 5,916 525,971 74,495 451,476 371,756 79,720 59,261 20,459
         May  r 391,394 107,282 284,112 180,445 103,667 97,669 5,998 537,109 74,688 462,421 383,199 79,222 58,711 20,511
         June  r 390,600 107,503 283,097 177,263 105,834 99,856 5,978 547,470 84,219 463,251 381,615 81,636 61,052 20,584
         July  r 383,669 103,302 280,367 177,640 102,727 96,498 6,229 544,587 86,112 458,475 378,713 79,762 58,354 21,408
         Aug  r 387,507 111,112 276,395 176,877 99,518 93,338 6,180 544,742 89,504 455,238 378,282 76,956 55,313 21,643
         Sep 397,650 115,406 282,244 176,743 105,501 99,468 6,033 561,522 94,158 467,364 385,545 81,819 60,326 21,493
EU member states 1
 
2002  3 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003 230,673 81,430 149,243 94,092 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,642
2004 259,480 92,867 166,613 101,254 65,359 61,563 3,796 376,461 43,838 332,623 284,173 48,450 36,494 11,9562005 270,808 91,882 178,926 108,523 70,403 66,156 4,247 414,377 60,186 354,191 300,022 54,169 41,305 12,864
2006          Apr  
r 301,359 100,688 200,671 126,093 74,578 69,879 4,699 432,891 69,887 363,004 308,131 54,873 40,634 14,239
         May  r 298,392 102,265 196,127 121,895 74,232 69,495 4,737 442,429 70,048 372,381 317,768 54,613 40,288 14,325
         June  r 298,953 101,866 197,087 120,521 76,566 71,842 4,724 453,120 79,494 373,626 317,693 55,933 41,671 14,262
         July  r 292,064 97,952 194,112 119,760 74,352 69,398 4,954 451,885 81,363 370,522 315,491 55,031 40,081 14,950
         Aug  r 298,509 105,795 192,714 120,990 71,724 66,827 4,897 454,389 84,618 369,771 316,943 52,828 37,790 15,038
         Sep 309,519 109,498 200,021 123,430 76,591 71,779 4,812 476,517 88,838 387,679 331,520 56,159 41,236 14,923
of which:  Euro-area member states 
 
2002  3 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,404
2004 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 305,864 28,295 277,569 244,860 32,709 24,258 8,4512005 175,532 59,160 116,372 69,048 47,324 44,369 2,955 332,261 29,443 302,818 268,483 34,335 25,225 9,110
2006          Apr 191,487 65,528 125,959 75,949 50,010 46,779 3,231 344,595 35,781 308,814 274,514 34,300 24,475 9,825
         May 192,803 65,201 127,602 77,835 49,767 46,440 3,327 354,313 36,220 318,093 284,183 33,910 24,038 9,872         June 192,640 64,074 128,566 77,322 51,244 47,949 3,295 356,714 37,658 319,056 284,488 34,568 24,842 9,726
         July 187,653 61,642 126,011 76,753 49,258 45,772 3,486 355,886 38,722 317,164 283,332 33,832 23,846 9,986
         Aug  
r 194,154 68,785 125,369 78,289 47,080 43,679 3,401 360,502 43,335 317,167 284,649 32,518 22,189 10,329
         Sep 200,153 70,425 129,728 79,426 50,302 47,055 3,247 372,489 45,304 327,185 291,709 35,476 25,124 10,352
Emerging economies and developing countries 2
 
2002  3 53,597 956 52,641 15,404 37,237 35,410 1,827 40,268 1,926 38,342 15,386 22,956 11,891 11,065
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,2492004 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,8352005 46,789 1,486 45,303 12,424 32,879 31,219 1,660 40,001 1,633 38,368 10,434 27,934 12,363 15,571
2006          Apr 49,135 1,563 47,572 13,656 33,916 32,274 1,642 41,287 1,652 39,635 10,690 28,945 11,618 17,327
         May 49,999 1,553 48,446 13,952 34,494 32,867 1,627 42,232 1,942 40,290 10,703 29,587 11,641 17,946         June 51,399 1,522 49,877 14,754 35,123 33,566 1,557 44,833 1,917 42,916 12,851 30,065 11,775 18,290
         July 51,409 1,667 49,742 14,898 34,844 33,276 1,568 45,215 1,916 43,299 12,686 30,613 11,545 19,068
         Aug 51,810 2,015 49,795 15,059 34,736 33,155 1,581 45,872 1,905 43,967 12,423 31,544 11,946 19,598         Sep 52,407 1,967 50,440 15,249 35,191 33,569 1,622 48,193 1,787 46,406 13,888 32,518 12,768 19,750
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in 2004, including the new member states: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, E stonia,
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases Slovenia. — 2All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. —
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- 3Change in the reporting population owing to an increase in the
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X.7. — 1From May exemption limit. 
73*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2006
X External sector
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Switzerland Norway Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK GBP SEK CHF NOK CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 2.926  27.421 115.740 25.580 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 2.753  26.912 111.198 25.143 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 2.483  21.248 111.949 23.303 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 2.4816 21.013 118.712 22.982 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 2.2620 20.116 121.240 22.614 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 2.3478 22.434 121.891 23.292 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 2.8410 22.718 119.508 24.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 2.9142 22.128 121.414 23.297 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 0.65874 8.8075 1.6003 8.3104 1.5840 1.6523 2.0145
2000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 0.60948 8.4452 1.5579 8.1129 1.3706 1.5889 2.0288
2001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 0.62187 9.2551 1.5105 8.0484 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 0.62883 9.1611 1.4670 7.5086 1.4838 1.7376 2.03662003 1.1312 130.97 7.4307 0.69199 9.1242 1.5212 8.0033 1.5817 1.7379 1.94382004 1.2439 134.44 7.4399 0.67866 9.1243 1.5438 8.3697 1.6167 1.6905 1.8731
2005 1.2441 136.85 7.4518 0.68380 9.2822 1.5483 8.0092 1.5087 1.6320 1.76602005          Apr 1.2938 138.84 7.4499 0.68293 9.1670 1.5475 8.1763 1.5991 1.6738 1.7967
         May 1.2694 135.37 7.4443 0.68399 9.1931 1.5449 8.0814 1.5942 1.6571 1.7665         June 1.2165 132.22 7.4448 0.66895 9.2628 1.5391 7.8932 1.5111 1.5875 1.7175
         July 1.2037 134.75 7.4584 0.68756 9.4276 1.5578 7.9200 1.4730 1.6002 1.7732
         Aug 1.2292 135.98 7.4596 0.68527 9.3398 1.5528 7.9165 1.4819 1.6144 1.7675         Sep 1.2256 136.06 7.4584 0.67760 9.3342 1.5496 7.8087 1.4452 1.6009 1.7515
         Oct 1.2015 138.05 7.4620 0.68137 9.4223 1.5490 7.8347 1.4149 1.5937 1.7212
         Nov 1.1786 139.59 7.4596 0.67933 9.5614 1.5449 7.8295 1.3944 1.6030 1.7088         Dec 1.1856 140.58 7.4541 0.67922 9.4316 1.5479 7.9737 1.3778 1.5979 1.7072
2006          Jan 1.2103 139.82 7.4613 0.68598 9.3111 1.5494 8.0366 1.4025 1.6152 1.7616
         Feb 1.1938 140.77 7.4641 0.68297 9.3414 1.5580 8.0593 1.3723 1.6102 1.7741         Mar 1.2020 140.96 7.4612 0.68935 9.4017 1.5691 7.9775 1.3919 1.6540 1.8956
         Apr 1.2271 143.59 7.4618 0.69463 9.3346 1.5748 7.8413 1.4052 1.6662 1.9733
         May 1.2770 142.70 7.4565 0.68330 9.3310 1.5564 7.7988 1.4173 1.6715 2.0240         June 1.2650 145.11 7.4566 0.68666 9.2349 1.5601 7.8559 1.4089 1.7104 2.0462
         July 1.2684 146.70 7.4602 0.68782 9.2170 1.5687 7.9386 1.4303 1.6869 2.0551
         Aug 1.2811 148.53 7.4609 0.67669 9.2098 1.5775 7.9920 1.4338 1.6788 2.0220         Sep 1.2727 148.99 7.4601 0.67511 9.2665 1.5841 8.2572 1.4203 1.6839 1.9453
         Oct 1.2611 149.65 7.4555 0.67254 9.2533 1.5898 8.3960 1.4235 1.6733 1.9066
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 2.15 p.m. ECB time. For additional euro reference exchange
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle rates of the ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5,
and end of the month. — 2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- Exchange rate statistics. 
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the euro-area member states, the Deutsche Mark value of
the ECU * and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1As per data from the European exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). — 3Applicable from 1 January
Commission. — 2Up to 1998, reciprocal values of the exchange rates for the 1999. — 4Applicable from 1 January 2001. — 5Deutsche Mark conversion
Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999, euro reference rate. 
74*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2006
X External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo  item Effective nominal exchange rates of
Indicators of the German economy’s selected foreign currencies against the
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  1,2 currencies of 19 industrial countries  1,3
EER-23  4 EER-42  5 19 industrial countries  3 49 countries  6
In real terms
based on the
In real terms unit labour In real termsbased on the In real terms costs of the based on the based on theconsumer based on the national consumer deflators of Pound Japanese
Period yen Nominal prices GDP deflator  7economy  7 Nominal prices total sales  7based on consumer prices US dollar sterling
1999 95.9 95.9 95.5 96.5 96.5 95.8 97.8 98.2 97.8 100.8 102.3 105.1
2000 86.1 86.0 85.3 85.2 87.9 85.8 91.5 92.8 91.2 105.4 105.2 117.9
2001 86.7 86.8 86.3 84.9 90.4 87.1 91.4 93.2 91.5 112.0 103.6 106.72002 89.2 90.4 89.7 88.2 94.8 90.9 92.4 94.2 92.6 110.7 104.2 100.82003 99.9 101.7 100.8 99.2 106.6 101.6 95.8 97.8 97.3 97.7 99.2 99.92004 103.8 105.9 104.4 103.6 111.0 105.4 96.1 99.3 98.9 89.8 103.4 101.7
2005 102.9 105.2 103.2 101.5 109.5 103.5
p 95.0 99.5 97.6 88.7 102.9 99.8
2002          Sep 90.7 92.2 97.2 93.2 94.6 93.5 107.6 104.7 102.5         Oct 91.1 92.5 97.7 93.5 94.6 93.9 108.5 105.0 99.8
         Nov 91.9 93.2 92.7 91.1 98.5 94.0 93.5 94.9 93.9 106.8 104.3 100.8         Dec 92.9 94.2 99.6 95.0 95.4 94.5 106.0 104.0 99.6
2003          Jan 95.3 96.8 102.3 97.6 96.2 95.6 103.0 102.6 100.4
         Feb 96.6 98.2 97.1 95.2 103.7 98.9 94.8 96.8 96.4 102.2 101.2 99.2         Mar 97.4 99.0 104.4 99.5 97.1 96.5 101.4 99.3 99.8
         Apr 97.9 99.6 104.6 99.6 97.2 96.5 101.4 98.7 98.6
         May 101.8 103.6 101.6 99.6 108.5 103.3 96.4 98.7 98.1 96.7 96.9 97.7         June 102.2 104.2 108.8 103.8 98.9 98.4 96.1 98.9 96.3
         July 101.0 102.9 107.2 102.3 98.4 97.5 97.8 98.5 97.3
         Aug 99.8 101.8 101.2 100.0 106.0 101.3 95.8 97.9 96.9 99.1 98.1 98.3         Sep 99.6 101.7 105.9 101.2 97.5 96.9 97.2 98.2 101.1
         Oct 101.3 103.4 108.0 103.0 98.1 97.7 93.3 98.8 103.7
         Nov 101.2 103.3 103.3 101.8 108.0 102.9 96.3 98.1 97.7 93.0 99.5 103.9         Dec 104.2 106.1 111.2 105.8 99.0 99.0 90.6 99.5 102.9
2004          Jan 105.4 107.4 112.5 107.0 99.8 99.7 88.9 101.6 102.9
         Feb 105.3 107.3 105.8 104.6 112.3 106.8 96.9 99.6 99.6 89.3 104.1 102.4         Mar 103.4 105.5 110.2 104.8 99.1 98.7 90.9 104.2 102.1
         Apr 101.6 103.7 108.3 103.1 98.5 97.8 91.8 104.3 104.0
         May 102.4 104.5 102.9 102.1 109.5 104.2 95.4 98.8 98.4 93.4 103.7 100.0         June 102.3 104.3 109.6 104.1 98.4 98.2 91.9 104.9 101.6
         July 102.8 104.9 110.1 104.5 98.8 98.3 90.9 105.0 101.2
         Aug 102.7 104.9 103.2 102.8 109.9 104.5 95.7 99.0 98.4 91.3 104.6 100.5         Sep 103.0 105.2 110.3 104.7 99.1 98.4 90.7 102.8 100.8
         Oct 104.2 106.3 111.5 105.8 99.6 99.0 88.9 101.8 100.8
         Nov 105.6 107.6 105.6 104.9 113.1 107.0 96.4 100.0 99.5 85.4 101.4 102.6         Dec 107.1 109.2 114.4 108.3 100.8 100.2 84.3 102.8 102.0
2005          Jan 105.8 108.0 112.9 106.9 100.3 99.4 85.3 101.7 103.6
         Feb 105.1 107.2 105.5 104.3 111.9 105.8
p 96.4 100.1 98.8 86.1 102.9 102.4
         Mar 106.0 108.2 112.9 106.8 100.4 99.1 85.3 103.0 101.4
         Apr 105.1 107.2 111.9 105.8 99.9 98.5 86.8 104.0 100.4
         May 104.0 106.2 102.9 102.6 110.6 104.7 p 95.2 99.6 98.0 87.8 103.2 102.0
         June 101.2 103.5 107.6 101.9 98.5 96.6 89.6 104.4 102.0
         July 101.7 104.0 108.0 102.2 98.9 96.9 90.7 101.6 99.8
         Aug 102.3 104.6 101.3 100.2 108.7 102.9 p 94.4 99.2 97.2 89.2 102.4 99.9
         Sep 101.8 104.1 108.2 102.4 99.4 97.3 88.8 103.4 99.5
         Oct 101.4 103.6 107.8 101.8 99.2 96.9 90.5 102.7 97.1
         Nov 100.7 102.9 103.0 99.0 106.9 100.8 p 93.9 99.1 96.5 92.3 102.7 95.2
         Dec 100.7 102.9 106.9 100.8 99.2 96.4 91.6 102.9 94.7
2006          Jan 101.4 103.7 107.5 101.4 99.3 96.4 90.0 102.2 96.3
         Feb 100.7 103.0 103.0 98.8 106.6 100.5 p 94.1 99.2 96.1 91.0 102.5 94.9
         Mar 101.5 103.9 107.4 101.3 99.2 96.2 90.8 101.7 95.2
         Apr 102.7 105.1 108.6 102.4 99.7 96.8 89.7 101.5 94.5
         May 103.8 106.1 105.1 100.4 110.3 103.8 p 94.7 99.9 97.4 86.1 103.8 96.7
         June 103.9 106.2 110.9 104.2 99.9 97.6 87.2 103.3 94.7
         July 104.3 106.6 111.0 104.5 100.2 97.9 87.6 103.3 93.8
         Aug 104.4 106.7 ... ... 111.1 104.4 p 95.0 99.9 97.4 87.0 105.4 93.0
         Sep 104.2 106.5 110.9 104.2 100.1 97.5 87.4 105.6 92.4
         Oct 103.7 105.9 110.2 103.5 100.0 97.1 88.4 105.9 91.6
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of United Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these calcula tions
the currency concerned. — 1The method of calculation is consistent with are based on manufactured goods trade between 1999 and 2001 and
the procedure used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of capture third-market effects. Where consumer prices were not yet available,
the euro (see Monthly Bulletin, November 2001, pp 51−65). In contrast to estimates have been used. For details of the methodology, see
footnote 4, the weights used are based on the relevant trade in the period ECB, Monthly Bulletin, September 2004, pp 69−72 and the ECB’s Occasional
from 1995 to 1997. — 2Decline in the figures implies an increase in Paper No 2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website
competitiveness. — 3Euro-area countries as well as Canada, Denmark, (www.ecb.int). — 5ECB calculations. In addition to the countries belonging
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. — to the EER-23 group (see footnote 4), this group also includes the following4ECB calculations based on the weighted averages of the effective countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, India, Indonesia,
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Romania,countries: Australia, Canada, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —Estonia, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Norway, 6Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-42 group except
Poland, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania and Malta. — 7 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X External sector

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006

Overviewof
publications
bytheDeutsche
BundesbankThis overviewprovides information
about selected recent economic andstatisticalpublicationsbytheDeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated,thesepublicationsareavailableinbothEnglishandGerman,inprintedformandontheinternet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-ision.Forasmallfeetocovercosts,afile which is updated monthly andcontains approximately 40,000 timeseries published by the Bundesbankcanbeobtainedonmagnetictapecas-sette or CD-ROM from the DivisionStatistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresseslistedonthereverseofthetitlepage.Selectedtimeseriescanalsobedownloadedfromtheinternet.
AnnualReport
FinancialStabilityReviewMonthlyReport
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2005 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2006 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006

MonthlyReportarticles
December 2005
– Price-setting behaviour in Germany
– The road to the Single Euro Payments Area
January 2006
– Determinants of the current accounts in central
and east European EU member states and therole of German direct investment
– Securities market regulation: international ap-
proaches
February 2006
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2005-06
March 2006
– German balance of payments in 2005– New legal and regulatory framework for the
German securitisation and Pfandbrief market
– A disaggregated framework for analysing
public finances: Germany’s fiscal track record
between 2000 and 2005
April 2006
– Determinants of the term structure of interest
rates – approaches to combining arbitrage-free
models and monetary macroeconomics
– The creation of a single list of eligible collateral
throughout the euro area
May 2006
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2006June 2006
– Investment and financing in 2005– Concentration risk in credit portfolios
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2004
July 2006
– Recent developments in German banks’ lend-
ing to domesticenterprises and households
– State government finances in Germany– Derivatives and their feedback effects on the
spot markets
August 2006
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2006
September 2006
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2005
– German foreign direct investment (FDI) rela-
tionships: recent trends and macroeconomic
effects
– The evolution of labour market-related ex-
penditure
October 2006
– How informative survey data on private sector
inflation expectations are for monetary policy-makers
– Current trends and structural changes in the
publicbond market
November 2006
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2006
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006

StatisticalSupplementstothe
MonthlyReport1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
SpecialPublications
Makro-JqPGAkonometrisches Mehr-LJqPPNnder-Modell,
November 19962
EuropJqPPNische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von WJqPPNhrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
2
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
2
The market for German Federal securities,May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von WJqPPNhrung und Wirtschaft, March 2003
2
Die EuropJqPPNische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und WJqPPNh-rungsunion, April 2005
2
European economic and monetary union,
September 2005
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20062
SpecialStatisticalPublications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200332 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, September 20062,4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20002
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2005,
July 20065
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
2006
6 Ratios from financial statements of German
enterprises 2002 to 2003, December 20055
7 ErlJqPPNuterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis fJqPTPr die
Zahlungsbilanz, February 20052
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republicof Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 International capital links,
April 20061,5
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2006
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20062
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
MonthlyReport
November2006
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available in German only.
3Solely available on the internet, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Stat-
istics”, “External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
4Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.5Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
MonthlyReport
November2006
DiscussionPapers*
Series1
EconomicStudies
28/2006
Empirical Bayesian density forecasting in lowa and
shrinkage for the Monte Carlo era
29/2006
The within-distribution business cycle dynamics ofGerman firms
30/2006
Dependence on external finance: an inherent
industry characteristic?
31/2006
Comovements and heterogeneity in the euro areaanalyzed in a non-stationary dynamicfac tor model
32/2006
Forecasting using a large number of predictors: is
Bayesian regression a valid alternative to principal
components?
33/2006
Real-time forecasting of GDP based on a large fac-
tor model with monthly and quarterly data
34/2006
Macroeconomic fluctuations and bank lending:evidence for Germany and the euro area
35/2006
Fiscal institutions, fiscal policy and sovereign risk
premia
36/2006
Political risk and export promotion: evidence fromGermany
37/2006
Has the export pricing behaviour of German enter-
prises changed? Empirical evidence from Germansectoral export pricesSeries2
BankingandFinancialStudies
06/2006
Banks’ regulatory buffers, liquidity networks and
monetary policy transmission
07/2006
Empirical risk analysis of pension insurance – thecase of Germany
08/2006
The stability of efficiency rankings when risk-preferences and objectives are different
09/2006
Sector concentration in loan portfolios and
economic capital
10/2006
The cost efficiency of German banks: a comparisonof SFA and DEA
Bankinglegislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz JqPTPber das Kreditwesen, February 2001
2
2a Grundsatz I JqPTPber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20012
2b Grundsatz II JqPTPber die LiquiditJqPPNt der Institute,
August 19992
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the internet.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

