MONTHLY REPORT
AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER
2006
Vol 58
No 8

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1Fax +49 69 5601071Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (internet edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 18 August 2006.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on theinternet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in summer 2006 5
Overview 6Global and European setting 10
Consumer price volatility affectedby surging oil prices: The euro areaand the USA compared 18
Monetary policy and banking business 21
Money market management andliquidity needs 22
Financial markets 29
Volatility in the stock market 36
Economic conditions in Germany 39Public finances 51
Developments in the governmentrevenue and expenditure ratio upto 2007 52
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
4Capital market 48*
Public finances in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*External sector 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
5The economic scene
in Germany
in summer 2006

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
6OverviewSharp expansion in German economy
in second quarter
The strong growth in the global economy
continued in the second quarter of 2006. Atthe same time, however, certain risk factorsworsened, thus clouding expectations. Theunexpected further sharp rise in oil prices inthe third quarter could have a certain restrain-ing effect on growth, dampening the priceoutlook worldwide. Moreover, it remains tobe seen how rapidly and to what extent stim-uli from the US economy will tail off in therest of the year. The Japanese economy alsoslowed down considerably in the secondquarter. By contrast, the expansionary forcesin the euro area gained notable ground.
Meanwhile, on the international financial
markets certain investment risks were reclas-sified. This was accompanied by growing un-certainty about economic developments, es-pecially in the United States. This ultimatelyled to massive portfolio shifts away fromshares towards bonds in mid-May. Govern-ment bonds, in particular, benefited from thiswhile corporate bonds became less attractiveby comparison. It is true that the cyclically-induced upward trend in interest rates brieflyregained the upper hand. However, owing tothe intermittently escalating tensions in theMiddle East and increasing fears of a globalslowdown in growth stemming primarilyfrom the US economy, there was another re-versal in interest rate movements in July. Atthe end of the period under review, the yieldon ten-year government bonds in the euroarea was roughly 4%, which was only slightlyhigher than at the end of March. Against thisInternational
setting

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
7setting, the euro exchange rate remained, on
balance, largely unchanged, having appreci-ated significantly in the first few months ofthe year.
Against the backdrop of rising inflationary
risks, the central banks in the key currencyareas maintained their tight monetary policystance. The Governing Council of the ECBalso further curtailed monetary accommoda-tion in two steps during the summer. Follow-ing the interest rate rises in December lastyear and March this year, there were two fur-ther rises – of 25 basis points each – in earlyJune and August. The minimum bid rate onthe main refinancing operations was raised to3% with effect from 9 August. These interestrate adjustments were necessary given theongoing expansionary stance of Europeanmonetary policy and increasing inflationaryrisks. Not only do the persistent rise in energyprices and the planned increases in adminis-tered prices and indirect taxes have a directnegative impact on the general price climate,they also increase the risks of second-roundeffects on wage and price developments,which are particularly worrying from a stabil-ity point of view. Moreover, monetary analysishas been pointing to medium to longer-terminflationary risks for a long time now.
The cyclical upturn in the German economy
has gained considerable momentum sincethe start of the year. According to initial cal-culations by the Federal Statistical Office, inthe second quarter of 2006 overall outputwas almost 1% greater than in the previousthree-month period, and there has been asignificant upward revision of the results forthe two preceding quarters. According to the
information currently available, the Germaneconomy is being driven by exports and, in-creasingly, by domestic demand. Investmentexpenditure evidently grew sharply in the re-porting period. This was particularly so in theconstruction industry, which underwent anextensive catching-up phase followingweather-related stoppages. There was also aperceptible increase in investment in machin-ery and equipment. In view of the ongoingrise in output, which, according to Ifo Insti-tute data, has led to a further marked in-crease in capacity utilisation, capacity expan-sion now plays a greater role in enterprises’investment decisions. Foreign trade, too, islikely to have made another positive contribu-tion to growth, albeit a less marked one thanpreviously. Real exports may have been slight-ly up on the first quarter. Spending by foreignvisitors in connection with the FIFA WorldCup played a role here, especially with regardto travel services. By contrast, according tothe indicators currently available, there hasbeen no further increase in consumption byresidents since the significant rise in the firstthree months of the year. Nevertheless, if thefirst six months of the year are taken as awhole, there is likely to have been a visibleimprovement in private consumption.
The more favourable macroeconomic trend
has since reached the labour market, too. Thenumber of persons in work, which has under-gone significant upward revision since thethird quarter of 2005, increased by more than100,000 to almost 39 million in seasonallyadjusted terms. Although they extend only asfar as May, estimates by the Federal Employ-
Monetary
policy
German
economy
in 2006 Q2Labour market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
8ment Agency suggest that in the second
quarter of 2006 seasonally adjusted employ-ment subject to social security contributionsdid not fall for the first time in over five years.The increase was particularly strong inbusiness-related services, which include la-bour leasing. The declining number of short-time workers and the rising number of job va-cancies likewise point to the emergence of acyclical revival in the labour market. Surveyscarried out among enterprises regarding theirhiring plans also seem to confirm this.
The pay settlements on the labour market in
the second quarter of 2006 were, on aver-age, slightly higher than in 2005 althoughthere was considerable variation from sectorto sector. On an average of all sectors,monthly negotiated wages and salaries in thesecond quarter of 2006 were up by 1.6% onthe corresponding period last year. Thestronger increase compared with the firstquarter is due largely to numerous one-offpayments, which had already been agreed inearlier pay settlements.
External upward pressure on prices has in-
creased again in the past few months. Sea-sonally adjusted German import prices roseby 1.7% in the second quarter following a1.3% increase in the first quarter. Prices forimported energy rose by almost 35% on theyear, and import prices for metal ores wentup by more than 20%. Despite this, the exter-nal upward pressure on prices was, on thewhole, fairly contained even though generalprice developments tended to be less favour-able than in the previous year. After comingto a stillstand at the start of the year,consumer-level price pressures accelerated
again in the second quarter under the influ-ence of rising oil prices. Another reason forthis was the very warm and dry summer wea-ther in June, especially following, as it did, along and extremely cold winter. This pushedup food prices, in particular. After adjustmentfor seasonal variations, the consumer priceindex rose by 0.7% in the second quarter of2006. This was a rise of +2.0% on the year.
Upward risks to future price developments in
Germany have intensified in the wake of fur-ther sharp increases in energy and commod-ity prices. This is compounded by the immi-nent burdens on the general price climate inconnection with the planned VAT increase atthe start of 2007. As the economic expansioncontinues, the pass-through effects will alsoincrease on the demand side even before theincrease comes into effect.
While foreign orders have slowed down some-
what in recent months, industry’s improveddomestic order situation indicates a continu-ation of the expansionary trend in the Germaneconomy. The positive sentiment in the do-mestic economy also points to this. It is truethat the Ifo business climate was reviseddownwards slightly in July in response tolower business expectations. On balance,however, confidence in the German economyremains high.
The decline in business expectations in July
may also be linked to the now certain VAT in-crease: the negative impact expected in thefirst few months of next year – especially bythe wholesale and retail trade – has entered
Negotiated
wages
PricesFurther outlook

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
9the survey’s expectation horizon for the first
time. Indeed, the outlook in the wholesaleand retail sectors is likely to be increasingly in-fluenced by the special effect of the VAT in-crease. Thus, in the remainder of 2006 antici-patory effects on private consumption can beexpected, and these will subsequently be off-set by corresponding shortfalls. However, forthe long-term economic outlook it is moreimportant that a sound basis for consumptionis established as the labour market situationcontinues to improve. Thus, the path of mod-erate wage policy adopted a few years agomust not be abandoned just as the benefitsare beginning to be felt. This applies also, andindeed even more so, in the light of the forth-coming VAT increase.
The ongoing improvement in the order situ-
ation in the construction industry, in particu-lar, may be regarded as a driving force behindmacroeconomic growth. After adjustment forseasonal and working-day variations, theaverage level of orders received in April andMay was 7% higher than it had been in theweak first quarter, which had been affectedby bad weather. This amounts to a 10% in-crease on the same period last year and, atleast, justifies the expectation that the con-struction industry has now largely completedits painful adjustment process. In the nextfew months, however, the contribution togrowth from construction investment is un-likely to reach the record levels seen in thesecond quarter, which were partly weather-induced. On the other hand, anticipatory ef-fects may be expected in the construction in-dustry in the second half of 2006 owing tothe planned VAT increase.The public finance situation is likely to im-
prove somewhat this year. As things currentlystand, provided a moderate expenditure pol-icy is pursued, the general government deficitratio should decline from its level of 3.3% in2005 to fall below the 3% ceiling. However,this reduction is probably largely attributableto the favourable economic trend and shouldnot be regarded as grounds for relaxing theplanned fiscal policy stance. In line with this,the revised European Stability and GrowthPact explicitly states that member states areto pursue an even stricter consolidationcourse when economic developments provemore favourable than expected and not – ashas often been the case in the past – to allo-cate unexpected additional revenue immedi-ately. Pursuant to current financial planning,the fundamental objective of a structurallybalanced budget will not be achieved by2010 in any case. If there is less consolidation,the risk increases that the deficit ratios willrapidly shoot up again in the event of un-favourable macroeconomic developments.The central government budget situation, inparticular, remains extremely critical – even ifa positive scenario is envisaged – and the con-stitutional borrowing limits are not even closeto being met structurally. Against this back-drop, there is at present no leeway for anysignificant budgetary burdens, for example,as a result of the planned business tax andhealthcare reforms. Rather, what is required issound counterfinancing. From an efficiencyand growth perspective, expenditure cutsand the abolition of tax exemptions would befar more propitious.
Fiscal policy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
10Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
The global economy maintained its strong
growth in the second quarter of 2006, witheconomic activity in both the industrial coun-tries and the emerging markets remaining ex-pansionary. Nevertheless, at the same timenew risk factors have emerged to put adamper on the future outlook. Resurging oilprices may be having retarding effects, accel-erating the worldwide increase in price risks.What is more, the US economy is likely to beless of a driving force than previously. How-ever, none of this will fundamentally threatenthe continuation of the global upturn, notleast since, following the reassessment of in-vestment risks on the financial markets, inparticular those associated with emergingmarket economies, as well as in the propertysector of major industrial countries, the con-ditions for a sustained worldwide economicrecovery have improved. Lastly, the globaltightening of monetary policy, now alsoadopted by Japan, is designed to give monet-ary protection to the sustainability of globalgrowth. In this context, it should be borne inmind that real interest rates in the industrialcountries are, by historical standards, stillquite low and, in terms of greatly improvedreturns on investment in fixed capital, con-tinue to exert a stimulating effect.
In the meantime, something of a shift in ex-
pansionary forces can be observed amongthe industrial countries. This is evidenced bythe fact that this spring, for the first timesince 2001, the euro area boasted the fastestquarter-on-quarter growth of seasonally ad-justed real gross domestic product (GDP) ofGlobal
economy still
on growth path
Shift of focus in
global growth
patterns

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
11all members of the triad of industrial coun-
tries. The decisive factor here was the acceler-ated pace of economic growth in the euroarea, along with a slowdown in the pace ofeconomic expansion both in the USA andJapan following strong first-quarter growth.
These shifts in the international growth pat-
tern may well be contributing to a reductionin global imbalances. Despite a surge in oilprices, the US first-quarter current accountdeficit stood at 6
1/C252% of GDP ,1/C252percentage
point below the figure for the final quarter of2005. According to provisional figures, thecombined GDP of the major industrial coun-tries rose during the second quarter by a sea-sonally adjusted
3/C254% on the previous quarter.
It was up by 23/C254% on the year.
Of the various burdens weighing on global
economic activity since the beginning of thesecond quarter, the most significant is the re-newed surge of oil prices, which went upfrom just under US$60 a barrel (for Brentcrude oil) in mid-February to US$74 in lateApril/early May. After a brief period of fluctu-ation around the US$70 mark, prices roseagain in July, with the price for Brent crudereaching yet another (record) high of US$78by the beginning of August. As this reportwent to press, oil was trading at US$72 perbarrel. In euro terms, the increases since themiddle of February have been somewhatmore moderate due to the appreciation ofthe euro. At the end of the period under re-view, the price of a barrel stood at 356. The
latest price surges on the oil markets at thestart of the second quarter and also aftermid-year were mainly triggered by geopolit-ical tensions in the Middle East, which intensi-
fied in July. This situation was aggravated bythe unrest in Nigeria, which has somewhatcalmed down since then but at the time ledto considerable losses in output. In addition,prices were temporarily driven higher by fore-casts of another season of severe hurricaneactivity in the Gulf of Mexico. During August,additional temporary market strains werecaused by reports of the potential closure ofNorth America’s largest oil field. If forwardquotations are any guide, prices are not likelyto go down significantly in the medium term.World market prices for other raw materials,especially industrial raw materials, have like-wise risen sharply since the start of thesecond quarter.Log scale
US$
or €
Industrial raw materials
2000 = 100
in US dollar
terms
in euro termsCrude oil 1
in US dollars
in euroWorld market prices for
crude oil and industrial
raw materials
Sources: Thomson Financial, HWWA Com-
modity Price Index. — 1Price for one barrel
of Brent crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank200
180
160
140
120
100
8022070
60
50
40
30
202025
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Renewed
distinct rise in
energy prices at
start of Q2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
12The recent surge in energy prices has caused
inflation in the industrial nations to acceleratenoticeably. Year-on-year consumer price infla-tion climbed from 2.4% in March to 3.0% inJune. The last time prices rose that sharplywas in September 2005, when mineral oilproducts became vastly more expensive in thewake of hurricane damage in the USA. Dur-ing the second quarter, the indirect effects ofrising energy costs on the prices of othergoods also appear to have been more pro-nounced. Core inflation (excluding food andenergy) consequently rose by 0.2 percentagepoint to 1.8% between March and June. Ex-cluding Japan, where inflation, though rising,still remained very low as this report went topress, consumer prices in the industrial coun-tries were up in the second quarter by 3.3%on the year.
On the whole, financial market corrections in
emerging economies have not visibly damp-ened these countries’ real economic activity.In the medium term, however, it is quite pos-sible that revised inflation expectations forthe USA, in conjunction with higher long-term interest rates, will have a negative im-pact on the cyclical dynamics there. In thesecond quarter the major Latin Americaneconomies remained on a growth path. InBrazil, interest rate cuts over the past fewmonths have given a visible impetus to do-mestic activity. In the second quarter, Mexicanindustry was boosted especially by foreign de-mand. Economic developments in South-EastAsia up to the end of the period under reviewwere being supported by buoyant demandfor goods from the industrial countries andChina alike. China was hardly affected by theQuarterly,
annual percentage change
United KingdomEuro areaJapanUSAIndustrial countries, total
Total
Core rate 1Consumer prices in the
industrial countries
Sources: national statistics, Eurostat and
Bundesbank calculations. — 1Excluding en-
ergy and food; Japan: excluding fresh food
and petroleum products; euro area: HICP;
United Kingdom: CPI; the latter two ex-
cluding energy and unprocessed food.
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
2+
1+
03+
2+
1+
01+
0
1−4+
3+
2+
1+
04+
3+
2+
1+
0
2003 2004 2005 2006Stronger
upward price
pressure in
industrial
countries
Economic
trends in the
emerging
market
economies

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
13turmoil on international financial markets, its
second-quarter GDP posting a year-on-yearrise of 11
1/C254%, following on from a first-
quarter figure of 101/C254%. The oil-producing
countries saw their revenues improve furtherin the last few months owing to the renewedupsurge in oil prices. This should provide add-itional stimulus to aggregate growth. Giventhe pronounced stock market corrections inthe Middle East and in Russia, the prospectsfor sustainable overall economic growth inthese countries also look much more favour-able.
According to initial estimates, the US econ-
omy grew by just over
1/C252% in seasonally and
working-day adjusted terms in the secondquarter, representing a marked decelerationcompared to the first-quarter result (+1
1/C252%).
For all that, it was still up by 31/C252% on the
year. This slowdown is chiefly attributable tothe subdued increase in private consumption.Real expenditure on new residential construc-tion had even gone down by 1
1/C252% on the
quarter, following a modest decline in thetwo preceding quarters. Rising interest rates,coupled with signs that the US property mar-ket is settling down, probably had a major in-fluence on the development of these twocomponents of demand. Private consumptionwas also affected by the noticeable slacken-ing of employment growth and the additionalburden on household purchasing powercaused by the further rise in energy prices.However, consumption received some sup-port from the continued decline in the savingratio which, at -1
1/C252% in the second quarter,
indicated a transactional depletion of netassets. Not only private consumption but alsoprivate non-residential investment showed a
clear loss of momentum. Year-on-year realspending on new machinery, equipment andsoftware was down slightly, while investmentin structures increased substantially. Inventorychanges and real foreign trade both made aminor contribution to growth. The positiveexternal stimulus was mainly attributable to amoderate increase in exports combined withvirtually unchanged activity in imports. In theregular summer revision of the national ac-counts, GDP growth for the 2003-2005period was revised downwards slightly, withthe US economy reporting average growthduring this time of 3
1/C254%.
Due to the development in energy prices, US
consumer prices in the second quarter rose agreat deal more sharply than in the recentpast, standing at a seasonally adjusted 1.2%above the previous quarter’s level following aquarter-on-quarter rise of 0.6% in the firstquarter. Year-on-year, this represented a4.0% increase, following a 3.6% increase inthe first quarter. In the meantime, core infla-tion (excluding food and energy) took a vis-ible upward turn, rising by 0.3 percentagepoint on the first quarter to 2.4%. This trendcontinued in July at an overall rate of 4.1%;year-on-year core consumer price inflationstood at 2.7%. The quarterly personal con-sumption expenditure (PCE) deflator, forwhich data was available only until June asthis report went to press, rose from 2.0% inthe first quarter to a second-quarter figure of2.3%.
Against the backdrop of a downturn in eco-
nomic momentum during the second quarter,USA

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
14the US Federal Reserve decided in August not
to tighten monetary policy any further. Ac-cording to its June forecasts for 2006 and2007, the Fed expects a slight slowdown ineconomic growth spread across the year as awhole. Overall output during the forecastinghorizon will subsequently rise more or less instep with potential output growth.
1Accord-
ing to the Federal Reserve’s projection, con-sumer price inflation – as measured by thecore personal consumption expenditure de-flator – will lie somewhere in the range of2
1/C254%t o21/C252% in the course of this year and
between 2% and 21/C254% in 2007. Hence, the
outlook for prices is being assessed some-what less favourably than at the start of2006.
In Japan, the economic upswing also lost
some of its momentum in spring. After sea-sonal adjustment, real GDP saw a quarter-on-quarter rise of just
1/C254%, with a second-
quarter figure exceeding the previous year’sresult by 2%. In the preceding quarter theJapanese economy had managed to grow by
3/C254%. This deterioration in GDP was mainly
the result of a marked decline in public invest-ment and was compounded by additionaldampening effects stemming from privateresidential investment, inventory changes andforeign trade. At the same time, exports mayhave been adversely affected by weakergrowth in the important US market. On abrighter note, private consumption and, inparticular, private non-residential investmentgrew faster than in the winter months. Thissuggests that the positive underlying trend inJapan’s domestic economy remains solid.In the wake of this upturn in the economy
and sustained growth in the number of per-sons in work, it would appear that deflation-ary tendencies have now ceased. Against thisbackdrop, in mid-July the Bank of Japanabandoned its zero interest rate policy andraised its interest rate to
1/C254%. The price
climate in Japan can now be deemed favour-able from a cyclical vantage point, too. Con-sumer price inflation averaged 0.7% for theApril-June period, compared with a year-on-year figure of 0.4% in the first quarter, whilecore inflation (excluding fresh food and min-eral oil products) remained at 0.1% in thesecond quarter, broadly unchanged from itslevel in the winter months.
Overall output in the United Kingdom, after
seasonal and working-day adjustment,surged again between April and June, by
3/C254%
on the period according to initial estimates.This represented a year-on-year increase of2
1/C252%. The growth profile for the past few
years taken as a whole was revised upwardsslightly. GDP in the second quarter was drivenmainly by the services sector, which boostedits value added by 1% after seasonal adjust-ment. By contrast, the production sector (in-cluding construction) made no meaningfulcontribution to growth, in a departure fromits first-quarter performance. In the secondquarter, demand was driven significantly byhouseholds’ retail purchases. At constantprices, these came in at 2% above their de-cidedly weak level in the first quarter, after
1According to the June forecast, year-on-year real GDP
growth will be between 31/C254% and 31/C252% in the final
quarter of 2006 and between 3% and 31/C254% in the
fourth quarter of 2007.JapanUnited
Kingdom

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
15adjustment for seasonal and price-related
variations. Particularly as a result of the re-newed increase in energy costs, consumerprice inflation rose markedly, from a first-quarter year-on-year rate of 1.9% to 2.2% inthe second quarter, thus overshooting the of-ficial inflation target set by the Bank of Eng-land. However, core inflation (excluding en-ergy and food) dropped by 0.2 percentagepoint to 1.2%. In the course of the secondquarter, house prices may have passed theirpeak; however, they still rose by an averageof just below 9% on the year in the April-Julyperiod. Given the further outlook for prices,which is to be seen against the backdrop ofrobust economic growth and a discerniblyhigher rate of capacity utilisation – comparedwith the situation before revision of GDP –the Bank of England was prompted to raiseits benchmark interest rate at the beginningof August.
Economic activity in the new EU member
states continued to run full speed ahead dur-ing the second quarter, with seasonally ad-justed industrial output 4% up on the quarterand 11
3/C254% up on the year. All of this points
to a massive surge in total output, for whichno up-to-date aggregated data are availableat present. Recently, exports also made amajor contribution to propelling overall eco-nomic growth. The turmoil on the financialmarkets in May and June left its mark, espe-cially in Hungary, where the forint has depre-ciated greatly. That it was more vulnerablethan other new member states can be ex-plained by its sizeable current account deficitand high level of government debt. The re-newed energy price surge had a major effecton consumer price inflation in the spring
months. Year-on-year consumer price infla-tion for this group of countries averaged2.4% for June, compared with 2.0% inMarch. Individual figures ranged from 1.5%in Poland to 6.3% in Latvia.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Overall economic output in the euro area was
up just under 1% in the second quarter of2006 after seasonal adjustment, according tothe Eurostat Flash Estimate. This indicates afurther acceleration of the fast pace ofgrowth which was already evident in the firstquarter. Indeed, it was up by 2
1/C252% on the
year. Over the first six months of the year, realGDP , which likewise stood at an annualisedrate of 2
1/C252%, grew considerably faster than
potential output, estimated at approximately2%. Therefore, in 2006, aggregate capacityutilisation is expected to rise for the first timesince 2000 – with the exception of the 2004results, which were distorted by strong posi-tive working-day effects. For the period up toMarch 2007 the European Commission ex-pects this growth process to continue at asteady rate according to its short-term GDPprojections.
That GDP rose as high as it did in the second
quarter is largely attributable to the acceler-ated increase in industrial output which, forthe April-June period, averaged 1% on thequarter and 3
3/C254% on the year after seasonal
adjustment. This was accompanied by a fur-ther noticeable rise in the degree of equip-ment utilisation in manufacturing during theNew EU
member statesFurther
acceleration of
GDP growth in
second quarter
Sustained
dynamic
industrial
activity

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
16April-July period that, by the mid-year mark,
had clearly surpassed its long-term average,returning to its 2001 second-quarter level.
The order situation in the industrial sector re-
mained favourable. Over the April-Mayperiod, seasonally adjusted new orders, interms of value, were up by
3/C254% from their
first-quarter level and 9% higher than theprevious year’s level. The relatively small in-crease in new orders must be viewed in thecontext of the extensive volume of largeorders placed during the preceding two quar-ters. Excluding the manufacture of heavytransport equipment, where large ordershave a great impact, seasonally adjustedorders placed with industrial enterprises inthe euro area in the April-May period were2% higher than in the first three months ofthe year.
The general sentiment in industry continued
to improve into the month of July. Apart fromone brief interruption during autumn, indus-trial confidence has risen steadily since thesummer of 2005. The latest figure for the in-dicator of sentiment is well above the multi-year average and only just below its recordhigh achieved in spring 2000. The most re-cent rise is due to two factors: the more fa-vourable assessment of order books and themore optimistic output expectations. By con-trast, consumer confidence in July held steadyat the level of the preceding months, thusslightly exceeding its long-term average.
As far as it is possible to tell, GDP expansion
on the demand side during the second quar-ter was fairly broadly based. Exports to non-Seasonally adjusted,
quarterly percentage change
Spain
2006ItalyFranceGermanyEuro areaGrowth trends in
the euro area
Sources: national statistics, Eurostat and the
ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
01.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.0
0.5
0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005Continued
positive
economic
indicators at
mid-year
More evenly
balanced
demand trend

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
17euro area countries during the months of
April and May, for which such data are avail-able, rose in terms of value by a seasonallyadjusted 1% from the first quarter. With therenewed increase in energy prices in thesecond quarter and the continued improve-ment in euro-area domestic demand, nominalimports rose by 1
3/C254% after seasonal adjust-
ment, outpacing export sales growth notice-ably. These developments caused the balanceof trade to drop considerably and even to dipslightly into deficit territory in May.
An increase in the volume of goods purchased
by households helped to bolster domesticsecond-quarter demand. Once again therewas a distinct leap in the demand for cars, asmeasured by the number of new registrations,while the demand for other consumer goodssaw more subdued growth. In addition, con-struction investment is likely to have risen agreat deal more sharply than in the wintermonths, when extremely inclement weatherconditions considerably curbed constructionactivity, at least in the more northerly euro-area countries. Moreover, the findings of theEuropean Commission spring survey on indus-trial investment plans point to buoyant invest-ment activity in this sector. According to thesestatistics, industrial enterprises intend to en-large their budgets for new machinery, equip-ment and premises by a total of 7% in realterms in 2006, compared with a 1% increasein the preceding year. In the fourth quarter of2005 these enterprises had only planned a5% real increase for 2006.
The number of unemployed persons in the
euro area continued to fall sharply in the firstquarter of 2006. According to provisional
Eurostat figures, the average number of per-sons without paid work in the second quarterstood at a seasonally adjusted 11.53 million.The unemployment figure for this period wastherefore 1.32 million down on the year.After the elimination of seasonal factors, thestandardised unemployment rate fell to7.9%, from 8.7% a year earlier. In virtually alleuro-area member states – though no currentdata are available for Italy and Greece – un-employment either held steady or declined. Interms of the absolute reduction in the un-employment rate, developments were par-ticularly favourable in Germany and Spain. Inthe case of Germany, this may have stemmedto some extent from statistical effects. How-ever, the level of unemployment in the twoaforementioned countries, as well as inFrance and Belgium, still exceeds the euro-area average. During the first quarter in2006, up until which data are available, euro-area labour costs went up by just under 2
1/C254%
on the year, at a pace virtually unchangedfrom the final quarter in 2005.
After easing in the months around the turn of
2005-06, euro-area consumer prices rosesomewhat more sharply again in the secondquarter. In seasonally adjusted terms, prices,as measured by the HICP , for the April-Juneperiod were, on average, 0.8% higher thanin the first quarter. In other words, inflationwas twice as high as in the two precedingquarters. Energy was the prime force drivingup prices, costing 3.9% more than in the pre-vious quarter. Even excluding the relativelyvolatile components of energy and unpro-cessed food, seasonally adjusted HICP stillContinued
labour market
recovery
Higher energy
prices still
affecting
inflation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
18Deutsche BundesbankConsumer price volatility affected by surging oil prices:
The euro area and the USA compared
The extremely sharp rise in crude oil prices in recent 
years has also driven up consumer price inﬂ  ation in the 
industrial countries. However, the impact this price surge on the international crude oil markets has had on the 
intensity of consumer price ﬂ  uctuation is less appar-
ent. This article will review and compare developments in the volatility of the euro-area Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) and the US Consumer Price Index (CPI).
Price volatility is measured on the basis of the disper-
sion of month-on-month inﬂ  ation rates.
1 In contrast to 
a measure of dispersion that is based directly on index series, this method avoids distorting effects caused by level shifts. In addition, broadly uniform price changes are not rated as being relevant to volatility. How ever, 
results are not signiﬁ  cantly changed if alternative 
methods for measuring the price ﬂ  uctuation ratio are 
applied.
2
This method initially appears to conﬁ  rm the notion that 
energy prices ﬂ  uctuate much more sharply than average 
consumer prices for other goods. This said, the former are typically much less volatile than crude oil prices.
3 
What is more, the level of ﬂ  uctuation intensity has also 
visibly shifted over time. In the 1990s, the annualised 
standard deviation of monthly euro-area energy price 
inﬂ ation rates stood at an average of approximately two 
percentage points. By contrast, in recent years energy price movements (measured as the average values of this measure of dispersion) have been more than twice as intense. The increase in volatility coincided with a crude oil price surge in 1999, when the cost of a barrel of Brent jumped from US$10 in January to US$25 in Decem-ber. Since then, despite a series of strong increases in the price of crude oil, energy price volatility does not appear to have increased much further, at least not in the euro area. Nevertheless, similar to the situation in the crude oil market, more marked and drawn out periods of stronger and weaker price movements are evident.In comparison to the euro area, the USA is characterised 
by generally more volatile energy prices. This is most probably due to the relatively low level of energy prices there. Of particular signiﬁ  cance here is that mineral oil 
tax is higher in the euro area, on average. Its design as a 
volume-based tax leads to a linear increase in consumer prices for mineral oil products. Consequently, changes in the price of crude oil elicit smaller percentage point ﬂ  uc-
tuations in the euro-area consumer prices of mineral oil products than is the case in the USA. In addition, there has been a drastic increase in the level of volatility in US energy prices recently, a phenomenon which in its intensity is not even close to being matched in the euro area and on the crude oil market. The cause was sharply ﬂ uctuating petrol prices at US gasoline stations during 
the latter part of the summer and in the autumn of last year when hurricanes severely hampered operations not just at oil production facilities but also at reﬁ  neries in 
the Gulf of Mexico.
4 While volatile crude prices quota-
tions clearly inﬂ  uenced mineral oil product prices paid 
by consumers, reﬁ  ning bottlenecks will also have played 
an important role.5
Being subject to such relatively strong ﬂ  uctuations gives 
energy prices a decisive inﬂ  uence on the volatility of the 
overall indices. This is reﬂ  ected in the broader spread 
of headline rates in the USA compared with the euro 
area.6 Individual (weighted) ﬂ  uctuations in the rates of 
change of energy and core component prices are not the only contributor to volatility in the overall index. Other deﬁ ning factors are the nature and the intensity of the 
relationship between these ﬂ  uctuations (measured stat-
istically as covariance). Although this relationship varies greatly over time, if one focuses solely on the years 2004 and 2005, the relationship which prevailed in the USA during that period was positive. By contrast, the euro area showed a negative contemporaneous correlation between the rates of change for energy prices and for all other consumer prices taken together. Thus, while the increase in energy prices has become more pronounced, 
1 The measure of volatility used here is the annualised standard devi-
ation of the previous twelve month-on-month rates at any one time. These are calculated from the difference in seasonally-adjusted index values (in logarithmic form). In the absence of a stable seasonal pat-tern, original values are used in the case of euro-area energy prices. — 2 It is possible to use the dispersion of year-on-year rates and/or the 
standard deviation of changes in these rates as an alternative to the dispersion of month-on-month rates. — 3 One reason for this is the higher prices paid by consumers for mineral oil products caused by 
refining costs, taxes and, where relevant, profit margins. Another is that the relevant index also includes the prices of other sources of energy that are less subject to fluctuation. By contrast, exchange rate fluctuations do not make any practical contribution to the variabil-ity of the volatility of consumer prices for energy. — 4 In September 
2005, the seasonally adjusted cost of fuel for US consumers was up nearly 16% on the month. November saw petrol prices go back down 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
19taken as an average, the increase in other prices has 
tended to fall, which in turn has curbed the volatility of the overall euro-area index.
It is particularly worth noting the differences between 
the two regions with regard to consumer price volatility 
once energy is excluded. Over the long term, standard deviations in the inﬂ  ation rates for the CPI basket of 
goods excluding energy in the USA and the comparable euro-area HICP basket appear to share an almost equally low average value. However, while price volatility in the USA has hardly veered away from this level since the start of the decade, the corresponding euro-area indicator ﬂ uctuated relatively sharply. On occasion, the spread in 
volatility between overall HICP and its sub-index (exclud-ing energy) was extremely narrow.
From a statistical viewpoint this result comes as a surprise, 
as the scope of the sample on which the US price survey is based is comparatively limited. This means that the index excluding energy would actually be expected to display the larger price ﬂ  uctuation. One possible explanation is 
that the volatility of euro-area HICP excluding energy is driven by changes to administered prices, which, though intermittent, are still quite a signiﬁ  cant factor. What 
is more, the stable volatility level of the CPI sub-index 
excluding energy in the USA might also reﬂ  ect a rela-
tively evenly-spread adjustment of market-based prices as well as greater price ﬂ  exibility. Given the relatively 
uneven movement of HICP excluding energy over time, it is doubtful whether the rate of change in question can be referred to as the “core inﬂ  ation measure”, ie an indi-
cator of medium-term price pressure in the euro area. In any case, it is no substitute for the careful analysis of sufﬁ ciently disaggregated price movements nor for a 
thorough examination of the determinants of consumer price inﬂ  ation, both of which are standard procedure in 
central banks.
by more than 17%. Since the standard deviation of inflation rates is 
computed across the respective preceding twelve-month period, the measure of volatility used here remains exceptionally high in the ensu-ing period as well. — 5 Measured in terms of the standard deviation 
of daily yields, the price volatility of petrol futures traded at the New York Mercantile Exchange shot upwards in September 2005 and, even now, is still above the corresponding indicator for comparable crude oil contracts – even though the situation has returned to a semblance of normality. — 6 Assuming the same quantity of consumption applies, 
these higher inﬂ  ation rates for US energy sources - deriving from lower 
prices - would have to be offset by a corresponding reduction in its weight in the overall index. The actual index weights, however, are quite similar to one another, suggesting a higher level of energy con-sumption in the United States. This means that the large variations in energy price volatility are also reﬂ  ected noticeably in the margin of 
ﬂ uctuation for overall rates.Monthly dataPer-
centage
points
Per-
centage
points
Consumer prices excluding energy
1993 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 2006Enlarged scale
Total consumer pricesConsumer prices for energy
Euro areaUSAConsumer price volatility 1
0.6
0.4
0.2
01.8
1.6
1.41.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
018
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
20rose by 0.4%, which was a somewhat steep-
er rise than before. This was triggered byhigher prices for services (+0.5%), processedfood (+0.4%) and industrial goods (+0.3%excluding energy). Overall HICP was thereforeup in the second quarter by 2.5% on theyear, as against 2.3% in the first quarter. Fin-
land (1.6%) and the Netherlands (1.8%) con-tinued to have the lowest inflation rates, withGreece (3.4%), Luxembourg (3.7%) andSpain (4.0%) recording the highest. In July,the year-on-year euro-area HICP inflation ratecame in at 2.4%. This somewhat more mod-est increase was due mainly to baseline ef-fects in energy prices.
In recent years, energy price surges have not
only fuelled the general trend towards risinginflation but also contributed to price volatil-ity. Compared with the USA, euro-area con-sumer prices have fluctuated less intensely. If,however, energy is disregarded, the volatilityof all other consumer prices has itself beensubjected to quite hefty swings in recentyears. Given these relatively shaky dynamicsfor HICP (excluding energy) over time, it istherefore doubtful whether the correspond-ing inflation rate can truly be referred to as a“core inflation measure”, ie as an indicator ofmedium-term euro-area price pressure (seethe notes on pages 18 and 19).Euro-area consumer prices
Annual percentage change
2005 2006
I t e m Q 3Q 4Q 1Q 2HICP, total 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.5
of whichEnergy 12.7 11.1 12.2 11.6Unprocessed food 0.8 1.4 1.4 1.6
HICP excluding energy
and unprocessed food 1.4 1.5 1.4 1.5
of whichIndustrial goods 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.6Services 2.2 2.1 1.9 2.0Processed food 1.8 2.2 2.0 2.2
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer price
volatility

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
21Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the
money market
In the summer months, the Governing Coun-
cil of the ECB further reined back its accom-modating monetary policy in two stages. Fol-lowing the interest rate rises in December oflast year and in March of this year, two fur-ther interest rate rises, each of 25 basispoints, followed in mid-June and at the be-ginning of August. With effect from 9 Au-gust, the minimum bid rate of the main refi-nancing operations has amounted to 3%.Likewise, the interest rates for the marginallending facility and the deposit facility wereadjusted upwards accordingly, and currentlyamount to 4% and 2%, respectively.
These interest rate adjustments were war-
ranted, given the expansionary Europeanmonetary policy stance on the one hand, andthe increasing inflation risks on the other. Thecontinuing rise in energy prices, as well as theplanned increase in administrative prices andindirect taxes, are not just worsening theoverall price climate, but are also increasingthe risks of second-round effects in wage andprice developments that are particularlyworrying in terms of stability policy. Secondly,the monetary analysis has, for a long time,signalled inflationary risks in the medium tolong term.
Like the preceding interest rate rises, the lat-
est monetary policy measures were also im-plemented smoothly on the money marketon the whole. Apart from short-term fluctu-ations at the end of the first half of the yearand at the end of the reserve maintenanceInterest rate
rises in June
and in August
Money market
rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
22Money market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods between
12 April and 11 July 2006, the liquidity needs arising fromthe autonomous factors determining bank liquidity in-creased markedly by 524.5 billion (net). As usual at this
time of year, the main reason for this was the stronggrowth in banknotes in circulation of 522.4 billion al-
together. Demand for banknotes increased, particularly inthe April-May reserve period before the Easter holidaysand the holiday on 1 May. Government deposits likewiseincreased owing to seasonal factors with the increase com-ing exclusively in the June-July reserve period. Primarily,this can be traced back to the effect of the end of the firsthalf of the year, which had an even stronger impact thanin the previous year. However, the liquidity needs wereslowed by the development of the remaining autonomousfactors throughout the observation period. If the changesin net foreign reserves and in other factors are taken to-gether, a move which eliminates valuation effects, 513.3
billion net flowed into the market via such transactions.This essentially occurred as a result of Eurosystem pur-chases of euro-denominated financial assets which werenot linked to monetary policy.
In the April-May period, there was an increase in the provi-
sion of liquidity via longer-term refinancing operations of56.3 billion after the transaction of 30 March 2006 had
completed the topping up process from 590.0 billion to
5120.0 billion that was started in late January. The volume
of the main refinancing operations was noticeably in-creased by 526.4 billion to 5316.5 billion in the period
under review, which served to balance out the increasedliquidity requirement owing to the increase in general gov-ernment deposits at central banks in the June-July reserveperiod. On balance, credit institutions’ central bank bal-ances rose to such an extent as to offset the perceptibleincrease of 56.7 billion in the required reserves to 5165.6
billion.
In the period under review, the EONIA stood mostly at be-
tween 2.60% and 2.62% until the interest rate rise tookeffect on 15 June 2006. With the new minimum bid rate of2.75%, the EONIA stood mostly at 2.83-2.84%. Hence, thespread between the EONIA and the minimum bid ratewent down from between 10 and 12 basis points most ofthe time to between 8 and 9 basis points during the threereserve periods. Amongst other things, this can be attrib-uted to the fact that, starting with the main refinancingoperation (MRO) settled on 27 April 2006, the ECB extend-ed its policy of increasing allotment from 51.0 billion to
52.0 billion above the benchmark amount. Since the MRO
settled on 4 May 2006, this policy has also applied to thelast MRO of the reserve maintenance period. The statedobjective of the increased allotment policy is to containthe recently increased EONIA spread. At the same time, theECB gave an assurance that it would continue to ensurebalanced liquidity conditions on the last day of the reservemaintenance period.
Ultimately, this procedure temporarily led to a slight reduc-
tion in rates towards the end of each of the three reservemaintenance periods, with liquidity-absorbing fine-tuningoperations ensuring that the EONIA was very close to, oreven equal to the minimum bid rate at the end of thereserve maintenance period.The volumes of the fine-tuning operations amounted to
511.5 billion, 54.9 billion and 58.5 billion in the period
under review. Only in the middle operation of the threewas there very slight underbidding, with the result thatthe desired volume of 55.0 billion was not quite achieved.
However, the EONIA of 2.50% in the reserve maintenanceperiod ending on 14 June indicated balanced liquidity con-ditions.
The temporary slight increase in rates in the course of the
period under review were limited to days at the end of themonth and half year when market participants displayedan increased liquidity preference.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
2006
Item12 Apr
to9 May10 May
to14 June15 June
to11 July
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due tochanges in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) – 12.7 – 2.9 – 6.8
2 General government deposits
with the Eurosystem(increase: –) + 0.5 + 5.6 – 21.5
3 Net foreign reserves
2+ 9.1 – 0.1 – 2.6
4 Other factors2– 1.7 + 3.5 + 5.1
Total – 4.8 + 6.1 – 25.8
II Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a)Main refinancing
operations + 1.2 – 4.3 + 29.5
(b)Longer-term refinancing
operations + 6.3 + 0.0 – 0.0
(c) Other operations – 1.1 + 0.3 – 0.2
2 Standing facilities
(a)Marginal lending facility + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1
(b)Deposit facility (increase: –) + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.5
Total + 6.6 – 4.0 + 28.9
III Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I + II) + 1.7 + 2.1 + 3.0
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) – 1.5 – 2.2 – 3.0
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s con-
tribution, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section ofthisMonthly Report .—2Including end-of-quarter valuation
adjustments with no impact on liquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
23periods, the overnight market interest rate
(EONIA) was close to the marginal allotmentrate for the main refinancing operations inthe period under review. In expectation of themonetary policy measures, the remainingmoney market interest rates tended to go upoverall in the period under review. Whereas,in doing so, longer-term interest rates rose byjust under 30 basis points between the startof May and the start of August, short-termrates rose by more than 40 basis points – themoney market yield curve has therefore flat-tened somewhat. This tendency also con-tinued after the most recent interest rate riseat the start of August. The three-month for-ward rate, in which interest rate expectationsare also reflected, likewise suggested that themarket is expecting further interest rate risesuntil spring. The premium of the three-monthforward rates due in six to nine months re-mained at around
1/C252a percentage point at
the beginning of August; as before, the pre-mium of the three-month forward rates duein three to six months amounted to just over
1/C254a percentage point.
Monetary developments in the euro area
Low money market rates shaped monetary
developments up to the end of the periodunder review. Between April and June, themonetary aggregate M3 in the euro area in-creased at a seasonally adjusted annual rateof 9%. In a balance sheet context, the on-going strong credit growth was the main con-tributor to this. Furthermore, large amountsof funds from cross-border payment transac-tions accrued to German non-banks in thequarter under review for the first time in a
year. Longer-term investments by Germannon-banks in the domestic banking sector,which likewise rose sharply, formed some-thing of a counterweight to this, withoutwhich monetary growth would have beeneven stronger.
In this context, the especially liquid compon-
ents of the monetary aggregate, in particular,increased markedly in the quarter under re-view. For example, the amount of cash in cir-culation continued to grow sharply in thesecond quarter at a seasonally adjusted andannualised growth rate of just under 9
1/C252%,
and the corresponding rate for overnight de-posits came to just over 8%, similar to that ofthe previous quarter. However, deposits witha maturity of up to two years have also risenSeasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
Reference value: 4 ½%
2006Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
87
6
54
3
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Money holdings
again up
sharplyM3
components
broadly up

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
24sharply recently. These are likely to have
benefited from the marked rise in interestrates in this market segment in the secondquarter. Marketable instruments – especiallymoney market fund shares and repo transac-tions – were broadly expanded in the quarterunder review, whereas deposits redeemableat notice of up to three months stagnated.
The sharp increase in money holdings in the
euro area was – as mentioned previously –again accompanied by a considerable in-crease in demand for credit from the privatesector. The seasonally adjusted annual banklending rate to domestic enterprises andhouseholds amounted to 10
1/C252% in the
second quarter, despite the banks’ interestrate rises up to then. In particular, there wascontinuing high demand for bank loans tonon-financial enterprises and housing loans.In addition, banks added a considerableamount of securities issued by enterprisesresident in the euro area to their portfolios.
In return, credit institutions noticeably re-
duced their holdings of euro-area govern-ment bonds in the second quarter, having al-ready reduced them in the first quarter. Over-all, the weakening effect of public sector netborrowing on M3 was minor in the quarterunder review, since central governmentsmarkedly reduced their bank deposits (thatare not part of M3) and unsecuritised banklending to the public sector remained largelyconstant in seasonally adjusted terms.
Besides the very strong growth of credit of
domestic banks overall, in the second quarter,extensive inflows of funds from abroad ad-€ billion, seasonally adjusted
change over the period indicated
€ billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet couterparts 1
Credit to
enterprises
and
households
Government
borrowing
or saving2
Net externalassets
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counter-parts
of M3
3Money stock
Jan to Mar 2006
Increase
in M3
April to June 2006Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts are
shown in terms of whether they expand (+)
or contract (−) the money stock. — 2Bank
credit to general government less euro-area
central government deposits with MFIs and
holdings of securities issued by the MFIsector. — 3Calculated as a residual of the
other items of the consolidated balance
sheet of the MFI sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank400+ 300+ 200+ 100+ 0 100− 200−Continuing
heavy lending
to the private
sector
Decline in credit
to general
government
Inflows of
funds from
abroad

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
25vanced monetary expansion once again for
the first time in a year. In any case, the net ex-ternal asset position of the banking sector,which reflects foreign payment transactionsby non-banks with other euro-area countries,rose sharply.
By contrast, the renewed strong monetary
capital formation had a dampening effect onmonetary growth. Longer-term investmentsof resident non-banks in the banking sectorexpanded at a seasonally adjusted and annu-alised rate of 8% in the second quarter. Forexample, banks were able to sell large hold-ings of longer-term bank debt securities out-side the banking sector. Furthermore, longer-term time deposits (with an agreed maturityof over two years) rose sharply. By contrast,growth of longer-term savings deposits (withan agreed notice period of more than threemonths) was only moderate.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
In line with developments throughout the
euro area, the balances of German investorsat German banks also went up sharply in thesecond quarter. For example, it was not justhighly liquid deposits that increased unusuallysharply. Their seasonally adjusted and annual-ised growth rate rose to 7
1/C252% at the end of
the quarter under review, up from just over5% in the previous quarter. In addition, long-term time and savings deposits were again upsharply.Between April and June, overnight deposits
grew at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of5
1/C252% as other financial institutions and non-
financial enterprises, in particular, sharply in-creased their higher-interest-bearing over-night deposits. In addition, short-term timedeposits rose exceptionally sharply in thequarter under review. Even more noticeablythan in the previous quarter, this sharp risewas shaped by social security funds, intowhich considerable “additional” revenue waspaid in the first half of 2006 as a result of theshortened deadline for transferring social se-curity contributions adopted last year. By con-trast, short-term savings deposits (with anotice period of three months) were furtherreduced.Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2006 2005
ItemApril to
JuneApril to
June
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 14.6 + 18.5
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years + 19.0 + 3.9of over 2 years + 7.7 – 0.6
Redeemable at agreed notice
of up to 3 months – 7.9 – 1.0of over 3 months + 2.7 – 1.6
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised + 8.0 + 8.4Securitised – 3.0 + 0.6
to domestic government
Unsecuritised – 10.3 – 4.7Securitised + 2.3 – 13.4
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .—1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche BundesbankMonetary
expansion
dampened by
strong
monetary
capital
formation
Sharp rise in
bank depositsMarked
increase in
overnight
deposits and...
... exceedingly
sharp increase
in short-term
deposits owing
to special effect

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
26Besides short-term deposits, longer-term
bank deposits also increased markedly in thedomestic business of German credit institu-tions recently. In particular, time deposits re-deemable at notice of over two years were re-sponsible for the rise, as in the previous quar-ter. However, longer-term savings deposits(with an agreed period of notice of over threemonths) were increased sharply as well.
In comparison with credit growth in the euro
area as a whole, lending by German banks todomestic non-banks again rose only moder-ately in the second quarter, even though Ger-man banks’ lending to residents, which hadlong been stagnant or even in decline, hasshown a noticeable recovery. Their annualisedgrowth rate amounted to just over 1
1/C252%.
There was demand from non-financial enter-prises for medium to longer-term bank loans,
in particular. Housing loans and householdconsumer credit granted by banks also in-creased somewhat. According to the BankLending Survey, anticipatory effects with re-gard to the impending rise in VAT played arole in this respect. Overall, however, demandfor lending to the private sector in Germanywas still very subdued. As a substitute for thecomparatively weak demand for lending tothe private sector, banks evidently purchaseda noticeable amount of securities, with theresult that there were also marked increasesin the figures for the euro area as a whole (asreported above). German enterprises ac-counted for most of these securities in thedomestic business of German banks; holdingsof government bonds were topped up onlyslightly. By contrast, there was again a reduc-tion in loans to general government of late,with the result that the public sector actuallyslightly reduced its net debt to the Germanbanking system in the second quarter.
In addition, the figures for lending in Ger-
many again recorded sizeable securities lend-ing transactions (reverse repos) in the secondquarter, which cover non-monetary financialintermediaries (particularly securities tradinghouses) as a counterparty in connection withthe settlement of secured interbank loans. Ul-timately, no funds were transferred to the do-mestic private non-bank sector in this case. If,therefore, the effect on growth in domesticcredit associated with such operations is elim-inated, the year-on-year growth in lending tothe German private sector was around
1/C252a
percentage point lower.Seasonally adjusted
€b n
%
2006Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02300
2250
2200
2150
2100
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Marked growth
in longer-term
bank deposits
Growth in
lending only
moderate,...... but
nevertheless
overstated by
special effects

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
27The banks have adjusted their lending rates
further upwards following the ECB’s interestrate rises at the start of March and in mid-June. On average, the German institutionsmost recently charged between 4 and 5 percent for short-term loans to enterprises, de-pending on volume; ie just under
1/C252ap e r -
centage point more than before the interestrate rise in March. As expected, the longer-term lending rates have also increased in thelast few months, after capital market ratesrose continuously until May. By contrast, thesubsequent and temporary sharp fall in cap-ital market rates did not have any discernibleimpact on the relevant bank interest rates.For example, German credit institutionscharged between 4.5% and 4.8% for long-term loans to enterprises in June, dependingon credit volume, and 4.6% for long-termhousing loans. By contrast, there was a slightslackening in conditions for consumer lendingoverall. With an interest rate fixed over fiveyears, the banks were demanding 8.6% forthese loans at the end of the quarter underreview. Strong competitive pressure may havebeen a factor, particularly in trade with bor-rowers with a good credit rating. In any case,the institutions reporting to the Eurosystem’sBank Lending Survey reported smaller mar-gins in this business area. By contrast, banks’general credit standards remained largely un-changed over the second quarter accordingto the results of the survey after the partici-pating institutions had previously talkedabout relaxing the conditions for issuingloans.
Interest rate developments for German
banks’ deposit business were also shaped by%
%
%%
%
%
1
2002Consumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in loan margins
Loans to enterprises
Average
loansRiskier loansConsumer creditLoans to households
Housing loansChanges in credit standards
Loans to enterprisesBank Lending Survey *
*Percentage difference between the num-
bers of respondents reporting “tightened
considerably” and “tightened somewhat”
and the numbers of respondents reporting
“eased somewhat” and “eased consider-
ably”. — 1Expectations for Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−100+
80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−40+
20+
0
20−40+
20+
0
20−60+
40+
20+
0
20−
2003 2004 2005 2006Lending rates
continuing to
rise

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
28the interest rate rises. For example, the banks
further adjusted their rates upwards forshort-term deposit business with householdsin the second quarter of 2006. The ratesoffered by credit institutions ranged between2.5% and 3.2% for time deposits, dependingon the maturity, 1.4% for overnight depositsand 2.1% for savings deposits with noticeperiods of up to three months. Only interestrates on deposits with an agreed maturity ofover two years went down slightly after cap-ital market rates had come under pressure af-fected by reassessments on the stock marketsover the second quarter.New business
% per
annum
% per
annum% per
annum
... over €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year... up to €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
... over €1 million
    with an initial    rate fixation of over
    five yearsLoans to non-financial
corporations ...Loans to households
Consumer credit 1
2
Housing loans3Households’ deposits...
...overnight...redeemable at agreed notice
   of up to 3 months
...with an agreed maturity
   of up to 1 yearBank interest
rates in Germany
1 With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year
and up to 5 years. — 2 Decline owing to
special effect. — 3 With an initial rate
fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years.
Deutsche Bundesbank5.5
5.2
4.9
4.64.34.03.7
3.4
3.12.87.0
6.76.4
6.1
5.85.55.24.9
4.6
4.34.02.7
2.4
2.1
1.8
1.5
1.2
0.9
2003 2004 2005 2006Deposit rates
mainly
increasing

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
29Financial marketsFinancial market environment
The last few months have seen a re-
evaluation of investment risks in the inter-national financial markets. In addition, grow-ing geopolitical tensions and changing ex-pectations regarding the US Federal Reserve’sfuture interest rate policy have been shapingevents in the marketplace. Increased riskawareness and heightened uncertainty werereflected in sometimes sharp price move-ments in the global capital markets, especiallyfrom mid-May to mid-June. The market situ-ation did, however, subsequently becomesomewhat calmer. Overall, European bondyields had improved slightly by the end of thisreporting period, while stock prices, despitehaving rallied recently, were still down slightlyoverall.
Exchange rates
In a setting of rising money market rates
worldwide and of capital market rates show-ing little change, the euro has remainedlargely stable since mid-May following its per-ceptible appreciation in the second quarter.There was no clearly discernable trend in theeuro-dollar exchange rate during the report-ing period. Changing market expectationsconcerning the US Federal Reserve’s prospect-ive monetary policy stance are likely to havecontributed significantly to short-termchanges in the exchange rate. Moreover, theeuro may have benefited to a lesser extentthan the US dollar from the increased riskaversion of investors, who primarily woundFinancial
market trends
Euro exchange
rate
movements
against the
US dollar...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
30up exposures in some emerging markets and
invested mainly in US bonds.
At US$1.30, the euro’s exchange rate initially
hit a new annual record high in early June,when surprisingly unfavourable news aboutthe US economy, especially its labour market,was published at the same time as unexpect-edly positive economic figures for the euroarea. However, the Federal Reserve’s subse-quent warnings of a possible further acceler-ation in US inflation, which were interpretedby the market as suggesting a continuationof monetary policy tightening, resulted in adepreciation of the euro against the US dol-lar.
The Federal Reserve’s communication policy
continued to have a major impact on theeuro-dollar exchange rate. The euro re-covered again at the end of June, when theannouncement accompanying the Fed’s inter-est rate decision gave no hints of furtherinterest rate hikes. This was followed by aperceptible easing of US short-term forwardinterest rates. The euro forfeited its gains inthe first half of July against the backdrop of alarge, albeit smaller than feared, US tradedeficit and surprisingly robust US economicactivity – as indicated, not least, by rising in-dustrial output and steadily increasing cap-acity utilisation. However, it then reboundedlater when market players revised their ex-pectations of rising US key interest ratesdownwards in response to statements by theFed. Following the publication of the BeigeBook, in which the Fed reported a cooling ofthe US economy, and an unexpectedly lowrate of growth in the US economy for thesecond quarter, this assessment became fur-
ther entrenched. After the Federal Reservehad left its key interest rates unchanged inearly August – as had largely been anticipated– the euro, at latterly US$1.29, was trading agood 9% above its exchange rate at the be-ginning of the year.
The euro appreciated against the Japanese
yen during the reporting period and has sincereached all-time highs. Rumours of the Gov-ernor of the Bank of Japan possibly resigningand emerging doubts among market playersabout the Japanese zero interest rate policyending in the near future had initially im-posed a strain on the yen in May and June.The yen exerted temporary downward pres-sure on the euro during the first week of Julywhen the markets interpreted the Tankan re-port as a signal that the Bank of Japan wasnow indeed likely to be increasing its interestrates soon. Nevertheless, the euro regainedits losses against the yen as early as the fol-lowing week on the back of positive econom-ic data for the euro area and speculation con-cerning an earlier than expected interest ratemove by the European Central Bank. By con-trast, the Bank of Japan’s raising of the keyinterest rate in mid-July, which had been an-ticipated by market players, had no percep-tible impact on the euro’s exchange rateagainst the yen. As this report went to press,the euro was being quoted at ¥149, whichwas around 7% above its value at the begin-ning of the year.
The euro also initially gained ground on the
pound sterling in the reporting period; thisappreciation, however, was comparatively
...the yen...
...and the
pound sterling

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
31moderate as the gains were largely relin-
quished again as July progressed. Growing in-flation expectations and surprisingly dynamiceconomic growth in the UK economy ledmarkets players to view an increase in interestrates by the Bank of England as more likely,thus strengthening the pound. The expectedinterest rate move was, in fact, then made atthe beginning of August. Portfolio shifts bysome central banks to the advantage of thepound sterling are also likely to have contrib-uted to the stabilisation of the British cur-rency. At the end of the period under review,the euro stood at GBP 0.68, just below its ex-change rate at the beginning of the year.
The euro hardly moved vis-/C224-vis an average of
the currencies of 23 major trading partnersduring the period under review. Most recent-ly, the effective exchange rate was 4% higherthan at the start of the year, and thus some-what up on its level at the start of monetaryunion. In real terms, ie taking into accountthe inflation differentials between the euroarea and its major trading partners, the euro’seffective exchange rate has risen by 3
1/C252%
since the final quarter of 2005.
Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
European bond market yields were also sub-
ject to pronounced fluctuations in the secondquarter. At 4% at the end of the reportingperiod, capital market rates, as measured bylong-term public bond yields, were onlyslightly higher than at the end of March. De-velopments in recent months were similaracross virtually all the major global markets.
In the light of the generally positive economicindicators, yields in the euro area grew by ap-proximately
1/C253of a percentage point to just
under 41/C254% before the onset of strains in the
international financial markets in May. How-ever, growing uncertainty about economicdevelopments, especially in the United States,and increased risk awareness among inter-nationally operating investors led to massiveDaily data, log scale
US$
£¥
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.20  1... pound sterling
£ 0.7110  1... yen
¥ 133.73  1against the ...
... US dollar
$ 1.1789  1Exchange rate of the euro
1Rate at the beginning of monetary union
on 4 January 1999. — 2As calculated by the
ECB against the currencies of 23 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank106
103
1000.72
0.70
0.68
0.66142
139
136
1331451481.30
1.27
1.24
1.21
1.18
1.15
ASO NDJF M A MJ JA
2005 2006Effective euro
exchange rate
Slight rise in
capital market
rates in euro
area with
perceptible
fluctuations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
32portfolio shifts away from shares into bonds
in mid-May. Government bonds, in particular,benefited from this move, while corporatebonds became less attractive in comparison.As a result, euro-area capital market rates, asmeasured by the yields of 10-year bonds, fellbelow 4% within a matter of days.
In June, upward tendencies in interest rates
temporarily gained the upper hand. However,this development went into reverse again inJuly against the backdrop of military conflictin the Middle East and growing concernsabout weak growth, stemming especiallyfrom the US economy. Ten-year euro govern-ment bonds were priced at around 4% at theend of the period under review, and thusshowed an interest rate spread of just under
1/C252percentage point against US bonds.Under the impact of these developments in
capital market interest rates and the interestrate policy tightening by the GoverningCouncil of the European Central Bank, theyield curve in the German bond market hasflattened somewhat and shifted upwards.The yield spread between the capital marketand the long-term maturity segment of thebond market thus dropped from around
3/C254percentage point at the end of March to
just under1/C252percentage point.
Along with the change in investors’ risk
awareness, the risk premium on corporatebonds with a less than first-class ratingwidened considerably in the second quarter.Since the end of March, the interest ratespreads on BBB-rated European non-financialcorporate bonds have increased by 25 basispoints to 134 basis points. This is a return tothe level reached in May 2005 immediatelyafter the downgrading of one large US manu-facturer’s credit rating. This widening of thespread is more indicative of investors’ re-evaluation of the risk involved than of greateruncertaintly about the fundamentals. This isbecause factors such as current profits, ex-pected year-on-year earnings per share andexpectations concerning the earnings growthof the companies listed on the Dow JonesEuroStoxx index
1all point to enterprises
being in a sound position and a correspond-ingly positive outlook for the future.Weekly average
%
Per-
centage
pointsSpread of BBB-rated
corporate bond yields over
euro-area government bonds
2003 2004 2005 2006Current yield on seven to ten-year
euro-area government bonds
outstanding
euro-area
government bondsBBB-rated corporate bondsCorporate and government
bond yields in the euro area
Source: Merrill Lynch, Thomson Financial
Datastream.
Deutsche Bundesbank2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
06.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
1According to Consensus Forecasts. This picture is
clouded slightly by Moody’s rating agency, which down-
graded more investment-grade borrowers than it up-
graded in the first two quarters of the year.Yield curve
somewhat
flatter
Wider interest
rate spreads on
corporate
bonds ...
... point to less
willingness to
take risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
33With changing conditions in the international
bond markets in the second quarter, issuingactivity in the German bond market alsoflagged. At 3267
1/C252billion, gross sales of do-
mestic debt securities were significantly lowerthan in the previous quarter ( 3325
1/C252billion).
After taking account of redemptions andchanges in issuers’ holdings of their ownbonds, there were net sales of 327
1/C252billion in
the second quarter, which was well belowthe 366
1/C252billion’s worth of securities that
German borrowers had placed on the bondmarket in the first quarter. However, foreignbonds and money market paper were sold inthe German market for 343
1/C252billion in the
reporting period, which was barely morethan in the previous quarter ( 342
1/C252billion).
The vast majority of these were euro-denominated debt securities from euro-areapartner countries ( 330
1/C252billion), which are
regularly in demand among domestic invest-ors owing to the fact they carry a slightlyhigher rate of interest than the benchmarkBund. Sales of foreign debt securities in cur-rencies other than the euro raised 313 billion
(first quarter: 39
1/C252billion). As a result, the
total funds raised through the issuance of do-mestic and foreign debt securities amountedto371 billion compared with 3109 billion in
the preceding quarter.
Falling issuing activity in the German bond
market was most obviously reflected in thenet redemptions of credit institutions, whichincreased their bonded debt by no more than312
1/C252billion after selling 336 billion net in
the first quarter. In the second quarter, debtsecurities issued by specialised credit institu-tions ( 311
1/C252billion) and other bank debt se-curities ( 391/C252billion) accounted in virtually
equal parts for the funds raised, while publicPfandbriefe and mortgage Pfandbriefe wereredeemed for 36
1/C252billion and 32 billion re-
spectively. The effects of restructuring at onelarge Pfandbrief issuer some time ago werethus still evident in the debt securities marketin the second quarter of 2006.
General government also tapped the bond
market to a lesser extent in the period underreview than it did in the first quarter ( 36
1/C252bil-
lion as against 321 billion). The major part of
these funds was raised by the Federal states,which, on balance, sold their own bonds inthe German capital market in the amount ofjust under 36
1/C252billion. By contrast, the Federal
Government and other public sector borrow-ers have recently left their bond market debt%
0123456789 1 0
Residual maturity in years17 August 20063 August 2006 1
31 March 2006Yield curve
in the German bond market *
*Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-cou-
pon bonds (Svensson method), based on
listed Federal securities. — 1Before the
interest rate increase of 25 basis points by
the Governing Council of the ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank4.2
4.03.83.6
3.4
3.2
3.02.8Markedly lower
bond sales
Less borrowing
by credit
institutions,......the public
sector ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
34virtually unchanged, not least because of the
currently favourable cash balance. The Fed-eral Government generated a net total of 38
billion from issuing further five-year Federalnotes (Bobls) and issued short-term FederalTreasury financing paper (Sch/C228tze) to a netvalue of 3
1/C252billion. At the same time, the
Federal Government reduced its net liabilitiesarising from ten-year bonds outstanding by34
1/C252billion and from 30-year bonds out-
standing by 31/C252billion. In addition, it re-
deemed two-year Federal Treasury notes inthe amount of 32
1/C252billion net.
Given rising but still comparatively favourable
borrowing costs, non-financial enterprises in-creased their capital market debt by 38 billion
in the second quarter, compared with 39
1/C252
billion in the previous quarter. In particular,their liabilities arising from longer-term cor-
porate bonds increased by 361/C252billion, half
of which was incurred by one large-scale issu-ance by a chemicals company. At the sametime, money market instruments were issuedfor just under 32 billion.
Unlike before, domestic investors were the
most important group of buyers in the Ger-man debt securities market with net pur-chases of 359
1/C252billion. Domestic non-banks,
especially, added substantially ( 336 billion) to
their bond portfolios, half of which was com-prised of foreign bonds. Their purchases ofdomestic bonds consisted primarily ofprivate-sector bonds ( 313
1/C252billion), with
bank bonds predominating. German creditinstitutions also sharply expanded their bondinvestments in the second quarter ( 323
1/C252bil-
lion), exclusively through foreign paper onbalance ( 325
1/C252billion), while overall slightly
reducing their holdings of domestic debtsecurities ( 32 billion). Foreign investors ac-
quired German debt securities in the amountof311
1/C252billion, focusing exclusively on pri-
vate issues. Demand for German short-datedbonds with a maturity of less than one yearwas at 33 billion.
Sharp price mark-downs in the stock markets
from mid-May to mid-June reflected a funda-mental re-evaluation of investment riskworldwide. The correction mainly affectedmarkets in which price developments hadbeen very positive over the past one and ahalf years or so. The Dow Jones EuroStoxxindex fell by around 3% during the periodunder review, whereas the US market, asmeasured by the S&P 500, was ultimately un-Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2005 2006
I t e m Q 2Q 1Q 2Debt securities
Residents 42.1 53.9 59.7
Credit institutions 26.8 24.6 23.6of which
Foreign debt securities 26.0 29.0 25.5
Non-banks 15.3 29.4 36.1of which
Domestic debt securities – 6.9 15.9 17.9
Non-residents 62.5 55.3 11.3
Shares
Residents – 25.3 4.9 – 16.1
Credit institutions – 4.5 6.1 – 8.2of which
Domestic shares – 6.9 7.4 – 5.1
Non-banks – 20.8 – 1.2 – 7.9of which
Domestic shares – 18.3 – 7.4 – 5.5
Non-residents 26.4 0.6 12.7
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 6.2 11.5 9.7
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 3.2 – 6.3 – 2.1of which: Share-based funds – 0.8 – 0.5 – 3.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
...and by
enterprisesPurchases of
debt securities
Correction in
the stock
markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
35changed. They have both recovered again
slightly since mid-June, as has the JapaneseNikkei index, although, at the end of the re-porting period, it was still approximately 7%below its level at the beginning of April.Global volatility, which had previously been ata very low level, shot up at times along withfalling stock market prices. Although the situ-ation has calmed down again somewhat re-cently, it is still higher than the levels recordedprior to the correction.
With lower share prices overall, the price-
earnings ratio for expected annual earningson the Dow Jones EuroStoxx index nowstands at 11.6, which is below its multi-yearaverage. This valuation adjustment cannot beexplained solely by the slightly increased cap-ital market interest rate and thus a higher dis-count factor for future dividends. Rather, itpoints to a greater degree of restraint amonginvestors in terms of taking on risk.
A characteristic of this keener risk awareness
among globally active investors is the com-paratively good performance of the defensivesectors. For example, the basic goods industryand utilities experienced smaller price lossesthan, say, technology sector shares. More-over, share price developments in the euroarea and the United States are likely to havebeen bolstered by currently vigorous mergersand acquisitions activity, which was alsobuoyed up by continuing favourable debt fi-nancing conditions.
Despite the changeable, and latterly difficult,
financial market setting, issuing activity in theGerman equity market picked up slightly inMonthly data
Lin scale
Price-earnings ratio3
DAX
Dow Jones EuroStoxxAverage expected earnings 1, 3
for enterprises
listed on the ...
DAX
... Dow Jones EuroStoxxLog scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx 1, 2
DAX 1, 2Price movements and
earnings estimates for
European and German
public limited companies
1January 2002 = 100. — 2Source: Deutsche
Börse AG. — 3Based on year-on-year
I / B / E / S analyst estimates (“earnings before
goodwill”). Source: Thomson Financial Data-
stream.
Deutsche Bundesbank20
18
16
1412
10180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
45
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Ebbing risk
propensity
Slightly more
funds raised in
equity market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
36Deutsche BundesbankVolatility in the stock market
Volatility in the German stock market, which had 
been in extremely low ﬁ  gures in the previous two 
years, showed a marked rise over a short space of time along with the simultaneous slump in prices in mid-May 2006. Since then, it has remained at a noticeably higher level. The volatility of the DAX – measured by the historical 30-day standard deviation – amounted to approximately 20% per year at the end of the period under review, which is close to its ﬁ  ve-year average and much lower 
than the ﬁ  gures of mid-2002 to mid-2003, when 
it peaked at over 60% per year. However, abrupt surges in volatility can prevent the stock market from functioning properly, at least in the short term. Thus, selling a large volume of stocks when prices are falling, for example, to comply with risk limits set in value-at-risk models, decreases market liquidity. Stock prices that persistently ﬂ uctuate sharply can have an impact on the real 
economy, for example, through an adjustment of the collateral limits or consumption.
Breaking down the monthly realised volatility of 
a typical DAX-listed enterprise into a company-
speciﬁ  c (idiosyncratic) component and a market 
component is useful for analysing and placing current ﬂ  uctuations in the stock market into 
context historically.
 1 Such a breakdown shows 
that market volatility, in particular, has risen in the past few months. By contrast, the rise in idio-
syncratic volatility was somewhat smaller. This implies a higher correlation between the yields on individual DAX stocks. As a result, the ratio of systemic (non-diversiﬁ  able) risk to non-systemic 
(diversiﬁ  able) risk increases so that even broadly 
diversiﬁ  ed investments in stocks are exposed to 
a higher ﬂ  uctuation risk. In comparison with the 
periods of high historical volatility from 1990 to 
1992 (exchange rate crisis), around 1998 (Russia 
and Asia crisis) and from 2000 to 2003 (global stock market decline), the current volatility situ-ation may be described as moderate.
Further indications as to whether the develop-
ment of volatility might cause disruptions to the ﬁ  nancial markets may be gained from the 
expected future volatility. The VDAX-NEW, for example, which is calculated from the market prices of traded DAX options, is designed to model the expected volatility of the DAX over the next 30 trading days. Owing to its forward-look-
ing nature, it is often called the investors’ “fear 
barometer”. This indicator, too, has shown a dis-tinct rise since mid-May. However, an empirical study shows that the VDAX-NEW, as an estima-tor of future volatility, is biased upwards.
3 Never-
theless, if this bias is taken into account – say, by analysing the changes – the VDAX-NEW is a more suitable tool than the historical volatility for esti-mating future price ﬂ  uctuations. Following the 
sudden rise up to mid-June, this indicator has been declining again.
1 See: Deutsche Bundesbank, Change in DAX volatility, 
Monthly Report, December 2003, p 17, as well as J Stapf and T Werner, How wacky is the DAX? The changing structure of German stock market volatility, Deutsche Bundesbank Dis-cussion Paper, Series 1, No 18/2003. — 2 Cumulative squared daily returns. — 3 One reason for this could be that the 
option premiums paid on the market are somewhat higher than would be necessary with a synthetic replication of the option, although this requires a continuous restructuring outlay.Daily values
%
VDAX-NEW
Historical volatilityHistorical volatility
and VDAX-NEW
Source: Deutsche Börse AG and Bundesbank calcula-
tions.25
20
15
10
5
2005 2006
Monthly values
Idiosyncratic
volatility
1988 90 95 00 05 2006Market volatilityBreakdown of volatility2
Source: Deutsche Börse AG and Bundesbank calcula-
tions.0.03
0.02
0.01
00.03
0.02
0.01
0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
37the second quarter. Particularly at the begin-
ning of the quarter, domestic enterprises is-sued new shares totalling 32 billion, com-
pared with no more than 3
1/C252billion in the
previous quarter. Half of this involved sharesof listed companies. The equity injections ofone enterprise in the energy sector accountedfor a substantial part of this issue volume. Un-like in previous quarters, domestic investorssold foreign equities on quite a large scale onbalance ( 35
1/C252billion).
German and foreign shares were purchased
in the second quarter exclusively by foreigninvestors, who sharply expanded their hold-ings in the German market ( 312
1/C252billion,
compared with 31/C252billion in the previous
quarter). By contrast, against the backdrop ofdevelopments on the global markets, domes-tic investors – banks and non-banks alike –sold shares in the amount of 316 billion.
However, they resold more domestic equitiesthan foreign ones ( 310
1/C252billion and 351/C252bil-
lion respectively).
In contrast to the trend among other forms of
investment, the inflow of resources to domes-tic investment funds, at 37
1/C252billion in the
second quarter, was up slightly on the start ofthe year ( 35 billion). Resources channelled
into specialised funds open only to institu-tional investors were somewhat down overallcompared with the preceding three-monthperiod ( 39
1/C252billion as against 3111/C252billion).
However, publicly offered funds experiencednotably smaller outflows in the reportingperiod than in the first quarter ( 32 billion
compared with 36
1/C252billion). Share-based
funds were particularly affected by the salesMajor items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2005 2006
I t e m Q 2Q 1Q 2
I Current account 1,2 + 23.4 + 26.5 + 21.0
Foreign trade 1,3 + 41.5 + 39.9 + 37.5
Services 1 –5 . 8 –6 . 0 –4 . 3
Income 1 – 1.3 + 3.3 – 2.8
Current transfers 1 –6 . 4 –6 . 0 –4 . 8
II Capital transfers 1,4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 24.6 – 43.4 – 50.0
1 Direct investment – 11.2 – 15.8 – 6.9
German investmentabroad – 17.2 – 16.1 – 12.1Foreign investment inGermany + 6.0 + 0.3 + 5.2
2 Portfolio investment + 33.0 – 1.2 – 4.7
German investmentabroad – 56.5 – 62.1 – 29.7
Shares + 0.4 – 1.2 + 11.3Mutual fund shares – 8.7 – 18.4 + 2.7Debt securities – 48.2 – 42.5 – 43.6
Bonds and notes
5 – 46.1 – 42.3 – 36.0
of which:Euro-denominatedbonds and notes – 41.8 – 33.2 – 30.5
Money marketinstruments – 2.2 – 0.2 – 7.6
Foreign investmentin Germany + 89.5 + 60.9 + 25.0
Shares + 26.1 + 0.7 + 12.1Mutual fund shares + 0.8 + 5.0 + 1.6Debt securities + 62.5 + 55.3 + 11.3
Bonds and notes
5 + 64.6 + 46.0 + 8.6
of which:Public bonds andnotes + 29.9 + 21.3 + 0.9
Money marketinstruments – 2.1 + 9.3 + 2.8
3 Financial derivatives
6 – 2.0 – 5.5 + 2.0
4 Other investment 7 – 45.6 – 22.0 – 40.9
Monetary financialinstitutions
8 – 64.8 – 48.3 – 56.0
of which: short-term – 48.3 – 30.0 – 38.9
Enterprises andindividuals + 5.2 – 5.7 + 16.3
of which: short-term + 7.7 – 2.5 + 10.0
General government – 0.8 + 4.6 – 15.2
of which: short-term – 1.3 + 5.6 – 15.1
Bundesbank + 14.8 + 27.4 + 14.0
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values(increase: –)
9 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.4
IV Errors and omissions + 1.1 + 16.7 + 29.0
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankShare
purchases
Sales of mutual
fund shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
38(37 billion). Shares in bond-based funds were
also liquidated on a smaller scale ( 31 billion).
Open-end real estate funds, which had comeunder pressure from the temporary closure ofsome funds, even managed to post slight in-flows of funds again in the second quarter(3
1/C252billion). Although shares in foreign in-
vestment funds worth 3181/C252billion had been
sold in the German market in the first quarter,shares to the value of 32
1/C252billion were re-
deemed in the period under review.
The main purchasers of mutual fund shares
(33 billion) were German credit institutions,
which predominantly added domestic mutualfunds to their portfolios. Domestic non-banksslightly increased their net holdings of mutualfund shares by 3
1/C252billion. Overall, they sold
foreign investment fund certificates and ac-quired shares in domestic investment com-panies for roughly the same amount. Foreigninvestors purchased just under 3
1/C252billion in
mutual fund shares in the German market.Direct investment
In terms of direct investment, there were
outflows of investment funds in the secondquarter, although, on balance, these were37 billion smaller than in the first quarter of
2006 ( 316 billion). This was due mainly, for
one thing, to the investment decisions of Ger-man companies (capital exports of 312 bil-
lion, down from 316 billion in the first quar-
ter). New investments by the chemicals indus-try in Malta and the United States played amajor role in this, while this industry con-currently withdrew capital from Sweden.Additionally, foreign direct investment inGermany came to 35 billion in the second
quarter, after being at a very low level in thepreceding three-month period. The mostsignificant factor in the period under reviewwas financial credit among affiliated enter-prises.
Purchases of
mutual fund
sharesNet capital
exports in direct
investment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
39Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The economic upswing of the German econ-
omy has become significantly stronger duringthe course of this year. According to initialcalculations by the Federal Statistical Office,overall output, which had already increasedmore rapidly (
3/C254%) at the start of the year ac-
cording to the most recently revised data ofthe national accounts, was almost 1% higherin the second quarter than in the previousthree-month period.
Even though this positive result benefited
from one-off effects such as the normalisa-tion of construction activity and certain spe-cial factors in connection with the FIFA WorldCup, the underlying tendency shows a similarfinding. For instance, the annualised realgross domestic product increased by just over2
1/C252% in the first half of 2006, compared with
a corresponding growth rate of 11/C252% in the
second half of 2005. The now substantial gapof 2% in working-day-adjusted terms com-pared with the overall production level of thefirst half of 2005 and the higher degree ofcapacity utilisation in the main industries areevidence of the progress that has now beenachieved in the current business cycle. Thefact that the labour market is now increasing-ly benefiting from this and that the aggregatedemand in the first half of the year showed amore balanced profile warrants the conclu-sion that the expansion process has nowclearly improved.
Although, as usual, important details of the
national accounts for the second quarter arenot yet available, there is strong evidenceGrowth surge
in second
quarter
Marked
increase in
investment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
40that there has been a sharp rise in investment
in the period under review. This particularlyapplies to construction, which was character-ised by a strong backlog effect after theweather-induced losses. In addition, invest-ment was boosted by expenditure on ma-chinery and equipment. In view of the sus-tained rise in production, which, according toIfo Institute data, has now led to a furthermarked increase in capacity utilisation, cap-acity extension now also plays a more signifi-cant role in the investment decisions of enter-prises. Another reason why this is probablythe case is that despite the downturn of theIfo business climate in July, there is still a highlevel of confidence in the German economy.
The external sector is also likely to have made
another positive, albeit small contribution togrowth. In real terms, exports may have mar-
ginally exceeded the level of the first quarter.In this context, spending by foreign visitors inconnection with the FIFA World Cup had atemporary stimulating effect. Thus, Germanexports of foreign travel services expandedconsiderably.
1Real imports may also have in-
creased somewhat. By contrast, consumptionby households is not likely to have increasedany further after the sharp rise in the firstthree months. Nevertheless, the fact thatclassical retail purchases experienced a posi-tive trend, especially in June, is also likely tobe linked to the World Cup because a largenumber foreign visitors generated domesticturnover. According to the available data andindicators, private consumption also showeda moderate upward trend during the first sixmonths of the year.
Output and sales
Industry was also an important cyclical pace-
maker in the second quarter. Output was1
1/C252% up on the first quarter after adjustment
for seasonal and calendar effects. Industrywas therefore able to maintain the pace ofgrowth experienced in the second half of2005, after momentum temporarily weak-ened to
1/C252% in the first quarter. At the same
time, there was also a further sharp rise incapacity utilisation. According to Ifo surveys,it exceeded the average level of medium-Seasonally adjusted
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 2006Log scale  
Real GDP
2000 = 100Economic growth in Germany
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−106
104
102
100
98
96
1In accordance with the residence concept, overnight
accommodation expenses, the purchase of admission
tickets by non-residents and the consumption by World
Cup visitors in Germany, for example, are recorded as in-
come from cross-border services both in the balance of
payments statistics and in the national accounts system.Industrial
activity remains
positive

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
41term capacity utilisation by roughly 31/C254per-
centage points in June 2006. This signifies afurther rise in the propensity and necessity forinvestment in capacity extensions.
The intermediate goods industry recorded the
largest growth in output. Manufacturers ofbasic metals, in particular, recorded signifi-cant gains. Manufacturers of electrical ma-chinery and apparatus were also able to growmore strongly than in the first quarter. Bycontrast, chemicals suppliers had to curtailtheir production level somewhat after a stag-nation in the first three months. Output inthe consumer goods and durables industryclearly surpassed the level recorded betweenJanuary and March. After sustaining losses inthe first quarter, the non-durable consumergoods industry was also able to increase itsoutput in the second quarter. The capitalgoods sector experienced only moderategrowth in output after recording a sharp risein the first quarter. This was mainly due to thesubdued trend in the motor vehicle manufac-turing sector. Output in the manufacture ofmachinery and equipment became some-what weaker. By comparison, there was amarked decline in the manufacture of com-puters and other information processingequipment.
In the second quarter, seasonally adjusted
German exports of goods were 1% up innominal terms on the previous period wherethere had been a sharp rise in exports. How-ever, this growth can primarily be traced backto the price component. Although exports tocountries outside of the euro area increasedfurther, particularly to the ten new EU mem-ber states and the Russian Federation, sales
of German products to the euro area partnercountries did, however, decline recently.While exports of capital and consumer goodsdeclined in April and May (figures with a sec-toral breakdown are available until then), theintermediate goods industry was able to ex-pand its foreign business somewhat. Themotor vehicle industry also showed goodsales figures abroad.2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 2006Log scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank5+
0
5−
10−
15−105
90100
8595
8090
75
7010+
5+
0
5−110
105
100
95
90
Foreign trade
more subdued

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
42The value of imports rose by just under 1% in
the second quarter after adjustment for sea-sonal variations and thus much the same asexport sales. In real terms, however, therewas a decline in imports of goods. This mainlyaffected imports of capital goods and energysources. However, imports of intermediategoods, in particular from the ten new EUmember states, rose slightly in real terms.
After the construction industry had particu-
larly suffered from adverse weather condi-tions in the first quarter, the second quartersaw the emergence of a rapid period of nor-malisation in construction activity. During thistime period, output exceeded the weak firstquarter by 10
1/C252% after adjustment for sea-
sonal and calendar effects. Compared withthe fourth quarter of 2005, which was not af-fected by adverse weather conditions, the in-
crease was 3
1/C252%. There was a particularly
strong growth in output in the civil engineer-ing sector, which is possibly connected withcatch-up effects after the production losses inthe winter months and an increase in roadconstruction assignments in the run-up to theFIFA World Cup.
Commercial service providers continue to
benefit from the favourable economic activityin industry. According to the Ifo business sur-vey, the current business conditions are stillrated positively. According to the survey bythe Centre for European Economic Research,the rating has even improved vis-/C224-vis the firstquarter. Computer and telecommunicationservice providers, in particular, assessed theirsituation more confidently, as did computerretailers. Architects, external auditors and taxconsultants were also among those who citedmore optimistic turnover ratings. By contrast,the advertising enterprises questioned as partof the survey were more restrained in their as-sessments.
Real turnover in the retail trade sector grew
by just over
1/C252% in the second quarter in sea-
sonal and working-day adjusted terms after ithad already increased by 1
1/C254% in the period
from January to March. The slowdown mayalso have been related to the back paymentof expenses for the last heating period, whichlimited spending in other areas. The retailtrade sector is likely to have benefited fromspecial effects in connection with the FIFAWorld Cup in June. This is at least indicatedby the sharp rise in turnover among grocers,beverage retailers and tobacconists in thisForeign trade by category of goods
Percentage change
Average of April and May 2006
compared with
Q1 2006;
seasonallyadjustedApril and
May 2005;unadjustedfigures
Item Exports Imports Exports Imports
Total + 0.8 + 0.2 + 11.2 + 14.5
Selected main
categories
Intermediate goods + 2.4 + 3.1 + 12.4 + 15.6Capital goods – 0.2 – 2.1 + 10.2 + 10.5Consumer goods – 1.3 + 0.2 + 6.6 + 9.3Energy . – 0.4 . + 44.6
Selected categories
Chemicals – 1.6 – 4.2 + 9.4 + 9.6Machinery + 0.5 + 1.3 + 8.7 + 11.9Motor vehicles andmotor vehicle parts + 1.2 – 0.5 + 9.4 + 4.1Information tech-nology + 0.7 – 4.2 + 11.8 + 14.5Metals and metalproducts + 4.2 + 7.7 + 17.7 + 23.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
Construction
industry in
period of
normalisationService
providers
continue to
assess current
situation as
positive
Trade subdued,
hotel and
restaurant
services more
favourable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
43month. In wholesale trade, the development
in the second quarter, which saw a year-on-year rise of 1
3/C254%, was also not as favourable
as in the previous three-month period whenwholesale turnover was 3
3/C254% up on the year.
By contrast, developments in hotel and res-taurant services were more favourable.Growth was recorded in the area of accom-modation services, in particular, and for thefirst time in quite a while, the turnover in thecatering trade was virtually no longer belowthe corresponding prior-year figures.
Employment and unemployment
The more favourable overall economic devel-
opment has now reached the labour marketas well. The number of persons in work,which has been revised considerably upwardssince the third quarter of 2005, increased byover 100,000 to almost 39 million persons inthe second quarter of this year after adjust-ment for seasonal variations. In a year-on-year comparison, this increase, which wasjust as strong for employed persons as forself-employed persons, was also quite signifi-cant at 0.5%. Estimates by the Federal Em-ployment Agency, which, however, only go asfar as May, suggest that seasonally adjustedemployment subject to social security contri-butions has not decreased for the first time inover five years. According to these calcula-tions, there was an increase of 85,000 jobs inApril and May, compared with the first quar-ter. If these figures are confirmed, it wouldmean that this would also be the first time ina long while that there has not been a year-on-year decrease. There was a particularlySeasonally adjusted, quarterly
Millions
Millions
Thou-
sands
Millions
Thou-
sands
%
0
12Unemployment rateJulyJulyLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed
- 
JulyLin scale
Employed
Year-on-year changeof which
Workers
subject to
social security
contributions- Apr/
MayLog scale
EmployedLabour market
1From January 2004, unemployed ex-
cluding participants in aptitude testing and
training measures. — 2From January 2005,
including persons formerly receiving social
assistance but able to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
1110
9
8
7600+
300+
0
300−5.0
4.4
4.1
3.84.7500+
0
500−28.0
27.5
27.0
26.5
26.039.5
39.0
38.5
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Employment on
the increase

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
44strong increase in commercial services, which
also include labour leasing. The decliningnumber of short-time workers and the risingnumber of job vacancies also point to anemerging cyclical revival of the labour mar-ket. Surveys carried out among enterprises re-garding their hiring plans also seem to con-firm this. Part-time low-paid employment inthe form of “mini jobs” also expanded fur-ther. However, the number of persons em-ployed in government-assisted employmentopportunities (one-euro jobs) declined some-what in the second quarter.
The reduction in unemployment continued in
the second quarter of 2006 owing to the im-proved situation in employment. The numberof persons registered as unemployed de-creased by 115,000 to now 4.59 million per-sons in the second quarter; the unemploy-ment rate went down from 11.3% in the firstquarter to 11.0%. This decline, however, isoverstated by about 0.1 percentage pointowing to the annual adjustment of the refer-ence variable (size of labour force) in May.
2In
a year-on-year comparison, the number ofpersons registered as unemployed at the Fed-eral Employment Agency decreased by330,000. The unemployment rate was downby 0.9 percentage point on the year. Apartfrom the increase in demand for labour, an-other significant reason for this trend was themore stringent requirements set by employ-ment services for job seekers and the reduc-tion of wage substitution benefits with theresult that some job seekers did not reregisterthemselves as unemployed. In addition, morepeople took advantage of the early retire-ment rule pursuant to Social Security Code III,section 428, the “58-year-old regulation”
(58er-Regelung ). In line with this regulation,
the beneficiaries receive unemploymentbenefit but are generally no longer countedas being unemployed.
The decline in the number of persons regis-
tered as unemployed also continued in July.After adjustment for seasonal variations, thisfigure was down 85,000 persons on themonth. However, owing to the fact that thereporting date was brought forward to themiddle of the month, the economic upturnmay be somewhat overstated as the usualseasonal rise in unemployment in July will notbe fully recorded until August this year.
Wages and prices
The pay settlements on the labour market
were, on average, somewhat higher than in2005 although there was considerable vari-ation from sector to sector. In the public sec-tor, the agreement reached in May by localgovernments to extend the negotiated num-ber of working hours per week after a14-week strike was followed by a new col-lective pay settlement (TV-L) by state govern-ments for fee structures, weekly workingtimes and annual special payments. More-
2In the unemployment statistics for the first quarter of
2005, persons receiving social assistance but who are
able to work were included only in the numerator of the
ratio (unemployed persons), but not in the denominator
(total of all civil members of the workforce). The denom-
inator is adjusted only once a year when the results of
the microcensus of the previous year become available.
Owing to this adjustment of the numerator, the national
unemployment rate has been overstated by about 0.1
percentage point since the beginning of 2005. The recal-
culation of the reference variable in May 2006 corrected
this statistical effect.Declining
unemployment
Pay settlements
somewhat
higher than in
previous year

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
45over, management and the trade unions
agreed on one-off payments graded accord-ing to income for this year and next year, butnot on a general increase of remuneration.Following the doctors at university hospitalsand hospitals run by the Federal state, doc-tors at local authority hospitals achieved sig-nificant pay increases and improved workingconditions.
In the private banking sector, the negotiating
partners agreed that a one-off payment andlinear increases of 3% as of 1 September2006 and 1.5% as of 1 December 2007would be paid by the end of June 2008. Inthe case of Deutsche Telekom AG, the wageagreement which is to remain valid until theend of July 2007, envisages the pay-out ofone-off payments and a 3% pay increase foremployees as of 1 November 2006. Further-more, the negotiating partners agreed onmeasures to cut costs and boost productivity.In the wood and plastics processing industry,there were settlements comprising one-offpayments and a linear pay increase of 2.5%for a period of 12 months. Depending on theeconomic situation of the enterprise, theamount of the one-off payment can be ad-justed upon agreement with the workers’council. For the temporary employment sec-tor, a minimum wage agreement of 37.00
per hour in West Germany and 36.10 per
hour in East Germany was reached during theperiod under review, which is to be achievedby broadening the scope of the GermanEmployee Posting Act ( Arbeitnehmer-
Entsendegesetz ) to this sector.On an average of all sectors, the monthly ne-
gotiated rates of pay were 1.6% up on theyear in the second quarter of 2006. Thegreater increase compared with the first quar-ter is mainly due to an increased number ofone-off payments not applying to scheduledrates of pay, which had already been deter-mined in previous pay agreements for thecorresponding months. When assessing themost recent pay agreements in terms of theireffects on costs and employment, it shouldbe borne in mind that the final rates are notonly higher on average, but they also do notbecome fully effective until later in the year.Moreover, shorter durations were agreed onthe whole, which means that a new round ofnegotiations will be required in the secondand third quarters of next year when theprice effects resulting from the increase inVAT as of 1 January 2007 will start to have areal effect.
The external upward pressure on prices inten-
sified again in the past few months. After ad-justment for seasonal variations, import pricesrose by 1.7% in the second quarter after ris-ing by 1.3% in the first quarter. The year-on-year increase went up from 6.2% to 6.7%despite the appreciation of the euro againstthe currencies of the most important tradingpartners. In this context, the appreciation ofthe euro only marginally alleviated the do-mestic price effects resulting from the surgein commodity prices on the international mar-kets. Prices for imported energy were up byalmost 35% on the year and by more than20% for metal ores. Apart from that, how-ever, the external upward pressure on pricesremained within narrow bounds, even
Aggregate level
of negotiated
wages
Sharp increase
in import prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
46though the general price development was
rather more unfavourable than in the previ-ous year. Although prices of imported capitalgoods were down 1.2% on the year andprices of consumer goods rose by a mere1.3%, price decreases for capital goods, how-ever, were still at 3.7% in the second quarterof 2005 and prices of consumer goods fell by0.6%. Owing to moderately increasing exportprices, the terms of trade were down by3.8% on the year.
Industrial producer prices for domestic sales
rose by a seasonally adjusted 1.7% in theperiod from April to June, almost as sharplyas at the beginning of the year. Althoughpressure on prices for energy from domesticproduction eased somewhat, it intensified inthe case of intermediate goods, which alsoinclude metals and semi-finished products.Capital goods experienced a relatively moder-ate price increase with a year-on-year rise of+0.6%. The accelerated price increase forconsumer goods (+1.6%, after being +1.2%in the first quarter) was primarily due to high-er prices for pork, the supply of which suf-fered from a decline in sales owing to the hotand dry summer weather. All in all, the year-on-year rate of increase of industrial producerprices rose to 6.1% in the second quarter,compared with 5.7% in the first threemonths.
There was a further sharp rise in construction
prices in the second quarter; an increase of1.9% on the year. The increase in the cost ofroad construction was particularly strongwith an annual growth rate of 3.4%. This isattributable to the sharp rise in the price of2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
%
JulyLin scale
Year-on-year changeConsumer prices2Construction prices 1Producer prices
of agricultural productsProducer prices
of industrial productsLog scale
Import pricesImport, producer and
consumer prices
1Not seasonally adjusted. — 2 National
consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
2+
1+
0112
109
106
103
100
97106
103
100112
109
106
103
100
97
94118
115
112
109
106
103
100
97109
106
103
100
97
94
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Price of
domestic
industrial
products rises
Rising prices in
construction

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
47bitumen (+54% on the year) in connection
with the rising oil prices. Construction pricesof residential buildings also increased by1.5% compared with the second quarter of2005.
After the seasonally adjusted pressure on
consumer prices had initially come to a halt atthe beginning of the year, it intensified againin the following months under the influenceof rising oil prices. There was a particularlysharp rise in the price of fuel and heating oil.The particularly warm and dry summer wea-ther from June onwards also played a role inthis, especially as it followed a long and par-ticularly cold winter. This led to a price in-crease particularly for vegetables and pota-toes, but edged up the prices of other foodproducts, too. After adjustment for seasonalvariations, the consumer price index rose by0.7% in the second quarter of 2006. Com-pared with the previous year, the increasewas +2.0%. Excluding energy and food, priceinflation declined to 0.2% on the quarter andto 0.8% on the year. This shows that, apartfrom the components which are especiallysensitive to the weather and the conditionson the world market, the domestic pricetrend remained subdued. The price for indus-trial goods (excluding energy) increased by0.7% on the year, services by 0.9% andhousing rents by 1%.
Consumer prices were 1.9% up on the year
at the beginning of the third quarter com-pared with the previous year; the HarmonisedIndex of Consumer Prices increased by 2.1%on the year. Apart from the increase in oilprices, this was also due to the fact that thedecrease in food prices in July was more re-
strained than usual and that package holidaysbecame much more expensive. By contrast,the strong price reductions for clothing dur-ing the summer clearance sales had a damp-ening effect on the growth rate of consumerprices.
Orders received and outlook
The situation in industrial orders also showed
a positive trend in the second quarter. Afteradjustment for seasonal and working-dayvariations, the inflow of orders in the secondquarter was 1% up on the average level re-corded in the previous three months whendemand increased by 1
1/C252%. That is equiva-
lent to a year-on-year increase of 10%, com-pared with 10
1/C252% in the first quarter. Taking
the first six months of the year as a whole,the growth in demand in the second half of2005 at 6
1/C252%, which was, however, influ-
enced by large orders, has now fallen to3
3/C254%.
Against this backdrop, there was a slight
downturn in the flow of orders during thecourse of the second quarter. After a sharprise in April, slight deductions were recordedin May and June. In June, these mainly affect-ed domestic demand, which had previouslyrecorded an increase, whereas demand fromabroad remained at a high level in thismonth. In the period from April to June, do-mestic orders rose by 3% in total, after theyhad remained unchanged in the first quarter.The rise in domestic demand was thus at itshighest level in a long time. By contrast, for-Accelerated
increase in
consumer
prices
Favourable
economic
activity in
industry at
somewhat
slower pace

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
48eign orders slowed down a little in the second
quarter.
The capital goods manufacturing sector
played a key role in this. The decline in thissector was almost exclusively due to a lull inorders for manufacturers of motor vehiclesand motor vehicle parts, which did, however,experience strong growth in the first quarter.Excluding this sector, overall foreign demandwas up on the already high level recorded inthe first quarter. By contrast, there was an in-crease in the number of incoming orders inthe mechanical engineering sector, whichwas due to more buoyant domestic businessactivity. The producers of office machines andtelecommunication equipment concluded asmany orders as in the first quarter. In the caseof intermediate goods, however, incomingorders grew considerably in the second quar-ter after they had stagnated at first. Manu-facturers of basic metals, in particular, closeda number of new deals. The key stimuli in thisarea came from domestic customers, butthere were also more orders from foreign cus-tomers. Manufacturers of electrical machin-ery and apparatus also significantly increasedtheir inflow of orders. Foreign business pickedup in particular. In the chemicals industry, for-eign business was also a key factor for theoverall increase in incoming orders, whereasthe improved situation in orders for manufac-turers of consumer goods resulted in equalmeasure from domestic and foreign business.
The fact that the stocks of orders are quite
high and that the positive sentiment in indus-try has remained strong also suggests thatthis favourable business development willVolume, 2000 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeApr/
May
1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 2006Total construction orders
Apr/MayDomesticLog scale
ForeignLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Total industrial ordersDemand for industrial goods
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−10+115
100110
95105
90100
85
80
75
70
65105
100
95
90100135
95130
90125
85120
80115
110
105
10015+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−115
110
105
100
95
90
85
- 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
49continue. The picture for small and medium-
sized enterprises is also now looking more fa-vourable. Although the Ifo business climatewas revised downwards somewhat in Julyowing to the fact that business expectationswere not as optimistic as before and that ex-port expectations were rated somewhat morecautiously in June and July, there is still, how-ever, an overall strong feeling of confidencein the German economy. The decline in busi-ness expectations in July may also be linkedto the fact that the negative effects of the in-crease in VAT that are expected to affectwholesale and retail trade in particular havebeen entered as part of the survey’s expect-ations horizon for the first time.
However, the fact that the situation in orders
in the construction industry has improved fur-ther is particularly likely to ease the burden.On average and after adjustment for seasonaland working-day variations, the number ofincoming orders was 7% up in April and Mayon the weak first quarter, which was influ-enced by poor weather conditions. This isequivalent to a year-on-year increase of 10%.The sharpest increase in construction demandin May was among industrial customers. Witha seasonally adjusted growth of just under15% in the period from April to May, follow-ing the interruption sustained as a result ofthe subdued first quarter, industrial demandfor construction work again benefited fromthe positive underlying trend which had beenunderway since the second quarter of lastyear. In housing construction, losses weremade in May after an exceptionally strongrise in April. All in all, incoming orders in Apriland May were about 7% up on the subduedlevel of the first quarter and 2
3/C254% up on the
average level of the final quarter of 2005. Fol-lowing the previously apparent effects in con-nection with the discontinuation of the grantto homebuyers, considerably fewer buildingpermits were issued in the past few months.
According to the Ifo Institute survey, commer-
cial service providers are not rating their pro-spects quite as optimistically as before. Thus,business expectations in the second quarterbarely held their ground against the high levelrecorded in the first quarter. The assessmentswere more cautious in July. According to re-ports of the Centre for European EconomicResearch, it is mainly telecommunication ser-vice providers, computer retailers and tech-nical consultants who are rating their demandsituation more favourably. By contrast, theadvertising industry and computer serviceproviders made more cautious assessments.
In the coming months, the outlook for trade
will probably be increasingly influenced bythe special effect of the rise in VAT. Therefore,certain anticipatory effects are likely to be ex-pected later on in the year, which could thenbe accompanied by corresponding losses. Ac-cording to the most recent survey for themonth of July by the consumer research insti-tution, Gesellschaft f/C252r Konsumforschung
(GfK), households are more pessimistic abouttheir income outlook as well as their expect-ations regarding economic activity. Althoughthe propensity to purchase has clearly risen,as was seen in the past few months already, itremains to be seen to what extent the in-creased propensity to spend will actually bereflected in a sustained stronger consumer
Revived
demand for
construction
workService
providers
somewhat
more sceptical
about future
developments
Outlook
in trade
influenced by
special effects

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
50demand. In the past, there have always been
longer periods in which these factors de-veloped in opposite directions. Another factorto be taken into consideration is that energyprices went up strongly again recently, there-by limiting the amount of disposable incomeavailable for other consumption.
Against the background of the sustained
positive outlook in industry among commer-cial service providers, albeit recently on asomewhat weaker scale, there is much tosuggest that the economic upswing will con-tinue. The German economy is likely to con-tinue to benefit from the strong growth ofthe global economy. Owing to the substantialrise in industrial capacity utilisation, invest-ment in capacity extensions is becoming evermore important. The recent increase in de-mand for private non-residential constructionfrom industrial customers is also encouraging.
However, since no further stimuli are beinggenerated as a result of the normalisation inconstruction activity, the contribution togrowth from construction investment in thecoming months is likely to be less substantialthan in the second quarter. One-off effects inconnection with the FIFA World Cup are nowalso disappearing. However, anticipatory ef-fects are to be expected in the constructionindustry in the second half of 2006 owing tothe increase in VAT. Private consumptioncould therefore also assume a more promin-ent role. More important, however, is thatconsumption gains a sound footing in light ofthe sustained improvement in the labour mar-ket, while the persistently high energy pricescontinue to place a great deal of strain onconsumption.
Economic
outlook
remains
positive

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
51Public financesGeneral government budget
The public finances situation is likely to im-
prove somewhat this year. As things nowstand, the general government deficit ratio,which amounted to 3.3% in 2005, will de-crease to below the 3% ceiling if the govern-ment pursues a moderate spending policy.However, this decrease can be attributedmainly to the favourable economic climate.The general government debt ratio is likely toexceed last year’s figure of 67.7%, therebymoving further away from the referencevalue (60%).
The general government revenue ratio (as de-
fined in the national accounts) is expected toremain stable at almost the same level as in2005. The social contributions will presum-ably increase only slightly as a result of mod-erate growth in gross wages and salaries, andnon-tax revenue will actually decrease in ab-solute terms. However, there is some indica-tion that tax revenue will experience muchstronger growth than the nominal gross do-mestic product (GDP) and that this will causethe tax ratio to increase considerably. The keyfactor here is not the fiscal measures that, onbalance, have a rather neutral effect but thefavourable economic climate and the particu-larly strong growth in profit-related taxes. Theexpenditure side of the general governmentbudget is also benefiting from the favourableeconomic climate. In addition, the moderategrowth in expenditure on old-age provisionand the expected decline in personnel ex-penditure should help to reduce the expend-iture ratio overall, although additionalDeficit ratio
likely to be
below 3% limit
for 2006
Revenue ratio
expected to
remain almost
constant ...
... and
expenditure
ratio to
decrease

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
52Deutsche BundesbankDevelopments in the government revenue and expenditure ratio up to 2007
In its Implementation Report to the European Commission,
the Federal Government predicts that by the end of 2007 thegeneral government deficit ratio in Germany will have fallenfrom 3.3% in 2005 to 2
1/C252%.1A slight decline in the revenue
ratio will be accompanied by a sharper reduction in theexpenditure ratio. The economic research institutes’ jointassessment from the second quarter of this year presents asimilar picture, assuming an even sharper decline in the ex-penditure and the deficit ratio.
At first glance, this finding appears to contradict the obser-
vation that the new Federal Government’s consolidationmeasures – especially in the period under review – primarilyconcern the revenue side, mainly tax and social securityrates.
2However, the apparent contradiction disappears when
it is remembered that, although rises in tax rates push up therevenue ratio, it is not only current fiscal policy decisions,such as the Growth and Employment Promotion Programmeand the new Federal Government’s consolidation package,which influence the development of the general govern-ment revenue and expenditure ratio. Rather, decisions takenin the past, such as the shortening of the maximum period ofentitlement to unemployment benefit l and the reduction ofthe grant to new home buyers starting in 2004, also have animpact. Moreover, the general structure of the tax and trans-fer system, for example, the modalities for adjusting socialbenefits or the progressive effect of the tax system (fiscaldrag), may also lead to changes in the revenue and expendit-ure ratio even without discretionary measures. Finally, cyc-lical movements and longer-term macroeconomic trends aswell as demographic changes have a perceptible impact onthe ratio of government income and expenditure to GDP.
Revenue ratio developments
3
Fiscal policy measures and fiscal drag
On the revenue side, discretionary fiscal policy measures in
2006 and 2007 would – when viewed in isolation – lead to atotal increase of roughly
3/C254percentage point in the revenueratio. This is due almost entirely to measures by the new Fed-
eral Government, in particular, the increase in the standardrate of VAT and insurance tax by 3 percentage points, whichwill be offset only partly by the reduction in the contributionrate to the Federal Employment Agency. In addition, thestructure of the tax and social security system, especially theprogressive income tax scale, will lead to a slight increase inthe ratio (fiscal drag).
Development in macroeconomic assessment bases of major
taxes and social security contributions weaker than nominalGDP
The factors mentioned above will, however, merely offset a
decline in the revenue ratio which would otherwise be ex-pected – mainly because highly “revenue-yielding” macro-economic assessment bases will grow less strongly than nom-inal GDP. Taxes and statutory social security contributions arelargely based on variables included in the national income.If, as is expected this year and next, national income growsmore slowly than nominal GDP,
4the key macroeconomic
basis for taxes and statutory contributions in relation to GDPwill decline. The main reason why national income is laggingfar behind nominal GDP growth is the increase in thestandard rate of VAT by 3 percentage points in 2007, as VATreceipts are among those deducted from GDP to arrive atnational income.
Changes in the distribution of national income also have a
significant impact – as can be seen from the development ofthe wage ratio (measured as the share of employee compen-sation in national income). In fiscal terms, entrepreneurialand investment income is far less lucrative than compensa-tion of employees
5mainly because of the burden of social se-
curity contributions on the latter.6In 2006 and also in 2007,
the decline in the wage ratio observed in recent years is likelyto continue. However, it should be borne in mind that thefunctional distribution of income fluctuates with cyclicaldevelopments and, typically, the wage ratio falls during anupswing and rises during a downturn. Furthermore, sectoralshifts in value added and changes in the forms of employ-
1The Implementation Report for 2007 quotes rounded figures which
make the analysis more difficult. The reason given is the uncertaintiesassociated with projections. — 2The Implementation Report presents a
somewhat different picture. This is partly because it also takes into ac-count some expenditure measures from the preceding legislativeperiod. — 3On the analytical approach see: J Kremer, CR Braz, T Bro-
sens, G Langenus, S Momigliano, M Spolander, A disaggregated frame-work for the analysis of structural developments in public finance, Re-search Centre of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Discussion Paper Series 1,
05/2006; and Deutsche Bundesbank, A disaggregated framework foranalysing public finances: Germany’s fiscal track record between 2000and 2005, Monthly Report, March 2006, pp 61-76. — 4The ratio of na-
tional income to GDP declines when depreciation or taxes on produc-tion increase disproportionately or when subsidies grow more slowlythan GDP . The ratio also declines when the balance from the income ofnon-residents in Germany and the income of residents abroad increases

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
53ment are likely to curb the wage ratio. Moreover, given the
continually rapid increase in the degree of openness, particu-larly in the German economy, it may be assumed that thetrend towards the production of capital-intensive goods willincrease and, as a result of this progressive specialisation, thewage ratio will fall.
As regards the use of GDP, it is particularly private consump-
tion (before VAT and excise taxes) that is subject to taxes andsocial security contributions. This highly revenue-yielding as-sessment base could also grow more slowly than GDP.
Thus, overall, the macroeconomic reference variables of ma-
jor taxes and social security contributions are likely to growmore slowly than nominal GDP in 2006 and 2007, thus curb-ing the revenue ratio.
Expenditure ratio developments
In the period under review, the new Federal Government’s
measures will, on balance, not have a significant impact onthe expected decline in the general government expenditureratio.
7By contrast, measures agreed before the formation of
the new Government (such as cuts in unemployment benefitI) and the general structure of the transfer system will play amore extensive role – even though the impact is more diffi-cult to quantify here than on the revenue side. For example,the pension adjustment formula – through the presumedcontribution to a supplementary private pension scheme(“Riester reform steps”) and the sustainability factor, amongother things – are partly responsible for the fact that a posi-tive pension adjustment is scarcely to be expected in 2007,either.
Finally, the shifts in the structure of GDP described above, in
particular the expected moderate rise in gross wages and sal-aries, will almost automatically be reflected in lower expend-iture growth rates. This applies, first of all, to personnel ex-penditure when parallel pay developments in the privateand public sector are taken as the “normal line”.
8In add-ition, important social benefits such as pensions and unem-
ployment benefit I are essentially dependent on wage devel-opments, and government healthcare spending is stronglyinfluenced by the wages and salaries to be paid in thislabour-intensive sector. Thus, to a certain extent, the expend-iture ratio will fall even without active consolidation effortsby fiscal policy makers. Furthermore, the VAT-inducedgrowth in nominal GDP will curb not only the revenue ratio,but the expenditure ratio as well.
9
Concluding remarks
The general government deficit ratio in Germany could fall
considerably by 2007. The new fiscal policy measures, in par-ticular tax increases, are particularly important in this re-spect. This should lead to a broad stabilisation in the revenueratio because it will more or less offset the below-averagegrowth in the revenue-yielding macroeconomic assessmentbases in relation to GDP. There will not be any perceptibledecline in the expenditure ratio as a result of the FederalGovernment’s new fiscal policy measures but rather thanks,in particular, to macroeconomic structural shifts and earliermeasures.
With regard to the medium and longer-term repercussions
for growth and employment, it would have been preferableto accept the prevailing trend towards a decline in the rev-enue ratio and to view this revenue development as thestarting point for determining the expenditure path, the rea-son being that, if the tax and social security rates which arepredominantly responsible for distortionary effects are raisedor the effective burden of taxes and social security contribu-tions on wages, profits and consumption is increased, the fis-cal policy setting will deteriorate even if the revenue ratio re-mains unchanged. To achieve the necessary deficit reductiondespite this, measures would have to be taken on theexpenditure side in order to accelerate the decline in the ex-penditure ratio which is – partly quasi automatically – al-ready underway.
disproportionately. — 5As a rule, this also applies if gross wages and
salaries, which constitute the macroeconomic assessment base forwage tax and social security contributions, are considered instead ofcompensation of employees. — 6In addition, shifts within employee
compensation at the expense of employment subject to social securitycontributions as witnessed in recent years should be taken intoaccount. — 7Pursuant to the Federal Government’s Implementation
Report, the expenditure ratio is expected to fall by roughly 1 percen-tage point, with an annual average rise in expenditure of roughly
0.7% or approximately 515 million in total. Thus, the growth in expen-
diture is well below the expected rise in nominal GDP . — 8The rela-
tively modest public sector pay settlement for 2006 and 2007 will alsocreate additional savings. — 9This also applies to the cut in the pension
insurance contributions paid by central government on behalf of re-cipients of unemployment benefit II from 2007.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
54charges are expected as a result of unemploy-
ment benefit II in particular.
In the coming year the government deficit
ratio is likely to decrease significantly. Themain reasons for this improvement are thecentral government’s fiscal package, whichwill lead to additional revenue as a result oftax increases, and the moderate increase onthe expenditure side, which is expected as aresult of stringent budget management andforgoing any additional measures that mightincrease expenditure. On the other hand, theoverall economic assessment bases for signifi-cant charges are likely to develop at a muchslower rate than nominal GDP (see the ex-planatory notes on pages 52-53).
The Ecofin Council stepped up the ongoing
excessive deficit procedure against Germanyon 14 March 2006. Germany was calledupon to correct its excessive deficit as swiftlyas possible and by no later than 2007 as wellas to reduce the structural deficit ratio by atotal of at least 1 percentage point over thecourse of 2006 and 2007. Once the excessivedeficit has been corrected, it is to be reducedfurther by at least
1/C252percentage point per
year until the medium-term objective of a bal-anced budget is achieved. The Council de-manded that Germany submit a report, firstby 14 July 2006 and thereafter twice yearly.This report is to detail the measures that Ger-many has taken to meet the requirements de-cided upon by the Council.
1In the first imple-
mentation report of 5 July 2006, central gov-ernment expects a deficit ratio of 3.1% in thecurrent year and 2
1/C252% in the coming year. As
a result of the fact that not all additional taxrevenue is deemed to be cyclically induced,
the structural deficit ratio will decrease by0.2 percentage point this year. In 2007 fiscalmeasures are to ensure that the ratio de-creases by approximately 1 percentage point.
On the basis of this implementation report,
the European Commission has calculated thatthe structural balance of revenue and ex-penditure would increase by a total of only0.9 percentage point in relation to GDP in2006 and 2007. However, the Commissionbelieves that Germany has made sufficientprogress in correcting its excessive deficitwithin the deadline specified. The centralgovernment, it says, has decreased the struc-tural deficit ratio by almost the requiredamount. No further action is currently neces-sary in connection with the excessive deficitprocedure. The European Commission has,however, expressed concern that, as thingscurrently stand, structural consolidation after2007 is not likely to reach the required 0.5%of GDP per year.
Calculations by the Commission clearly show
that the scope of the planned consolidationmeasures cannot be reduced and that pru-dent budget management is required at alllevels of government. Germany should makeevery possible effort to observe the 3% ceil-ing in 2006. The current favourable develop-ment of revenue should on no account beused as an excuse to ease the consolidationcourse. The explicit aim of the revised Euro-pean Stability and Growth Pact is to take aneven stronger consolidation course if devel-
1See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, March
2006, p 8.Marked decline
in deficit ratio
expected in
2007
Central govern-
ment submits
implementation
report as part
of excessive
deficit
procedureCommission
suspends
excessive deficit
procedure
against
Germany
No reduction in
scope of
planned
consolidation
measures for
2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
55opments are more favourable than expected
and not – as was often the case in the past –to allocate unexpected additional revenue im-mediately elsewhere. According to the cur-rent financial plan, the basic aim of a structur-ally balanced budget will not be achieved by2010. If there is less consolidation, the dangerincreases that the deficit ratios will quicklyrise again in the event of unfavourablemacroeconomic developments. The centralgovernment’s budgetary position in particularremains critical even in a positive environ-ment, and the constitutional borrowing limitsare not even close to being met structurally.After 2007 it will be necessary to decreasethe structural deficit rapidly to take due ac-count of future budgetary strains stemmingfrom demographic developments and to re-duce the general government debt ratio.From today’s perspective, additional consoli-dation measures are required to achieve this.
This does not leave any leeway for strains on
the budget that may arise as a result of theplanned business taxation and health systemreforms. Sound counterfinancing measuresare of far greater importance. Factoring inself-financing effects on a grand scale wouldgo against prudent budgetary policy. Ongrounds of efficiency and growth, it would bemore advantageous to implement savings onthe expenditure side or to decrease tax ex-emptions as a means of counterfinancing thereforms.Budgetary development of central,
state and local government
2
Tax revenue
Tax revenue3increased significantly in the
second quarter and was almost 9% up onthe same period last year (see also the tableon page 56). Of the direct taxes, wage tax rev-enue increased by 2
1/C252%. The positive trend in
profits meant that revenue from profit-relatedtaxes grew especially sharply (by over 54% or36
1/C252billion), albeit from a rather weak levelYear-on-year change
%Tax revenue *
*Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes, which are not yet
known for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−
2004 2005 2006
2Reporting below is based on the budgetary definition
(as defined in the government’ s financial statistics). The
development of local government finances is analysed in
greater detail in the short article in the Monthly Report of
July 2006.
3Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the last quarter recorded.No leeway for
budgetary
strains in
planned
reforms
Sharp increase
in tax revenue
in second
quarter

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
56in the previous year. The effects of the
marked decrease in refunds to employeesthat are deducted from assessed income taxcan also be seen here. Of the consumption-related taxes, revenue from turnover tax in-creased sharply (by over 6
1/C252%). Despite the
fact that growth was overstated in the previ-ous year as a result of a large refund, thepositive underlying trend of the previous fewquarters continues. Petrol consumption con-tinued to decline, resulting in a fall in mineraloil tax (-2%). In spite of the increase in to-bacco tax in September 2005, revenue re-mained at almost the same level as the previ-ous year owing to a decrease in consump-tion.
Tax revenue (excluding local government tax)
as a whole increased considerably (7
1/C252%) inthe first half of the year compared with the
first six months of 2005, and the favourabledevelopment continued in July. This meansthat growth is much higher than the rateforecast (just over 2
1/C252%) in the last official tax
revenue estimate for the current year in May.However, due consideration should be givento the fact that the tax subsidies agreed in2006 are likely to start reducing revenue overthe course of the year. In addition, variousspecial factors came into effect in the firsthalf of 2006.
4Even so, the official estimate
will clearly be exceeded as things now stand.Overall tax revenue and major individual taxes
H1 Q2Estimate
for2006
3
2005 2006 2005 2006
Year-on-year
changeYear-on-year
change
Type of tax 5billion in 5bnas a per-
centage 5billion in 5bnas a per-
centageYear-on-
yearpercent-agechange
Overall tax revenue
1 192.6 207.1 + 14.4 + 7.5 102.2 111.2 + 9.0 + 8.8 + 2.7
of which
Wage tax 56.9 57.9 + 1.0 + 1.7 29.0 29.8 + 0.7 + 2.6 + 1.1Assessed income tax – 0.4 3.8 + 4.2 . 3.4 5.9 + 2.5 + 74.3 + 36.7Investmentincome tax
2 11.4 12.5 + 1.0 + 8.9 5.6 7.0 + 1.4 + 24.8 + 3.6
Corporation tax 7.1 10.4 + 3.2 + 45.3 2.7 5.2 + 2.5 + 90.6 + 14.2Turnover tax 67.9 71.1 + 3.2 + 4.7 33.0 35.2 + 2.2 + 6.7 + 1.8Mineral oil tax 14.3 14.2 – 0.1 – 0.8 9.9 9.7 – 0.2 – 1.9 – 2.0Tobacco tax 6.1 6.4 + 0.3 + 4.6 3.6 3.6 – 0.0 – 0.2 + 3.0
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are notyet known for the last quarter recorded. — 2Non-assessed taxes on earnings and withholding tax on
interest income. — 3According to official tax estimate
of May 2006.
Deutsche Bundesbank
4These special factors include greater revenue from
motor vehicle tax in the first quarter as a result of taxing
previously tax-exempt low-pollutant cars from 1 January
2006; lower expenditure on grants to homebuyers, espe-
cially in March (the month in which the largest part of
the payment is due), as these grants were progressively
reduced beginning in 2004; and the low amount of turn-
over tax in the previous year.Increase in
taxes to date
greater than
estimated for
entire year

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
57In July the Federal Government approved the
key points of the reform of business and in-come tax that is to come into effect in 2008.The aim of the reform is to make Germany amore attractive business and investment loca-tion and to stabilise local government fi-nances. As details are yet to be specified,however, the legislators still have consider-able leeway. Measures are planned to reducethe tax burden on corporations from corpor-ation tax, local business tax and the solidaritysurcharge from the current level of almost40% to below 30%.
5This would put tax
rates at a high middle position in the EU taxtable. Non-corporations are to be granted taxrelief by means of preferential treatment forretained profits or self-financed investmentsand by lowering the inheritance tax and gifttax burden. In addition, a withholding tax forprivate capital income may be introduced.Counterfinancing measures that are currentlybeing considered include making further re-strictions on the tax-deductibility of interestexpenditure in connection with local businesstax and, possibly, also making restrictions inthe case of corporation tax, broadening thetax base to include components of totalwages paid or increasing property tax oncommercial real estate. Additional adjust-ments are also likely to be made. In this way,the low tax rates on profits made by Germancorporations can be partially offset by chan-ging the half-income system for dividends.
A comprehensive assessment is not yet pos-
sible on the basis of these key points. It is truethat by significantly decreasing the tax ratescharged to corporations, which are high byinternational standards, Germany should be-come more attractive as an international busi-
ness and investment location and this shouldreduce the incentive to seek accounting op-tions to avoid paying taxes in Germany. How-ever, the impact of tax cuts is watered downby the counterfinancing measures. If the taxsystem is to be made more incentive-oriented, the reform ought to be counterfi-nanced by cutting tax breaks or curbingspending. As a rule, important tax principles,such as the neutrality of financing and thetimely fiscal recognition of losses, should beobserved. There is reason to fear that theplanned introduction and extension of specialregulations will make tax law even more com-plicated and opaque.
Central government budgetCentral government recorded a surplus of
31
1/C252billion in the second quarter of 2006
compared with a deficit of 341/C252billion in the
same period last year. The increase of 21/C252%
in revenue is due to both a sharp rise in taxrevenue (of just over 34
1/C252billion or 9%) and
greater revenue from motorway tolls (+ 31/C252
billion). (One-off) proceeds from loan repay-
ments and the disposal of equity interests de-clined by just over 33
1/C252billion. Expenditure
decreased by almost 7% compared with2005. Two factors alone alleviated the strainon the central government budget by almost34 billion or just over 6% of expenditure –
firstly, the fact that central government nolonger had to pay grants to the Federal Em-ployment Agency this year and, secondly,that it received repayment from the Federal
5Depending on the local business tax multiplier.Key points of
business
taxation reform
approved
Fundamental
reform not yet
in sightSlight surplus in
central govern-
ment budget in
second quarter

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
58Employment Agency for the liquidity assist-
ance that it had provided at the beginning ofthe year and that had been booked as nega-tive expenditure. Interest costs were also justover 3
1/C252billion lower. The increase in expend-
iture on social security for job seekers(Hartz IV) was not as strong but still amount-ed to almost 3
1/C252billion (+4%).
At320 billion, the deficit in the central gov-
ernment budget in the first half of the yearwas 313
1/C252billion lower than in 2005. How-
ever, in the second half of 2006 various fac-tors that did not apply last year will probablyplace an additional strain on the budget. Forexample, measures taken by central govern-ment to stimulate growth are likely to slowadditional growth in tax revenue. Further-more, according to the central governmentbudget, larger contributions to the EU are to
be paid in the second half of 2006. In 2006central government will not receive repay-ments of liquidity assistance ( 35 billion) from
the Federal Employment Agency as it did atthe end of 2005. In addition, the central gov-ernment budget foresees that revenue fromasset realisations in the second half of theyear will amount to only half of the 315 bil-
lion that was received in the same period of2005. This figure could be even lower if someof these one-off proceeds are shifted to sub-sequent years as available funds owing to fa-vourable budgetary developments.
For 2006 as a whole, the central government
budget envisages an increase in the deficit of37 billion to almost 338
1/C252billion. Owing to
the fact that tax revenue is likely to be greaterthan expected, it is possible that the outturnwill be even more favourable. As things cur-rently stand, the risks on the expenditure sideare likely to be limited. Additional expend-iture expected as a result of unemploymentbenefit II and the central government’s sharein the costs of accommodation is likely to beat least partly offset by savings from integra-tion measures and from interest expenditure.
The Federal Cabinet approved the draft
budget for 2007 at the beginning of July. Thebudget envisages bringing down planned netborrowing to 322 billion. This is based primar-
ily on additional revenue from increasing thestandard rate of turnover tax and of addition-al fiscal measures. In addition, expenditure infavour of other public authorities will be dras-tically reduced. Easing the burden on centralgovernment means increasing the burden in€b n
€b n Cumulative
200420052006
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
200420052006Central government
balance of revenue and
expenditure since 2004
Deutsche Bundesbank20−
25−
30−
35−
40−
45−
50−10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
30−
Particularly
favourable
development in
first half of year
not likely to
continue for
whole yearDeficit may
be more
favourable than
expected for
year as a whole
2007 central
government
budget
characterised
by tax increases
and shifting
burdens

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
59other areas of the government budget. A
number of measures will be taken to achievethis: first, by cutting the grant for non-insurance-related benefits to the statutoryhealth insurance system (which was intro-duced only in 2004) by just over 32
1/C252billion;
second, by decreasing pension contributionsfor recipients of unemployment benefit II byaround 32 billion to almost half of their previ-
ous value; third, by reducing central govern-ment’s contribution to those costs paid bylocal government for accommodation for re-cipients of unemployment benefit II by over31
1/C252billion in accordance with the draft
budget; and fourth, by decreasing contribu-tions to be paid to the state governments forlocal public transport by 3
1/C252billion. Expend-
iture is estimated to be almost 21/C252% more
than the target for 2006. If the increasedgrants to the Federal Employment Agency inconnection with the rise in turnover tax areexcluded, central government expenditure isslightly down. If, however, the cuts made inpayments to other levels are also taken intoaccount, this again results in an increase ofapproximately 2
1/C252%. At the end of June the
Financial Planning Council agreed to limitgrowth in expenditure to less than 1%.
In 2007 net borrowing is to be brought back
below the limit defined in Article 115 of theBasic Law for the first time since 2001. Withinvestment expenditure at 323
1/C252billion, the
difference between that and net borrowing isonly 31
1/C252billion. In addition, extensive asset
realisations continue to be included in the fi-nancial plan. These actually represent disin-vestments and impair the government’s assetposition in the same way as borrowings. Justover 39 billion is to be raised by selling equity
interests alone. The assumption of debt asso-ciated with the planned earnings from re-structuring the ERP special fund is not to beincluded in the borrowing limit. Evidently thecentral government budget will again receiveadditional relief of approximately 35 billion
from the securitisation of claims on the PostOffice pension fund at the expense of subse-quent financial years. Even with the agreedcuts, the amounts budgeted for social secur-ity for job seekers seem rather limited. This in-dicates that the rather alarming structural im-balance of the central government budgetwill continue in 2007. On the revenue side,the results of the official May tax estimatewere increased not only to include plannedlegal changes but also a lump-sum premiumof approximately 32 billion resulting from the
positive outcome for May. Even if additionalrevenue has been emerging since the July fig-ures (which are now available), such adjust-ments are inconsistent with the basic inten-tion of maintaining an independent basis forbudgetary planning by means of the WorkingGroup on Tax Estimates. Given the need forfundamental consolidation measures, itseems advisable to use any additional revenuenot foreseen in the central governmentbudget not to relax fiscal policy but to helpdecrease the deficit further.
Central government’s medium-term financial
plan for the period up to 2010 envisages de-creasing net borrowing by only 3
1/C252billion per
year from 2008. In 2010 this will mean netborrowing of 320
1/C252billion and investment ex-
penditure of 3231/C252billion. The amounts
budgeted for non-tax revenue indicate thatContinued
structural
imbalance in
central govern-
ment budget
Medium-term
financial plan
envisages only
slight decrease
in deficit

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
60central government intends to realise a large
volume of assets to cover the extent of thestructural underfunding. Although the finan-cial plan includes shortfalls of 34 billion,
which are expected as a result of the businesstaxation reform that is to come into effect in2008, these are expected to decrease as timegoes on. However, it obviously does not takeinto consideration the agreed increase of theFederal grant to the statutory health insur-ance scheme. This amount is already far tooclose to the constitutional borrowing limitand could get dangerously close to exceedingit.
The special funds recorded a surplus of al-
most 31 billion in the second quarter com-
pared with 31
1/C252billion in the same period of
2005. As a result of lower repayments and anincrease in loans granted, the surplus of the
ERP special funds decreased somewhat.Withdrawals from the flood disaster fund setup in 2003 decreased again. It is likely thatthe special funds will show a surplus at theend of the year.
State government budgetsThe state government budgets recorded a
small surplus of almost 3
1/C254billion in the
second quarter compared with a deficit of 33
billion in the same period in 2005.6Revenue
increased by 51/C252% overall – boosted by a
sharp increase in tax revenue. At the sametime expenditure increased only slightly. Theparticularly large item of personnel expend-iture decreased by just over
1/C252% whereas in
the previous quarter, probably as a result ofoutsourcing, it had recorded a sharper de-cline. Overall, the deficit of the state govern-ment budgets decreased to just over 37 bil-
lion in the first half of 2006 from 311
1/C252billion
in the same period of 2005.
The state government financial plans foresee
only a moderate decrease in deficits to justover 323 billion for 2006. If tax revenue con-
tinues to develop positively, however, deficitscould decrease even further. Nevertheless,over half of the state governments are likelyto exceed their upper borrowing limits forstructural reasons again this year. Berlin, Bre-men, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia,Saarland and Schleswig-Holstein are not likelyto be able to observe these limits, even if theytake the proceeds from asset realisations intoFederal Government’s medium-term
financial planning
5billion
Financial planActual
2005Target
2006 1Draft2007
22008 32009 2010
Expenditure 259.8 261.6 267.6 274.3 274.9 276.8
of which
Investment 22.9 23.2 23.5 23.4 23.6 23.3
Revenue 228.6 223.4 245.6 252.8 253.9 256.3
of which
Taxes 190.1 194.0 214.5 218.2 226.0 231.1
Net borrowing 31.2 38.2 22.0 21.5 21.0 20.5Memo item:
Percentagechange in ex-penditure + 3.3 + 0.7 + 2.3
4 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.7
1Including asset realisations of around 516 billion — 2This contains
asset disposals of just over 515 billion including relief arising from
sales of claims on the Post Office pension fund. — 3From 2008 this
contains charges of 54 billion from the planned business tax reform
(decreasing over the course of time). — 4Adjusted for the revenue
from a turnover tax item given to the Federal Employment Agency,this results in a decrease of 0.2%.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6Including the figures for Saarland which are now avail-
able again.Special funds
record surplusMore
favourable
results for state
government
budgets in
second quarter
Sharper
decrease in
deficit possible
but upper
borrowing
limits often
exceeded for
structural
reasons

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
61account. By contrast, Bavaria and Saxony
may be able to conclude the year without netborrowing.
The reform of the federal structure that is to
come into effect in 2007 shifts responsibilityfor expenses to state governments – in par-ticular for state civil servants’ pay. State gov-ernments alone are to be responsible forhigher education in the future. This sees theend of both joint responsibility for construct-ing colleges and universities and planningeducation as well as of financial assistance toimprove local transport and to promote socialhousing. As compensation, state govern-ments are to receive Federal resources of 32
1/C252
billion every year until the end of 2013. How-
ever, state governments’ participatory rightsto influence national legislation will be re-stricted with the expected result that onlyhalf of all laws will require the consent ofstate governments. Having said this, new par-ticipatory rights are to be introduced for anynew laws that would entail considerablecosts for state governments. Transferring le-gislative power for land and buildings transfertax to state governments is a first step to in-creasing their fiscal autonomy. Stage two ofthe federal structure reform should see a de-tailed revision of the financial constitution.
7
Social security funds
Statutory pension insurance schemeIn the second quarter of 2006, the statutory
pension insurance scheme recorded a consid-erable surplus of over 32 billion following adeficit of almost 31
1/C252billion in the previous
year. This was due to considerably increasedincome from compulsory contributions bybringing forward the transfer deadline for so-cial contributions occurring in January in par-ticular and also, as a result of a transitionalregulation, those occurring in subsequentmonths up to and including July. Whilst rev-enue from compulsory contributions there-fore increased by almost 12%, the increase intotal revenue was much lower at 6
1/C252% be-
cause Federal grants, which cover just overone-quarter of the budget, virtually stag-nated. Pension expenditure increased onlyslightly, namely by
1/C252%. This was due not
only to the waiver of a pension adjustment inQuarterly
€b n
€b nLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
Expenditure
RevenueFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−64
62
60
58
56
54
2004 2005 2006
7See Deutsche Bundesbank, State government finances
in Germany, Monthly Report, July 2006, pp 48-49.Federal
structure
reform
increases state
government
responsibility
for expenses
Additional
revenue from
contributions to
statutory
pension
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
62July 2005 but also to the moderate growth in
the number of pensioners.
Over the remainder of 2006 the positive spe-
cial effects on the contribution side will peterout, and the less favourable underlying finan-cial trends will make themselves felt again.Nevertheless, at the end of the year, the min-imum reserve of 20% of a month’ s expend-iture will be significantly overshot. Even so,this financial buffer will probably not be suffi-
cient to forgo raising contribution rates in2007. However, the expected erosion of re-serves by the end of 2007 indicates a consider-able need for adjustment in the coming years.
Federal Employment AgencyThe Federal Employment Agency posted a
surplus of 32 billion in the second quarter of
2006 after recording a deficit of almost 3
1/C252
billion in the same period of last year. As was
the case in pension insurance, it was bringingforward the transfer date for contributionsthat provided the essential contribution tothis result. Revenue from contributions in-creased by just over 12% in the second quar-ter. In total, revenue increased by no morethan just over 4% year on year because cen-tral government reimbursements of adminis-trative costs and insolvency contributionswere much lower.
Expenditure fell by almost 14
1/C252% in the
second quarter compared with 2005. Ap-proximately half of this decrease in expend-iture can be attributed to the 13% decline inexpenditure on unemployment benefit, a de-velopment which, in turn, can be attributedto the lower number of persons registered asunemployed. Large savings were also record-ed again in connection with active labourmarket policies (-26%). Additionally, loweradministrative expenses and insolvency pay-ments meant that the expenditure side de-creased further. However, the compensatoryamount to be paid to central government inthe second quarter was 9
1/C252% higher than in
the previous year.Quarterly
€b n
€b n€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefit and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding central government liquidity
assistance. — 2Sharp decline in 2005
caused by shifting responsibility for train-
ing recipients of unemployment benefit II
to central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−8.8
8.0
7.2
6.4
5.6
4.8
4.0
3.2
2.4
2.016.0
14.0
12.0
10.0
2004 2005 2006
Higher
contribution
rate necessary
in 2007Surplus
attributable to
one-off
additional
revenue from
contributions...
...and a
significant
decrease in
expenditure

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
63In the first half of 2006 the surplus amounted
to almost 34 billion. The surplus of 31.8 bil-
lion foreseen in the Federal EmploymentAgency’s budget is likely to be greatly over-shot over the year as a whole. In the secondhalf of the year, after the transitional regula-tion for transferring contributions comes toan end, revenue from August will be on amuch smaller scale, and savings from activelabour market policies could be somewhatlower. Nevertheless, it is quite likely that thesurplus from the first half of the year will in-crease even further in the second half of theyear if only because of the seasonally-relatedsmaller number of persons registered as un-employed and to the additional revenue fromcontributions resulting from special pay-ments. In the coming year three factors willmake it possible to cut the contribution rateby 2 percentage points to 4.5% and to en-sure that the financial situation for the labourmarket improves as expected – firstly, thenew central government grant linked to rev-enue from turnover tax, secondly, savings, es-pecially those resulting from shortening themaximum period of entitlement to un-employment benefit I and, thirdly, a recourseto the reserves that have been set up to date.
Statutory health insurance scheme
8
After a deficit of just over 31 billion in the
health insurance institutions in the first quar-ter of 2006, the financial situation is expectedto ease somewhat, particularly as a result ofthe significant increase in Federal resourceswhich are to be granted to health insuranceinstitutions over the remainder of 2006. How-ever, it is almost impossible to significantly de-crease the health insurance institutions’ debt
and to replenish the statutory reservesthrough the use of surpluses. The envisagedhealth system reform will not be able to hin-der a sharp increase in contribution rates inthe coming year. This increase is also due tothe cutback of just over 32
1/C252billion in Federal
resources. The Federal grant is not expectedto start increasing until after 2008. However,it is not yet clear which form counterfinan-cing will take in the central governmentbudget. Furthermore, the current collectionsystem for contributions is to be replaced by ahealth fund which is to be maintained fromcontributions from employees and employersand from a Federal grant. The health insur-ance institutions are to receive risk-adjustedamounts from this fund for each person in-sured. If the fund is not sufficient for allhealth insurance institutions, then individualinstitutions have to charge their membersadditional contributions. However, theseamounts must not exceed 1% of the house-hold income of the persons insured or a totalof 5% of the institution’s expenditure onhealth care. Stronger competitive pressure onhealth insurance institutions will be restrictedinitially by capping additional contributions,and the planned conversion is likely to entailadditional bureaucracy. Depending on theform that the fund model actually takes andhow it develops, this may lay the foundationsfor decoupling employee compensation fromthe financing of statutory health insurance aswell as for a more transparent financing of
8The financial development of the statutory health and
long-term care insurance schemes is analysed in greater
detail in the short articles of the Monthly Report of June
2006.Surplus over
and above the
amount
expected for
2006 as a
whole
Health system
reform will not
prevent rise in
contribution
rates in 2007 ...... but could lay
foundations for
decoupling
employee
compensation
from health
insurance
funding

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
64non-insurance-related benefits. The measures
agreed on the expenditure side do not appearto be sufficient. There should be enoughscope here to intensify competition among
service providers.

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Public finances in Germany
1 General government budgetary
position 52*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006

2 Budgetary position of central,
state and local government 52*
3 Government fiscal position as
defined in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of central, state and
local government 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*
6 Specific taxes levied by central,
state and local government 54*
7 General government debt 55*8 Change in general government
debt 57*
9 Loans raised by general govern-
ment against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Central government debt 58*11 Central government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets
of the German pension insurancefund 59*
13 Revenue and expenditure of the
Federal Employment Agency 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 60*
2 Output in the production sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*X External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 67*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 69*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the euro-area memberstates, the Deutsche Mark value ofthe ECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2004          Dec 8.9 6.7 6.6 6.5 6.1 7.1 8.2 2.05 2.17 3.7
2005          Jan 9.6 7.1 6.8 6.7 6.6 7.4 8.0 2.08 2.15 3.6
         Feb 10.1 7.3 6.6 6.6 6.7 7.4 8.8 2.06 2.14 3.6         Mar 9.2 7.1 6.5 6.6 6.3 7.4 8.7 2.06 2.14 3.7
         Apr 9.3 7.4 6.8 6.9 6.7 7.8 8.3 2.08 2.14 3.5
         May 10.2 7.6 7.4 7.3 6.5 7.9 8.4 2.07 2.13 3.4         June 10.9 8.0 7.6 7.6 6.7 8.2 9.6 2.06 2.11 3.2
         July 11.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 6.9 8.4 9.2 2.07 2.12 3.3
         Aug 11.6 8.6 8.2 8.1 7.0 8.7 9.2 2.06 2.13 3.3         Sep 11.1 8.8 8.4 8.2 7.4 9.1 8.7 2.09 2.14 3.1
         Oct 11.1 8.6 7.9 8.0 7.8 9.4 9.0 2.07 2.20 3.3
         Nov 10.5 8.2 7.6 7.6 8.2 9.5 8.9 2.09 2.36 3.5         Dec 11.4 8.5 7.4 7.6 8.3 9.5 8.8 2.28 2.47 3.4
2006          Jan 10.3 8.4 7.7 7.7 8.4 10.0 8.7 2.33 2.51 3.4
         Feb 9.9 8.7 7.9 8.0 8.7 10.7 8.8 2.35 2.60 3.5         Mar 10.1 9.0 8.5 8.4 9.5 11.5 8.8 2.52 2.72 3.7
         Apr 9.8 9.3 8.7 8.7 9.6 11.8 8.9 2.63 2.79 4.0
         May 10.2 9.2 8.8 8.7 9.4 11.8 8.9 2.58 2.89 4.0         June 9.3 9.1 8.5 ... 9.1 11.5 8.0 2.70 2.99 4.1
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.81 3.10 4.1
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2004          Dec + 9,117 + 7,492 + 3,041 + 211 + 38,469 − 37,114 + 1,475 1.3408 107.1 109.3
2005          Jan − 6,932 + 1,402 + 15,864 − 12,075 − 17,728 + 47,246 − 1,579 1.3119 105.8 108.0
         Feb + 4,847 + 5,603 + 24,248 − 2,841 + 24,121 − 1,945 + 4,913 1.3014 105.1 107.2         Mar + 4,285 + 8,062 − 21,291 − 8,829 − 6,748 − 7,228 + 1,514 1.3201 106.0 108.2
         Apr − 10,455 + 3,516 − 5,483 − 13,710 − 8,366 + 17,417 − 825 1.2938 105.1 107.2
         May − 2,861 + 5,732 + 41,516 + 6,704 + 19,779 + 12,482 + 2,551 1.2694 104.0 106.2         June + 2,162 + 8,847 + 13,452 − 7,712 + 97,713 − 77,930 + 1,380 1.2165 101.2 103.5
         July + 2,983 + 9,525 + 1,017 − 85,054 + 78,470 + 5,023 + 2,577 1.2037 101.7 103.9
         Aug − 2,736 + 966 + 412 − 12,033 − 14,000 + 26,521 − 76 1.2292 102.3 104.5         Sep − 1,612 + 5,487 + 33,151 − 526 + 24,875 + 9,263 − 461 1.2256 101.8 103.9
         Oct − 7,523 + 1,732 − 12,781 − 7,858 − 6,161 + 1,014 + 224 1.2015 101.4 103.5
         Nov − 5,579 + 1,467 + 2,199 − 3,867 − 44,034 + 48,906 + 1,194 1.1786 100.7 103.0         Dec + 273 + 1,746 − 13,162 − 8,485 − 7,755 − 4,278 + 7,356 1.1856 100.7 103.1
2006          Jan − 11,395 − 7,242 + 4,019 + 868 − 37,009 + 42,303 − 2,144 1.2103 101.4 103.6
         Feb − 872 + 428 + 14,024 − 26,899 + 15,822 + 23,002 + 2,099 1.1938 100.7 103.0         Mar − 2,951 + 2,196 + 66,542 + 11,400 + 43,940 + 4,553 + 6,649 1.2020 101.5 103.9
         Apr − 7,328 + 442 + 4,859 − 1,911 − 10,824 + 18,820 − 1,226 1.2271 102.7 105.0
         May − 11,921 + 269 + 36,479 − 1,091 + 50,963 − 11,708 − 1,687 1.2770 103.8 106.0         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2650 103.9 106.2
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2684 104.3 106.5
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables X.12 and 13, pp 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-23 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area
Real gross domestic product 1 
2003 0.9 − 0.2 1.8 1.1 4.8 4.4 0.1 2.0 − 0.1 1.4 − 1.1 3.0 0.8
2004 2.6 1.2 3.5 2.3 4.7 4.5 0.9 4.2 1.7 2.5 1.2 3.1 2.1
2005 1.2 0.9 2.9 1.2 3.7 4.7 0.1 4.0 1.1 1.9 0.4 3.4 1.32005          Q1 1.2 − 0.6 1.3 1.4 3.4 4.0 − 0.4 1.9 0.4 1.6 0.0 2.2 1.2
         Q2 1.5 1.7 3.6 1.7 3.7 5.6 0.2 3.6 1.9 1.8 0.4 4.3 1.2         Q3 1.0 1.4 3.2 1.1 3.8 5.9 0.1 5.3 2.0 1.5 0.3 3.1 1.6         Q4 1.3 1.1 3.7 0.8 3.7 6.5 0.0 7.5 1.9 2.3 0.8 4.0 1.7
2006          Q1 2.7 3.1 5.1 1.5 4.1 5.8 1.9 7.3 2.9 3.0 1.0 3.2 2.0
         Q2 ... 1.0 ... ... 4.1 ... ... ... 2.4 3.0 ... ... 2.4
Industrial production 1,2 
2003 0.7 0.4 1.2 − 0.4 0.3 4.7 − 0.5 3.9 − 1.4 2.1 0.1 1.4 0.32004 3.2 3.0 5.0 2.0 1.2 0.3 − 0.6 3.7 2.5 6.2 − 2.7 1.6 2.0
2005 − 0.4 3.4 − 2.3 0.0 − 0.9 3.0 − 0.8 2.1 − 1.2 4.3 0.3 0.7 1.22005          Q1 − 1.2 2.5 0.5 0.7 − 1.5 1.2 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.9 4.6 − 1.7 0.3 0.6
         Q2 0.4 2.3 − 6.8 0.1 − 2.6 2.0 − 1.2 0.3 − 0.1 5.1 0.0 0.1 0.6         Q3 − 1.8 3.5 − 2.1 0.3 − 0.7 3.0 0.4 6.5 − 2.3 3.9 0.7 0.7 1.4         Q4 1.0 5.1 − 0.7 − 1.0 1.3 5.8 0.5 3.1 − 1.6 3.5 2.3 1.6 2.0
2006          Q1 6.2 4.9 4.5 0.5 1.2 2.6 3.0 4.2 3.0 6.0 1.6 2.6 3.4
         Q2 4.8
6p 4.9 15.0 1.7 p 0.4 p 6.4 1.3 p 4.6 0.3 ... 1.4 4.2 e 3.7
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.8 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 79.0 78.9 81.02004 80.4 83.2 84.5 84.1 75.6 75.6 76.4 85.6 82.7 81.3 80.4 79.0 81.5
2005 79.4 82.9 84.9 83.2 72.1 74.2 76.4 82.3 82.0 81.7 80.0 80.2 81.32005          Q2 79.4 81.9 87.5 84.6 72.4 69.7 76.4 83.2 82.0 81.8 79.2 80.1 81.1
         Q3 78.2 82.7 82.4 82.5 71.9 78.2 75.9 79.8 81.7 81.3 79.9 80.6 80.9         Q4 79.1 82.9 84.3 81.8 72.2 76.8 76.7 81.4 82.1 81.3 79.2 80.1 81.1
2006          Q1 80.4 84.2 85.2 83.6 74.2 74.0 76.8 82.8 81.5 81.9 78.7 80.7 82.0
         Q2 82.8 84.4 85.1 84.5 74.6 76.1 77.3 84.0 81.9 83.2 78.0 81.1 82.5         Q3 83.9 86.4 88.1 85.2 77.2 76.3 78.0 86.7 81.4 84.0 79.4 79.4 83.6
Unemployment rate 4 
2003 8.2 9.0 9.0 9.5 9.7 4.7 8.4 3.7 3.7 4.3 6.3 11.1 8.72004 8.4 9.5 8.8 9.6 10.5 4.5 8.0 5.1 4.6 4.8 6.7 10.7 8.9
2005 8.4 9.5 8.4 9.5 9.8 4.3 7.7 4.5 4.7 5.2 7.6 9.2 8.62006          Jan 8.6 9.1 8.1 9.1 4.3 ... 4.7 4.3 5.2 7.8 8.8 8.2
         Feb 8.5 8.9 8.0 9.1 4.3 ... 4.7 4.1 5.1 7.7 8.8 8.1         Mar 8.5 8.7 7.9 9.0 4.3 ... 4.8 4.0 5.1 7.6 8.9 8.0
         Apr 8.6 8.2 7.8 8.9 4.3 ... 4.8 3.9 4.9 7.6 8.2 8.0
         May 8.6 8.3 7.7 8.8 4.3 ... 4.7 3.9 5.0 7.5 8.3 7.9         June 8.6 8.2 7.7 8.7 4.4 ... 4.7 3.8 4.9 7.4 8.2 7.8
         July 8.7 ... ... ... 4.4 ... ... ... 4.9 ... 7.6 ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2003 1.5 1.0 1.3 2.2 3.5 4.0 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.1 2.1
2004 1.9 1.8 0.1 2.3 3.0 2.3 2.3 3.2 1.4 2.0 2.5 3.1 2.1
2005 2.5 1.9 0.8 1.9 3.5 2.2 2.2 3.8 1.5 2.1 2.1 3.4 2.22006          Jan 2.8 2.1 1.2 2.3 3.0 2.5 2.2 4.1 1.8 1.5 2.6 4.2 2.4
         Feb 2.8 2.1 1.3 2.0 3.2 2.7 2.2 3.9 1.4 1.5 2.9 4.1 2.3         Mar 2.2 1.9 1.2 1.7 3.3 2.8 2.2 3.7 1.4 1.3 3.0 3.9 2.2
         Apr 2.6 2.3 1.5 2.0 3.5 2.7 2.3 3.5 1.8 2.1 2.9 3.9 2.4
         May 2.8 2.1 1.7 2.4 3.3 3.0 2.3 3.6 1.8 2.1 2.9 4.1 2.5         June 2.5 2.0 1.5 2.2 3.5 2.9 2.4 3.9 1.8 1.9 2.8 4.0 2.5
         July 2.4 2.1 1.4 2.2 3.9 2.9
p 2.3 3.4 p 1.8 p 2.0 2.2 4.0 p 2.4
General government financial balance 5 
2003 0.1 − 4.0 2.5 − 4.2 − 5.8 0.2 − 3.4 0.2 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 2.9 0.0 − 3.1
2004 0.0 − 3.7 2.3 − 3.7 − 6.9 1.5 − 3.4 − 1.1 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 2.8
2005 0.1 − 3.3 2.6 − 2.9 − 4.5 1.0 − 4.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 6.0 1.1 − 2.4
General government debt 5 
2003 98.5 63.8 44.3 62.4 107.8 31.1 104.2 6.3 51.9 64.4 57.0 48.9 69.3
2004 94.7 65.5 44.3 64.4 108.5 29.4 103.8 6.6 52.6 63.6 58.7 46.4 69.8
2005 93.3 67.7 41.1 66.8 107.5 27.6 106.4 6.2 52.9 62.9 63.9 43.2 70.7
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central October. — 4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; sea-
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — sonally adjusted. — 5  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition;
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece, Portugal and the Euro−area Euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank, member states: European
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and Commission. — 6  Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by
energy; adjusted for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey for the
seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and second quarter (industry in Germany: on average − 3.7%). 
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2004          Nov 90.3 86.8 18.0 3.5 6.9 10.3 106.0 95.6 29.1 15.4 0.8 7.2 5.8
         Dec 27.6 70.6 15.7 − 43.0 − 48.4 26.1 − 7.5 − 33.7 40.2 26.0 1.2 9.1 3.9
2005          Jan 96.6 54.8 15.4 41.9 38.2 − 15.8 83.9 99.7 11.9 1.9 − 0.3 10.7 − 0.4
         Feb 61.0 37.7 10.9 23.2 32.5 13.8 66.1 52.4 46.6 7.5 0.5 32.6 6.0         Mar 48.4 53.9 6.7 − 5.6 − 4.5 − 22.5 37.4 59.9 47.0 15.3 − 0.1 23.8 8.0
         Apr 136.5 120.2 68.2 16.2 11.6 2.7 110.0 107.3 17.5 5.4 − 0.5 15.3 − 2.7
         May 55.4 62.0 2.7 − 6.6 − 4.2 − 39.0 − 6.2 32.8 26.3 0.2 − 0.4 21.7 4.8         June 79.6 71.2 − 24.4 8.4 8.3 100.7 21.6 − 79.2 77.8 27.6 − 0.7 30.0 20.9
         July 53.8 54.0 − 7.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 0.0 44.5 44.5 14.8 5.6 − 1.0 6.7 3.5
         Aug − 5.9 3.3 − 1.4 − 9.2 − 5.7 1.9 − 1.1 − 3.0 17.9 1.6 − 1.0 12.5 4.8         Sep 97.7 98.1 11.7 − 0.4 − 6.1 − 21.1 65.8 86.9 29.8 2.5 − 1.6 14.7 14.2
         Oct 103.3 90.3 23.6 13.0 15.8 − 5.2 57.8 62.9 41.9 9.6 − 0.5 31.1 1.8
         Nov 143.0 104.8 19.9 38.2 44.0 − 43.5 25.7 69.2 24.6 13.3 0.2 6.3 4.8         Dec 40.3 73.6 − 0.7 − 33.3 − 56.4 41.9 − 47.7 − 89.5 42.5 27.9 0.8 − 7.5 21.3
2006          Jan 125.7 103.6 18.5 22.1 27.0 2.7 127.1 124.4 9.3 6.2 0.7 0.7 1.7
         Feb 92.6 109.4 28.1 − 16.8 − 7.2 − 19.1 25.6 44.7 56.1 12.4 0.3 25.0 18.3         Mar 144.2 132.1 46.9 12.1 8.7 − 21.5 50.7 72.2 51.3 21.2 0.8 21.6 7.8
         Apr 159.6 158.5 61.1 1.0 0.4 − 6.5 89.6 96.1 24.1 11.3 0.4 17.7 − 5.3
         May 44.1 72.6 5.2 − 28.5 − 18.0 17.1 50.2 33.1 31.0 10.3 1.3 21.9 − 2.5         June 51.8 47.4 − 32.8 4.4 2.1 64.0 − 55.8 − 119.8 44.3 9.8 1.3 18.8 14.4
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2004          Nov 6.1 11.8 1.1 − 5.7 − 1.8 3.3 41.4 38.1 0.5 2.6 0.8 − 0.9 − 2.0
         Dec − 14.0 − 1.8 9.9 − 12.2 − 8.2 10.3 − 25.6 − 36.0 2.1 3.7 1.1 − 5.2 2.5
2005          Jan 20.9 6.3 6.3 14.6 10.2 − 4.8 26.3 31.1 2.3 0.6 − 0.3 0.7 1.3
         Feb − 2.2 0.6 − 5.1 − 2.8 1.6 1.7 14.0 12.3 4.9 4.1 0.5 4.8 − 4.5         Mar 8.5 − 1.1 6.2 9.6 9.8 − 10.4 4.0 14.3 10.6 2.6 − 0.0 7.8 0.3
         Apr 63.2 50.8 45.3 12.4 7.5 15.6 56.3 40.7 11.8 − 2.8 − 0.5 10.8 4.2
         May − 21.7 − 15.0 − 17.7 − 6.6 − 5.7 − 22.7 − 25.5 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 0.5 2.0 0.7         June − 27.7 − 9.3 − 16.0 − 18.4 − 12.8 49.9 − 6.3 − 56.2 9.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 4.9 5.3
         July 3.9 2.9 4.5 1.0 − 3.0 3.7 14.3 10.6 6.8 1.8 − 0.7 2.8 2.9
         Aug 2.8 2.7 2.3 0.2 3.4 − 3.4 − 10.4 − 7.0 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.0 0.6         Sep 5.1 17.1 1.9 − 12.0 − 7.2 − 0.1 16.2 16.3 − 5.6 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 2.0 − 1.7
         Oct 10.3 11.0 2.7 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 4.2 2.9 7.1 3.7 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.7 4.2
         Nov 4.2 1.9 5.4 2.3 10.0 − 7.0 2.3 9.3 2.5 2.0 0.2 − 2.4 2.8         Dec − 7.7 − 3.4 11.2 − 4.3 − 6.6 16.8 − 38.3 − 55.1 − 5.0 4.0 0.7 − 10.7 0.9
2006          Jan 38.3 30.0 13.0 8.3 6.2 9.1 36.9 27.8 6.7 0.9 0.7 4.7 0.4
         Feb 0.2 12.8 4.7 − 12.6 − 3.2 − 7.1 6.9 14.0 17.0 5.3 0.3 6.2 5.2         Mar 19.0 16.8 9.3 2.1 2.0 2.9 17.9 14.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.8 − 4.1 3.2
         Apr 44.8 45.1 30.1 − 0.4 − 1.6 9.7 10.3 0.6 2.4 4.2 0.2 − 3.3 1.2
         May − 3.7 − 9.6 − 6.9 5.9 13.4 − 4.6 6.2 10.8 3.1 1.7 1.1 4.9 − 4.6         June − 31.3 − 16.3 − 18.3 − 15.0 − 11.3 58.3 39.3 − 18.9 7.1 1.5 1.3 0.0 4.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 14.6 47.0 − 39.1 43.8 50.5 4.4 46.2 − 13.5 6.7 − 5.7 − 3.2 4.2 2004          Nov 
− 20.4 − 70.8 − 104.8 109.5 38.7 19.7 19.1 39.2 31.6 5.0 − 8.0 − 1.6          Dec 
18.2 42.3 − 8.4 − 0.3 14.6 − 8.5 23.2 − 27.8 12.8 − 0.2 12.4 − 3.5 2005          Jan 
29.5 − 11.2 − 9.8 4.4 4.4 3.7 0.8 − 5.3 5.2 − 1.7 − 1.9 8.9          Feb 
− 22.7 − 26.0 − 27.5 35.0 26.9 8.2 18.7 4.1 4.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 6.5          Mar 
− 6.5 43.2 − 85.0 57.1 33.1 9.3 23.8 16.7 7.3 − 0.6 13.8 14.7          Apr 
− 7.4 − 49.2 − 46.7 34.1 30.1 4.8 25.4 − 1.9 5.9 12.8 7.3 − 7.6          May
38.0 5.3 − 59.2 68.1 76.8 10.7 66.1 − 12.5 3.8 − 0.3 − 14.5 5.9          June
− 0.7 − 12.6 − 52.2 39.0 17.8 9.9 8.0 15.6 5.6 − 0.3 12.9 0.7          July− 44.3 41.4 − − 19.1 − 35.6 − 52.0 − 5.5 − 46.5 12.1 4.3 10.6 4.1 1.9          Aug 
15.7 − 25.0 − 56.2 78.3 53.2 6.2 47.0 23.1 2.0 − 14.8 − 6.9 − 0.4          Sep 
− 3.0 20.1 − 39.1 37.0 27.2 3.4 23.8 9.5 0.2 7.0 − 6.0 1.1          Oct 
5.7 51.8 − 17.4 24.2 28.2 4.0 24.2 − 2.9 − 1.0 − 2.1 − 9.3 4.6          Nov 
− 11.6 − 66.0 − 117.2 149.5 91.9 18.3 73.6 38.0 19.5 − 18.2 − 14.2 0.2          Dec 
18.0 90.1 − 11.1 − 18.6 − 27.1 − 11.9 − 15.2 − 7.9 16.4 15.2 6.6 7.9 2006          Jan 
8.0 − 16.8 − 26.2 16.1 − 6.6 4.0 − 10.6 19.4 3.3 − 2.1 3.2 9.0          Feb 
− 6.5 11.5 − 66.3 55.8 25.6 7.4 18.2 28.4 1.8 1.0 − 0.8 10.4          Mar 
− 10.5 19.3 − 120.2 95.1 53.9 8.1 45.9 42.7 − 1.5 13.9 10.1 1.1          Apr 
− 15.4 3.8 − 41.8 12.0 23.4 3.1 20.4 − 10.7 − 0.7 7.8 9.3 12.6          May
40.7 − 12.4 − 43.1 70.6 54.9 10.1 44.8 18.7 − 3.1 − 10.8 − 9.1 − 7.6          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 1.9 − 7.6 0.8 2.1 18.4 29.2 − 9.5 − 0.1 0.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 2004          Nov 
0.1 4.0 0.3 4.8 − 10.0 − 29.5 23.5 9.2 − 7.2 − 3.9 − 2.2          Dec 
1.4 − 4.7 1.1 − 2.0 17.1 23.2 − 15.8 0.9 10.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 2005          Jan 
− 0.8 − 5.6 1.3 1.0 1.0 5.2 − 5.6 0.3 2.2 0.3 − 1.4          Feb 
− 3.3 − 1.7 2.1 2.5 − 7.4 0.4 − 5.5 − 1.0 1.0 1.6 − 3.9          Mar 
0.8 54.2 0.9 2.3 12.0 2.4 6.9 0.1 0.3 0.4 1.8          Apr 
− 1.3 − 50.1 2.4 1.0 9.0 9.0 3.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.9          May
0.8 6.6 0.7 3.4 5.7 10.0 − 5.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 0.2 2.5          June
0.4 1.0 0.6 2.2 − 0.6 0.6 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.5 1.4 − 2.0          July
− 0.4 − 7.9 1.6 − 1.2 9.0 1.7 1.1 − 0.5 3.9 0.2 2.7          Aug 
0.5 4.1 2.3 1.0 6.0 7.1 0.1 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.5 1.8          Sep 
− 1.2 − 3.6 0.0 1.0 7.2 3.4 2.1 − 1.1 4.3 − 2.4 0.9          Oct 
− 0.3 − 17.9 − 0.1 2.1 12.8 15.5 0.8 − 1.4 0.9 − 1.0 − 1.9          Nov 
0.9 18.5 − 1.2 4.2 − 5.3 − 8.6 10.2 6.6 − 13.6 − 0.0 0.1          Dec 
2.0 30.8 0.7 − 2.9 7.9 2.7 0.3 − 1.3 7.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 2006          Jan 
− 6.2 − 15.9 2.0 0.5 − 1.8 − 2.8 0.7 − 0.4 2.2 0.6 − 2.1          Feb 
1.8 3.8 0.5 2.4 16.4 8.1 1.3 − 2.0 7.4 − 0.1 1.7          Mar 
− 0.2 34.1 0.4 2.0 18.1 9.3 12.7 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.7          Apr 
1.7 − 17.8 0.8 1.2 4.8 4.5 0.5 − 3.5 0.6 0.4 2.2          May
1.9 14.7 1.1 2.7 3.3 3.4 4.9 − 2.6 − 1.4 0.9 − 1.9          June
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2004          May 15,256.9 10,688.1 8,388.4 7,270.0 444.8 673.6 2,299.7 830.8 1,468.9 3,197.5 1,371.3
         June 15,328.8 10,755.0 8,437.6 7,321.5 449.3 666.8 2,317.3 836.7 1,480.6 3,183.3 1,390.6
         July 15,351.5 10,784.6 8,464.6 7,356.2 451.5 657.0 2,320.0 843.0 1,477.0 3,185.8 1,381.0
         Aug 15,384.7 10,763.5 8,445.7 7,347.6 451.0 647.1 2,317.8 838.0 1,479.8 3,226.1 1,395.1         Sep 15,487.1 10,810.5 8,498.5 7,401.7 449.6 647.2 2,312.0 830.9 1,481.1 3,214.6 1,461.9
         Oct 15,585.4 10,865.1 8,553.2 7,449.7 452.4 651.2 2,311.9 831.2 1,480.6 3,219.5 1,500.8
         Nov 15,777.3 10,950.1 8,634.6 7,512.7 457.8 664.0 2,315.5 827.7 1,487.8 3,282.6 1,544.6         Dec 15,723.6 10,966.7 8,693.4 7,556.3 467.2 669.9 2,273.3 833.4 1,439.9 3,237.4 1,519.5
2005          Jan 15,991.7 11,071.4 8,749.9 7,596.6 471.4 681.9 2,321.5 838.0 1,483.4 3,373.2 1,547.2
         Feb 16,103.5 11,130.7 8,787.6 7,622.8 481.5 683.2 2,343.1 828.7 1,514.4 3,421.3 1,551.5         Mar 16,264.7 11,178.0 8,840.1 7,669.4 483.0 687.6 2,337.9 827.5 1,510.4 3,483.9 1,602.8
         Apr 16,571.7 11,316.7 8,959.1 7,721.5 493.6 744.1 2,357.6 832.1 1,525.4 3,603.2 1,651.7
         May 16,759.8 11,385.6 9,030.0 7,785.7 501.1 743.3 2,355.6 830.0 1,525.6 3,661.9 1,712.2         June 17,040.5 11,519.7 9,146.7 7,924.1 508.0 714.5 2,373.0 830.4 1,542.7 3,722.2 1,798.5
         July 17,130.3 11,572.0 9,202.8 7,982.2 507.2 713.4 2,369.1 830.8 1,538.3 3,755.5 1,802.9
         Aug 17,100.6 11,566.3 9,205.2 7,984.8 506.0 714.4 2,361.1 827.2 1,533.9 3,748.6 1,785.7         Sep 17,323.8 11,669.2 9,310.1 8,073.4 507.0 729.7 2,359.1 832.9 1,526.2 3,846.4 1,808.3
         Oct 17,462.7 11,766.5 9,370.1 8,140.3 523.6 706.2 2,396.5 830.1 1,566.4 3,905.8 1,790.4
         Nov 17,891.0 11,958.3 9,482.3 8,225.9 544.6 711.8 2,476.0 824.4 1,651.6 4,057.7 1,875.0         Dec 17,896.8 11,990.4 9,547.9 8,288.1 551.6 708.2 2,442.5 847.5 1,595.0 4,016.0 1,890.4
2006          Jan 18,203.1 12,125.7 9,666.0 8,386.5 556.5 723.0 2,459.7 842.5 1,617.2 4,129.7 1,947.7
         Feb 18,346.7 12,223.0 9,779.9 8,469.1 568.1 742.7 2,443.1 833.0 1,610.0 4,188.4 1,935.3         Mar 18,481.9 12,353.6 9,909.0 8,552.9 576.5 779.5 2,444.6 836.2 1,608.4 4,203.1 1,925.2
         Apr 18,706.4 12,501.5 10,061.6 8,645.5 585.1 831.1 2,439.9 836.7 1,603.2 4,252.8 1,952.1
         May 18,786.0 12,529.2 10,124.2 8,709.3 594.0 820.9 2,405.0 826.2 1,578.8 4,284.5 1,972.3         June 18,747.0 12,575.5 10,169.2 8,788.1 599.6 781.6 2,406.2 828.5 1,577.7 4,228.6 1,943.0
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2004          May 4,495.6 3,374.2 2,634.5 2,296.1 66.2 272.3 739.7 461.6 278.0 952.1 169.3         June 4,477.8 3,364.6 2,621.6 2,295.8 66.5 259.2 742.9 456.3 286.6 944.6 168.6
         July 4,479.3 3,372.7 2,619.4 2,292.9 70.7 255.8 753.4 465.2 288.2 937.4 169.1
         Aug 4,477.2 3,362.1 2,608.0 2,286.8 69.1 252.1 754.2 460.6 293.6 949.3 165.8         Sep 4,507.8 3,365.6 2,616.9 2,294.9 69.5 252.6 748.6 455.9 292.7 974.8 167.4
         Oct 4,522.7 3,376.3 2,615.4 2,291.9 69.3 254.3 760.9 460.8 300.0 976.6 169.8
         Nov 4,559.3 3,380.9 2,626.0 2,301.2 68.5 256.2 754.9 456.8 298.2 1,005.9 172.4         Dec 4,511.9 3,363.1 2,620.3 2,285.7 68.7 265.9 742.9 453.1 289.7 969.6 179.2
2005          Jan 4,562.3 3,381.7 2,623.9 2,283.1 68.7 272.0 757.7 457.7 300.1 1,009.8 170.8
         Feb 4,569.3 3,376.7 2,622.0 2,286.5 69.6 266.0 754.7 453.2 301.5 1,018.7 173.9         Mar 4,580.5 3,384.2 2,619.8 2,278.0 71.6 270.1 764.4 453.1 311.4 1,029.4 166.9
         Apr 4,706.9 3,446.9 2,670.0 2,283.0 74.7 312.2 776.9 458.0 318.9 1,087.9 172.2
         May 4,682.9 3,426.6 2,656.1 2,286.6 76.1 293.4 770.5 457.3 313.2 1,078.6 177.8         June 4,650.4 3,397.3 2,644.9 2,291.2 80.8 272.9 752.4 451.9 300.5 1,080.5 172.5
         July 4,665.0 3,400.1 2,646.8 2,288.6 80.4 277.9 753.2 455.8 297.4 1,091.8 173.1
         Aug 4,654.8 3,402.2 2,648.8 2,288.2 80.1 280.4 753.4 452.6 300.8 1,079.7 172.9         Sep 4,684.5 3,407.5 2,666.3 2,303.8 80.2 282.3 741.2 447.7 293.5 1,103.6 173.4
         Oct 4,699.9 3,417.0 2,676.6 2,311.6 82.1 282.9 740.4 449.3 291.1 1,106.4 176.5
         Nov 4,722.5 3,421.6 2,678.8 2,308.0 83.5 287.3 742.8 441.6 301.2 1,117.8 183.1         Dec 4,667.4 3,412.0 2,673.6 2,291.3 87.7 294.6 738.4 443.8 294.6 1,080.6 174.8
2006          Jan 4,754.2 3,463.2 2,717.0 2,321.5 88.4 307.1 746.2 445.9 300.3 1,120.2 170.8
         Feb 4,765.6 3,463.1 2,729.4 2,329.2 91.1 309.1 733.7 436.5 297.2 1,134.2 168.3         Mar 4,791.8 3,478.9 2,743.5 2,334.6 93.4 315.5 735.4 436.5 298.9 1,145.0 167.9
         Apr 4,843.7 3,522.5 2,787.6 2,348.9 94.5 344.2 734.8 437.6 297.2 1,146.9 174.3
         May 4,843.9 3,518.0 2,777.3 2,346.0 95.5 335.8 740.7 430.1 310.6 1,145.4 180.5         June 4,844.8 3,486.3 2,760.6 2,347.5 103.3 309.8 725.7 426.5 299.2 1,183.7 174.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
416.6 6,366.8 5,980.0 6,023.2 2,235.3 900.5 71.2 1,266.1 1,461.7 88.3 2004          May
423.0 6,433.1 6,021.8 6,060.1 2,275.7 875.9 71.3 1,276.3 1,472.9 88.0          June
436.2 6,417.4 6,028.2 6,069.2 2,260.8 887.0 70.7 1,283.1 1,479.4 88.0          July
433.4 6,384.5 6,000.9 6,045.8 2,223.8 892.2 69.3 1,289.6 1,482.9 88.0          Aug 438.0 6,444.1 6,051.3 6,088.9 2,275.5 881.2 67.8 1,293.0 1,483.7 87.7          Sep 
444.4 6,476.5 6,087.4 6,126.5 2,275.2 906.3 69.7 1,300.1 1,486.6 88.6          Oct 
448.8 6,504.0 6,128.7 6,165.8 2,305.9 893.7 69.4 1,315.4 1,492.0 89.4          Nov 468.4 6,589.6 6,245.0 6,274.3 2,321.0 925.0 71.6 1,344.8 1,521.5 90.5          Dec 
459.9 6,624.1 6,248.9 6,284.3 2,340.9 901.5 71.4 1,347.7 1,532.6 90.2 2005          Jan 
463.6 6,660.8 6,254.4 6,291.8 2,340.3 900.0 70.9 1,354.9 1,534.9 90.8          Feb 
471.8 6,684.3 6,294.8 6,343.6 2,367.2 905.4 70.7 1,370.4 1,538.7 91.2          Mar 
481.1 6,730.8 6,347.1 6,396.8 2,391.8 922.5 71.6 1,375.9 1,544.3 90.7          Apr 
485.8 6,760.3 6,372.7 6,428.5 2,419.0 920.4 72.2 1,377.1 1,549.5 90.3          May496.6 6,917.7 6,492.1 6,543.2 2,643.8 904.5 78.2 1,436.0 1,390.2 90.5          June
506.4 6,942.6 6,510.2 6,577.6 2,654.9 922.2 77.7 1,438.9 1,394.4 89.5          July
500.9 6,866.4 6,473.6 6,543.2 2,605.8 933.7 78.0 1,440.7 1,396.6 88.4          Aug 507.1 6,956.1 6,545.1 6,614.2 2,653.1 950.0 83.3 1,443.5 1,397.4 86.9          Sep 
510.5 6,994.2 6,582.5 6,649.0 2,667.4 962.3 83.5 1,453.2 1,396.3 86.2          Oct 
514.5 7,029.5 6,604.5 6,673.5 2,683.8 955.2 87.5 1,466.7 1,393.8 86.4          Nov 532.8 7,181.8 6,779.1 6,837.3 2,761.4 985.8 90.8 1,501.2 1,410.8 87.3          Dec 
520.9 7,194.7 6,763.3 6,831.4 2,745.8 974.5 91.7 1,506.8 1,424.6 87.9 2006          Jan 
524.9 7,228.3 6,775.4 6,854.7 2,734.7 990.4 95.4 1,520.0 1,426.0 88.2          Feb 
532.3 7,298.4 6,853.9 6,935.2 2,761.2 1,010.1 97.3 1,550.6 1,426.9 89.0          Mar 
540.3 7,382.2 6,944.4 7,022.1 2,802.8 1,044.5 100.3 1,560.8 1,424.4 89.3          Apr 
543.4 7,385.1 6,960.3 7,031.0 2,818.9 1,025.1 102.7 1,570.5 1,423.1 90.7          May553.5 7,497.9 7,033.7 7,097.5 2,861.7 1,039.1 104.7 1,580.5 1,419.6 92.0          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
111.6 2,229.8 2,154.8 2,118.4 634.1 202.7 16.9 672.6 505.8 86.2 2004          May
113.8 2,229.2 2,151.6 2,114.1 636.3 193.0 16.6 676.9 505.5 85.8          June
117.4 2,226.0 2,149.7 2,113.7 629.2 197.9 16.2 678.5 506.0 85.9          July
116.7 2,232.2 2,153.1 2,119.1 630.6 199.7 16.0 680.3 506.6 85.8          Aug 118.0 2,238.1 2,162.0 2,126.3 644.8 191.9 15.9 681.5 506.7 85.5          Sep 
119.0 2,237.6 2,164.0 2,132.6 642.0 197.5 16.0 684.1 507.0 86.1          Oct 
121.1 2,258.0 2,187.6 2,153.3 668.5 188.1 15.7 687.1 507.0 86.9          Nov 125.9 2,264.6 2,193.8 2,158.6 639.4 208.7 15.7 690.9 516.0 88.0          Dec 
123.9 2,275.5 2,203.9 2,167.3 661.1 193.9 15.7 691.8 517.0 87.8 2005          Jan 
124.9 2,278.8 2,208.6 2,170.9 664.8 189.0 15.7 695.8 517.3 88.3          Feb 
127.4 2,272.0 2,204.8 2,169.7 666.7 183.6 15.5 698.0 517.2 88.7          Mar 
129.7 2,279.1 2,210.9 2,177.8 669.1 192.2 15.7 695.3 517.3 88.2          Apr 
130.7 2,285.8 2,217.2 2,182.7 677.7 193.6 15.7 691.4 516.7 87.7          May134.1 2,288.9 2,220.6 2,182.8 686.7 186.4 16.1 691.0 515.4 87.1          June
136.3 2,289.1 2,221.5 2,185.0 688.3 189.1 16.0 690.0 515.3 86.4          July
135.2 2,290.5 2,224.1 2,185.3 689.5 189.8 15.7 690.5 514.4 85.4          Aug 136.2 2,296.5 2,229.3 2,191.8 697.8 189.7 15.9 690.1 514.4 83.9          Sep 
137.2 2,298.5 2,231.2 2,195.7 699.1 194.3 16.3 689.4 513.4 83.2          Oct 
139.3 2,315.7 2,249.4 2,211.4 714.1 193.8 16.6 691.3 512.2 83.5          Nov 143.5 2,329.5 2,260.2 2,222.9 706.0 201.4 17.0 695.1 519.2 84.2          Dec 
140.6 2,334.4 2,263.0 2,225.0 709.0 199.9 17.3 695.9 518.0 84.9 2006          Jan 
141.1 2,331.8 2,266.9 2,225.6 704.7 199.3 17.6 701.3 517.5 85.2          Feb 
143.5 2,341.2 2,273.7 2,232.7 714.4 197.9 17.8 701.1 515.5 86.0          Mar 
145.5 2,365.1 2,296.3 2,255.8 723.6 209.2 18.1 705.1 513.7 86.2          Apr 
146.8 2,370.8 2,302.7 2,252.2 725.2 204.7 18.5 706.4 510.2 87.3          May149.5 2,381.2 2,310.1 2,255.7 727.5 205.4 18.9 707.8 507.5 88.6          June
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2004          May 195.1 148.5 78.3 42.5 1.0 23.1 3.3 0.4 221.2 217.8 608.9 1,986.8 1,591.7
         June 223.7 149.2 81.1 40.6 1.0 22.8 3.3 0.4 216.9 213.4 609.2 2,000.3 1,601.1
         July 201.5 146.8 77.6 41.3 1.0 22.9 3.4 0.4 223.0 219.5 613.0 2,017.6 1,610.0
         Aug 193.0 145.7 78.0 40.7 1.0 22.1 3.5 0.5 224.3 220.2 624.1 2,027.5 1,618.8         Sep 204.1 151.0 81.5 42.8 1.0 21.8 3.5 0.5 215.9 212.5 609.5 2,049.8 1,637.4
         Oct 197.4 152.6 83.7 41.9 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 229.7 226.7 617.1 2,059.0 1,643.0
         Nov 182.8 155.4 89.2 39.2 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 223.9 220.9 613.3 2,061.5 1,646.8         Dec 162.4 152.9 84.8 42.0 1.3 20.3 3.8 0.5 228.8 225.9 604.9 2,061.7 1,654.8
2005          Jan 180.6 159.3 92.4 41.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 228.7 225.5 616.4 2,086.6 1,663.7
         Feb 210.1 158.9 92.4 40.6 1.4 20.2 3.9 0.4 227.0 224.2 615.4 2,123.6 1,693.3         Mar 187.4 153.3 87.4 40.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 226.9 223.2 614.5 2,145.5 1,702.8
         Apr 180.9 153.2 88.2 39.0 1.5 20.3 3.8 0.5 226.3 222.5 627.8 2,176.8 1,714.0
         May 173.5 158.2 90.6 41.3 1.5 20.4 4.0 0.5 239.2 235.2 634.8 2,203.7 1,721.3         June 211.5 163.0 93.8 42.9 1.5 20.4 3.9 0.4 238.9 234.5 621.3 2,243.3 1,742.9
         July 210.8 154.3 87.2 40.8 1.6 20.3 3.9 0.5 238.6 235.3 635.1 2,249.8 1,742.0
         Aug 166.8 156.4 89.4 40.8 1.5 20.0 4.2 0.4 249.2 245.4 639.7 2,263.5 1,745.9         Sep 182.4 159.4 90.8 42.5 1.5 19.9 4.2 0.4 234.4 230.8 631.5 2,284.1 1,755.1
         Oct 179.4 165.8 100.0 40.0 1.3 19.9 4.2 0.4 241.4 237.7 629.0 2,316.0 1,776.2
         Nov 185.1 170.9 104.4 40.5 1.3 20.2 4.0 0.4 239.3 235.9 629.6 2,334.1 1,774.6         Dec 173.6 171.0 100.5 44.4 1.1 20.9 3.7 0.4 221.9 219.1 615.8 2,326.2 1,760.7
2006          Jan 191.6 171.7 101.4 44.3 1.1 20.8 3.6 0.4 237.0 233.7 608.4 2,337.6 1,772.4
         Feb 199.6 174.1 103.1 45.1 1.1 20.7 3.6 0.4 235.0 231.4 610.2 2,381.3 1,799.1         Mar 193.1 170.1 94.8 49.3 1.2 20.9 3.6 0.4 235.9 231.6 603.1 2,403.2 1,826.8
         Apr 182.6 177.5 99.6 51.8 1.2 21.0 3.4 0.4 249.7 246.0 613.1 2,412.6 1,836.1
         May 167.2 187.0 104.2 56.2 1.3 21.4 3.5 0.4 258.2 253.7 620.9 2,437.9 1,852.2         June 207.9 192.4 106.7 59.2 1.3 21.5 3.4 0.4 247.4 243.7 612.0 2,458.9 1,868.4
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2004          May 48.3 63.1 15.7 24.1 0.6 20.5 1.8 0.4 17.0 17.0 34.6 861.5 701.5         June 50.7 64.4 17.3 24.0 0.6 20.3 1.8 0.4 16.1 16.1 34.5 859.1 697.1
         July 49.7 62.6 15.6 23.7 0.6 20.4 1.9 0.4 16.8 16.8 38.4 860.1 692.4
         Aug 52.1 61.0 15.7 22.8 0.6 19.5 2.0 0.5 14.2 14.2 39.6 865.1 696.9         Sep 48.1 63.6 15.8 25.4 0.6 19.3 2.0 0.5 18.1 18.1 37.5 869.5 699.7
         Oct 45.6 59.4 15.0 21.9 0.7 19.2 2.1 0.5 21.2 21.2 36.2 865.5 691.2
         Nov 43.7 61.1 16.7 21.8 0.7 19.3 2.0 0.5 22.0 22.0 34.3 860.8 687.5         Dec 43.8 62.2 16.0 24.8 0.6 18.1 2.2 0.5 14.8 14.8 30.5 850.2 678.1
2005          Jan 45.2 63.0 17.9 23.9 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 25.1 25.1 30.2 854.7 673.7
         Feb 44.3 63.5 19.2 23.2 0.6 18.0 2.1 0.4 27.3 27.3 30.5 856.4 671.1         Mar 41.0 61.2 17.5 22.7 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 862.2 671.6
         Apr 41.8 59.4 17.5 20.9 0.6 18.0 1.9 0.5 28.6 28.6 32.6 875.9 676.5
         May 40.5 62.5 18.4 22.8 0.7 18.1 2.1 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 880.9 676.1         June 41.3 64.9 19.6 23.9 0.7 18.1 2.2 0.4 28.3 28.3 32.4 890.3 681.5
         July 41.7 62.4 18.5 22.4 0.6 18.1 2.3 0.5 26.7 26.7 33.8 892.6 682.4
         Aug 41.6 63.6 19.1 23.1 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 30.6 30.6 34.0 893.4 678.4         Sep 42.1 62.6 18.0 23.2 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 28.0 28.0 33.5 894.6 678.1
         Oct 40.9 61.9 19.6 20.9 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 32.3 32.3 31.1 896.4 679.9
         Nov 40.7 63.6 20.3 21.9 0.6 18.0 2.3 0.4 33.2 33.2 30.1 894.0 668.9         Dec 41.6 65.1 19.8 24.1 0.6 18.2 2.0 0.4 19.5 19.5 30.1 883.3 660.2
2006          Jan 43.6 65.8 19.2 25.4 0.7 18.3 1.9 0.4 27.4 27.4 29.4 889.1 664.7
         Feb 37.5 68.7 20.9 26.5 0.7 18.3 1.9 0.4 29.6 29.6 30.0 896.4 665.8         Mar 39.3 69.2 19.1 28.9 0.7 18.4 1.8 0.4 37.0 37.0 29.9 890.1 663.4
         Apr 39.1 70.2 18.9 29.8 0.8 18.5 1.8 0.4 35.6 35.6 29.8 882.1 656.5
         May 40.8 77.8 21.7 34.2 0.8 18.8 1.9 0.4 37.0 37.0 30.3 886.4 657.8         June 42.7 82.9 22.8 38.0 0.9 18.9 1.9 0.4 35.7 35.7 31.2 893.4 663.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
... ... 1,890.1 2,930.9 1,019.5 17.2 1,689.1 − 2,788.6 5,377.4 6,303.8 4,287.5 167.0 2004          May
... ... 1,899.7 2,892.7 1,024.0 16.1 1,713.5 − 2,833.4 5,408.0 6,334.2 4,311.3 163.2          June
... ... 1,919.3 2,897.7 1,031.2 17.4 1,697.9 − 2,834.8 5,428.5 6,362.3 4,345.1 170.8          July
... ... 1,926.7 2,902.7 1,038.0 20.4 1,729.9 − 2,795.7 5,398.0 6,345.6 4,364.8 173.2          Aug ... ... 1,948.7 2,861.6 1,044.6 14.6 1,808.9 − 2,857.1 5,451.1 6,376.7 4,396.2 176.0          Sep 
... ... 1,958.4 2,847.5 1,047.0 20.8 1,843.5 − 2,866.0 5,490.4 6,436.1 4,416.2 177.7          Oct 
... ... 1,956.1 2,904.7 1,055.7 44.1 1,921.4 − 2,913.7 5,528.9 6,469.7 4,438.6 185.9          Nov ... ... 1,958.0 2,842.2 1,051.6 33.6 1,842.9 − 2,948.9 5,632.3 6,568.2 4,465.7 192.8          Dec 
... ... 1,986.4 2,993.4 1,054.4 29.3 1,899.0 − 2,966.0 5,637.3 6,581.6 4,499.5 192.6 2005          Jan 
... ... 2,008.7 3,029.0 1,058.9 21.9 1,903.2 − 2,970.1 5,643.4 6,599.9 4,534.0 195.5          Feb 
... ... 2,038.9 3,110.5 1,068.0 0.4 1,942.9 − 2,997.6 5,680.4 6,627.8 4,589.2 194.2          Mar 
... ... 2,055.8 3,224.7 1,068.8 15.5 2,020.0 − 3,031.1 5,738.4 6,713.4 4,612.0 194.8          Apr 
... ... 2,089.4 3,310.2 1,081.1 − 12.2 2,056.9 − 3,064.1 5,778.4 6,766.0 4,658.8 194.1          May... ... 2,123.6 3,251.9 1,133.2 − 14.7 2,152.4 − 3,304.4 5,851.9 6,830.7 4,804.1 196.6          June
... ... 2,130.0 3,288.1 1,136.2 − 15.6 2,149.1 − 3,321.8 5,890.0 6,882.9 4,815.3 200.9          July
... ... 2,141.5 3,279.6 1,143.0 1.9 2,156.3 − 3,268.6 5,852.9 6,862.8 4,834.0 201.9          Aug ... ... 2,161.8 3,381.1 1,166.2 − 17.8 2,181.2 − 3,322.5 5,933.0 6,918.7 4,878.8 203.0          Sep 
... ... 2,193.2 3,446.6 1,163.5 − 11.2 2,172.6 − 3,349.3 5,970.3 6,962.0 4,916.5 204.7          Oct 
... ... 2,202.9 3,637.5 1,178.6 − 5.0 2,332.8 − 3,378.5 5,996.3 6,995.3 4,955.3 211.3          Nov ... ... 2,195.8 3,544.4 1,199.2 14.7 2,259.9 − 3,479.6 6,153.9 7,121.4 5,004.8 222.6          Dec 
. . 2,193.6 3,645.4 1,225.2 − 2.7 2,436.7 − 3,451.0 6,131.8 7,121.2 5,034.9 223.9 2006          Jan 
. . 2,227.9 3,725.0 1,246.4 − 2.9 2,398.6 − 3,445.9 6,151.2 7,149.7 5,103.7 227.0          Feb . . 2,239.3 3,762.7 1,254.6 24.0 2,367.7 − 3,469.8 6,203.0 7,205.9 5,154.9 226.4          Mar 
. . 2,247.2 3,817.4 1,250.2 10.2 2,430.6 − 3,522.0 6,294.0 7,322.1 5,169.0 225.6          Apr 
. . 2,263.0 3,844.9 1,238.9 5.3 2,451.3 − 3,544.3 6,303.2 7,357.2 5,184.9 224.8          May. . 2,290.4 3,735.9 1,247.0 24.1 2,370.3 − 3,599.6 6,374.7 7,402.6 5,231.7 225.6          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
27.6 32.3 801.5 671.6 270.6 − 61.3 471.9 53.3 649.8 1,401.8 1,513.4 1,851.8 − 2004          May
29.5 29.7 799.9 642.5 276.7 − 54.5 474.3 53.9 653.5 1,395.1 1,504.8 1,860.1 −          June
27.2 27.7 805.2 638.2 280.6 − 59.0 478.3 55.6 644.8 1,391.0 1,501.1 1,871.1 −          July
29.2 26.5 809.4 636.6 278.9 − 69.5 480.2 58.6 646.4 1,394.0 1,503.5 1,874.5 −          Aug 27.5 26.1 815.9 654.3 277.5 − 80.2 493.1 60.9 660.7 1,403.1 1,512.3 1,880.2 −          Sep 
27.2 25.1 813.3 639.6 278.9 − 58.8 502.5 62.3 656.9 1,402.1 1,511.7 1,882.2 −          Oct 
29.5 22.7 808.7 669.7 277.1 − 73.6 510.9 63.1 685.2 1,420.6 1,529.0 1,879.6 −          Nov 27.5 22.5 800.2 627.6 277.6 − 69.5 516.2 63.4 655.4 1,423.3 1,518.6 1,875.2 −          Dec 
27.6 21.2 805.8 667.8 279.2 − 76.0 506.0 64.5 679.0 1,432.3 1,536.4 1,883.1 − 2005          Jan 
27.2 26.5 802.8 676.7 275.0 − 77.0 501.8 65.8 684.0 1,431.9 1,543.3 1,880.3 −          Feb 
23.6 26.1 812.6 695.2 276.1 − 95.6 510.3 67.9 684.1 1,425.8 1,535.8 1,893.9 −          Mar 
24.9 26.6 824.5 737.1 281.0 − 43.8 516.5 68.8 686.6 1,435.3 1,547.9 1,907.4 −          Apr 
25.1 24.4 831.5 745.4 282.5 − 89.5 517.3 71.3 696.1 1,447.7 1,557.5 1,911.5 −          May27.0 25.0 838.4 693.3 290.0 − 95.1 522.3 72.0 706.3 1,451.0 1,563.7 1,925.0 −          June
25.2 24.8 842.6 702.5 291.6 − 98.3 526.9 72.6 706.8 1,452.5 1,563.0 1,929.1 −          July
27.0 25.7 840.7 694.3 292.3 − 111.5 531.3 74.1 708.5 1,454.8 1,572.1 1,927.1 −          Aug 28.8 25.7 840.1 713.1 294.7 − 120.9 545.1 76.4 715.8 1,462.3 1,578.3 1,926.9 −          Sep 
28.8 26.5 841.0 720.5 298.7 − 131.6 554.0 76.5 718.8 1,466.8 1,585.5 1,930.5 −          Oct 
26.8 27.0 840.2 733.8 304.7 − 154.4 565.6 76.4 734.4 1,481.9 1,598.9 1,938.0 −          Nov 26.2 27.7 829.4 678.1 306.9 − 134.4 554.4 75.1 725.8 1,490.1 1,593.6 1,934.2 −          Dec 
24.5 28.8 835.8 701.4 327.5 − 107.9 552.8 75.8 728.2 1,491.3 1,601.5 1,962.8 − 2006          Jan 
23.5 27.7 845.2 720.2 332.3 − 126.0 551.4 77.8 725.6 1,489.2 1,600.0 1,982.6 −          Feb 
23.8 29.2 837.2 729.6 336.7 − 134.5 561.8 78.2 733.4 1,496.1 1,616.0 1,979.6 −          Mar 
22.8 29.5 829.7 723.2 340.8 − 104.1 571.1 78.7 742.5 1,515.9 1,633.7 1,980.6 −          Apr 
23.0 31.5 831.9 729.4 336.0 − 122.8 576.7 79.5 746.9 1,517.1 1,639.0 1,980.8 −          May20.8 33.4 839.2 712.3 336.5 − 114.0 568.5 80.6 750.3 1,522.8 1,643.8 1,991.4 −          June
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2004          Jan 309.2 232.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 427.6 37.0 − 11.2 133.6 561.4
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 303.3 219.4 56.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 418.0 48.6 − 21.1 134.1 552.3
         Apr 301.4 217.9 67.1 0.4 − 0.4 − 425.3 51.5 − 25.7 135.3 561.0
         May 310.7 213.2 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 436.4 46.0 − 18.9 135.0 571.5         June 311.3 224.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.5 − 442.5 52.2 − 21.1 137.1 580.1
         July 308.2 245.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 449.1 65.0 − 24.1 138.8 588.1
         Aug 300.8 253.6 75.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 460.9 61.1 − 31.8 139.1 600.1         Sep 299.4 251.6 75.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 462.8 56.3 − 32.4 139.3 602.3
         Oct 298.8 256.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 465.1 58.2 − 32.1 139.3 604.4
         Nov 298.3 257.9 75.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 − 469.7 55.1 − 32.1 138.4 608.4         Dec 298.0 265.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.5 475.4 60.2 − 36.0 138.5 614.1
2005          Jan 290.3 272.9 75.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 496.0 45.3 − 41.9 139.1 635.2
         Feb 280.6 276.6 78.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 487.1 63.8 − 55.5 140.0 627.2         Mar 280.2 277.8 82.2 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 489.5 68.5 − 59.2 141.3 630.9
         Apr 282.1 278.2 86.9 0.2 − 0.1 − 498.6 67.4 − 62.1 143.3 642.0
         May 287.0 276.5 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 505.5 62.9 − 58.9 144.0 649.7         June 286.8 273.1 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 512.8 53.5 − 62.0 145.5 658.5
         July 293.3 297.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.3 522.6 67.4 − 57.3 147.9 670.6
         Aug 305.5 309.5 90.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.0 532.6 67.4 − 45.0 149.8 682.7         Sep 304.8 303.5 90.0 − 0.3 0.1 − 531.5 63.1 − 46.2 150.2 681.8
         Oct 307.9 288.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 531.6 47.9 − 44.6 151.4 683.1
         Nov 315.1 293.4 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 535.6 50.4 − 37.9 150.2 686.0         Dec 313.2 301.3 90.0 0.0 − 0.1 0.3 539.8 51.0 − 39.6 153.0 692.9
2006          Jan 317.6 316.4 89.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 559.2 44.2 − 33.5 154.1 713.3
         Feb 325.2 310.0 96.2 0.0 0.3 0.1 − 548.4 56.6 − 28.7 155.4 703.9         Mar 324.7 299.3 104.7 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 550.8 53.3 − 34.0 158.3 709.2
         Apr 327.9 290.1 113.7 0.1 0.7 0.3 − 556.4 51.6 − 35.2 159.5 716.2
         May 337.0 291.3 120.0 0.2 − 0.2 0.4 569.1 51.1 − 33.5 161.2 730.5         June 336.9 287.0 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 572.0 45.5 − 37.0 163.3 735.4
         July 334.3 316.5 120.0 0.2 − 0.6 0.3 578.8 67.0 − 42.1 166.3 745.7
Deutsche Bundesbank
2004          Jan 73.1 119.5 32.3 0.2 − 0.1 − 116.2 0.1 70.9 37.9 154.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 72.4 109.7 41.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 113.5 0.1 72.0 37.9 151.5
         Apr 72.9 97.9 48.7 0.2 − 0.3 − 115.8 0.1 65.7 37.8 153.9
         May 75.4 100.7 51.8 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 119.3 0.1 70.9 37.7 157.0         June 75.6 115.6 49.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.2 0.1 80.9 38.3 159.9
         July 74.6 127.9 49.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 122.7 0.1 91.1 38.5 161.1
         Aug 72.1 136.9 50.3 0.0 − 0.1 − 126.2 0.1 94.7 38.3 164.6         Sep 72.2 131.7 50.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 127.5 0.1 88.8 37.9 165.4
         Oct 72.1 129.8 48.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 127.7 0.1 84.8 37.5 165.3
         Nov 72.2 136.0 46.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 − 128.3 0.1 88.4 37.5 166.0         Dec 72.2 142.4 46.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 129.9 0.1 93.4 37.6 167.5
2005          Jan 70.2 144.7 46.9 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 135.2 0.1 89.1 37.4 172.7
         Feb 67.7 137.7 49.4 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 133.2 0.1 83.8 37.9 171.1         Mar 67.6 145.3 52.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.0 134.0 0.1 93.5 37.5 171.5
         Apr 68.1 133.3 53.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 136.6 0.0 79.8 38.0 174.7
         May 69.3 140.3 52.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 138.4 0.1 85.9 38.1 176.5         June 69.5 139.3 52.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 141.2 0.1 81.5 38.5 179.7
         July 71.1 149.5 53.0 0.1 − 0.0 0.1 142.6 0.1 92.0 38.9 181.6
         Aug 74.1 155.6 53.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 145.2 0.0 98.9 39.4 184.7         Sep 74.0 148.4 52.6 0.0 0.2 0.0 − 145.2 0.0 90.9 39.0 184.3
         Oct 75.1 149.4 55.1 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 145.1 0.1 95.2 39.0 184.2
         Nov 77.2 145.0 54.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 145.4 0.0 92.6 38.8 184.2         Dec 77.2 140.9 54.4 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 146.9 0.0 86.0 39.3 186.3
2006          Jan 79.1 154.1 55.7 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 151.9 0.0 97.9 39.2 191.2
         Feb 81.6 158.1 61.6 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 149.7 0.1 112.1 39.6 189.3         Mar 81.0 145.8 68.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 150.7 0.1 104.7 39.6 190.4
         Apr 82.5 137.8 74.3 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 151.5 0.0 103.6 39.7 191.3
         May 85.2 152.2 76.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 154.8 0.0 118.5 40.2 195.0         June 84.9 153.9 73.7 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 156.2 0.1 115.5 40.6 197.0
         July 84.0 162.4 71.6 0.1 − 0.4 0.1 157.9 0.1 118.6 41.0 199.3
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem forof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 10.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − + 11.5 − 20.0 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 12.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 5.9 − 13.2 + 11.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 9.6 + 11.6 − 9.9 + 0.5 − 9.1          Mar 
− 1.9 − 1.5 + 10.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 7.3 + 2.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.7          Apr 
+ 9.3 − 4.7 + 7.9 − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 5.5 + 6.8 − 0.3 + 10.5          May+ 0.6 + 11.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − 0.4 + 6.1 + 6.2 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 8.6          June
− 3.1 + 20.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 12.8 − 3.0 + 1.7 + 8.0          July
− 7.4 + 8.2
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 11.8 − 3.9 − 7.7 + 0.3 + 12.0          Aug 
− 1.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 − 4.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.2          Sep 
− 0.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.1          Oct 
− 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − + 4.6 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 4.0          Nov − 0.3 + 7.8
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.7 + 5.1 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 5.7          Dec 
− 7.7 + 7.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 20.6 − 14.9 − 5.9 + 0.6 + 21.1 2005          Jan 
− 9.7 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 8.9 + 18.5 − 13.6 + 0.9 − 8.0          Feb − 0.4 + 1.2 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 4.7 − 3.7 + 1.3 + 3.7          Mar 
+ 1.9 + 0.4 + 4.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 − 1.1 − 2.9 + 2.0 + 11.1          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 6.9 − 4.5 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 7.7          May− 0.2 − 3.4
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.3 − 9.4 − 3.1 + 1.5 + 8.8          June
+ 6.5 + 24.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 9.8 + 13.9 + 4.7 + 2.4 + 12.1          July
+ 12.2 + 11.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 12.3 + 1.9 + 12.1          Aug − 0.7 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.9          Sep 
+ 3.1 − 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 15.2 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 1.3          Oct 
+ 7.2 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.0 + 2.5 + 6.7 − 1.2 + 2.9          Nov − 1.9 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.8 + 6.9          Dec 
+ 4.4 + 15.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 19.4 − 6.8 + 6.1 + 1.1 + 20.4 2006          Jan 
+ 7.6 − 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 10.8 + 12.4 + 4.8 + 1.3 − 9.4          Feb 
− 0.5 − 10.7 + 8.5 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.9 + 5.3          Mar 
+ 3.2 − 9.2 + 9.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 1.2 + 7.0          Apr 
+ 9.1 + 1.2 + 6.3 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 12.7 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 14.3          May− 0.1 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 2.9 − 5.6 − 3.5 + 2.1 + 4.9          June
− 2.6 + 29.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 21.5 − 5.1 + 3.0 + 10.3          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 0.8 − 9.8 + 9.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 2.6          Mar + 0.5 − 11.8 + 7.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 2.4 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 2.5 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 3.1          May+ 0.2 + 14.9 − 2.4 + 0.1 − + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 2.9          June
− 1.0 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 1.3          July
− 2.5 + 9.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 3.5          Aug + 0.1 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.3 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 + 0.8          Sep 
− 0.1 − 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.7          Nov − 0.0 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 1.6          Dec 
− 2.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 5.1 2005          Jan 
− 2.5 − 6.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 2.0 + 0.0 − 5.3 + 0.4 − 1.6          Feb 
− 0.0 + 7.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.7 − 0.4 + 0.4          Mar 
+ 0.4 − 12.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 13.7 + 0.5 + 3.2          Apr 
+ 1.3 + 7.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.7 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 0.1 + 1.8          May+ 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 0.4 + 3.3          June
+ 1.7 + 10.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.4 + 1.8          July
+ 3.0 + 6.1 + 0.9 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.5 + 3.1          Aug − 0.2 − 7.2 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.4 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 2.1 − 4.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 + 0.1          Nov − 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 6.6 + 0.5 + 2.1          Dec 
+ 1.9 + 13.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 − 0.1 + 4.9 2006          Jan 
+ 2.5 + 4.0 + 5.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 2.3 + 0.0 + 14.2 + 0.3 − 1.9          Feb 
− 0.6 − 12.3 + 6.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 1.1          Mar 
+ 1.5 − 8.0 + 6.0
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9          Apr 
+ 2.7 + 14.4 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 14.9 + 0.5 + 3.7          May
− 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.6 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 0.9 + 8.4 − 2.1 − 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.4          July
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingeuro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2005 Dec                  2 1 013.5 148.6 157.7 19.0 138.6 21.4 9.1 9.1 −
                                9 1 041.8 148.4 157.3 19.0 138.3 21.5 9.0 9.0 −
                              16 1 016.9 148.3 156.7 19.6 137.1 22.6 9.5 9.5 −
                              23 1 019.7 148.1 152.0 16.4 135.6 24.0 9.3 9.3 −
                              30 3 1 038.2 3 163.9 3 154.1 16.4 3 137.8 23.7 9.2 9.2 −
2006 Jan                  6 1 038.6 163.8 155.3 13.8 141.6 22.8 8.9 8.9 −
                              13 1 033.3 163.8 156.2 13.8 142.4 22.2 9.2 9.2 −
                              20 1 051.2 163.8 156.7 13.3 143.4 22.9 9.4 9.4 −
                              27 1 055.2 163.8 155.4 13.2 142.2 23.1 9.1 9.1 −
         Feb                  3 1 030.4 163.7 156.1 13.1 143.1 22.7 8.9 8.9 −
                              10 1 035.4 163.7 154.4 12.5 141.9 23.1 9.2 9.2 −
                              17 1 039.3 163.6 154.2 12.5 141.6 23.2 10.9 10.9 −
                              24 1 062.7 163.5 155.3 12.5 142.7 22.6 11.4 11.4 −
         Mar                  3 1 055.8 163.4 152.6 12.5 140.1 24.1 11.6 11.6 −
                              10 1 052.3 163.3 151.6 12.5 139.1 25.3 11.2 11.2 −
                              17 1 044.0 163.2 150.1 12.5 137.6 25.8 11.9 11.9 −
                              24 1 056.1 163.1 151.0 12.5 138.6 26.9 11.8 11.8 −
                              31 3 1 067.5 3 180.8 3 144.7 12.1 3 132.6 3 25.8 11.4 11.4 −
2006 Apr                  7 1 067.0 180.7 147.0 12.1 134.9 26.5 12.0 12.0 −
                              13 1 075.1 180.7 145.8 12.1 133.7 25.5 12.5 12.5 −
                              21 1 084.8 180.6 145.2 12.1 133.1 24.7 12.1 12.1 −
                              28 1 080.4 180.5 146.0 12.1 134.0 24.4 13.0 13.0 −
         May                 5 1 079.3 179.6 149.5 11.7 137.9 25.2 12.4 12.4 −
                              12 1 075.7 179.6 147.0 11.7 135.3 25.3 12.7 12.7 −
                              19 1 076.4 179.5 148.2 11.7 136.5 25.9 12.8 12.8 −
                              26 1 084.1 179.5 147.0 11.7 135.3 25.3 13.3 13.3 −
         June                 2 1 084.5 179.5 148.0 11.7 136.3 26.1 13.5 13.5 −
                                9 1 080.5 179.5 147.6 11.7 135.9 25.5 13.2 13.2 −
                              16 1 087.3 179.4 149.3 11.7 137.6 25.1 12.4 12.4 −
                              23 1 112.5 179.4 149.7 14.1 135.6 26.2 13.3 13.3 −
                              30 3 1 112.8 3 175.5 3 142.1 12.9 3 129.2 3 25.7 13.5 13.5 −
         July                 7 1 111.4 175.3 143.1 12.9 130.2 25.1 13.3 13.3 −
                              14 1 107.8 175.2 142.6 12.9 129.8 24.6 13.5 13.5 −
                              21 1 125.2 175.2 143.8 12.8 130.9 24.8 12.9 12.9 −
                              28 1 128.3 175.1 142.7 12.7 130.1 24.7 13.2 13.2 −
         Aug                  4 1 114.6 175.1 141.1 12.9 128.2 25.7 13.7 13.7 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2004          Sep 283.6 3 36.7 3 39.1 7.0 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 293.7 36.7 38.2 7.0 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 298.6 36.7 38.4 6.9 31.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 293.5 3 35.5 3 35.8 6.5 3 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
2005          Jan 287.9 35.5 36.2 6.5 29.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 300.1 35.5 35.7 6.4 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 294.6 3 36.4 3 37.4 6.1 3 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 299.0 36.4 37.0 6.1 30.9 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 304.6 36.4 37.2 6.2 31.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 310.7 3 39.8 3 38.9 5.8 3 33.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 317.5 39.8 38.6 5.0 33.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 315.3 39.8 37.6 5.0 32.6 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 325.0 3 43.3 39.5 5.0 34.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 324.6 43.3 39.3 5.0 34.3 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 329.2 43.3 38.2 5.0 33.2 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 344.1 3 47.9 3 38.3 4.5 3 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
2006          Jan 338.9 47.9 38.3 4.5 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 335.1 47.9 36.7 3.8 32.9 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 340.5 3 53.2 3 36.0 3.8 3 32.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 344.9 53.2 34.5 3.7 30.8 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 357.5 53.1 35.6 3.4 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 359.1 3 52.0 3 33.9 3.6 3 30.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 364.4 52.0 34.3 3.5 30.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
396.5 306.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.1 93.5 40.8 143.0 2005 Dec                  2
423.5 333.5 90.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.1 94.2 40.8 143.9                                 9
398.5 308.5 90.0 − − − 0.0 3.2 93.9 40.7 143.6                               16
404.0 314.0 90.0 − − − − 3.5 94.4 40.3 144.1                               23
406.0 315.0 90.0 − − 0.9 − 3.6 3 92.4 40.1 3 145.2                               30
406.2 316.0 90.0 − − 0.2 0.0 3.7 93.0 40.1 144.7 2006 Jan                  6
399.1 309.0 90.0 − − 0.1 − 4.1 93.2 40.1 145.3                               13
414.1 324.0 90.0 − − 0.1 0.0 3.9 93.7 40.1 146.5                               20
416.0 316.0 100.0 − − 0.0 − 4.0 95.2 40.1 148.4                               27
390.0 290.0 100.0 − − 0.0 0.0 3.7 95.5 40.6 149.1          Feb                  3
393.5 293.5 100.0 − − − − 3.9 96.4 40.6 150.7                               10
395.2 295.0 100.0 − − 0.2 0.0 4.0 94.3 40.6 153.4                               17
418.4 308.0 110.0 − − 0.4 − 3.9 94.0 40.6 153.0                               24
411.5 301.5 110.0 − − 0.0 − 3.6 95.5 40.6 153.0          Mar                  3
408.0 298.0 110.0 − − 0.0 − 4.3 94.6 40.6 153.3                               10
400.6 290.5 110.0 − − 0.0 − 5.1 93.8 40.6 152.8                               17
408.0 298.0 110.0 − − − 0.0 5.1 95.3 40.6 154.3                               24
404.1 284.0 120.0 − − 0.1 − 5.9 3 94.8 40.6 3 159.5                               31
400.0 280.0 120.0 − − − − 5.3 95.8 40.6 159.3 2006 Apr                  7
408.5 288.5 120.0 − − 0.0 − 5.4 94.9 40.6 161.3                               13
418.2 298.0 120.0 − − 0.2 − 5.3 95.1 40.6 163.1                               21
411.1 291.0 120.0 − − 0.1 − 5.7 93.8 40.6 165.4                               28
406.0 286.0 120.0 − − 0.0 − 6.1 94.0 40.6 165.9          May                  5
404.0 284.0 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 5.4 95.0 40.6 166.1                               12
403.3 283.0 120.0 − − 0.3 − 5.8 93.6 40.6 166.8                               19
411.5 291.5 120.0 − − − 0.0 5.8 93.5 40.6 167.6                               26
410.5 290.5 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 5.6 93.3 40.6 167.4          June                  2
406.2 286.0 120.0 − − 0.2 − 5.5 94.2 40.6 168.3                                 9
412.0 292.0 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 6.1 93.8 40.6 168.5                               16
436.0 316.0 120.0 − − − − 6.1 92.1 40.6 169.1                               23
448.6 328.5 120.0 − − 0.1 0.0 6.1 91.6 40.0 3 169.6                               30
446.0 326.0 120.0 − − − − 5.9 91.5 40.0 171.1          July                  7
441.5 321.5 120.0 − − − − 5.9 89.6 40.0 174.9                               14
455.3 335.0 120.0 − − 0.3 0.0 6.4 88.7 40.0 178.1                               21
458.0 338.0 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 6.1 87.1 40.1 181.2                               28
444.0 324.0 120.0 − − − 0.0 6.3 85.9 40.1 182.8          Aug                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
173.6 127.4 45.6 − − 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.5 2004          Sep 
195.1 148.1 46.9 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0          Oct 
199.8 153.5 46.0 − − 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0          Nov 190.4 143.0 47.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Dec 
185.1 134.3 50.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.3 2005          Jan 
205.2 151.7 53.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 
184.4 129.9 52.1 − − 2.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 31.7          Mar 
201.7 148.2 53.5 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Apr 
190.8 139.3 51.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 35.6          May208.1 151.2 55.6 − − 1.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2          June
215.3 163.4 51.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
194.5 142.6 51.9 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 38.6          Aug 211.2 156.0 54.8 − − 0.4 − 0.1 − 4.4 26.1          Sep 
203.0 148.6 54.2 − − 0.2 − 0.1 − 4.4 34.2          Oct 
195.0 140.8 54.2 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 47.8          Nov 203.9 146.5 56.4 − − 0.9 − 0.1 − 4.4 49.2          Dec 
227.2 162.5 64.7 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 20.6 2006          Jan 
218.9 146.4 72.5 − − 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.4 26.6          Feb 
224.5 147.1 77.4 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 21.7          Mar 
233.0 158.0 74.9 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.2          Apr 
227.6 152.6 74.9 − − 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.4 36.2          May248.8 177.3 71.5 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3          June
253.8 177.9 72.8 − − 3.2 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3          July
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2005 Dec                  2 1 013.5 547.9 158.3 158.0 0.3 − − − 0.2 − 50.8 42.9 7.9
                                9 1 041.8 554.6 154.1 154.0 0.0 − − − 0.3 − 76.5 68.9 7.7
                              16 1 016.9 558.6 158.4 158.3 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 42.4 34.5 7.9
                              23 1 019.7 568.0 150.7 150.7 0.0 − − − 0.2 − 43.5 35.6 7.9
                              30 5 1 038.2 565.2 155.5 155.3 0.3 − − − 0.2 − 41.8 34.2 7.6
2006 Jan                  6 1 038.6 560.3 153.1 153.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 49.5 42.0 7.5
                              13 1 033.3 553.8 152.8 152.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 50.4 42.8 7.6
                              20 1 051.2 549.4 155.9 155.9 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 68.1 60.3 7.8
                              27 1 055.2 546.7 160.0 159.9 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 72.1 64.6 7.5
         Feb                  3 1 030.4 550.6 151.0 151.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 51.9 44.3 7.6
                              10 1 035.4 550.3 159.5 159.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 49.5 42.1 7.4
                              17 1 039.3 549.4 156.6 156.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 55.5 48.0 7.5
                              24 1 062.7 550.2 159.8 159.2 0.6 − − − 0.2 − 74.5 67.0 7.4
         Mar                  3 1 055.8 555.2 159.0 158.9 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 64.5 56.8 7.6
                              10 1 052.3 555.5 159.7 159.7 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 60.0 52.1 7.8
                              17 1 044.0 554.7 160.3 160.2 0.0 − − − 0.2 − 52.0 44.2 7.8
                              24 1 056.1 553.3 159.9 159.9 0.0 − − − 0.2 − 66.1 58.4 7.8
                              31 5 1 067.5 557.2 156.1 155.8 0.4 − − 0.0 0.1 − 63.1 55.3 7.8
2006 Apr                  7 1 067.0 563.4 156.8 156.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 55.8 48.1 7.7
                              13 1 075.1 571.6 159.6 159.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 54.4 46.8 7.6
                              21 1 084.8 565.9 161.8 161.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 68.1 60.8 7.3
                              28 1 080.4 568.8 154.5 153.9 0.6 − − − 0.1 − 66.2 58.8 7.4
         May                 5 1 079.3 572.7 160.5 160.5 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 51.6 44.1 7.5
                              12 1 075.7 570.4 167.1 167.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 48.0 40.5 7.5
                              19 1 076.4 568.6 160.0 160.0 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 55.3 47.8 7.5
                              26 1 084.1 570.3 162.5 162.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 59.9 52.4 7.6
         June                 2 1 084.5 575.9 160.4 160.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 55.7 47.8 7.9
                                9 1 080.5 576.5 160.6 159.9 0.7 − − − 0.1 − 52.7 44.6 8.1
                              16 1 087.3 576.4 165.8 165.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 52.2 44.4 7.8
                              23 1 112.5 575.2 162.6 162.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 83.4 75.3 8.1
                              30 5 1 112.8 580.1 158.5 157.4 1.2 − − 0.0 0.1 − 94.0 86.2 7.9
         July                 7 1 111.4 585.3 168.6 168.5 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 77.5 69.5 7.9
                              14 1 107.8 586.6 168.3 168.2 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 72.9 64.9 8.0
                              21 1 125.2 586.2 168.3 168.3 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 87.5 79.6 7.9
                              28 1 128.3 588.4 162.3 162.2 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 94.8 86.8 8.0
         Aug                  4 1 114.6 593.9 167.9 167.8 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 70.4 62.3 8.1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2004          Sep 283.6 126.5 40.1 40.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 293.7 128.2 35.5 35.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov 298.6 129.5 48.3 48.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Dec 
5 293.5 136.3 41.3 41.2 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2005          Jan 287.9 132.3 40.8 40.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Feb 300.1 133.0 40.2 40.2 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Mar 
5 294.6 136.1 38.1 38.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.3
         Apr 299.0 137.9 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         May 304.6 139.4 41.3 41.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         June
5 310.7 142.6 34.6 33.7 0.8 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         July 317.5 145.2 39.7 39.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Aug 315.3 143.5 39.0 39.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Sep 
5 325.0 145.0 38.8 38.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Oct 324.6 146.2 37.4 37.3 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Nov 329.2 147.3 41.9 41.7 0.2 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Dec 
5 344.1 153.7 46.3 46.3 0.0 − − − 0.2 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2006          Jan 338.9 148.8 45.4 45.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Feb 335.1 149.9 38.5 38.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.0 0.6         Mar 
5 340.5 151.5 39.7 39.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Apr 344.9 154.7 38.8 38.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4         May 357.5 155.3 51.4 51.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         June
5 359.1 157.8 39.9 39.4 0.5 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 364.4 160.3 52.4 52.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of thisfinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
12.0 0.5 8.6 8.6 − 5.9 67.2 − 103.7 58.4 2005 Dec                  2
12.1 0.4 8.5 8.5 − 5.9 67.3 − 103.7 58.4                                 9
12.1 0.4 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 68.4 − 103.7 58.4                               16
12.4 0.5 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 68.0 − 103.7 58.4                               23
13.2 0.4 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 5 70.0 − 5 119.1 58.4                               30
12.6 0.4 10.1 10.1 − 5.9 69.0 − 119.1 58.4 2006 Jan                  6
12.5 0.3 11.0 11.0 − 5.9 68.8 − 119.1 58.4                               13
12.7 0.3 12.3 12.3 − 5.9 67.9 − 119.1 59.3                               20
12.8 0.3 10.7 10.7 − 5.9 68.2 − 119.1 59.4                               27
12.8 0.2 10.8 10.8 − 5.9 68.5 − 119.1 59.3          Feb                  3
12.6 0.2 10.3 10.3 − 5.9 68.4 − 119.1 59.3                               10
12.6 0.2 9.9 9.9 − 5.9 67.9 − 119.1 61.9                               17
13.2 0.2 10.2 10.2 − 5.9 67.5 − 119.1 62.0                               24
13.1 0.2 9.8 9.8 − 5.9 66.9 − 119.1 62.0          Mar                  3
13.2 0.3 10.3 10.3 − 5.9 66.1 − 119.1 62.0                               10
13.7 0.2 9.6 9.6 − 5.9 66.3 − 119.1 62.1                               17
13.8 0.1 11.8 11.8 − 5.9 63.7 − 119.1 62.1                               24
14.7 0.1 9.2 9.2 − 5.8 5 66.7 − 5 132.4 62.0                               31
13.9 0.2 11.0 11.0 − 5.8 65.6 − 132.4 62.0 2006 Apr                  7
13.6 0.2 9.0 9.0 − 5.8 66.4 − 132.4 62.0                               13
13.6 0.2 7.6 7.6 − 5.8 67.3 − 132.4 62.0                               21
14.1 0.2 8.1 8.1 − 5.8 68.1 − 132.4 62.0                               28
14.3 0.2 11.4 11.4 − 5.8 68.0 − 132.4 62.1          May                  5
14.1 0.2 9.2 9.2 − 5.8 65.6 − 132.4 62.8                               12
14.3 0.2 10.6 10.6 − 5.8 66.1 − 132.4 62.8                               19
14.8 0.2 8.9 8.9 − 5.8 66.2 − 132.4 62.8                               26
14.5 0.2 10.6 10.6 − 5.8 65.9 − 132.4 62.8          June                  2
14.3 0.1 9.5 9.5 − 5.8 65.7 − 132.4 62.8                                 9
14.5 0.1 10.9 10.9 − 5.8 66.0 − 132.4 62.8                               16
14.5 0.1 10.0 10.0 − 5.8 65.7 − 132.4 62.8                               23
14.5 0.1 8.7 8.7 − 5.7 5 66.2 − 5 122.0 62.8                               30
14.5 0.1 9.2 9.2 − 5.7 65.6 − 122.0 62.8          July                  7
14.8 0.1 8.5 8.5 − 5.7 66.0 − 122.0 62.9                               14
15.3 0.1 10.3 10.3 − 5.7 66.7 − 122.0 62.9                               21
15.4 0.1 9.6 9.6 − 5.7 67.0 − 122.0 62.9                               28
15.3 0.1 9.1 9.1 − 5.7 67.2 − 122.0 62.9          Aug                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
5.6 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4 12.0 60.9 29.6 5.0 2004          Sep 
5.9 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 24.1 62.3 29.6 5.0          Oct 
5.6 0.0 1.5 1.5 − 1.4 13.9 63.1 29.6 5.0          Nov 5.9 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.4
5 9.7 63.4 5 27.8 5.0          Dec 
3.5 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 64.5 27.8 5.0 2005          Jan 
3.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.4 21.0 65.8 27.8 5.0          Feb 3.2 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 9.4 67.9
5 30.1 5.0          Mar 
3.4 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 68.8 30.1 5.0          Apr 3.5 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.4 9.6 71.3 30.1 5.0          May3.3 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.5 13.0 72.0
5 35.9 5.0          June
3.5 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 10.8 72.6 35.9 5.0          July3.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.5 10.5 74.1 35.9 5.0          Aug 3.5 0.0 4.1 4.1 − 1.5 11.0 76.4
5 39.2 5.0          Sep 
3.4 0.0 4.0 4.0 − 1.5 11.0 76.5 39.2 5.0          Oct 3.4 0.0 2.9 2.9 − 1.5 11.2 76.4 39.2 5.0          Nov 3.4 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.5 11.3 75.1
5 44.3 5.0          Dec 
3.4 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 11.5 75.8 44.3 5.0 2006          Jan 
3.5 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.5 12.0 77.8 44.3 5.0          Feb 3.8 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.4 9.4 78.2
5 48.5 5.0          Mar 
3.6 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 1.4 12.7 78.7 48.5 5.0          Apr 3.8 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.4 9.8 79.5 48.5 5.0          May3.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.4 22.3 80.6
5 45.8 5.0          June
3.6 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.4 11.6 81.2 45.8 5.0          July
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.8
1998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.22004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.32004          Sep 6,597.6 13.2 2,165.1 1,759.6 1,123.8 635.8 405.6 295.9 109.6 3,361.1 3,091.0 2,478.1 2,229.6         Oct 6,627.7 13.9 2,178.3 1,759.5 1,128.1 631.4 418.7 306.4 112.4 3,371.9 3,094.1 2,475.6 2,226.8
         Nov 6,683.4 13.3 2,197.3 1,771.7 1,137.6 634.1 425.6 310.6 115.1 3,376.5 3,098.8 2,482.9 2,233.7         Dec 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005          Jan 6,672.1 13.2 2,182.9 1,749.0 1,124.6 624.4 433.9 312.6 121.4 3,377.2 3,092.4 2,478.8 2,216.8
         Feb 6,717.4 12.8 2,220.8 1,752.4 1,124.4 628.1 468.3 339.6 128.7 3,372.3 3,080.6 2,474.4 2,219.9         Mar 6,723.0 13.6 2,215.6 1,757.1 1,123.7 633.4 458.5 325.4 133.0 3,379.8 3,084.0 2,475.2 2,216.6
         Apr 6,908.4 13.1 2,275.5 1,814.0 1,174.8 639.1 461.6 325.9 135.6 3,442.4 3,127.8 2,518.2 2,217.5
         May 6,892.0 13.8 2,284.9 1,808.0 1,167.1 640.9 477.0 338.3 138.6 3,422.1 3,107.1 2,500.9 2,220.6         June 6,851.3 13.6 2,279.3 1,788.0 1,141.2 646.8 491.4 348.5 142.8 3,392.9 3,073.3 2,482.3 2,222.8
         July 6,871.3 14.0 2,282.1 1,797.8 1,149.9 647.8 484.3 342.6 141.7 3,395.6 3,082.2 2,488.3 2,224.4
         Aug 6,849.5 13.5 2,270.8 1,787.5 1,143.7 643.8 483.3 338.5 144.8 3,397.7 3,085.8 2,491.0 2,225.3         Sep 6,873.8 14.0 2,271.5 1,770.2 1,129.9 640.3 501.3 353.7 147.6 3,403.1 3,089.8 2,505.3 2,238.3
         Oct 6,888.8 14.1 2,270.7 1,754.8 1,123.5 631.3 515.9 368.7 147.2 3,412.5 3,098.7 2,512.0 2,244.5
         Nov 6,924.1 13.3 2,287.0 1,760.4 1,133.3 627.1 526.6 373.7 152.9 3,417.1 3,093.2 2,510.3 2,240.3         Dec 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006          Jan 6,940.6 13.3 2,275.4 1,739.2 1,128.2 610.9 536.2 374.0 162.3 3,458.7 3,123.8 2,542.5 2,251.5
         Feb 6,967.7 14.1 2,289.3 1,745.9 1,132.6 613.4 543.4 376.9 166.4 3,458.7 3,117.1 2,546.9 2,255.5         Mar 7,004.8 13.3 2,302.4 1,736.7 1,123.2 613.4 565.7 392.7 172.9 3,474.5 3,127.4 2,556.8 2,258.4
         Apr 7,075.7 14.5 2,320.4 1,768.4 1,156.7 611.7 552.1 379.5 172.6 3,518.0 3,161.1 2,590.8 2,264.9
         May 7,102.2 14.0 2,347.5 1,787.1 1,170.6 616.5 560.4 381.7 178.7 3,513.5 3,160.4 2,584.0 2,264.5         June 7,075.1 13.8 2,316.3 1,738.4 1,130.8 607.6 577.9 391.7 186.2 3,481.8 3,122.7 2,560.2 2,265.4
 Changes 1
1998 1,001.0 − 0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.21999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.12002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.42004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2005 197.2 0.1 101.8 13.2 25.7 − 12.5 88.6 50.5 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.52004          Oct 36.3 0.7 13.2 0.0 4.3 − 4.3 13.2 10.4 2.7 11.7 3.9 − 1.8 − 2.0
         Nov 67.8 − 0.6 19.3 12.2 9.5 2.7 7.1 4.2 2.9 6.1 5.7 8.3 7.9         Dec − 55.0 1.9 − 19.2 − 17.8 − 11.2 − 6.6 − 1.4 − 4.2 2.9 − 14.0 − 12.4 0.2 − 6.6
2005          Jan 40.4 − 2.0 8.2 − 1.2 1.7 − 2.9 9.4 6.2 3.2 20.9 11.7 1.9 − 4.1
         Feb 50.7 − 0.4 38.0 3.6 − 0.2 3.8 34.5 27.1 7.4 − 2.2 − 9.4 − 2.0 5.4         Mar − 0.5 0.8 − 4.9 4.9 − 0.6 5.6 − 9.9 − 14.2 4.3 8.5 4.8 2.2 − 1.9
         Apr 183.0 − 0.5 59.4 56.8 51.1 5.7 2.6 0.5 2.1 63.2 44.4 43.7 1.4
         May − 32.5 0.7 9.2 − 6.1 − 7.7 1.6 15.3 12.4 2.9 − 21.7 − 21.4 − 18.0 2.6         June − 46.3 − 0.2 − 5.5 − 19.8 − 25.9 6.1 14.4 10.2 4.2 − 27.7 − 32.1 − 16.7 4.4
         July 22.1 0.4 2.9 10.0 8.8 1.2 − 7.0 − 5.9 − 1.1 3.9 10.0 7.0 2.7
         Aug − 19.9 − 0.5 − 11.3 − 10.5 − 6.2 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 3.6 2.7 2.8 4.3 3.4 1.3         Sep 20.2 0.5 0.7 − 17.3 − 13.8 − 3.5 18.0 15.2 2.8 5.1 4.0 14.0 12.8
         Oct 14.7 0.1 − 0.8 − 15.4 − 6.4 − 9.0 14.6 15.1 − 0.5 10.3 9.6 7.4 6.8
         Nov 29.4 − 0.8 16.6 5.9 9.8 − 3.8 10.7 4.9 5.7 4.2 − 5.7 − 1.8 − 4.0         Dec − 64.0 2.0 − 10.8 2.3 15.2 − 12.9 − 13.1 − 17.4 4.3 − 7.7 − 6.1 − 3.9 − 11.8
2006          Jan 62.7 − 2.1 − 4.5 − 22.4 − 20.2 − 2.3 18.0 14.2 3.8 38.3 25.3 24.7 12.2
         Feb 19.1 0.8 13.8 6.7 4.4 2.4 7.1 2.9 4.1 0.2 − 6.0 5.1 4.7         Mar 46.6 − 0.8 13.4 − 9.1 − 9.3 0.3 22.4 15.8 6.6 19.0 12.8 12.4 4.8
         Apr 81.7 1.2 18.2 31.8 33.4 − 1.7 − 13.5 − 13.3 − 0.2 44.8 34.4 34.6 6.8
         May 34.1 − 0.5 27.9 19.5 14.6 4.8 8.4 2.3 6.1 − 3.7 − 0.2 − 6.3 − 0.3         June − 27.0 − 0.2 − 31.2 − 49.0 − 40.3 − 8.8 17.9 10.3 7.6 − 31.1 − 37.1 − 23.2 1.4
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997
394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005248.5 612.9 425.8 187.1 270.1 138.8 65.3 131.3 25.7 105.6 898.6 725.5 159.6 2004          Sep 
248.7 618.5 430.9 187.7 277.8 139.9 65.1 137.9 25.5 112.4 901.8 727.5 161.9          Oct 
249.1 615.9 426.6 189.3 277.7 143.1 67.5 134.6 25.7 108.9 931.8 756.6 164.6          Nov 255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4          Dec 
262.0 613.6 427.5 186.2 284.9 145.2 66.3 139.7 25.8 113.9 935.8 762.7 163.1 2005          Jan 
254.5 606.2 422.2 184.0 291.7 147.6 66.6 144.1 26.5 117.5 945.4 771.9 166.2          Feb 
258.6 608.8 420.7 188.2 295.8 144.6 61.4 151.2 28.0 123.2 955.0 780.7 159.1          Mar 
300.7 609.6 422.8 186.8 314.6 151.8 65.5 162.9 30.7 132.1 1,013.1 835.4 164.2          Apr 
280.3 606.2 421.7 184.5 315.0 155.2 66.0 159.8 31.1 128.7 1,001.3 821.1 169.8          May259.5 591.0 416.2 174.7 319.6 162.6 68.4 157.0 31.2 125.8 1,001.0 815.4 164.5          June
263.9 593.9 418.9 175.0 313.4 158.5 64.2 154.9 32.4 122.5 1,014.5 830.9 165.1          July
265.8 594.8 417.0 177.8 311.9 157.7 62.9 154.2 31.1 123.0 1,002.5 815.7 164.9          Aug 267.0 584.6 410.7 173.9 313.2 161.0 65.5 152.2 32.6 119.6 1,020.0 829.8 165.2          Sep 
267.5 586.7 413.2 173.6 313.8 164.6 67.0 149.2 31.7 117.5 1,023.2 832.3 168.2          Oct 
270.0 582.9 406.9 176.0 324.0 168.5 67.7 155.4 30.2 125.2 1,031.7 837.8 174.9          Nov 278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7          Dec 
291.0 581.2 409.8 171.4 334.9 174.4 69.9 160.5 31.6 128.9 1,030.5 831.4 162.8 2006          Jan 
291.4 570.2 401.1 169.1 341.5 182.5 73.6 159.1 31.0 128.1 1,045.4 846.5 160.2          Feb 
298.5 570.5 401.3 169.2 347.1 186.7 76.2 160.4 30.8 129.6 1,055.1 856.0 159.6          Mar 
325.9 570.3 402.8 167.4 356.9 196.8 84.1 160.1 30.4 129.8 1,056.7 859.5 166.0          Apr 
319.5 576.4 394.9 181.4 353.2 193.3 81.5 159.9 30.7 129.2 1,055.0 854.9 172.0          May294.9 562.5 391.0 171.5 359.1 200.3 82.2 158.8 31.1 127.7 1,097.0 892.0 166.1          June
Changes 1
92.3 25.8 28.1 − 2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 199830.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.1 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.7 31.6 − 22.2 2005
0.2 5.7 5.1 0.6 7.9 1.3 − 0.0 6.6 − 0.1 6.7 9.0 7.5 1.7 2004          Oct 
0.4 − 2.6 − 4.2 1.6 0.4 3.5 2.7 − 3.1 0.3 − 3.4 41.1 38.9 1.9          Nov 6.8 − 12.5 − 4.1 − 8.4 − 1.7 − 2.0 − 5.1 0.3 0.0 0.3 − 26.1 − 19.1 2.4          Dec 
6.0 9.8 4.4 5.4 9.1 4.4 4.1 4.8 − 0.0 4.8 25.6 21.0 − 12.4 2005          Jan 
− 7.4 − 7.4 − 5.2 − 2.2 7.2 2.6 0.4 4.6 0.8 3.8 14.6 13.6 0.7          Feb 
4.1 2.6 − 1.6 4.2 3.7 − 3.3 − 5.4 7.0 1.4 5.6 4.1 3.7 − 9.0          Mar 
42.2 0.8 2.2 − 1.4 18.8 7.2 4.1 11.6 2.8 8.9 56.7 53.5 4.2          Apr 
− 20.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 2.3 − 0.3 2.9 0.1 − 3.2 0.3 − 3.5 − 25.7 − 27.2 5.0          May
− 21.0 − 15.4 − 5.7 − 9.8 4.4 7.3 2.3 − 2.9 0.1 − 3.0 − 5.5 − 10.6 − 7.4          June
4.3 3.0 2.7 0.3 − 6.1 − 4.1 − 4.2 − 2.0 1.2 − 3.2 15.0 16.9 − 0.2          July2.1 0.9 − 1.9 2.8 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 1.3 0.5 − 10.2 − 12.8 − 0.7          Aug 1.2 − 10.0 − 6.2 − 3.9 1.2 3.1 2.4 − 2.0 1.4 − 3.4 14.3 11.1 − 0.4          Sep 
0.6 2.2 2.5 − 0.3 0.7 3.6 1.6 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 2.0 3.1 2.3 1.9          Oct 
2.2 − 3.9 − 6.3 2.4 9.9 3.8 0.5 6.1 − 1.5 7.6 3.2 0.7 6.3          Nov 7.9 − 2.2 1.9 − 4.0 − 1.6 0.6 − 2.7 − 2.1 0.4 − 2.6 − 37.4 − 40.5 − 10.2          Dec 
12.5 0.6 0.9 − 0.3 13.0 5.3 4.8 7.7 1.2 6.5 36.8 34.4 − 5.9 2006          Jan 
0.4 − 11.0 − 8.7 − 2.3 6.1 7.7 3.4 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 8.1 9.1 − 3.8          Feb 7.6 0.4 0.2 0.2 6.2 4.5 2.8 1.7 − 0.1 1.8 17.5 16.4 − 2.4          Mar 
27.7 − 0.2 1.6 − 1.8 10.4 10.6 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.2 11.8 12.9 5.7          Apr 
− 6.0 6.1 − 7.9 14.0 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 2.3 − 0.2 0.4 − 0.6 5.1 1.6 5.3          May− 24.7 − 13.9 − 4.0 − 9.9 6.0 7.1 0.7 − 1.1 0.4 − 1.4 42.2 37.3 − 6.7          June
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 End of year or month
 
1997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.3
1998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.32004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.62004          Sep 6,597.6 1,495.3 1,242.0 253.3 2,237.6 2,113.6 645.8 876.6 225.6 591.2 505.7 76.0 14.4         Oct 6,627.7 1,534.8 1,277.0 257.7 2,237.1 2,118.1 646.8 879.0 225.7 592.3 506.3 73.5 9.6
         Nov 6,683.4 1,536.2 1,285.2 250.9 2,257.3 2,140.2 672.5 874.6 218.3 593.0 506.2 73.4 11.9         Dec 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005          Jan 6,672.1 1,524.6 1,258.7 265.9 2,275.1 2,155.3 665.1 886.0 225.7 604.1 516.4 74.7 13.5
         Feb 6,717.4 1,552.6 1,282.7 269.8 2,278.4 2,160.3 670.4 885.0 220.6 605.0 516.7 73.7 13.2         Mar 6,723.0 1,524.3 1,255.2 269.1 2,271.6 2,159.7 672.3 882.2 214.5 605.2 516.5 70.9 11.5
         Apr 6,908.4 1,630.5 1,328.3 302.2 2,278.7 2,170.3 675.5 890.0 220.1 604.8 516.6 66.5 10.7
         May 6,892.0 1,593.7 1,303.3 290.5 2,285.4 2,177.0 683.3 889.6 223.2 604.1 516.4 67.9 12.4         June 6,851.3 1,577.1 1,301.4 275.7 2,288.5 2,179.8 691.4 885.7 218.6 602.7 515.6 67.4 14.5
         July 6,871.3 1,581.0 1,311.5 269.5 2,288.7 2,185.9 694.8 889.3 220.8 601.9 515.5 61.1 11.6
         Aug 6,849.5 1,557.4 1,290.4 267.0 2,290.1 2,188.2 697.1 890.7 221.6 600.4 515.0 60.2 11.0         Sep 6,873.8 1,553.7 1,290.8 262.9 2,296.1 2,192.6 703.0 890.7 221.8 598.9 515.0 61.5 12.4
         Oct 6,888.8 1,553.0 1,276.7 276.3 2,298.0 2,196.8 706.7 892.9 223.8 597.2 513.9 60.3 11.6
         Nov 6,924.1 1,546.0 1,273.1 272.9 2,315.2 2,213.4 722.5 894.9 224.6 596.0 512.5 61.2 11.5         Dec 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006          Jan 6,940.6 1,589.6 1,306.9 282.7 2,334.0 2,227.0 716.1 908.1 233.7 602.8 517.9 63.4 11.8
         Feb 6,967.7 1,583.4 1,303.2 280.2 2,331.2 2,233.0 714.3 916.1 235.7 602.6 517.4 60.7 10.8         Mar 7,004.8 1,581.0 1,303.4 277.6 2,340.8 2,241.4 720.9 919.1 237.5 601.4 515.4 60.1 12.1
         Apr 7,075.7 1,635.0 1,340.8 294.3 2,364.7 2,257.5 725.7 932.0 246.2 599.8 513.6 68.1 16.3
         May 7,102.2 1,634.7 1,338.6 296.1 2,370.4 2,269.4 734.6 937.4 249.9 597.4 510.1 60.2 11.8         June 7,075.1 1,617.7 1,334.0 283.6 2,380.7 2,276.8 735.1 945.6 256.2 596.1 507.5 61.3 14.8
 Changes 1
1998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.42004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 197.2 32.8 26.9 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.52004          Oct 36.3 41.0 35.4 5.6 − 0.1 4.8 1.3 2.4 0.1 1.1 0.5 − 2.3 − 4.8
         Nov 67.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.4 20.9 22.6 26.6 − 4.8 − 7.2 0.8 − 0.1 0.2 2.4         Dec − 55.0 − 5.9 − 13.7 7.8 8.5 9.6 − 26.1 25.3 21.7 10.4 9.3 − 1.3 − 3.1
2005          Jan 40.4 − 6.2 − 12.9 6.7 10.0 6.2 18.6 − 13.0 − 14.4 0.7 0.9 2.4 4.6
         Feb 50.7 28.8 24.3 4.5 3.6 5.3 5.4 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.8 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2         Mar − 0.5 − 29.7 − 28.1 − 1.5 − 6.9 − 0.5 2.3 − 1.7 − 5.5 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.8
         Apr 183.0 105.9 73.0 32.9 7.0 10.6 3.2 7.7 5.6 − 0.3 0.1 − 4.4 − 0.8
         May − 32.5 − 39.7 − 26.1 − 13.6 5.8 6.1 7.4 − 0.5 2.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 1.0 1.6         June − 46.3 − 17.7 − 2.2 − 15.5 2.8 2.6 7.9 − 4.0 − 4.6 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 2.0
         July 22.1 4.3 10.2 − 6.0 3.0 6.2 3.4 3.6 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 2.8
         Aug − 19.9 − 23.2 − 21.0 − 2.3 1.0 2.3 2.3 1.5 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6         Sep 20.2 − 4.4 0.2 − 4.5 5.8 4.2 5.8 − 0.1 0.2 − 1.5 0.1 1.2 1.4
         Oct 14.7 − 0.9 − 14.2 13.3 1.9 4.2 4.2 1.6 1.5 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.8
         Nov 29.4 − 8.2 − 4.1 − 4.1 16.9 16.4 15.7 1.9 0.7 − 1.2 − 1.4 0.8 − 0.1         Dec − 64.0 23.8 27.8 − 4.0 13.9 12.0 − 6.6 11.3 8.8 7.4 6.6 1.0 − 1.9
2006          Jan 62.7 17.5 2.9 14.6 5.3 1.8 0.5 2.0 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 1.4 2.2
         Feb 19.1 − 7.6 − 4.3 − 3.3 − 3.3 5.7 − 2.0 7.9 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 1.0         Mar 46.6 − 0.5 1.1 − 1.6 10.1 8.8 6.9 3.1 1.9 − 1.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 1.4
         Apr 81.7 55.5 37.7 17.8 24.5 16.4 5.1 12.9 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.9 8.2 4.2
         May 34.1 1.7 − 0.9 2.6 6.1 12.2 9.0 5.6 3.8 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 7.8 − 4.5         June − 27.0 − 17.1 − 4.6 − 12.5 10.3 7.4 0.5 8.2 6.3 − 1.3 − 2.6 1.2 2.9
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  
7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 200359.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 200558.0 8.2 3.5 2.9 48.1 46.0 18.1 38.7 1,575.0 119.7 595.6 335.1 302.2 2004          Sep 
60.4 10.3 3.5 2.9 45.6 42.6 21.2 37.4 1,569.6 118.0 582.7 335.5 309.3          Oct 
58.1 8.0 3.4 2.8 43.7 41.3 22.0 35.6 1,569.6 116.1 616.1 332.3 314.4          Nov 59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2          Dec 
58.0 8.5 3.2 2.7 45.2 41.8 25.1 31.3 1,559.9 110.2 615.0 333.1 308.1 2005          Jan 
57.3 8.0 3.2 2.7 44.3 41.5 27.3 31.6 1,570.4 117.3 623.3 332.7 301.2          Feb 
56.3 8.0 3.1 2.6 41.0 40.5 28.3 34.0 1,585.3 114.8 639.3 334.6 305.7          Mar 
52.8 9.3 3.1 2.5 41.8 39.4 28.6 34.4 1,606.5 117.7 680.0 341.0 308.7          Apr 
52.5 9.5 2.9 2.5 40.5 39.2 28.3 33.9 1,614.2 115.8 686.9 343.8 305.7          May50.4 8.5 2.5 2.1 41.3 39.7 28.3 34.2 1,637.1 118.2 636.2 343.9 306.0          June
47.0 7.4 2.5 2.1 41.7 41.4 26.7 35.7 1,640.1 116.2 645.0 346.2 307.9          July
46.8 7.7 2.4 2.0 41.6 40.5 30.6 35.8 1,639.6 118.1 640.3 344.0 311.6          Aug 46.6 7.6 2.4 2.0 42.1 40.8 28.0 35.6 1,637.1 117.9 657.6 344.2 321.5          Sep 
46.3 8.3 2.4 2.0 40.9 39.7 32.3 32.8 1,634.0 116.2 662.6 346.8 329.3          Oct 
47.3 8.4 2.4 2.0 40.7 38.7 33.2 31.8 1,631.2 113.8 679.3 348.6 338.8          Nov 50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5          Dec 
49.3 9.6 2.4 2.0 43.6 40.4 27.4 31.2 1,617.4 112.2 646.3 369.7 325.0 2006          Jan 
47.6 8.5 2.4 2.0 37.4 35.8 29.6 31.7 1,630.9 113.9 662.9 377.3 320.6          Feb 
45.6 7.8 2.4 2.0 39.3 37.0 37.0 31.6 1,632.1 119.8 667.6 384.1 330.7          Mar 
49.5 11.7 2.4 2.0 39.1 37.6 35.6 31.5 1,623.9 121.1 662.7 384.6 337.5          Apr 
46.0 8.3 2.3 1.9 40.8 37.0 37.0 32.1 1,632.9 125.9 667.8 386.5 340.7          May44.2 6.9 2.3 1.9 42.6 39.3 35.7 33.0 1,640.9 126.7 652.0 387.2 328.0          June
Changes 1
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.3 − 9.4 22.4 14.4 18.5 2005
2.5 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 3.4 3.1 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 9.2 0.8 5.3 2004          Oct 
− 2.1 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.3 0.8 − 1.8 3.8 − 1.9 40.6 − 2.6 2.6          Nov 
1.9 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 7.2 − 4.1 − 11.3 0.7 − 33.4 − 2.4 0.7          Dec 
− 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.3 10.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.6 29.6 2.9 − 5.9 2005          Jan 
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.2 0.3 12.3 0.9 11.5 − 0.0 − 7.9          Feb 
− 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 1.0 1.0 2.4 12.9 − 2.5 12.2 1.5 6.0          Mar 
− 3.6 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.8 − 1.1 0.3 0.4 20.1 3.0 39.7 5.7 3.9          Apr 
− 0.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 2.4 − 1.9 − 3.1 1.7 1.1          May− 2.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.8 0.5 − 0.1 0.3 21.0 2.4 − 54.2 − 0.3 1.9          June
− 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.4 1.7 − 1.5 1.5 1.5 − 2.1 10.0 2.5 0.8          July
− 0.2 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.2 3.9 0.1 0.0 1.9 − 3.6 − 2.1 4.0          Aug − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 0.2 15.1 0.0 10.5          Sep 
− 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.1 4.3 − 2.9 − 3.2 − 1.6 4.7 2.6 8.1          Oct 
0.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 1.0 0.9 − 1.0 − 4.7 − 2.7 13.1 1.5 10.8          Nov 
2.9 1.3 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.0 − 13.6 − 0.1 − 19.1 − 0.1 − 52.6 − 1.7 − 14.8          Dec 
− 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.0 1.7 7.9 − 0.5 4.4 − 1.9 24.3 5.3 − 1.5 2006          Jan 
− 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 6.2 − 4.6 2.2 0.6 10.3 1.8 12.4 7.1 − 2.6          Feb − 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 1.3 7.4 − 0.1 5.5 5.9 9.4 7.5 7.4          Mar 
4.0 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 4.0 1.3 1.3 1.3 4.6          Apr 
− 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.7 − 0.6 0.6 0.6 11.8 4.8 9.2 2.3 1.8          May− 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 2.3 − 1.4 0.9 0.2 − 0.6 − 15.8 0.6 − 4.8          June
footnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than four with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data collected the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published together with money
separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the deposits market fund shares. 
with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt securities
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2006          Jan 2,082 6,981.2 58.8 2,742.4 1,974.6 753.6 3,773.8 474.4 2,595.3 2.7 689.1 149.6 256.6
         Feb 2,082 7,006.4 56.5 2,784.3 2,007.3 761.7 3,760.1 456.9 2,603.9 2.5 687.7 152.6 252.8         Mar 2,080 7,041.4 52.3 2,821.6 2,033.9 769.9 3,762.7 465.3 2,594.6 2.5 691.9 154.8 250.1
         Apr 2,081 7,112.9 54.9 2,834.5 2,047.5 767.5 3,813.3 492.9 2,591.5 2.5 716.4 153.1 257.2
         May 2,081 7,137.8 67.8 2,847.6 2,049.1 778.6 3,805.4 478.0 2,591.9 2.5 723.7 154.3 262.8         June 2,076 7,109.3 57.2 2,867.4 2,066.4 779.1 3,774.1 473.6 2,594.8 2.5 691.9 154.1 256.5
Commercial banks 5
2006          May 254 2,078.1 28.5 817.1 677.2 135.0 1,051.6 265.0 562.5 1.3 216.4 82.2 98.7         June 254 2,030.6 15.8 824.1 684.7 135.0 1,014.2 259.2 563.6 1.4 182.0 81.6 94.9
   Big banks 6
2006          May 5 1,312.6 17.2 513.8 440.0 70.5 644.2 179.3 303.3 1.1 155.5 70.6 66.8         June 5 1,279.4 7.7 523.5 451.1 69.8 611.8 175.4 302.3 1.1 126.3 69.8 66.7
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2006          May 160 628.6 10.2 230.2 168.8 59.9 352.6 62.7 235.9 0.2 52.4 11.5 24.1         June 160 628.0 7.4 233.2 169.0 62.4 351.0 61.6 237.6 0.2 50.2 11.8 24.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2006          May 89 136.9 1.1 73.1 68.4 4.6 54.9 23.0 23.3 0.0 8.6 0.1 7.8         June 89 123.2 0.8 67.4 64.6 2.8 51.4 22.2 23.6 0.0 5.6 0.1 3.5
Landesbanken
2006          May 12 1,398.9 5.6 768.5 582.5 174.6 554.5 79.0 377.6 0.3 95.8 26.0 44.3         June 12 1,413.1 7.9 778.2 588.3 176.0 557.6 75.8 381.1 0.3 98.0 26.1 43.4
Savings banks
2006          May 458 1,004.7 18.4 229.9 81.2 148.1 720.8 63.9 548.2 0.6 108.0 15.7 19.9         June 458 1,005.4 18.3 229.0 81.6 146.9 722.5 65.4 548.4 0.6 108.1 15.7 19.8
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2006          May 2 237.1 0.6 158.3 105.3 52.4 57.0 12.6 19.1 0.0 24.9 12.4 8.7         June 2 233.9 1.0 155.0 102.0 52.6 57.0 13.8 19.0 0.0 23.9 12.4 8.5
Credit cooperatives
2006          May 1,290 593.1 12.4 148.7 62.1 84.6 405.6 37.2 319.0 0.3 48.8 9.1 17.3         June 1,285 594.1 12.2 147.7 61.8 83.8 407.3 37.9 319.8 0.3 48.9 9.4 17.5
Mortgage banks
2006          May 23 882.6 0.9 259.7 159.0 100.5 598.4 10.9 444.3 − 143.1 2.5 21.1         June 23 883.0 1.3 259.7 159.1 100.4 599.3 11.8 443.3 − 144.1 2.5 20.2
Building and loan associations
2006          May 26 193.5 0.0 54.9 41.8 13.2 120.2 1.3 102.8 . 16.1 0.4 17.9         June 26 193.6 0.0 55.0 42.0 13.0 120.2 1.3 103.0 . 15.9 0.4 18.0
Special purpose banks
2006          May 16 749.8 1.3 410.4 340.0 70.3 297.2 8.1 218.4 − 70.6 6.0 34.8         June 16 755.7 0.7 418.7 347.0 71.5 296.0 8.4 216.5 − 70.9 6.0 34.3
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2006          May 136 780.6 10.1 291.4 227.1 62.2 439.6 68.0 273.3 0.3 97.8 12.2 27.4         June 136 750.7 5.2 281.3 218.5 60.5 428.4 66.7 274.5 0.4 86.8 12.2 23.6
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2006          May 47 643.7 8.9 218.3 158.7 57.6 384.7 45.0 250.0 0.3 89.2 12.1 19.6         June 47 627.4 4.4 213.8 153.8 57.7 377.0 44.5 250.8 0.3 81.2 12.1 20.1
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,972.4 262.1 1,710.2 2,625.2 804.1 349.7 761.0 131.5 611.2 524.7 99.2 1,663.2 322.5 397.8 2006          Jan 
1,993.4 252.0 1,741.3 2,614.1 794.7 342.1 766.9 120.6 611.1 524.2 99.4 1,679.5 327.2 392.2          Feb 
2,002.2 255.0 1,747.1 2,624.7 803.6 347.0 764.6 126.8 609.8 522.2 99.8 1,684.8 329.7 400.0          Mar 
2,052.4 279.2 1,773.1 2,646.3 803.4 367.2 767.2 125.9 608.2 520.3 100.3 1,676.7 330.2 407.4          Apr 
2,053.4 297.1 1,756.3 2,656.9 830.3 353.0 767.3 137.3 605.8 516.8 100.6 1,685.4 332.4 409.6          May2,022.6 281.9 1,740.6 2,663.7 831.2 354.3 773.0 130.4 604.5 514.2 100.8 1,692.8 334.0 396.2          June
Commercial banks 5
803.5 173.8 629.6 799.8 406.7 171.5 112.9 111.3 99.7 91.2 8.9 219.0 100.7 155.0 2006          May
759.0 153.7 605.3 804.3 404.8 172.9 118.2 106.3 99.4 90.7 8.9 226.1 101.2 140.1          June
Big banks 6
514.6 119.4 395.1 479.1 213.4 126.9 72.1 105.1 66.4 64.5 0.3 155.9 57.9 105.1 2006          May
483.8 108.3 375.5 481.0 210.8 128.3 75.6 101.1 66.0 64.1 0.3 162.9 57.8 93.9          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
185.6 33.9 151.7 298.3 177.8 39.5 39.2 6.1 33.3 26.7 8.6 63.1 39.6 42.0 2006          May
184.0 27.8 156.1 299.4 178.3 39.5 39.6 5.3 33.4 26.5 8.6 63.2 40.2 41.3          June
Branches of foreign banks
103.4 20.5 82.9 22.3 15.5 5.2 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 3.2 8.0 2006          May
91.1 17.5 73.6 24.0 15.7 5.2 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 3.2 5.0          June
Landesbanken
481.7 67.4 414.3 333.1 59.8 50.9 205.2 16.9 16.5 15.8 0.6 463.2 61.5 59.4 2006          May
495.0 71.7 423.3 334.2 62.1 49.8 205.2 14.2 16.4 15.7 0.6 461.2 61.5 61.2          June
Savings banks
214.9 6.0 208.9 649.2 211.3 51.7 12.7 − 306.4 251.4 67.2 43.4 50.8 46.5 2006          May
214.8 6.7 208.1 647.5 210.3 51.6 12.8 − 305.5 249.9 67.3 43.8 51.4 47.8          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
137.5 34.1 103.3 41.8 9.4 13.2 17.9 8.8 − − 1.3 35.8 10.7 11.4 2006          May
133.5 33.8 99.7 42.8 10.1 13.5 17.9 9.6 − − 1.3 36.0 10.7 10.9          June
Credit cooperatives
77.5 2.5 75.0 421.4 138.0 53.3 26.1 − 182.0 157.1 22.0 33.2 34.1 26.8 2006          May
77.7 2.7 75.0 421.4 137.7 53.6 26.2 − 181.9 156.7 22.0 33.7 34.8 26.4          June
Mortgage banks
158.6 6.5 152.1 170.3 2.4 5.3 161.6 − 0.9 0.9 0.1 504.6 24.3 24.9 2006          May
161.6 5.0 156.6 172.2 2.6 5.4 163.3 − 0.9 0.8 0.1 499.9 24.2 25.0          June
Building and loan associations
29.5 1.7 27.9 126.6 0.3 1.0 124.6 − 0.4 0.4 0.3 4.2 7.4 25.8 2006          May
29.7 2.3 27.4 126.6 0.3 1.1 124.5 − 0.4 0.4 0.4 3.8 7.4 26.0          June
Special purpose banks
150.2 5.0 145.2 114.8 2.5 6.1 106.1 0.3 − − 0.2 382.1 42.9 59.8 2006          May
151.2 6.1 145.1 114.7 3.2 6.5 104.8 0.3 − − 0.2 388.3 42.8 58.7          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
261.6 55.7 205.9 274.0 150.4 31.6 66.0 6.9 21.9 21.6 4.0 160.7 30.4 54.0 2006          May
236.9 44.8 192.0 277.5 152.9 31.2 67.7 7.7 21.7 21.3 4.0 156.2 30.3 49.7          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
158.2 35.2 123.0 251.6 134.9 26.4 64.4 6.9 21.9 21.6 4.0 160.7 27.2 46.0 2006          May
145.7 27.3 118.4 253.6 137.2 26.1 64.6 7.6 21.7 21.3 3.9 156.2 27.2 44.8          June
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.2
1997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2005          Jan 12.9 44.6 1,671.9 1,075.0 0.0 7.2 589.7 2.2 3,009.9 2,641.6 2.6 2.6 362.1
         Feb 12.5 44.1 1,676.1 1,075.3 0.0 7.7 593.0 2.2 3,000.5 2,639.5 2.5 2.5 355.0         Mar 13.2 39.3 1,684.2 1,077.9 0.0 8.5 597.7 2.2 3,003.9 2,634.7 2.5 1.4 364.2
         Apr 12.7 39.9 1,739.1 1,127.1 0.1 8.8 603.1 2.2 3,042.4 2,637.8 2.5 1.9 399.2
         May 13.3 41.4 1,732.2 1,118.4 0.1 8.1 605.7 2.1 3,022.1 2,639.8 2.4 2.2 376.7         June 13.1 36.9 1,716.9 1,097.2 0.0 8.3 611.4 2.1 2,988.9 2,636.7 2.3 1.5 347.5
         July 13.5 41.7 1,719.7 1,100.0 0.0 8.7 611.0 2.1 2,998.0 2,640.9 2.5 2.1 352.6
         Aug 13.0 39.7 1,712.2 1,095.9 0.0 9.8 606.5 2.1 3,001.1 2,639.8 2.4 2.0 356.9         Sep 13.6 40.7 1,693.9 1,081.2 0.1 10.5 602.2 2.1 3,004.7 2,646.6 2.3 1.1 354.5
         Oct 13.7 37.7 1,684.9 1,081.2 0.0 9.9 593.8 2.1 3,012.9 2,655.3 2.4 4.2 351.0
         Nov 12.8 42.1 1,687.2 1,087.7 0.0 9.8 589.7 2.1 3,004.8 2,644.9 2.3 3.5 354.0         Dec 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006          Jan 13.0 45.5 1,663.1 1,079.4 0.0 8.1 575.6 2.0 3,032.2 2,659.1 2.3 2.7 368.2
         Feb 13.7 42.4 1,672.9 1,086.9 0.0 8.5 577.5 2.0 3,023.3 2,654.5 2.1 1.5 365.1         Mar 12.9 39.0 1,667.9 1,081.2 0.0 10.0 576.7 1.9 3,030.2 2,657.6 2.1 1.5 369.1
         Apr 14.1 40.3 1,698.4 1,113.6 0.0 10.9 573.9 2.7 3,066.0 2,665.6 2.1 1.9 396.5
         May 13.5 53.7 1,703.5 1,113.6 − 10.5 579.3 2.0 3,065.4 2,657.3 2.1 1.4 404.6         June 13.4 43.3 1,665.7 1,085.0 − 9.7 571.0 1.9 3,028.3 2,654.2 2.1 2.0 370.0
Changes *
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 − 1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 36.51998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.11999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2005          Jan − 2.1 + 3.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 − − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.1 + 8.6 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 11.1
         Feb − 0.3 − 0.5 + 4.2 + 0.4 − + 0.5 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 9.3 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 7.1         Mar + 0.7 − 4.8 + 8.1 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 4.6 − 0.0 + 3.3 − 4.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 9.2
         Apr − 0.5 + 0.7 + 54.9 + 49.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 38.5 + 3.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 35.0
         May + 0.6 + 1.5 − 6.9 − 8.7 − − 0.7 + 2.5 − 0.0 − 20.2 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.5         June − 0.2 − 4.5 − 15.2 − 21.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 5.9 − 0.0 − 33.4 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 29.3
         July + 0.4 + 4.8 + 2.8 + 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 5.1
         Aug − 0.6 − 2.0 − 7.5 − 4.1 − + 1.1 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.3         Sep + 0.6 + 1.0 − 18.3 − 14.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 4.3 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 6.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 2.3
         Oct + 0.2 − 2.9 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 8.4 + 0.0 + 8.3 + 8.6 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 3.5
         Nov − 0.9 + 4.4 + 2.3 + 6.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 8.1 − 10.4 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 3.1         Dec + 2.3 + 5.8 − 2.8 + 9.2 − − 3.1 − 8.8 + 0.0 − 9.7 − 12.2 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 3.6
2006          Jan − 2.1 − 2.4 − 21.4 − 17.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 5.4 − 0.1 + 19.6 + 8.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 10.5
         Feb + 0.7 − 3.1 + 9.8 + 7.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 8.9 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 3.1         Mar − 0.7 − 3.4 − 5.0 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 6.9 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.0
         Apr + 1.2 + 1.3 + 30.5 + 32.3 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 35.3 + 7.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 27.4
         May − 0.6 + 13.4 + 5.8 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 5.4 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.1         June − 0.2 − 10.4 − 38.2 − 29.0 − − 0.8 − 8.4 − 0.1 − 37.1 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 34.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 1996
76.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
1.0 61.7 100.9 1,259.0 141.3 1,117.6 0.1 30.2 2,209.2 665.9 841.3 604.1 97.8 43.7 2005          Jan 
1.0 61.3 98.3 1,282.7 130.4 1,152.2 0.1 29.7 2,216.1 670.9 843.1 605.0 97.2 43.7          Feb 1.0 60.9 98.0 1,255.8 131.3 1,124.4 0.1 29.6 2,218.8 673.0 845.1 605.2 95.5 43.4          Mar 
1.0 60.7 103.6 1,328.8 163.2 1,165.5 0.1 29.5 2,226.4 675.9 850.4 604.9 95.2 43.3          Apr 
1.0 60.7 103.2 1,303.9 151.6 1,152.3 0.1 29.7 2,232.9 683.9 850.1 604.1 94.8 43.0          May1.0 58.5 102.8 1,301.6 139.3 1,162.3 0.1 27.0 2,238.9 692.5 849.3 602.7 94.5 43.5          June
0.0 58.2 104.0 1,312.0 121.9 1,190.0 0.1 26.9 2,245.4 695.2 854.4 601.9 93.8 43.4          July
0.0 58.2 103.7 1,290.1 128.7 1,161.3 0.1 27.3 2,250.3 698.1 858.8 600.4 93.0 43.5          Aug 
− 56.6 104.7 1,290.6 121.0 1,169.6 0.1 27.2 2,254.2 704.0 858.9 598.9 92.4 42.0          Sep 
− 56.5 105.3 1,276.3 121.3 1,154.9 0.1 27.1 2,258.1 707.7 861.1 597.2 92.1 41.7          Oct 
− 56.7 107.9 1,272.8 126.0 1,146.6 0.1 26.8 2,274.6 723.6 863.2 596.0 91.9 42.1          Nov − 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4          Dec 
− 56.2 110.8 1,306.0 118.4 1,187.5 0.1 26.2 2,285.7 718.1 872.9 602.8 91.9 38.9 2006          Jan 
− 55.1 113.2 1,302.1 115.2 1,186.8 0.1 25.1 2,287.7 715.3 877.7 602.6 92.1 38.2          Feb 
− 54.0 115.8 1,302.7 110.3 1,192.3 0.1 23.2 2,303.4 722.4 887.1 601.4 92.4 37.8          Mar 
− 53.9 113.7 1,340.4 128.1 1,212.2 0.1 23.5 2,322.4 726.5 903.1 599.8 93.0 38.1          Apr 
− 53.8 113.6 1,338.3 132.3 1,205.9 0.1 22.7 2,333.8 742.5 900.6 597.4 93.3 37.9          May− 53.7 113.2 1,333.2 116.2 1,216.9 0.1 22.5 2,342.7 742.0 911.0 596.1 93.6 37.4          June
Changes *
− 5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 0.1 + 1.3 − 12.1 + 21.7 − 33.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.2 + 19.0 − 9.9 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.1 2005          Jan 
− − 0.2 − 2.6 + 23.7 − 10.9 + 34.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 7.0 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 27.1 + 0.9 − 28.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.1 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.3          Mar 
− − 0.2 + 5.6 + 72.9 + 31.8 + 41.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 2.9 + 5.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1          Apr 
− + 0.0 − 0.3 − 24.8 − 11.6 − 13.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 8.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.3          May
− 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 2.3 − 12.3 + 10.0 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 6.1 + 8.6 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
− 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 10.6 − 17.4 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 6.4 + 2.7 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1          July
− − 0.0 − 0.2 − 21.9 + 6.8 − 28.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 4.4 − 1.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          Aug 
− 0.0 − 1.6 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 7.7 + 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 5.9 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.4          Sep 
− − 0.1 + 0.6 − 14.3 + 0.3 − 14.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.9 + 4.1 + 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4          Oct 
− + 0.3 + 2.5 − 3.6 + 4.7 − 8.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 16.5 + 15.9 + 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.4          Nov − − 0.1 + 0.6 + 27.2 − 5.5 + 32.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.0 − 6.6 + 1.2 + 7.4 − 0.0 + 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.4 + 2.3 + 2.2 − 2.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 9.0 + 1.1 + 8.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 3.6 2006          Jan 
− − 1.1 + 2.4 − 3.9 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.0 − 2.8 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 1.1 + 2.7 + 0.8 − 4.9 + 5.7 − 0.0 − 2.0 + 15.7 + 7.1 + 9.5 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.4          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 2.1 + 37.1 + 17.7 + 19.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 19.0 + 4.0 + 16.0 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.3          Apr 
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.4 − 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 10.6 + 16.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.2          May− − 0.1 − 0.4 − 5.1 − 15.9 + 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.9 − 0.5 + 10.4 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4          June
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.9
1997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2005          Jan 0.3 918.7 784.9 627.9 156.9 3.3 130.5 1.5 656.3 380.8 151.7 229.1 9.8 265.7
         Feb 0.3 962.5 821.3 660.8 160.5 3.5 137.7 1.5 662.7 381.2 152.9 228.3 7.7 273.8         Mar 0.4 969.4 821.6 657.3 164.3 4.5 143.4 1.5 659.3 372.1 139.4 232.7 5.1 282.0
         Apr 0.4 1,001.7 850.2 679.8 170.4 5.8 145.7 1.5 707.4 405.6 168.8 236.8 6.5 295.3
         May 0.4 1,014.5 858.7 681.6 177.1 5.4 150.4 1.5 698.2 396.5 155.0 241.5 4.3 297.3         June 0.5 1,040.0 877.6 693.9 183.7 6.2 156.2 1.5 690.0 385.1 141.2 243.9 4.0 300.9
         July 0.4 1,040.0 880.0 691.0 188.9 6.6 153.4 1.4 689.8 389.2 145.4 243.8 3.4 297.2
         Aug 0.5 1,023.0 860.2 668.5 191.7 7.0 155.8 1.5 691.9 387.1 144.0 243.0 4.8 300.0         Sep 0.4 1,057.2 889.0 690.2 198.8 7.1 161.1 1.5 694.1 391.4 142.7 248.7 5.4 297.4
         Oct 0.4 1,073.5 905.2 704.2 201.0 6.9 161.4 1.5 697.3 392.8 144.1 248.7 5.5 298.9
         Nov 0.5 1,079.5 905.2 707.3 197.9 6.3 167.9 1.5 723.2 403.0 150.0 253.0 7.9 312.3         Dec 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006          Jan 0.3 1,079.3 895.3 678.6 216.7 6.0 178.0 1.5 741.6 411.1 154.8 256.2 9.5 320.9
         Feb 0.4 1,111.4 920.5 701.9 218.6 6.7 184.2 1.5 736.8 406.7 144.3 262.5 7.5 322.6         Mar 0.4 1,153.7 952.8 729.0 223.8 7.6 193.3 1.4 732.4 402.7 140.1 262.6 6.9 322.8
         Apr 0.4 1,136.1 933.9 710.2 223.8 8.6 193.6 1.4 747.2 419.3 160.6 258.7 8.0 319.9
         May 0.5 1,144.1 935.5 709.1 226.5 9.3 199.3 1.4 740.0 412.9 155.5 257.4 7.9 319.1         June 0.4 1,201.7 981.5 748.5 232.9 12.0 208.2 1.0 745.7 414.6 151.9 262.6 9.3 321.9
Changes *
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 − 0.1 + 10.4 − 1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.91998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.01999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2005          Jan + 0.1 + 21.8 + 17.6 + 16.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 19.7 + 12.6 + 13.5 − 0.9 − 1.3 + 8.4
         Feb − 0.0 + 46.4 + 39.0 + 34.9 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 7.2 − 0.0 + 9.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 8.7         Mar + 0.1 + 4.1 − 2.6 − 5.6 + 3.0 + 1.0 + 5.6 − − 6.5 − 11.7 − 14.2 + 2.5 − 2.5 + 7.7
         Apr − 0.0 + 31.5 + 27.8 + 21.9 + 5.8 + 1.3 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 47.4 + 33.2 + 29.3 + 3.8 + 1.3 + 12.9
         May + 0.1 + 4.7 + 0.7 − 4.1 + 4.8 − 0.5 + 4.4 + 0.0 − 17.7 − 16.0 − 16.0 + 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.5         June + 0.0 + 22.6 + 16.0 + 10.2 + 5.7 + 0.9 + 5.8 − 0.0 − 11.1 − 13.9 − 14.5 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 3.1
         July − 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.4 − 2.2 + 5.6 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 3.5
         Aug + 0.0 − 15.9 − 18.1 − 21.7 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 2.1         Sep − 0.1 + 32.2 + 26.8 + 20.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.6 − 1.8 + 4.5 + 0.6 − 3.0
         Oct − 0.0 + 16.4 + 16.2 + 14.1 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.6
         Nov + 0.2 + 3.1 − 2.7 + 1.2 − 3.9 − 0.6 + 6.4 + 0.0 + 22.7 + 7.5 + 5.1 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 12.9         Dec − 0.3 − 40.5 − 45.0 − 58.8 + 13.7 − 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.0 − 11.0 − 14.8 − 17.1 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 2.5
2006          Jan + 0.1 + 35.3 + 29.9 + 32.9 − 3.0 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 0.0 + 32.8 + 25.5 + 23.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 6.8
         Feb + 0.1 + 28.2 + 21.5 + 20.6 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 6.1 + 0.0 − 8.8 − 7.3 − 11.4 + 4.2 − 2.2 + 0.7         Mar − 0.0 + 46.9 + 36.6 + 30.1 + 6.5 + 1.0 + 9.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 − 0.5 + 1.2
         Apr + 0.0 − 11.7 − 13.0 − 14.8 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 20.4 + 20.8 + 21.3 − 0.5 + 1.2 − 1.6
         May + 0.1 + 11.9 + 4.9 + 1.2 + 3.8 + 0.7 + 6.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.0 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.5         June − 0.1 + 56.8 + 45.3 + 38.9 + 6.4 + 2.8 + 8.8 − 0.4 + 4.2 + 0.3 − 3.9 + 4.2 + 1.3 + 2.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 1996
15.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
9.9 39.4 626.8 143.8 483.0 367.2 115.8 0.6 345.9 67.1 278.7 124.8 153.9 0.8 2005          Jan 
10.8 39.2 630.3 131.4 498.9 385.2 113.6 0.6 353.5 73.3 280.2 127.3 153.0 1.8          Feb 10.8 39.2 656.8 149.4 507.4 393.9 113.5 0.6 333.1 68.1 264.9 111.9 153.0 1.8          Mar 
10.7 39.3 706.7 154.6 552.1 436.1 116.0 0.6 356.9 73.5 283.4 137.5 145.9 1.7          Apr 
10.6 39.2 703.7 167.7 536.0 419.3 116.7 0.7 354.9 70.5 284.4 136.9 147.5 1.6          May10.5 39.8 660.4 160.3 500.1 373.2 126.9 0.6 330.1 67.2 262.9 112.7 150.2 1.5          June
10.4 39.8 655.2 141.9 513.3 387.5 125.8 0.8 329.8 65.2 264.6 115.8 148.8 1.1          July
10.7 39.8 655.0 143.1 511.9 385.9 126.0 0.7 323.7 61.7 262.0 115.5 146.5 1.0          Aug 10.7 39.8 655.2 146.5 508.7 381.8 127.0 0.7 335.8 68.6 267.2 120.7 146.5 0.9          Sep 
10.6 39.2 680.8 142.4 538.4 410.2 128.2 0.6 330.9 65.8 265.0 122.5 142.6 1.3          Oct 
10.5 37.2 681.2 150.5 530.8 402.1 128.7 0.6 345.3 82.1 263.2 124.5 138.6 1.3          Nov 10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2          Dec 
7.0 38.8 666.4 143.6 522.7 397.4 125.3 0.6 339.5 86.0 253.5 119.6 134.0 1.1 2006          Jan 
7.1 39.5 691.3 136.8 554.5 428.8 125.7 0.6 326.4 79.4 247.0 114.1 133.0 1.7          Feb 5.9 38.9 699.4 144.6 554.8 426.3 128.5 0.5 321.3 81.2 240.1 110.1 130.0 1.7          Mar 
5.8 39.4 712.0 151.1 560.9 433.7 127.2 0.5 323.9 76.9 247.0 119.0 128.0 1.7          Apr 
5.5 40.7 715.1 164.8 550.4 424.8 125.5 0.5 323.1 87.8 235.3 109.7 125.6 1.7          May5.6 40.9 689.4 165.7 523.7 398.0 125.7 0.6 321.0 89.2 231.9 102.7 129.2 1.7          June
Changes *
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
+ 0.1 − 0.3 + 17.4 + 55.9 − 38.4 − 40.0 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 30.7 + 30.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 2005          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 11.9 + 17.5 + 19.2 − 1.7 − + 9.0 + 6.3 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.9          Feb 
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 23.7 + 17.5 + 6.2 + 7.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 22.3 − 5.3 − 16.9 − 15.4 − 1.6 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 49.2 + 5.0 + 44.2 + 41.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 23.4 + 5.4 + 18.0 + 25.5 − 7.5 − 0.0          Apr 
− 0.1 − 0.6 − 10.1 + 12.0 − 22.1 − 21.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 6.9 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.1          May− 0.1 + 0.4 − 46.0 − 8.1 − 37.9 − 47.6 + 9.7 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 3.6 − 22.9 − 24.8 + 1.9 − 0.1          June
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 18.2 + 13.7 + 14.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 1.9 + 5.0 + 3.2 + 1.8 − 0.4          July
+ 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 3.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.0          Aug + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 3.0 − 4.5 − 5.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 11.1 + 6.8 + 4.3 + 4.9 − 0.7 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.1 − 0.6 + 25.3 − 4.1 + 29.4 + 28.3 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 2.9 − 2.2 + 1.8 − 4.0 + 0.4          Oct 
− 0.1 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 7.6 − 9.8 − 9.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 12.9 + 16.0 − 3.1 + 1.6 − 4.7 + 0.0          Nov + 0.0 + 0.1 − 29.1 − 47.5 + 18.3 + 18.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 28.6 − 20.1 − 8.6 − 5.0 − 3.5 − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 + 1.3 + 17.7 + 40.9 − 23.2 − 20.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 24.9 + 24.3 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 2006          Jan 
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 21.9 − 7.6 + 29.5 + 29.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 15.1 − 6.9 − 8.2 − 6.1 − 2.2 + 0.0          Feb 
− 1.2 − 0.2 + 11.8 + 8.6 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 3.8 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 2.1 − 4.9 − 3.3 − 1.7 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 + 0.8 + 17.2 + 7.5 + 9.7 + 10.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 5.1 − 4.0 + 9.1 + 9.7 − 0.6 − 0.1          Apr 
− 0.3 + 1.4 + 6.3 + 14.4 − 8.1 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 11.1 − 10.3 − 8.8 − 1.5 + 0.0          May+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 27.0 + 0.6 − 27.6 − 27.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.3 − 4.0 − 7.2 + 3.3 + 0.1          June
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 
3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.2
1997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2005          Jan 3,009.9 2,644.2 323.6 279.1 278.5 0.6 44.4 42.5 2.0 2,686.3 2,117.7
         Feb 3,000.5 2,642.1 325.2 285.2 284.6 0.6 40.0 38.1 1.9 2,675.3 2,109.7         Mar 3,003.9 2,637.2 325.3 287.8 286.8 1.0 37.5 37.1 0.4 2,678.5 2,107.7
         Apr 3,042.4 2,640.3 328.8 285.7 284.6 1.1 43.1 42.3 0.8 2,713.6 2,147.6
         May 3,022.1 2,642.3 331.0 286.3 285.1 1.2 44.7 43.7 1.0 2,691.2 2,130.1         June 2,988.9 2,639.0 325.7 289.1 288.2 1.0 36.5 36.0 0.5 2,663.3 2,109.2
         July 2,998.0 2,643.3 323.1 284.0 283.0 1.0 39.1 38.0 1.1 2,674.9 2,120.4
         Aug 3,001.1 2,642.3 318.5 280.5 279.3 1.3 37.9 37.2 0.7 2,682.7 2,126.2         Sep 3,004.7 2,649.0 326.2 293.5 292.9 0.6 32.7 32.2 0.5 2,678.4 2,126.9
         Oct 3,012.9 2,657.7 339.3 298.0 297.0 1.0 41.3 38.1 3.2 2,673.6 2,128.6
         Nov 3,004.8 2,647.2 325.1 288.7 288.1 0.6 36.4 33.5 2.9 2,679.7 2,133.6         Dec 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006          Jan 3,032.2 2,661.3 325.0 282.8 282.0 0.8 42.2 40.3 1.9 2,707.3 2,168.5
         Feb 3,023.3 2,656.6 316.7 283.3 282.6 0.7 33.4 32.6 0.8 2,706.5 2,170.1         Mar 3,030.2 2,659.7 329.2 292.7 291.7 0.9 36.5 35.9 0.6 2,701.1 2,167.3
         Apr 3,066.0 2,667.7 336.7 297.1 296.0 1.0 39.7 38.8 0.8 2,729.3 2,199.0
         May 3,065.4 2,659.4 326.4 293.2 292.4 0.7 33.2 32.5 0.7 2,739.0 2,196.1         June 3,028.3 2,656.3 326.2 292.9 291.9 1.0 33.3 32.3 1.1 2,702.1 2,173.3
Changes *
1997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 282.5 + 219.91998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.31999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.02004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2005          Jan + 8.6 − 2.5 + 2.7 − 4.7 − 4.5 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 7.2 + 0.2 + 5.9 + 3.4
         Feb − 9.3 − 2.2 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 6.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.1 − 11.0 − 8.0         Mar + 3.3 − 4.8 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 3.2 − 2.0
         Apr + 38.5 + 3.0 + 3.5 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 5.6 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 35.0 + 39.8
         May − 20.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 22.4 − 17.4         June − 33.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.2 − 8.1 − 7.7 − 0.5 − 28.1 − 20.9
         July + 9.1 + 4.3 − 2.6 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 11.6 + 11.2
         Aug + 3.1 − 1.1 − 4.6 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 7.8 + 5.8         Sep + 3.1 + 6.3 + 7.4 + 12.6 + 13.2 − 0.6 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.6
         Oct + 8.3 + 8.7 + 13.0 + 4.5 + 4.1 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 5.8 + 2.7 − 4.8 + 1.6
         Nov − 8.1 − 10.5 − 14.0 − 9.1 − 8.8 − 0.4 − 4.9 − 4.6 − 0.3 + 5.9 + 4.9         Dec − 9.7 − 12.2 − 15.5 − 15.2 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 5.7 + 7.7
2006          Jan + 19.6 + 8.8 + 15.3 + 9.3 + 9.1 + 0.2 + 6.0 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 4.3 + 9.9
         Feb − 8.9 − 4.7 − 8.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 8.8 − 7.6 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 1.5         Mar + 6.9 + 3.0 + 12.4 + 9.3 + 9.2 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.3 − 0.2 − 5.5 − 2.7
         Apr + 35.3 + 7.5 + 7.6 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 27.6 + 31.3
         May − 1.4 − 9.0 − 11.0 − 4.6 − 4.3 − 0.3 − 6.4 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 9.7 − 2.9         June − 37.1 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 36.9 − 22.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 1996
2,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,938.3 194.0 1,744.3 179.4 55.3 568.6 385.0 32.1 352.8 182.7 1.0 6.4 2005          Jan 
1,935.3 193.0 1,742.3 174.4 54.9 565.6 384.1 30.9 353.2 180.6 1.0 6.4          Feb 
1,929.8 192.3 1,737.5 178.0 54.6 570.8 383.5 31.7 351.8 186.3 1.0 6.3          Mar 
1,932.9 191.0 1,741.8 214.7 54.5 566.0 380.5 31.9 348.7 184.5 1.0 6.2          Apr 
1,935.5 191.0 1,744.5 194.6 54.5 561.1 378.0 31.2 346.8 182.1 1.0 6.2          May1,934.6 190.9 1,743.7 174.6 52.5 554.1 380.2 32.1 348.1 172.9 1.0 6.0          June
1,941.4 192.5 1,748.9 179.0 52.3 554.5 380.9 32.6 348.3 173.5 0.0 5.9          July
1,946.0 195.4 1,750.6 180.2 52.3 556.5 379.8 33.1 346.6 176.7 0.0 5.9          Aug 1,945.4 195.1 1,750.3 181.5 52.0 551.5 378.4 33.2 345.3 173.0 − 4.6          Sep 
1,947.5 194.3 1,753.2 181.0 51.9 545.1 375.1 33.1 342.0 169.9 − 4.6          Oct 
1,952.2 195.1 1,757.1 181.4 52.2 546.1 373.4 32.1 341.3 172.7 − 4.5          Nov 1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5          Dec 
1,969.5 193.0 1,776.5 199.0 51.8 538.7 369.6 31.8 337.8 169.2 − 4.4 2006          Jan 
1,972.9 193.5 1,779.4 197.1 50.7 536.5 368.5 32.2 336.3 168.0 − 4.4          Feb 
1,966.6 193.2 1,773.5 200.7 49.6 533.7 365.3 31.9 333.4 168.4 − 4.4          Mar 
1,968.9 192.6 1,776.3 230.2 49.4 530.3 364.0 31.9 332.2 166.3 − 4.5          Apr 
1,972.0 194.3 1,777.8 224.1 49.3 542.9 362.4 30.9 331.6 180.5 − 4.5          May1,973.4 196.3 1,777.2 199.9 49.3 528.8 358.7 30.8 327.9 170.1 − 4.4          June
Changes *
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 − 18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
− 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 5.9 − 0.0 + 2.5 − 2.7 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 5.2 − − 0.1 2005          Jan 
− 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 4.9 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 2.1 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 5.5 − 0.8 − 4.7 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 5.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 3.1 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 36.7 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 3.1 − 1.8 − − 0.1          Apr 
+ 2.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 − 20.1 + 0.0 − 4.9 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 2.4 − − 0.0          May− 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 2.0 − 7.2 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 9.2 − 0.0 − 0.2          June
+ 6.8 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 4.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1          July
+ 4.6 + 2.9 + 1.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 3.2 − − 0.0          Aug − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 4.9 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 1.3          Sep 
+ 2.1 − 0.8 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.3 − 3.1 − − 0.1          Oct 
+ 4.5 + 0.8 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 2.7 − − 0.0          Nov + 1.2 − 0.4 + 1.6 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 2.9 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.2 − 1.7 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 0.3 − 5.6 − 5.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 0.6 − − 0.1 2006          Jan 
+ 3.4 + 0.5 + 2.9 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 2.2 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 6.3 − 0.3 − 6.0 + 3.5 − 1.1 − 2.7 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 2.9 + 0.4 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.8 − 0.6 + 2.4 + 29.5 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.3 − 2.1 − + 0.1          Apr 
+ 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 12.6 − 1.6 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 14.2 − + 0.0          May+ 1.4 + 2.0 − 0.6 − 24.2 − 0.0 − 14.1 − 3.8 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 10.4 − − 0.0          June
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2003 2,241.6 1,124.5 1,083.3 867.1 216.2 1,252.2 335.1 151.0 37.2 59.0 152.3 32.1 54.4 54.4
2004 2,224.2 1,127.7 1,086.0 869.7 216.3 1,211.6 320.4 136.7 37.1 53.0 141.4 31.9 56.1 60.0
2005          June 2,223.1 1,133.4 1,082.7 880.1 202.6 1,210.8 314.3 135.8 36.6 52.0 136.5 31.5 58.2 70.1
         Sep 2,238.5 1,144.2 1,087.9 890.9 197.1 1,217.9 312.8 134.5 37.3 50.9 134.1 32.2 57.6 79.7         Dec 2,226.6 1,154.5 1,093.3 895.9 197.4 1,199.7 311.3 130.6 37.2 49.4 134.1 31.6 57.8 74.0
2006          Mar 2,258.6 1,172.5 1,109.3 915.2 194.0 1,229.7 320.7 130.3 37.6 50.0 131.2 32.1 59.0 97.7
         June 2,265.6 1,173.1 1,109.8 915.7 194.0 1,233.0 319.0 134.2 38.6 49.8 131.4 32.5 60.1 94.1
 Short-term lending
2003 313.9 − 14.1 − 14.1 266.7 8.9 46.6 4.2 13.2 55.9 3.9 8.0 25.82004 283.4 − 12.5 − 12.5 239.3 7.6 40.9 3.5 11.1 52.9 3.6 5.9 26.4
2005          June 288.4 − 11.6 − 11.6 246.2 6.9 42.4 3.5 11.4 50.1 3.9 6.4 35.1
         Sep 293.1 − 11.7 − 11.7 250.2 7.1 41.9 4.0 10.9 48.0 4.0 6.5 42.1         Dec 273.2 − 11.2 − 11.2 230.0 6.7 38.8 3.2 9.7 49.2 3.3 6.1 32.8
2006          Mar 292.0 − 10.7 − 10.7 250.7 6.5 39.9 3.4 10.6 47.0 3.7 6.2 54.8
         June 292.1 − 10.6 − 10.6 250.7 6.4 42.9 3.4 10.4 47.5 3.7 5.9 51.2
 Medium-term lending
2003 195.0 − 38.2 − 38.2 121.2 12.0 17.5 2.3 6.0 11.9 3.4 10.9 6.52004 194.3 − 38.8 − 38.8 119.9 11.8 16.4 2.5 5.6 11.1 3.2 11.3 7.6
2005          June 190.9 − 36.0 − 36.0 118.4 10.9 16.0 2.0 5.4 11.2 3.1 11.4 8.2
         Sep 195.1 − 35.9 − 35.9 122.9 10.8 16.0 2.1 5.3 11.4 3.1 11.0 9.2         Dec 194.6 − 35.7 − 35.7 122.5 10.7 15.6 2.1 5.2 11.4 3.0 10.6 10.8
2006          Mar 193.2 − 34.7 − 34.7 123.2 10.4 15.9 2.1 5.2 11.5 3.0 10.5 11.4
         June 196.3 − 34.8 − 34.8 125.5 10.6 17.0 2.2 5.2 11.5 3.0 10.3 11.7
 Long-term lending
2003 1,732.8 1,124.5 1,031.0 867.1 164.0 864.3 314.2 86.9 30.6 39.9 84.5 24.7 35.5 22.12004 1,746.5 1,127.7 1,034.7 869.7 165.0 852.4 301.0 79.4 31.2 36.2 77.3 25.0 38.9 26.0
2005          June 1,743.7 1,133.4 1,035.1 880.1 155.0 846.1 296.5 77.4 31.1 35.1 75.2 24.6 40.4 26.9
         Sep 1,750.3 1,144.2 1,040.3 890.9 149.5 844.8 294.9 76.6 31.3 34.7 74.7 25.0 40.2 28.4         Dec 1,758.8 1,154.5 1,046.3 895.9 150.4 847.2 293.9 76.2 31.8 34.5 73.5 25.2 41.1 30.4
2006          Mar 1,773.5 1,172.5 1,063.9 915.2 148.7 855.8 303.8 74.5 32.1 34.2 72.7 25.5 42.3 31.5
         June 1,777.2 1,173.1 1,064.5 915.7 148.7 856.8 302.0 74.4 33.0 34.2 72.4 25.8 43.9 31.3
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2005          Q2 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 3.7 − 2.3 + 1.1 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 2.7         Q3 + 14.9 + 5.8 + 5.6 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 7.0 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 2.3 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 9.3         Q4 − 11.9 + 5.4 + 5.1 + 4.7 + 0.4 − 18.3 − 1.9 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 8.2
2006          Q1 + 14.7 − 1.3 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 18.9 − 2.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 23.6
         Q2 + 5.7 − 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 2.5 − 1.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 4.3
 Short-term lending
2005          Q2 + 1.3 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.8         Q3 + 4.3 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0         Q4 − 19.7 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 20.0 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 9.7
2006          Q1 + 18.8 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 20.6 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 22.0
         Q2 − 0.7 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.4
 Medium-term lending
2005          Q2 + 0.2 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1         Q3 + 4.0 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 4.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.2         Q4 − 0.5 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.4
2006          Q1 − 1.5 − − 1.1 − − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6
         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3
 Long-term lending
2005          Q2 + 4.8 + 3.3 + 2.5 + 3.7 − 1.3 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.8         Q3 + 6.6 + 5.8 + 5.5 + 5.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.0         Q4 + 8.3 + 5.4 + 5.7 + 4.7 + 1.0 + 2.2 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.1
2006          Q1 − 2.6 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.0
         Q2 + 3.6 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.2
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
711.9 160.7 44.0 207.2 437.0 67.7 975.6 744.7 230.9 118.6 21.6 13.7 3.5 2003
695.5 163.7 42.5 204.2 419.0 61.7 999.4 762.4 237.0 129.2 19.9 13.2 3.2 2004
690.1 161.2 41.6 201.5 412.7 60.9 999.3 765.3 234.0 131.7 18.9 13.0 3.1 2005          June
691.6 161.0 44.4 200.8 410.9 60.2 1,006.9 771.9 235.0 132.7 19.5 13.7 3.2          Sep 
685.0 160.3 40.6 199.3 407.5 60.6 1,012.9 778.9 234.0 130.1 18.8 14.1 3.1          Dec 
691.7 167.9 39.2 199.0 406.1 61.3 1,014.8 784.9 229.9 128.6 18.0 14.2 3.7 2006          Mar 
692.2 166.3 39.8 199.7 404.2 61.0 1,018.5 787.1 231.3 130.4 18.3 14.1 3.7          June
Short-term lending
109.1 17.9 14.6 31.2 49.4 12.9 45.9 5.1 40.8 2.4 21.6 1.2 0.0 2003
95.0 15.8 11.5 27.6 44.4 11.4 43.0 4.9 38.0 2.3 19.9 1.1 0.0 2004
93.4 15.3 10.7 25.9 42.3 11.4 41.2 4.7 36.5 2.3 18.9 1.0 0.0 2005          June
92.7 14.9 13.1 24.7 41.1 11.1 41.8 4.6 37.3 2.7 19.5 1.1 0.0          Sep 
86.9 14.1 10.3 23.9 40.1 10.6 41.8 4.5 37.3 2.6 18.8 1.4 0.0          Dec 
85.1 13.5 10.0 22.7 39.6 11.5 40.2 4.1 36.0 2.5 18.0 1.2 0.0 2006          Mar 
85.6 13.1 11.0 22.9 39.1 11.4 40.4 4.2 36.2 2.6 18.3 1.1 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
62.7 5.7 5.6 18.0 30.4 4.5 73.2 26.2 47.0 37.1 − 0.6 0.1 2003
62.3 6.5 6.5 17.2 29.6 3.9 73.8 26.9 46.9 37.7 − 0.5 0.1 2004
61.2 6.1 6.2 16.1 30.5 3.8 72.0 25.0 46.9 38.6 − 0.5 0.1 2005          June
64.9 7.1 7.0 17.1 30.2 3.8 71.6 25.0 46.6 38.1 − 0.6 0.1          Sep 
63.7 7.3 6.5 15.9 29.8 3.8 71.5 25.0 46.5 37.2 − 0.7 0.1          Dec 
63.6 7.6 6.0 15.7 29.3 3.7 69.4 24.2 45.2 36.2 − 0.6 0.1 2006          Mar 
64.6 7.8 6.0 16.1 28.8 3.8 70.2 24.1 46.1 37.3 − 0.6 0.1          June
Long-term lending
540.0 137.1 23.8 158.0 357.2 50.4 856.5 713.4 143.1 79.1 − 11.9 3.4 2003
538.2 141.5 24.5 159.5 345.0 46.4 882.6 730.6 152.0 89.2 − 11.5 3.1 2004
535.5 139.8 24.6 159.6 340.0 45.6 886.1 735.6 150.5 90.8 − 11.5 3.0 2005          June
534.1 139.0 24.2 159.0 339.5 45.3 893.5 742.3 151.2 91.9 − 12.0 3.1          Sep 
534.4 138.9 23.8 159.6 337.6 46.2 899.6 749.4 150.2 90.3 − 12.0 3.1          Dec 
543.0 146.8 23.2 160.5 337.2 46.1 905.3 756.6 148.7 89.9 − 12.4 3.6 2006          Mar 
541.9 145.4 22.8 160.7 336.3 45.8 907.9 758.9 149.1 90.6 − 12.4 3.6          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.5 + 5.3 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 2005          Q2
+ 1.4 − 0.3 + 2.8 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 + 7.2 + 6.6 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.1          Q3
− 4.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 0.8 + 6.0 + 7.1 − 1.1 − 1.6 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1          Q4
− 3.6 − 1.0 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 3.3 + 0.3 − 3.8 + 0.4 − 4.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 2006          Q1
+ 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 2.0 − 0.3 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
+ 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 2005          Q2
− 0.7 − 0.4 + 2.4 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
− 5.3 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
− 1.8 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.0 2006          Q1
+ 0.5 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 −          Q2
Medium-term lending
− 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.9 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2005          Q2
+ 3.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 1.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2006          Q1
+ 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 4.4 + 3.5 + 0.8 + 1.4 − + 0.0 + 0.1 2005          Q2
− 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 7.4 + 6.7 + 0.7 + 1.0 − + 0.6 + 0.1          Q3
+ 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.9 + 1.2 + 6.2 + 7.2 − 1.0 − 0.7 − − 0.1 − 0.1          Q4
− 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 1.0 − 2.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.0 2006          Q1
− 1.2 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. — loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2003 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.3
2004 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.12005 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 231.3 633.1 8.2 624.9 603.4 91.9 42.4 31.6 12.6
2005          July 2,245.4 695.2 854.4 227.3 627.1 7.7 619.5 601.9 93.8 43.4 32.4 18.1
         Aug 2,250.3 698.1 858.8 230.7 628.1 7.6 620.5 600.4 93.0 43.5 32.2 21.7         Sep 2,254.2 704.0 858.9 231.4 627.5 7.7 619.8 598.9 92.4 42.0 32.1 21.0
         Oct 2,258.1 707.7 861.1 232.8 628.3 7.9 620.5 597.2 92.1 41.7 32.1 21.7
         Nov 2,274.6 723.6 863.2 232.8 630.3 8.0 622.3 596.0 91.9 42.1 31.9 22.6         Dec 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 231.3 633.1 8.2 624.9 603.4 91.9 42.4 31.6 12.6
2006          Jan 2,285.7 718.1 872.9 237.1 635.9 8.4 627.5 602.8 91.9 38.9 31.7 18.4
         Feb 2,287.7 715.3 877.7 235.0 642.7 8.6 634.1 602.6 92.1 38.2 31.7 19.0         Mar 2,303.4 722.4 887.1 243.8 643.4 8.6 634.8 601.4 92.4 37.8 31.6 25.0
         Apr 2,322.4 726.5 903.1 255.1 648.0 8.7 639.4 599.8 93.0 38.1 31.6 27.4
         May 2,333.8 742.5 900.6 250.1 650.4 8.9 641.6 597.4 93.3 37.9 31.5 27.5         June 2,342.7 742.0 911.0 258.4 652.5 9.0 643.5 596.1 93.6 37.4 31.5 26.7
Changes *
2004 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 − 3.7 + 29.7 − 0.3 + 29.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 0.92005 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 3.9 + 16.4 + 0.4 + 16.0 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 2.4
2005          July + 6.4 + 2.7 + 5.1 + 3.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.4
         Aug + 4.5 + 2.4 + 4.4 + 3.4 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 1.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.6         Sep + 3.9 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.7
         Oct + 3.9 + 4.1 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.7
         Nov + 16.5 + 15.9 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.9         Dec + 2.0 − 6.6 + 1.2 − 1.6 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.6 + 7.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 10.0
2006          Jan + 9.0 + 1.1 + 8.5 + 5.8 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 0.1 + 5.9
         Feb + 2.0 − 2.8 + 4.7 − 2.1 + 6.8 + 0.2 + 6.6 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6         Mar + 15.7 + 7.1 + 9.5 + 8.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 6.0
         Apr + 19.0 + 4.0 + 16.0 + 11.3 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 4.6 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 10.6 + 16.0 − 3.3 − 5.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 2.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8         June + 8.9 − 0.5 + 10.4 + 8.3 + 2.1 + 0.2 + 1.9 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8
Domestic government End of year or month *
2003 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −2004 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −2005 103.7 21.0 78.7 31.7 47.0 0.5 46.5 2.4 1.5 32.3 1.0 −
2005          July 103.7 19.0 80.4 31.6 48.8 0.5 48.3 2.8 1.6 33.7 1.1 −
         Aug 104.0 20.1 79.3 31.2 48.1 0.5 47.6 3.0 1.6 33.8 1.0 −         Sep 103.3 19.1 79.6 32.6 47.1 0.5 46.5 3.1 1.5 32.4 1.0 −
         Oct 101.5 20.7 76.3 29.4 46.9 0.5 46.4 3.0 1.5 32.3 1.0 −
         Nov 102.0 21.5 76.3 29.2 47.1 0.5 46.6 2.7 1.5 32.2 1.0 −         Dec 103.7 21.0 78.7 31.7 47.0 0.5 46.5 2.4 1.5 32.3 1.0 −
2006          Jan 106.1 21.2 81.1 33.7 47.3 0.6 46.8 2.3 1.5 29.5 1.0 −
         Feb 104.4 22.0 78.6 31.1 47.5 0.6 47.0 2.3 1.5 29.5 1.0 −         Mar 106.2 20.6 81.9 35.1 46.7 0.6 46.1 2.3 1.5 29.2 1.0 −
         Apr 107.7 19.7 84.3 37.2 47.0 0.7 46.3 2.2 1.5 29.4 1.0 −
         May 114.7 22.6 88.3 40.8 47.4 0.7 46.7 2.3 1.6 29.2 0.9 −         June 122.1 24.8 93.4 46.2 47.2 0.7 46.5 2.3 1.6 28.4 0.9 −
Changes *
2004 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.4 − 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.1 −2005 − 0.2 + 3.9 − 3.8 + 1.2 − 5.1 − 0.4 − 4.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.1 −
2005          July − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.8 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.8 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 −         Sep − 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − −
         Oct − 1.8 + 1.6 − 3.3 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Nov + 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − −         Dec + 1.6 − 0.5 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
2006          Jan + 2.5 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 0.0 −
         Feb − 1.7 + 0.7 − 2.4 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − −         Mar + 1.8 − 1.4 + 3.2 + 4.0 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Apr + 1.4 − 1.0 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −
         May + 7.1 + 3.0 + 4.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −         June + 7.4 + 2.1 + 5.2 + 5.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2003 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
2004 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.12005 2,173.0 696.0 785.7 199.5 586.1 7.7 578.4 601.0 90.3 10.2 30.7 12.6
2005          July 2,141.6 676.2 774.0 195.7 578.3 7.2 571.2 599.1 92.2 9.7 31.3 18.1
         Aug 2,146.3 678.0 779.5 199.5 580.0 7.1 572.9 597.4 91.4 9.7 31.2 21.7         Sep 2,150.9 684.9 779.3 198.8 580.5 7.2 573.3 595.9 90.8 9.6 31.1 21.0
         Oct 2,156.6 687.0 784.8 203.3 581.5 7.4 574.1 594.2 90.6 9.4 31.1 21.7
         Nov 2,172.6 702.1 786.9 203.6 583.2 7.5 575.7 593.3 90.4 9.9 30.9 22.6         Dec 2,173.0 696.0 785.7 199.5 586.1 7.7 578.4 601.0 90.3 10.2 30.7 12.6
2006          Jan 2,179.6 696.8 791.9 203.3 588.6 7.8 580.7 600.5 90.3 9.3 30.7 18.4
         Feb 2,183.2 693.3 799.0 203.9 595.2 8.0 587.2 600.3 90.6 8.8 30.8 19.0         Mar 2,197.2 701.8 805.3 208.7 596.6 8.0 588.6 599.1 90.9 8.6 30.7 25.0
         Apr 2,214.7 706.8 818.9 217.8 601.0 8.0 593.0 597.6 91.5 8.7 30.6 27.4
         May 2,219.1 719.9 812.3 209.3 603.0 8.1 594.9 595.1 91.7 8.6 30.6 27.5         June 2,220.5 717.2 817.5 212.2 605.3 8.3 597.0 593.8 92.0 9.0 30.6 26.7
Changes *
2004 + 63.9 + 25.3 + 27.4 − 5.1 + 32.5 − 0.7 + 33.1 + 12.5 − 1.3 + 3.4 + 1.8 + 0.92005 + 76.8 + 66.8 + 16.3 − 5.2 + 21.4 + 0.8 + 20.6 − 0.9 − 5.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 2.4
2005          July + 7.2 + 4.4 + 4.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.4
         Aug + 4.6 + 1.7 + 5.5 + 3.8 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.6         Sep + 4.6 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7
         Oct + 5.7 + 2.5 + 4.9 + 4.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.7
         Nov + 16.0 + 15.1 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.9         Dec + 0.4 − 6.1 − 1.2 − 4.1 + 2.9 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 7.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 10.0
2006          Jan + 6.5 + 0.9 + 6.1 + 3.8 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 5.9
         Feb + 3.7 − 3.5 + 7.1 + 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.2 + 6.4 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6         Mar + 13.9 + 8.5 + 6.3 + 4.8 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 6.0
         Apr + 17.5 + 5.0 + 13.6 + 9.1 + 4.4 − 0.0 + 4.4 − 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 3.6 + 13.0 − 7.3 − 9.2 + 2.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8         June + 1.5 − 2.6 + 5.2 + 2.9 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2003 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.32004 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.12005 809.9 233.2 550.8 108.7 442.0 2.4 439.6 5.0 21.0 9.7 19.4 12.6
2005          July 799.3 226.0 545.9 108.3 437.5 2.1 435.4 5.5 22.0 9.3 19.8 18.1
         Aug 807.6 229.5 551.0 112.1 439.0 2.0 436.9 5.3 21.8 9.2 19.8 21.7         Sep 812.0 234.5 550.6 111.1 439.4 2.1 437.4 5.4 21.6 9.1 19.7 21.0
         Oct 816.6 234.0 556.0 115.5 440.5 2.2 438.3 5.2 21.5 9.0 19.7 21.7
         Nov 821.6 237.6 557.7 115.8 441.9 2.3 439.6 5.1 21.3 9.4 19.5 22.6         Dec 809.9 233.2 550.8 108.7 442.0 2.4 439.6 5.0 21.0 9.7 19.4 12.6
2006          Jan 817.6 235.1 556.5 112.4 444.1 2.6 441.5 5.0 21.0 8.9 19.5 18.4
         Feb 817.6 229.7 561.9 111.6 450.3 2.7 447.6 5.0 21.0 8.3 19.4 19.0         Mar 829.0 237.4 565.7 114.7 451.0 2.6 448.4 5.0 20.8 8.1 19.4 25.0
         Apr 842.3 237.8 578.7 123.6 455.1 2.6 452.5 5.0 20.8 8.2 19.4 27.4
         May 847.7 250.7 571.4 114.3 457.1 2.7 454.4 4.9 20.8 8.2 19.4 27.5         June 848.5 247.5 575.4 116.1 459.3 2.8 456.6 4.9 20.7 8.5 19.4 26.7
Changes *
2004 + 31.1 − 2.3 + 33.0 + 7.3 + 25.7 + 0.0 + 25.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 1.0 + 0.92005 + 46.7 + 31.0 + 16.4 − 1.5 + 18.0 + 0.7 + 17.3 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 2.4
2005          July + 6.6 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 2.7 + 2.2 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.4
         Aug + 8.2 + 3.4 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.6         Sep + 4.4 + 5.0 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7
         Oct + 4.6 − 0.5 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.7
         Nov + 5.0 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.9         Dec − 11.7 − 4.4 − 6.9 − 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 10.0
2006          Jan + 7.6 + 1.9 + 5.7 + 3.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 5.9
         Feb − 0.0 − 5.4 + 5.4 − 0.8 + 6.2 + 0.1 + 6.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6         Mar + 11.4 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 6.0
         Apr + 13.4 + 0.4 + 13.0 + 8.9 + 4.1 − 0.0 + 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 4.6 + 12.8 − 8.0 − 9.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8         June + 0.8 − 3.1 + 4.0 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2003 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.4
2004 1,334.2 428.1 414.8 71.7 283.5 59.6 13.2 235.3 216.9 25.7 175.1 16.22005 1,363.1 462.8 448.1 79.7 305.1 63.2 14.8 234.9 217.0 23.7 179.0 14.2
2006          Jan 1,362.0 461.8 446.8 80.0 303.4 63.4 15.0 235.4 218.1 23.7 180.1 14.2
         Feb 1,365.7 463.6 448.6 79.5 305.2 63.8 15.1 237.1 219.4 24.4 180.8 14.3         Mar 1,368.2 464.4 449.2 77.7 307.1 64.3 15.2 239.6 221.6 24.6 182.4 14.5
         Apr 1,372.4 469.0 454.2 78.5 310.9 64.7 14.8 240.2 222.4 25.0 182.9 14.5
         May 1,371.4 469.2 453.5 79.6 308.9 65.1 15.7 240.9 223.1 25.2 183.3 14.6         June 1,372.0 469.7 453.6 78.3 309.9 65.4 16.1 242.1 224.4 25.6 184.1 14.6
Changes *
2004 + 32.8 + 27.6 + 26.7 + 4.8 + 19.2 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 5.6 − 5.1 − 3.5 + 0.6 − 2.22005 + 30.1 + 35.8 + 34.2 + 8.0 + 21.5 + 4.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 4.1 − 1.8
2006          Jan − 1.1 − 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.0
         Feb + 3.7 + 1.9 + 1.8 − 0.7 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1         Mar + 2.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.3
         Apr + 4.2 + 4.6 + 5.0 + 0.8 + 3.5 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1
         May − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1         June + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2003 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 21.9
2004 103.6 41.4 0.8 5.8 34.8 0.0 12.9 15.1 2.7 2.2 10.2 0.1 21.52005 103.7 38.8 1.3 7.9 29.6 0.0 12.9 16.3 3.9 2.5 9.9 0.1 19.1
2006          Jan 106.1 40.4 2.1 8.5 29.8 0.0 10.2 17.4 4.0 3.5 9.8 0.1 19.1
         Feb 104.4 35.8 1.1 4.7 29.9 0.0 10.2 18.1 3.9 4.4 9.8 0.1 19.0         Mar 106.2 37.0 1.6 6.4 29.0 0.0 10.2 19.1 3.7 5.6 9.7 0.1 18.7
         Apr 107.7 37.6 0.8 7.6 29.1 0.0 10.4 17.9 3.3 4.9 9.7 0.1 18.7
         May 114.7 37.0 1.0 6.8 29.2 0.0 10.3 18.1 3.2 5.2 9.7 0.1 18.7         June 122.1 39.3 2.0 8.4 28.9 0.0 9.5 22.5 5.6 7.2 9.6 0.1 18.6
Changes *
2004 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 2.42005 − 0.2 − 3.0 + 0.1 + 2.1 − 5.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 2.4
2006          Jan + 2.5 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb − 1.7 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 3.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1         Mar + 1.8 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 1.7 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Apr + 1.4 + 0.5 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 7.1 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − − 0.0         June + 7.4 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 4.4 + 2.5 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
18.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 − 2003
18.4 94.3 141.0 5.5 135.6 595.7 586.3 9.5 75.1 0.3 12.8 − 200417.9 90.8 144.1 5.3 138.8 596.0 586.4 9.6 69.3 0.5 11.3 − 2005
17.3 90.9 144.5 5.3 139.2 595.5 585.9 9.6 69.4 0.5 11.2 − 2006          Jan 
17.7 92.3 144.9 5.3 139.6 595.3 585.7 9.6 69.6 0.5 11.3 −          Feb 
18.0 94.0 145.6 5.4 140.2 594.2 584.6 9.6 70.1 0.5 11.3 −          Mar 
17.8 94.3 145.9 5.4 140.5 592.6 583.1 9.5 70.7 0.5 11.2 −          Apr 
17.8 95.0 146.0 5.5 140.5 590.3 580.9 9.4 71.0 0.5 11.2 −          May17.7 96.2 145.9 5.5 140.4 589.0 579.6 9.3 71.3 0.5 11.2 −          June
Changes *
− 0.5 − 12.3 + 6.7 − 0.7 + 7.4 + 12.2 + 12.0 + 0.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 2004− 0.5 − 3.7 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 4.5 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 2005
− 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2006          Jan 
+ 0.4 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 −          Feb 
+ 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Mar 
− 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          May− 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
 
   
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
24.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0 2003
25.7 10.5 9.6 2.3 3.3 0.3 21.4 2.9 12.9 4.8 0.8 0.0 200428.0 11.8 10.4 2.6 3.2 0.3 20.7 4.1 11.0 4.9 0.7 0.0 2005
24.7 9.1 9.8 2.8 3.1 0.3 23.6 6.0 11.9 5.0 0.6 0.0 2006          Jan 
26.9 10.2 10.7 2.8 3.1 0.3 23.7 6.7 11.3 5.1 0.6 0.0          Feb 
26.0 9.3 10.8 2.7 3.1 0.3 24.2 6.0 12.3 5.3 0.6 0.0          Mar 
26.6 9.7 10.9 2.8 3.1 0.3 25.6 5.8 13.8 5.4 0.6 0.0          Apr 
29.3 10.9 12.3 3.0 3.2 0.3 30.3 7.6 16.6 5.6 0.6 0.0          May27.7 10.0 11.5 3.0 3.2 0.3 32.6 7.1 19.2 5.7 0.6 0.0          June
Changes *
+ 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 2004+ 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 2005
− 3.2 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − + 2.9 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2006          Jan 
+ 2.1 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Feb 
− 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 −          Mar 
+ 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 4.7 + 1.8 + 2.7 + 0.2 − −          May− 1.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 2.3 − 0.4 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          June
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2003 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 16.0 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.0
2004 613.0 603.5 515.5 397.9 88.0 76.7 9.6 7.7 14.2 105.8 98.4 85.2 7.42005 611.9 603.4 519.2 404.2 84.2 74.4 8.5 6.8 13.3 99.3 91.9 77.5 7.4
2006          Feb 611.1 602.6 517.5 403.8 85.2 75.9 8.5 6.8 0.3 99.4 92.1 76.3 7.3
         Mar 609.8 601.4 515.4 402.5 86.0 76.7 8.4 6.8 0.3 99.8 92.4 75.9 7.3
         Apr 608.2 599.8 513.6 401.8 86.2 76.9 8.4 6.7 0.2 100.3 93.0 75.5 7.3
         May 605.8 597.4 510.1 399.7 87.3 78.1 8.4 6.7 0.3 100.6 93.3 75.1 7.3         June 604.5 596.1 507.5 397.9 88.6 79.4 8.4 6.7 0.3 100.8 93.6 74.8 7.2
Changes *
2004 + 12.6 + 13.1 + 14.7 + 20.1 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.42005 − 2.2 − 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.5 − 4.0 − 2.6 − 1.1 − 0.8 . − 5.3 − 5.4 − 6.5 + 0.0
2006          Feb − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − . + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0
         Mar − 1.2 − 1.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0
         Apr − 1.7 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.0
         May − 2.4 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 2.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0         June − 1.3 − 1.3 − 2.6 − 1.9 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 . + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2003 1,490.1 353.4 20.8 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.2
2004 1,550.0 382.6 22.9 214.6 36.5 62.1 94.2 1,393.7 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.72005 1,608.7 400.7 25.3 274.5 32.0 61.8 94.8 1,452.1 1.5 0.2 0.5 0.8 45.8 2.5
2006          Feb 1,633.5 412.9 30.9 286.8 33.3 64.5 98.2 1,470.8 1.6 0.2 0.6 0.8 45.9 2.6
         Mar 1,636.9 405.2 32.2 287.5 38.1 70.0 102.7 1,464.2 1.7 0.3 0.7 0.8 47.9 2.6
         Apr 1,628.6 404.1 34.2 286.3 38.4 70.7 103.4 1,454.4 1.8 0.3 0.7 0.8 48.1 2.6
         May 1,637.6 406.2 35.2 288.3 38.0 71.1 107.5 1,459.0 1.6 0.2 0.7 0.7 47.8 2.6         June 1,645.1 405.7 33.8 289.6 35.8 69.0 109.5 1,466.5 1.5 0.1 0.7 0.7 47.7 2.6
Changes *
2004 + 57.4 + 27.9 + 1.8 + 34.7 − 7.9 − 8.0 − 11.0 + 76.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.52005 + 56.1 + 16.2 + 3.4 + 59.8 − 5.6 − 0.3 − 5.8 + 62.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 2.6 + 0.0
2006          Feb + 16.1 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 9.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 11.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1
         Mar + 3.3 − 7.8 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 3.8 + 5.5 + 4.4 − 6.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.0
         Apr − 8.3 − 0.4 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.2 − 0.0
         May + 9.0 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 4.0 + 4.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0         June − 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 2.2 − 2.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2005 26 192.4 38.2 0.0 13.6 29.8 64.5 10.1 17.2 0.5 28.5 120.1 5.0 5.6 7.4 94.2
2006          Apr 26 193.5 41.9 0.0 13.3 28.6 64.6 10.7 16.0 0.5 28.7 121.7 4.9 4.3 7.4 8.1
         May 26 193.5 41.8 0.0 13.2 28.3 64.8 11.0 16.1 0.4 29.1 121.7 5.0 4.2 7.4 8.1         June 26 193.6 42.0 0.0 13.0 28.1 65.1 11.1 15.9 0.4 29.3 121.6 5.0 3.8 7.4 7.9
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          Apr 15 141.1 31.3 0.0 6.5 18.1 47.3 9.8 10.5 0.3 22.0 82.0 4.7 4.3 4.8 5.2         May 15 141.3 31.2 0.0 6.5 17.9 47.5 10.1 10.5 0.3 22.5 82.0 4.8 4.2 4.8 5.1         June 15 141.3 31.2 0.0 6.4 17.9 47.9 10.1 10.3 0.3 22.7 82.0 4.8 3.8 4.8 5.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          Apr 11 52.4 10.6 0.0 6.8 10.5 17.3 1.0 5.5 0.1 6.7 39.6 0.2 − 2.6 2.9         May 11 52.2 10.6 0.0 6.7 10.3 17.3 1.0 5.6 0.1 6.6 39.6 0.2 − 2.6 3.0         June 11 52.2 10.8 0.0 6.6 10.3 17.3 1.0 5.6 0.1 6.6 39.6 0.2 − 2.6 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2005 26.1 3.3 5.7 41.0 27.1 36.5 16.6 4.1 6.5 3.3 13.5 11.1 7.7 13.8 11.5 0.5
2006          Apr 2.3 0.1 0.5 4.1 3.0 3.3 1.7 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.9 11.5 7.9 0.9 0.1
         May 1.9 0.1 0.6 3.6 2.3 3.1 1.5 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.1 11.7 7.9 1.0 0.0         June 2.0 0.1 0.5 3.6 2.5 3.4 1.6 0.4 0.6 0.3 1.2 11.6 7.9 1.0 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          Apr 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.9 2.1 2.4 1.2 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.7 6.8 3.8 0.6 0.0         May 1.2 0.1 0.3 2.5 1.4 2.2 1.0 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.9 7.0 3.8 0.6 0.0         June 1.3 0.1 0.3 2.6 1.6 2.4 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.0 7.0 3.8 0.7 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          Apr 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.8 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.6 4.1 0.3 0.0         May 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.6 4.1 0.3 0.0         June 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.5 4.1 0.3 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.52004 52 203 1,452.7 681.0 595.7 170.2 425.6 85.2 671.0 477.3 17.1 15.8 460.2 193.7 100.72005 54 211 1,626.5 713.1 640.8 180.1 460.7 72.3 805.8 587.7 22.0 21.5 565.7 218.1 107.6
2005          Aug 53 207 1,648.9 718.3 645.6 174.7 470.9 72.7 799.8 577.8 20.6 19.4 557.2 222.0 130.9
         Sep 53 207 1,643.7 708.8 635.0 173.3 461.7 73.8 806.3 590.1 21.2 20.0 568.9 216.2 128.6
         Oct 54 211 1,705.5 729.6 657.1 185.2 471.9 72.5 834.9 612.6 22.2 21.0 590.5 222.3 141.0
         Nov 54 211 1,775.0 791.3 717.6 193.7 523.8 73.7 827.4 608.9 23.3 22.4 585.6 218.5 156.3         Dec 54 211 1,626.5 713.1 640.8 180.1 460.7 72.3 805.8 587.7 22.0 21.5 565.7 218.1 107.6
2006          Jan 54 214 1,664.5 717.5 645.5 185.0 460.5 72.0 834.8 621.6 22.3 21.7 599.3 213.3 112.2
         Feb 54 215 1,702.8 747.8 673.1 207.5 465.7 74.6 859.3 644.9 21.4 20.9 623.5 214.3 95.8         Mar 54 212 1,713.8 748.6 676.6 214.2 462.4 72.0 870.9 666.5 21.2 20.6 645.3 204.4 94.3
         Apr 54 210 1,721.0 728.9 657.6 215.7 441.9 71.4 899.1 696.3 21.4 20.8 674.9 202.8 93.0
         May 54 212 1,716.6 733.8 665.5 224.3 441.2 68.2 897.3 684.9 19.6 19.0 665.3 212.5 85.5
Changes *
2004 − 3 + 1 +207.5 +100.7 + 90.1 − 15.4 +105.5 + 10.6 + 64.2 + 57.8 − 1.9 − 1.0 + 59.7 + 6.4 + 42.72005 + 2 + 8 + 74.0 − 4.9 + 10.6 + 10.0 + 0.6 − 15.5 + 80.1 + 70.1 + 4.9 + 5.7 + 65.2 + 10.0 − 1.1
2005          Aug − 1 − + 26.6 − 6.4 − 6.0 − 1.6 − 4.4 − 0.4 + 22.1 + 16.4 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 17.3 + 5.8 + 11.0
         Sep − − − 14.5 − 13.1 − 14.0 − 1.5 − 12.5 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 8.5 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 7.8 − 7.2 − 2.6
         Oct + 1 + 4 + 61.5 + 20.7 + 22.1 + 11.9 + 10.1 − 1.3 + 28.5 + 22.3 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 21.4 + 6.2 + 12.2
         Nov − − + 56.3 + 56.3 + 55.5 + 8.6 + 46.9 + 0.9 − 15.1 − 9.3 + 1.1 + 1.3 − 10.4 − 5.8 + 15.1         Dec − − −147.3 − 77.8 − 76.4 − 13.6 − 62.8 − 1.4 − 20.8 − 20.6 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 19.3 − 0.2 − 48.7
2006          Jan − + 3 + 58.2 + 12.2 + 12.0 + 4.8 + 7.2 + 0.2 + 40.4 + 42.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 41.9 − 1.8 + 5.6
         Feb − + 1 + 20.9 + 24.1 + 21.9 + 22.5 − 0.6 + 2.2 + 14.2 + 15.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 16.5 − 1.5 − 17.3         Mar − − 3 + 31.1 + 7.9 + 10.0 + 6.8 + 3.3 − 2.1 + 23.6 + 30.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 31.1 − 7.3 − 0.4
         Apr − − 2 + 35.2 − 10.2 − 10.1 + 1.4 − 11.5 − 0.1 + 43.4 + 41.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 41.4 + 1.8 + 2.1
         May − + 2 + 12.8 + 10.9 + 13.7 + 8.6 + 5.1 − 2.8 + 8.6 − 3.2 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 1.4 + 11.8 − 6.7
    
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.62004 45 170 647.7 304.4 236.1 117.1 119.0 68.3 282.1 211.9 38.6 35.0 173.3 70.2 61.22005 43 153 713.6 320.9 249.4 119.9 129.6 71.4 324.6 224.0 39.0 35.8 185.0 100.6 68.1
2005          Aug 43 162 702.5 320.8 248.8 125.2 123.6 72.0 313.7 217.9 38.4 36.1 179.5 95.8 67.9
         Sep 43 162 705.3 320.1 247.6 119.9 127.6 72.6 316.6 220.4 37.2 36.0 183.2 96.2 68.5
         Oct 43 162 704.4 325.3 253.2 120.1 133.2 72.0 313.2 215.1 36.8 35.7 178.3 98.1 66.0
         Nov 43 156 714.2 326.4 256.1 119.0 137.1 70.4 320.5 217.8 37.1 36.0 180.7 102.7 67.3         Dec 43 153 713.6 320.9 249.4 119.9 129.6 71.4 324.6 224.0 39.0 35.8 185.0 100.6 68.1
2006          Jan 44 154 730.9 328.7 254.9 120.9 134.0 73.8 332.7 220.3 39.4 36.2 180.9 112.4 69.6
         Feb 44 153 752.3 336.9 259.7 123.4 136.3 77.2 333.0 219.3 37.5 35.8 181.8 113.7 82.4         Mar 43 153 759.2 335.8 260.7 121.8 138.9 75.1 340.6 221.7 37.2 35.5 184.5 118.9 82.8
         Apr 43 152 762.2 338.2 259.7 123.6 136.2 78.4 336.3 218.6 37.6 35.9 181.0 117.7 87.8
         May 43 153 771.2 333.9 255.5 123.3 132.1 78.5 344.7 226.9 39.2 37.4 187.7 117.8 92.5
Changes *
2004 − 1 − 9 + 9.3 + 0.8 − 8.1 − 10.2 + 2.0 + 9.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 2.8 + 4.2 + 7.0 + 0.12005 − 2 − 17 + 49.9 + 7.0 + 7.6 + 2.7 + 4.9 − 0.6 + 36.8 + 6.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 6.1 + 30.3 + 6.1
2005          Aug − 1 − 3 + 13.1 + 7.0 + 7.5 − 0.2 + 7.7 − 0.5 + 5.5 + 5.5 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 4.6 − 0.0 + 0.5
         Sep − − + 1.4 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 5.3 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Oct − − − 1.1 + 5.1 + 5.6 + 0.1 + 5.4 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 5.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 5.1 + 1.9 − 2.5
         Nov − − 6 + 7.7 − 0.2 + 2.1 − 1.1 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 6.7 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 1.2         Dec − − 3 − 0.3 − 5.4 − 6.5 + 0.9 − 7.4 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 6.4 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 4.5 − 2.1 + 0.8
2006          Jan + 1 + 1 + 20.6 + 9.0 + 6.4 + 1.0 + 5.4 + 2.5 + 10.0 − 2.7 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 12.7 + 1.6
         Feb − − 1 + 18.7 + 6.4 + 4.0 + 2.6 + 1.4 + 2.4 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 12.8         Mar − 1 − + 10.6 + 1.2 + 2.2 − 1.7 + 3.8 − 1.0 + 8.7 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 5.2 + 0.7
         Apr − − 1 + 7.1 + 5.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.5 + 4.8 − 3.2 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.2 + 5.2
         May − + 1 + 11.4 − 2.5 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.3 + 1.1 + 9.1 + 9.0 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 7.3 + 0.1 + 4.8
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 2003
1,226.9 798.4 295.2 503.2 428.4 61.8 55.7 52.4 6.1 5.8 366.6 139.9 21.7 64.3 20041,362.8 912.4 373.6 538.9 450.4 63.9 59.0 55.3 4.9 4.6 386.5 171.9 20.9 70.8 2005
1,382.4 915.1 353.7 561.4 467.3 65.8 61.0 58.0 4.9 4.6 401.5 158.3 23.0 85.2 2005          Aug 
1,370.7 906.0 359.8 546.1 464.7 69.0 64.1 61.4 4.9 4.6 395.7 159.3 23.0 90.7          Sep 1,429.9 946.0 353.9 592.1 483.9 66.3 61.5 58.5 4.9 4.6 417.6 156.7 21.6 97.3          Oct 
1,490.4 998.6 360.3 638.3 491.8 66.0 61.1 57.5 4.8 4.5 425.8 158.7 21.3 104.6          Nov 1,362.8 912.4 373.6 538.9 450.4 63.9 59.0 55.3 4.9 4.6 386.5 171.9 20.9 70.8          Dec 
1,388.6 925.4 362.6 562.8 463.2 72.4 64.5 61.0 7.8 7.6 390.9 168.3 21.4 86.3 2006          Jan 
1,421.7 924.0 357.9 566.0 497.8 70.5 62.4 58.8 8.1 7.8 427.2 175.7 21.4 84.0          Feb 
1,425.6 941.6 355.5 586.1 484.1 70.0 62.0 59.3 8.0 7.7 414.1 180.3 21.6 86.3          Mar 
1,426.5 922.5 340.2 582.3 504.0 68.6 60.8 58.1 7.8 7.5 435.4 188.1 21.9 84.5          Apr 
1,422.8 911.5 342.4 569.1 511.3 70.1 62.5 59.6 7.6 7.4 441.1 185.0 22.5 86.4          May
Changes *
+ 186.4 + 93.2 + 28.1 + 65.1 + 93.3 − 4.4 − 4.8 − 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 97.7 + 0.4 − 8.7 + 29.4 2004+ 59.5 + 69.4 + 78.4 − 8.9 − 10.0 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 12.0 + 32.1 − 0.8 − 16.7 2005
+ 5.4 + 16.9 + 3.2 + 13.6 − 11.4 − 3.3 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 8.1 + 9.5 + 0.2 + 11.5 2005          Aug 
− 19.1 − 13.6 + 6.1 − 19.8 − 5.5 + 3.2 + 3.1 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 3.6          Sep + 58.6 + 39.7 − 6.0 + 45.7 + 18.8 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 21.5 − 2.6 − 1.4 + 6.9          Oct 
+ 50.0 + 45.9 + 6.4 + 39.5 + 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 2.0 − 0.3 + 4.6          Nov − 126.4 − 85.5 + 13.2 − 98.8 − 40.8 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 38.8 + 13.3 − 0.4 − 33.8          Dec 
+ 40.8 + 22.1 − 10.9 + 33.0 + 18.7 + 8.5 + 5.5 + 5.7 + 2.9 + 2.9 + 10.2 − 3.7 + 0.4 + 20.7 2006          Jan 
+ 19.8 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 4.7 + 29.2 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 31.0 + 7.5 + 0.0 − 6.3          Feb 
+ 18.7 + 25.5 − 2.4 + 27.9 − 6.8 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 6.2 + 4.6 + 0.2 + 7.7          Mar 
+ 19.4 − 7.6 − 15.3 + 7.8 + 27.0 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 28.3 + 7.8 + 0.3 + 7.7          Apr 
+ 9.1 − 3.4 + 2.3 − 5.7 + 12.5 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 11.0 − 3.1 + 0.6 + 6.2          May
    
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003462.3 277.5 83.4 194.1 184.9 31.8 27.3 26.5 4.5 4.3 153.1 73.5 39.1 72.7 2004525.4 310.6 103.3 207.3 214.8 36.0 29.1 27.1 7.0 6.8 178.8 79.7 41.0 67.5 2005
512.2 310.5 94.5 216.1 201.7 29.5 23.7 22.4 5.8 5.7 172.2 76.9 41.5 71.9 2005          Aug 
516.6 309.8 99.0 210.8 206.8 31.6 25.6 24.5 6.0 5.8 175.2 76.8 41.6 70.2          Sep 518.6 312.9 97.8 215.0 205.8 30.6 23.9 22.4 6.7 6.6 175.2 76.9 41.2 67.7          Oct 
526.5 318.9 97.2 221.7 207.7 29.9 23.0 21.6 6.9 6.8 177.7 76.8 40.8 70.0          Nov 525.4 310.6 103.3 207.3 214.8 36.0 29.1 27.1 7.0 6.8 178.8 79.7 41.0 67.5          Dec 
534.6 322.2 101.0 221.3 212.4 33.0 24.7 23.5 8.4 8.1 179.3 84.9 41.0 70.5 2006          Jan 
553.4 329.6 101.2 228.5 223.8 34.4 26.4 25.3 8.0 7.9 189.4 87.9 41.0 70.0          Feb 
557.1 336.0 108.7 227.3 221.1 34.8 26.8 25.7 8.0 7.9 186.3 90.8 41.1 70.3          Mar 
558.1 336.0 109.5 226.4 222.1 33.9 25.7 24.9 8.2 7.9 188.2 91.8 40.8 71.6          Apr 
564.2 341.0 115.4 225.6 223.2 36.5 28.1 27.0 8.3 8.1 186.7 91.8 41.2 74.0          May
Changes *
+ 1.4 − 0.7 − 16.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 5.4 − 2.2 + 4.7 2004+ 48.6 + 24.2 + 19.9 + 4.3 + 24.4 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 20.2 + 6.2 + 1.9 − 6.7 2005
+ 11.4 + 5.1 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 6.3 + 2.2 + 2.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 2005          Aug 
+ 3.2 − 1.4 + 4.5 − 5.9 + 4.6 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.8          Sep + 1.6 + 2.8 − 1.2 + 4.0 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.1 + 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 2.4          Oct 
+ 6.0 + 4.8 − 0.7 + 5.4 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 2.1          Nov − 0.8 − 8.0 + 6.1 − 14.1 + 7.3 + 6.1 + 6.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 0.2 − 2.6          Dec 
+ 11.9 + 13.2 − 2.4 + 15.5 − 1.3 − 3.0 − 4.4 − 3.6 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 5.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 2006          Jan 
+ 16.5 + 6.0 + 0.2 + 5.8 + 10.5 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 9.1 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.8          Feb 
+ 6.9 + 8.2 + 7.6 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − − 1.7 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.8          Mar 
+ 4.5 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 + 2.3 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.2 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 1.8          Apr 
+ 8.3 + 6.6 + 5.9 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.7          May
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2005          Dec 7,687.9 153.8 0.5 153.3 154.1 0.8 0.0
2006          Jan 7,758.3 155.2 0.5 154.7 155.4 0.7 0.0
         Feb 7,908.7 158.2 0.5 157.7 158.3 0.6 0.0         Mar 7,969.3 159.4 0.5 158.9 159.5 0.6 0.0
         Apr 8,045.3 160.9 0.5 160.4 161.2 0.8 0.0
         May 8,154.9 163.1 0.5 162.6 163.3 0.7 0.0         June 8,304.2 166.1 0.5 165.6 166.3 0.7 0.0
         July  
p,8 8,349.2 167.0 0.5 166.5 167.1 0.6 ...
         Aug  p ... ... ... 165.8 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2005          Dec 1,953,946 39,079 203 38,875 39,246 371 1
2006          Jan 1,974,075 39,481 203 39,278 39,573 295 1
         Feb 1,977,327 39,547 203 39,343 39,581 238 1         Mar 1,984,283 39,686 203 39,483 39,699 216 0
         Apr 2,003,934 40,079 203 39,876 40,177 301 0
         May 2,026,250 40,525 203 40,322 40,647 325 0         June 2,050,379 41,008 203 40,805 41,033 228 1
         July  
p 2,060,073 41,201 203 40,999 41,165 166 1
         Aug  p 2,062,897 41,258 201 41,057 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. — 8The total number of deficiencies was not availabe when this
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the report went to press. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 2.25 3.25          Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2006 Mar                  8 1.50 2.50 3.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75          June                15 1.75 2.75 3.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          Aug                  9 2.00 3.00 4.00 2002 Jan                  1 2.71 2005 Jan                  1 1.21
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          to          July                  1 1.17
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
 2006 Jan                  1 1.37
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50          July                 1 1.95
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2006 June               28 371,979 328,500 − 2.75 2.83 2.84 7
         July                 5 376,624 326,000 − 2.75 2.78 2.81 7
         July               12 367,223 321,500 − 2.75 2.81 2.82 7
         July               19 388,712 335,000 − 2.75 2.81 2.82 6
         July               25 359,208 338,000 − 2.75 2.81 2.82 8
         Aug                  2 357,627 324,000 − 2.75 2.76 2.79 7
         Aug                  9 359,131 318,000 − 3.00 3.05 3.06 6
         Aug                15 367,386 311,000 − 3.00 3.05 3.06 8
Longer-term refinancing operations
2006 June                 1 59,771 40,000 − − 2.87 2.88 91
         June               29 57,185 40,000 − − 3.00 3.01 91
         July               27 54,824 40,000 − − 3.08 3.09 91
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2006          Jan 2.33 2.18 − 2.36 2.49 2.46 − 2.55 2.33 2.36 2.39 2.51 2.65 2.75 2.83
         Feb 2.35 2.31 − 2.50 2.58 2.52 − 2.66 2.35 2.37 2.46 2.60 2.72 2.83 2.91         Mar 2.52 1.98 − 2.65 2.70 2.63 − 2.81 2.52 2.60 2.63 2.72 2.87 3.00 3.11
         Apr 2.63 2.57 − 2.74 2.78 2.73 − 2.86 2.63 2.63 2.65 2.79 2.96 3.11 3.22
         May 2.57 2.25 − 2.63 2.87 2.82 − 2.92 2.58 2.62 2.69 2.89 3.06 3.20 3.31         June 2.70 2.43 − 2.92 2.97 2.91 − 3.06 2.70 2.79 2.87 2.99 3.16 3.29 3.40
         July 2.81 2.76 − 2.85 3.08 3.02 − 3.16 2.81 2.84 2.94 3.10 3.29 3.43 3.54
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2005          Oct 1.93 3.17 2.12 3.39 4.49 4.19 4.57 7.92 6.80 5.64 4.24 3.77 4.24
         Nov 1.96 3.15 2.16 3.43 4.48 4.17 4.53 7.86 6.77 5.66 4.29 3.79 4.25         Dec 2.01 3.15 2.30 3.41 4.54 4.14 4.52 7.89 6.77 5.62 4.35 3.84 4.24
2006          Jan 2.05 3.10 2.32 3.47 4.62 4.14 4.50 7.99 6.78 5.60 4.42 3.88 4.26
         Feb 2.09 3.12 2.38 3.37 4.59 4.17 4.54 7.97 6.79 5.68 4.49 3.95 4.31         Mar 2.16 3.00 2.48 3.35 4.60 4.15 4.52 8.06 6.80 5.73 4.53 3.98 4.31
         Apr 2.21 3.01 2.53 3.40 4.63 4.16 4.52 8.10 6.73 5.75 4.59 4.05 4.34
         May 2.27 3.04 2.59 3.41 4.63 4.16 4.52 8.10 6.70 5.71 4.64 4.10 4.36         June 2.34 3.07 2.72 3.53 4.69 4.21 4.55 8.10 6.75 5.73 4.72 4.19 4.40
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2005          Oct 0.69 1.99 2.28 2.16 1.97 2.27 0.97 2.04 2.58 3.55
         Nov 0.70 2.02 2.34 2.18 2.00 2.27 1.00 2.08 2.18 3.52         Dec 0.71 2.15 2.25 2.21 1.97 2.30 1.02 2.25 2.48 3.55
2006          Jan 0.73 2.21 2.47 2.56 2.00 2.32 1.05 2.27 2.40 3.52
         Feb 0.74 2.24 2.52 2.36 1.97 2.34 1.08 2.31 2.69 3.37         Mar 0.76 2.37 2.60 2.45 1.98 2.37 1.14 2.48 2.93 3.28
         Apr 0.79 2.40 2.81 2.49 2.00 2.42 1.16 2.51 2.92 3.71
         May 0.79 2.45 2.86 2.48 2.00 2.48 1.18 2.58 3.11 3.38         June 0.81 2.57 2.88 2.57 2.03 2.52 1.22 2.70 3.28 3.27
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2005          Oct 9.65 7.74 6.82 6.43 8.01 3.81 3.33 3.68 3.99 3.96 3.88 4.50 4.33
         Nov 9.70 7.61 6.75 6.40 7.86 3.84 3.38 3.71 3.98 3.98 4.00 4.28 4.37         Dec 9.67 7.45 6.76 6.36 7.43 3.98 3.49 3.85 4.03 4.01 4.06 4.57 4.40
2006          Jan 9.81 7.87 6.94 6.48 8.13 4.09 3.61 3.91 4.14 4.07 4.15 4.59 4.34
         Feb 9.61 7.76 6.88 6.34 7.95 4.08 3.66 3.97 4.14 4.06 4.24 4.66 4.35         Mar 9.90 7.65 6.79 6.28 7.88 4.15 3.73 3.99 4.22 4.10 4.33 4.72 4.49
         Apr 9.76 7.76 7.06 6.31 7.92 4.29 3.84 4.07 4.33 4.17 4.30 4.85 4.62
         May 9.78 7.77 7.23 6.23 7.89 4.34 3.90 4.15 4.40 4.19 4.43 5.05 4.76         June 9.84 7.73 7.05 6.30 7.81 4.43 4.00 4.20 4.48 4.25 4.51 5.09 4.71
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2005          Oct 5.11 3.88 4.43 4.04 2.94 3.58 3.80
         Nov 5.09 3.92 4.44 4.03 3.10 3.60 3.98         Dec 5.12 3.99 4.50 4.12 3.25 3.58 3.96
2006          Jan 5.23 4.07 4.59 4.13 3.18 3.72 3.96
         Feb 5.29 4.13 4.69 4.16 3.26 4.36 4.02         Mar 5.30 4.23 4.59 4.16 3.50 3.83 4.18
         Apr 5.40 4.34 4.73 4.15 3.51 3.94 4.22
         May 5.36 4.38 4.83 4.26 3.57 4.13 4.32         June 5.45 4.47 4.84 4.33 3.74 4.12 4.26
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          June 1.98 105,056 2.83 195,073 2.03 69,719 4.33 24,559
         July 1.98 104,577 2.82 194,330 2.03 72,105 4.23 25,296
         Aug 1.97 104,573 2.80 194,000 2.04 74,930 4.19 24,961         Sep 1.97 104,938 2.77 193,451 2.03 74,966 4.19 24,849
         Oct 1.98 105,488 2.76 192,845 2.05 78,275 4.10 22,472
         Nov 2.01 105,875 2.75 192,758 2.11 76,669 4.07 22,497         Dec 2.10 109,209 2.74 195,206 2.26 78,779 4.05 22,543
2006          Jan 2.13 110,140 2.72 194,850 2.28 78,905 4.04 22,655
         Feb 2.17 112,180 2.71 194,806 2.33 78,055 4.02 22,895         Mar 2.29 114,677 2.69 195,260 2.48 79,671 3.99 22,943
         Apr 2.34 115,934 2.68 195,181 2.53 83,245 3.94 23,474
         May 2.39 117,353 2.67 194,825 2.60 82,547 3.94 23,648         June 2.48 119,134 2.66 194,457 2.71 82,607 3.92 23,866
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2005          June 4.99 7,118 4.53 30,947 5.52 899,575 8.77 77,156 5.83 71,357 6.18 328,311
         July 4.93 7,032 4.49 30,817 5.49 902,650 8.70 75,090 5.79 71,644 6.16 328,183
         Aug 4.95 6,792 4.46 30,942 5.47 904,553 8.73 74,731 5.76 71,856 6.15 328,911         Sep 4.95 6,930 4.40 30,916 5.45 906,439 8.74 76,920 5.75 70,882 6.14 328,568
         Oct 4.88 6,746 4.37 30,687 5.42 908,391 8.81 76,284 5.73 70,158 6.12 328,289
         Nov 4.89 6,778 4.35 30,701 5.40 911,024 8.68 73,793 5.68 70,586 6.10 327,736         Dec 5.00 6,674 4.33 30,827 5.36 913,041 8.83 76,436 5.64 70,569 6.07 326,570
2006          Jan 5.07 6,339 4.31 30,241 5.34 920,556 8.91 74,655 5.57 70,145 6.04 326,777
         Feb 5.09 6,296 4.31 30,130 5.33 921,348 8.84 73,963 5.56 69,580 6.03 326,418         Mar 5.17 6,205 4.30 29,959 5.30 921,392 9.01 74,505 5.57 68,684 6.04 323,755
         Apr 5.17 6,108 4.31 29,514 5.28 922,067 8.98 73,506 5.60 68,536 6.04 324,317
         May 5.21 5,999 4.31 29,958 5.27 922,561 9.09 72,925 5.57 69,051 6.04 324,795         June 5.29 6,138 4.32 29,879 5.26 923,639 9.29 74,259 5.55 69,157 6.04 324,007
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          June 4.63 164,192 4.02 83,350 5.05 478,638
         July 4.56 160,600 3.99 84,654 5.01 481,158
         Aug 4.55 156,384 3.96 86,614 5.00 479,790         Sep 4.58 162,536 3.92 87,116 4.98 477,806
         Oct 4.57 159,761 3.89 87,126 4.96 479,099
         Nov 4.54 157,383 3.92 86,744 4.94 479,951         Dec 4.62 155,094 3.98 85,524 4.91 480,327
2006          Jan 4.65 155,685 3.97 85,081 4.90 490,068
         Feb 4.76 151,426 4.02 86,030 4.89 492,375         Mar 4.88 153,697 4.05 87,248 4.89 490,677
         Apr 4.92 157,411 4.09 87,594 4.88 492,493
         May 4.96 153,940 4.13 88,128 4.88 494,363         June 5.07 157,957 4.14 90,560 4.88 494,889
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates may always be calculated either as annualised agreed intere st
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other relatedhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- balance sheet statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis purchase, including building and home improvements; including loan s
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well assample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name andsional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are for their own account. — 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. —can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2005          June 1.22 448,210 1.89 25,674 2.72 994 2.25 1,031 2.10 515,200 2.40 86,665
         July 1.17 450,961 1.88 22,781 2.22 1,060 2.35 2,043 2.08 515,042 2.36 85,918
         Aug 1.17 449,144 1.88 23,949 2.37 1,060 2.17 1,469 1.98 514,260 2.33 84,891         Sep 1.18 450,970 1.89 23,194 2.41 1,123 2.16 2,960 2.00 514,247 2.31 83,344
         Oct 1.18 453,497 1.89 22,812 2.72 1,346 2.37 3,124 1.94 513,181 2.28 82,864
         Nov 1.17 465,158 1.92 26,107 2.77 1,372 2.50 2,962 2.02 512,020 2.29 83,107         Dec 1.20 463,399 2.06 31,326 2.73 1,124 2.35 3,036 1.99 518,955 2.31 83,921
2006          Jan 1.22 462,356 2.16 31,502 2.81 2,112 2.69 7,533 2.00 517,768 2.33 84,615
         Feb 1.23 464,324 2.21 27,206 2.72 1,715 2.60 4,571 2.00 517,281 2.35 84,898         Mar 1.26 465,115 2.29 32,612 2.84 1,401 2.46 1,823 1.96 515,333 2.39 85,689
         Apr 1.31 469,686 2.32 28,341 3.09 1,529 2.55 2,024 1.99 513,543 2.43 85,904
         May 1.34 469,841 2.37 29,853 3.14 1,548 2.63 1,690 1.99 509,976 2.49 87,032         June 1.35 470,361 2.49 31,399 3.23 1,592 2.55 1,922 2.05 507,349 2.54 88,337
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          June 1.24 148,194 1.97 48,861 2.08 235 4.10 1,211
         July 1.25 149,050 1.98 36,761 2.20 128 3.38 1,113
         Aug 1.27 151,273 1.99 41,006 2.35 98 3.58 596         Sep 1.25 152,999 2.01 46,851 2.52 234 3.08 1,419
         Oct 1.25 157,054 2.01 39,509 2.85 308 4.09 1,433
         Nov 1.26 162,669 2.06 44,866 2.29 301 3.99 993         Dec 1.30 164,748 2.22 50,870 2.56 501 4.20 1,070
2006          Jan 1.34 156,885 2.24 47,599 2.66 203 4.08 866
         Feb 1.38 153,233 2.29 41,033 2.91 296 3.83 1,366         Mar 1.47 153,285 2.51 47,007 3.10 392 3.56 948
         Apr 1.52 156,243 2.59 45,185 3.09 446 3.96 859
         May 1.51 157,638 2.55 51,722 3.78 252 4.14 529         June 1.57 157,582 2.67 50,441 4.07 321 3.38 1,133
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2005          June 7.86 5.35 1,515 6.09 4,707 8.73 3,779 3.65 8,095 4.69 2,177 4.60 2,597
         July 7.94 5.37 1,180 6.19 4,978 8.74 3,699 3.65 8,413 4.62 1,941 4.44 2,397
         Aug 7.98 5.54 1,085 6.23 4,073 8.70 3,487 3.63 8,483 4.64 1,550 4.50 2,399         Sep 7.91 5.41 1,203 6.16 5,262 8.71 3,081 3.58 9,626 4.61 1,858 4.30 2,490
         Oct 7.83 5.16 1,295 6.00 4,314 8.98 2,752 3.65 6,797 4.60 1,415 4.32 2,295
         Nov 7.53 5.33 1,102 5.75 4,327 8.63 2,993 3.70 5,719 4.51 1,500 4.44 2,844         Dec 6.98 4.85 1,443 5.64 4,631 7.89 2,778 3.97 9,234 4.69 2,336 4.44 5,586
2006          Jan 7.75 5.18 1,652 5.81 4,330 8.99 2,942 3.93 9,920 4.75 1,922 4.39 3,668
         Feb 7.67 5.35 1,090 5.78 4,294 8.74 2,987 4.05 6,990 4.86 1,316 4.45 2,340         Mar 7.53 5.17 1,368 5.62 5,483 8.64 3,733 4.11 8,250 4.91 2,132 4.62 3,635
         Apr 7.51 5.24 1,449 5.59 5,435 8.69 3,316 4.07 10,032 4.97 1,610 4.74 3,212
         May 7.48 5.49 933 5.49 7,186 8.67 3,338 4.14 8,538 5.19 1,890 4.84 3,161         June 7.26 5.12 1,283 5.35 5,319 8.64 3,105 4.21 10,126 5.24 2,119 4.81 3,148
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          June 10.38 49,871 4.27 4.25 2,196 4.01 2,449 4.22 5,527 4.26 4,262
         July 10.35 47,624 4.22 4.15 3,353 3.94 2,699 4.17 6,315 4.23 4,226
         Aug 10.40 48,289 4.19 4.30 2,010 3.88 2,439 4.10 5,789 4.19 4,615         Sep 10.42 50,075 4.18 4.21 2,095 3.95 2,331 4.11 5,388 4.16 4,390
         Oct 10.53 49,007 4.19 4.22 2,603 3.94 2,395 4.11 5,674 4.18 3,873
         Nov 10.40 46,684 4.25 4.36 2,062 4.05 2,620 4.14 6,669 4.25 4,629         Dec 10.47 49,066 4.34 4.44 2,522 4.25 3,138 4.19 8,514 4.32 5,545
2006          Jan 10.63 47,574 4.41 4.55 3,199 4.27 2,857 4.29 8,266 4.35 5,913
         Feb 10.54 47,294 4.40 4.58 2,049 4.32 2,275 4.28 6,081 4.31 4,479         Mar 10.59 48,233 4.50 4.71 2,204 4.37 2,588 4.39 6,849 4.39 5,710
         Apr 10.61 46,939 4.60 4.74 3,072 4.42 2,364 4.45 6,204 4.56 4,470
         May 10.77 46,390 4.68 4.82 2,074 4.58 2,435 4.58 6,381 4.56 4,871         June 10.86 47,657 4.75 4.91 2,338 4.61 2,395 4.66 6,108 4.63 4,902
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          June 5.97 72,936 4.41 7,080 4.50 1,346 4.43 1,308
         July 5.95 69,329 4.37 6,987 4.54 1,242 4.41 1,542
         Aug 5.97 67,834 4.29 6,317 4.54 1,737 4.42 1,350         Sep 5.95 71,180 4.28 7,229 4.46 1,284 4.32 1,533
         Oct 5.93 70,819 4.38 6,822 4.45 1,371 4.39 1,375
         Nov 5.84 69,640 4.52 6,735 4.54 1,075 4.31 1,545         Dec 5.79 69,127 4.57 7,716 4.61 1,321 4.46 2,155
2006          Jan 5.86 68,636 4.49 6,725 4.74 1,206 4.48 1,513
         Feb 6.02 67,921 4.60 5,966 4.80 1,106 4.43 1,787         Mar 6.04 68,216 4.71 8,373 4.82 1,470 4.46 2,130
         Apr 6.14 69,334 4.90 7,905 4.98 1,140 4.43 1,793
         May 6.13 69,129 4.98 8,997 5.08 1,433 4.53 2,132         June 6.26 70,516 5.04 9,035 5.00 1,210 4.80 1,897
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          June 3.15 45,170 3.67 5,302 4.05 6,020
         July 3.15 42,996 3.82 4,692 4.09 5,191
         Aug 3.17 40,536 3.72 4,520 4.10 5,272         Sep 3.22 41,690 3.51 4,177 4.11 5,925
         Oct 3.15 42,531 3.89 3,182 3.97 5,831
         Nov 3.30 38,132 3.96 3,327 4.14 6,858         Dec 3.46 55,247 3.94 5,163 4.15 11,083
2006          Jan 3.40 44,581 4.04 5,404 4.17 6,838
         Feb 3.41 38,352 4.81 6,422 4.19 6,126         Mar 3.75 48,056 4.03 4,699 4.38 6,675
         Apr 3.61 36,866 4.07 5,379 4.47 4,994
         May 3.76 36,909 4.37 5,659 4.61 6,865         June 3.98 52,421 4.35 5,165 4.45 7,267
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,1091997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,9462002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,9202003 177,847 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 43,392 86,554 35,748 50,806 − 91,2932004 236,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 103,179 108,730 121,841 − 13,111 − 128,160
2005 258,684 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 148,142 102,658 61,740 40,918 − 156,0262006          Apr 7,889 4 − 4,051 2,525 1,531 7,885 2,205 − 1,470 3,675 − 5,684
         May 48,982 34,028 12,096 7,997 13,936 14,954 44,473 21,337 23,136 − 4,509         June 14,130 − 6,665 4,682 − 2,495 − 8,852 20,795 13,004 3,746 9,258 − 1,126
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,485
1994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,932
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6781998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,728 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,193
2001 82,665 17,575 65,090 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,9172002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,9412003 15,470 16,838 − 1,367 − 11,829 7,056 − 18,885 27,3002004 3,316 10,157 − 6,842 15,410 5,045 10,365 − 12,094
2005 31,803 13,766 18,037 − 27,039 10,208 − 37,247 58,8422006          Apr − 7,751 1,427 − 9,178 17,292 26,615 − 9,323 − 25,043
         May 325 226 99 − 5,595 − 4,249 − 1,346 5,920         June 3,999 362 3,637 − 27,792 − 30,561 2,769 31,791
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,309
1994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 6002006          Mar 91,177 59,163 1,529 8,486 15,784 33,364 1,553 30,461 −         Apr 71,057 46,015 890 8,829 9,252 27,045 3,719 21,323 −
         May 77,018 51,962 6,015 5,909 12,607 27,430 5,544 19,513 69         June 75,211 54,041 1,396 8,700 12,721 31,225 863 20,307 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 4002006          Mar 34,783 19,437 1,176 2,666 6,331 9,265 434 14,912 −         Apr 23,322 13,307 611 5,090 2,869 4,737 2,502 7,513 −
         May 31,904 17,472 5,036 2,654 3,950 5,832 2,717 11,716 69         June 26,324 18,100 1,017 4,158 3,423 9,502 60 8,164 −
Net sales  6 
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,7011994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,9632006          Mar 18,235 10,844 − 3,506 3,228 10,142 979 853 6,539 − 1,080         Apr 7,915 − 235 − 421 − 5,090 − 229 5,505 2,947 5,204 − 2,798
         May 30,886 13,334 4,855 833 7,432 214 4,863 12,689 30         June 141 3,584 − 4,555 − 1,415 4,439 5,116 − 1,549 − 1,894 − 5,663
*For definitions, see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to Monthly Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Report 2, Capital market statistics. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006          Apr 2,969,570 1,784,918 157,441 510,163 349,600 767,714 90,611 1,094,041 127,786
         May 3,000,456 1,798,252 162,296 510,997 357,032 767,928 95,474 1,106,729 127,816         June 3,000,597 1,801,837 157,741 509,581 361,470 773,044 93,925 1,104,835 122,153
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-June 2006 
1,032,679 674,394 56,010 215,427 132,811 270,147 25,012 333,271 46,189    less than 2
679,398 447,310 43,184 141,048 90,376 172,703 14,910 217,178 49,966 2 to less than 4
473,792 270,266 33,262 91,738 44,745 100,522 21,418 182,108 9,333 4 to less than 6
266,661 136,227 15,371 32,675 23,742 64,440 9,755 120,678 7,878 6 to less than 8
309,981 179,002 9,360 16,595 24,739 128,309 11,212 119,766 2,534 8 to less than 10
45,982 26,409 506 7,088 9,186 9,628 2,126 17,447 2,893 10 to less than 15
33,747 21,062 50 1,558 15,503 3,949 303 12,382 1,657 15 to less than 20
158,358 47,166 − 3,453 20,368 23,348 9,187 102,005 1,705 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 519,280
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 553,110
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 723,077
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 1,040,7691998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006          Apr 162,309 419 255 20 279 12 − 14 − 31 − 104 1,197,094
         May 162,681 372 83 119 10 337 − 12 − 19 − 146 1,140,152         June 162,549 − 132 223 347 3 2 − 1,145 929 − 490 1,121,571
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — oFrom January was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose shares are traded
1994, including the shares of east German companies (resultant increase in on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
share circulation: DM7,771 million). — 1Including shares issued out of Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse
company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on the Official Mar- AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
ket, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock market segment
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German Germanmore than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 3.2 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006          Apr 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.9 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.0 117.04 97.12 377.68 6,009.89
         May 3.9 3.9 3.9 4.0 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.1 117.46 97.11 351.74 5,692.86         June 3.9 3.9 3.9 4.0 3.9 4.2 4.3 4.2 116.42 96.49 349.39 5,683.31
         July 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.4 117.23 97.18 348.99 5,681.97
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,3181997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 46,738 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 2,795 48,496 − 2,658 734 51,154 2,061 − 1,7582004 12,386 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 10,933 7,715 8,446 3,796 − 731 7,137 4,671
2005 81,581 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 39,863 80,648 21,290 7,761 59,358 32,102 933
2006          Apr 2,336 1,742 − 1,570 − 178 − 1,399 − 441 3,312 594 1,020 1,604 180 − 584 414 1,316
         May 3,061 4,539 297 678 − 234 − 505 4,242 − 1,478 2,777 2,079 200 698 − 1,678 284         June − 519 1,250 − 876 973 − 2,192 231 2,126 − 1,769 − 473 − 860 − 14 387 − 1,755 − 46
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
Person- operat- Fixed
of nel ex- ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex-
which pend- pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend-
Period Total Taxes Total  3 iture iture grants Interest tion aid  4 Balance venue  5 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 − 12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 − 14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.11997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 − 94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 − 91.71998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 − 56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 − 53.41999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 − 26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 − 23.4
2000 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  
6 555.4 446.2 599.6 169.9 69.8 213.9 66.6 40.1 39.2 − 44.2 445.1 449.1 − 4.0 923.3 971.4 − 48.2
2002  p 554.7 441.7 610.9 173.3 70.6 226.9 66.1 38.7 33.5 − 56.2 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 927.7 992.2 − 64.5
2003  pe 547.0 442.2 614.3 174.0 70.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 32.4 − 67.3 467.7 474.3 − 6.6 925.4 999.3 − 73.9
2004  pe 543.9 442.8 609.3 173.5 69.8 236.9 64.7 34.5 28.8 − 65.4 470.3 468.8 + 1.5 925.3 989.3 − 64.0
2005  pe 567.9 452.1 621.2 172.4 72.0 244.9 64.0 33.3 33.4 − 53.2 468.5 471.4 − 2.8 946.9 1,002.9 − 56.1
2004          Q1 116.3 96.9 158.5 41.7 15.7 63.0 25.3 5.4 6.3 − 42.1 116.4 116.8 − 0.4 206.4 248.9 − 42.5         Q2 132.9 112.9 141.5 41.5 15.5 59.4 10.0 6.8 6.3 − 8.6 115.8 116.4 − 0.6 226.0 235.2 − 9.2         Q3 133.4 107.8 151.9 41.9 16.1 57.5 20.4 8.5 6.3 − 18.6 114.0 116.0 − 2.1 226.3 246.9 − 20.6         Q4  
p 159.7 125.6 157.3 46.7 20.6 56.1 8.7 12.6 10.7 + 2.4 121.6 118.7 + 2.9 263.6 258.3 + 5.3
2005          Q1  p 121.7 99.2 159.9 41.1 15.2 66.3 25.2 4.6 6.6 − 38.2 117.1 117.5 − 0.4 211.3 249.9 − 38.6
         Q2  p 138.9 112.5 144.8 41.2 16.0 62.8 10.1 6.4 6.3 − 6.0 117.3 118.2 − 0.9 233.5 240.4 − 6.9
         Q3  p 144.3 110.6 154.2 41.3 17.1 59.3 19.7 8.6 6.9 − 10.0 114.1 117.0 − 2.9 236.0 248.8 − 12.9
         Q4  p 162.4 129.5 161.9 47.1 21.8 55.4 8.8 12.5 14.4 + 0.5 118.1 118.3 − 0.2 264.3 264.0 + 0.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly f igures
Office. — *The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed for some insurance sectors are estimated. — 3Including discrepancies in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the clearing transactions between central, state and local government. —
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — 4Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the interests. — 5Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly Federal Labour Office. — 6Owing to modifications of the system of
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between other operatin g
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, expenditure and current grants. see footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. — 2The annual figures differ from the sum of
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001 240.6 261.3 184.6 207.1 50.4 52.6 119.5 123.2 24.8 25.2
2002 240.8 273.5 183.6 207.6 48.1 53.3 121.7 125.0 25.2 25.42003 239.6 278.8 182.9 208.9 49.1 53.5 117.4 124.6 24.7 25.52004  
pe 233.8 273.6 186.8 207.8 48.9 51.8 120.9 124.4 24.9 25.1
2005  pe 250.0 281.5 190.5 211.5 48.8 51.5 125.7 128.2 25.7 25.5
2004          Q1 44.8 73.4 42.7 52.1 11.1 12.8 25.8 29.7 5.4 5.5         Q2 56.4 62.3 46.3 51.0 11.3 11.5 28.8 29.0 5.7 5.8         Q3 58.3 71.2 45.2 49.9 12.5 12.5 29.9 30.5 6.2 6.2         Q4  
p 74.4 66.7 51.7 54.3 13.1 15.0 35.9 34.9 7.6 7.5
2005          Q1  p 46.0 74.9 45.8 52.9 10.8 12.5 25.7 29.4 5.6 5.5
         Q2  p 61.4 66.0 47.0 50.2 11.6 11.5 29.9 30.4 6.2 5.9
         Q3  p 68.8 73.2 44.4 50.5 12.2 12.4 31.5 31.5 6.3 6.4
         Q4  p 73.8 67.4 52.8 57.4 13.6 15.0 38.0 36.7 7.8 7.6
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. — *See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. — 1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. — 4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Item 1998 1999 2000  1 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005  pe 
Revenue 1,779.3 945.0 967.0 952.6 955.2 963.7 958.7 975.9
of which
Taxes 897.3 490.5 511.7 488.3 485.4 489.6 487.2 497.6Social contributions 727.8 375.4 378.4 383.7 389.2 394.4 395.3 397.0
Expenditure 1,862.9 974.3 990.7 1,012.2 1,034.7 1,050.3 1,039.9 1,050.4of which
Intermediate consumption 154.3 83.5 82.4 85.2 88.7 89.2 89.5 94.4Compensation of employees 319.8 165.6 166.1 166.2 169.1 169.0 168.7 167.3Interest 129.0 63.2 65.1 64.5 62.9 64.6 62.9 63.4Social benefits  
2 998.4 523.1 532.7 551.2 574.1 588.1 586.6 598.1
Gross capital formation 69.4 37.6 36.8 36.8 35.5 32.9 30.7 29.1
Net lending/net borrowing − 83.6 − 29.3 − 23.7 − 59.6 − 79.6 − 86.6 − 81.2 − 74.5
Memo item
As defined in the Maastricht TreatyDeficit as % of GDP  
3,4 2.2 1.5 1.1 2.8 3.7 4.0 3.7 3.3
Debt level 2,317.6 1,224.3 1,231.0 1,241.5 1,293.0 1,381.0 1,451.0 1,520.7
as % of GDP  3 60.3 60.9 59.7 58.8 60.3 63.8 65.5 67.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In or 1.3% of GDP) is shown. — 2Including social benefits in kind. — 3GDP
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include including financial intermediation services indirectly measured ( FISIM). —
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share 4Unlike the net lending/net borrowing balance as shown in the national
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. — 1Adjusted for proceeds from the sale accounts, the deficit ratio as defined in the Maastricht Treaty includes
of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office record such interest payments arising from swap transactions and forward rate
proceeds ( €50.8 billion) under "net increase in non-produced assets", with agreements. 
the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus ( €27.1 billion
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 7141997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 1171998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 122002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 512003 442,238 390,437 214,002 155,510 . 20,925 51,673 4,751 + 1272004 442,838 386,459 208,918 157,901 . 19,641 56,237 5,233 + 142
2005 452,078 392,313 211,810 158,792 . 21,711 59,750 5,838 + 16
2006          Q1 ... 90,827 45,234 38,702 . 6,892 ... ... ...
         Q2 ... 104,964 57,521 43,338 . 4,105 ... ... ...
2006          Feb . 30,833 14,165 12,356 . 4,312 . . .
         Mar . 31,626 17,588 12,576 . 1,463 . . .
         Apr . 30,048 16,190 12,369 . 1,488 . . .
         May . 33,819 18,474 13,886 . 1,459 . . .         June . 41,097 22,856 17,083 . 1,158 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Including receipts from the 1988. — 4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  — 2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. — 5Difference between the local government’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
remitted to state government. — 3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,1702002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,8462003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,4092004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,712 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,507 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006          Q1 95,851 36,593 28,095 − 2,104 5,184 5,418 35,873 27,508 8,365 313 15,897 6,258 916 5,024
         Q2 111,206 47,844 29,772 5,856 5,173 7,042 35,236 26,345 8,891 1,611 20,438 5,130 949 6,242
2006          Feb 32,505 10,141 9,194 − 374 324 997 13,549 10,648 2,901 169 6,499 1,817 330 1,671
         Mar 32,965 13,248 8,757 − 1,618 4,717 1,392 9,972 7,159 2,813 4 7,393 2,044 304 1,339
         Apr 31,742 11,151 9,583 − 193 37 1,725 11,111 8,088 3,023 1,089 6,389 1,672 330 1,694
         May 35,589 13,499 9,929 − 342 96 3,817 12,754 9,925 2,829 513 6,717 1,806 300 1,770         June 43,874 23,193 10,260 6,391 5,041 1,501 11,371 8,331 3,040 8 7,332 1,652 319 2,777
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table central government to finance the supplementary grant to the statutory
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing to local
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to centralcentral and state government), the real property taxes and other local government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% wasgovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2The allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; since
revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax is allocated to central, state 2002 49.6% has been allocated to central government and 50.4% to stateand local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15 and the revenue from the government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedwithholding tax on interest income is allocated to central, state and local central government share. — 6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
government in the ratio of 44:44:12, while the revenue from corporation and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beentax and non-assessed taxes on earnings is allocated to central and state affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —government in the ratio of 50:50. — 3From 1996, after deducting child 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
benefit. — 4Non-assessed taxes on earnings and the withholding tax on government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. — 8For the breakdown, see
interest income. — 5In 1998, 3.64% and from 1999, 5.63% was allocated to Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness tax  2 taxes taxes  3 
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 6962003 43,188 14,094 2,204 8,870 6,531 11,722 7,336 230 3,373 786 6,989 24,139 9,658 6812004 41,782 13,630 2,195 8,750 6,597 11,601 7,740 80 4,284 788 6,883 28,373 9,939 669
2005 40,101 14,273 2,142 8,750 6,462 11,779 8,673 97 4,097 777 6,935 32,129 10,247 565
2006          Q1 4,480 2,786 399 3,792 1,492 2,948 2,718 13 1,049 168 2,311 ... ... ...
         Q2 9,727 3,604 505 1,662 1,720 3,220 2,258 3 881 200 1,788 ... ... ...
2006          Feb 1,399 1,181 87 2,809 265 758 637 7 314 49 811 . . .
         Mar 3,296 1,132 280 522 791 1,373 834 3 381 54 772 . . .
         Apr 3,161 1,275 156 512 500 786 703 3 312 59 596 . . .
         May 3,429 1,043 186 633 438 989 804 − 1 317 64 622 . . .         June 3,137 1,286 164 517 782 1,445 751 1 252 77 570 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. — 2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  6 Other  7 tion 5,6 
General government
2000 1,211,455 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 301 44,146 108
2001 1,223,966 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 123 8,986 1082002 1,277,667 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 66 7,845 972003 1,358,137 36,022 246,414 153,611 12,810 471,115 396,832 341 34,163 33 6,711 862004 1,430,453 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,418 379,984 430 53,672 2 5,572 82
2005          Mar 1,457,187 37,489 290,175 162,644 11,037 506,670 387,456 474 55,586 2 5,572 84
         June 1,465,395 37,214 295,608 170,389 11,180 507,071 381,150 501 56,623 2 5,572 87         Sep 1,480,141 37,183 299,830 163,335 11,061 525,365 379,830 498 58,508 2 4,443 87         Dec 
p 1,488,275 36,945 310,118 174,423 11,055 521,801 368,382 498 60,523 2 4,443 86
Central government 8,9,10  
2000 715,835 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 301 44,146 1072001 701,115 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 123 8,986 1072002 725,443 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 66 7,845 972003 767,713 35,235 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 38,146 223 7,326 33 6,711 852004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 2 5,572 81
2005          Mar 870,406 36,393 102,959 162,592 11,037 495,478 45,119 373 10,798 2 5,572 83
         June 874,053 36,021 105,227 170,338 11,180 495,879 38,778 408 10,562 2 5,572 86         Sep 885,192 35,989 106,836 163,284 11,061 514,173 38,303 408 10,608 2 4,443 86         Dec 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 29,318 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
2006          Mar 898,780 36,130 111,773 167,352 10,883 519,889 36,917 408 10,899 2 4,443 84
         June 913,018 36,927 108,975 177,669 10,399 518,757 44,284 408 11,073 2 4,443 83
State government (western)
2000 282,431 − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 12001 305,788 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 12002 328,390 250 97,556 . . . 217,333 5 13,246 . . 12003 355,661 472 125,356 . . . 207,880 4 21,949 . . 12004 376,697 750 148,219 . . . 193,216 3 34,508 . . 1
2005          Mar 382,341 250 154,965 . . . 190,360 3 36,762 . . 1
         June 384,373 0 157,226 . . . 189,139 3 38,005 . . 1         Sep 389,392 0 160,561 . . . 189,090 0 39,741 . . 1         Dec 
p 395,846 0 167,692 . . . 187,081 0 41,073 . . 1
2006          Mar p 401,548 0 173,504 . . . 183,549 0 44,493 . . 1
State government (eastern)
2000 55,712 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .2001 58,771 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .2002 63,782 338 23,838 . . . 37,739 − 1,867 . . .2003 68,076 315 28,833 . . . 37,022 − 1,906 . . .2004 71,975 533 31,400 . . . 35,428 − 4,614 . . .
2005          Mar 73,190 846 32,251 . . . 35,866 − 4,227 . . .
         June 74,898 1,193 33,154 . . . 36,142 − 4,409 . . .         Sep 74,691 1,194 32,433 . . . 36,553 − 4,511 . . .         Dec 
p 75,249 847 33,528 . . . 35,781 − 5,093 . . .
2006          Mar p 76,170 721 35,300 . . . 34,636 − 5,513 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont’d)
  
  
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  6 Other  7 tion 5,6 
Local government (western) 11 
2000 81,414 . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .
2001 82,203 . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .2002 84,097 . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .2003 90,906 . 77 . . 603 87,868 19 2,339 . . .2004 95,057 . − . . 552 91,317 13 3,174 . . .
2005          Mar 95,600 . − . . 591 91,819 15 3,175 . . .
         June 97,250 . − . . 591 93,469 15 3,175 . . .         Sep 97,500 . − . . 591 93,719 15 3,175 . . .         Dec 
p 98,260 . − . . 335 94,735 15 3,175 . . .
Local government (eastern) 11 
2000 17,048 . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .2002 16,745 . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .2003 16,951 . − . . 131 16,601 87 132 . . .2004 17,353 . − . . 131 16,914 73 235 . . .
2005          Mar 17,250 . − . . 131 16,809 75 235 . . .
         June 17,250 . − . . 131 16,809 75 235 . . .         Sep 17,200 . − . . 131 16,759 75 235 . . .         Dec 
p 17,300 . − . . 131 16,859 75 235 . . .
ERP Special Fund 8 
2000 18,386 . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .2001 19,161 . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .2002 19,400 . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .2003 19,261 . . 51 . 10,169 8,522 8 512 . . .2004 18,200 . . 51 . 10,169 7,584 8 389 . . .
2005          Mar 18,098 . . 51 . 10,169 7,482 8 389 . . .
         June 17,270 . . 51 . 10,169 6,812 − 238 . . .         Sep 15,864 . . 51 . 10,169 5,406 − 238 . . .         Dec 15,066 . . 51 . 10,169 4,609 − 238 . . .
2006          Mar 14,811 . . 51 . 10,169 4,353 − 238 . . .
         June 14,811 . . 51 . 10,169 4,353 − 238 . . .
Indemnification Fund 
2000 204 .... 2 0 4 ......
2001 285 .... 2 8 5 ......
2002 369 .... 3 6 9 ......
2003 469 .... 4 6 9 ......
2004 400 .... 4 0 0 ......
2005          Mar 302 .... 3 0 2 ......
         June 302 .... 3 0 2 ......
         Sep 301 .... 3 0 1 ......
         Dec 300 .... 3 0 0 ......
2006          Mar 200 .... 2 0 0 ......
         June 200 .... 2 0 0 ......
German Unity Fund 8,10 
2000 40,425 − 275 2,634 . 29,593 7,790 − 133 . . .2001 39,638 − 3,748 10,134 . 21,292 4,315 − 149 . . .2002 39,441 − 3,820 10,134 . 22,315 3,146 − 26 . . .2003 39,099 − 4,610 10,134 . 23,563 793 − − . . .2004 38,650 − 4,538 9,634 . 23,787 690 − − . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernment debt. — 1Predominantly 8In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
own securities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
long-term paper. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes. Including ratios. — 9On 1 July 1999 central government assumed joint responsibility
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federalsupplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal.investment assistance levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing As from July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded under central
construction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former government. — 10On 1 January 2005 central government assumed joint
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the responsibility for the debts of the German Unity Fund. As from January, thereturn of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to aforementioned special fund is recorded under central government. —their home country. — 6Excluding offsets against outstanding claims. — 11Data other than year-end figures have been estimated. Including debt of
7Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the municipal special purpose associations. 
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
€ million
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2004 2005
Item 2004 2005  p Total 1st hf Q3 Q4 Total  p 1st hf Q3 Q4  p 
Borrowers
Central government  2 812,123 886,254 + 44,410 + 36,042 + 10,273 − 1,906 + 35,479 + 23,277 + 11,140 + 1,062
German Unity Fund  2 38,650 − − 450 + 4 + 107 − 561 − − − −
ERP Special Fund 18,200 15,066 − 1,061 − 736 − − 325 − 3,134 − 931 − 1,406 − 798
Indemnification Fund 400 300 − 69 − 73 + 1 + 2 − 99 − 98 − 1 − 1
State government (western) 376,697 395,846 + 21,036 + 12,579 + 6,175 + 2,282 + 19,149 + 7,676 + 5,019 + 6,454
State government (eastern) 71,975 75,249 + 3,899 + 3,176 + 260 + 462 + 3,274 + 2,923 − 207 + 558Local government (western)  
3 95,057 98,260 + 4,805 + 3,075 + 491 + 1,239 + 4,403 + 3,431 + 220 + 752
Local government (eastern)  3 17,353 17,300 + 373 − 26 + 110 + 289 + 35 − 25 − 30 + 90
Total 1,430,453 1,488,275 + 72,941 + 54,041 + 17,417 + 1,483 + 59,110 + 36,258 + 14,735 + 8,117
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 35,722 36,945 − 299 + 1,286 + 187 − 1,772 + 1,223 + 1,491 − 31 − 238 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 279,796 310,118 + 33,382 + 23,516 + 6,947 + 2,919 + 30,322 + 15,812 + 4,222 + 10,288
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 168,958 174,423 + 15,347 + 8,863 + 4,152 + 2,332 + 5,465 + 1,431 − 7,053 + 11,087
Federal savings notes 10,817 11,055 − 1,993 − 2,220 − 22 + 249 + 238 + 362 − 119 − 6Bonds  
5 495,418 521,801 + 24,302 + 17,481 + 5,785 + 1,037 + 26,383 + 11,653 + 18,294 − 3,564
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 379,984 368,382 − 16,223 − 4,780 − 910 − 10,534 − 10,314 + 2,482 − 1,329 − 11,467
Loans from social security funds 430 498 + 89 + 31 + 42 + 17 + 68 + 71 − 3 −Other loans  
6 53,632 60,483 + 19,509 + 9,894 + 2,377 + 7,238 + 6,851 + 2,951 + 1,884 + 2,016
Old debt  7 8 4 8 8 − 3 5 − 2 9 −1 −5 +4 +5 +0 −1
Equalisation claims 5,572 4,443 − 1,138 + 0 − 1,139 + 1 − 1,130 − − 1,130 −Investment assistance levy 41 41 − − −−−−−−
Total 1,430,453 1,488,275 + 72,941 + 54,041 + 17,417 + 1,483 + 59,110 + 36,258 + 14,735 + 8,117
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 − − −−−−−−
Credit institutions 541,700 514,000 + 17,525 + 29,756 + 3,451 − 15,682 − 26,412 − 11,884 + 2,290 − 16,818
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 430 498 + 89 + 31 + 42 + 17 + 68 + 71 − 3 −Other  
8 263,983 263,937 − 11,673 − 3,946 − 10,476 + 2,748 − 46 − 4,729 − 1,252 + 5,935
Foreign creditors  pe 619,900 705,400 + 67,000 + 28,200 + 24,400 + 14,400 + 85,500 + 52,800 + 13,700 + 19,000
Total 1,430,453 1,488,275 + 72,941 + 54,041 + 17,417 + 1,483 + 59,110 + 36,258 + 14,735 + 8,117
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. — 6Including loans raised abroad. — 7Old liabilities arising
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernment debt. — 1Net borrowing from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
differs from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer construction of the former GDR’s armed forces and from housing
of debts. — 2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt inassociations. — 4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. — 8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 5Excluding issuers’ holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund  3 Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 − − −2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 − − −2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 − − −2002 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 − − −2003 399,304 38,410 793 9,042 260,046 91,013 − − −
2004 Dec 399,250 36,791 690 7,981 262,070 91,719 − − −2005 Mar 399,064 36,069 − 7,878 264,478 90,639 − − −
June 394,063 31,898 − 7,050 264,757 90,358 − − −
Sep 392,498 30,680 − 5,644 265,990 90,184 − − −Dec 
p 388,942 26,796 − 4,846 266,222 91,078 − − −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. — 1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. — 2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Schätze)  2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 claims  8 Other  9 tion 7,8 
1998 958,004 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,290 8,684 186
1999  10 714,080 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 488 45,175 104
2000 715,835 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 301 44,146 107
2001 701,115 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 123 8,986 1072002 725,443 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 66 7,845 972003 767,713 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 38,146 223 7,326 33 6,711 852004 812,123 34,440 1,074 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 2 5,572 812005  
11 886,254 36,098 1,155 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 29,318 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
2005          June 874,053 36,021 1,111 105,227 170,338 11,180 495,879 38,778 408 10,562 2 5,572 86
         July 889,851 36,128 1,091 110,360 171,179 11,186 506,393 39,106 408 10,562 2 4,443 86
         Aug 878,817 35,886 1,095 110,935 156,950 11,125 514,177 34,243 408 10,562 2 4,443 86         Sep 885,192 35,989 1,076 106,836 163,284 11,061 514,173 38,303 408 10,608 2 4,443 86
         Oct 888,191 35,734 1,073 113,486 168,448 11,088 503,350 40,541 408 10,608 2 4,443 85
         Nov 890,379 35,275 1,118 115,057 169,537 10,981 509,857 34,125 408 10,608 2 4,443 86         Dec 886,254 36,098 1,155 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 29,318 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
2006          Jan 903,024 36,761 1,278 115,718 175,014 10,628 514,676 34,581 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
         Feb 891,427 36,957 1,370 117,185 161,161 10,735 514,768 34,974 408 10,710 2 4,443 85         Mar 898,780 36,130 1,487 111,773 167,352 10,883 519,889 36,917 408 10,899 2 4,443 84
         Apr 905,742 37,200 1,657 117,828 172,470 10,643 512,431 39,336 408 10,899 2 4,443 83
         May 909,441 37,387 1,840 118,528 173,593 10,771 519,098 34,232 408 10,899 2 4,443 82         June 913,018 36,927 2,062 108,975 177,669 10,399 518,757 44,284 408 11,073 2 4,443 83
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including Germany to their home country. — 8Excluding offsets against outstanding
cash bills. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. — claims. — 9Commutation and compensation debt and old debt mainly
3Including loans raised abroad. — 4Including money market loans. — denominated in foreign currency. — 10On 1 July 1999 central government
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for
employees. — 6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund
levy. — 7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. — 11On 1 January 2005 central
former GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the German Unity
with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Fund. 
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1998 + 228,050 + 52,301 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,632 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,755 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 9402001 + 135,018 − 14,719 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,4952002 + 178,203 + 24,327 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 − 10,155 + 2,221 + 222003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 62,513 + 13,623 + 42,422 + 15,942 + 109,834 + 8,874 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,2182004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 52,713 + 24,199 + 35,594 + 15,847 + 130,916 + 5,313 + 7,186 − 1,620 + 1,844 + 8022005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 53,197 + 26,700 + 33,278 + 5,465 + 131,620 + 10,618 + 2,317 − 10,689 + 4,511 + 6,041
2005          Jan-June + 119,550 + 23,277 + 28,041 + 11,712 + 14,395 + 1,431 + 67,310 + 6,994 + 1,081 − 5,587 + 8,722 − 3,474
2006          Jan-June + 132,232 + 26,763 + 29,492 + 7,891 + 17,310 + 3,297 + 68,342 + 250 + 687 − 1,073 + 16,402 + 7,353
2005          June + 17,505 − 1,528 + 3,848 + 3,848 + 4,292 + 4,292 + 12,895 − 5,059 + 50 − 1,031 − 3,579 + 694
         July + 23,703 + 15,799 + 10,514 + 10,514 + 841 + 841 + 11,298 + 5,246 + 236 − 487 + 814 + 14,482
         Aug + 10,517 − 11,035 + 7,785 + 7,785 + 620 − 14,229 + 6,622 + 273 + 70 − 283 − 4,581 − 13,116         Sep + 25,105 + 6,376 − 4 − 4 + 6,335 + 6,335 + 14,044 − 4,060 + 176 − 449 + 4,554 + 6,078
         Oct + 20,837 + 2,999 − 654 − 10,823 + 5,164 + 5,164 + 12,434 + 6,421 + 362 − 1,293 + 3,532 − 1,720
         Nov + 10,845 + 2,188 + 6,507 + 6,507 + 1,089 + 1,089 + 7,279 + 1,006 + 159 − 2,226 − 4,189 − 3,840         Dec + 14,366 − 4,124 + 1,009 + 1,009 + 4,834 + 4,834 + 12,632 − 5,261 + 233 − 365 − 4,341 + 7,631
2006          Jan + 31,775 + 16,770 + 11,949 + 3,810 + 643 + 643 + 13,760 + 7,055 + 196 + 36 + 5,227 + 915
         Feb + 14,936 − 11,597 + 6,326 + 92 + 160 − 13,853 + 7,800 + 1,770 + 66 − 192 + 585 − 14,595         Mar + 29,077 + 7,353 + 5,121 + 5,121 + 6,191 + 6,191 + 15,218 − 6,091 + 184 − 229 + 2,362 + 6,384
         Apr + 20,723 + 6,962 − 231 − 7,459 + 5,118 + 5,118 + 13,382 + 6,885 + 48 + 14 + 2,406 + 5,080
         May + 9,983 + 3,699 + 6,667 + 6,667 + 1,123 + 1,123 + 7,022 + 1,015 + 137 − 140 − 4,965 + 4,448         June + 25,739 + 3,577 − 341 − 341 + 4,075 + 4,075 + 11,161 − 10,383 + 56 − 562 + 10,787 + 5,121
1After deduction of repurchases. — 2Federal Treasury notes (Schätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the German
pension insurance fund *
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
1993 290,393 232,408 52,671 298,065 252,920 15,898 − 7,672 39,786 29,957 8,499 1,100 229 6,297
1994 322,335 256,662 61,891 324,323 273,880 17,751 − 1,988 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,8901995 338,185 270,294 64,387 348,115 294,034 20,285 − 9,930 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,8001996  
8 353,672 282,616 68,388 362,667 305,780 21,660 − 8,995 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 374,853 297,402 74,961 372,955 316,511 23,280 + 1,898 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,261
1998 389,101 297,827 88,755 385,707 327,823 24,393 + 3,394 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,5731999 208,173 152,206 54,628 203,295 172,919 12,950 + 4,878 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,9042000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,8622004  
9 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005  p 229,027 156,259 71,548 233,153 200,161 13,440 − 4,126 1,974 1,794 16 43 122 4,912
2005          Q1 55,160 36,897 17,996 58,001 50,031 3,390 − 2,841 2,607 2,432 16 41 118 4,828
         Q2 56,913 38,647 17,911 58,286 49,929 3,413 − 1,373 1,195 1,020 16 42 118 4,874         Q3 57,546 38,492 18,807 58,455 50,150 3,337 − 909 362 187 16 43 117 4,885         Q4 59,408 42,224 16,834 58,412 50,050 3,300 + 996 1,974 1,794 16 43 122 4,912
2006          Q1 60,801 42,622 17,908 57,965 50,110 3,247 + 2,836 4,452 4,293 16 43 101 4,924
         Q2 60,537 42,351 17,877 58,328 50,143 3,257 + 2,209 7,406 7,241 16 45 105 4,956
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension deducted from pension payments. — 4Including long-term care insurance
insurance scheme. — *Excluding German pension insurance for the mining, scheme for pensioners from 1995 to 2004 Q1. — 5Largely corresponds to
railroad and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do not tally with the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. — 6Including cash. —
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993, 7Excluding loans to other social security funds; including participating
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending interests. — 8Excluding income arising from the revaluation of
and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government participating interests. — 9Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of
cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance equity interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Employment Agency
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, € million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capitalloans
Unemployment support  
4,5 Job promotion  5,6 from
Measures central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern financed govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany by levies  7 Balance ment
1993 85,109 79,895 1,829 109,536 48,005 34,149 13,856 36,891 15,895 20,996 2,840 − 24,426 24,419
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 2,753 − 10,205 10,1421995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 2,627 − 6,892 6,8871996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 2,318 − 13,763 13,7561997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 1,756 − 9,574 9,5741998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 2,540 − 7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 1,349 − 3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 1,330 − 868 8672001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 1,660 − 1,931 1,9312002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 2,215 − 5,623 5,6232003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,2152004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,1752005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2005          Q1 11,934 11,072 40 14,775 7,983 5,805 2,178 3,332 2,083 1,249 410 − 2,842 5,532
         Q2 13,283 11,449 324 13,697 7,394 5,376 2,018 3,062 1,956 1,105 440 − 414 223         Q3 12,924 11,618 420 12,662 6,357 4,720 1,637 2,576 1,670 906 372 + 262 − 458         Q4 14,551 12,850 652 11,954 5,920 4,431 1,489 2,620 1,712 908 228 + 2,597 − 4,900
2006          Q1 14,041 13,057 42 12,320 7,155 5,260 1,894 2,306 1,526 780 388 + 1,721 538
         Q2 13,827 12,848 275 11,742 6,362 4,691 1,670 2,266 1,505 761 300 + 2,084 − 538
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government scheme for recipients of wage substitutes are paid in January instead of in
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- December. — 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up,
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service
compensatory amount to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit, Agencies (PSAs), compensation top-up payments and business start-up
short-time working benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory grants. — 7Promotion of winter construction and insolvency compensation
health insurance, pension insurance and long-term care insurance schemes. to employees. 
From 2003, the January contributions to the statutory pension insurance
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
  2004   2005   2006
  2003   2004   2005   2003   2004   2005   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 100.5 105.0 107.8 1.0 4.4 2.7 4.2 3.4 0.3 4.1 2.9 3.4 7.1Construction 86.4 85.1 81.9 − 4.5 − 1.6 − 3.8 − 4.2 − 3.1 − 12.0 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 5.0Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 102.3 104.2 106.0 − 1.3 1.9 1.7 1.0 2.2 0.9 2.6 2.2 1.0 2.2
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 105.2 107.1 108.9 0.6 1.8 1.7 1.4 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.8 1.3 1.8
Public and private services  3 102.1 102.4 101.8 − 0.3 0.4 − 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.7 0.3
Gross value added 101.7 103.9 105.1 − 0.1 2.1 1.1 1.5 1.7 0.0 1.9 1.4 1.2 3.0
Gross domestic product  4 101.1 102.8 103.8 − 0.2 1.6 1.0 1.2 1.3 − 0.5 1.8 1.5 1.1 2.9
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 101.5 102.0 102.2 0.1 0.6 0.2 − 0.1 1.5 − 0.5 1.1 0.9 − 0.9 1.1
Government consumption 102.1 100.5 100.6 0.1 − 1.6 0.1 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Machinery and equipment 88.9 91.3 94.9 − 0.2 2.6 4.0 5.1 5.1 3.7 7.5 2.2 2.8 8.3Premises 88.4 86.3 83.4 − 1.6 − 2.3 − 3.4 − 4.4 − 3.3 − 10.8 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 1.4 4.3Other investment  
6 111.1 113.1 115.2 3.3 1.8 1.8 1.6 1.7 2.2 2.2 1.9 1.1 3.0
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . 0.5 0.5 0.2 1.7 0.5 0.1 0.5 − 0.3 0.6 1.0
Domestic use 98.1 98.7 99.0 0.6 0.6 0.4 1.4 1.0 − 1.2 1.8 0.5 0.4 2.8Net exports  
8 . . . − 0.7 1.1 0.6 − 0.1 0.3 0.7 0.1 1.0 0.7 0.2
Exports 113.6 124.2 132.0 2.4 9.3 6.3 7.3 8.4 3.7 4.9 8.6 7.8 14.2Imports 104.9 112.3 118.2 5.1 7.0 5.3 8.7 8.5 2.2 5.5 6.6 6.7 16.2
Gross domestic product  
4 101.1 102.8 103.8 − 0.2 1.6 1.0 1.2 1.3 − 0.5 1.8 1.5 1.1 2.9
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,287.6 1,312.5 1,332.2 1.7 1.9 1.5 1.4 2.9 0.7 2.1 2.3 0.9 2.9
Government consumption 415.5 412.8 417.2 0.8 − 0.6 1.1 − 1.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 1.6 1.5 1.4 2.0Machinery and equipment 146.9 149.4 153.9 − 3.2 1.7 3.0 4.3 4.0 2.8 6.3 1.2 2.1 7.0Premises 213.0 210.7 205.6 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 2.4 − 2.7 − 1.5 − 8.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.8 5.1Other investment  
6 24.5 24.9 25.2 − 0.2 1.6 1.4 2.0 2.2 1.7 1.2 1.1 1.7 1.3
Changes in inventories  7 − 11.6 − 4.0 1.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,075.8 2,106.2 2,135.3 1.4 1.5 1.4 2.2 2.1 − 0.0 2.6 1.5 1.5 4.2Net exports 87.6 109.5 112.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 772.7 842.8 901.7 0.9 9.1 7.0 7.7 9.6 4.7 5.7 8.8 8.5 15.7Imports 685.1 733.4 789.6 2.5 7.0 7.7 10.0 11.1 4.3 7.5 9.1 9.3 20.8
Gross domestic product  
4 2,163.4 2,215.7 2,247.4 0.9 2.4 1.4 1.7 1.9 0.4 2.1 1.7 1.5 3.2
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 104.5 106.0 107.4 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.5 1.4 1.2 1.0 1.3 1.8 1.7Gross domestic product 103.7 104.5 105.0 1.0 0.8 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.4 0.2 0.5 0.3Terms of trade 103.0 102.8 101.2 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 2.0 − 1.7 − 2.5
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,131.1 1,134.5 1,128.8 0.2 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.7 0.0Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 468.9 523.8 557.0 3.6 11.7 6.3 8.0 9.8 3.6 7.8 5.4 8.7 9.2
National income 1,600.0 1,658.3 1,685.8 1.2 3.6 1.7 2.4 2.4 1.0 2.3 1.4 1.9 3.2
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,147.3 2,216.0 2,251.2 1.2 3.2 1.6 2.5 2.5 0.8 2.3 1.7 1.6 3.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2006. — 1Includ- ucts). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangi-
ing communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- ble fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment,
ties, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home services. — literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net increase
4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on prod- in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-
Period total tion  2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
2001 99.5 92.7 97.3 100.4 99.4 102.3 100.4 98.8 98.0 101.1 102.1 104.0
2002 98.3 88.7 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.42003 98.4 84.9 99.8 99.5 99.5 102.0 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.62004 100.9 80.6 102.7 102.5 103.3 105.7 87.4 98.0 104.6 103.7 101.2 111.9
2005 103.7 76.1 102.8 106.3 106.5 111.0 87.8 101.0 110.0 104.6 106.1 116.8
 
2004          Oct 108.2 93.3 104.8 109.9 109.9 113.8 96.6 105.4 108.0 106.8 104.0 126.9
         Nov 106.8 86.8 110.1 108.3 107.7 112.3 94.4 104.9 107.7 105.2 104.2 120.4         Dec 95.9 62.4 115.6 96.9 89.5 107.9 78.8 95.5 99.1 84.3 118.3 93.0
2005          Jan 94.5 47.9 112.6 96.9 101.0 95.4 81.8 94.6 109.9 104.9 86.3 106.8
         Feb 94.7 43.3 107.8 98.1 99.2 100.5 85.8 94.1 107.0 101.8 93.1 112.2         Mar 106.6 60.3 112.3 110.3 108.7 117.8 95.9 102.5 116.5 109.2 113.8 126.4
         Apr 102.7 80.5 101.3 104.9 106.1 109.4 87.1 97.4 108.6 106.2 101.2 122.5
         May 100.6 83.2 97.8 102.5 105.2 104.6 79.6 97.8 108.6 102.8 99.0 112.1         June 106.3 88.5 92.5 109.5 109.3 117.3 90.5 99.1 108.0 107.7 115.6 122.3
         July 106.8 93.0 96.5 109.1 110.2 114.0 83.9 102.8 112.7 108.3 107.7 122.3
         Aug 95.7 84.2 92.4 97.2 101.5 94.9 70.0 98.7 108.2 96.1 92.0 90.4         Sep 110.8 92.3 93.6 114.3 113.4 121.4 97.8 106.3 111.4 109.6 114.5 129.7
         Oct 113.0 93.2 104.0 115.8 115.6 119.5 100.4 112.8 118.0 112.8 108.0 131.5
         Nov 112.2 85.7 107.8 115.1 113.6 122.1 99.2 108.2 110.7 111.0 113.3 130.0         Dec 100.3 61.3 115.5 102.3 94.4 115.5 81.6 97.9 100.9 84.5 128.6 95.7
2006          Jan 98.0 41.6 119.5 100.9 104.5 101.0 86.0 96.4 113.5 104.4 92.5 107.3
         Feb 100.3 45.6 109.1 104.3 105.2 109.3 89.5 95.8 109.6 106.7 99.4 121.6         Mar 
7 111.5 7 62.8 112.5 115.9 116.3 124.0 98.4 103.0 118.4 116.8 117.3 131.5
         Apr  + 7 107.0 7 85.5 102.2 109.5 112.1 113.0 92.0 101.2 113.6 108.3 107.6 119.7
         May  + 7 106.6 7 87.7 96.0 109.5 112.5 113.6 88.7 99.7 111.4 109.5 109.0 121.1
         June  + p 7 111.2 7 92.9 93.6 114.8 117.4 121.7 92.3 100.7 114.1 114.7 118.1 124.9
Annual percentage change  
  
2001 − 0.5 − 7.7 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 2.4 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.1 + 2.2 + 4.12002 − 1.2 − 4.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.32003 + 0.1 − 4.3 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 5.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 + 2.12004 + 2.5 − 5.1 + 2.9 + 3.0 + 3.8 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 3.5 + 4.0
2005 + 2.8 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 5.0 + 0.5 + 3.1 + 5.2 + 0.9 + 4.8 + 4.4
 
2004          Oct + 2.9 − 5.4 + 2.5 + 3.7 + 2.8 + 7.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 + 3.8 − 0.4 + 5.9 + 12.9
         Nov + 0.5 − 5.1 + 5.3 + 0.5 + 2.3 − 1.3 − 5.7 + 1.7 + 6.2 + 1.8 − 1.5 − 3.6         Dec + 0.9 − 7.1 + 8.0 + 0.7 + 2.8 − 0.8 − 4.9 + 1.4 + 7.0 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 4.6
2005          Jan + 2.8 − 1.4 − 3.1 + 3.9 + 4.6 + 5.3 − 1.9 + 1.1 + 7.9 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 9.8
         Feb + 0.6 − 23.2 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 3.7 − 0.8 + 2.3 + 5.3 − 1.3 + 6.2 + 1.9         Mar + 1.1 − 23.1 + 1.8 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 5.4 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 8.4 − 2.2 + 7.1 + 3.9
         Apr + 2.1 − 6.4 + 0.3 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 5.4 − 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 7.2
         May + 0.8 − 4.4 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 − 7.7 + 3.3 + 6.0 − 2.5 + 0.5 − 2.7         June + 2.6 − 4.3 + 1.5 + 3.4 + 2.0 + 5.6 + 4.0 + 2.0 + 4.3 − 3.1 + 8.6 + 1.3
         July + 3.4 − 2.7 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 2.9 + 5.4 − 3.6 + 3.7 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 9.1
         Aug + 2.0 − 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.4 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 2.8 + 3.0 + 4.3 + 2.2 + 2.8 − 0.2         Sep + 3.7 − 2.8 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 4.0 + 5.8 + 1.0 + 4.8 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 7.5
         Oct + 4.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 5.4 + 5.2 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 7.0 + 9.3 + 5.6 + 3.8 + 3.6
         Nov + 5.1 − 1.3 − 2.1 + 6.3 + 5.5 + 8.7 + 5.1 + 3.1 + 2.8 + 5.5 + 8.7 + 8.0         Dec + 4.6 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 5.5 + 7.0 + 3.6 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 2.9
2006          Jan + 3.7 − 13.2 + 6.1 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 5.9 + 5.1 + 1.9 + 3.3 − 0.5 + 7.2 + 0.5
         Feb + 5.9 + 5.3 + 1.2 + 6.3 + 6.0 + 8.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 4.8 + 6.8 + 8.4         Mar 
7 + 4.6 7 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 5.1 + 7.0 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 7.0 + 3.1 + 4.0
         Apr  + 7 + 4.2 7 + 6.2 + 0.9 + 4.4 + 5.7 + 3.3 + 5.6 + 3.9 + 4.6 + 2.0 + 6.3 − 2.3
         May  + 7 + 6.0 7 + 5.4 − 1.8 + 6.8 + 6.9 + 8.6 + 11.4 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 6.5 + 10.1 + 8.0
         June  + p 7 + 4.6 7 + 5.0 + 1.2 + 4.8 + 7.4 + 3.8 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 5.6 + 6.5 + 2.2 + 2.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — oUsing the quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities related to print-
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The ing. — 7Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of es-
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Build- timates, to the results of the annual overall survey in the constructio n sector
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — (average +3%). — +Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statis-
3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in particular, mining of tical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Producti on
coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas and manu- Survey for the second quarter 2006 (industry: on average -3.7%). 
facture of refined petroleum products. — 4Including mining and
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 Durable goods Non-durable goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
total  
  
2001 98.3 − 1.6 95.9 − 4.0 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.5 99.8 − 0.1 102.4 + 2.5
2002 98.2 − 0.1 96.4 + 0.5 99.5 + 0.1 99.0 − 2.4 95.7 − 4.1 101.0 − 1.42003 99.0 + 0.8 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.2 95.6 − 3.4 90.3 − 5.6 98.8 − 2.22004 105.1 + 6.2 104.9 + 7.3 107.6 + 6.9 95.1 − 0.5 89.3 − 1.1 98.7 − 0.1
2005 111.7 + 6.3 109.9 + 4.8 116.1 + 7.9 99.7 + 4.8 91.4 + 2.4 104.9 + 6.3
 
2005          June 113.6 + 7.1 111.1 + 3.2 120.1 + 10.3 95.4 + 6.6 92.0 + 3.5 97.5 + 8.5
         July 114.4 + 8.0 113.6 + 6.5 118.3 + 9.7 101.3 + 5.6 88.7 + 0.6 109.0 + 8.2
         Aug 101.7 + 6.5 102.0 + 3.4 102.2 + 8.7 98.4 + 7.0 79.0 + 7.9 110.4 + 6.6         Sep 117.9 + 8.3 114.6 + 5.5 123.5 + 11.5 105.7 + 4.3 99.5 + 4.6 109.5 + 4.2
         Oct 118.6 + 9.9 117.3 + 7.7 122.7 + 12.3 106.5 + 7.6 102.7 + 6.4 108.8 + 8.2
         Nov 119.9 + 13.6 116.8 + 9.3 126.3 + 18.6 104.0 + 7.1 102.5 + 7.6 104.8 + 6.7         Dec 114.2 + 5.4 103.6 + 9.1 128.3 + 3.2 91.4 + 5.8 83.2 + 6.8 96.4 + 5.1
2006          Jan 117.5 + 9.8 115.5 + 5.7 123.2 + 14.5 100.5 + 3.4 91.9 + 4.0 105.9 + 3.2
         Feb 121.3 + 15.4 116.2 + 11.3 129.1 + 21.4 105.8 + 3.1 92.3 + 5.4 114.1 + 2.0         Mar 127.3 + 8.5 125.9 + 10.3 131.9 + 8.0 112.8 + 4.2 103.2 + 6.2 118.8 + 3.1
         Apr 121.3 + 15.0 123.7 + 16.9 124.5 + 15.5 100.8 + 5.8 95.8 + 5.7 103.9 + 5.8
         May 118.4 + 12.2 121.7 + 14.4 121.0 + 11.6 98.0 + 8.3 93.7 + 10.2 100.7 + 7.2         June  
p 123.4 + 8.6 127.0 + 14.3 127.0 + 5.7 97.1 + 1.8 94.2 + 2.4 98.9 + 1.4
from the domestic market  
  
2001 97.6 − 2.3 96.4 − 3.5 98.0 − 2.0 99.9 + 0.0 99.5 − 0.4 100.2 + 0.3
2002 94.6 − 3.1 94.6 − 1.9 94.7 − 3.4 94.6 − 5.3 92.0 − 7.5 96.3 − 3.9
2003 94.6 + 0.0 95.0 + 0.4 96.0 + 1.4 89.9 − 5.0 86.3 − 6.2 92.1 − 4.4
2004 98.3 + 3.9 100.3 + 5.6 100.1 + 4.3 87.2 − 3.0 83.0 − 3.8 89.8 − 2.5
2005 101.4 + 3.2 103.5 + 3.2 102.8 + 2.7 91.0 + 4.4 85.2 + 2.7 94.6 + 5.3
 
2005          June 104.0 + 5.7 104.2 + 2.4 110.0 + 8.9 86.6 + 6.3 85.0 + 6.0 87.6 + 6.4
         July 103.7 + 4.2 107.6 + 3.5 103.9 + 4.0 91.8 + 7.0 83.5 + 5.2 96.9 + 8.0
         Aug 96.1 + 4.5 98.7 + 2.5 95.7 + 6.5 89.8 + 5.0 74.5 + 6.4 99.2 + 4.4         Sep 105.8 + 5.7 107.2 + 4.3 107.7 + 7.9 96.7 + 4.0 92.7 + 5.5 99.2 + 3.2
         Oct 107.3 + 4.7 111.0 + 5.4 106.6 + 3.2 98.6 + 7.1 95.6 + 6.3 100.4 + 7.5
         Nov 107.3 + 7.5 110.9 + 6.8 107.7 + 8.5 95.9 + 7.0 96.0 + 7.3 95.8 + 6.9         Dec 98.0 − 0.6 95.5 + 7.2 105.9 − 7.9 82.6 + 4.3 75.5 + 4.1 87.0 + 4.3
2006          Jan 102.3 + 5.1 106.9 + 3.9 102.2 + 7.7 89.2 + 1.0 86.4 + 4.1 91.0 − 0.5
         Feb 103.4 + 7.9 106.9 + 9.4 102.8 + 8.1 95.1 + 2.8 86.4 + 4.9 100.4 + 1.7         Mar 112.9 + 5.7 115.6 + 8.4 114.5 + 4.6 100.5 + 0.7 95.5 + 3.9 103.6 − 1.1
         Apr 107.4 + 9.5 114.8 + 14.7 106.2 + 6.3 89.9 + 3.1 86.1 + 2.5 92.3 + 3.5
         May 107.0 + 11.5 114.8 + 14.8 106.2 + 9.9 87.4 + 5.8 85.9 + 9.7 88.4 + 3.8         June  
p 110.3 + 6.1 119.3 + 14.5 110.0 + 0.0 85.8 − 0.9 85.8 + 0.9 85.8 − 2.1
from abroad  
  
2001 99.1 − 0.9 95.1 − 4.9 100.6 + 0.6 104.8 + 4.9 100.4 + 0.4 107.4 + 7.52002 102.7 + 3.6 99.1 + 4.2 104.1 + 3.5 108.6 + 3.6 103.9 + 3.5 111.4 + 3.72003 104.4 + 1.7 102.3 + 3.2 105.1 + 1.0 108.2 − 0.4 99.3 − 4.4 113.8 + 2.22004 113.5 + 8.7 112.2 + 9.7 114.5 + 8.9 112.5 + 4.0 103.1 + 3.8 118.4 + 4.0
2005 124.7 + 9.9 119.9 + 6.9 128.4 + 12.1 118.9 + 5.7 104.9 + 1.7 127.6 + 7.8
 
2005          June 125.6 + 8.6 122.0 + 4.3 129.4 + 11.4 114.9 + 7.2 107.5 − 0.5 119.5 + 12.0
         July 127.8 + 12.1 123.0 + 10.8 131.5 + 14.2 122.2 + 3.2 100.2 − 6.8 136.0 + 8.6
         Aug 108.6 + 8.7 107.2 + 5.0 108.2 + 10.7 117.4 + 10.4 88.8 + 10.9 135.2 + 10.2         Sep 133.0 + 11.0 126.2 + 7.2 138.1 + 14.1 125.5 + 4.9 114.3 + 3.2 132.5 + 5.9
         Oct 132.8 + 15.8 127.1 + 11.0 137.5 + 19.7 124.0 + 8.4 118.3 + 6.7 127.6 + 9.4
         Nov 135.7 + 20.4 125.9 + 12.7 143.5 + 26.8 121.8 + 7.0 116.8 + 8.0 124.9 + 6.4         Dec 134.5 + 11.6 116.2 + 11.4 148.9 + 12.1 110.8 + 8.3 100.1 + 11.5 117.4 + 6.6
2006          Jan 136.5 + 14.5 128.9 + 8.0 142.6 + 19.4 125.5 + 7.4 103.9 + 3.7 138.9 + 9.1
         Feb 143.6 + 23.1 130.7 + 13.9 153.3 + 31.5 129.4 + 3.5 105.1 + 6.1 144.5 + 2.3         Mar 145.3 + 11.3 142.0 + 12.8 148.0 + 10.7 140.1 + 10.2 120.0 + 10.2 152.6 + 10.2
         Apr 138.6 + 20.7 137.5 + 19.9 141.3 + 22.8 124.9 + 10.3 117.2 + 11.4 129.7 + 9.7
         May 132.7 + 13.1 132.4 + 13.8 134.6 + 12.9 121.3 + 12.2 110.8 + 11.1 127.9 + 12.8         June  
p 139.7 + 11.2 139.0 + 13.9 142.7 + 10.3 122.2 + 6.4 112.7 + 4.8 128.1 + 7.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany  1 Eastern Germany  2 
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2002 88.8 − 6.0 72.8 91.5 95.7 92.1 − 6.9 80.5 94.8 96.4 79.6 − 3.6 51.6 81.9 94.0
2003 79.3 − 10.7 67.5 78.6 87.5 82.0 − 11.0 75.6 79.6 88.7 72.0 − 9.5 45.1 75.4 84.42004 74.3 − 6.3 61.3 72.8 84.2 77.0 − 6.1 70.5 74.6 83.8 67.1 − 6.8 35.8 67.7 85.2
2005 73.8 − 0.7 56.9 74.5 83.5 77.8 + 1.0 66.5 78.0 84.8 62.6 − 6.7 30.5 64.2 80.1
   
2005          May 77.8 + 2.5 62.3 70.7 95.6 81.9 + 3.8 71.0 73.9 98.1 66.8 − 1.2 38.4 61.7 89.0
         June 88.6 − 1.4 66.7 86.2 105.1 93.7 − 0.7 79.0 91.2 105.9 74.7 − 3.7 33.0 71.5 102.8
         July 81.4 + 3.2 59.1 74.2 103.5 84.2 + 2.6 68.6 74.4 105.4 74.0 + 5.4 32.9 73.8 98.5
         Aug 82.5 + 6.5 57.5 81.9 98.8 87.0 + 11.4 67.3 86.9 99.5 70.2 − 7.4 30.5 67.3 96.8         Sep 89.2 + 3.8 63.8 89.0 105.2 93.9 + 5.3 74.4 92.6 107.7 76.2 − 0.9 34.6 78.5 98.7
         Oct 74.5
+ 0.0 57.1 74.5 85.3 79.2 + 0.4 67.7 78.0 87.8 61.6 − 1.4 28.0 64.2 78.9
         Nov 67.6 + 9.4 51.2 75.2 69.2 72.5 + 12.8 59.5 81.6 70.1 54.2 − 1.5 28.4 56.7 67.1
         Dec 74.9 + 7.8 59.3 84.6 73.6 78.6 + 9.5 68.9 87.8 74.2 64.6 + 2.5 32.9 75.5 72.1
2006          Jan 50.3 + 7.7 43.8 53.3 50.9 54.2 + 8.2 53.1 56.5 52.2 39.6 + 6.5 18.0 44.3 47.7
         Feb 59.1 + 13.4 46.9 64.7 60.4 64.9 + 17.6 54.5 70.9 64.4 43.3 + 0.0 26.0 46.8 50.0
         Mar 82.3 + 4.3 63.0 85.1 91.1 86.4 + 3.7 74.1 87.4 93.0 70.8 + 5.7 32.4 78.3 86.0
         Apr 80.4 + 13.4 63.5 80.7 90.7 84.7 + 14.0 73.5 83.4 93.3 68.8 + 11.9 36.1 73.0 83.9
         May 86.1 + 10.7 64.3 89.7 95.8 94.0 + 14.8 75.8 97.4 101.6 64.4 − 3.6 32.5 67.2 80.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications 0.2.8. — 1Excluding West Berlin. — 2Including West Berlin. — 3Including
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there- the railways and post office. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  2 of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco products leather goods ing materials sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2003 = 100
1998 97.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 89.1 + 1.5 77.2 + 5.5 112.1 − 1.1 111.7 + 3.2 96.3 + 1.7 + 1.5 91.6 + 4.8
1999 97.8 + 0.5 + 0.3 89.7 + 0.7 82.9 + 7.4 111.8 − 0.3 110.6 − 1.0 97.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 94.6 + 3.3
2000 100.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 91.5 + 2.0 87.8 + 5.9 111.7 − 0.1 113.4 + 2.5 98.6 + 1.5 + 0.3 92.6 − 2.1
2001 102.1 + 1.9 . 95.7 + 4.6 94.3 + 7.4 111.4 − 0.3 109.6 − 3.4 100.7 + 2.1 . 95.3 + 2.92002 100.5 − 1.6 − 1.3 98.3 + 2.7 97.6 + 3.5 105.7 − 5.1 101.0 − 7.8 99.9 − 0.8 − 0.8 98.1 + 2.92003  
5 100.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 100.2 + 1.9 100.1 + 2.6 100.2 − 5.2 100.2 − 0.8 100.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 100.4 + 2.3
2004 101.6 + 1.5 + 1.5 103.2 + 3.0 99.6 − 0.5 103.1 + 2.9 103.5 + 3.3 101.9 + 1.7 + 1.3 102.5 + 2.1
2005  6 103.7 + 2.1 + 1.5 106.3 + 3.0 104.4 + 4.8 104.8 + 1.6 101.8 − 1.6 104.0 + 2.1 + 1.4 105.3 + 2.7
 
2005          June  6 99.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 105.7 + 4.7 101.8 + 2.7 97.3 + 0.7 96.2 − 3.2 102.3 + 1.9 + 1.1 112.6 + 3.2
         July 101.8 + 1.7 + 1.2 106.1 + 1.7 107.4 + 4.3 101.9 + 0.1 98.6 − 0.9 104.5 + 2.4 + 1.7 113.1 + 5.1
         Aug 100.0 + 2.8 + 2.4 103.5 + 1.8 99.6 + 2.8 98.5 + 4.8 97.2 + 0.5 99.4 + 2.9 + 2.3 95.9 + 4.2         Sep 101.0 + 1.7 + 0.6 100.7 + 2.7 104.0 + 5.8 103.5 − 2.8 98.8 − 1.1 101.8 + 2.7 + 1.3 104.0 + 6.4
         Oct 107.8 + 1.1 + 0.5 106.7 + 2.3 108.0 + 2.3 121.6 + 0.7 108.3 − 2.0 108.0 + 1.4 + 0.5 109.0 + 2.9
         Nov 109.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 107.4 + 0.8 107.7 + 3.7 113.2 + 2.0 108.9 − 2.3 109.8 + 1.4 + 0.3 114.3 + 3.6         Dec 125.5 + 0.7 + 0.3 124.4 + 0.9 122.9 + 2.0 130.9 + 0.7 121.3 − 1.0 119.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 99.0 + 1.4
2006          Jan 98.4 + 2.6 + 2.1 100.1 + 1.9 104.2 + 9.0 92.8 + 4.2 95.9 + 1.6 95.6 + 2.4 + 1.3 86.1 + 0.7
         Feb 92.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 98.3 + 0.9 98.7 + 3.0 76.9 + 1.9 89.3 + 1.5 92.0 + 2.2 + 1.0 91.7 + 3.9         Mar 106.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 109.0 − 0.4 109.5 + 4.2 103.1 − 1.0 106.7 + 0.1 108.0 + 0.5 − 0.5 116.2 + 1.1
         Apr 105.6 + 2.0 + 1.6 108.1 + 1.2 106.8 + 5.6 114.2 − 2.2 107.9 + 5.2 108.5 + 2.3 + 1.3 118.4 + 3.0
         May 105.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 108.3 − 1.4 106.0 + 2.6 110.3 + 5.3 104.9 + 4.2 107.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 115.4 + 2.9         June 102.0 + 2.8 + 2.3 107.4 + 1.6 105.9 + 4.0 101.4 + 4.2 99.0 + 2.9 105.2 + 2.8 + 1.9 115.6 + 2.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding from 2001, at 2000 prices. — 5Figures for 2003 do not include Lower
value-added tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version Saxony. — 6Figures from January 2005 are provisional, some of them have
0.2.8. — 1Excluding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding been revised. Figures for recent months are particularly uncertain owing to
the sale of automotive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor estimates for missing returns. 
vehicle parts and accessories.— 4Up to (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices;
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1  r Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployed  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-manu- ment pro-
going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cationaling Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  
3 6,7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percen- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2003 38,725 − 0.9 − 368 34,650 − 1.3 9 6,136 817 195 143 260 4,377 + 315 10.5 355
2004 38,875 + 0.4 + 150 34,652 + 0.0 6,019 769 151 117 184 10 4,381 10 +9 3 10 10.5 286
2005 38,822 − 0.1 − 53 34,425 − 0.7 5,931 719 126 62 115 11 4,861 11 + 479 11 11.7 12 413
2005          July 38,771 − 0.3 − 119 5,918 734 109 50 99 4,837 + 476 11.7 447
         Aug 38,849 − 0.2 − 76 34,520 − 0.7 5,948 740 89 51 95 4,798 + 451 11.6 464         Sep 39,163 − 0.1 − 55 5,959 740 96 55 103 4,647 + 390 11.2 467
         Oct 39,332 − 0.1 − 34 5,937 732 102 58 111 4,555 + 348 11.0 453
         Nov 39,338 − 0.0 − 8 34,775 − 0.6 5,930 729 98 59 128 4,531 + 274 10.9 422         Dec 39,130 + 0.0 + 15 5,900 708 84 55 129 4,605 + 141 11.1 394
2006          Jan 38,364 − 0.0 − 9 5,863 655 96 49 120 5,010 − 76 12.1 415
         Feb 38,406 + 0.1 + 20 33,970 − 0.3 5,853 636 101 46 113 5,048 − 241 12.2 464         Mar 38,490 + 0.1 + 53 5,857
13 651 105 45 110 4,977 − 289 12.0 506
         Apr 38,678 + 0.3 + 117 5,858 13 686 83 45 110 4,790 − 262 11.5 546
         May 38,904 + 0.5 + 182 ... ... 5,861 13 698 72 15 4915 114 4,535 − 349 14 10.8 565
         June 16 39,064 16 + 0.7 16 + 260 5,888 ... 62 15 5115 117 r 4,399 r − 382 10.5 581
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 5215 112 4,386 − 451 10.5 627
Western Germany o 
  
2003 . . . . . 9 5,503 594 160 31 161 2,753 + 255 8.4 292
2004 . . . . . 5,380 562 122 24 121 10 2,783 10 +8 9 10 8.5 239
2005 . . . . . 5,214 529 101 13 77 11 3,247 11 + 464 11 9.9 12 325
2005          July . . . . . 5,198 539 87 10 67 3,240 + 479 9.9 346         Aug . . . . . 5,224 543 69 10 63 3,238 + 472 9.8 359         Sep . . . . . 5,232 543 77 9 68 3,141 + 439 9.5 357
         Oct . . . . . 5,209 535 86 9 74 3,099 + 404 9.4 345
         Nov . . . . . 5,203 535 81 9 85 3,081 + 353 9.4 321         Dec . . . . . 5,176 522 70 9 85 3,120 + 258 9.5 310
2006          Jan . . . . . 5,147 488 79 9 79 3,362 + 52 10.2 327
         Feb . . . . . 5,137 477 81 9 75 3,370 − 116 10.2 367         Mar . . . . . 5,139
13 488 83 9 74 3,317 − 160 10.1 397
         Apr . . . . . 5,139 13 509 67 9 74 3,201 − 139 9.7 419
         May . . . . . 5,139 13 516 58 15 915 78 3,046 − 196 14 9.2 435
         June . . . . . 5,162 ... 50 15 1015 80r 2,966 r − 222 8.9 445
         July . . . . . ... ... ... 15 1015 77 2,960 − 280 8.9 486
Eastern Germany +  
  
2003 . . . . . 9 632 223 35 112 99 1,624 + 61 18.5 63
2004 . . . . . 639 207 29 93 63 10 1,599 10 +4 10 18.4 47
2005 . . . . . 717 189 25 49 38 11 1,614 11 +1 6 11 18.7 12 88
2005          July . . . . . 720 195 21 39 32 1,597 − 2 18.6 101         Aug . . . . . 725 197 20 42 32 1,560 − 21 18.1 106         Sep . . . . . 727 197 19 46 34 1,506 − 49 17.5 110
         Oct . . . . . 727 196 17 49 37 1,456 − 56 16.9 108
         Nov . . . . . 727 194 17 50 43 1,450 − 79 16.9 100         Dec . . . . . 723 186 14 46 44 1,485 − 117 17.3 84
2006          Jan . . . . . 716 167 17 41 41 1,649 − 129 19.2 87
         Feb . . . . . 716 160 19 37 38 1,678 − 124 19.5 97         Mar . . . . . 717
13 164 22 36 36 1,660 − 129 19.3 110
         Apr . . . . . 719 13 177 17 36 36 1,589 − 124 18.5 127
         May . . . . . 722 13 182 14 15 3915 36 1,490 − 153 14 17.4 131
         June . . . . . 725 ... 11 15 4115 37 1,433 − 160 16.8 135
         July . . . . . ... ... ... 15 4215 36 1,426 − 171 16.7 142
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual wards are positively affected by the first-time inclusion of firms which are re-
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- quired to report and which have been identified in the course of drawing
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- up the corporate register. — 10From January 2004, unemployed persons ex-
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Work-place concept; aver- cluding all those participating in occupational aptitude testing and training
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — schemes. — 11From January 2005, unemployed persons including recipients
3Up to December 2004, western Germany including West Berlin and east- of social assistance who are able to work. — 12From January 2005, in-
ern Germany excluding West Berlin. — 4The figures refer to the economic cluding offers of job opportunities. — 13Provisional up to adjustment to
classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or the figures of the annual overall survey. — 14From May 2006, calculated on
parts thereof; civil engineering”. — 5Mid-month level. — 6Employees in- the basis of new labour force figures. — 15Annualised data from the
volved in job creation schemes and structural adjustment measures Federal Employment Agency based on information received so far. —(SAM). — 7Mid-month level; end of month figures up to December 2004. — 16 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 
8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — 9The figures from 2003 on-
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index HWWA
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Period Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
2000 = 100  
  
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.4 101.2 100.3 103.0 107.1 101.0 100.6 91.4 91.9
2002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 104.9 102.6 100.2 102.4 100.0 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.12003 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 104.1 101.3 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.92004 106.2 105.7 102.9 114.8 108.9 104.8 101.4 105.8 99.7 101.1 97.2 101.4 96.3
2005 108.3 105.8 103.8 126.6 111.1 105.9 102.7 110.7 98.8 102.4 101.4 139.5 105.4
 
2004          Oct 106.6 104.2 102.9 120.4 108.9 105.1 107.6 97.4 101.7 99.4 123.0 92.0
         Nov 106.2 104.1 103.0 117.2 108.4 105.2 102.0 107.1 98.6 101.6 98.1 108.1 91.4         Dec 107.3 105.3 103.7 114.5 111.7 105.2 107.2 98.7 101.2 97.2 96.8 89.2
2005          Jan 106.9 105.7 103.5 116.4 109.8 105.4 108.1 97.6 101.5 98.0 107.5 95.7
         Feb 107.3 106.3 103.6 117.5 110.5 105.6 102.5 108.5 98.8 101.8 98.8 111.4 99.2         Mar 107.6 106.6 103.7 120.7 110.3 105.6 109.1 100.0 102.1 100.1 125.3 103.1
         Apr 107.7 106.4 103.7 123.3 109.7 105.7 109.9 98.4 102.1 100.1 128.2 103.1
         May 108.0 107.1 103.6 123.0 110.9 105.8 102.5 109.9 98.4 102.0 99.7 124.3 102.3         June 108.1 107.0 103.5 125.8 110.6 105.9 110.4 98.5 102.2 101.3 144.6 106.6
         July 108.6 105.9 103.2 129.0 112.1 106.0 111.0 97.5 102.4 101.9 151.8 107.0
         Aug 108.7 104.9 103.1 130.9 112.5 106.0 102.7 111.3 98.7 102.4 102.8 160.9 105.9         Sep 109.1 104.8 104.2 135.1 111.3 106.0 111.8 98.4 102.8 103.3 160.5 105.8
         Oct 109.1 104.4 104.3 135.6 111.2 106.1 112.6 98.7 103.0 103.7 154.0 108.0
         Nov 108.6 104.6 104.4 130.9 110.4 106.2 103.0 112.5 100.4 103.0 103.5 148.5 112.0         Dec 109.6 105.5 104.2 131.0 113.7 106.3 112.8 101.4 103.1 103.8 152.0 115.8
2006          Jan 109.1 106.6 103.7 134.4 110.7 106.5 114.1 101.1 103.3 104.7 163.7 120.1
         Feb 109.5 107.1 104.0 134.7 111.6 106.7 103.7 114.9 103.3 103.7 105.1 160.9 124.5         Mar 109.5 107.0 104.4 135.0 111.3 106.7 115.5 104.9 104.0 105.6 163.6 123.7
         Apr 109.9 107.4 104.4 139.2 111.2 106.8 116.6 105.9 104.5 107.0 177.8 129.3
         May 110.1 108.4 104.3 139.8 111.3 106.9 104.4 116.7 106.3 104.8 107.2 171.6 134.5         June 110.3 108.5 104.2 140.7 111.7 107.0 117.1
p 106.9 104.8 107.0 172.7 130.0
         July 110.7 108.1 103.9 142.1 113.6 107.1 ... ... ... ... 182.1 135.6
Annual percentage change  
  
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 7.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.12002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 6.6 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.92003 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.3 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.62004 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.5 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 − 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 22.3 + 10.8
2005 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 10.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.6 − 0.9 + 1.3 + 4.3 + 37.6 + 9.4
 
2004          Oct + 2.0 − 1.4 + 1.5 + 9.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 3.3 − 5.5 + 1.3 + 4.1 + 51.9 + 3.7
         Nov + 1.8 − 1.3 + 1.6 + 7.0 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 2.8 − 5.9 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 32.3 + 0.4         Dec + 2.1 − 0.4 + 2.3 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 2.9 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 2.2 + 20.0 − 0.2
2005          Jan + 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.4 + 5.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.9 − 5.8 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 30.1 + 3.1
         Feb + 1.8 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 6.6 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 4.2 − 6.1 + 1.5 + 3.7 + 35.5 + 3.1         Mar + 1.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 8.3 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 4.2 − 4.9 + 1.3 + 3.8 + 37.4 − 0.4
         Apr + 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 9.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 4.6 − 5.8 + 1.0 + 3.3 + 35.1 − 1.9
         May + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 2.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 4.1 − 5.6 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 18.9 + 1.2         June + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 10.2 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 4.6 − 8.1 + 1.1 + 4.4 + 43.5 + 7.6
         July + 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 4.6 − 7.1 + 1.2 + 4.7 + 45.0 + 9.6
         Aug + 1.9
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 11.6 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 4.6 − 1.1 + 0.9 + 4.7 + 40.8 + 11.9
         Sep + 2.5 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 15.9 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 4.9 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 5.1 + 42.4 + 13.2
         Oct + 2.3 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 12.6 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 4.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 4.3 + 25.2 + 17.4
         Nov + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 11.7 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.4 + 5.5 + 37.4 + 22.5         Dec + 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 14.4 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 5.2 + 2.7 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 57.0 + 29.8
2006          Jan + 2.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 15.5 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 1.8 + 6.8 + 52.3 + 25.5
         Feb + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 14.6 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 5.9 + 4.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 44.4 + 25.5         Mar + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 1.9 + 5.5 + 30.6 + 20.0
         Apr + 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 12.9 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 6.1 + 7.6 + 2.4 + 6.9 + 38.7 + 25.4
         May + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 13.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 6.2 + 8.0 + 2.7 + 7.5 + 38.1 + 31.5         June + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 6.1
p + 8.5 + 2.5 + 5.6 + 19.4 + 22.0
         July + 1.9 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.3 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... + 20.0 + 26.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWA Index of World Market Prices. — tion price level. — 4Excluding value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Previously: Overall construc- industrial raw materials. 
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999 € billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM / 
€ change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change %
1995 1,575.1 3.2 1,034.9 0.8 553.5 4.6 1,588.4 2.1 2,344.9 3.0 257.6 − 0.6 11.0
1996 1,592.5 1.1 1,029.9 − 0.5 599.0 8.2 1,629.0 2.6 2,386.5 1.8 251.7 − 2.3 10.51997 1,589.7 − 0.2 1,012.9 − 1.7 613.2 2.4 1,626.1 − 0.2 2,427.6 1.7 245.4 − 2.5 10.11998 1,623.0 2.1 1,036.3 2.3 625.0 1.9 1,661.3 2.2 2,474.2 1.9 249.4 1.7 10.11999 854.6 3.0 547.5 3.3 330.5 3.4 878.0 3.4 1,297.7 2.6 122.7 − 3.8 9.5
2000 883.4 3.4 569.6 4.0 339.9 2.8 909.5 3.6 1,337.4 3.1 123.2 0.4 9.2
2001 902.0 2.1 590.0 3.6 353.8 4.1 943.9 3.8 1,389.5 3.9 130.9 6.2 9.42002 908.4 0.7 591.5 0.2 368.7 4.2 960.1 1.7 1,406.1 1.2 139.4 6.5 9.92003 907.7 − 0.1 587.5 − 0.7 379.0 2.8 966.5 0.7 1,435.5 2.1 147.9 6.1 10.32004 912.0 0.5 600.3 2.2 379.3 0.1 979.6 1.4 1,466.4 2.1 153.8 4.0 10.5
2005 908.9 − 0.3 599.5 − 0.1 377.8 − 0.4 977.3 − 0.2 1,491.7 1.7 159.5 3.7 10.7
2004          Q2 219.9 1.0 142.4 3.4 94.0 0.2 236.4 2.1 360.6 1.7 35.6 4.2 9.9
         Q3 226.5 0.1 153.0 1.7 93.7 − 0.7 246.6 0.8 360.5 1.7 32.4 4.7 9.0         Q4 252.1 − 0.0 164.7 1.5 95.0 − 0.8 259.7 0.7 378.2 3.4 35.1 9.2 9.3
2005          Q1 213.3 − 0.1 141.2 0.7 95.0 − 1.8 236.2 − 0.3 371.4 1.2 52.9 4.3 14.3
         Q2 219.2 − 0.3 142.5 0.0 94.5 0.6 237.0 0.3 369.1 2.3 37.1 4.2 10.1         Q3 225.8 − 0.3 152.5 − 0.3 93.5 − 0.2 245.9 − 0.3 369.3 2.5 33.7 4.2 9.1         Q4 250.7 − 0.6 163.4 − 0.8 94.9 − 0.1 258.3 − 0.5 381.9 1.0 35.7 1.7 9.3
2006          Q1 213.8 0.2 139.9 − 0.9 94.9 − 0.1 234.8 − 0.6 381.5 2.7 53.9 1.8 14.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2006. — *House- plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
holds including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Residence surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — 3Social cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state and fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 6In-
local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), private cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (workplace concept)  2 (workplace concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change change 2000 = 100
1995 89.8 4.9 90.2 4.6 94.8 3.1 88.3 6.1 89.5 5.5 89.9 4.1
1996 92.1 2.6 92.3 2.4 96.2 1.4 91.7 3.8 92.1 2.9 92.5 2.91997 93.5 1.5 93.7 1.5 96.3 0.2 93.4 1.9 93.6 1.7 94.2 1.71998 95.3 1.9 95.4 1.8 97.2 0.9 95.1 1.8 95.1 1.7 95.7 1.61999 98.0 2.9 98.1 2.8 98.6 1.4 98.0 3.1 98.0 3.0 97.4 1.8
2000 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 1.5 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.7
2001 102.0 2.0 101.9 1.9 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.7 1.7 102.2 2.22002 104.7 2.7 104.6 2.7 103.2 1.4 105.0 3.2 104.9 3.1 104.3 2.02003 106.8 2.0 106.8 2.1 104.4 1.2 107.7 2.5 107.4 2.4 . .2004 108.1 1.2 108.2 1.3 104.9 0.5 109.6 1.8 109.4 1.8 . .
2005 109.1 1.0 109.4 1.1 105.2 0.4 111.3 1.5 111.0 1.5 . .
2004          Q3 111.4 1.0 111.5 1.1 104.0 − 0.0 116.7 0.8 116.4 0.8 . .
         Q4 120.8 0.7 121.1 0.9 114.7 − 0.2 121.8 2.0 121.6 2.0 . .
2005          Q1 101.1 1.3 101.4 1.4 99.6 0.4 101.5 1.6 101.2 1.5 . .
         Q2 101.3 1.0 101.6 1.2 101.9 0.5 101.4 1.3 101.2 1.3 . .         Q3 112.4 0.9 112.7 1.1 104.5 0.5 118.6 1.6 118.3 1.6 . .         Q4 121.7 0.7 122.1 0.8 114.9 0.1 123.7 1.5 123.4 1.5 . .
2006          Q1 102.0 0.9 102.4 1.0 100.2 0.6 103.2 1.7 103.3 2.0 . .
         Q2 102.8 1.5 103.2 1.6 . . 103.8 2.3 103.8 2.6 . .
2005          Dec 101.8 0.9 102.1 1.0 . . 102.0 1.9 101.8 1.9 . .
2006          Jan 101.6 0.9 102.0 1.0 . . 101.7 1.4 101.7 1.7 . .
         Feb 102.3 1.5 102.7 1.6 . . 104.1 3.7 104.1 4.0 . .         Mar 102.2 0.3 102.7 0.5 . . 104.0 0.2 104.1 0.5 . .
         Apr 103.8 2.2 104.2 2.4 . . 103.9 2.6 104.0 2.9 . .
         May 102.4 1.2 102.8 1.4 . . 104.0 2.4 104.1 2.7 . .         June 102.1 1.0 102.6 1.2 . . 103.4 1.9 103.4 2.2 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. — 2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2006. — 3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
X External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2005 2006
Item 2003 2004 2005 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May
Current account + 32,443 + 49,868 − 23,148 − 1,365 − 12,829 − 15,218 − 2,951 − 7,328 − 11,921A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,036,038 1,128,189 1,220,048 309,008 327,390 328,074 121,612 107,395 116,438
Imports (fob) 929,915 1,022,899 1,165,961 293,030 322,445 332,694 119,417 106,953 116,169
Balance + 106,120 + 105,291 + 54,085 + 15,978 + 4,945 − 4,618 + 2,196 + 442 + 269
2 Services
Receipts 331,810 362,051 397,286 108,910 105,770 96,001 32,889 32,336 35,995
Expenditure 312,293 333,074 362,531 99,314 94,985 90,871 31,156 29,094 32,245
Balance + 19,516 + 28,977 + 34,754 + 9,596 + 10,784 + 5,130 + 1,733 + 3,242 + 3,750
3 Income − 37,159 − 27,999 − 43,749 − 7,096 − 12,344 − 671 + 59 − 5,146 − 10,742
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 82,103 81,898 83,598 15,294 22,161 29,245 6,118 4,886 5,694
Transfers to non-residents 138,139 138,299 151,836 35,135 38,377 44,302 13,057 10,753 10,892
Balance − 56,034 − 56,404 − 68,238 − 19,842 − 16,215 − 15,057 − 6,938 − 5,867 − 5,199
Capital account + 12,942 + 17,457 + 12,515 + 2,821 + 4,690 + 2,297 + 487 + 522 + 686B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 1,263 − 10,913 + 79,142 + 34,580 − 23,744 + 84,585 + 66,542 + 4,859 + 36,479C)
1 Direct investment − 12,264 − 41,192 − 156,286 − 97,613 − 20,210 − 14,631 + 11,400 − 1,911 − 1,091
By resident units abroad − 147,166 − 141,722 − 232,665 − 115,933 − 47,203 − 42,033 − 1,958 − 12,751 − 15,932By non-resident units in the euro area + 134,906 + 100,525 + 76,380 + 18,321 + 26,993 + 27,403 + 13,358 + 10,841 + 14,842
2 Portfolio investment + 74,877 + 60,291 + 155,411 + 89,784 − 49,137 + 31,246 + 46,358 − 5,230 + 48,633
By resident units abroad − 276,413 − 338,069 − 442,730 − 108,771 − 118,270 − 192,281 − 58,519 − 31,440 − 12,377
Equity − 78,687 − 103,432 − 140,577 − 31,946 − 58,712 − 97,927 − 26,418 − 3,415 + 12,953Bonds and notes − 175,711 − 177,693 − 286,808 − 71,449 − 64,017 − 87,274 − 29,677 − 19,086 − 19,632
Money market instruments − 22,016 − 56,942 − 15,345 − 5,377 + 4,458 − 7,079 − 2,424 − 8,940 − 5,698
By non-resident units in the euro area + 351,289 + 398,360 + 598,140 + 198,556 + 69,132 + 223,526 + 104,877 + 26,210 + 61,010
Equity + 110,250 + 128,058 + 279,474 + 150,700 + 62,549 + 121,263 + 50,331 − 8,832 − 7,963
Bonds and notes + 198,855 + 254,948 + 255,771 + 24,499 + 26,420 + 85,631 + 61,287 + 24,622 + 63,068
Money market instruments + 42,183 + 15,351 + 62,892 + 23,355 − 19,838 + 16,632 − 6,741 + 10,420 + 5,904
3 Financial derivatives − 13,009 − 4,986 − 15,245 − 439 − 8,813 − 8,493 − 2,418 − 5,594 + 2,330
4 Other investment − 79,085 − 37,545 + 76,491 + 40,807 + 45,642 + 69,858 + 4,553 + 18,820 − 11,708
Eurosystem + 9,147 + 6,771 + 4,928 + 4,773 − 4,215 + 6,309 + 2,286 − 2,129 + 5,538
General government − 3,808 − 5,902 + 2,622 + 8,951 − 4,380 + 3,866 + 2,394 − 1,161 − 9,600
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 17,810 − 12,570 + 91,743 + 35,120 + 39,582 + 85,853 + 6,875 + 17,387 − 2,691
Long-term + 1,553 − 23,755 − 49,034 − 7,375 − 34,483 − 756 − 8,852 + 4,034 − 4,891Short-term − 19,363 + 11,189 + 140,777 + 42,494 + 74,065 + 86,610 + 15,728 + 13,353 + 2,200
Other sectors − 66,613 − 25,848 − 22,798 − 8,035 + 14,655 − 26,170 − 7,001 + 4,723 − 4,955
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 28,217 + 12,522 + 18,768 + 2,040 + 8,774 + 6,604 + 6,649 − 1,226 − 1,687
Errors and omissions − 44,124 − 56,414 − 68,510 − 36,037 + 31,883 − 71,665 − 64,079 + 1,947 − 25,244D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
67*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
X External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  
1,2 items  3,4 Services  5 Income transfers assets Total  6 value  7 Omissions
DM million
1992 − 35,438 + 33,656 − 1,426 − 44,983 + 28,481 − 51,167 − 1,963 + 16,574 − 52,888 + 20,827
1993 − 31,450 + 60,304 − 3,217 − 52,549 + 19,095 − 55,083 − 1,915 + 43,448 + 22,795 − 10,0821994 − 49,418 + 71,762 − 1,318 − 62,803 + 2,393 − 59,451 − 2,637 + 60,708 + 2,846 − 8,653
1995 − 42,363 + 85,303 − 4,294 − 63,985 − 3,975 − 55,413 − 3,845 + 50,117 − 10,355 − 3,909
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 791997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,6131998 − 28,695 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,2942001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,7752001 + 425 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,7572002 + 43,375 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,328 − 18,022 − 27,511 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,7162003 + 40,291 + 129,921 − 11,149 − 34,274 − 15,925 − 28,282 + 312 − 48,054 + 445 + 7,451
2004 + 81,925 + 156,096 − 15,243 − 31,254 + 635 − 28,309 + 430 − 114,695 + 1,470 + 32,340
2005 + 92,645 + 160,554 − 20,148 − 27,484 + 8,643 − 28,921 − 1,268 − 100,416 + 2,182 + 9,039
2003          Q3 + 10,334 + 38,430 − 2,672 − 13,384 − 3,384 − 8,656 + 208 + 9,792 − 751 − 20,335
         Q4 + 15,078 + 31,815 − 2,994 − 4,886 − 2,571 − 6,285 − 16 − 27,506 + 1,186 + 12,444
2004          Q1 + 24,233 + 41,359 − 3,325 − 6,993 − 1,151 − 5,656 + 280 + 482 + 205 − 24,996
         Q2 + 24,091 + 43,303 − 3,510 − 5,945 − 2,401 − 7,357 + 177 − 61,906 − 339 + 37,638         Q3 + 13,814 + 36,436 − 4,269 − 11,476 + 1,555 − 8,432 + 191 − 23,665 + 1,568 + 9,660         Q4 + 19,787 + 34,998 − 4,139 − 6,841 + 2,632 − 6,863 − 218 − 29,606 + 37 + 10,037
2005          Q1 + 29,191 + 43,229 − 4,421 − 5,405 + 3,135 − 7,348 − 1,491 − 22,591 − 181 − 5,109
         Q2 + 23,419 + 41,543 − 4,677 − 5,755 − 1,307 − 6,386 + 107 − 24,592 + 1,230 + 1,066         Q3 + 19,505 + 41,059 − 5,182 − 12,038 + 3,294 − 7,628 + 60 − 15,579 − 783 − 3,985         Q4 + 20,530 + 34,723 − 5,868 − 4,287 + 3,520 − 7,558 + 57 − 37,654 + 1,916 + 17,067
2006          Q1 + 26,486 + 39,887 − 4,657 − 5,983 + 3,276 − 6,037 + 153 − 43,369 + 1,082 + 16,730
         Q2  
p + 20,976 + 37,489 − 4,547 − 4,328 − 2,825 − 4,812 + 13 − 50,025 + 367 + 29,036
2004          Jan + 5,984 + 12,498 − 1,362 − 3,797 − 809 − 546 + 13 + 4,947 − 206 − 10,944         Feb + 6,341 + 12,273 − 1,043 − 1,879 − 343 − 2,667 − 179 + 6,043 − 26 − 12,205         Mar + 11,908 + 16,588 − 920 − 1,317 + 0 − 2,443 + 447 − 10,508 + 437 − 1,846
         Apr + 7,716 + 14,371 − 1,068 − 2,189 − 1,610 − 1,788 + 84 − 40,093 − 628 + 32,293
         May + 7,634 + 14,140 − 1,223 − 1,409 − 1,232 − 2,642 − 30 − 7,317 + 607 − 287         June + 8,741 + 14,791 − 1,219 − 2,347 + 442 − 2,926 + 123 − 14,496 − 318 + 5,633
         July + 6,300 + 13,572 − 1,722 − 2,426 + 178 − 3,301 + 164 + 2,957 + 847 − 9,421
         Aug + 2,543 + 10,917 − 1,411 − 4,865 + 300 − 2,398 + 80 − 7,626 + 517 + 5,003         Sep + 4,972 + 11,947 − 1,135 − 4,184 + 1,078 − 2,733 − 52 − 18,996 + 204 + 14,077
         Oct + 6,360 + 12,387 − 1,438 − 2,820 + 709 − 2,478 − 22 − 1,620 + 839 − 4,718
         Nov + 7,293 + 11,763 − 1,336 − 1,592 + 906 − 2,448 − 186 − 19,467 − 182 + 12,360         Dec + 6,134 + 10,848 − 1,365 − 2,429 + 1,017 − 1,938 − 10 − 8,520 − 621 + 2,396
2005          Jan + 7,800 + 13,333 − 1,621 − 1,857 + 581 − 2,637 − 1,221 + 12,505 − 353 − 19,084
         Feb + 9,406 + 13,571 − 1,372 − 1,385 + 963 − 2,372 − 107 − 8,662 + 494 − 637         Mar + 11,985 + 16,325 − 1,428 − 2,163 + 1,591 − 2,340 − 164 − 26,434 − 322 + 14,613
         Apr + 6,307 + 12,719 − 1,474 − 1,737 − 1,809 − 1,392 − 199 − 17,615 + 404 + 11,507
         May + 5,475 + 12,079 − 1,376 − 2,271 − 809 − 2,146 + 272 + 8,126 − 141 − 13,873         June + 11,637 + 16,746 − 1,826 − 1,746 + 1,312 − 2,848 + 34 − 15,103 + 967 + 3,432
         July + 8,341 + 14,466 − 1,662 − 2,913 + 876 − 2,426 + 104 − 5,752 + 324 − 2,693
         Aug + 3,044 + 11,576 − 1,707 − 5,364 + 883 − 2,345 − 86 + 571 + 932 − 3,528         Sep + 8,120 + 15,017 − 1,813 − 3,761 + 1,535 − 2,858 + 42 − 10,398 − 2,039 + 2,236
         Oct + 6,163 + 12,181 − 2,350 − 2,757 + 1,425 − 2,337 + 329 − 6,148 + 207 − 344
         Nov + 8,388 + 13,306 − 1,851 − 1,027 + 1,059 − 3,100 − 108 − 14,159 + 1,059 + 5,879         Dec + 5,980 + 9,236 − 1,668 − 503 + 1,036 − 2,121 − 165 − 17,346 + 650 + 11,532
2006          Jan + 6,254 + 12,583 − 1,714 − 3,043 + 815 − 2,386 + 7 − 11,489 − 26 + 5,227
         Feb + 10,986 + 12,951 − 1,217 − 924 + 1,552 − 1,376 + 283 − 18,367 + 1,534 + 7,099         Mar + 9,246 + 14,354 − 1,726 − 2,016 + 910 − 2,274 − 137 − 13,514 − 426 + 4,404
         Apr + 6,982 + 11,235 − 1,489 − 1,067 + 539 − 2,237 − 144 − 9,868 + 1,475 + 3,030
         May + 3,914 + 12,971 − 1,577 − 1,618 − 4,753 − 1,109 − 282 − 13,147 − 1,067 + 9,515         June  
p + 10,081 + 13,283 − 1,481 − 1,644 + 1,389 − 1,467 + 439 − 27,010 − 41 + 16,491
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, goods returned and value of goods for repair. — 4See footnote 2. —
exports fob. — 2From January 1993, including additional estimates for 5Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are import figure. — 6Financial account balance including change in reserve
included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. — assets. Capital exports: − . — 7 Increase: − . 
3Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
68*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
X External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2006
Country / group of countries  2003  2004  2005 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun  p 
All countries  1 Exports 664,455 731,544 786,186 68,541 70,130 76,959 69,861 72,567 73,523
Imports 534,534 575,448 625,632 55,957 57,180 62,605 58,627 59,596 60,240Balance + 129,921 + 156,096 + 160,554 + 12,583 + 12,951 + 14,354 + 11,235 + 12,971 + 13,283
I Exports 490,672 541,395 581,549 50,828 51,568 57,215 52,358 54,387 ...European countries
Imports 384,939 408,698 445,391 38,853 40,130 44,659 41,834 42,595 ...Balance + 105,733 + 132,697 + 136,157 + 11,976 + 11,439 + 12,556 + 10,524 + 11,792 ...
Exports 426,342 466,326 498,556 43,882 44,171 49,502 44,832 46,635 ... 1 EU member states (25)
Imports 324,043 342,636 368,831 31,562 32,586 36,171 33,975 34,533 ...
Balance + 102,299 + 123,691 + 129,725 + 12,320 + 11,586 + 13,331 + 10,857 + 12,102 ...
Memo item
Exports 369,776 404,770 430,995 37,990 37,938 42,540 38,156 39,684 ...  EU member states (15)
Imports 266,404 285,049 309,453 26,482 27,081 30,310 28,343 28,802 ...Balance + 103,372 + 119,720 + 121,542 + 11,508 + 10,858 + 12,230 + 9,813 + 10,882 ...
Euro-area Exports 288,668 317,696 339,752 30,068 30,244 33,630 30,338 31,494 ...countries Imports 215,705 230,717 249,162 21,163 21,948 24,680 23,006 23,208 ...
Balance + 72,963 + 86,979 + 90,590 + 8,905 + 8,295 + 8,950 + 7,331 + 8,286 ...
of which
Austria Exports 35,857 40,244 42,533 3,769 3,710 4,132 3,866 4,035 ...
Imports 21,453 24,020 25,292 2,145 2,204 2,521 2,401 2,550 ...Balance + 14,404 + 16,224 + 17,241 + 1,624 + 1,506 + 1,612 + 1,465 + 1,485 ...
Belgium and Exports 38,413 43,992 47,749 4,032 4,483 4,932 4,228 4,654 ...Luxembourg Imports 26,132 28,818 33,687 2,858 2,881 3,250 3,081 3,254 ...
Balance + 12,282 + 15,173 + 14,062 + 1,174 + 1,602 + 1,682 + 1,148 + 1,400 ...
France Exports 69,025 74,360 79,871 7,154 6,943 7,790 6,921 7,156 ...
Imports 48,545 51,535 54,627 4,623 4,608 5,780 5,330 5,013 ...Balance + 20,480 + 22,825 + 25,244 + 2,532 + 2,335 + 2,009 + 1,591 + 2,143 ...
Italy Exports 48,414 51,479 54,374 4,898 4,947 5,346 4,878 5,043 ...
Imports 34,259 35,676 35,589 3,014 3,071 3,342 3,184 3,312 ...Balance + 14,156 + 15,803 + 18,785 + 1,884 + 1,876 + 2,004 + 1,694 + 1,731 ...
Netherlands Exports 42,219 46,730 47,799 4,433 4,413 4,900 4,605 4,656 ...
Imports 42,301 46,204 53,371 4,566 5,030 5,381 4,840 4,874 ...Balance − 83 + 526 − 5,573 − 133 − 617 − 481 − 235 − 217 ...
Spain Exports 32,364 36,249 40,395 3,291 3,356 3,720 3,353 3,572 ...
Imports 16,518 17,426 17,985 1,419 1,557 1,803 1,590 1,586 ...Balance + 15,846 + 18,823 + 22,410 + 1,871 + 1,799 + 1,917 + 1,763 + 1,986 ...
Other EU member Exports 137,674 148,630 158,804 13,814 13,928 15,871 14,494 15,141 ...states Imports 108,337 111,919 119,669 10,399 10,637 11,491 10,969 11,325 ...
Balance + 29,336 + 36,711 + 39,135 + 3,415 + 3,290 + 4,381 + 3,525 + 3,816 ...
of which
United Exports 55,597 59,986 61,681 5,380 5,231 6,015 5,258 5,403 ...Kingdom Imports 31,712 34,466 39,414 3,307 3,385 3,723 3,576 3,655 ...
Balance + 23,885 + 25,520 + 22,268 + 2,073 + 1,846 + 2,292 + 1,682 + 1,748 ...
Exports 64,331 75,069 82,993 6,947 7,397 7,713 7,526 7,752 ... 2 Other European
Imports 60,897 66,062 76,561 7,291 7,544 8,488 7,859 8,061 ... countries
Balance + 3,434 + 9,007 + 6,432 − 344 − 147 − 775 − 333 − 310 ...
II Exports 172,329 188,782 203,210 17,512 18,484 19,661 17,435 17,974 ...Non-European
Imports 148,895 166,132 179,603 17,051 16,995 17,889 16,738 16,947 ... countries
Balance + 23,434 + 22,650 + 23,608 + 461 + 1,489 + 1,772 + 697 + 1,027 ...
Exports 12,072 13,785 14,785 1,173 1,294 1,330 1,267 1,361 ... 1 Africa
Imports 10,239 11,092 13,208 1,092 1,496 1,424 1,192 1,375 ...
Balance + 1,832 + 2,694 + 1,577 + 81 − 201 − 94 + 74 − 14 ...
Exports 79,629 84,694 91,970 7,779 8,472 9,362 7,640 8,082 ... 2 America
Imports 51,948 54,679 57,443 5,298 5,444 5,758 5,649 5,658 ...
Balance + 27,681 + 30,016 + 34,527 + 2,481 + 3,028 + 3,604 + 1,991 + 2,424 ...
of which
Exports 61,654 64,860 69,311 5,809 6,392 7,114 5,696 6,140 ... United States
Imports 39,231 40,709 41,342 3,775 3,883 3,961 3,834 3,988 ...Balance + 22,423 + 24,151 + 27,969 + 2,034 + 2,509 + 3,153 + 1,863 + 2,152 ...
Exports 75,620 84,789 90,608 8,107 8,227 8,456 8,072 8,045 ... 3 Asia
Imports 84,783 98,177 106,882 10,435 9,926 10,467 9,710 9,715 ...
Balance − 9,162 − 13,388 − 16,275 − 2,328 − 1,699 − 2,011 − 1,638 − 1,670 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 15,511 17,357 20,478 1,698 1,729 1,914 1,742 1,787 ...
Imports 4,469 4,398 4,967 481 457 407 427 490 ...Balance + 11,043 + 12,959 + 15,512 + 1,218 + 1,272 + 1,507 + 1,314 + 1,296 ...
Japan Exports 11,889 12,719 13,330 1,156 1,239 1,176 1,031 992 ...
Imports 19,684 21,583 21,435 1,780 1,912 2,211 1,959 1,826 ...Balance − 7,795 − 8,865 − 8,104 − 625 − 673 − 1,035 − 928 − 834 ...
Exports 18,265 20,992 21,280 1,883 2,023 2,009 2,061 2,023 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 25,681 32,791 39,891 4,158 3,808 3,944 3,588 3,630 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 7,417 − 11,800 − 18,611 − 2,275 − 1,785 − 1,934 − 1,527 − 1,607 ...Exports 5,008 5,513 5,847 454 490 514 456 485 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 1,925 2,184 2,069 226 130 241 187 198 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,083 + 3,329 + 3,778 + 228 + 361 + 273 + 269 + 287 ...
Memo item
Exports 24,515 26,838 27,542 2,435 2,417 2,566 2,395 2,403 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 27,119 30,012 30,596 3,056 2,685 2,822 2,739 2,700 ... South-East Asia  
3 
Balance − 2,603 − 3,174 − 3,054 − 621 − 268 − 256 − 344 − 297 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by regi on. —
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 
69*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
X External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2001 − 49,862 − 37,821 + 4,254 + 1,080 − 2,431 + 3,488 − 18,433 − 2,544 − 591 − 1,817 − 9,115
2002 − 35,328 − 35,154 + 2,789 + 1,424 − 1,549 + 5,237 − 8,075 − 2,073 + 506 − 1,418 − 16,6032003 − 34,274 − 36,761 + 1,791 + 1,365 − 748 + 5,088 − 5,009 − 1,836 + 1,485 − 1,241 − 14,6842004 − 31,254 − 34,813 + 3,885 + 1,316 − 480 + 5,349 − 6,511 − 1,364 + 973 − 940 + 1,5752005 − 27,484 − 34,957 + 6,358 + 1,629 + 114 + 3,592 − 4,221 − 1,701 + 832 − 1,618 + 10,262
2004          Q4 − 6,841 − 6,013 + 1,251 + 347 − 46 + 1,181 − 3,562 − 343 + 338 − 117 + 2,749
2005          Q1 − 5,405 − 6,222 + 1,014 + 411 + 1,027 + 1,024 − 2,660 − 334 + 124 + 223 + 2,912
         Q2 − 5,755 − 8,045 + 1,465 + 494 − 246 + 833 − 256 − 398 + 107 − 487 − 819         Q3 − 12,038 − 14,207 + 1,830 + 283 − 323 + 853 − 473 − 420 + 87 − 972 + 4,266         Q4 − 4,287 − 6,482 + 2,049 + 442 − 344 + 882 − 833 − 549 + 514 − 382 + 3,902
2006          Q1 − 5,983 − 6,382 + 1,006 + 451 − 521 + 730 − 1,268 − 414 − 34 + 179 + 3,097
         Q2 − 4,328 − 7,976 + 1,564 + 465 − 236 + 998 + 857 − 427 + 327 − 461 − 2,364
2005          Aug − 5,364 − 5,936 + 650 + 110 + 89 + 370 − 647 − 128 + 26 − 305 + 1,189
         Sep − 3,761 − 4,895 + 571 + 192 − 136 + 286 + 220 − 132 + 0 − 333 + 1,868
         Oct − 2,757 − 3,940 + 674 + 145 − 309 + 251 + 422 − 144 + 36 − 148 + 1,573
         Nov − 1,027 − 1,594 + 728 + 127 − 57 + 229 − 460 − 147 + 251 − 141 + 1,201         Dec − 503 − 948 + 647 + 170 + 22 + 402 − 795 − 258 + 227 − 93 + 1,128
2006          Jan − 3,043 − 2,379 + 311 + 176 − 386 + 185 − 950 − 153 − 103 + 60 + 755
         Feb − 924 − 1,626 + 413 + 162 + 10 + 246 − 131 − 114 + 90 + 60 + 1,492         Mar − 2,016 − 2,377 + 282 + 113 − 145 + 299 − 188 − 146 − 21 + 60 + 850
         Apr − 1,067 − 2,633 + 542 + 88 − 225 + 375 + 786 − 110 + 121 − 146 + 685
         May − 1,618 − 2,637 + 632 + 291 − 33 + 289 − 160 − 175 + 130 − 169 − 4,584         June − 1,644 − 2,706 + 389 + 86 + 22 + 334 + 231 − 143 + 76 − 146 + 1,535
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2001 − 26,856 − 16,367 − 14,257 − 12,587 − 2,110 − 10,489 − 3,520 − 6,969 − 387 − 1,361 + 974
2002 − 27,511 − 15,710 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 2,665 − 11,801 − 3,470 − 8,331 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,2052003 − 28,282 − 18,277 − 15,428 − 13,731 − 2,849 − 10,005 − 3,332 − 6,672 + 312 − 1,238 + 1,5502004 − 28,309 − 17,128 − 14,307 − 12,730 − 2,821 − 11,180 − 3,180 − 8,000 + 430 − 1,094 + 1,5242005 − 28,921 − 17,907 − 16,253 − 14,725 − 1,654 − 11,014 − 2,926 − 8,088 − 1,268 − 3,419 + 2,151
2004          Q4 − 6,863 − 4,206 − 3,097 − 2,763 − 1,109 − 2,658 − 795 − 1,863 − 218 − 340 + 122
2005          Q1 − 7,348 − 4,671 − 3,739 − 3,194 − 932 − 2,678 − 732 − 1,946 − 1,491 − 2,038 + 547
         Q2 − 6,386 − 3,253 − 3,762 − 3,322 + 509 − 3,134 − 732 − 2,402 + 107 − 315 + 422         Q3 − 7,628 − 4,927 − 4,457 − 4,138 − 470 − 2,702 − 732 − 1,970 + 60 − 331 + 391         Q4 − 7,558 − 5,057 − 4,296 − 4,071 − 762 − 2,501 − 732 − 1,769 + 57 − 734 + 791
2006          Q1 − 6,037 − 3,479 − 2,934 − 2,433 − 545 − 2,558 − 732 − 1,826 + 153 − 310 + 463
         Q2 − 4,812 − 1,732 − 3,541 − 3,234 + 1,809 − 3,081 − 732 − 2,349 + 13 − 664 + 677
2005          Aug − 2,345 − 1,395 − 1,203 − 1,054 − 192 − 949 − 244 − 706 − 86 − 142 + 55
         Sep − 2,858 − 1,969 − 1,908 − 1,867 − 61 − 888 − 244 − 644 + 42 − 101 + 143
         Oct − 2,337 − 1,440 − 1,057 − 998 − 383 − 898 − 244 − 654 + 329 − 109 + 438
         Nov − 3,100 − 2,153 − 1,846 − 1,757 − 307 − 947 − 244 − 703 − 108 − 104 − 4         Dec − 2,121 − 1,465 − 1,393 − 1,317 − 72 − 656 − 244 − 412 − 165 − 521 + 356
2006          Jan − 2,386 − 1,555 − 1,402 − 1,143 − 152 − 832 − 244 − 588 + 7 − 81 + 88
         Feb − 1,376 − 538 − 156 + 22 − 381 − 839 − 244 − 595 + 283 − 77 + 359         Mar − 2,274 − 1,387 − 1,376 − 1,313 − 11 − 887 − 244 − 644 − 137 − 152 + 16
         Apr − 2,237 − 1,327 − 1,480 − 1,375 + 152 − 910 − 244 − 666 − 144 − 80 − 64
         May − 1,109 + 82 − 1,480 − 1,385 + 1,562 − 1,191 − 244 − 947 − 282 − 137 − 145         June − 1,467 − 486 − 581 − 474 + 94 − 980 − 244 − 737 + 439 − 447 + 885
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
X External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2005 2006
Item 2003 2004 2005 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Apr May June
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 203,369 − 260,875 − 368,560 − 66,268 − 40,092 − 167,991 − 93,576 − 17,139 − 30,546 − 45,891
1 Direct investment  1 − 5,470 − 1,516 − 36,695 − 7,402 + 4,008 − 16,070 − 12,059 − 9,273 + 7,010 − 9,797
Equity capital − 33,417 + 17,642 − 16,779 − 1,694 − 3,646 − 6,493 − 11,601 + 194 − 5,666 − 6,128
Reinvested earnings  2 + 3,784 − 5,605 − 9,715 − 2,773 − 2,449 − 3,182 − 1,727 − 713 + 233 − 1,247
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors + 24,163 − 13,553 − 10,201 − 2,934 + 10,103 − 6,394 + 1,269 − 8,753 + 12,444 − 2,421
2 Portfolio investment − 41,720 − 110,592 − 210,891 − 29,129 − 59,927 − 62,144 − 29,660 − 3,797 − 8,908 − 16,955
Equity 3 + 4,468 + 3,520 − 22,884 − 3,435 − 20,584 − 1,220 + 11,320 + 4,681 + 4,568 + 2,071
Mutual fund shares  4 − 2,795 − 10,933 − 39,864 − 12,000 − 5,260 − 18,413 + 2,654 − 594 + 1,478 + 1,769
Bonds and notes  5 − 53,224 − 90,734 − 143,604 − 9,540 − 32,630 − 42,262 − 36,019 − 3,840 − 13,472 − 18,708
Money market instruments + 9,831 − 12,445 − 4,540 − 4,154 − 1,454 − 250 − 7,615 − 4,045 − 1,482 − 2,088
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 1,901 − 5,412 − 4,697 + 4,358 − 3,159 − 5,457 + 2,037 − 1,393 + 1,778 + 1,651
4 Other investment − 154,722 − 144,826 − 118,461 − 33,313 + 17,070 − 85,401 − 54,260 − 4,151 − 29,359 − 20,750
MFIs  7,8 − 122,352 − 121,833 − 85,781 − 19,195 + 37,903 − 107,125 − 56,860 − 7,891 − 2,424 − 46,544
Long-term − 32,602 + 5,854 − 69,977 − 21,339 − 16,496 − 15,280 − 17,130 − 1,355 − 4,970 − 10,804
Short-term − 89,750 − 127,687 − 15,804 + 2,144 + 54,399 − 91,845 − 39,731 − 6,536 + 2,546 − 35,740
Enterprises and households − 33,329 − 22,284 − 13,763 − 8,264 + 9,482 − 13,003 + 1,343 + 726 − 828 + 1,445
Long-term − 4,920 − 7,482 − 8,924 − 1,800 − 2,085 − 3,220 − 2,823 − 1,049 − 843 − 931
Short-term  7 − 28,409 − 14,802 − 4,838 − 6,463 + 11,567 − 9,783 + 4,166 + 1,775 + 15 + 2,376
General government + 728 + 2,143 + 3,156 + 3,753 − 7,232 + 7,438 − 13,165 − 2,923 − 5,764 − 4,478
Long-term + 156 + 49 + 7,695 + 4,734 + 179 + 244 + 250 − 190 − 45 + 485Short-term  
7 + 572 + 2,094 − 4,539 − 981 − 7,412 + 7,194 − 13,415 − 2,733 − 5,719 − 4,964
Bundesbank + 230 − 2,851 − 22,073 − 9,607 − 23,082 + 27,288 + 14,422 + 5,937 − 20,343 + 28,828
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) + 445 + 1,470 + 2,182 − 783 + 1,916 + 1,082 + 367 + 1,475 − 1,067 − 41
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 155,315 + 146,180 + 268,145 + 50,688 + 2,439 + 124,621 + 43,551 + 7,271 + 17,399 + 18,881
1 Direct investment  1 + 25,873 − 12,172 + 26,264 + 877 + 16,472 + 297 + 5,178 − 455 + 2,897 + 2,736
Equity capital + 44,233 + 27,493 + 12,103 − 426 + 4,714 − 487 + 1,227 + 116 + 558 + 553Reinvested earnings  
2 − 3,163 + 677 + 6,530 + 2,770 + 2,033 + 1,789 + 956 + 433 + 555 − 32
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors − 15,197 − 40,343 + 7,632 − 1,467 + 9,725 − 1,006 + 2,995 − 1,004 + 1,784 + 2,215
2 Portfolio investment + 112,629 + 120,068 + 196,987 + 35,560 + 15,039 + 60,906 + 25,003 − 18,047 + 10,552 + 32,498
Equity  3 + 23,093 − 12,763 + 40,030 + 8,408 + 140 + 656 + 12,130 − 25,047 + 5,759 + 31,418
Mutual fund shares − 1,757 + 4,671 + 932 + 1,861 − 1,903 + 4,976 + 1,554 + 1,316 + 284 − 46Bonds and notes  
5 + 69,628 + 142,689 + 158,690 + 26,848 + 24,663 + 45,965 + 8,557 − 933 + 4,136 + 5,355
Money market instruments + 21,665 − 14,529 − 2,665 − 1,558 − 7,862 + 9,308 + 2,762 + 6,617 + 373 − 4,229
3 Other investment + 16,813 + 38,285 + 44,893 + 14,252 − 29,072 + 63,419 + 13,369 + 25,774 + 3,950 − 16,354
MFIs  7,8 + 10,708 + 32,337 + 22,455 + 3,202 − 27,316 + 58,864 + 833 + 22,684 + 7,768 − 29,619
Long-term − 5,964 − 10,083 − 9,830 − 749 − 11,354 − 2,988 + 28 − 1,027 − 2,333 + 3,388
Short-term + 16,672 + 42,421 + 32,285 + 3,951 − 15,962 + 61,852 + 805 + 23,711 + 10,101 − 33,007
Enterprises and households + 429 + 11,057 + 20,803 + 12,723 − 1,413 + 7,342 + 14,917 + 2,553 − 730 + 13,094
Long-term − 297 + 7,810 + 7,836 + 4,564 − 3,296 + 79 + 9,129 + 1,981 + 28 + 7,120
Short-term  7 + 726 + 3,247 + 12,967 + 8,160 + 1,882 + 7,263 + 5,788 + 572 − 758 + 5,974
General government + 3,693 − 2,658 + 3,740 − 3,419 + 1,049 − 2,850 − 1,993 + 2,144 − 4,567 + 431
Long-term + 4,872 − 1,425 + 2,818 + 607 − 381 − 1,264 − 329 − 353 − 416 + 440Short-term  
7 − 1,179 − 1,233 + 922 − 4,026 + 1,430 − 1,586 − 1,664 + 2,497 − 4,152 − 9
Bundesbank + 1,983 − 2,451 − 2,105 + 1,746 − 1,391 + 63 − 387 − 1,606 + 1,480 − 260
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 48,054 − 114,695 − 100,416 − 15,579 − 37,654 − 43,369 − 50,025 − 9,868 − 13,147 − 27,010
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
71*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
X External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,8711996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2005          Feb 75,603 72,794 36,348 6,538 29,908 312 1,809 687 5,542 70,061
         Mar 100,452 73,813 36,399 6,143 31,271 312 25,627 699 6,322 94,131
         Apr 87,967 74,123 36,905 6,096 31,123 312 12,782 750 6,123 81,845
         May 107,063 76,431 37,282 6,340 32,809 350 29,451 831 6,292 100,771         June 90,055 78,700 39,816 5,830 33,054 350 10,141 864 5,822 84,232
         July 90,752 77,205 38,927 5,007 33,270 350 12,291 907 6,491 84,261
         Aug 109,966 76,342 39,121 4,990 32,231 350 32,397 878 5,456 104,511         Sep 103,805 82,825 43,325 4,994 34,506 350 19,747 883 7,580 96,225
         Oct 111,515 82,506 43,325 4,979 34,202 350 27,777 882 7,374 104,141
         Nov 127,813 85,143 46,240 5,012 33,890 350 41,420 901 6,411 121,403         Dec 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006          Jan 104,778 89,064 51,820 4,477 32,766 350 14,499 865 6,307 98,471
         Feb 109,677 88,029 51,646 3,829 32,554 350 20,450 847 5,663 104,013         Mar 105,884 89,157 53,173 3,755 32,229 350 15,543 834 6,286 99,598
         Apr 100,233 89,433 56,106 3,685 29,643 350 9,606 844 4,632 95,601
         May 120,684 89,520 55,979 3,356 30,184 350 29,950 865 6,070 114,614         June 88,241 85,905 51,983 3,639 30,284 350 1,121 866 5,839 82,402
         July 102,264 89,167 54,918 3,465 30,784 350 11,852 894 6,183 96,081
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
72*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
X External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2002  3 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003 362,099 86,627 275,472 159,653 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2004 377,540 98,632 278,908 159,764 119,144 112,342 6,802 506,434 50,211 456,223 361,111 95,112 63,762 31,3502005 409,493 97,333 312,160 179,738 132,422 125,497 6,925 548,107 65,557 482,550 375,114 107,436 73,270 34,166
2006          Jan 413,021 102,082 310,939 177,792 133,147 126,013 7,134 546,504 69,528 476,976 373,415 103,561 68,362 35,199
         Feb  
r 428,746 105,887 322,859 188,491 134,368 127,142 7,226 562,002 74,853 487,149 381,578 105,571 69,063 36,508
         Mar  r 438,389 109,651 328,738 189,098 139,640 132,265 7,375 569,382 74,719 494,663 384,392 110,271 73,055 37,216
         Apr  r 442,254 107,018 335,236 197,825 137,411 129,853 7,558 567,708 76,597 491,111 382,446 108,665 70,879 37,786
         May  r 441,393 108,835 332,558 194,397 138,161 130,536 7,625 579,791 77,080 502,711 393,902 108,809 70,352 38,457
         June 441,999 109,025 332,974 192,017 140,957 133,422 7,535 592,753 86,586 506,167 394,466 111,701 72,827 38,874
Industrial countries 1
 
2002  3 278,074 62,861 215,213 133,509 81,704 75,996 5,708 493,155 55,770 437,385 372,464 64,921 50,731 14,190
2003 310,454 85,390 225,064 144,980 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,2202004 335,809 97,485 238,324 148,649 89,675 84,903 4,772 468,592 48,304 420,288 349,293 70,995 53,480 17,5152005 362,704 95,847 266,857 167,314 99,543 94,278 5,265 508,106 63,924 444,182 364,680 79,502 60,907 18,595
2006          Jan 366,534 100,625 265,909 165,418 100,491 95,040 5,451 506,324 67,822 438,502 363,159 75,343 56,105 19,238
         Feb  
r 381,166 104,420 276,746 175,197 101,549 95,993 5,556 521,088 73,120 447,968 371,086 76,882 57,094 19,788
         Mar  r 389,976 108,139 281,837 175,902 105,935 100,214 5,721 528,208 73,054 455,154 374,237 80,917 60,662 20,255
         Apr  r 393,119 105,455 287,664 184,169 103,495 97,579 5,916 526,421 74,945 451,476 371,756 79,720 59,261 20,459
         May  r 391,394 107,282 284,112 180,445 103,667 97,669 5,998 537,559 75,138 462,421 383,199 79,222 58,711 20,511
         June 390,600 107,503 283,097 177,263 105,834 99,856 5,978 547,920 84,669 463,251 381,615 81,636 61,052 20,584
EU member states 1
 
2002  3 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003 230,673 81,430 149,243 94,092 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,6422004 259,480 92,867 166,613 101,254 65,359 61,563 3,796 376,461 43,838 332,623 284,173 48,450 36,494 11,9562005 270,808 91,882 178,926 108,523 70,403 66,156 4,247 414,377 60,186 354,191 300,022 54,169 41,305 12,864
2006          Jan 276,186 96,255 179,931 108,445 71,486 67,101 4,385 414,392 63,493 350,899 299,019 51,880 38,636 13,244
         Feb  
r 289,276 99,704 189,572 116,727 72,845 68,414 4,431 429,372 68,641 360,731 307,641 53,090 39,539 13,551
         Mar  r 296,750 103,472 193,278 117,502 75,776 71,208 4,568 434,660 68,417 366,243 310,217 56,026 42,087 13,939
         Apr  r 301,359 100,688 200,671 126,093 74,578 69,879 4,699 433,341 70,337 363,004 308,131 54,873 40,634 14,239
         May  r 298,392 102,265 196,127 121,895 74,232 69,495 4,737 442,879 70,498 372,381 317,768 54,613 40,288 14,325
         June 298,953 101,866 197,087 120,521 76,566 71,842 4,724 453,570 79,944 373,626 317,693 55,933 41,671 14,262
of which:  Euro-area member states 
 
2002  3 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,4042004 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 305,864 28,295 277,569 244,860 32,709 24,258 8,4512005 175,532 59,160 116,372 69,048 47,324 44,369 2,955 332,261 29,443 302,818 268,483 34,335 25,225 9,110
2006          Jan 174,379 58,249 116,130 68,261 47,869 44,842 3,027 332,197 30,630 301,567 269,241 32,326 23,020 9,306
         Feb 184,337 62,371 121,966 73,039 48,927 45,849 3,078 341,634 32,254 309,380 276,337 33,043 23,559 9,484         Mar 189,597 65,739 123,858 73,274 50,584 47,464 3,120 345,003 32,629 312,374 277,453 34,921 25,378 9,543
         Apr 191,487 65,528 125,959 75,949 50,010 46,779 3,231 344,595 35,781 308,814 274,514 34,300 24,475 9,825
         May 192,803 65,201 127,602 77,835 49,767 46,440 3,327 354,313 36,220 318,093 284,183 33,910 24,038 9,872         June 192,640 64,074 128,566 77,322 51,244 47,949 3,295 356,714 37,658 319,056 284,488 34,568 24,842 9,726
Emerging economies and developing countries 2
 
2002  3 53,597 956 52,641 15,404 37,237 35,410 1,827 40,268 1,926 38,342 15,386 22,956 11,891 11,065
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,2492004 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,8352005 46,789 1,486 45,303 12,424 32,879 31,219 1,660 40,001 1,633 38,368 10,434 27,934 12,363 15,571
2006          Jan 46,487 1,457 45,030 12,374 32,656 30,973 1,683 40,180 1,706 38,474 10,256 28,218 12,257 15,961
         Feb 47,580 1,467 46,113 13,294 32,819 31,149 1,670 40,914 1,733 39,181 10,492 28,689 11,969 16,720         Mar 48,413 1,512 46,901 13,196 33,705 32,051 1,654 41,174 1,665 39,509 10,155 29,354 12,393 16,961
         Apr 49,135 1,563 47,572 13,656 33,916 32,274 1,642 41,287 1,652 39,635 10,690 28,945 11,618 17,327
         May 49,999 1,553 48,446 13,952 34,494 32,867 1,627 42,232 1,942 40,290 10,703 29,587 11,641 17,946         June 51,399 1,522 49,877 14,754 35,123 33,566 1,557 44,833 1,917 42,916 12,851 30,065 11,775 18,290
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in 2004, including the new member states: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, E stonia,
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases Slovenia. — 2All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. —
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- 3Change in the reporting population owing to an increase in the
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X.7. — 1From May exemption limit. 
73*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2006
X External sector
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Switzerland Norway Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK GBP SEK CHF NOK CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 2.926  27.421 115.740 25.580 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 2.753  26.912 111.198 25.143 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 2.483  21.248 111.949 23.303 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 2.4816 21.013 118.712 22.982 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 2.2620 20.116 121.240 22.614 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 2.3478 22.434 121.891 23.292 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 2.8410 22.718 119.508 24.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 2.9142 22.128 121.414 23.297 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 0.65874 8.8075 1.6003 8.3104 1.5840 1.6523 2.0145
2000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 0.60948 8.4452 1.5579 8.1129 1.3706 1.5889 2.0288
2001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 0.62187 9.2551 1.5105 8.0484 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 0.62883 9.1611 1.4670 7.5086 1.4838 1.7376 2.03662003 1.1312 130.97 7.4307 0.69199 9.1242 1.5212 8.0033 1.5817 1.7379 1.94382004 1.2439 134.44 7.4399 0.67866 9.1243 1.5438 8.3697 1.6167 1.6905 1.8731
2005 1.2441 136.85 7.4518 0.68380 9.2822 1.5483 8.0092 1.5087 1.6320 1.76602005          Jan 1.3119 135.63 7.4405 0.69867 9.0476 1.5469 8.2125 1.6060 1.7147 1.8620
         Feb 1.3014 136.55 7.4427 0.68968 9.0852 1.5501 8.3199 1.6128 1.6670 1.8192         Mar 1.3201 138.83 7.4466 0.69233 9.0884 1.5494 8.1880 1.6064 1.6806 1.8081
         Apr 1.2938 138.84 7.4499 0.68293 9.1670 1.5475 8.1763 1.5991 1.6738 1.7967
         May 1.2694 135.37 7.4443 0.68399 9.1931 1.5449 8.0814 1.5942 1.6571 1.7665         June 1.2165 132.22 7.4448 0.66895 9.2628 1.5391 7.8932 1.5111 1.5875 1.7175
         July 1.2037 134.75 7.4584 0.68756 9.4276 1.5578 7.9200 1.4730 1.6002 1.7732
         Aug 1.2292 135.98 7.4596 0.68527 9.3398 1.5528 7.9165 1.4819 1.6144 1.7675         Sep 1.2256 136.06 7.4584 0.67760 9.3342 1.5496 7.8087 1.4452 1.6009 1.7515
         Oct 1.2015 138.05 7.4620 0.68137 9.4223 1.5490 7.8347 1.4149 1.5937 1.7212
         Nov 1.1786 139.59 7.4596 0.67933 9.5614 1.5449 7.8295 1.3944 1.6030 1.7088         Dec 1.1856 140.58 7.4541 0.67922 9.4316 1.5479 7.9737 1.3778 1.5979 1.7072
2006          Jan 1.2103 139.82 7.4613 0.68598 9.3111 1.5494 8.0366 1.4025 1.6152 1.7616
         Feb 1.1938 140.77 7.4641 0.68297 9.3414 1.5580 8.0593 1.3723 1.6102 1.7741         Mar 1.2020 140.96 7.4612 0.68935 9.4017 1.5691 7.9775 1.3919 1.6540 1.8956
         Apr 1.2271 143.59 7.4618 0.69463 9.3346 1.5748 7.8413 1.4052 1.6662 1.9733
         May 1.2770 142.70 7.4565 0.68330 9.3310 1.5564 7.7988 1.4173 1.6715 2.0240         June 1.2650 145.11 7.4566 0.68666 9.2349 1.5601 7.8559 1.4089 1.7104 2.0462
         July 1.2684 146.70 7.4602 0.68782 9.2170 1.5687 7.9386 1.4303 1.6869 2.0551
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 2.15 p.m. ECB time. For additional euro reference exchange
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle rates of the ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5,
and end of the month. — 2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- Exchange rate statistics. 
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the euro-area member states, the Deutsche Mark value of
the ECU * and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. — 1As per data from the European exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). — 3Applicable from 1 January
Commission. — 2Up to 1998, reciprocal values of the exchange rates for the 1999. — 4Applicable from 1 January 2001. — 5Deutsche Mark conversion
Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999, euro reference rate. 
74*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
X External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo  item Effective nominal exchange rates of
Indicators of the German economy’s selected foreign currencies against the
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  1,2 currencies of 19 industrial countries  1,3
EER-23  4 EER-42  5 19 industrial countries  3 49 countries  6
In real terms
based on the
In real terms unit labour In real termsbased on the In real terms costs of the based on the based on the
consumer based on the national consumer deflators of Pound Japanese
Period yen Nominal prices GDP deflator  7economy  7 Nominal prices total sales  7based on consumer prices US dollar sterling
1999 95.9 95.9 95.6 96.5 96.5 95.8 97.7 98.1 97.7 100.8 102.3 105.1
2000 86.1 86.0 85.5 85.2 87.9 85.8 91.4 92.7 91.2 105.4 105.2 117.9
2001 86.7 86.8 86.5 84.8 90.4 87.0 91.3 93.2 91.5 112.0 103.6 106.72002 89.2 90.4 89.9 88.0 94.8 90.9 92.1 94.1 92.6 110.7 104.2 100.82003 99.9 101.7 101.2 99.3 106.6 101.6 95.7 97.8 97.2 97.7 99.2 99.92004 103.8 105.9 104.9 103.4 111.0 105.4 96.0 99.3 98.8 89.8 103.4 101.7
2005 102.9 105.2 104.2 101.4 109.5 103.5
p 94.8 99.5 97.6 88.7 102.9 99.8
2001          Q1 88.3 88.0 87.6 86.2 90.9 87.8 91.9 93.8 92.1 109.3 102.4 108.1
         Q2 85.3 85.4 84.9 83.3 88.8 85.6 90.7 92.6 90.8 113.4 104.1 106.9         Q3 86.4 86.6 86.4 84.2 90.5 87.0 91.0 93.0 91.5 112.2 103.9 106.8         Q4 86.8 87.3 87.1 85.6 91.2 87.6 91.6 93.2 91.6 113.1 104.0 104.9
2002          Q1 86.0 86.9 86.4 84.6 90.4 86.8 91.2 93.2 91.0 116.6 104.9 98.8
         Q2 87.8 89.0 88.2 86.6 93.0 89.2 91.6 93.7 91.7 112.1 103.5 100.8         Q3 90.9 92.1 91.8 89.8 97.2 93.1 92.5 94.6 93.7 107.0 103.9 103.7         Q4 91.9 93.3 93.2 90.8 98.6 94.2 93.2 94.9 94.1 107.1 104.4 100.1
2003          Jan 95.3 96.8 102.3 97.6 96.1 95.5 103.0 102.6 100.4
         Feb 96.6 98.1 97.1 95.2 103.7 98.9 94.6 96.8 96.4 102.2 101.2 99.2         Mar 97.4 99.0 104.4 99.5 97.1 96.5 101.4 99.3 99.8
         Apr 97.9 99.6 104.6 99.6 97.2 96.5 101.4 98.7 98.6
         May 101.8 103.6 101.9 99.7 108.5 103.3 96.2 98.7 98.1 96.7 96.9 97.7         June 102.2 104.2 108.8 103.8 99.0 98.5 96.1 98.9 96.3
         July 101.0 102.9 107.2 102.3 98.3 97.5 97.8 98.5 97.3
         Aug 99.8 101.7 101.7 100.1 106.0 101.1 95.8 97.8 96.9 99.1 98.1 98.3         Sep 99.6 101.6 105.9 101.0 97.4 96.8 97.2 98.2 101.1
         Oct 101.3 103.3 108.0 102.9 98.0 97.6 93.3 98.8 103.7
         Nov 101.2 103.3 104.0 101.9 108.0 102.9 96.1 98.0 97.6 93.0 99.5 103.9         Dec 104.2 106.3 111.2 106.0 99.0 99.0 90.6 99.5 102.9
2004          Jan 105.4 107.4 112.5 106.9 99.7 99.7 88.9 101.6 102.9
         Feb 105.3 107.3 105.8 104.8 112.3 106.8 96.6 99.5 99.5 89.3 104.1 102.4         Mar 103.4 105.4 110.2 104.7 99.0 98.7 90.9 104.2 102.1
         Apr 101.6 103.7 108.3 103.0 98.5 97.8 91.8 104.3 104.0
         May 102.4 104.4 103.3 102.1 109.5 104.1 95.3 98.8 98.4 93.4 103.7 100.0         June 102.3 104.2 109.6 104.1 98.4 98.2 91.9 104.9 101.6
         July 102.8 104.9 110.1 104.5 98.9 98.4 90.9 105.0 101.2
         Aug 102.7 104.8 103.8 102.4 109.9 104.4 95.7 99.1 98.5 91.3 104.6 100.5         Sep 103.0 105.0 110.3 104.6 99.1 98.4 90.7 102.8 100.8
         Oct 104.2 106.2 111.5 105.7 99.5 99.0 88.9 101.8 100.8
         Nov 105.6 107.7 106.6 104.5 113.1 107.1 96.3 99.9 99.4 85.4 101.4 102.6         Dec 107.1 109.3 114.4 108.5 100.7 100.1 84.3 102.8 102.0
2005          Jan 105.8 108.0 112.9 106.9 100.3 99.2 85.3 101.7 103.6
         Feb 105.1 107.2 107.0 104.2 111.9 105.9
p 96.3 100.1 98.8 86.1 102.9 102.4
         Mar 106.0 108.2 112.9 106.8 100.5 99.1 85.3 103.0 101.4
         Apr 105.1 107.2 111.9 105.8 99.9 98.6 86.8 104.0 100.4
         May 104.0 106.2 104.6 102.1 110.6 104.6 p 95.0 99.7 98.1 87.8 103.2 102.0
         June 101.2 103.5 107.6 101.9 98.6 96.7 89.6 104.4 102.0
         July 101.7 103.9 108.0 102.0 99.0 96.9 90.7 101.6 99.8
         Aug 102.3 104.5 103.0 100.1 108.7 102.7 p 94.1 99.3 97.3 89.2 102.4 99.9
         Sep 101.8 103.9 108.2 102.3 99.3 97.2 88.8 103.4 99.5
         Oct 101.4 103.5 107.8 101.6 99.2 96.8 90.5 102.7 97.1
         Nov 100.7 103.0 102.4 99.3 106.9 100.9 p 93.6 99.0 96.4 92.3 102.7 95.2
         Dec 100.7 103.1 106.9 101.0 99.0 96.4 91.6 102.9 94.7
2006          Jan 101.4 103.6 107.5 101.3 99.1 96.2 90.0 102.2 96.3
         Feb 100.7 103.0 102.5 99.5 106.6 100.5 p 93.8 99.0 96.0 91.0 102.5 94.9
         Mar 101.5 103.9 107.4 101.3 99.1 96.2 90.8 101.7 95.2
         Apr 102.7 105.0 108.6 102.3 99.7 96.8 89.7 101.5 94.5
         May 103.8 106.0 ... ... 110.3 103.8 p 94.2 99.9 97.4 86.1 103.8 96.7
         June 103.9 106.2 110.9 104.2 100.0 97.7 87.2 103.3 94.7
         July 104.3 106.5 111.0 104.4 100.1 97.8 87.6 103.3 93.8
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of United Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these calcula tions
the currency concerned. — 1The method of calculation is consistent with are based on manufactured goods trade between 1999 and 2001 and
the procedure used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of capture third-market effects. Where consumer prices were not yet available,
the euro (see Monthly Bulletin, November 2001, pp 51−65). In contrast to estimates have been used. For details of the methodology, see
footnote 4, the weights used are based on the relevant trade in the period ECB, Monthly Bulletin, September 2004, pp 69−72 and the ECB’s Occasional
from 1995 to 1997. — 2Decline in the figures implies an increase in Paper No 2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website
competitiveness. — 3Euro-area countries as well as Canada, Denmark, (www.ecb.int). — 5ECB calculations. In addition to the countries belonging
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. — to the EER-23 group (see footnote 4), this group also includes the following4ECB calculations based on the weighted averages of the effective countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, India, Indonesia,
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Romania,countries: Australia, Canada, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —Estonia, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Norway, 6Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-42 group except
Poland, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania and Malta. — 7 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X External sector

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-ision. For a small fee to cover costs, afile which is updated monthly andcontains approximately 40,000 timeseries published by the Bundesbankcan be obtained on magnetic tape cas-sette or CD-ROM from the DivisionStatistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2005 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2006 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006

Monthly Report articles
September 2005
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2004
– Recent trends in individual payments
– The role of volatility patterns in financial mar-
kets
– Potential financial risk faced by the Internation-
al Monetary Fund
October 2005
– Germany’s financial linkage to the EU budget
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
– an analysis based on a new dataset
– New transparency rules for credit institutions
– Risk appetite in a dynamic financial market
environment
November 2005
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2005
December 2005
– Price-setting behaviour in Germany– The road to the Single Euro Payments Area
January 2006
– Determinants of the current accounts in central
and east European EU member states and therole of German direct investment
– Securities market regulation: international ap-
proaches
February 2006
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2005-06March 2006
– German balance of payments in 2005– New legal and regulatory framework for the
German securitisation and Pfandbrief market
– A disaggregated framework for analysing
public finances: Germany’s fiscal track recordbetween 2000 and 2005
April 2006
– Determinants of the term structure of interest
rates – approaches to combining arbitrage-freemodels and monetary macroeconomics
– The creation of a single list of eligible collateral
throughout the euro area
May 2006
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2006
June 2006
– Investment and financing in 2005– Concentration risk in credit portfolios
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2004
July 2006
– Recent developments in German banks’ lend-
ing to domestic enterprises and households
– State government finances in Germany
– Derivatives and their feedback effects on the
spot markets
August 2006
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2006
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19962
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
2
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
2
The market for German Federal securities,May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 2003
2
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-rungsunion, April 2005
2
European economic and monetary union,
September 2005
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20062
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200332 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, June 20062,4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20002
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2005,
July 20065
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
2006
6 Ratios from financial statements of German
enterprises 2002 to 2003, December 20055
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, February 20052
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 International capital links,
April 20051, 5
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2005
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20062
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2006
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available in German only.
3Solely available on the internet, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Stat-
istics”, “External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
4Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.5Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2006
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
15/2006
Internalization and internationalization under com-
peting real options
16/2006
Consumer price adjustment under the microscope:
Germany in a period of low inflation
17/2006
Identifying the role of labor markets for monetarypolicy in an estimated DSGE model
18/2006
Do monetary indicators (still) predict euro areainflation?
19/2006
Fool the markets? Creative accounting, fiscal trans-parency and sovereign risk premia
20/2006
How would formula apportionment in the EU
affect the distribution and the size of the corporatetax base? An analysis based on German multi-nationals
21/2006
Monetary and fiscal policy interactions in a NewKeynesian model with capital accumulation andnon-Ricardian consumers
22/2006
Real-time forecasting and political stock marketanomalies: evidence for the U.S.
23/2006
A reappraisal of the evidence on PPP: a systematicinvestigation into MA roots in panel unit root testsand their implications
24/2006
Margins of multinational labor substitutionSeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
01/2006
Forecasting stock market volatility with macroeco-
nomic variables in real time
02/2006
Finance and growth in a bank-based economy: is itquantity or quality that matters?
03/2006
Measuring business sector concentration by aninfection model
04/2006
Heterogeneity in lending and sectoral growth:
evidence from German bank-level data
05/2006
Does diversification improve the performance ofGerman banks? Evidence from individual bank
loan portfolios
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20012
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20012
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19992
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the internet.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

