MONTHLY REPORT
FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE
2007
Vol 59
No 2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (internet edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 16 February 2007.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
bank can be downloaded from our website.
The statistical data are also published on the
internet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-
tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-
tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
around the turn of 2006-07 5
Overview 6
Global and European setting 11
Monetary policy and banking business 20
Money market management and
liquidity needs 21
Financial markets 28
The relationship between currency
futures and exchange rate
developments 30
Outflows from domestic mutual funds
in 2006 37
Economic conditions in Germany 39
Upturn with a bright outlook 40
Industrial orders and production:
how informative is the oder capacity
index? 52
Public finances 56
The structural development of public
finances – Results of the disaggregated
framework for 2006 58
Key elements of the planned business
tax reform 64
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*
Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem 16*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
Banks 20*
Minimum reserves 42*
Interest rates 43*
Capital market 48*
Financial accounts 52*
Public finances in Germany 54*
Economic conditions 61*
External sector 68*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
5The economic scene
in Germany
around the turn
of 2006-07

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
6OverviewContinued strong upswing
The global economy continued to grow
sharply in the final quarter of last year. It is
now in one of its most dynamic periods since
the 1950s. A major part in this was played by
the ongoing rapid pace of expansion in the
emerging market economies. The cyclical mo-
mentum of the industrial countries also
picked up, however, following a perceptible
downturn in the third quarter, especially in
the US economy. The fall in oil prices, which
gave a noticeable boost to consumers’ pur-
chasing power as well as providing relief for
enterprises on the cost side, had an expan-
sionary effect on global growth. Furthermore,
the exceptionally mild winter weather had a
positive impact on developments in the
United States and Europe, especially benefit-
ing construction output. The decline in oil
prices in the fourth quarter triggered a simul-
taneous marked fall in consumer price infla-
tion in the industrial countries. In the fourth
quarter, the year-on-year rate of change, at
1.8%, was3/C254% down on the preceding
three-month period. However, domestic price
pressure built up somewhat in the last few
months of 2006. The core rate (excluding en-
ergy and food) stood at 1.9%, compared
with 1.8% in the third quarter.
The financial markets were lifted by the
brighter economic climate. The stock mar-
kets, in particular, were very buoyant with
share prices in Europe climbing more strongly
than in the USA. In autumn, the bond mar-
kets were characterised for a time by declin-
ing longer-term interest rates in the wake of
a perceptibly more pessimistic assessment ofInternational
setting
Financial
markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
7the outlook for the US economy following
the slowdown in economic activity in thethird quarter. Once the US indicators largelyturned positive again towards the end of theyear, however, long-term interest rates, too,started to move upwards. This rebound wasespecially apparent in the European bondmarkets. Starting in early October, the yieldsof European government bonds went up intotal by just under
1/C252percentage point to
more than 4%. This was accompanied by a
marked appreciation of the euro, above all, in
November and early December. Measured by
its effective exchange rate, the single cur-rency had gained around 1
1/C252% since the start
of the fourth quarter.
The appreciation of the euro ultimately re-
inforced the dampening effects on prices in
the euro area that were being generated onthe external side. The year-on-year rate of in-crease in the Harmonised Index of ConsumerPrices (HICP) for the euro area undershot the2% mark for the first time since the firstquarter of 2004, dropping to 1.8%. As men-
tioned above, this was due mainly to thesharp fall in energy prices. Prices of unpro-cessed food also went up less sharply thanthey had done in the third quarter. Excludingthese two volatile components, however,prices rose somewhat faster in the final quar-ter than before. Although the short-termprice outlook eased somewhat following thefall in oil prices and the firming of the euro in
the foreign exchange markets, domestic price
risks were tending to become greater owingto the pick-up in aggregate demand in theeuro area. The risks to stability policy have in-creased, especially on the wage front follow-ing the rapid growth in employment over thepast few years. This is being reinforced by ex-cessively strong monetary expansion, which isbeing driven by ongoing strong growth inlending, and which, in the longer term, points
to inflation risks. For this reason, the Eurosys-tem’s expansionary monetary policy stancewas scaled back in October and Decemberwith an interest rate rise of
1/C254percentage
point in both months. Since then, the main
refinancing rate has been at 31/C252%.
In the course of the the past year, Germany
increasingly began to act as the euro area’seconomic engine. The German economy con-
tinued to grow sharply in the final quarter.According to the initial figures of the FederalStatistical Office, German output went up by0.9% in the fourth quarter after adjustmentfor seasonal and working-day variations. Thiswas 3.7% up on the year in working-day-
adjusted terms. After factoring in the upwardrevision of the two preceding quarters, thisnow gives working day-adjusted growth of2.9% for 2006 as a whole, compared with1.1% for 2005. On a longer-term view, theGerman economy performed more success-fully than at any time since 2000. Based onpresent knowledge, foreign trade againseems to have made a major contribution to
the expansion of economic output. Real
growth in exports of goods and services,which was already quite buoyant in the thirdquarter of 2006, quickened further in thefinal three months of the year. Overall, the ex-ternal sector provided a considerable expan-sionary stimulus to the growth of the econ-omy as a whole in the fourth quarter, reflect-ing both the persistently favourable inter-Monetary
policyGerman
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
8national setting and the fact that the German
economy continued to be in a good competi-
tive position.
Domestically, investment was on the up
again. Given the continued growth in cap-
acity utilisation, the desire to expand capacity
is likely to have played a greater role in spend-
ing on machinery and equipment. This is
borne out by the most recent Ifo Investment
Test as well as the latest German Chamber of
Industry and Commerce (DIHK) survey on in-
vestment. These reveal that, while replace-
ment purchases are still the prime motive for
investment, more and more firms are stating
the wish to expand their capacity, particularly
in industry and in the construction sector. The
upbeat business sentiment in trade and in-
dustry offers further evidence of the positive
trend in investment. Construction investment
was additionally boosted by the exceptionally
mild winter and was presumably given an
extra fillip by the advanced processing of
orders ahead of the increase in value added
tax (VAT) at the start of 2007.
Private consumption still presents no clear-cut
picture. As in the third quarter, retail trade
sales (excluding cars) via traditional outlets re-
mained quite subdued at the end of the year.
Whereas anticipatory purchases in advance of
the rise in VAT were evident for certain cat-
egories of goods during the period under re-
view, this contrasted with lower spending
elsewhere. In November and December, there
was an extremely sharp rise in new passenger
car registrations, however. But as the higher
unit car sales were accommodated partly by
depleting existing stocks, increased consumerdemand did not have an impact on produc-
tion in the reporting period.
In the last few months of 2006, the under-
lying upward cyclical momentum was reflect-
ed in a sharp increase in employment and a
sharp decrease in unemployment. Much of
the growth in employment was recorded in
business-related services, which includes tem-
porary employment. According to Federal
Employment Agency figures, there was a
year-on-year increase in employment of near-
ly 265,000 in this sector in November 2006 –
more recent data are unavailable at present –
compared with a gain of 430,000 jobs sub-
ject to social security contributions in the
economy as a whole. This in itself reveals that
reforms to improve the flexibility of labour
hold out the promise of considerable gains in
employment. The positive trend continued at
the start of 2007. The seasonally adjusted un-
employment rate fell from 9.8% in December
2006 to 9.5% in January 2007. The figure
one year earlier had been as high as 11.4%.
The gratifying improvement in the labour
market situation is, not least, the result of the
moderate wage developments during the
past few years, owing to which jobs in Ger-
many have been safeguarded and new em-
ployment opportunities have been created in
the ongoing cyclical upturn. In 2006, as be-
fore, negotiated rates of pay increased only
slightly. On an hourly basis, their rise amount-
ed to 1.1%, compared with 1.0% in 2005.
There will be one large wage round in the
first six months of 2007. Many pay agree-
ments, mainly in major industrial sectors, are
eligible for termination. Given the positiveLabour market
Wages

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
9economic situation, especially in the export-
oriented sectors, wage bargainers will haveto ensure that, as well as allowing employeesto participate appropriately in firms’ commer-cial performance, they take due account ofthe requirements of the economy as a wholewhen determining wage adjustments.
Consumer prices in Germany showed hardly
any further rise during the final quarter, al-though this was due mainly to crude oil be-coming cheaper, which was reflected in fall-ing fuel and heating oil prices. If energy is ex-cluded, however, pressure on prices con-tinued to mount. In seasonally adjustedterms, goods and services (including foodand rents) were 0.6% more expensive in thefourth quarter, compared with 0.3% in thesecond quarter and 0.5% in the third quarter.This owed something to accelerated price ad-justments ahead of the VAT increase on 1 Jan-uary 2007. For example, the prices of tobaccoproducts were raised by almost 5% as of1 October 2006. The prices of some items ofclothing, too, gave indications of acceleratedprice adjustments. Overall, prices of industrialgoods (excluding food and energy but includ-ing tobacco products) were 1.0% up on thequarter, compared with 0.2% in the two pre-ceding quarters. By contrast, the increase inprices for services and housing rents re-
mained quite moderate (0.4% and 0.3% re-spectively). According to both the nationalindex and the HICP , the year-on-year rate ofinflation in the fourth quarter was 1.3% over-all.
There was quite a sharp rise of 0.5% in sea-
sonally adjusted consumer prices in Germanyat the start of 2007. According to the nation-
al consumer price index, the year-on-year fig-ure went up from 1.4% to 1.6% and accord-ing to the HICP from 1.4% to 1.8%. The factthat the rate of price increase was not great-er, given the increase in the standard rate ofVAT from 16% to 19% as from 1 January2007, was due partly to the falling prices ofheating oil. Furthermore, as was expected,the price effect of the VAT increase was notconcentrated solely on the beginning of2007. In addition to the accelerated price ad-justments during 2006, lagged effects arelikely to become operative over the course of2007. Nevertheless, the prices of goods inJanuary 2007 did not go down, as is usual forthis time of the year, but went up instead,and the usual seasonal fall in the prices of ser-vices was smaller than on average in the pastfew years. According to the Bundesbank’s es-timates, the VAT increase may have contrib-uted just under 1 percentage point to the an-nual HICP rate in January 2007, two-thirds ofwhich may have been accounted for by Janu-ary itself and one-third by anticipatory effectsin the latter part of 2006.
The impact that the VAT increase will have on
economic developments in the current year isstill uncertain. This is suggested, at all events,by some sentiment indicators, such as the
slight deterioration in the Ifo business climatein January and consumers’ lower propensityto purchase. On the other hand, sentiment inthe retail trade has not slumped and expect-ations have latterly even shown a further im-
provement. The relief afforded to consumersby lower oil prices suggests that this trendwill continue. Along with markedly lower so-
Prices...
...and VAT
increase

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
10cial security contributions, this forms a coun-
terweight to the VAT increase. The continuing
improvement in the labour market is even
more important as a basis for a gradual and
sustained strengthening of consumer de-
mand.
Overall, the central government fiscal meas-
ures are likely to dampen economic growth at
the start of this year. The German economy is
on a sound footing, however. Following a
temporary, slight interruption, economic ac-
tivity could pick up momentum again in the
near future. If fiscal and economic policy-
makers continue to pursue the path of reform
and wage policy remains geared to employ-
ment, this, together with the strong under-
lying economic trend, will indeed give the up-
swing a longer-term perspective.
These are favourable conditions for pressing
ahead with the consolidation of public fi-
nances. In the past year, the situation of pub-
lic finances improved and is now clearly more
positive than was expected at the beginning
of 2006. According to the initial provisional
data of the Federal Statistical Office, the gen-
eral government deficit ratio went down by
1.2 percentage points to 2.0%. This meant
that it undershot the 3% ceiling stipulated in
the EU Treaty for the first time since 2001.
The sharp fall in the deficit was due mainly tothe favourable development of the economy
and the exceptionally large rise in revenue
from profit-related taxes, which is erratic and
very volatile. By contrast, the debt ratio is like-
ly to have remained largely unchanged. In the
current year, the deficit ratio will probably
show a further fall and the debt ratio is likely
to record a marked decrease. The main rea-
sons for this are measures on the revenue
side and a moderate rise in expenditure.
Not least in order to bring the debt ratio
swiftly down below the 60% reference value,
it will be necessary to continue reducing the
deficits at a rapid pace and to quickly achieve
the medium-term objective of a structurally
balanced budget. Under the German stability
programme of December 2006, a deficit ratio
of 11/C252% is planned for 2007. Given the more
favourable outcome for 2006 and what is
now assessed to be a decidedly more positive
macroeconomic momentum, it should be
possible to achieve a considerably lower fig-
ure. If the favourable economic trend as-
sumed by Federal Government for the ensu-
ing years were to be used appropriately in ac-
cordance with the requirements of the re-
formed Stability and Growth Pact and if an
annual structural consolidation of at least
0.5% of GDP were to be ensured, a structur-
ally balanced budget could be achieved in
2009.Public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
11Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
The world economy continued to grow
strongly in the fourth quarter. Its pace picked
up again after having slackened in the sum-
mer months, particularly in the industrial
countries. This was due chiefly to the visibly
stronger growth in the United States, Japan
and the euro area towards the end of the
year. Owing to similarly buoyant develop-
ments in all three of the aforementioned eco-
nomic regions, growth differentials in the
fourth quarter were lower than they had
been for a long time. All in all, real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) in the industrial nations
rose by an estimated 1% after seasonal ad-
justment from its level in the third quarter, in
which it had risen by1/C252%. This results in a
rate of increase of 3% for 2006 as a whole
compared with 21/C252% in 2005.
It must be noted that the 2006 fourth quarter
results for the United States and the euro
area were influenced by the exceptionally
mild weather, which benefited construction
output, in particular. In addition, the anticipa-
tory effects of the increase in value added tax
in Germany also had a positive impact on for-
eign trade partners via higher imports. More-
over, employment continued to increase at a
rapid pace worldwide, thus lending even
more stability and continuity to the upturn.
Global growth received an additional boost
from the decline in oil prices, which began in
August and, thereafter, visibly bolstered the
purchasing power of consumers in the oil-
consuming countries while relieving enter-
prises of a cost burden. The sharp share price
rises in the industrial countries are also likelyWorld economy
remains on
growth path

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
12to have stimulated household demand. Both
effects combined to form a counterweight
– especially in the United States – to the ex-
tremely sluggish market for residential prop-
erty, which led to a renewed distinct decline
in construction output. Against this back-
ground, the risks of a housing market-
induced sharp downturn in US growth, which
would certainly also hit the global economy
as a whole, are now being assessed as much
smaller than just a few months ago.1
The generally positive global economic out-
look is also reflected in a further increase in
the OECD’s composite leading indicators for
the OECD area and the major non-OECD
countries at the end of 2006. In a similar de-
velopment, the International Monetary Fund,
in January, confirmed its September 2006
forecast anticipating a further 5% increase in
global GDP for this year. The world economy
is therefore in one of its most dynamic phases
of growth since the 1950s. Owing, in particu-
lar, to the rapid growth of the emerging mar-
ket economies, the average growth rate over
the 1998-2007 period, at just over 4%, is
3/C254percentage point higher than over the
1988-1997 period.
The emerging market economies maintained
their strong upward trend throughout the re-
porting period, especially the South and East
Asian regions. Real GDP in China in the
fourth quarter of 2006 was up by 101/C252%
year-on-year. Output growth averaged
103/C254% for the year. The slight slowdown in
growth over the course of the year is attribut-
able particularly to government measures to
curb the investment boom. Consumer priceinflation, which had accelerated to 2.8%
year-on-year at the end of 2006, was much
more moderate again in January (2.2%). The
growth curve of the oil-producing countries
in the Middle East and the Commonwealth of
Independent States continued to point sharp-
ly upwards throughout the reporting period.
The decline in export income associated with
the lower oil prices does not yet seem to have
dented overall economic growth in the two
groups of countries. In the short term, the
more likely scenario would appear to be a fall
in the high aggregate saving ratio.
Latin American oil producers Venezuela and
Mexico continued to experience robust
growth, supported by persistently high crude
oil revenues. Other countries in the region
once again received a strong boost from ex-
ports of industrial raw materials and food.
Commodities account for an average of
around 40% of Latin American exports. Bra-
zil, the region’s largest economy, regained
momentum in the autumn quarter after hav-
ing grown by only1/C252% on the period in the
summer quarter. At all events, industrial out-
put grew perceptibly towards the end of the
reporting period.
Oil prices remained exceptionally calm in the
fourth quarter – in contrast to the preceding
periods. Brent crude oil traded in a relatively
tight band around the US$60 mark from early
October until well into November. Following
OPEC’s decision to further reduce production
with effect from 1 February 2007, oil prices
rose to as much as US$641/C252per barrel at the
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, Financial Stability Review,
November 2006, pp 14-16.Continued
favourable
outlook for
2007
Emerging
market
economies still
very buoyantOil markets
steady

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
13end of November and in early December.
However, oil prices receded as of mid-December. At the beginning of the year, pricesbegan to fall even faster, tumbling to US$51
1/C252
by mid-month. However, they subsequently
turned around, rising to US$561/C252by mid-Feb-
ruary. In euro terms, the price for a barrel ofBrent crude oil stood at 343 as this report
went to press. The further price decline fol-
lowing the turn of the year was due mainly tothe mild weather in Europe and the north-east
of the United States as well as – in a relateddevelopment – the abundant inventory stocksin the USA. In addition, the first OPEC decisionto cut production, which had entered into ef-fect on 1 November 2006, was probably im-
plemented only in part. Throughout the pastfew months, quotations on the futures mar-kets have consistently exceeded spot prices.This means that crude oil prices are expectedto go back up in the medium to long term.
By contrast, the prices of industrial raw ma-
terials, denominated in US dollars, have con-tinued their upward trend in the past fewmonths, reaching an all-time high at the endof January. However, owing to a base effect,the year-on-year increase fell from 46
1/C252%i n
July 2006 to 26%. In the autumn months,
the world market prices for food, beverages
and tobacco likewise rose sharply, particularly
in connection with the short supply of cer-eals. At the beginning of the year, prices con-
tinued to rise at a slower pace. In January, US-dollar-denominated cereal prices were 47
1/C252%
higher than a year earlier.
Owing to the fall in oil prices in the last third
of 2006, consumer price inflation in the in-dustrial countries slackened noticeably. At1.8% year-on-year in the fourth quarter, con-sumer price inflation was
3/C254percentage point
down on the summer quarter and around
1 percentage point below the second quarter
rate. Annual average inflation – as in the pre-
ceding year – stood at 2.4%. By contrast, do-mestically generated price pressures con-
tinued to rise in the last months of 2006.Core inflation (excluding energy and food)Log scale
US$
or €World market prices for
crude oil *
Sources: Thomson Financial Datastream and
Global Insight. — * Price for a barrel of
Brent crude oil.
Deutsche BundesbankUS$ Futures prices
14 February 20071 December 2006
Spot 3 M 6 M 9 M 12 M 15 M 18 M75
70
65
60
55Spot prices
2007in US dollars
in euro70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
2003 2004 2005 2006
Continued
bullishness in
the case
of other
commodities
Calmer price
movements in
industrial
countries

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
14stood at 1.8% in December compared with
1.3% in early 2006. For the year as a whole,
core inflation rose slightly to 1.7%. Year-on-
year consumer price inflation in the industrial
countries is likely to have diminished in Janu-
ary owing to the sharp fall in oil prices.
According to initial calculations, GDP growth
in the USA accelerated to just under 1% in
the fourth quarter of 2006 after seasonal andcalendar adjustment, after having slumped to
1/C252% in the two preceding periods. Output
was 31/C252% higher than in the autumn 2005
quarter. The growth rate for the year as a
whole was likewise 31/C252%. A considerable in-
crease in household demand for consumer
goods (+1% after seasonal and calendar ad-
justment) was the main reason for the more
dynamic end-of-year activity. There was an in-
creased demand for non-durable goods and
furniture, while real expenditure on cars fell
slightly. The greater propensity to purchase
was fostered by a strong rise in real dispos-
able income. This also reflects oil price-related
gains in purchasing power. At the same time,
the saving ratio improved from -11/C254%t o
-1%. Demand from the government also pro-
vided considerable expansionary stimuli. Un-
like in preceding quarters, however, commer-
cial investment showed no further growth as
this report went to press, and investment ex-
penditure on housing construction fell once
again by around 5% on the quarter and
121/C252% on the year. Exports, which grew by
21/C252% after seasonal adjustment, formed an-
other key pillar of economic activity alongside
private consumption and public expenditure.
Real imports decreased by3/C254% at the same
time and so the external deficit fell sharply.
This led to an imputed growth contribution
of just under1/C252percentage point.
Around the turn of 2006-07, the economic
indicators in the United States were largely
positive, which means that the outlook for a
“soft landing” of the US economy has be-
come entrenched. For instance, consumer
confidence rose significantly, employment
continued to grow, and new orders receivedQuarterly,
annual percentage change
JapanEuro area
JanOf which
USAIndustrial countries, total
Overall rate
Core rate 1Consumer prices in the
industrial countries
Sources: National statistics and Eurostat. —
1Excluding energy and food; euro area:
HICP excluding energy and unprocessed
food.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−3
2
1
04
3
2
1
04
3
2
1
0
2005 2006 2007
USA

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
15by industry picked up distinctly once again in
the November-December period. The morefavourable signals recently sent out by thehousing market and the construction sectorare also noteworthy. Among other things, thenumber of housing construction permitswent back up in December for the first timein a long while, and sales of new dwellingslikewise picked up. However, the mild winterweather in the north-east of the UnitedStates may well also have been a factor inthis development.
US consumer prices in the fourth quarter of
2006 were 0.5% down on the summer quar-ter after seasonal adjustment, due mainly tothe sharp fall in energy prices. Year-on-yearinflation stood at 1.9% following 3.3% inthe third quarter. The rate of price increasefor 2006 as a whole was 3.2%. Excluding en-ergy and food, seasonally adjusted prices stillrose in the fourth quarter, albeit much moreslowly than in earlier quarters. At 2.7%, coreinflation was somewhat down on the thirdquarter. At 2.5%, however, overall inflationfor 2006 was higher than at any time since2001. The sharp rise in housing rents (includ-ing imputed rents for owner-occupiedhomes) and the continued rise in healthcarecosts were major contributing factors. Thecore personal consumption expenditure de-
flator fell from 2.4% in the third quarter to2.3% in the fourth.
The Japanese economy grew at a consider-
ably faster pace in the fourth quarter of 2006
after having slowed down sharply in the sum-mer half of the year. Real GDP was up by aseasonally adjusted 1
1/C254% on the period and2% on the year. In 2006 as a whole, overall
economic output rose by 21/C254% compared
with 2% in 2005. In the fourth quarter, total
production was driven particularly by private
consumption, which was up by a seasonally
adjusted 1% on the third quarter, in which ithad decreased at the same rate. In addition,
private gross fixed capital formation acceler-ated far more strongly than in the summerquarter. General government demand alsohad a positive impact on GDP growth at theend of 2006; it was up by a seasonally adjust-
ed
1/C252% after having fallen noticeably in the
preceding quarters. Total domestic demand
contributed 1 percentage point to growth.
Real exports in the fourth quarter were a sea-
sonally adjusted 1% up on their already highlevel. With imports remaining unchanged,
foreign trade made a net contribution of
1/C254percentage point to GDP growth.
Average fourth-quarter consumer prices were
0.3% down on the preceding period afterseasonal adjustment. Year-on-year consumer
price inflation fell from 0.9% in August to0.3% in December owing to the decline in oilprices in the last third of 2006. Excluding en-ergy and food, prices continued their year-on-year decline in the last quarter of the yearbut, at 0.3%, they fell at a somewhat weaker
pace than in the summer half of the year.
According to initial calculations, real GDP in
the UK grew in the fourth quarter of 2006– the fifth period in succession – by
3/C254%o n
the period after seasonal and calendar adjust-
ment. Its year-on-year growth was 3%, with
annual average growth standing at 23/C254%. UK
growth in the fourth quarter was supportedJapanUnited
Kingdom

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
16by the services sector and construction, the
real value added of each of which grew by
1% after seasonal adjustment. By contrast,
the performance of the production sector (ex-
cluding construction) and agriculture fell
slightly. On the demand side, private con-
sumption – data on the individual compon-
ents are not yet available – is likely to have
once again been the main driving force. At all
events, real retail sales (excluding motor ve-
hicles), at a seasonally adjusted 11/C254%, grew
more strongly than in the summer quarter.
They were 33/C254% up on their end-2005 level.
The continued buoyancy of consumption has
now begun to be reflected in increased price
pressures. This led the Bank of England to
raise the Bank Rate further to 51/C254% in Janu-
ary. Consumer price inflation (HICP) hit 3.0%
in December, its highest level since the end of
1995, although the increase in mineral oil tax
at the beginning of the month figures prom-
inently here. Consumer price inflation fell to
2.7% in January, however. Core inflation (ex-
cluding energy and unprocessed food) stood
at 1.8% following 1.9% in December.
In the new EU member states (those of the
1 May 2004 enlargement round), business ac-
tivity in the final quarter of 2006 seems to
have maintained the somewhat more moder-
ate yet still rapid pace that it had adopted in
the summer months. At all events, industrial
production, which was up by a seasonally ad-
justed 11/C252% on the summer quarter, grew
more or less as strongly as before. Its year-on-
year rise was 91/C254%; its average growth for
the year 2006 was actually 101/C252%. The – for
the most part – strong growth in new orders
received in the October-November periodsuggests that the pace of industrial activity
could well accelerate again. This somewhat
more subdued growth in industrial produc-
tion in the new EU member states in the
second half of the year went hand in hand
with a slowdown in unemployment reduc-
tion. At 11.9% in October, the seasonally ad-
justed unemployment rate was only1/C254per-
centage point lower than its mid-year level
after having fallen by as much as3/C254percent-
age point in the first half of the year. Owing
to the fall in oil prices, consumer price infla-
tion diminished from a seasonally adjusted
1.3% in the third quarter to 0.5% in the
fourth. The year-on-year rate was 2.5% in
the last quarter of the year and the overall
rate for 2006 was 2.4%.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Euro-area growth picked up distinctly again
in the fourth quarter. Real GDP rose by just
under 1% after seasonal adjustment follow-
ing +1/C252% in the preceding period. The main
contributory factors were that total produc-
tion in France, which had stagnated in the
summer months, grew by well over1/C252% after
seasonal adjustment, and that the Italian
economy picked up speed considerably. Euro-
area GDP grew by 31/C254% from its autumn
2005 level. For the year as a whole, growth
amounted to 23/C254%, the highest rate since
2000.
Looking at individual sectors, construction –
in which activity was propelled not only by
unabated demand but also by the mild wea-
ther conditions – generated considerableNew EU
member statesFaster pace of
expansion
in 2006 Q4
Construction
output strong
and industrial
activity still
buoyant

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
17stimuli in the fourth quarter. Industrial pro-
duction likewise rose perceptibly. In thefourth quarter, it was a seasonally adjusted
1/C252% higher than in the preceding period, in
which it had grown by 1%. In 2006 as a
whole, industrial production increased by
33/C254%. Capacity utilisation in the manufactur-
ing industry continued to grow during the
October 2006-January 2007 period, thus
coming very close to its autumn 2000 peak.
Orders received in industry were up in Octo-ber-November by a seasonally adjusted
3/C254%
on the summer quarter, in which, however,
large orders had been placed. The year-on-
year increase stood at 91/C252%. New orders ex-
cluding the manufacture of other transport
equipment, which are much less influenced
by large orders, were a seasonally adjusted
11/C254% higher in the two autumn months than
in the third quarter of the year.
There are strong indications that the euro-
area industrial sector will remain on a growth
path during the current year. One is that in-dustrial confidence hit a new all-time high inNovember-December. Survey data for Januarywere only slightly less favourable. The veryhigh expectations for production, in particu-lar, give cause for optimism. Inventories and
the orders situation were also assessed morefavourably in the past few months. The re-sults of the investment survey for October-November also suggest that investment activ-ity in the manufacturing industry will remainbuoyant in 2007. Consumer sentiment like-wise continued to brighten in the November-January period, although the indicator is stillfar removed from the levels reached in the
second quarter of 2000.According to the available detailed data – ag-
gregated information on the demand com-ponents in the national accounts is not yetavailable – overall demand in the euro areagrew exceptionally vibrantly in the fourthquarter. Although real retail sales (excludingmotor vehicles) rose by only
1/C254% on the
period after seasonal adjustment and thus by
11/C252% on the year, seasonally adjusted pur-
chases of cars rose sharply – especially be-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
Oct/
Nov Log scale
New orders received by
manufacturers working
on orders
2000 = 100
Total
Of which
Excluding
heavy trans-
port equipment
200701994-2006
averageLin scale
Capacity utilisationLog scale
Industrial output
2000 = 100Selected indicators of
industrial activity
in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank125
120
115
110
105
100
9586
8482
80
78110
105
100
95
- - 
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Survey data
remain
favourable
Vibrant
consumer
demand and
strong export
growth

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
18cause of the anticipatory effects linked to the
value added tax hike in Germany. The num-
ber of new passenger car registrations in the
last three months of 2006 was 5% up on the
year. Construction investment also grew vig-
orously. In addition, nominal exports once
again saw strong growth in October-Novem-
ber; they were a seasonally adjusted 4%
higher than in the third quarter and 173/C254%
higher than a year earlier. At the same time,
imports, in terms of value, did not exceed
their summer months’ level; this was largely
connected with declining oil prices. All in all,
net exports are likely to have made a notice-
able contribution to GDP growth in the last
quarter of 2006.
The decline in euro-area unemployment con-
tinued in the last quarter of 2006. Accordingto provisional Eurostat figures, on average
over the autumn months, after seasonal ad-
justment, 11.18 million people were un-
employed, 200,000 fewer than in the sum-
mer 2006 quarter. The year-on-year decline in
unemployment amounted to 1.29 million.
The unemployment rate fell from 8.4% at the
end of 2005 to 7.6%; this is the lowest figure
since the beginning of the statistical series in
early 1993. The favourable unemployment
development was aided by strong growth in
employment. In the third quarter of 2006
– more recent information is not yet avail-
able – the number of employed persons was
a seasonally adjusted 0.4% up on the quarter.
Year-on-year growth stood at 1.4%. Labour
market developments were particularly fa-
vourable in Germany, Finland and France. In
Spain and Luxembourg, by contrast, the
standardised unemployment rate rose some-
what. Despite the improvement in the euro-
area labour market situation, wage growth
remained moderate. At 0.5% after seasonal
adjustment in the third quarter of 2006, it
was actually slightly lower than in the preced-
ing quarters. Year-on-year growth deceler-
ated slightly to 2.2%.
After euro-area inflation had already clearly
slowed down to 0.5% in the third quarter
after seasonal adjustment (from +0.8% in the
second quarter), prices came to a virtual
standstill in the autumn months. At 1.8%,
year-on-year HICP inflation fell below 2% for
the first time since the first quarter of 2004.
The sharp quarter-on-quarter drop in energy
prices (-4.2%) was the key factor in this de-
velopment. However, unprocessed food
prices also rose less steeply than in the thirdEuro-area consumer prices
Annual percentage change
2006
Item Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
HICP, total 2.3 2.5 2.1 1.8
of which
Energy 12.2 11.6 6.3 1.5
Unprocessed food 1.4 1.6 3.9 4.1
HICP excluding energy
and unprocessed food 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.6
of which
Processed food 2.0 2.2 2.1 2.2
Industrial goods 0.3 0.7 0.7 0.8
Services 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
Labour marketConsumer
prices in Q4...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
19quarter. Excluding these two relatively volatile
components, prices rose by 0.5% after sea-sonal adjustment in the fourth quarter, a min-imally faster pace than in the preceding quar-ters. One likely contributory factor was that,in Germany, the prices of tobacco products,which are counted as processed food, werealready raised sharply in October owing tothe VAT increase which took effect on 1 Jan-uary 2007. By contrast, the calm price trendsof the past few months continued for indus-trial goods and services alike. Year-on-yearHICP inflation excluding energy and unpro-cessed food rose from 1.5% to 1.6%.
On average for 2006, consumer price infla-
tion stood at 2.2% – as in 2005 already. Thesomewhat weaker rise in energy prices (7.7%following 10.1%) contrasted with an acceler-ated rate of increase in the price of unpro-cessed food (+2.8% following +0.8%). Ex-cluding these two components, prices in-creased at a rate of 1.5%, which was similarlymoderate to the preceding year. The slightabatement of price pressures in services wasoffset by a minute acceleration in the rate ofprice increase for non-energy industrialgoods.
In January – for which an initial estimate
based on existing country results and infor-mation on energy price movements is avail-able – year-on-year inflation remained at amoderate 1.9%. This was mainly the result ofthe continued drop in oil prices. In addition,the increase in value added tax in Germanyhas not yet completely made its way into con-sumer prices. Without the VAT effect, theHICP rate would have been an estimated
1/C254percentage point lower.... and on
average for
2006Initial estimate
for January
2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
20Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the
money market
The Governing Council of the ECB raised the
central bank rates by a further1/C254percentage
point in December 2006. Since 13 December,
main refinancing operations have been con-
ducted with a minimum bid rate of 31/C252%,
and interest rates on the marginal lending fa-
cility and the deposit facility have been 41/C252%
and 21/C252% respectively.
Like the previous interest rate rises, the aim of
this sixth increase since December 2005 was
to reduce the expansionary stance of monet-
ary policy further and thus to counter the on-
going risks to price stability. The fall in oil
prices in the fourth quarter of 2006 led to a
somewhat more favourable price outlook in
the shorter term; at the same time, however,
domestic price dangers tended to increase as
a result of the noticeable strengthening in ag-
gregate demand in the euro area. Following
the rapid growth in employment over the
past few years, the risks to price stability have
risen – particularly in terms of wages. Further-
more, monetary growth has been excessively
strong for quite some time; this is largely at-
tributable to the continued strength in credit
expansion and represents an inflation risk in
the longer term.
The interest rate policy was expected by
money market participants and implemented
smoothly. For the most part, the EONIA over-
night rate between the beginning of Novem-
ber and the beginning of February was slight-
ly above the marginal allotment rate which,
in turn, was only a few basis points higherInterest rate
increase in
December
Money market
rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
21Money market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods from 11 Oc-
tober 2006 to 16 January 2007, euro-area credit institu-tions’ need for central bank money arising from autono-
mous factors determining bank liquidity increased by 54.2
billion in net terms. This was due mainly to the steep rise
of531.0 billion in banknotes in circulation in the euro
area. The expansion was particularly robust in December,which was usual for the time of year and was similar in ex-
tent to 2005, even if the year-on-year rate of growth wasdeclining. However, this sharp increase was almost entirelyoffset by the remaining autonomous factors. Liquidityneeds arising from general government deposits declinedby514.1 billion net. If, in order to eliminate valuation ef-
fects, the changes in net reserve assets and other factors
are taken together, these two items resulted in a liquidityprovision of 512.7 billion. There was a significant increase
of57.8 billion in the minimum reserve requirement and
this, along with autonomous factors, led to growing de-mand for central bank liquidity.
The greater need for liquidity was covered primarily by the
main refinancing operations (MROs) being topped up by513.6 billion, with the greatest increase ( 59.2 billion) com-
ing in the December-January period. The volume of long-er-term refinancing operations (LTROs) targeted by theGoverning Council of the ECB for the period under reviewremained unchanged at 540 billion per operation. Starting
with the LTROs on 1 February 2007, this volume increasedto550 billion.
Until the key interest rate rise took effect on 13 December
2006, the EONIA was fluctuating predominantly between3.32% and 3.35%. With the new minimum bid rate of3.50%, the EONIA stood mostly between 3.56% and 3.63%.
As in the final two operations of the previous period, the
ECB continued to allot the benchmark amount in the firstthree MROs of the reserve maintenance period beginningon 11 October. As market participants had become accus-tomed to the ample allotments since the beginning of theyear, the spread between the EONIA and the minimum bidrate (EONIA spread) increased from 6 basis points to up to13 basis points. The ECB reacted by allotting 51.0 billion
above the benchmark in the last MRO of this reserve main-tenance period; as a result, the EONIA spread was reducedto 7 basis points at the end of the period. Despite the in-creased allotment, liquidity conditions were largely bal-anced on the last day of the reserve period and conse-quently no fine-tuning operation was necessary.
In the November-December reserve period, the ECB con-
tinued to allot 51.0 billion above the benchmark in all five
MROs. Consequently, the EONIA spread remained predom-inantly at 7 basis points. Owing to a liquidity shortfall atthe end of the reporting period, which was apparently an-ticipated by market participants, the spread increasedslightly on the last two days of the period. Following the
liquidity-providing fine-tuning operation of 52.5 billion
conducted by the ECB on the final day, the period came toa close with a low net recourse to the marginal lending fa-cility of 5531 million.
As in 2004 and 2005, the December-January reserve periodfeatured a policy of loose allotments, whose main object-ive was to compensate for seasonally-induced changes inforecasting the banknotes in circulation. While the ECB al-lotted 52.0 billion above the benchmark in the first MRO,
it increased its allotment in the operation before Christmasby54.0 billion and before New Year by 55.0 billion abovethe benchmark. The EONIA was at 3.69% at the end of
2006 and thus 19 basis points higher than the minimumbid rate of 3.50% applying since 13 December. The EONIA
spread increased slightly by 2 basis points compared to the
end of 2005. One possible reason was that there were onlythree trading days between the Christmas and New Yearholidays, with the result that little trading took place andrates increased. At the beginning of 2007, the EONIA fell
again to 3.60%, and the ECB allotted 52.0 billion and 51.0
billion above the benchmark in the last two MROs of theperiod. As liquidity conditions were balanced at the end ofthe reporting period, no fine-tuning operations were re-quired. On the last day of the reserve period, the EONIAstood at 3.50% and was therefore in line with the min-
imum bid rate.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
20062006/
2007
Item11 Octto7 Nov8 Novto12 Dec13 Decto16 Jan
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due to
changes in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) – 4.3 – 5.8 – 20.9
2 General government deposits
with the Eurosystem
(increase: –) – 1.1 + 5.3 + 9.9
3 Net foreign reserves
2+ 0.7 – 0.4 – 1.2
4 Other factors2+ 1.5 + 5.8 + 6.3
Total – 3.2 + 4.9 – 5.9
II Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a)Main refinancing
operations + 3.2 + 1.2 + 9.2
(b)Longer-term refinancing
operations € 0.0 – 0.0 € 0.0
(c) Other operations – 0.3 + 0.1 – 1.1
2 Standing facilities
(a)Marginal lending facility + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0
(b)Deposit facility (increase: –) + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1
Total + 3.0 + 1.3 + 8.0
III Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I + II) + 0.0 + 6.2 – 2.1
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) + 0.1 – 6.2 – 1.7
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s
contribution, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Sec-
tion of this Monthly Report .—2Including end-of-quarter
valuation adjustments with no impact on liquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
22than the minimum bid rate. Deviations oc-
curred only at the end of the reserve mainten-
ance periods or in the last week in December,
when financial institutions are usually eager
to hold more liquidity for accounting reasons.
The other money market rates also increased
quite steadily in the period under review. Fol-
lowing the central bank interest rate increase
in December, the longer maturities rose by up
to 20 basis points until the beginning of Feb-
ruary; by contrast, the interest rates at the
very short end changed only slightly. At the
end of the period under review, the remuner-
ation for 12-month funds was about1/C252per-
centage point higher than for overnight
money. Thus, the money market yield curve
became somewhat steeper. The three-month
forward rates, which express interest rate ex-
pectations, have also risen slightly since thechange in interest rates in December. Over a
six-month time horizon, further interest rate
increases are being priced in.
Monetary developments in the euro area
The strong monetary growth experienced in
the euro area over the course of the preced-
ing quarters of 2006 continued in the last
three months of the year. From October to
December monetary holdings included in M3
increased by an annualised, seasonally
adjusted growth rate of just over 9%. Along-
side lending to the private sector, which con-
tinued to grow at a very high level, it was pri-
marily the sizeable inflow of external funds
that encouraged monetary growth in the
euro area during the period under review.
However, continuing strong monetary capital
formation and a considerable reduction in net
general government borrowing from banks in
the euro area had a dampening effect on
monetary growth of late.
Of the M3 components, it was the short-term
time deposits that again found favour with
domestic investors in the period under re-
view. Given their remuneration at market
rates, these deposits had already been highly
popular since the phase of interest rate in-
creases began in the Eurosystem in December
2005. In addition, cash and overnight de-
posits – ie very liquid components – also in-
creased to a large extent in the reporting
period. Non-financial corporations in particu-
lar created overnight deposits; however,
other financial intermediaries also accumu-
lated these types of balances in the fourthSeasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
Reference value: 4 ½ %Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
6
5
4
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Strong
monetary
growth
continues
Heterogeneous
developments
in deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
23quarter, thus breaking their usual seasonal
pattern. By contrast, short-term savings de-posits were further reduced in the fourthquarter, as were repo transactions.
Lending to the private sector in the euro area
again rose significantly in the period under re-view. Even so, growth was noticeably weakerthan in the previous quarter. On an annual-ised basis, credit increased by 8%, a develop-ment which constituted the lowest rate of in-crease since the first quarter of 2005. Theperceptible slowdown was due mainly to astrong decline in short-term loans to non-monetary financial intermediaries towardsthe end of the year. This reduction should bematched by a decline in repo transactionsand may be purely temporary. Growth inhousing loans was also more subdued; the12-month rate continued to decrease in thefinal quarter of 2006 and, at 9.5% at the endof the quarter, was just over 2
1/C252percentage
points lower than in the second quarter. By
contrast, growth in consumer loans and other
lending to households remained unchanged
in the period under review. The expansion inlending to domestic non-financial enterprises
was again particularly robust. Given the lowcapital market rates, there was a particularlystrong increase in longer-term loans. Further-more, the banks substantially increased theirstocks of securities issued by domestic enter-
prises, thus indirectly making substantial add-itional funds available to the corporate sector.
Unlike domestic lending to the private sector,
credit from domestic banks to general gov-ernment continued to fall in the euro area inthe final quarter. The banks mainly reduced€ billion, seasonally adjusted
change over the period indicated
€ billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet counterparts 1
Credit to
enterprises
and
households
General
government
borrowing
or saving2
Net external
assets
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counterparts
of M33Money stock
Jul to Sep 2006
Increase
in M3
Oct to Dec 2006Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts are
shown in terms of whether they expand (+)
or contract (−) the money stock. — 2Bank
loans to general government less euro-areacentral government deposits with MFIs and
holdings of securities issued by the MFIsector. — 3Calculated as a residual of the
other items of the consolidated balance
sheet of the MFI sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank300+ 200+ 100+ 0 100− 200−Heavy lending
to private
sector
continues
Credit to
general
government
continues to
decline

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
24their stocks of public sector securities. At the
same time, however, central government de-
posits (which are not part of M3) also de-
creased sharply. On balance, general govern-
ment borrowing or saving curbed the in-
crease in M3 in the fourth quarter.
Monetary capital formation, which was al-
ready strong in the preceding quarters, accel-
erated again in the final quarter of the year.
With a seasonally adjusted annualised rate of
10%, the longer-term inflow of funds clearly
surpassed the result from the third quarter
(just over 7%). Alongside the longer-term
time deposits (with an agreed maturity of
more than two years) it was again primarily
the longer-term bank debt securities that in-
creased dramatically in the reporting period.
A large number of these securities may havebeen purchased by investors from outside the
euro area. This is certainly what the concur-
rent sharp increase in the net external assets
of banks in the euro area in the fourth quar-
ter seems to indicate.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
In the last quarter of 2006, large inflows of
funds from abroad also appear to have bol-
stered the strong growth in shorter-term
bank deposits in Germany, which, at a
seasonally adjusted annualised rate of just
over 6%, was weaker than in the euro area
as a whole but significantly stronger than in
the previous quarter. Short-term time de-
posits, on which an interest rate of between
3.2% and 3.6% was paid at the end of the
period under review, were in great demand.
From October to December the annualised
figure increased by more than one-third. The
fact that short-term savings deposits, which
often earn little interest, were reduced by an
annualised rate of just over 11% suggests
that households, in particular, continued to
aim to achieve a higher interest income by re-
grouping investments. By contrast, non-
financial corporations in Germany favoured
overnight deposits towards the end of the
year – probably in part for balance sheet rea-
sons – and increased them significantly.
As in the previous quarter, longer-term bank
deposits were also created in the final quarter
of 2006. There was a continuation of the
sharp increase in savings deposits with a no-
tice period of more than three months – trad-Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)
in Germany*
5billion
2006 2005
ItemOct to
DecOct to
Dec
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 23.6 + 13.2
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years + 30.1 + 11.0
of over 2 years + 5.7 + 3.9
Redeemable at agreed notice
of up to 3 months – 7.9 + 4.1
of over 3 months + 6.7 + 0.5
Lending
to domestic enterprises and
households
Unsecuritised – 33.7 – 9.1
Securitised + 3.9 + 10.7
to domestic government
Unsecuritised + 2.4 – 1.9
Securitised – 3.6 – 1.9
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-
cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money market
funds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of the
Monthly Report .—1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Monetary
capital
formation
stronger againSharp increase
in shorter-term
bank deposits
Renewed
demand for
longer-term
bank deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
25itionally formed exclusively by households –
which had begun in the second quarter. Inaddition, financial corporations extendedtheir longer-term time deposits.
Lending by German banks to domestic non-
banks fell significantly in the period under re-view. It shrank in the fourth quarter at a sea-sonally adjusted annualised rate of just under4
1/C252%. The main cause behind this develop-
ment was the notable reduction in short-term
loans to other financial intermediaries. Evi-
dently, securities lending transactions with
banks were not extended at the end of theyear. Short-term loans to other financial inter-
mediaries associated with these transactionshad still been rising appreciably in the preced-ing quarter. In addition, demand for housingloans slackened towards the end of the year.Lending to the public sector likewise de-
creased in the fourth quarter. By contrast,lending to domestic non-financial enterprisesincreased further. The year-on-year rate waslatterly at 1.5%, compared with 1.1% at theend of the third quarter.
According to the German results of the Bank
Lending Survey,
1however, the general weak-
ness in credit growth in Germany cannot be
attributed to tightened credit supply condi-
tions. The institutions surveyed left their
credit standards for corporate lending andhousing loans largely unchanged in the final
quarter of 2006. Households actually benefit-ed from a loosening of credit standards forconsumer credit. At the same time, the par-ticipating banks reduced their margins foraverage exposures not only for consumer
credit but also for all credit categories. Ac-cording to some banks, the increasingly com-
petitive conditions played a substantial role inthis development. As the margins for riskier
loans remained unchanged, the marginspread in the lending business of the Germaninstitutions surveyed also continued in the re-
porting period. For the first quarter of 2007,the participating banks are proceeding on theassumption that the credit standard forhouseholds will remain largely unchanged,
while predicting a slight loosening in the cor-porate sector. In corporate finance and con-
sumer credit, the German results pointed tosomewhat more relaxed lending policies thanin the euro area overall.
2For the first quarterSeasonally adjusted
€b n
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change2,330
2,300
2,270
2,240
2,210
2,180Log scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank5
4
3
2
1
0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
1The aggregate survey results for Germany can be
viewed at http://www.bundesbank.de/volkswirtschaft/
vo_veroeffentlichungen.en.php.
2See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, February
2007, pp 20 ff.Lendingreduced signifi-
cantly overall
Improved
supply
conditions for
consumer
credit

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
26Banking conditions in Germany
1 With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year and up to 5 years. — 2 Decline owing to special effect. — 3 With
an initial rate fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years. — 4 According to Bank Lending Survey; percentage
difference between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened
somewhat” and the numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably”. —
5 Expectations for Q1 2007.
Deutsche Bundesbank% pa
%
%Loans to non-financial corporations
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 07Changes in loan margins4
Loans to enterprises
Average loansRiskier loansChanges in credit standards4
Loans to enterprises
5Bank interest rates (new business)
... over € 1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year... up to € 1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
... over € 1 million
    with an initial
    rate fixation of over 5 yearsLoans to enterprises ...
100+
80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−60+
40+
20+
0
20−5.8
5.5
5.2
4.9
4.6
4.3
4.0
3.7
3.4
3.1
2.8% pa
%
%
%Loans to households
Consumer credit
Average loansRiskier loans
02 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Housing loans
Average loansRiskier loansConsumer credit
5Housing loans
5Consumer credit 1
2
Housing loans3
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−40+
20+
0
20−40+
20+
0
20−7.0
6.7
6.4
6.1
5.8
5.5
5.2
4.9
4.6
4.3
4.0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
27of 2007, the banks are expecting an upturn
in their lending business, particularly in cor-porate lending, and, to a lesser extent, inhousing loans.
The tightening in the Eurosystem monetary
policy was passed on by banks, particularly inthe case of new short-term loans to the pri-vate sector. By contrast, developments in theconditions for long-term bank loans weremore heavily influenced by the sometimesopposing trend in capital market rates. Therates for lending to households were latterlysomewhat lower than at the end of the thirdquarter. For loans to corporations, bankscharged between 4.8% and 5.0% accordingto credit volume, which was slightly morethan three months previously.
Short-term
lending rates
rise on the
whole, long-
term rates vary

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
28Financial marketsTrends in the financial markets
The international financial markets were
characterised by the favourable economic cli-
mate in Germany and Europe, in particular
towards the end of the fourth quarter of
2006. In addition, the US economy proved
more robust than expected by many obser-
vers, supported not least by falling energy
prices. Consequently, long-term interest rates
rose somewhat in the two economic areas.
The further tightening of Eurosystem monet-
ary policy was widely expected and its effects
were therefore felt primarily in short to me-
dium-term maturities. Given the optimistic
economic outlook, the stock markets were
very buoyant, with share prices in Europe
rising more strongly than in the United States.
It was against this backdrop that the euro ap-
preciated significantly against the US dollar,
especially in November and at the beginning
of December.
Exchange rates
In the last quarter of 2006, the euro benefit-
ed from the favourable economic outlook for
the euro area and market players’ expect-
ations of a further rise in interest rates. Fol-
lowing the publication of the Ifo index at the
end of November and the interest rate in-
crease by the Governing Council of the ECB
at the beginning of December, the euro occa-
sionally reached levels higher than US$1.33.
At the same time, the growing number of
negative reports emerging from the US real
estate market led some market participants
to speculate that interest rates in the UnitedFinancial
market
environment
Euro exchange
rate
movements
against the
US dollar ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
29States would soon be cut. Subsequently, no
clear trend was recognizable for a time in theeuro-dollar exchange rate, which remainedbetween US$1.31 and US$1.33; at the endof 2006, it was just over 11
1/C252% higher than a
year previously. At the beginning of 2007,
however, sentiment in the foreign exchange
markets once again shifted in favour of the
US currency, when a spate of positive newsdampened existing expectations of falling
interest rates. On the one hand, the US la-bour market presented itself in a surprisinglyrobust state and, on the other hand, the un-expected decline of the US trade deficit inNovember 2006 supported the US dollar. In
addition, the Federal Reserve emphasised theinflation risks for the US economy in the min-utes of its December meeting, which causedthe probability of an interest rate cut in theUSA to decline further in the eyes of the mar-ket participants. The euro temporarily lostsome of its gains, but had rebounded toUS$1.31 when this report went to press.
Owing to the increasing yield spread between
Japanese and European debt securities, theeuro’s upward trend against the yen con-tinued at first. Against the backdrop of thepositive economic development in the euroarea, the downward revision of the growthrates of gross domestic product (GDP) inJapan caused the euro-yen exchange rate toreach record highs in December. At the endof the year, the euro was valued at just under¥157 and thus around 13% higher than atthe beginning of the year. In January, theeuro temporarily surrendered some of itsgains amid mounting speculations that theBank of Japan would increase its key interestrate. However, when this did not occur, theeuro again reached its highs from the end ofthe year and partly even surpassed them.Most recently, the euro was valued at justunder ¥158 and thus 18% higher than at thebeginning of European monetary union.
Many market participants see carry trades as
the reason for the euro’s strength in relationto the Japanese currency. However, econo-Daily data, log scale
US$
£¥
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.01  1... pound sterling
£0.7110  1... yen
¥133.73  1against the ...
... US dollar
$1.1789  1Exchange rate of the euro
1Rate at the beginning of monetary union
on 4 January 1999. — 2As calculated by the
ECB against the currencies of 24 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank106
103
1000.72
0.70
0.68
0.66
0.64160
156
152
148
144
140
136
1321.33
1.30
1.27
1.24
1.21
1.18
JF M A M JJAS O N DJF
2006 2007... the yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
30Deuts che Bun desbankThe relationship between curren cy futures an d ex chan ge rate developments
In the forei gn ex chan ge markets, ma croe conomi c infor-
mation is currently interprete d primarily in the li ght of 
its impa ct on money market rates, sin ce market wat chers 
consi der ex chan ge rate developments as driven mainly 
by interest rate differentials between the curren cy areas. 
The reason for this is repeate dly sai d to be curren cy carry 
tra des, whi ch involves international investors borrowin g 
capital in low-interest curren cies an d investin g it in hi gh-
interest curren cies. However, sin ce these capital ﬂ  ows 
are not re corded systemati cally, it is difﬁ cult to estimate 
their ma gnitu de an d inﬂ uen ce on ex chan ge rates. Some 
pointers may be provi ded by the curren cy futures tra ded 
on ﬁ nan cial futures ex chan ges, su ch as the Chicago Mer-
cantile Ex chan ge ( CME), because the return on these 
futures correspon ds to that of carry tra des. The mat ch-
ing of the returns is base d on the vali dity of covere d 
interest rate parity
(1) ft,t+k  – st = it,t+k – i*
t,t+k ,
where ft,t+k denotes the (lo garithmi c) forwar d ex chan ge 
rate, st the (lo garithmi c) spot rate, it,t+k the domesti c 
interest rate an d i*
t,t+k the forei gn interest rate. Exten ding 
the equation with the (lo garithmi c) future spot rate st+k 
and su bsequently transformin g it results in
(2) st+k –  ft,t+k = st+k – st + i*
t,t+k – it,t+k .
The expression on the left-han d si de of equation 2 
stan ds for the return on the future tra de an d the sum 
on the ri ght-han d side for the return on the carry tra de. 
Therefore, from the viewpoint of international inves-
tors, both transa ctions offer the same risk/return stru c-
ture. Curren cy futures are therefore often use d to assess 
the current development in the international ﬁ  nan cial 
markets, even thou gh ex chan ge-tra ded contra cts still 
make up a relatively insi gniﬁ cant share of the overall 
forwar d market. In the followin g we seek to examine 
the suita bility of these data for explainin g an d fore cast-
ing ex chan ge rate developments. The examination is 
base d on the futures contra cts tra ded on the CME in the 
Australian dollar, euro, poun d sterlin g, Swiss fran c, yen 
and the correspon ding US dollar ex chan ge rates. Since 
a futures contra ct con cluded on the CME implies both a lon g (ie forwar d pur chase) an d a short (ie forwar d 
sale) curren cy tra de, the sum of all short contra cts is at 
ﬁ rst equal to the sum of all lon g contra cts. However, the 
counterparties are divided into two groups by the U S 
Commo dity Futures Tra ding Commission ( CFTC), mainly 
in a ccordance with their tra ding motives. Counterparties 
who use curren cy futures primarily to he dge open posi-
tions are classiﬁ  ed as “ commer cial tra ders”, whereas all 
others, in parti cular those with pre dominantly spe cula-
tive motives, are classiﬁ  ed as “non- commer cial tra ders”. 
According to the CFTC, the distin ction between commer-
cial an d non- commer cial tra ders is base d on information 
supplie d by the market parti cipants themselves. Fo cus-
ing on the tra ding activities of non- commer cial tra ders 
shoul d thus pro duce an at least approximate estimate 
of the ex chan ge rate expe ctations of the “market“. For 
example, if the sum of the spe culative short contra cts in 
1 Differen ce between the num ber of lon g an d short contra cts on 
Swiss fran cs (a bove CHF125,000) an d yen (a bove ¥12,500,000). — 
2 However, the correlation between the ex chan ge rate an d spe cu-
lative net position decreases si gniﬁ cantly when lon ger time perio ds are consi dere d. — 3 GMM estimator of the re gressions with Newey-
West corre ction of the covarian ce matrix. The depen dent varia ble 
is the per centa ge chan ge in the respe ctive U S dollar ex chan ge rate 
(dspot); dnetlon g is the chan ge of the net lon g positions. t-statisti c weekly
US$ thou-
san d
2005 200 6 07+  30
0
–  30
–  60
–  90
–1 2 0
–1 5 0Yen/U S dollar ex chan ge rate (Y  100 = U S$ ...)
Futures contra cts
(Net lon g positions, 1
right-han d scale)+  20
0
–  20
–  40
–  60
–  80Swiss fran c/US dollar ex chan ge rate
(CHF1 = U S$ ...)
Futures contra cts
(Net lon g positions, 1
right-han d scale)Exchan ge rates an d futures contra cts
0.97
0.94
0.91
0.88
0.85
0.82
0.790.87
0.84
0.81
0.78
0.75

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
31yen is greater than the sum of the spe culative lon g con-
tra cts, risk-neutral non- commer cial tra ders shoul d expe ct 
on avera ge that the yen will rise less than the interest 
rate differential between the two curren cies implies. In 
pra ctice, su ch a situation is assessin g simply as in dicatin g 
a future depre ciation of the yen a gainst the U S dollar.
With a correlation coefﬁ cient of 61% sin ce the begin-
nin g of 2005, the weekly availa ble time series (Tues day 
values) for the spe culative net positions as well as for the 
exchan ge rates show a remarka ble co-movement for the 
yen, whi ch is consi dere d the startin g point of carry tra de 
business. However, similar hi gh values are also foun d for 
the Australian dollar (79%), the euro (53%), the poun d 
sterlin g (90%) an d the Swiss fran c (66%), whi ch can 
certainly also explain market o bservers‘ interest in the 
spe culative net positions as an in dicator of ex chan ge 
rate developments.2
The statisti cal relationship foun d will now be e cono-
metri cally analyse d in more detail. Since the ex chan ge 
rate level generally exhi bits a unit root, the per centa ge 
chan ge in the ex chan ge rate is re gresse d in the e cono-
metri c analysis on the chan ge in the net position. The 
coefﬁ cients all have the corre ct si gn an d are statisti cally 
signiﬁ cant at the 1% level. For example, a coefﬁ cient of 
0.09 (for the euro) means that, all thin gs bein g equal, a 
rise by 1,000 lon g contra cts is a ccompanie d by a 0.09% 
appre ciation of the euro. In a ddition, a comparatively 
high R2 su ggests a si gniﬁ cant contri bution to explain-
ing the net positions. Of course, spe culators in forei gn 
exchan ge markets are mainly intereste d in knowin g 
whether the si gn of their position chan ge correspon ds 
to the si gn of the ex chan ge rate chan ge. Therefore, 
success rates were also calculate d, whi ch are deﬁ ne d as 
the relative num ber of weeks in whi ch non- commer cial 
tra ders raise d (lowere d) their net lon g position an d the 
curren cy appre ciate d (depre ciate d). In fa ct, with values 
pre dominantly a bove 70%, the coefﬁ cients point to a 
relatively hi gh su ccess rate of the market-wi de spe cula-
tive position-takin g. Consequently, the net positions in 
the futures markets can in deed be re garded as an in di-
cator of current developments in the forei gn ex chan ge 
market. However, if these data are to be use d for proje ctin g 
exchan ge rate movements, they must have system-
ati c lea ding in dicator properties. The lea ding in dica-
tor property of a varia ble can be gauged by means of 
Gran ger causality tests, in whi ch case histori cal values of 
the position chan ge are to be teste d for their statisti-
cal si gniﬁ cance for the current ex chan ge rate chan ge. 
The test results show that the position chan ges gener-
ally do not have any pre dictive or explanatory power; 
position chan ges (ex cept in the case of the euro) are not 
Gran ger- causal for the ex chan ge rate chan ges. By con-
trast, a Gran ger- causal relationship can be seen from 
the ex chan ge rate chan ges to the position chan ges. The 
econometri c mo del therefore does not allow the con clu-
sion that the ex chan ge rate is driven by the spe culative 
activities of international investors. On the contrary, 
spe culators appear to rea ct to ex chan ge rate chan ges by 
chan ging their net lon g position, whi ch coul d be inter-
prete d as an in dicator of fee dback tra ding. 
If the e conometri c test results are pre dominantly ne g-
ative in this case, too, a lea ding in dicator property of 
spe culative positions cannot be completely rule d out. 
Since the tests are base d on weekly data, any shorter-run 
relationship between the two varia bles is not capture d. 
According to more re cent approa ches in ex chan ge rate 
theory, whi ch expli citly take the mi crostru cture of the 
forei gn ex chan ge markets into a ccount, a causal impa ct 
of open positions on the ex chan ge rate development 
coul d at least exist for intra day data.
in brackets. (*, **, ***) si gniﬁ es statisti cal si gniﬁ cance at the 10% 
(5%, 1%) level. Success is deﬁ ne d as a week in whi ch non- commer-
cial tra ders raise d (lowere d) their net lon g position an d the curren cyappre ciate d (depre ciate d) (su ccess rate in per cent). Gran ger causality 
test base d on VAR estimations (Wal d test) χ2 – test statisti c.Estimation results3
Weekly data from 5 January 1999 to 2 January 2007
Position AUD CHF EUR GBP YEN
Constant 0.03 0.04 0.01 0.03 0.03
(0.53) (0.77) (0.21) (0.71) (0.06)
dnetlong 0.13 0.11 0.09 0.09 0.06
(10.12)*** (11.24)*** (8.52)*** (9.17)*** (11.65)***
R20.22 0.39 0.24 0.28 0.33
Success rate 63.31 73.86 70.50 70.98 72.66
Granger causality
dnetlong >> dspot 9.77 0.17 6.22** 2.30 2.71
dspot>> dnetlong 19.31** 13.30** 8.74** 10.79** 8.31**

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
32metric studies show more of a reversed caus-
ality and trace the speculative positions in the
derivative markets back to earlier exchange
rate movements (see box on pages 30-31).
Vis-/C224-vis the pound sterling, the euro stayed
within a narrow range around £0.67 at the
end of 2006. This therefore initially confirmed
the assumption of a strong co-movement of
the euro and the pound against the US dollar.
However, after the Bank of England surpris-
ingly increased its interest rate to 5.25% in
January 2007, the euro depreciated consider-
ably. Subsequently, the unexpectedly sharp
rise in real estate and consumer prices also
pointed to a dynamic development of the
British economy and initially triggered specu-
lations about further interest rate moves by
the central bank. However, these speculations
were dampened following the publication of
the minutes of the Bank of England’s meet-
ing, which showed that the last interest rate
move was voted through with only a small
majority. At the end of the period under re-
view, the euro-pound exchange rate was
hovering around £0.67 amid slight fluctu-
ations, which is just over 51/C252% below its
value at the start of European monetary
union.
Due to the accession of Slovenia into the euro
area and the entry of Bulgaria and Romania
into the EU, the index of the effective euro
exchange rate has been calculated since the
beginning of the year vis-/C224-vis 24 instead of
23 major trading partners. On average, it has
somewhat appreciated against the currencies
of this new group of countries since mid-No-
vember. As this article went to press, the ef-fective exchange rate stood at around the
same level recorded at the beginning of this
year and just over 21/C252% above the level at
the start of monetary union. In real terms – ie
taking the simultaneously prevailing inflation
differentials between the euro area and major
trading partners into account – the effective
euro exchange rate, which is also a measure
of the price competitiveness of companies in
the euro area, was thus again somewhat
more clearly above its value at the start of
monetary union.
Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
Since the beginning of October, European
government bond yields in the capital market
have increased by almost1/C252percentage point
to just over 4%. After a decline in November,
the increase since mid-December has been
notably pronounced. It was accompanied by
positive economic reports for the euro area
and for Germany, in particular. In line with a
buoyant economic outlook, the rise in interest
rates was accompanied by a higher real inter-
est rate level.1The uncertainty about future
interest rate developments, measured in
terms of the implied volatility of options on
Bund futures, concurrently decreased.
The yields in the European bond market
moved somewhat synchronously to interest
rates in the dollar area. There also, interest
rates have increased since mid-December,
1Real interest rates calculated from Consensus Econom-
ics surveys as well as yields of inflation-indexed govern-
ment bonds.... and the
pound sterling
Effective euro
exchange rateRising long-
term interest
rates in the
euro area ...
... and in the
dollar area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
33when a more favourable economic picture
started to emerge, to almost 5% most re-cently. Besides the fall in oil prices, this is likelyto be due inter alia to the more robust state
of the real estate market. Previously expectednegative effects on private consumption,which is especially important for the US econ-omy, have so far largely failed to materialise.In line with this, GDP growth expectations forthe USA for 2007 inferred from surveysincreased slightly in January to 2.4%.
2
In November, an inverse curve emerged in the
short to medium-term maturity segment ofthe yield curve for Federal bonds (Bunds) in
the German bond market. At the short end,
the yields increased owing to the Eurosys-tem’s interest rate rises, while the medium
and long-term yields decreased. Such a pat-tern is often seen as a leading indicator of amarked economic slowdown, which, how-ever, did not emerge for Germany (apartfrom the known shifts in the economic profile
due to the raising of value-added tax). Afterpartly surprisingly positive economic data inDecember, the yields therefore edged up-wards again perceptibly especially in the me-dium and long-term segments, which finallyresulted again in a rising interest rate curve.
At a slightly increasing interest rate level, the
yield spread of BBB-rated corporate bondsover government bonds in the euro areadeclined by about one-fifth to 99 basispoints. The increased risk premium, whichhad emerged in the tense financial markets inMay/June 2006, has thus been more thaneliminated. The declining yield spreads pointto a continuing high risk propensity on thepart of investors, which is benefiting not least
the persistently ebullient business withmergers and acquisitions.
With gross sales of domestic debt securities
amounting to 3256 billion in the fourth quar-
ter, issuing activity in the German bond mar-ket was stronger than in the third quarter.However, at 32
1/C252billion net after deducting
redemptions and changes in issuers’ holdings
of their own securities, German borrowers
raised less than half as much as in the previ-
ous quarter ( 36 billion). Foreign bonds and
money market instruments were accommo-
dated to a much greater degree in the Ger-man market in the reporting period ( 342 bil-
lion). The vast majority of these were euro-Weekly average
%
Per-
centage
pointsSpread of US bond yields
over the German
bond market
2004 2005 2006 2007Yield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
GermanyUSABond yields in Germany
and the USA
Deutsche Bundesbank1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2Source: Consensus Economics.End of the
inverse yield
curve
Declining
premiums on
corporate
bondsIssuing activityin the German
bond market
somewhat
brisker

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
34denominated government debt securities
from euro-area partner countries. The net
sales of these securities, which are regularly
in demand among domestic investors owing
to the fact that they carry a slightly higher
rate of interest than the benchmark Bund,
thus more than doubled quarter on quarter.
In addition, 331/C252billion worth of foreign debt
securities denominated in foreign currency
were purchased in the German market. The
total amount raised from the sales of domes-
tic and foreign debt securities in the period
from October to December thus reached
3441/C252billion, compared with 325 billion in
the previous three months.
At barely 341/C252billion in the fourth quarter,
the public sector increased its indebtedness in
the bond market to a much lesser degreethan in the previous quarter (just over 320 bil-
lion). On balance, it was mainly state govern-
ment that tapped the capital market ( 321/C252bil-
lion). The amount raised by central govern-
ment was – partly owing to its favourable
cash balance – merely 32 billion, compared
with 3211/C252billion in the third quarter. On bal-
ance, it issued only five-year Federal notes
(Bobls) for 39 billion and Federal Treasury fi-
nancing paper ( 31/C252billion), while it reduced
its market debt in the other debt instruments.
For example, it redeemed two-year Federal
Treasury notes (Sch/C228tze) amounting to 34 bil-
lion net and ten-year Bunds worth 32 billion
net. In addition, it reduced the circulation of
thirty-year Bunds and Federal Treasury dis-
count paper (Bubills) by 31/C252billion in each
case.
After the German credit institutions had re-
deemed their own bonds on balance in the
previous quarter, they made small use of the
bond market in the reporting period ( 321/C252bil-
lion). The amount raised from the issuance of
debt certificates by the specialised credit insti-
tutions and the category of other bank debt
securities, which can be structured flexibly,
reached 381/C252billion and 37 billion, respect-
ively, in the fourth quarter. By contrast, the
German credit institutions reduced their debt
related to mortgage Pfandbriefe by 39 billion
and their outstanding public Pfandbriefe by
34 billion.
In contrast to the other issuers, non-financial
corporations reduced the circulation of their
own bonds and money market instruments
on balance in the fourth quarter, namely by
341/C252billion and thus on a similar scale as in%
0123456789 1 0
Residual maturity in years14 February 2007
4 December 20065 October 2006 1Yield curve
in the German bond market *
*Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-cou-
pon bonds (Svensson method), based on
listed Federal securities. — 1Before the
interest rate increase of 25 basis points by
the Governing Council of the ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank4.2
4.1
4.0
3.9
3.8
3.7
3.6
3.5
Low level of
funds raised by
the public
sectorSlight rise in
credit institu-
tions’ market
debt
Net redemp-
tions of
corporate
bonds

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
35the previous quarter ( 34 billion). In doing so,
they redeemed short-term and longer-term
instruments in roughly equal amounts. Themain reason for this was probably firms’ lowexternal financing requirement.
As in the third quarter, German debt secur-
ities were mainly purchased by foreign invest-ors in the last quarter of 2006. They addedbonds and notes of public sector borrowersworth 320
1/C252billion and private sector debt in-
struments worth 320 billion to their port-
folios. In addition, German credit institutions
acquired bonds and notes worth 3211/C252billion
net. By contrast, domestic non-banks sold
fixed-income securities amounting to 3171/C252
billion. Both domestic groups of investorssold domestic debt securities ( 316
1/C252billion
and 3211/C252billion, respectively). While the
credit institutions primarily sold bank debt se-curities, non-banks sold public sector paper
and instruments issued by credit institutions
to a similar extent. By contrast, the interest ofdomestic buyers was focused on foreign se-
curities. Banks, in particular, included them intheir bond portfolios ( 338
1/C252billion), but also
non-banks were among the purchasers of
foreign debt securities ( 34 billion).
The share prices in the international stock
markets have experienced extremely buoyantgrowth since the end of September. Theshare price gains in Germany and Europe of17% (CDAX) and 12% (DJ Euro Stoxx) weresignificantly higher than the gains of the USS&P 500 index (9%).
3This presumably also
reflects changed growth expectations of the
capital market players. The good perform-
ance of the sub-indices for pro-cyclical stocksalso indicates cyclical influences on share
price movements. One factor that did nothave an effect on the share price develop-ment, by contrast, was the slight downwardrevision of the expected earnings growth forEuropean enterprises.
4In January, for ex-
ample, analysts projected an average annual
rise in profits of 7.3% for the next three to
five years, compared with 8.6% in Septem-
ber.Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2005 2006
Item Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents – 5.9 6.6 4.0
Credit institutions – 1.3 – 0.8 21.7
of which
Foreign debt securities 24.3 10.0 38.4
Non-banks – 4.6 7.5 – 17.7of which
Domestic debt securities – 14.3 – 1.6 – 21.5
Non-residents 16.8 18.4 40.6
Shares
Residents 5.3 16.3 – 20.0
Credit institutions 7.2 3.7 9.7
of which
Domestic shares 1.6 – 2.5 5.1
Non-banks – 1.9 12.6 – 29.7of which
Domestic shares – 14.0 4.6 – 25.1
Non-residents 19.2 2.0 22.2
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 13.9 5.7 7.0
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public – 3.4 – 3.9 – 1.9of which: Share-based funds 1.7 – 1.1 – 1.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
3Throughout the calendar year 2006, share prices in
Germany and in the euro area rose faster than in the US
market, while Japanese equities achieved lower growth.
In Japan, the subdued pace of economic activity in the
fourth quarter as well as in the year as a whole, together
with declining private consumption, weighed heavily on
the share prices. Most recently, however, the fact that the
Bank of Japan, contrary to expectations, did not raise its
key interest rate boosted share prices, at least for a time.
4I/B/E/S analysts’ forecasts for the DJ Euro Stoxx.Purchases of
debt securities
Share price
gains in the
stock markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
36In spite of rising share prices, issuing activity
in the German share market weakened in the
fourth quarter. Domestic enterprises issued
new shares totalling around 32 billion, com-
pared with just over 34 billion in the previous
quarter. The majority of these shares were
shares of listed companies. Foreign shares
were not sold on balance in Germany be-
tween October and December.
As in the bond market, foreign buyers were
the foremost investor group in the German
stock market in the fourth quarter with 322
billion. This mainly took the form of portfolio
investment ( 3131/C252billion).5Domestic credit
institutions increased their holdings of Ger-
man shares by 35 billion and purchased for-
eign equities worth 341/C252billion net. By con-
trast, regardless of the positive share price de-
velopments in the stock markets, domestic
non-banks sold both German and foreign
shares on balance in the amount of 325 bil-
lion and 341/C252billion, respectively, after having
increased their equity investments in the pre-
vious quarter.
In the fourth quarter of 2006, domestic mu-
tual investment companies recorded inflows
of35 billion, and thus more than in the previ-
ous reporting period ( 32 billion). On balance,
new resources were attracted only by the
specialised funds which are reserved for insti-
tutional investors ( 37 billion). By contrast,
mutual fund shares of German funds open to
the general public were redeemed again on
balance ( 32 billion), although the withdrawal
of resources has slowed down comparedMajor items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2005 2006
Item Q4 Q3 Q4
I Current account 1,2 + 19.4 + 18.7 + 35.4
Foreign trade 1,3 + 33.6 + 39.5 + 46.3 o
Services 1 – 4.3 – 11.3 – 3.0
Income 1 + 3.5 + 3.3 + 5.3
Current transfers 1 – 7.6 – 7.6 – 8.1
II Capital transfers 1,4 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.1
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 41.0 – 16.7 – 47.3
1 Direct investment + 20.5 – 13.0 + 8.6
German investment
abroad + 4.0 – 16.9 – 8.8
Foreign investment in
Germany + 16.5 + 3.8 + 17.3
2 Portfolio investment – 44.9 + 4.0 + 1.8
German investment
abroad – 59.9 – 22.1 – 53.4
Shares – 20.6 – 1.9 – 3.1
Mutual fund shares – 5.3 – 1.1 – 8.1
Debt securities – 34.1 – 19.1 – 42.2
Bonds and notes 5 – 32.6 – 17.6 – 44.1
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes – 25.3 – 15.5 – 38.6
Money market
instruments – 1.5 – 1.5 + 1.9
Foreign investment
in Germany + 15.0 + 26.1 + 55.2
Shares + 0.1 + 6.5 + 13.3
Mutual fund shares – 1.9 + 1.2 + 1.4
Debt securities + 16.8 + 18.4 + 40.6
Bonds and notes 5 + 24.7 + 22.7 + 48.5
of which
Public bonds and
notes + 14.3 + 10.1 + 21.3
Money market
instruments – 7.9 – 4.3 – 8.0
3 Financial derivatives 6 – 3.2 – 0.3 – 3.0
4 Other investment 7 – 15.4 – 8.3 – 55.3
Monetary financial
institutions 8 + 10.6 + 13.0 – 56.1
of which: short-term + 38.4 + 28.3 – 23.0
Enterprises and
individuals + 4.7 + 0.8 – 13.2
of which: short-term + 10.1 + 4.1 – 4.9
General government – 6.2 + 5.9 + 4.2
of which: short-term – 6.0 – 1.0 + 2.9
Bundesbank – 24.5 – 28.0 + 9.8
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 + 1.9 + 0.8 + 0.6
IV Errors and omissions + 21.6 – 1.7 + 12.0
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments. — oExports positively influ-
enced by late reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank5For details of direct investment, see p 38.Slightly less
funds raised in
equity market
Share
purchases
Sales of mutual
fund shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
37Deuts che Bun desbankOutﬂ  ows from domesti c mutual fun ds in 200 6
German non- banks reshufﬂ  ed their portfolios in 
200 6. This also ha d a bearin g on mutual investment 
fun ds. Thus, domesti c fun ds open to the general 
pu blic redeeme d shares for just over €14 billion on 
balan ce in 200 6. This outﬂ  ow of resour ces – the 
biggest to date – can be attri bute d lar gely to the 
with drawal of capital from open-en d real estate 
fun ds (€9 billion), whi ch, after a lar ge mutual 
fun d temporarily suspen ded re deemin g shares at 
the turn of 2005-0 6, continue d into the mi ddle of 
200 6. In a ddition, share- base d fun ds an d bon d-
base d fun ds, the two other tra ditional mutual 
fun ds cate gories, both ha d to make repayments 
(€6½ billion an d €4 billion, respe ctively). This is 
noteworthy inasmu ch as domesti c non- banks‘ 
dire ct investment in equities likewise fell, even 
thou gh sto ck markets re corded signiﬁ cant share 
pri ce gains all over the worl d in 200 6. 
Mixe d fun ds an d mixe d se curities- base d fun ds, 
whi ch were a ble to sell shares for €2 billion an d 
€1 billion net, respe ctively, beneﬁ te d from some 
of the resour ces whi ch were free d up. Pur chases of 
forei gn mutual fun d shares by domesti c non- banks 
were an even stron ger counterwei ght (€25 billion, 
compare d with €40 billion in 2005), whi ch means 
that net sales of forei gn mutual fun d shares have 
exceeded inﬂ ows of domesti c mutual fun ds open 
to the general pu blic in every year sin ce their dis-
tribution was simpliﬁ  ed in the context of Euro-
pean harmonisation at the start of 2004. How-
ever, this does not ne cessarily imply a with drawal 
of resour ces from German investment groups. A 
comparison with the fun d statisti cs of BVI, the 
German investment in dustries’ asso ciation, su g-
gests that forei gn mutual fun d shares were sol d 
mainly by forei gn su bsidiaries of German invest-
ment companies. Furthermore, there was stron g 
growth in 200 6 in the derivatives market aime d 
at retail investors. Instruments with a con ditional 
promise to pay (“ certiﬁ cates” an d the like) are, in 
some cases, pro bably re garded by investors as a 
substitute for mutual fun ds.1)
The outﬂ  ows from domesti c fun ds open to the 
general pu blic in 200 6 were offset by lar ger value 
gains, with the result that, overall, their assets un der mana gement in crease d by €1½ billion to 
€354½ billion. The proportion of equities in mutual 
fun ds’ portfolios went up in relation to debt se cu-
rities, whi ch was due mainly to the different pri ce 
tren ds in the two markets. One possi ble reason for 
the relu ctan ce of retail investors – who were pri-
marily the investors in question – to invest in equi-ties despite risin g share pri ces coul d be a lesser 
risk propensity, althou gh this woul d contrast to a 
certain extent with the behaviour of other groups 
of investors who have ultimately contri bute d to 
the g
enerally o bserva ble compression of risk pre-
miums in the ﬁ  nan cial markets. Irrespe ctive of 
this, the cautious investment behaviour of retail 
savers mi ght also be attri buta ble to psy cholo gical 
aspe cts. For example, many shares were tra ding at 
least close to their histori cal peaks in 200 6, whi ch 
allowe d investors who ha d pur chase d durin g the 
last boom to with draw their capital a gain without 
sustainin g a nominal loss. 
1 In the capital market statisti cs, these pro ducts, whi ch, in 
contrast to mutual fun ds, do not constitute a rin g-fen ced 
pool of dedicate d resour ces (“spe cial fun d“) an d are there-fore su bject to an issuer credit risk, are shown un der other 
bank debt se curities — o From 1999 data in euro.DM bn€ bn
o20406080
0Net pur chase of forei gn
mutual fun d shares by
resi dents
1994 200 6–2 0020406080Net inflow of resour ces to German
fun ds open to the general pu blic
Total
of which
Open-en d real estate fun dsSales of mutual fun d shares
in Germany
40
30
20
10
040
30
20
10
0
10–
20–
95 9 697 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
38with July to September ( 34 billion) (see box
on page 37). Share and bond-based funds, in
particular, recorded outflows ( 32 billion and
311/C252billion, respectively). By contrast, open-
end real estate funds and money market
funds were able to place unit shares amount-
ing to just over 31 billion and 31/C252billion, re-
spectively, in the market. The outstanding
shares of the mixed funds and pension mu-
tual funds remained unchanged. There was a
significant increase, however, in the sales of
foreign investment fund units ( 38 billion),
which were sold in the German market only
to the amount of 31 billion in the previous
quarter.
Mutual fund shares were purchased mainly
by domestic non-banks ( 310 billion), two-
thirds of which were foreign mutual fund
shares. Domestic credit institutions slightly in-
creased their holdings of mutual fund shares
on balance by 32 billion; they likewise
showed a clear preference for foreign mutual
fund shares ( 311/C252billion). Foreign investors
purchased just under 311/C252billion of mutual
fund shares in the German market.Direct investment
Similar to the transactions in cross-border
portfolio investment, direct investment also
resulted in capital imports in the last quarter
of 2006, amounting to 381/C252billion (net); in
each of the previous three quarters, there had
been noticeable outflows of funds. One main
reason for the turnaround was higher invest-
ment by foreign enterprises in Germany
(3171/C252billion, after 34 billion in the third
quarter). These enterprises increased their
equity capital by 391/C252billion, with corporate
takeovers in the pharmaceutical sector play-
ing an important role. Moreover, they grant-
ed more loans to their branches in Germany.
Another main reason is that the direct invest-
ment of German enterprises in the three-
month period from October to December
(39 billion) did not reach the value of the pre-
ceding period ( 317 billion). The decline was
significantly influenced by the sale of an
enterprise in the utility sector, after a large
takeover transaction had made an impact in
the previous three-month period. In addition,
inflows of funds owing to German parent
companies borrowing from their subsidiaries
abroad had further restraining effects.Purchases of
mutual fund
sharesTurnaround
in direct
investment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
39Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The cyclical upturn in the German economy
continued at a rapid pace in the final quarter
of 2006. According to initial calculations by
the Federal Statistical Office, overall econom-
ic output went up by 0.9% in seasonally and
calendar-adjusted terms in the fourth quarter.
There was a 3.7% rise on the year after ad-
justment for working-day variations. After
taking account of the upward revision for the
two preceding quarters, the annual growth
rate for 2006 was 2.9% in working-day ad-
justed terms, compared with 1.1% in 2005.
In unadjusted terms, the increase amounted
to 2.7%. Thus, on a longer-term comparison,
the German economy performed better than
at any time since 2000.
Towards the end of the year, economic
growth was, in fact, even somewhat higher
than in the third quarter. Anticipatory effects
in connection with the VAT increase that was
to come into effect on 1 January 2007 played
a greater role here than in the preceding
months. Furthermore, the exceptionally mild
weather conditions in November and Decem-
ber supported construction activity. Even if
these influences on domestic output are virtu-
ally excluded, however, there is still a strong
underlying cyclical trend which is having an
increasingly positive effect, not least in the la-
bour market. Although detailed figures for
the fourth quarter are not yet available, it can
be assumed that the economic growth pro-
cess was broadly based. There are also some
indications that the current upswing still has
a lot of potential (see also the explanatory
notes on pages 40-41).Strong growth
in Q4 2006

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
40Deutsche BundesbankUpturn with a bright outlook
The German economy is currently in a positive cyclical
phase. Towards the end of the period under review, in
fact, macroeconomic growth clearly exceeded general ex-
pectations. This could be an indication of the German
economy’s own stronger inherent momentum; neverthe-
less, a number of positive special factors were also in play
in 2006. As things look at present, what are the prospects
of the upswing carrying on in the longer term and grad-
ually leading to a steeper growth path?
The current cycle started in mid-2003, and has therefore
been under way for nearly four years. In itself, however,
this is still no reason to assume that the cyclical recovery
will come to an end in the near future, nor does it display
endogenous signs of fatigue or elements of tension. The
three preceding upturns, too, lasted over seven years on
average. Furthermore, it has to be borne in mind that
growth was fairly weak in the initial phase of the current
upswing, which was sustained solely by exports up to
mid-2004. Although corporate investment subsequently
turned positive, the rise in overall output remained sub-
dued until 2005. It was not until 2006 that housing in-
vestment and private consumption also made a contribu-
tion to the accelerated increase in aggregate demand.
Even so, as early as mid-2006, there arose concerns that
the upswing in Germany might soon come to an end.
Such worries related, firstly, to the risk of quite strong re-
tarding effects stemming from the international setting,
on which the German economy has traditionally been
heavily dependent, and, secondly, to the fear that the
VAT increase in Germany and excessive wage increases in
the current year might impair the cyclical upturn. These
anxieties became evident in the – at times – more cau-
tious assessments of business expectations in German in-
dustry as well as in the assessments of the economic out-
look in the financial sector.
With regard to developments in the global economy, in
the fourth quarter there was increasing expression of
concern about the threat of a sharp slowdown in the
global pace of growth if there were to be a hard landing
in the USA – stemming from a slump in prices in the hous-
ing market and a collapse of US construction activity –
which might even lead into a recession there. Such a de-
velopment would produce contagion effects for the rest
of the world, which would undoubtedly impact heavily
on the German economy. However, the likelihood of sucha scenario occurring has now clearly diminished. Follow-
ing the slowdown in the second and third quarters of
2006, the US economy picked up again towards the end
of the year. This is illustrated by the fact that seasonally
and calendar-adjusted real GDP, at just under 1%, ex-
panded noticeably more sharply than in the previous two
quarters. Added to this were initial signs of a stabilisation
in the housing market. Furthermore, considerable in-
creases in the value of financial assets have taken the
place of the recent lack of positive wealth effects. US
households’ consumer demand was sustained, above all,
by the gain in purchasing power resulting from the sharp
fall in oil prices since August 2006. Furthermore, global
growth has become more balanced regionally, with the
result that the global economy is likely to have become
less dependent on the US economy. Growth in Japan like-
wise accelerated in the final quarter, while the emerging
market economies, primarily China and India, are still in
full swing. Ultimately, the relief provided by the fall in
energy prices has given new impetus to the economies of
the oil-consuming countries worldwide. Moreover, for
enterprises, financing conditions have remained favour-
able and their resilience has shown a further improve-
ment owing to better profitability and capital adequacy.
Against this backdrop, in mid-January the IMF reaffirmed
its September 2006 forecast that global growth of 5% is
to be expected in 2007 – for the fourth time in succession.
This means that the global economy is in one of its most
dynamic periods of expansion since the 1950s. At the
same time, upward pressure on prices has increased only
marginally and oil-price-induced second-round effects
have largely been avoided. Along with modified wage
behaviour and increased confidence in stability, this
points to a markedly higher global growth potential.
Mainly on account of rapid growth in the emerging mar-
ket economies, average GDP growth between 1998 and
2007, at just over 4%, was3/C254percentage point higher
than the figure for the period from 1988 to 1997.1
What also has to be taken into consideration is that
global downside risks have diminished in recent months,
even if they are still of greater moment than the pro-
spects of even more positive global economic activity. Al-
though there is still the risk of sudden oil price surges,
this is to be rated significantly lower than a year ago.
Moreover, owing to the trend decline in the oil bill, the
pick-up in exports as a result of the depreciation of the
1The IMF assesses the GDP of the individual countries using purchas-
ing power parities. This means that the total output of the emergingmarket economies, which is expanding relatively sharply on average,
is given a higher weighting than when measured at market prices.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
41US dollar and the slowdown in growth, a slight easing of
the external imbalance is likely for the USA. In this con-nection, it should also be mentioned that the stability
and profitability of the global financial system may be
deemed to be favourable at present, not least becauseEast Asia has now become significantly more resilient fol-lowing the severe financial crisis of 1997-98.
Overall, German enterprises are well placed to partici-
pate fully in this positive development of the globaleconomy. As a result of the marked cost discipline in re-cent years, the competitiveness of the German economyis now in a very good state. Moreover, in many countries,there is a large demand for high-quality capital goods, a
market segment in which German enterprises have trad-itionally been strongly represented. Seen in this light, ex-ports are likely to continue generating major stimuli forthe upswing in Germany.
But with regard to the domestic economy, too, the pro-
spects of the upswing continuing are bright. The courseof consolidation pursued by enterprises over the past fewyears has led to a falling level of debt and a marked de-cline in the corporate sector’s net interest burden. Owingto their stronger capital base, enterprises have also be-come broadly more resistant to setbacks. The fact that
stability in the German financial system has continued to
improve of late is consistent with this. The German banksare in a robust state, and there has been a further in-crease in their ability to bear risk. Households, too, havebecome more optimistic. This was reflected, not least, bythe fact that, for the first time since 2000, there was nofurther rise in the household saving ratio.
Business investment is also likely to remain a major factor
underpinning the upswing. The current high level of util-isation of industrial plant capacity and a considerableneed for replacement investment suggest that invest-ment is still clearly on the up, especially as the externalfinancing conditions are still favourable in Germany, too,and enterprises are, to a particular extent, displaying animproved capital adequacy. Firms’ underlying sentimentis also very optimistic, which means that the “psycho-logical factor” also argues for stronger capital formation;there is, in any case, still a lot of room for manoeuvre interms of domestic saving.In addition, the marked brightening of the labour mar-
ket situation means that a crucial condition for strength-ening private consumption is in place. This means that
there is potential for a self-sustaining upswing in Ger-
many. This year, however, consumers are faced withstrains deriving from fiscal policy in connection with thefundamentally necessary consolidation of government
budgets. These strains are economically manageable
when taken in isolation, but still signify a considerableloss of income.
There is definitely the necessary room for more pro-
longed, largely tension-free economic growth. Althoughthe utilisation of the production factors labour and cap-
ital increased markedly in 2006, the normal level of cyclic-al capacity utilisation – given the uncertainty of outputgap estimates at the current end – is unlikely to havebeen reached yet. Furthermore, the “ignition” of invest-ment activity and the shifting of investment motives infavour of extensions suggest that capacity effects will in-creasingly set in. Not least, the reforms in the labour mar-ket are beginning to bear fruit. If the greater variabilityof possible working hour arrangements is taken into con-sideration along with what is now a broad range of em-ployment forms, a wide variety of options is now avail-able at the firm level, which permits a considerable in-crease in the flexibility of labour deployment and moreeffective factor input combinations.
However, there is still no clear empirical evidence of
stronger potential growth and, therefore, a steepergrowth path in Germany. From a national perspective, itwill now be important to persevere along the route thathas been taken. Not least given the fierce competitionfor investment and the continuing high level of baselineemployment, the key wage policy task is not to fully ex-ploit the existing greater cyclical scope for income distri-bution, to maintain its existing predictability, and toachieve a sustained increase in the employment contentof growth by means of flexible agreements. Moreover, itis crucial that fiscal policy remains on a consolidationpath, and that the economic policy framework providesscope to strengthen technological competitiveness andto build up human capital. To do this, it will be impera-tive to keep the reform process going, also against thebackdrop of the looming demographic strains.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
42Real foreign trade is likely to have again made
a significant contribution to the expansion in
economic output in the final quarter of 2006.
According to the available indicators, real
growth in exports of goods and services,
which had already been quite buoyant in the
third quarter, picked up even greater momen-
tum.1Moreover, imports went up only slightly
in the fourth quarter in real terms after rising
almost as sharply as exports in the third quar-
ter. On balance, the external sector generated
considerable expansionary impulses for over-
all growth in the fourth quarter. This reflects
both the ongoing favourable international
setting as well as the continued positive com-
petitive position of the German economy.
Domestic investment activity was on an up-
ward path again. Boosted by the growth incapacity utilisation throughout the period
under review, the incentive to expand is likely
to have gained further importance in the case
of expenditure on machinery and equipment.
This is also shown by the latest Ifo Investment
Test and the most recent survey on invest-
ment by the German Chamber of Industry
and Commerce (DIHK). These reveal that re-
placement purchases are still the most signifi-
cant investment motive. However, more
enterprises, especially in industry and the
construction sector, are stating that they
want to expand their capacity. The positive
business climate in trade and industry is also
an indication of the positive trend in invest-
ment. The exceptionally favourable weather
conditions generated an additional stimulus
to construction investment. The fact that
stocks of orders were completed before the
VAT increase came into effect is also likely to
have played a role here.
Private consumption is still not showing a
clearly recognisable picture. As in the third
quarter, traditional retail sales (excluding cars)
remained rather subdued towards the end of
the year. Although there were obvious antici-
patory effects in connection with the VAT in-
crease for certain categories of goods during
the reporting period, this contrasted with
lower spending in other areas. There was,
however, an exceptionally sharp rise in new
passenger car registrations by private owners
in November and December. In some cases,
the higher unit car sales were taken from
stock, which means that the increased con-Seasonally adjusted
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale  
Real GDP
2000 = 100Economic growth
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−108
106
104
102
100
98
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
1In this context, it should be noted that exports of goods
between September and November were positively influ-
enced by late reports.Strong external
stimuliDomestic
demand
somewhat
more subdued

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
43sumer demand was accompanied by a damp-
ening contribution to growth in terms of
changes in inventories.
Output and sales
Industrial activity continued at a rapid pace in
the fourth quarter as well. It was1/C254%u po n
the third quarter after adjustment for season-
al and working-day variations. However, out-
put failed to match the rapid growth rate of
the previous two quarters. At the same time,
according to the Ifo surveys, there was a fur-
ther sharp rise in capacity utilisation. In De-
cember 2006, it exceeded the average level
of medium-term capacity utilisation by
31/C252percentage points. This signifies a further
increase in the propensity or necessity for in-
vestment in capacity extensions.
The fact that industrial output was growing
at a somewhat slower pace since mid-year
probably also has to do with the fact that a
number of sectors, especially the motor ve-
hicle industry, had been stepping up their
output for quite some time prior to the VAT
increase in order to satisfy the expected in-
creased demand later on in the second half of
the year stemming from anticipatory effects.
The motor vehicle manufacturing industry,
for example, reached peak production as
early as the third quarter. In the fourth quar-
ter, output was 21/C254% down on the third
quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. If this
sector is excluded, industry increased its pro-
duction by3/C254%. The seasonally adjusted in-
crease was very pronounced in the manufac-
ture of machinery and equipment. Capitalgoods as a whole grew by around3/C254% after
adjustment for seasonal variations, while the
manufacture of consumer goods fell by some
13/C254%. Output of intermediate goods rose by
1%.
In the final quarter of 2006, German exports
of goods, which account for an increasing
share of industrial output, were a seasonally
adjusted 6% up on the quarter. Against this2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−105
100
95
90
85
80
75
7010+
5+
0
5−115
110
105
100
95
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Industrial
output in full
swing, ...
... somewhat
slower pace of
growth recently
Buoyant
foreign trade

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
44backdrop, producers of intermediate and
capital goods, in particular, were able to sig-
nificantly increase their export sales in Octo-
ber and November (figures with a sectoral
breakdown are available up to then). Exports
of metals and metal products grew very dy-
namically. There was also a sharp rise in ex-
ports of chemical products. Furthermore,
manufacturers of machinery, communication
and IT products achieved substantial growth
in sales abroad. In October and November,
the German car industry’s exports of motor
vehicles held up at the level of the third quar-
ter, in which foreign sales had grown consid-
erably. The fact that preference was given to
supplying the domestic market may have
owed something to the impending increase
in VAT on 1 January 2007. There was a sharprise in exports of consumer goods in October
and November.
Seasonally adjusted nominal imports of
goods in the fourth quarter were only slightly
(3/C254%) up on the preceding three-month
period. Given the favourable domestic eco-
nomic activity, significantly more capital
goods were imported than in the third quar-
ter. Imports of motor vehicles and vehicle
parts grew very strongly as a result of antici-
patory effects in connection with the VAT in-
crease. However, this was largely offset by
the fact that there was a considerable decline
in the value and volume of energy imports.
After a relatively weak start to the quarter,
construction output grew substantially as the
quarter progressed. Overall growth in the
fourth quarter was 21/C252% up on the summer
months. The exceptionally mild weather con-
ditions in November and December were a
major contributory factor in this. Further-
more, a greater number of orders are likely to
have been completed prior to the increase in
VAT. Both civil engineering and general con-
struction benefited from the rise in output.
Commercial service providers are likely to
have continued to benefit from the general
buoyancy of the economy. The Ifo business
survey shows that there was a marked im-
provement in the assessment of the situation
in the fourth quarter; following a temporary
decline in the third quarter, it exceeded the
already very high level of the second quarter.
Although the assessment was perceptibly
more cautious in January, this had been pre-
ceded by a sharp improvement in December.Foreign trade by category of goods
Percentage change
Average of Oct–Nov 2006 1
compared with
Q3 2006;
seasonally
adjustedOct–Nov 2005;
unadjusted
figures
Item Exports Imports Exports Imports
Total + 6.7 – 0.1 + 20.7 + 15.4
Main categories
Intermediate goods + 8.5 + 2.3 + 22.1 + 18.5
Capital goods + 7.5 + 3.0 + 16.5 + 11.3
Consumer goods + 5.2 + 1.7 + 14.6 + 5.0
Energy . – 10.9 . + 1.3
Selected categories
Chemicals + 5.5 + 6.3 + 18.9 + 11.0
Machinery + 7.7 + 3.8 + 24.8 + 15.9
Motor vehicles and
motor vehicle parts + 0.1 + 4.8 + 8.1 + 14.1
Information tech-
nology + 6.8 – 1.6 + 10.5 + 5.3
Metals and metal
products + 9.5 + 6.9 + 37.2 + 41.8
1Exports positively influenced by late reports.
Deutsche BundesbankConstruction
output
favoured by
special effects
Positive
situation for
service
providers

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
45According to the survey by the Centre for
European Economic Research (ZEW), the cur-
rent business situation was rated considerably
more favourably in the fourth quarter. In line
with the generally positive economic situ-
ation, the transport sector should also have
shown a positive performance. In the fourth
quarter, the hotel and catering industry failed
to match the level of the previous quarter.
In the retail trade sector (excluding motor ve-
hicles), real retail sales went up by a seasonal-
ly adjusted1/C254% in the final quarter of the
year. However, the growth in sales of electric-
al appliances, furniture and home improve-
ment materials, where demand was boosted
by the impending increase in VAT, was ac-
companied by a decline in demand for food
products. The fact that traditional retail pur-
chases failed to show any further growth as a
whole in the fourth quarter, despite the an-
ticipatory effects, should probably be seen in
connection with the significantly increased
number of purchases of new motor vehicles
by households towards the end of the year.
This may have restricted the scope for con-
sumer spending in other areas. This is also
consistent with the fact that new passenger
car registrations showed a very sharp in-
crease, especially in November and Decem-
ber. Wholesale trade expanded its real sales
quite substantially towards the end of the
period under review. As in the retail trade sec-
tor, electrical household appliances and con-
sumer electronics recorded the largest in-
crease in sales.Employment and unemployment
The underlying upward cyclical trend was re-
flected in a clear rise in employment and a
marked decline in unemployment in the last
few months of 2006. Although the delayed
start to the winter and the anticipatory ef-
fects of the increase in VAT on 1 January
2007 are likely to have played a part in this
positive outcome, enterprises make
personnel-related decisions on a medium to
long-term basis. For that reason, these special
factors are likely, if anything, to have had a
minor effect.
However, with the large-scale lifting of re-
strictions on the hiring out of labour at the
beginning of 2004, enterprises were given
the option of recruiting additional employees
through specialised recruitment agencies, ra-
ther than doing so directly themselves. Enter-
prises made extensive use of this option in
2006. Many new staff were recruited through
commercial service providers, which also in-
cludes the hiring out of labour. According to
Federal Employment Agency figures, in No-
vember 2006 (more recent figures are not
available at present) almost 260,000 more
persons were employed in this way than one
year earlier, giving an aggregate gain of
430,000 jobs subject to social security contri-
butions. Furthermore, around half of the in-
crease in vacancies for positions subject to so-
cial security contributions was in this services
sector.
There are likely to be several factors motivat-
ing the indirect recruitment of staff by leasing
labour. Firstly, in addition to enabling enter-Mixed picture
in tradeLabour market
benefits from
economic
upturn
Growing
importance of
subcontracted
work

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
46prises to make use of differing wage struc-
tures, subcontracted employment allows
them to assess performance without under-
taking direct contractual commitments. Sec-
ondly, enterprises can be more in control of
their arrangements and therefore match pro-
duction to the current order situation. Even
though the substantial gains in employment
in this area are partly due to the favourable
economic setting, it is already possible to tell
what employment gains could be associated
with appropriate reforms of employee protec-
tion rights for conventional employment con-
tracts.2
In the fourth quarter of 2006, the total num-
ber of persons in work rose by 115,000, or
0.3%, to a seasonally adjusted 39.32 million.
The year-on-year increase stood at 450,000,
or 1.1%. This was due, first and foremost, to
a sharp increase in employment subject to so-
cial security contributions. Towards the mid-
dle of the year, however, the increase in the
flat-rate contributions for mini-jobs seemed
to have reduced the level of marginal employ-
ment. The number of self-employed persons
continued to rise as the year progressed, des-
pite the restructuring of the terms and condi-
tions for financial support in August 2006.
The Federal Employment Agency supported a
somewhat larger number of workers in the
fourth quarter than in the previous months.
There was greater provision for reintegration
grants and employment opportunities (one-
euro jobs).Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Millions
Millions
Thou-
sands
Millions
Thou-
sands
%
0
200712Unemployment
rate
JanJanLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed
- 
JanLin scale
Employed
Year-on-year changeof which
Employees subject to social
security contributions
- Oct-
NovLog scale
EmployedLabour market
1From January 2004, unemployed ex-
cluding participants in aptitude testing and
training measures. — 2From January 2005,
unemployed including persons formerly
receiving social assistance but able to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9
8600+
300+
0
300−
600−
900−5.0
4.4
4.1
3.84.7500+
0
500−28.0
27.5
27.0
26.5
26.039.5
39.0
38.5
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
2See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The labour market in
Germany: general developments seen in an international
context, Monthly Report, January 2007, pp 31-51.Rising
employment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
47On an average of the fourth quarter, there
were, at a seasonally adjusted 4.20 million,
220,000 fewer persons registered as un-
employed than in the third quarter. The year-
on-year decline widened to 535,000 persons.
The unemployment rate decreased by 0.6
percentage point on the quarter to 10.0%.
This was an increase of 1.4 percentage points
in year-on-year terms. The positive develop-
ment continued at the start of 2007. In Janu-
ary, a seasonally adjusted 3.98 million persons
were out of work. This was 100,000 fewer
than in December. The number of un-
employed persons decreased by 765,000 on
the year after declining by 595,000 in Decem-
ber. One reason for the sharp year-on-year in-
crease was that, unlike in January 2006, the
weather-related component of underemploy-
ment was very small this time. The seasonally
adjusted unemployment rate went down
from 9.8% in December 2006 to 9.5% in
January, compared with a figure of 11.4%
one year earlier.
Wages and prices
Negotiated pay rates continued to rise at a
moderate rate in 2006. According to Bundes-
bank calculations, the increase was 1.1% on
an hourly basis, compared with 1.0% in the
previous year. On a monthly basis, the figure
was 1.3%, compared with 1.1% in 2005. The
wide fluctuation band of the rates of change
within the year of between -0.2% and
+2.8% was due to the abolition and/or defer-
ment of special payments (such as flat-rate
overtime payments, holiday and Christmas
bonuses) as well as to one-off payments in-cluded in new collective wage agreements.
The above-average rise in negotiated wages
and salaries in the fourth quarter, at +1.8%,
also reflects, first and foremost, an increase in
annual bonus payments for public sector
banks and a one-off flat-rate payment in De-
cember for Volkswagen employees to com-
pensate for the increase in weekly working
hours.
No new wage agreements of significance to
the economy as a whole were concluded in
the last few months of 2006. There will, how-
ever, be a large wage round during the first
half of 2007. A significant number of pay
agreements, particularly in the major indus-
trial sectors, may be terminated. Given the fa-
vourable economic conditions, especially in
the export-related sectors, it will be a matter2000 = 100, annual averages, log scale
Second-hand dwellings
1996 2006Newly built dwellingsProperty prices *
*Terraced houses and owner-occupied
dwellings; Bundesbank calculations based
on raw data provided by BulwienGesa AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank102
100
98
96
94
92102
100
98
97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05Sharp decline in
unemployment
Moderate wage
developments
in 2006
Large wage
round in 2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
48of ensuring that employees are rewarded ad-
equately for good business performance,
while adjusting wage schedules in a way that
takes due account of the interests of the
economy as a whole.
Owing to the more relaxed situation in the
international crude oil markets, there was a
seasonally adjusted 1% decline in import
prices in the fourth quarter of 2006 following
an increase of 0.7% in the previous quarter.
At the domestic industrial producer level, the
rate of price increase fell from 0.9% to 0.1%
for this same reason. However, the prices of
both imported and domestic intermediate
goods showed a further rise. By contrast,
there were relatively moderate price increases
for consumer and capital goods, which even
became cheaper in some cases.
The increase in construction prices eased only
slightly in the last few months of 2006. In the
fourth quarter of 2006, construction prices
went up by an average of 4% on the year. Al-
most all subsectors and individual construc-
tion services were affected by this increase.
Besides the higher prices for some intermedi-
ate goods, such as petroleum products and
steel products, the upturn in construction ac-
tivity and the capacity reductions over the
past few years are likely to have played a part
in this. The rise in prices for newly built dwell-
ings recorded by BulwienGesa AG is closely
linked to the price increase in the cost of resi-
dential construction (2.2% on average in
2006). According to Bundesbank calculations
based on city data provided by BulwienGesa
AG, the prices of newly constructed owner-
occupied apartments went up by 1%, where-Percentage change from previous year
Housing rents
Jan
2007Services
JanGoods excluding energy
JanFood
JanJanEnergyJanConsumer prices, totalConsumer prices
Deutsche Bundesbank.4+
2+
04
2
04
2
06
4
2
0
2−16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2−4
2
0
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Pressure on
import and
producer prises
eases
Increase in
construction
prices reflected
in housing
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
49as, in contrast to previous years, the price of
terraced housing showed no further decline.Similarly, the declining price of second-handdwellings, which had persisted for severalyears, now seems to have come to a stand-still, at least in the case of terraced housing.Prices for owner-occupied dwellings havenow weakened.
3
Consumer prices showed hardly any increase
in the final quarter of 2006. As in the case ofindustrial import and producer prices, this
was due to cheaper crude oil, which was re-
flected in falling fuel and heating oil prices(-8.3% and -9.3% respectively). Excluding
energy, however, price pressure increased:the seasonally adjusted cost of goods and ser-vices (including food products and housingrents) went up by 0.6%, compared with0.5% in the third quarter and 0.3% in the
second quarter. Price adjustments that werebrought forward in connection with the VATincrease on 1 January 2007 contributed tothis. Tobacco prices had already been in-creased by almost 5% as of 1 October 2006.There were also indications of acceleratedprice adjustments in the case of clothing andsome other goods. Overall, the cost of indus-trial goods (excluding food products and en-ergy, but including tobacco) was 1.0% up onthe quarter, compared with 0.2% in the twopreceding quarters. By contrast, the increasesin the prices of services and housing rentswere quite moderate (0.4% and 0.2% re-spectively).
The relatively sharp rise in food prices (3.0%)
was the most pronounced year-on-yearmovement in the fourth quarter. By contrast,the cost of both goods and services went upby just 1.0% and housing rents by 1.1%. In-cluding the 1.8% increase in the cost of en-ergy, the annualised rate for the fourth quar-ter in both the national consumer price indexand the Harmonised Index of ConsumerPrices (HICP) amounted to 1.3%. On an an-nual average of 2006, inflation rates were1.7% (national index) and 1.8% (HICP).Prices of selected goods and services
Percentage change on the month in January
Item 2006 2007Clothing and footware – 2.7 – 1.8
Household appliances – 0.2 0.3Information-processing equipment – 0.3 0.9Motor vehicles 0.2 2.2Medical products 0.1 1.3Furniture and furnishings – 0.3 0.2
Accommodation services – 17.9 – 15.5
Dry cleaning 0.4 1.3Hairdressing 0.1 1.5Telecommunications services – 0.3 1.6Catering services 0.0 0.8Insurance 0.2 2.2Maintenance and repair of private
vehicles 0.2 1.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
3The house price index that was recently published by
the Federal Statistical Office only goes up to 2005 and,
unlike the Bundesbank indicator which is based on data
provided by BulwienGesa AG, contains data on new
properties only. The ground component is also excluded
and the data on premises which are ready for occupancy
cover only part of the country. For further information on
the house price index of the Federal Statistical Office, see
also J Dechent, Entwicklungsstand und aktualisierte
Ergebnisse, Wirtschaft und Statistik, December 2006,
pp 1285-1294; for further information on the Bundes-
bank indicator, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Price indica-
tors for the housing market, Monthly Report, September
2003, pp 45-58.Decline in
consumer price
inflation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
50At the beginning of 2007, seasonally adjusted
consumer prices in Germany rose quite sharp-
ly at 0.5%. According to the national con-
sumer price index, the year-on-year increase
went up from 1.4% to 1.6%. The reason
why the upward pressure on prices was not
more pronounced, despite the rise in VAT
(and insurance tax) from 16% to 19% on
1 January 2007, was also due to the easing of
heating oil prices in the wake of much lower
oil prices. Nevertheless, the cost of energy
was 1.4% up on the December 2006 level.
Furthermore, as expected, the price effect of
the VAT increase was not concentrated solely
on the start of the year. Owing to the earlier
accelerated price adjustments in 2006,
lagged effects are likely to come into oper-
ation as 2007 goes on. However, the prices of
goods (excluding energy and food products)
increased rather than fell, which had been
the usual case since restrictions on the end-
of-season sales were lifted. In the case of ser-
vices, the decline in prices was smaller than
on average in previous years. The seasonally
adjusted cost of goods and services increased
by 0.5% and 0.4% respectively. The year-on-
year figures widened from 1.1% to 1.8% and
from 1.0% to 1.9% respectively. Owing to its
non-inclusion of owner-occupied housing,
the HICP was more strongly affected by the
increase in VAT than the national index; the
year-on-year increase went up from 1.4% to
1.8%. According to Bundesbank estimations,
the VAT increase could have contributed just
under 1 percentage point to the annual rate
of increase in the HICP in January 2007, of
which approximately two-thirds could have
been accounted by January itself and justunder one-third by anticipatory effects during
2006.
Orders received and outlook
The level of industrial orders received re-
mained very high in the fourth quarter and
was 61/C252% up on the year. In comparison with
the third quarter, however, there was a slight
decrease of1/C252% after adjustment for season-
al and calendar effects. By contrast, new
orders in the July to September period were
33/C254% up on the second quarter. The more
subdued trend in the final quarter was not so
much a reflection of the current underlying
pace of cyclical growth. Rather, it should be
remembered that the third quarter outturn
was influenced by a number of large orders,
especially from abroad.
This is also confirmed by a detailed look at
the new orders statistics. For example, export
orders declined by 11/C254%, albeit only in the
case of orders from non-euro-area countries
(from where the majority of large orders
came in the third quarter), whereas orders
from euro-area countries showed an increase.
In a sectoral breakdown, the decline was con-
centrated on the capital goods sector where
the majority of large orders are statistically re-
corded. By contrast, producers of intermedi-
ate and consumer goods concluded more
orders than in the third quarter. The reason
why domestic growth, at1/C254%, was not high-
er was due mainly to manufacturers of motor
vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. The damp-
ening impact of the VAT increase that was al-
ready noticeable in the fourth quarter ofSignificant price
effects of VAT
at start of year
Industrial
activity still
favourable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
512006 and in the first two months of the cur-
rent year is likely to continue to play a rolehere. Most of the other sectors, however, re-corded larger volumes of orders.
The fact that the stocks of orders are quite
large and that the resultant workload, asmeasured in terms of production months inthe fourth quarter, showed a further increasealso suggests that this favourable economicperformance will continue. Moreover, accord-ing to new calculations, the ratio of orders re-ceived to production capacity (order capacityindex) has reached a cyclically high value (seethe explanatory notes on pages 52-53). Senti-ment also remained decidedly positive inJanuary, despite the slight downturn in theIfo business climate, especially as business ex-pectations showed a further improvement atthe end of the period under review. At theend of the year, firms also assessed their ex-port activity for the coming three monthsmore favourably than in the previous quarter.
In the two-month period of October and
November – more recent official data areunavailable – construction orders were 2
3/C254%
down on the third quarter. In calendar-
adjusted terms, construction demand there-
fore remained at virtually the same level as in
the previous year. The decline reveals thedampening effects of the VAT increase,
whereas economically stimulating anticipa-tory effects had been observed up to the mid-dle of the year. This was particularly apparentin the case of housing demand, which record-ed a sharp overall decline in October and No-
vember. The declining number of construc-tion permits for dwellings during this period isVolume, 2000 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Oct-
NovTotal construction orders
Oct-NovDomesticLog scale
ForeignLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Total industrial ordersDemand for industrial goods
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−10+105
90100
8595
8090
75
70
65110
105
100
95
90110125
105120
100115
95110
9013013514015+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−125
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006- New order
capacity index
Construction
demand still
moving
sideways

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
52Deuts che Bun desbankIndustrial or ders an d pro duction: how informative is the or der capa city in dex?
The pro duction, or ders inﬂ  ow an d turnover statisti cs of the 
industrial se ctor constitute a detaile d information system 
whi ch provi des timely data on this core e conomi c area on 
a monthly basis. The volume of or ders re ceive d is of key 
importan ce for the short-term analysis of in dustrial a ctivity 
because it is a well-esta blishe d lea ding in dicator of in dus-
trial pro duction. However, developments in in dustrial output 
in the near future are not depen dent solely on the pa ce of 
orderin g at the current en d. The relationship between the 
levels of the or ders inﬂ  ow an d pro duction is also informative 
in this respe ct. For example, a su bstantial backlo g of or ders 
indicates that, all thin gs bein g equal, in crease d pro duction is 
to be expe cted in the followin g few months.1
However, the or der capa city in dex, whi ch esta blishes the 
ratio of the or ders re ceive d to pro duction capa city, is an in di-
cator to whi ch s cant re gard is pai d in applie d economi c ana-
lysis. Con ceptually, this in dex is base d on the i deas described 
above. A spe cial feature of the in dex is that it relates the 
current volume of or ders to output at the normal level of cap-
acity utilisation instea d of relatin g it to a ctual pro duction. 
The sele ction of a benchmark that is a djuste d for cyclic al 
ﬂ uctuations is ne cessary if the in dex is to be interprete d as 
a lea ding in dicator of in dustrial a ctivity. For example, an 
order volume that si gniﬁ cantly ex ceeds pro duction capa city 
indicates foreseea ble bottlene cks in or der pro cessin g. Con-
versely, a low or der capa city in dex is a si gn of an unsatisfa c-
tory deman d situation, whi ch in dicates that in dustrial a ctiv-
ity may be below avera ge su bsequently.
If, however, the or der capa city in dex is calculate d on the 
basis of the pu blishe d total a ggregates of pro duction an d 
orders re ceive d as well as the (mean-a djuste d) Ifo capa city 
utilisation rate for manufa cturin g,2 the time series for Ger-
many as a whole startin g at the en d of 1992 shows a positive 
tren d (see the upper part of the chart). The informative value 
of this variant3 is restri cted by the fa ct that, in the a bsen ce of 
a constant mean, there is no empiri cal referen ce value with 
whi ch the realise d in dex levels can be compare d. The tren d 
behaviour can be attri bute d to the fa ct that the pu blishe d 
indices of in dustrial pro duction an d or ders re ceive d differ 
with respe ct to their deﬁ nition an d wei ghtin g. Whereas the 
pro duction in dex takes a ccount solely of in dustrial pro duc-tion (even if that is only part of the overall output delivere d 
by ﬁ rms belon ging to the in dustrial se ctor), the reporte d 
order volume also contains servi ces if these are part of the 
agree d or der. The pu blishe d pro duction in dex also contains 
components whi ch are not or der-in duced an d whi ch are like-
wise distortin g in this respe ct. Another differen ce consists in 
the fa ct that the pro duction ﬁ  gures of the in dividual se ctors 
are a ggregate d with the base-year shares of value a dded in 
order to form the overall in dex whereas the new or ders in dex 
is wei ghte d on the basis of the se ctoral or der volumes.
The sometimes consi dera ble differen ces in wei ghtin g an d 
deﬁ nition have resulte d in the a ggregate in dices of in dus-
trial pro duction an d or ders re ceive d bein g su bject to distin ct 
tren d proﬁ  les because developments in the in dividual in dus-
trial se ctors diver ge from ea ch other owin g, for example, to 
1 Such a situation is due not only to capa city bottlene cks but also to 
lar ge or ders whi ch are re corded in full in the new or der statisti cs at 
the time the or ders are pla ced but whi ch are entere d in the pro duc-
tion statisti cs in a ccordance with their sta ge of completion. — 2 As the 
followin g line of reasonin g shows, an o bvious step to take is to use 
the capa city utilisation of the manufa cturin g se ctor ex cluding foo d, 
bevera ges an d to bacco. — 3 The or der capa city in dex was use d in this form in the annual reports of the German Coun cil of E conomi c 
Experts until 2003. — 4 Ba cklo g of or ders as a per centa ge of pro duc-
tion cap acity. — 5 The estimates are base d on seasonally an d workin g-
day-a djuste d monthly data in the perio d between January 1991 an d 
De cem ber 200 6. — 6 The contemporaneous correlation ex ceeds the 
value 0.9. — 7 With respe ct to the Ifo in dicator, this out come is vali d 
only as lon g as the survey ﬁ  ndings are representative of the in dustry. Quarterly
%
Balan ces
Base d on the mo difie d indices
Ifo sto ck of or ders
(right-han d scale)+   10
–   5
–  25
–  40
–  65
1993 200 6Base d on the pu blishe d indicesOrder capa city in dex4
10+
5+
0
5–
10–15+
10+
5+
0
5–
10–
15–
94 95 9 697 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
53stru ctural chan ge (see the a djacent ta ble). To eliminate su ch 
effe cts (whi ch are un desira ble for the issue at han d) the ver-
sion of the or der capa city in dex presente d here is base d on 
new or der an d pro duction in dices whi ch are as consistent as 
possi ble in their wei ghtin g an d deﬁ nition. First, a mo diﬁ ed 
new or der in dex is constru cted whi ch, like the pro duction 
index, wei ghts the or der volumes of the in dustrial se ctors 
by the per centa ges of value a dded. Secon d, in dustrial pro-
duction is corre cted for components whi ch are not or der-
induced. An or der capa city in dex whose baseline statisti cs 
are re con ciled with ea ch other in this way appears to fulﬁ  l 
the stationarity property that is helpful for interpretational 
purposes (see the lower part of the chart on pa ge 52).
The nee d to use mo diﬁ ed series in or der to calculate the 
order capa city in dex can be veriﬁ  ed by means of a time series 
analysis. Formally deﬁ ne d as O CI = (OR/PR)· CAP, the or der 
capa city in dex – given sta ble capa city utilisation CAP – has 
a time- constant mean only if the ratio of or ders re ceive d to 
pro duction OR/PR is stationary. As the components of this 
ratio are tren ding over time (or, to be more pre cise, are inte-
grate d), the con dition is met only if there is a cointe gration 
relationship in the form lnOR – lnPR between the in dex series 
of or ders re ceive d an d pro duction. Re gardless of whether 
mo diﬁ cations are ma de or not, cointe gration can be esta b-
lishe d between or ders re ceive d an d pro duction. In the case 
of the pu blishe d series, however, the estimate d lon g-term 
relationship expresse d as lnOR – 1.5·lnPR diver ges su bstan-
tially from the re quire d result. If, instea d, the mo diﬁ cations 
are un dertaken, the estimate is InOR – 1.1 InPR, representin g 
a mu ch more favoura ble result from a theoreti cal point of 
view.5
A comparison of the or der capa city in dex with the assessments 
of or der backlo gs in the Ifo Institute’s survey of the manu-
facturin g se ctor reveals maximum syn chronisation.6 This is 
impressive, primarily because the information on whi ch both 
indicators are base d derives from different sour ces. One pos-
sible explanation is that the enterprises surveye d base their 
assessment of their or der backlo gs (impli citly) on the current 
ratio of or ders re ceive d to pro duction capa city. At all events, 
the information on in dustrial a ctivity supplie d by either in di-
cator seems to be essentially inter chan geable so far.7The or der capa city in dex appears to lea d overall e conomi c 
activity a bout one quarter in a dvan ce. Unlike the Ifo busi-
ness climate in dicator, it may therefore possess a genuine 
lea ding in dicator property. At just un der 0.7, however, the 
correlation with the previous year’s calen dar-a djuste d gross 
domesti c pro duct ( GDP) is, in comparison, somewhat less 
pronoun ced.8
If the or der capa city in dex propose d here is taken as a basis, 
the or der volume in the fourth quarter of 200 6 was some 
10% above the pro duction capa city of or der- base d in dus-
try. A ccording to the Ifo Institute, moreover, manufa ctur-
ing enterprises assess their or der position to be better than 
at any time sin ce the uniﬁ  cation boom. The or der situation 
in the in dustrial se ctor is therefore extremely favoura ble at 
present. Even if the or ders re ceive d evolve at a slower pa ce 
for a while, full or der books are a goo d basis for sta ble in dus-
trial pro duction.
By contrast, the or der capa city in dex coul d have limite d informative 
value at the current en d of the sample because the pro duction an d new 
order in dices are su bject to revision. See T A Knets ch an d H-E Reimers, 
How to Treat Ben chmark Revisions? The Case of German Pro duction 
and Or ders Statisti cs, Deuts che Bun desbank, Dis cussion Paper, Series 1, 
No 38/200 6. — 8 Durin g this perio d, the contemporaneous correlationbetween the Ifo business climate in dicator an d the year-on-year chan ge 
in GDP is just over 1–10 point a bove this. See Deuts che Bun desbank, How 
robust is the empiri cal relationship between the Ifo business climate 
indicator an d overall e conomi c activity? Monthly Report, Novem ber 
200 6, pp 40-41.Weights o fselected industrial sectors in the
production and new orders indices
%
Index weights
Industrial sector New orders ProductionMemo item
Change in
real gross
value addedbetween
1991 and2004
Manufacture of motor vehicles,trailers and semi-trailers 20.1 12.1 12.1
Manufacture of machinery and
equipment 15.8 14.9 – 9.9
Manufacture of basic metals and
fabricated metal products 13.1 13.2 5.9
Manufacture of chemicals and
chemical products 11.5 9.8 38.4
Manufacture of electrical machinery
and appartus n e c 7.1 8.0 – 1.9
Manufacture of radio, television
and communication equipment and
apparatus 5.4 2.8 67.4
Manufacture of other non-metallic
mineral products 1.7 3.8 1.9
Manufacture of food products,
beverages and tobacco 0 8.8 – 12.0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
54also consistent with this picture. The effects
are likely to be less pronounced in the finish-
ing trades.
Commercial construction orders, which had
already been benefiting from the generally fa-
vourable cyclical situation for some time, con-
tinued to show a positive development. They
rose by a seasonally adjusted 21/C252%o na n
average of October and November. By con-trast, public sector orders, which were quite
volatile towards the end of the period under
review, went down by 53/C254% during the same
period.
The outlook for service providers and in the
retail trade sector was assessed more cau-
tiously in the third quarter. According to the
Ifo business survey, the subindicator for busi-
ness expectations in the services sector de-
clined in the fourth quarter. It did, however,
go up sharply again in January. The ZEW indi-
cator for business expectations in the services
sector declined in the fourth quarter. The
more modest expectations possibly reflect en-
terprises’ uncertainties regarding the implica-
tions of the VAT increase.
Business prospects in the trade sector in the
coming months are also likely to be influ-
enced by the effects of the increase in VAT.
This could especially be the case for sales of
motor vehicles, which benefited strongly
from anticipatory effects in November and
December. Other consumer durables, such as
furniture, household appliances and con-
sumer electronics, are also likely to be affect-
ed in the coming months by the dampening
effects of the VAT increase. One indication of
this was the development of the GfK con-
sumer climate. The subindicator, in particular,
which reflects consumers’ propensity to pur-
chase, declined very substantially in January
and is now at the level recorded in the third
quarter of 2005. The deterioration in the con-
sumption climate owing to the VAT increase
is clearly overshadowing the continuing posi-
tive underlying trend at present. The retail
trade sector itself was assessing its future pro-Monthly
%Thou-
sands
Memo item, lin scale
Propensity to purchase,
according to Gfk
(balance of responses)
oo
2007 1997Reduced log scale
New car registrationsLog scale
Retail sales of selected
consumer durables 1
Volume, 2003 = 100Volume effects
of VAT increases
1 Furniture and furnishings, household ap-
pliances and home improvement mater-
ials. — oVAT increase.
Deutsche Bundesbank80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−220
200
180
160
140
120
100
90140
130
120
110
100
95
98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06Service
providers and
trade more
subdued
Quantitative
effects of the
VAT increase

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
55spects more favourably again towards the
end of the period under review. The relief forconsumers from lower oil prices also suggeststhat this trend will continue. This is currentlyproviding a distinct counterweight to the VATincrease. More important still is the ongoingimprovement in the labour market situationas a basis for a gradual and sustained recov-ery of consumer demand.
Although the fiscal measures of the Federal
Government are likely to have a temporarynegative impact on the growth process over-all, the German economy is on a solid foot-ing, which means that the dampening effectper se is likely to be manageable. Following a
temporary slight interruption, the economycould soon be gaining momentum again. IfGermany’s fiscal and economic policymakerspersist with their course of consolidation andreform and if the wage policy remainsemployment-oriented, there are favourableprospects at present of an extended upswingand a gradually higher growth path.
Positive under-
lying trend
overshadowed
for a short time

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
56Public financesGeneral government budget
The situation of public finances in Germany
improved during 2006 and is now much
more favourable than had been expected at
the start of that year. According to initial pro-
visional data from the Federal Statistical Of-
fice, the general government deficit ratio de-
creased by 1.2 percentage points to 2.0%.
This was the first time since 2001 that it had
been below the ceiling of 3% laid down in
the EC Treaty. As a result of the pleasing de-
velopment at the end of the year, which has
not yet been fully incorporated into the pre-
liminary outturn, a further downward revision
of the deficit ratio is likely.
Government debt again rose considerably in
2006. The high debt-to-GDP ratio of almost
68% in 2005 is expected to have remained
largely unchanged even though the high
nominal rate of economic growth had a
dampening effect on the ratio. Thus, despite
the clear decline in the deficit, it was still too
high to secure a perceptible decrease in the
debt ratio.
The rather sharp decrease in the deficit was
mainly due to the favourable economic devel-
opment and the extraordinarily strong in-
crease in profit-related taxes, which are sub-
ject to erratic and large fluctuations. The
standard calculations (see box on pages 58-
59) show that the positive economic effect
contributed almost1/C252percentage point and
the growth in profit taxes another1/C252percent-
age point to improving the deficit ratio.In 2006 deficit
ratio below
ceiling for first
time since 2001
Debt ratio
expected to be
largely
unchanged
Favourable
economic de-
velopment and
extraordinary
increase in
profit-related
taxes

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
57In 2006, the general government revenue
ratio rose slightly to 43.7%. While, in relationto GDP , revenue from profit-related taxesclimbed steeply by approximately
3/C254percent-
age point (see adjacent chart),1with un-
changed contribution rates the social security
contributions decreased by1/C253percentage
point2because, as in the previous years, gross
wages and salaries grew at a slower pacethan GDP . Consumer restraint in response to
higher oil prices depressed receipts from
energy tax, which is a volume-based tax.
In 2006, expenditure in relation to GDP fell
by just over 1 percentage point to 45.7%.The positive economic development made asignificant contribution to this decrease,which not only led to a decline in the ratio as
a result of nominal GDP growth but alsothanks to lower labour market-related ex-penditure. The subdued wage developmentimplies not only relatively weak growth in rev-enue but also an easing of the pressure ongovernment expenditure because many socialbenefits are closely coupled with develop-ments in remuneration. This developmentalso made it easier to limit government per-
sonnel expenditure, which decreased consid-
erably in relation to GDP .
In 2007, both the debt ratio and the deficit
ratio should fall. This is due to measures onthe revenue side, in particular, and to a mere-ly moderate increase in expenditure. Overall,the revenue ratio might decrease slightly.Changes in the legal framework will lead toconsiderably higher net revenue, and raisingthe standard rate of VAT, in particular, willgive rise to additional revenue far in excess ofthe net relief in social contributions. On theother hand, in particular gross wages and sal-aries, as the most significant macroeconomicreference variable for government revenue,but also pre-tax private consumption, are ex-as a percentage of GDP
Deficit ratio
2Expenditure ratio
Revenue ratio
Taxes and social
security ratio 1General government
fiscal ratios *
*As defined in the national accounts. —
1 Taxes and social contributions plus cus-
toms duties and the EU share in VAT rev-
enue. — 2 Excluding proceeds from the sale
of UMTS licences.
Deutsche Bundesbank4
32
1
049
48474645
44
434241
40
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, The development of profit-
related taxes, Monthly Report, November 2006, p 55.
2The bringing forward of the transfer deadline for most
social security contributions does not increase revenue asdefined in the national accounts owing to the accruals
principle of accounting.Marginal rise in
revenue ratio
Expenditure
ratio drop
mainly due to
cyclical reasons
Despite
increases in tax
and contribu-
tion rates,
revenue ratio
could decrease
slightly in 2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
58Deutsche BundesbankThe structural development of public finances –
Results of the disaggregated framework for 2006
At first glance, it would appear that the state of public fi-
nances in Germany improved significantly last year. Ac-
cording to initial calculations, the general government fis-
cal deficit fell to 2.0% of GDP, compared with 3.2% in
2005. Using the disaggregated framework for analysing
public finances,1which was presented in detail in the
March 2006 Monthly Report , it is possible to estimate the
role played by cyclical and specific temporary effects.
Structural changes in the revenue and expenditure ratios
and their major determinants can also be identified. The
main results of this analysis for 2006 are presented
below.2
The significant decline of 1.2 percentage points in the def-
icit ratio last year was due, in large part, to the favourable
cyclical development of the economy. On the basis of the
standard adjustment procedure used within the European
System of Central Banks, the contribution from economic
activity is calculated as 0.4 percentage point. By contrast,
clearly defined temporary special effects (such as the pro-
ceeds from UMTS sales in the past) did not, on balance,
have any notable impact on the change in the fiscal bal-
ance in 2006. Thus, the structural deficit defined using the
disaggregated framework – which is adjusted for these
two effects – declined by 0.8 percentage point in relation
to trend GDP.
Structural revenue rose by 0.7 percentage point in rela-
tion to trend GDP and, thus, more strongly than the un-
adjusted revenue ratio. The ratio was boosted slightly by
the fact that the – as usual – positive fiscal drag (in par-
ticular, the progression effect) from the progressive in-
come tax rate outweighed the negative impact in the case
of excise taxes – which are largely volume-based. This
was, however, compensated by the continued negative
structural decoupling of the macroeconomic assessment
bases from the development of GDP. For example, when
viewed in isolation, the (trend towards) comparatively
small increases in gross wages and salaries reduced the
ratio of social contribution receipts and wage tax receiptsto trend GDP. This was not fully offset by the trend of fast-
er rising entrepreneurial and investment income in rela-
tion to GDP. Legislation changes had, on balance, no size-
able impact. A number of revenue-boosting measures (in-
cluding the latest increase in tobacco tax which, for the
first time, applied to the whole year, and the broadening
of the income tax base) were accompanied by various rev-
enue-reducing measures (such as more favourable depre-
ciation rules).
Ultimately, the decisive factor behind both the sharp rise
in the structural revenue ratio and the decline in the struc-
tural deficit ratio is the unusually strong growth (which is
not explained by the standardised procedure) in taxes and
social security contributions in relation to trend GDP (re-
sidual: +0.7 percentage point). This was due, in particular,
to profit-related taxes (+0.5 percentage point). Receipts
from these taxes grew at a much faster pace than was to
be expected given the development of entrepreneurial
and investment income (which serves as the macroeco-
nomic reference variable for profit-related taxes in the
cyclical adjustment procedure). This may be due partly to
the fact that in 2006 large tax advances were accompan-
ied by unusually high net back payments in respect of
earlier years. After adjustment for legislative changes, the
increase in turnover tax receipts was also higher than ex-
pected in view of the (standardised) macroeconomic base.
Tax-driven advance purchases of consumer goods are like-
ly to have contributed to this because they increased the
proportion of goods in total consumption which are sub-
ject to the standard rate of VAT which was increased as of
1 January 2007. It is also possible that insolvency-related
tax shortfalls and the level of turnover tax fraud declined.
As in the preceding years, the comparatively unfavourable
development in excise taxes can probably be explained by
the fact that consumption habits changed in response to
the rise in energy and tobacco prices.
Despite the restrained growth in nominal expenditure, in
structural terms there was hardly any reduction in the ex-
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, A disaggregated framework for analys-
ing public finances: Germany’s fiscal track record between 2000 and
2005, Monthly Report, March 2006, pages 61-76. — 2The results are
subject to change in the future in the event of revisions to the prelim-
inary national account figures or revised estimates of the macroeco-
nomic outlook. — 3In addition to the adjustment for the cyclically
driven perceptible decline in labour-market-related expenditure, an-other contributory factor was the very low GDP deflator in 2006. This
meant that there was only a comparatively small increase in the struc-
tural expenditure ratio denominator, which is comprised of real trend
GDP and the GDP deflator. — 4Adjusted for cyclical influences and
temporary effects. In accordance with ESA 95. — 5Percentages of
nominal GDP. — 6Assessed income tax, investment income taxes, cor-
poration tax, local business tax. — 7Payments attributable to the

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
59penditure ratio.3While the interest expenditure ratio in-
creased slightly for the first time in a number of years, the
structural ratio of other expenditure (primary expend-
iture) declined. This was due, not least, to the develop-
ment in compensation of government employees, which,
as in the preceding years, contributed to consolidation
thanks to the falling number of public sector employees
and the largely unchanged negotiated rates of pay. There
was, on balance, moderate growth in social benefits
which are, to a large extent, linked to wage develop-
ments. Ratio-reducing trends in pension expenditurewere offset by ratio-boosting effects in other areas, in
particular in healthcare expenditure.
On balance, it is clear that the noticeable decline in the
unadjusted deficit ratio in 2006 was largely due to special
factors. The positive cyclical influences, which are factored
out of the structural development, and the boom in
profit-related taxes are the main factor behind the very
favourable development.
general government sector, eg social contributions for public sector
employees (estimated). — 8Other current transfers receivable, sales
and total capital revenue. — 9Including other current transfers to
households. — 10Other current transfers payable to corporations
and the rest of the world, other net acquisitions of non-financial
assets and capital transfers. — 11Spending by the statutory pension
insurance scheme, on civil servant pensions and payments by the postoffice pension fund. — 12Spending by the statutory health insurance
scheme and assistance towards civil servants’ healthcare costs. —
13Spending by the Federal Employment Agency (excluding its com-
pensatory payment to the Federal Government), and expenditure onunemployment assistance (up to 2004) or unemployment benefit II
(from 2005) and on labour market reintegration measures.Structural development4as percentage of trend GDP
Year-on-year change in percentage points
Item 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Total
2001-2006
Unadjusted fiscal balance5– 4.1 – 0.8 – 0.4 0.3 0.5 1.2 – 3.3
Cyclical component50.0 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.4 – 0.8
Temporary effects5– 2.5 0.1 – 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 2.3
Fiscal balance – 1.7 – 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.8 – 0.2
Interest payable – 0.1 – 0.2 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.4
Owing to change in average interest rates0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 0.0 – 0.7
Owing to change in debt levels– 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3
Primary balance – 1.8 – 0.7 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.9 – 0.6Revenue – 1.9 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 1.0 0.1 0.7 – 3.0
of which
Tax and social contributions – 1.9 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.8 0.0 0.7 – 2.6
Fiscal drag 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.7
Decoupling of base from GDP – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.1
Legislation changes – 1.1 0.7 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.2 0.1 – 0.7
Residual – 0.8 – 1.0 – 0.6 – 0.2 0.3 0.7 – 1.5
of which: profit-related taxes
6– 0.7 – 0.8 – 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 – 0.9
Memo item: included in expenditure7– 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.4
Non-tax-related revenue80.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.4
Primary expenditure – 0.1 0.1 – 0.5 – 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 2.3
of which
Social payments90.2 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.4
Subsidies – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.6
Compensation of employees – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 1.0
Intermediate consumption 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.2
Gross fixed capital formation 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 – 0.4
Other expenditure100.1 – 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2
Memo item
Pension expenditure110.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.4
Healthcare expenditure120.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 0.2
Labour-market expenditure130.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
60pected to grow again at a slower rate than
nominal GDP , which will increase additionally
as a result of the price effect from raising ex-
cise taxes. Furthermore, profit-related taxes
may fall following the sharp gains in the pre-
vious years.
The moderate development of wages to date
will also continue to curb the expenditure
ratio.3In relation to GDP , expenditure on old-
age provision, the labour market and person-
nel should therefore decrease considerably.
The current relatively small number of new
pensioners, the parameters of the pension
adjustment formula that have a dampening
effect on pension increases, the decline in
government personnel, which is likely to con-
tinue, as well as the shortening of the periods
of entitlement to unemployment benefit I will
also help to reduce the expenditure ratio. A
contribution to consolidation is also expected
from capital transfers due to the fact that
grants to homebuyers are gradually being
phased out.
By reducing the deficit ratio to well below
3%, in 2006 Germany satisfied one essential
prerequisite for being released from the ex-
cessive deficit procedure. The Ecofin Council’s
demand for structural consolidation of at
least 1 percentage point over the two-year
period from 2006 to 2007 should therefore
be fulfilled. However, given the emerging
trend, it is not yet certain whether the debt
criterion stipulated in the Maastricht Treaty
will be deemed to have been met. The criter-
ion states that the debt ratio may only exceed
the 60% reference value if it is diminishing
sufficiently and approaching the referencevalue at a satisfactory pace. The reform of the
Stability and Growth Pact should mean that
more emphasis is placed on debt dynamics
and sustainability.
To quickly bring the debt ratio below the ref-
erence value of 60%, it is essential to rapidly
reduce the deficits even further and to
achieve the medium-term budgetary object-
ive of a structurally balanced budget as soon
as possible. In line with the Stability and
Growth Pact, this should happen in 2009. Ac-
cording to the German stability programme
of December 2006, a deficit ratio of 11/C252%i s
planned for 2007. In view of the fact that the
outturn for 2006 was more favourable than
expected and that the macroeconomic trend
is now forecast to be considerably more ad-
vantageous, it should definitely be possible to
achieve a ratio of 1% both in cyclically-adjust-
ed and unadjusted terms. When the pact was
being reformed, a key aim was to consider
the individual economic situation when defin-
ing the annual consolidation demands. In
concrete terms, this means that, in the eco-
nomically favourable phase predicted by the
Federal Government in the next few years,
structural consolidation should exceed the
reference value of1/C252% of GDP . Against this
backdrop, counterfinancing would have to be
found to compensate for the shortfall in tax
revenue as a result of the business tax reform
planned for 2008 and the scale of consolida-
tion demanded would have to be ensured.
However, the Federal Government has not
3For further details, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Develop-
ments in the government revenue and expenditure ratio
up to 2007, Monthly Report, August 2006, pp 52-53.Perceptible
decrease in ex-
penditure ratio
expected
European
deficit criterion
met but debt
ratio still over
60% and hardly
changedPursuant to
Stability and
Growth Pact,
balanced
budget should
be aimed at for
2009

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
61defined this as an objective in the latest stabil-
ity programme.
Budgetary development of central,
state and local government
Tax revenue
After the clear rise of 61/C252% in tax revenue4in
the fourth quarter of 2006 compared to the
corresponding quarter of the previous year,
an extraordinarily sharp increase of 71/C252%
(331 billion) has been recorded for the year as
a whole. Assessed taxes, which grew by 55%
(3141/C252billion) as a result of lower refunds,
higher additional payments in respect of earl-
ier years and the favourable development of
profits in the previous year, made a significant
contribution to this. Revenue from the as-
sessed income tax rose by almost 38 billion
(80%). This particularly sharp increase also re-
flects the reduction in tax subsidies thanks to
the considerable decline in rebates to employ-
ees (- 311/C252billion) and grants to homebuyers
(-31 billion), both of which are booked
against assessed income tax. Both the re-
newed rise in the number of persons em-
ployed and the increase in average earnings
contributed to the growth of 3% ( 331/C252bil-
lion) in wage tax receipts. At 5% ( 37 billion),
turnover tax recorded the largest rise of all in-
direct taxes. This also reflects a slight pick-up
in domestic private demand, which – not
least in the field of new car registrations –
was also boosted by anticipatory effects from
the early announcement of an increase in the
standard rate of VAT from 1 January 2007.
However, according to preliminary figures forthe macroeconomic reference variables, the
increase in revenue clearly exceeds the
growth of these variables. Smaller insolvency-
related tax shortfalls, but possibly also com-
bating turnover tax evasion more effectively,
may have contributed to this increase. The
slight decrease in revenue from energy tax
and the merely small gain in revenue from to-
bacco tax, despite the rise in the tobacco tax
rate in September 2005, are most likely con-
nected to consumer reactions to price in-
creases.
Compared with the tax estimate of Novem-
ber 2005 – which formed the general basisYear-on-year change
%Tax revenue *
*Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes which are not yet known
for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−
2004 2005 2006
4According to the budgetary definition. Including EU
shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts
from local government taxes which are not yet known
for the fourth quarter.Assessed taxes
make largest
contribution to
growth in tax
revenue in
2006 as a
whole
Expectations
for 2006 clearly
exceeded

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
62for drawing up the budgets – additional rev-
enue (including estimated local government
taxes) of approximately 332 billion was col-
lected. This discrepancy is mainly due to the
unexpectedly sharp growth in revenue from
profit-related taxes ( 3231/C252billion). Turnover
tax revenue ( 3+41/C252billion) and wage tax rev-
enue ( 3+21/C252billion) were also up by more
than expected. This reflects, in particular, the
more favourable economic development in
2006.
In 2007, considerable additional revenue is
expected as a result of the increase in the
standard rate of VAT and insurance tax. As all
additional receipts from insurance tax and ap-
proximately two-thirds of additional receipts
from VAT accrue to central government, par-
ticularly strong revenue growth will be re-corded for this level of government. In con-
trast to this, state and local government rev-
enue will rise at a much more moderate rate.
For local government, local business tax rev-
enue will probably be weakened by the tem-
porary expansion of declining-balance depre-
ciation. Estimates for macroeconomic devel-
opment in 2007, which are now more posi-
tive, as well as the baseline effect from the
outturn for 2006, which was more favourable
than expected, indicate that tax revenue for
2007 could also exceed the forecast of No-
vember 2006.
The preliminary draft of the business tax re-
form was presented at the beginning of Feb-
ruary (see box on page 64). The planned de-
crease in the statutory rates of corporation
and local business taxes is designed to lowerOverall tax revenue and major individual taxes
Year as a whole Q4
2005 2006Estimate
for 2006 32005 2006
Year-on-year changeYear-on-
year
change Year-on-year change
Type of tax 5billion as % in 5billion in 5billion 5billion as % in 5billion
Overall tax revenue 1 415.4 446.1 + 7.4 + 30.8 + 4.9 4 120.9 128.8 + 6.5 + 7.9
of which
Wage tax 118.9 122.6 + 3.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 33.9 35.5 + 4.9 + 1.7
Assessed income
tax 9.8 17.6 + 79.9 + 7.8 + 1.5 6.0 7.5 + 25.5 + 1.5
Investment income
tax2 16.9 19.5 + 15.3 + 2.6 – 0.2 2.7 3.7 + 38.6 + 1.0
Corporation tax 16.3 22.9 + 40.2 + 6.6 + 0.2 5.4 6.5 + 19.5 + 1.1
Turnover tax 139.7 146.7 + 5.0 + 7.0 + 2.5 36.5 38.5 + 5.5 + 2.0
Energy tax 40.1 39.9 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 16.0 15.7 – 2.1 – 0.3
Tobacco tax 14.3 14.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 4.2 4.3 + 2.0 + 0.1
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but excluding re-
ceipts from local government taxes which are not yet known for
the last quarter recorded. — 2Non-assessed taxes on earnings
and withholding tax on interest income. — 3According to offi-cial tax estimate of November 2005, excluding local government
taxes. — 4Actual tax revenue including (estimated) local
government taxes was approximately 532 billion higher than
the estimate.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Additional
revenue as a
result of tax
increases
expected in
2007Business tax
reform: cut in
rates and
widening of tax
base

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
63the tax rates for German corporations consid-
erably from their current high level. A conces-sion is to be provided for non-corporations inthe form of preferential tax treatment of in-ternal financing. The business tax reformshould basically enhance Germany’s attract-iveness as an investment location comparedto the status quo – even after considering the
counterfinancing measures ( inter alia , tight-
ening depreciation rules). The measures tobroaden the tax base which, in part, are in-
tended to counterfinance the tax cuts, in par-ticular, focus on closing tax loopholes. Theplanned regulations will certainly mean thattax law will become much more complex andare, in some respects, systematically question-
able. The fact that the tax framework is stilldistorting financing decisions to a large de-gree is especially problematic. For example,the retention of profits by corporations and,
in the future, also by non-corporations will betaxed at a much lower rate than distribution,which will hinder the efficient allocation offunds via the capital markets. The introduc-tion of a withholding tax at a rate of 25%from 2009 coupled with the abolition of thesystem of (50%) income tax relief on dividendpayments for individuals and with taxation oncapital gains (also including the interest de-duction ceiling) puts equity financing at a
considerable disadvantage over debt finan-cing.
With regard to the burdens for public finances,
the Federal Government envisages tax short-
falls of approximately 35 billion per year as a
result of the business tax reform assuming thereform is put into effect in full and if potential€b n
Corporation
taxNon-assessed
taxes on
earningsLocal business
taxAssessed
income taxWithholding tax
on interest
income
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Revenue from profit-related taxes *
*As defined in the national accounts. Employee refunds deducted from assessed income tax revenue.
Adjusted for the impact of changes in tax legislation in accordance with government estimates. 
Deutsche Bundesbank110
100
90
80
70
605040
30
2010
0
Burdens
expected for
general
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
64Key elements of the planned business tax reform
In the draft Business Tax Reform Act (2008), the Fed-
eral Government has set out the details of its plans
to amend business taxation. The main objectives of
the business tax reform are to improve Germany’s
competitiveness as an international investment lo-
cation, to create greater neutrality in terms of legal
form and financing, and to close tax loopholes.
Some of the key elements which should, according
to plan, enter into force on 1 January 2008 are as
follows.
– The corporation tax rate is to be reduced from
25% to 15% and the basic rate of local business
tax is to be cut from 5% to 3.5%. By contrast,
the option of deducting local business tax from
its own base and from that of corporation tax is
to be abolished. This would mean that the tax
rate applicable to corporations (assuming a
400% multiplier in the case of local business
tax) will fall from its present level of 38.7% to
29.8%.
– The facility to deduct interest paid on loans as
operational expenditure is to be restricted in
the case of group enterprises which have a
below-average equity capital base compared
with the other enterprises in their group
(“interest deduction ceiling”). Interest expend-
iture in excess of interest income (where the dif-
ference is above the threshold limit of 51 mil-
lion) is deductible only up to 30% of profits.
Recognised financing expenditure which can-
not be offset against profits may be carried for-
ward for an unlimited period.
– Non-corporations will have the option of apply-
ing a reduced flat tax rate (28.25%) to retained
profits. If these funds are later withdrawn, they
will then be taxed in the same way as dividends.
In future, 3.8 times (instead of the current 1.8
times) the assessment base of local business tax
(Gewerbesteuermessbetrag ) may be deducted
from the income tax liability incurred on busi-
ness earnings. On the other hand, it will no
longer be possible to deduct local business tax
payments from the income tax base. Smaller
businesses will be granted concessions in the
form of tax-deductible investment allowances,
which will permit them to offset up to 40% of
their future purchase prices or production costs
against profits (upper limit of 5200,000).– In future, the calculation of the local business
tax base will include not only interest on per-
manent debt at a rate of 50%, but all interest
paid on borrowed funds and comparable finan-
cing expenses, albeit only at a rate of 25%. Only
a portion of rents, leasing payments and licence
fees will be recognised as debt financing. A rate
of 25% will apply to mobile assets and 75% to
immobile assets.
– From 1 January 2009, private capital income is
to be subject to withholding tax at a rate of
25%. It is envisaged that this tax will apply not
only to interest and dividend payments but also
to private capital gains from the sale of secur-
ities. The current system of (50%) income tax re-
lief on dividend payments will be abolished for
individuals and, in the case of non-corporations,
will be replaced by partial relief with a 40% ex-
emption rate. To prevent individual parties
from being disadvantaged vis-/C224-vis the income
tax liability, it will be possible to apply for an as-
sessment ex post.
– In addition to the points mentioned above, the
draft envisages the following counterfinancing
measures, in particular.
– The declining-balance depreciation facility
is to be abolished.
– It should no longer be possible to decrease
the taxation burden by means of securities
lending.
– To curb domestic tax evasion through the
relocation of functions abroad, the trans-
ferred package will be subject to a tax as-
sessment in which the arm’s length principle
will apply.
– Further restriction of the use of loss carry-
forwards to reduce profits following the ac-
quisition of a business (shell purchase).
– The threshold limit for the immediate write-
down of assets is to be reduced from 5410
(purchase price or production costs) to 560
as a general rule. The current threshold will
still apply in the case of smaller enterprises.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
65positive macroeconomic repercussions are fac-
tored out of the calculation. Consequently, alarge proportion of tax-relevant profits is ex-pected to be transferred back to Germany andfewer profits are expected to be transferredabroad. However, the shortfalls are likely to behigher in the first few years because the ratecuts will apply immediately but some of thecounterfinancing measures will not take full ef-fect until later. All in all, it is extremely difficultto forecast the scale of revenue shortfalls as itis very hard to predict how tax payers will reactand what the resulting macroeconomic effectswill be. It is also possible that local govern-ments may adjust the average local businesstax multiplier. Against the backdrop of the con-tinuing need for consolidation and of the ra-ther negative experience gained in the pastwhen estimating revenue from profit-relatedtaxes, it seems advisable to take a cautious ap-proach.
Central government budgetIn the fourth quarter of 2006, central govern-
ment recorded a lower budget surplus, at justunder 31 billion, than in the same period in
the previous year ( 36
1/C252billion). The main rea-
son for this was that the Federal Employment
Agency, in contrast to 2005, received almost
no liquidity assistance during the year, mean-
ing that no repayments were necessary at theend of the year. The lack of revenue from the
sale of participating interests and loan repay-ments was offset by additional tax revenue.
According to provisional year-end figures, the
deficit for 2006 as a whole amounted to justover 328 billion and was thus considerablybelow the budgeted figure of almost 338
1/C252
billion. Together with lower than planned net
expenditure, the sharper growth of tax rev-enue in particular, which exceeded the
budgeted figure by 310 billion, accounts for
the more favourable financial position. Bene-
fits for the long-term unemployed were only
3
1/C252billion more than budgeted as additional
burdens, particularly for unemployment
benefit II but also for the share in costs of ac-
commodation, were largely offset by savings
in integration payments. Compared with2005, the deficit decreased by only slightly
over 33 billion. While tax revenue (+ 314 bil-
lion) and the Bundesbank’s profit (+ 32 billion)
increased considerably, proceeds from assetdisposals decreased significantly (- 311 billion)
and additional burdens arose from the reform
of the labour market ( 33 billion including the
compensatory amount and taking into ac-count that payments for unemployment as-sistance were no longer posted as was thecase in 2005). However, despite the favour-able economic developments, with invest-ment expenditure at 323 billion, the borrow-
ing limit prescribed by Article 115 of the BasicLaw could not be adhered to when imple-menting the budget. Excluding the one-offproceeds envisaged in the Federal budgetand transferred to the Post Office pensionfunds to ease the pressure on the budget, thedeficit amounted to as much as 342 billion.
After adjustment for these one-off proceeds,the deviation from the borrowing limit speci-fied in the Basic Law amounted to almost320 billion.
The 2007 Federal budget approved by theBundestag at the end of November 2006,
Central govern-
ment budget in
fourth quarterDeficit for the
whole of 2006
noticeably
below
budgeted
figure ...
... but only
slightly below
previous year

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
66plans a further reduction in net borrowing to
3191/C252billion with investment expenditure at
324 billion. Asset disposals in the core budget
and the Post Office pension funds are still
providing relief of approximately 315 billion,
however. Without these, the limit pursuant to
Article 115 of the Basic Law will still be over-
shot by over 310 billion despite tax increases
and a cut of 34 billion in payments to the
statutory pension and health insurance
schemes. Even if the better outturn for 2006,
which is 311/C252billion higher than in the tax es-
timate of November 2006, is carried over as a
base effect and if the macroeconomic devel-
opment, which is now forecast to be some-
what more positive, gives rise to additional
revenue, additional consolidation measures
are still needed. However, the medium-term
financial plan of summer 2006 envisages onlya somewhat unambitious decrease in the def-
icit even after adjustment for declining one-
off proceeds for 2008 to 2010.
Central government’s special funds finished
2006 with a deficit of 31/C252billion, having
achieved a surplus of 34 billion in 2005. The
main reason for this was the development of
the ERP Special Fund, which, for the first time
since 2001, issued more loans than were paid
back. A deficit ( 321/C252billion) is again envis-
aged in the 2007 budget. Furthermore, the
flood disaster fund set up in 2003 will be dis-
solved by transferring the remaining funds of
just over 31 billion to central government and
the states affected by the flood. Against this
backdrop, the special funds could also record
a deficit in 2007.
State government budgets5
The extremely favourable development of
state government budgets continued in the
final quarter of 2006. Compared with 36 bil-
lion in the final quarter of 2005, the budget
deficit amounted to only 31/C252billion. Over the
year as a whole, the deficit was down by
more than half on the year (from 324 billion)
to310 billion. The actual outturn was there-
fore much better than the decrease to 3201/C252
billion (including numerous supplements)
forecast in the budgets. Total revenue rose by
just over 51/C252%, predominantly due to an un-
expectedly sharp increase in tax revenue
(+91/C252%), which more than compensated for
the decrease in other revenue, particularly as€b n
€b n Cumulative
200420052006
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
200420052006Central government fiscal
deficit / surplus since 2004
Deutsche Bundesbank20−
25−
30−
35−
40−
45−
50−10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
30−
5The most recently published data on local government
finances are analysed in the short articles in the Bundes-
bank Monthly Report of January 2007.Continued
structural over-
burdening of
Federal budgetSpecial funds
with deficit
Sharp decline in
state govern-
ment budget
deficit in 2006

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
67a result of the fact that Landesbanks were no
longer repaying subsidies. Expenditure, how-ever, fell by almost
1/C252%. This was chiefly due
to the fact that state-owned enterprises were
no longer recapitalised. The proportion of the
significant decline in personnel expenditure
(-2%) that can be attributed to state institu-tions being taken out of the core budgets of
some state governments (such as universitiesin North Rhine-Westphalia) is likely to havebeen largely offset by higher grants to theseinstitutions. Nevertheless, moderate develop-ments in remuneration also helped to rein in
expenditure.
Deficits are expected to be reduced further in
2007 mainly due to revenue from the in-crease in VAT. The budget plans currentlyavailable indicate that the fiscal balance willdecrease moderately – compared with theamount budgeted for 2006 – to 316 billion in
2007. As the budgeted figures have, in manycases, not yet been adjusted to take accountof the significant upward revisions of the fig-ures in the latest tax estimate, they should beinterpreted as predicting changes rather thanforecasting actual levels. They therefore indi-cate that the deficits may be expected todecline further.
According to the figures currently available,
Bremen, Saarland and Schleswig-Holstein arecurrently still exceeding the constitutionallimits for new borrowing. Berlin’s budget en-visages a further overshooting of the borrow-ing limit. According to a ruling by the FederalConstitutional Court, Berlin is not facingacute budgetary hardship and has not yet ex-plored all consolidation options. This meansthat it will not be able to claim budgetary
hardship as justification for its excessive bor-rowing which far exceeds the level stipulatedin the state constitution. While Berlin has an-nounced its intention of keeping within the
borrowing limit in 2007 (by continuing theextensive incorrect use of Federal funds ear-marked for the reconstruction of eastern Ger-
many), a supplementary budget has not yetbeen approved. However, other states also re-quire extensive consolidation measures as, ac-cording to their budgets, they are relying
partly on asset disposals or stretching the def-inition of self-financed investments in orderto adhere to borrowing limits. According tocurrent figures, half of the states haveachieved a balanced budget (Bavaria, Saxony,Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and,thanks to extensive asset disposals, Hamburg)or are actively working towards achieving thisin the medium-term (Saxony-Anhalt in 2010;Baden-W/C252rttemberg, Brandenburg andLower Saxony in 2011). As a result of the factthat the reduction of Solidarity Pact funding,which is in part still being used incorrectly,will gather speed from 2009, and the inevit-able significant increase in pension costs, thestate governments have to continue the firmpath to consolidation by strictly limiting thegrowth in their expenditure even if tax rev-enue continues to develop positively. The pro-visions resolved by the Financial PlanningCouncil stipulate a maximum limit of 1% forexpenditure growth in the next few years.
Deficit
reduction
continues in
2007, ...
... however,
budgetary
situation is still
critical in some
states

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
68Social security funds
Statutory pension insurance scheme
In the fourth quarter of 2006, the statutory
pension insurance scheme recorded a surplus
of33 billion resulting in a positive balance of
371/C252billion for the year as a whole. Reserves
were, therefore, topped up to 391/C252billion or
to an amount equivalent of 0.6 of a month’s
expenditure. However, the encouraging re-
sults are exclusively based on the fact that
since January 2006 social insurance contribu-
tions have generally no longer been trans-
ferred at the middle of the month following
the month in which wages and salaries were
paid but at the end of the same month in
which payment was made. As a result of this
change, contributions were paid in mid-Janu-ary 2006 for December’s pay, in accordance
with the old law, and at the end of January
for January’s pay.6The ensuing one-off add-
itional revenue of approximately 3101/C252billion
prevented a deficit of approximately 33 billion
that could not be offset by own reserves.
Thus, the underlying financial situation con-
tinued to be strongly marked by deficit in
spite of a clear increase in revenue from con-
tributions and only a slight rise in pension ex-
penditure. This was another factor contribut-
ing to the decision to increase the contribu-
tion rates in 2007 from 19.5% to 19.9%.
In spite of the higher contribution rate, the
favourable employment trend and the fact
that if there is to be any pension increase at
all it is likely to be slight, a deficit is again ex-
pected for 2007. However, the reserves are
now safely above the lower limit of 0.2 of a
month’s expenditure (upper limit of target
corridor: 1.5 of a month’s expenditure) so
that the contribution rate presumably will not
need to be raised again for 2008. However, it
must be borne in mind that this is currently
only a “break” in the demographically-
related burdens on pension insurance. While
at present a relatively large number of people
are of working age, the number of people
entering retirement is rather low. This is inten-
sified by the fact that the average retirement
age is likely to increase further (to 63 by the
end of 2008) owing to pension deductions in
the event of early retirement and the raising
of the earliest possible age for taking retire-
ment in the event of unemployment or asQuarterly
€b n
€b nLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
ExpenditureRevenueFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−64
62
60
58
56
54
2004 2005 2006
6A transitional regulation made it possible for the
second wave of contributions due in January to be spread
over the following six months.Surplus in 2006
as a result of
one-off effect
due to earlier
transfer of
contributionsFinancial
situation
showing funda-
mental deficit

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
69part of pre-retirement part-time work. The
overall situation will deteriorate noticeablyand continually at the beginning of the nextdecade. In order to counter this, measures arecurrently being resolved or prepared to curbthe increase in contribution rates. One keymeasure is the raising of the statutory retire-ment age to 67. The important message that,in order to achieve sustainable public financesin the face of rising life expectancy, the work-ing life must be extended and the retirementage postponed is undermined by the incon-sistent exemption granted to people whohave paid contributions for at least 45 years.Similarly, this exemption also tones down thecurbing effect on the contribution rate.
Federal Employment AgencyThe Federal Employment Agency finished the
fourth quarter of 2006 with a surplus of 34
1/C252
billion and the year as a whole with 311 bil-
lion. A large proportion of this (estimated at
331/C252billion) was attributable to the one-off
effect arising from the fact that the transferdate for social security contributions has been
brought forward. Even more significant, how-
ever, was the decline in expenditure, in par-ticular on unemployment benefit I (-15% or
34 billion) which was caused by improve-
ments in the labour market conditions andwas accompanied by a reduction in active la-bour market policies of 32
1/C252billion (-20%).
Furthermore, at 331/C254billion the compensa-
tory amount was more than 31 billion lower.
The number of income-support households
switching from unemployment benefit I to
the basic allowance for job seekers (un-employment benefit II) should therefore havedecreased by roughly 120,000 to approxi-mately 330,000 households.
In 2007, the Federal Employment Agency will
have to cope with revenue falling by just over314 billion on the year. Only just over one-
third of revenue shortfalls resulting from de-
creasing the contribution rate from 6.5% to4.2% will be offset by the new rule-basedFederal grant. It is also true that the expend-Quarterly
€b n
€b n€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefit and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding central government liquidity
assistance. — 2Sharp decline in 2005 caused
by shifting responsibility for training for
recipients of unemployment benefit II to
central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−8.8
8.0
7.2
6.4
5.6
4.8
4.0
3.2
2.4
2.016.0
14.0
12.0
10.0
2004 2005 2006Surplus in 2006
due to one-off
additional
revenue from
contributions
and clear
decreases in
expenditure
Deficit
expected for
2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
70iture on unemployment benefit I is expected
to fall again due, inter alia , to the fact that the
financial effect of the reduction of maximum
periods of entitlement should gradually be felt
from February. Overall, however, a deficit is ex-
pected and, therefore, an erosion of the re-
serves set aside from last year’ s surplus. In the
long term, the contribution rate is likely to be
sustainable only if the number of recipients of
unemployment benefit I – which, unlike un-
employment benefit II, is an indication of cyc-
lical and not structural unemployment – does
not, on average, exceed 1.2 million.7In 2006,
just over 1.4 million people claimed unemploy-
ment benefit I, thus exceeding this critical fig-
ure. In the future, fewer people on average
will claim unemployment benefit I as the max-
imum periods of entitlement have been short-
ened. However, it should be borne in mind
that the number of people currently claiming
unemployment benefit I is probably rather low
as a result of the economic situation, but the
figure could increase rapidly if the pace of
growth slows down. If contribution rates are
decreased again or if the (often only marginal-
ly successful) active labour market pro-
grammes are extended, this will increase the
risk that the Federal Employment Agency will
not be able to cover economically weak
phases with its own financial resources. To
avoid a procyclical policy, it is necessary to set
up sufficient reserves during positive economic
periods as a precaution for difficult times.
Statutory health insurance scheme8
Over the course of the first nine months of
2006, the statutory health insurance scheme
recorded a deficit of 31/C254billion. However, forthe year as a whole, a surplus of over 31 bil-
lion is expected because the second instal-
ment of the Federal grant coincided with typ-
ically high revenue from contributions in the
fourth quarter and expenditure has most like-
ly continued to develop at a comparatively
moderate rate. The increases in contribution
rates at the beginning of 2007, which were,
in some cases, rather sharp, are based on bur-
dens arising from cutting Federal grants (by
31.7 billion), which are currently being felt, as
well as from higher expenditure as a result of
the increase in VAT (approximately 31 billion).
Another reason behind the increase in contri-
bution rates is to repay loans taken up in the
past. Finally, caution in the face of uncertain-
ties regarding the upcoming healthcare re-
form must also have had its part to play.
The Act to promote competition among
statutory health insurance institutions ( GKV-
Wettbewerbsst/C228rkungsgesetz ) has now been
approved by the Bundesrat and the first sec-
tions can come into effect on 1 April 2007.
As opposed to the original plans, some of the
savings announced at the last minute con-
cerning hospitals and all of those concerning
travel costs have been withdrawn. The bur-
dens on private health insurance schemes
have also been softened. In particular, restric-
tions have been placed on who is entitled to
the base tariff and the start of the new regu-
lations in this area has been put back by a
year to 1 January 2009. However, the struc-
7See Deutsche Bundesbank, The evolution of labour
market-related expenditure, Monthly Report, September
2006, especially pp 75-78.
8An extensive analysis of the budgetary development of
statutory health insurance and long-term care insurance
schemes can be found in the short articles in the Bundes-
bank Monthly Report of December 2006.Clear rise in
contribution
rates at
beginning of
year
Healthcare
reform
approved after
final changes

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
71ture of the health insurance fund has hardly
changed. From 2009, it is to be funded fromcontributions from insured persons and taxresources, and risk-adjusted premiums are tobe passed on to the individual statutoryhealth insurance institutions. This means thatthe institutions receive flat rates for thepeople whom they insure, while the socialcompensation component will be transferredto the health insurance fund. As before, con-tributions in proportion to income will be lev-ied to finance the fund – but these arecharged at a standard contribution ratethroughout Germany. Therefore, health insur-ance institutions will no longer competeusing contribution rates but – together withgreater scope in terms of expenditure differ-entiation – by using an additional contribu-tion which may be applied if necessary. Thisadditional contribution is calculated in pro-portion to income as soon as the upper limitof38 per month is exceeded.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
72

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*
2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*
3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the European
monetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financial
sectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
specific taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*
6 Labour market 65*
7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republic
of Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in
Stage III of Economic and MonetaryUnion 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2005          Apr 9.3 7.4 6.8 6.9 6.7 7.8 8.4 2.08 2.14 3.5
         May 10.1 7.6 7.3 7.2 6.5 7.9 8.4 2.07 2.13 3.4
         June 10.9 8.0 7.6 7.6 6.7 8.2 9.7 2.06 2.11 3.2
         July 11.2 8.3 7.9 7.9 6.9 8.4 9.3 2.07 2.12 3.3
         Aug 11.6 8.6 8.1 8.1 7.0 8.7 9.3 2.06 2.13 3.3
         Sep 11.0 8.8 8.3 8.1 7.4 9.1 8.8 2.09 2.14 3.1
         Oct 11.2 8.7 8.0 8.0 7.8 9.4 9.1 2.07 2.20 3.3
         Nov 10.5 8.2 7.6 7.6 8.2 9.5 8.9 2.09 2.36 3.5
         Dec 11.4 8.5 7.3 7.5 8.3 9.5 8.9 2.28 2.47 3.4
2006          Jan 10.3 8.4 7.7 7.6 8.5 10.0 8.7 2.33 2.51 3.4
         Feb 9.9 8.7 7.9 8.0 8.8 10.8 8.8 2.35 2.60 3.5
         Mar 10.1 9.0 8.5 8.4 9.5 11.6 8.8 2.52 2.72 3.7
         Apr 9.8 9.3 8.7 8.6 9.7 11.9 8.9 2.63 2.79 4.0
         May 10.1 9.1 8.7 8.6 9.5 11.9 8.8 2.58 2.89 4.0
         June 9.2 9.0 8.4 8.3 9.2 11.5 8.0 2.70 2.99 4.1
         July 7.5 8.2 7.8 8.1 9.3 11.9 8.6 2.81 3.10 4.1
         Aug 7.3 8.4 8.2 8.1 9.2 12.0 8.3 2.97 3.23 4.0
         Sep 7.2 8.4 8.5 8.4 9.4 12.2 8.2 3.04 3.34 3.8
         Oct 6.3 8.2 8.5 8.8 9.1 12.1 8.4 3.28 3.50 3.9
         Nov 6.6 8.9 9.3 9.2 8.7 11.9 8.6 3.33 3.60 3.8
         Dec 7.5 9.4 9.7 ... 8.2 11.5 8.5 3.50 3.68 3.8
2007          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.56 3.75 4.1
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares /units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
 
 
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2005          Apr − 8,989 + 3,144 − 6,849 − 19,289 − 4,090 + 17,369 − 838 1.2938 105.3 106.0
         May − 1,316 + 5,296 + 41,771 − 2,419 + 25,274 + 16,368 + 2,548 1.2694 104.3 105.2
         June + 3,129 + 8,457 + 6,134 − 7,718 + 102,299 − 89,813 + 1,366 1.2165 101.6 102.5
         July + 3,398 + 8,668 + 2,114 − 88,960 + 82,800 + 5,581 + 2,693 1.2037 102.2 103.0
         Aug + 1,327 + 40 − 11,675 − 19,770 − 26,089 + 34,148 + 36 1.2292 102.7 103.6
         Sep − 5,688 + 4,805 + 33,052 + 1,413 + 21,017 + 10,964 − 341 1.2256 102.1 103.0
         Oct − 6,234 + 1,265 − 13,643 − 12,920 − 6,879 + 6,080 + 77 1.2015 101.8 102.7
         Nov − 1,064 + 780 + 2,322 − 6,403 − 43,886 + 51,579 + 1,031 1.1786 101.2 102.0
         Dec − 834 + 1,840 − 31,063 − 17,222 − 4,940 − 16,143 + 7,242 1.1856 101.2 102.0
2006          Jan − 10,158 − 6,320 − 3,213 − 2,677 − 39,367 + 41,147 − 2,316 1.2103 101.9 102.7
         Feb − 599 + 517 + 19,462 − 29,122 + 18,076 + 28,568 + 1,940 1.1938 101.2 102.0
         Mar − 2,086 + 2,977 + 49,491 + 259 + 35,636 + 7,088 + 6,509 1.2020 102.0 102.9
         Apr − 7,273 + 714 + 17,426 + 1,821 − 13,857 + 30,589 − 1,127 1.2271 103.1 104.0
         May − 11,507 + 497 + 31,915 − 3,407 + 42,063 − 5,051 − 1,689 1.2770 104.0 104.8
         June + 8,292 + 5,166 − 805 − 14,817 + 65,303 − 52,706 + 1,415 1.2650 104.2 104.9
         July + 258 + 4,608 + 6,182 − 9,508 + 3,246 + 13,781 − 1,336 1.2684 104.6 105.4
         Aug − 6,321 − 2,321 + 1,584 − 4,695 − 18,350 + 25,459 − 830 1.2811 104.6 105.4
         Sep + 1,525 + 5,709 + 44,326 − 27,130 + 51,152 + 21,360 − 1,055 1.2727 104.4 105.2
         Oct + 1,520 + 5,788 − 4,298 − 15,322 + 29,371 − 18,411 + 64 1.2611 103.9 104.7
         Nov + 1,652 + 5,964 − 17,745 − 11,622 + 40,730 − 46,016 − 837 1.2881 104.5 105.2
         Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3213 105.6 106.0
2007          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2999 104.9 105.3
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-24 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Slovenia Spain area
Real gross domestic product 1 
2004 3.0 1.2 3.7 2.3 4.7 4.3 1.1 3.6 1.9 2.5 1.2 4.4 3.2 2.0
2005 1.1 0.9 2.7 1.2 3.7 5.5 0.0 4.0 1.5 1.9 0.4 4.0 3.5 1.4
2006 ... 2.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... p 2.9 ... ... ... ... 2.7
2005          Q3 1.3 1.4 3.4 1.1 3.8 5.9 0.0 4.4 2.0 2.1 0.3 3.8 3.0 1.6
         Q4 0.7 1.1 2.2 0.7 3.7 6.6 0.1 6.6 1.9 2.6 1.0 3.9 3.3 1.8
2006          Q1 3.3 3.2 6.2 1.8 4.1 5.8 2.2 7.3 3.4 2.9 1.1 5.1 3.7 2.2
         Q2 2.8 1.4 6.4 1.4 4.1 4.9 1.3 6.0 2.5 3.3 0.8 4.8 4.0 2.9
         Q3 2.5 2.6 5.4 1.9 ... 7.7 1.5 5.5 2.8 3.2 1.5 5.6 3.6 2.7
         Q4 ... 3.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.7 ... ... ... ... 3.3
Industrial production 1,2 
2004 3.2 3.0 5.0 2.0 1.2 0.3 − 0.6 3.9 2.5 6.2 − 2.7 4.6 1.6 2.0
2005 − 0.4 3.4 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.9 3.0 − 0.8 0.4 − 1.2 4.2 0.3 3.9 0.7 1.3
2006 5.1 8p 5.5 8.2 0.8 p 0.9 p 4.8 2.4 p 2.5 1.1 ... 2.5 7.4 3.8 e 3.8
2005          Q3 − 1.8 3.5 0.3 0.4 − 0.7 3.0 0.3 3.8 − 2.3 3.4 0.7 3.2 0.7 1.5
         Q4 0.9 5.1 1.6 − 0.8 1.3 5.8 0.5 2.0 − 1.6 3.7 2.3 7.7 1.6 2.2
2006          Q1 6.2 4.9 3.7 0.6 1.2 2.6 3.0 5.1 2.9 5.6 1.6 6.5 2.6 3.4
         Q2 5.6 5.9 15.5 1.8 0.6 6.6 1.4 0.9 0.8 7.6 1.6 6.1 4.0 4.2
         Q3 4.0 r 6.4 9.9 0.5 0.5 7.1 1.1 − 0.1 0.0 10.0 2.8 8.8 4.2 4.1
         Q4 4.7 8p 4.7 3.9 0.3 p 1.2 p 2.8 3.8 p 3.8 0.5 ... 4.1 8.3 4.4 e 3.5
Capacity utilisation in industry 3,4 
2004 80.4 83.2 84.5 84.1 75.6 75.6 76.4 85.6 82.7 81.3 80.4 81.6 79.0 81.4
2005 79.4 82.9 84.9 83.2 72.1 74.2 76.4 82.3 82.0 81.7 80.0 82.2 80.2 81.2
2006 82.7 85.5 86.0 85.0 75.7 75.7 77.6 85.2 82.0 83.4 78.4 83.9 80.5 83.0
2005          Q4 79.1 82.9 84.3 81.8 72.2 76.8 76.7 81.4 82.1 81.3 79.2 82.6 80.1 81.0
2006          Q1 80.4 84.2 85.2 83.6 74.2 74.0 76.8 82.8 81.5 81.9 78.7 83.1 80.7 81.9
         Q2 82.8 84.4 85.1 84.5 74.6 76.1 77.3 84.0 81.9 83.2 78.0 83.8 81.1 82.4
         Q3 83.9 86.4 88.1 85.7 77.2 76.3 78.0 86.7 81.4 84.0 79.4 84.7 79.4 83.6
         Q4 83.5 86.8 85.4 86.3 76.7 76.5 78.1 87.2 83.0 84.3 77.4 84.1 80.6 83.9
2007          Q1 83.4 87.6 89.3 86.1 76.9 76.8 78.2 87.4 83.4 85.1 79.7 85.6 81.2 84.4
Unemployment rate 5 
2004 8.4 9.5 8.8 9.6 10.5 4.5 8.0 5.1 4.6 4.8 6.7 6.3 10.6 8.8
2005 8.4 9.5 8.4 9.6 9.8 4.3 7.7 4.5 4.7 5.2 7.6 6.5 9.2 8.6
2006 8.3 8.4 7.7 9.0 ... 4.4 ... 4.8 3.9 4.8 7.4 6.0 8.6 7.8
2006          July 8.1 8.3 7.8 9.0 4.5 6.7 4.7 3.8 4.7 7.2 6.0 8.4 7.7
         Aug 8.1 8.5 7.8 8.9 4.5 6.7 4.7 4.0 4.7 7.2 5.8 8.4 7.7
         Sep 8.0 8.5 7.7 8.8 4.2 6.7 4.8 3.8 4.6 7.2 5.7 8.3 7.7
         Oct 8.0 8.1 7.6 8.7 4.2 ... 4.8 3.7 4.6 7.1 5.6 8.6 7.6
         Nov 7.9 8.0 7.5 8.6 4.2 ... 4.8 3.7 4.6 7.1 5.5 8.5 7.6
         Dec 7.8 7.9 7.3 8.5 4.3 ... 4.8 3.6 4.6 7.1 5.4 8.5 7.5
2007          Jan 7.8 ... ... ... 4.2 ... ... ... 4.5 ... ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2004 1.9 1.8 0.1 2.3 3.0 2.3 2.3 3.2 1.4 2.0 2.5 3.7 3.1 2.1
2005 2.5 1.9 0.8 1.9 3.5 2.2 2.2 3.8 1.5 2.1 2.1 2.5 3.4 2.2
2006 2.3 1.8 1.3 1.9 3.3 2.7 2.2 3.0 p 1.7 1.7 3.0 2.5 3.6 p 2.2
2006          July 2.4 2.1 1.4 2.2 3.9 2.9 2.3 3.4 1.7 2.0 3.0 1.9 4.0 2.4
         Aug 2.3 1.8 1.3 2.1 3.4 3.2 2.3 3.1 1.9 2.1 2.7 3.1 3.8 2.3
         Sep 1.9 1.0 0.8 1.5 3.1 2.2 2.4 2.0 1.5 1.3 3.0 2.5 2.9 1.7
         Oct 1.7 1.1 0.9 1.2 3.2 2.2 1.9 0.6 1.3 1.3 2.6 1.5 2.6 1.6
         Nov 2.0 1.5 1.3 1.6 3.3 2.4 2.0 1.8 1.6 1.6 2.4 2.4 2.7 1.9
         Dec 2.1 1.4 1.2 1.7 3.2 3.0 2.1 2.3 p 1.7 1.6 2.5 3.0 2.7 p 1.9
2007          Jan 1.7 e 1.8 1.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.6 2.8 ... 6e 1.9
General government financial balance 7 
2003 0.0 − 4.0 2.5 − 4.2 − 6.1 0.3 − 3.5 0.3 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 2.9 − 2.8 0.0 − 3.1
2004 0.0 − 3.7 2.3 − 3.7 − 7.8 1.5 − 3.4 − 1.1 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.8
2005 − 2.3 − 3.2 2.7 − 2.9 − 5.2 1.1 − 4.1 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 6.0 − 1.4 1.1 − 2.5
General government debt 7 
2003 98.6 63.9 44.3 62.4 107.8 31.1 104.3 6.3 52.0 64.6 57.0 28.5 48.7 69.3
2004 94.3 65.7 44.3 64.4 108.5 29.7 103.9 6.6 52.6 63.8 58.6 28.7 46.2 69.8
2005 93.2 67.9 41.3 66.6 107.5 27.4 106.6 6.0 52.7 63.4 64.0 28.0 43.1 70.8
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. — 6  Including
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — Slovenia from January 2007 onwards. — 7  As a percentage of GDP;
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece, Portugal and the Euro−area Maastricht Treaty definition; Euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank,
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and member states: European Commission. 8  Provisional; adjusted in advance by
energy; adjusted for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the
seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and Quarterly Production Survey for the fourth quarter. 
October. — 4  Euro area including Slovenia. — 5  Standardised, as a
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2005          May 55.4 62.0 2.7 − 6.6 − 4.2 − 35.2 − 2.4 32.8 28.4 0.2 − 0.4 21.7 7.0
         June 82.1 71.2 − 24.4 10.9 10.8 97.1 17.9 − 79.2 79.1 27.6 − 0.7 30.0 22.2
         July 53.8 54.0 − 7.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 43.8 44.5 14.4 5.6 − 1.0 6.7 3.0
         Aug − 5.9 3.3 − 1.4 − 9.2 − 5.7 − 2.1 − 5.2 − 3.0 17.5 1.6 − 1.0 12.5 4.5
         Sep 97.7 98.1 11.7 − 0.4 − 6.1 − 4.7 82.2 86.9 30.7 2.5 − 1.6 14.7 15.1
         Oct 103.3 90.3 23.6 13.0 15.8 − 8.9 54.0 62.9 38.0 9.6 − 0.5 31.1 − 2.2
         Nov 143.2 104.9 20.1 38.2 44.0 − 42.9 27.7 70.6 24.9 12.5 0.2 6.3 5.9
         Dec 44.5 77.9 3.6 − 33.3 − 56.4 18.4 − 71.4 − 89.8 44.5 27.9 0.8 − 7.5 23.3
2006          Jan 128.0 105.8 20.8 22.1 27.0 − 11.9 112.7 124.6 8.2 6.2 0.7 0.7 0.7
         Feb 92.7 109.4 28.1 − 16.8 − 7.2 − 26.6 18.1 44.7 57.8 12.4 0.3 25.0 20.1
         Mar 141.8 129.0 44.5 12.8 8.7 0.9 72.1 71.2 47.9 17.6 0.8 21.8 7.7
         Apr 162.7 161.8 64.4 0.9 0.2 − 15.9 80.0 95.9 25.6 14.9 0.4 17.8 − 7.5
         May 43.5 71.6 4.1 − 28.1 − 17.6 6.9 50.2 43.4 28.3 10.4 1.3 21.8 − 5.2
         June 52.2 47.8 − 30.1 4.4 1.8 52.6 − 67.2 − 119.9 47.6 10.9 1.2 21.8 13.7
         July 69.1 89.5 13.2 − 20.3 − 16.5 21.1 100.7 79.7 47.5 9.2 1.2 16.3 20.8
         Aug − 14.2 12.3 − 5.4 − 26.5 − 21.3 − 18.9 1.7 20.5 5.1 2.4 1.5 5.3 − 4.1
         Sep 126.7 134.0 21.4 − 7.3 − 13.4 17.0 120.3 103.3 27.7 4.3 1.4 14.4 7.6
         Oct 83.1 86.3 29.6 − 3.2 − 5.8 18.6 117.3 98.6 48.3 18.6 2.1 22.5 5.1
         Nov 108.1 106.4 15.8 1.7 3.5 75.9 143.0 67.1 38.4 10.5 2.6 32.4 − 7.1
         Dec − 12.6 40.5 1.9 − 53.1 − 58.4 83.7 64.4 − 19.3 44.6 21.7 2.1 18.1 2.7
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2005          May − 21.7 − 15.0 − 17.7 − 6.6 − 5.7 − 22.7 − 25.5 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 0.5 2.0 0.7
         June − 27.7 − 9.3 − 16.0 − 18.4 − 12.8 49.9 − 6.3 − 56.2 9.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 4.9 5.3
         July 3.9 2.9 4.5 1.0 − 3.0 3.7 14.3 10.6 6.8 1.8 − 0.7 2.8 2.9
         Aug 2.8 2.7 2.3 0.2 3.4 − 3.4 − 10.4 − 7.0 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.0 0.6
         Sep 5.1 17.1 1.9 − 12.0 − 7.2 − 0.1 16.2 16.3 − 5.6 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 2.0 − 1.7
         Oct 10.3 11.0 2.7 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 4.2 2.9 7.1 3.7 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.7 4.2
         Nov 4.2 1.9 5.4 2.3 10.0 − 7.0 2.3 9.3 2.5 2.0 0.2 − 2.4 2.8
         Dec − 7.7 − 3.4 11.2 − 4.3 − 6.6 16.8 − 38.3 − 55.1 − 5.0 4.0 0.7 − 10.7 0.9
2006          Jan 38.3 30.0 13.0 8.3 6.2 9.1 36.9 27.8 6.7 0.9 0.7 4.7 0.4
         Feb 0.2 12.8 4.7 − 12.6 − 3.2 − 7.1 6.9 14.0 17.0 5.3 0.3 6.2 5.2
         Mar 19.0 16.8 9.3 2.1 2.0 2.9 17.9 14.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.8 − 4.1 3.2
         Apr 44.8 45.1 30.1 − 0.4 − 1.6 9.7 10.3 0.6 2.4 4.2 0.2 − 3.3 1.2
         May − 3.7 − 9.6 − 6.9 5.9 13.4 − 4.6 6.2 10.8 3.1 1.7 1.1 4.9 − 4.6
         June − 31.3 − 16.3 − 18.3 − 15.0 − 11.3 58.4 39.5 − 18.9 7.5 1.5 1.3 0.2 4.5
         July − 6.9 − 5.4 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 2.5 2.7 − 11.0 − 13.7 14.6 2.2 1.1 2.4 8.9
         Aug − 4.3 3.9 0.6 − 8.2 − 4.2 − 4.9 1.1 6.1 − 3.1 2.9 1.5 − 4.9 − 2.6
         Sep 23.7 32.8 9.5 − 9.1 − 7.9 15.0 32.8 17.8 − 5.8 0.4 1.2 − 4.2 − 3.3
         Oct 4.2 − 0.7 5.1 4.9 1.2 − 4.6 − 5.1 − 0.5 5.1 − 0.1 2.1 − 0.9 4.0
         Nov 12.6 5.5 7.3 7.2 6.6 42.0 42.1 0.1 − 0.8 1.3 2.6 − 0.3 − 4.3
         Dec − 40.6 − 22.9 4.2 − 17.8 − 14.9 43.0 25.5 − 17.5 5.2 3.9 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.6
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 7.4 − 47.5 − 46.7 34.1 30.1 4.8 25.4 − 1.9 5.9 12.8 7.3 − 7.6 2005          May
38.0 2.9 − 59.2 68.1 76.8 10.7 66.1 − 12.5 3.8 − 0.3 − 14.5 5.9          June
− 0.7 − 12.8 − 52.2 39.0 17.8 9.9 8.0 15.6 5.6 − 0.3 12.9 0.7          July
− 44.3 37.8 − − 19.1 − 35.6 − 52.0 − 5.5 − 46.5 12.1 4.3 10.6 4.1 1.9          Aug 
15.7 − 9.5 − 56.2 78.3 53.2 6.2 47.0 23.1 2.0 − 14.8 − 6.9 − 0.4          Sep 
− 3.0 20.4 − 39.1 37.0 27.2 3.4 23.8 9.5 0.2 7.0 − 6.0 1.1          Oct 
5.7 52.9 − 16.8 23.6 28.2 4.0 24.2 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 2.1 − 9.3 4.6          Nov 
− 11.5 − 83.6 − 113.6 149.4 91.9 18.3 73.6 38.0 19.5 − 18.2 − 14.2 − 3.4          Dec 
18.0 75.7 − 14.1 − 18.6 − 27.2 − 12.0 − 15.2 − 7.9 16.4 15.2 6.6 11.0 2006          Jan 
8.0 − 25.9 − 26.1 16.2 − 6.6 4.0 − 10.6 19.4 3.4 − 2.1 3.2 8.8          Feb 
− 6.5 34.1 − 67.2 56.8 25.6 7.4 18.2 29.3 1.8 1.0 − 0.8 10.3          Mar 
− 10.5 13.2 − 118.6 94.1 53.9 8.1 45.9 41.7 − 1.5 13.9 10.1 0.4          Apr 
− 15.4 − 5.4 − 42.8 12.2 23.7 3.3 20.4 − 10.7 − 0.7 7.8 9.9 12.9          May
41.1 − 27.4 − 43.4 70.1 53.8 10.1 43.7 19.0 − 2.8 − 11.6 − 5.2 − 9.9          June
− 13.1 41.7 − 14.2 − 3.8 − 25.1 9.0 − 34.0 24.4 − 3.1 5.3 12.0 0.6          July
− 9.5 − 42.6 − 14.0 − 21.6 − 57.1 − 3.7 − 53.4 35.4 0.1 14.5 2.7 18.4          Aug 
18.0 7.6 − 90.4 94.6 62.7 4.2 58.5 35.8 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 4.9 1.8          Sep 
− 11.1 36.7 − 27.8 14.3 − 17.1 3.9 − 21.0 38.5 − 7.1 − 2.6 0.7 15.4          Oct 
0.8 65.4 − 79.4 66.2 45.3 4.4 40.8 29.1 − 8.2 − 0.3 14.6 − 1.1          Nov 
− 36.2 − 93.9 − 156.6 204.2 140.0 20.7 119.3 47.9 16.2 − 21.0 − 22.6 − 4.0          Dec 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 1.3 − 50.1 2.4 1.0 9.0 9.0 3.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.9 2005          May
0.8 6.6 0.7 3.4 5.7 10.0 − 5.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 0.2 2.5          June
0.4 1.0 0.6 2.2 − 0.6 0.6 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.5 1.4 − 2.0          July
− 0.4 − 7.9 1.6 − 1.2 9.0 1.7 1.1 − 0.5 3.9 0.2 2.7          Aug 
0.5 4.1 2.3 1.0 6.0 7.1 0.1 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.5 1.8          Sep 
− 1.2 − 3.6 0.0 1.0 7.2 3.4 2.1 − 1.1 4.3 − 2.4 0.9          Oct 
− 0.3 − 17.9 − 0.1 2.1 12.8 15.5 0.8 − 1.4 0.9 − 1.0 − 1.9          Nov 
0.9 18.5 − 1.2 4.2 − 5.3 − 8.6 10.2 6.6 − 13.6 − 0.0 0.1          Dec 
2.0 30.8 0.7 − 2.9 7.9 2.7 0.3 − 1.3 7.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 2006          Jan 
− 6.2 − 15.9 2.0 0.5 − 1.8 − 2.8 0.7 − 0.4 2.2 0.6 − 2.1          Feb 
1.8 3.8 0.5 2.4 16.4 8.1 1.3 − 2.0 7.4 − 0.1 1.7          Mar 
− 0.2 34.1 0.4 2.0 18.1 9.3 12.7 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.7          Apr 
1.7 − 17.8 0.8 1.2 4.8 4.5 0.5 − 3.5 0.6 0.4 2.2          May
1.9 14.5 1.1 2.7 3.3 3.4 4.9 − 2.6 − 1.4 0.9 − 1.9          June
1.0 − 3.3 0.6 2.6 − 16.5 − 9.8 4.6 − 4.0 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 1.0          July
3.0 − 16.6 2.7 − 1.0 7.5 − 6.8 9.8 − 4.5 4.8 − 0.2 4.4          Aug 
2.3 29.5 2.0 0.4 12.7 0.7 10.5 − 3.8 3.2 − 0.6 2.7          Sep 
− 2.8 6.1 0.6 1.3 − 8.8 − 6.8 8.6 − 4.8 − 6.0 0.0 0.1          Oct 
2.1 29.2 − 0.1 1.8 24.1 28.0 7.3 − 6.2 − 4.5 − 0.2 − 0.3          Nov 
− 2.9 − 11.7 − 2.0 5.4 11.8 4.3 15.7 3.1 − 10.5 − 0.2 − 0.6          Dec 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2004          Nov 15,777.3 10,950.1 8,634.6 7,512.7 457.8 664.0 2,315.5 827.7 1,487.8 3,282.6 1,544.6
         Dec 15,723.6 10,966.7 8,693.4 7,556.3 467.2 669.9 2,273.3 833.4 1,439.9 3,237.4 1,519.5
2005          Jan 15,967.0 11,071.4 8,749.9 7,596.6 471.4 681.9 2,321.5 838.0 1,483.4 3,348.4 1,547.2
         Feb 16,072.9 11,130.7 8,787.6 7,622.8 481.5 683.2 2,343.1 828.7 1,514.4 3,390.7 1,551.5
         Mar 16,234.0 11,178.0 8,840.1 7,669.4 483.0 687.6 2,337.9 827.5 1,510.4 3,453.3 1,602.8
         Apr 16,547.1 11,316.7 8,959.1 7,721.5 493.6 744.1 2,357.6 832.1 1,525.4 3,578.7 1,651.7
         May 16,735.8 11,385.6 9,030.0 7,785.7 501.1 743.3 2,355.6 830.0 1,525.6 3,638.0 1,712.2
         June 17,013.5 11,519.7 9,146.7 7,924.1 508.0 714.5 2,373.0 830.4 1,542.7 3,695.3 1,798.5
         July 17,103.2 11,572.0 9,202.8 7,982.2 507.2 713.4 2,369.1 830.8 1,538.3 3,728.3 1,802.9
         Aug 17,069.9 11,566.3 9,205.2 7,984.8 506.0 714.4 2,361.1 827.2 1,533.9 3,717.9 1,785.7
         Sep 17,308.3 11,669.2 9,310.1 8,073.4 507.0 729.7 2,359.1 832.9 1,526.2 3,830.8 1,808.3
         Oct 17,442.4 11,766.5 9,370.1 8,140.3 523.6 706.2 2,396.5 830.1 1,566.4 3,885.5 1,790.4
         Nov 17,889.7 11,958.3 9,482.3 8,225.9 544.6 711.8 2,476.0 824.4 1,651.6 4,056.4 1,875.0
         Dec 17,873.1 11,994.6 9,552.1 8,288.1 553.6 710.5 2,442.5 847.5 1,595.0 3,989.7 1,888.7
2006          Jan 18,164.4 12,132.2 9,672.5 8,386.5 558.0 728.0 2,459.7 842.5 1,617.2 4,088.8 1,943.4
         Feb 18,297.5 12,229.6 9,786.5 8,469.1 569.6 747.7 2,443.1 833.0 1,610.0 4,137.4 1,930.5
         Mar 18,450.2 12,357.8 9,912.3 8,552.1 575.8 784.5 2,445.4 837.0 1,608.4 4,174.0 1,918.4
         Apr 18,673.4 12,508.4 10,067.7 8,644.7 587.0 836.0 2,440.7 837.5 1,603.2 4,217.4 1,947.6
         May 18,751.1 12,535.6 10,129.8 8,708.5 595.4 825.9 2,405.8 826.9 1,578.8 4,247.6 1,967.9
         June 18,697.2 12,576.5 10,173.9 8,785.0 602.3 786.6 2,402.7 829.6 1,573.1 4,175.6 1,945.0
         July 18,842.2 12,651.8 10,266.5 8,859.6 614.4 792.5 2,385.3 826.5 1,558.7 4,284.4 1,906.0
         Aug 18,862.6 12,649.4 10,286.5 8,875.7 611.5 799.3 2,362.9 821.2 1,541.6 4,280.4 1,932.8
         Sep 19,235.2 12,771.1 10,415.2 8,985.7 620.2 809.3 2,355.9 824.6 1,531.3 4,418.5 2,045.6
         Oct 19,419.9 12,853.5 10,503.3 9,041.4 634.8 827.1 2,350.2 826.4 1,523.8 4,540.9 2,025.6
         Nov 19,724.4 12,951.8 10,599.7 9,122.7 640.4 836.5 2,352.1 824.5 1,527.6 4,621.0 2,151.6
         Dec 19,747.0 12,928.6 10,635.6 9,155.6 650.2 829.8 2,293.1 829.7 1,463.4 4,687.0 2,131.3
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2004          Nov 4,559.3 3,380.9 2,626.0 2,301.2 68.5 256.2 754.9 456.8 298.2 1,005.9 172.4
         Dec 4,511.9 3,363.1 2,620.3 2,285.7 68.7 265.9 742.9 453.1 289.7 969.6 179.2
2005          Jan 4,562.3 3,381.7 2,623.9 2,283.1 68.7 272.0 757.7 457.7 300.1 1,009.8 170.8
         Feb 4,569.3 3,376.7 2,622.0 2,286.5 69.6 266.0 754.7 453.2 301.5 1,018.7 173.9
         Mar 4,580.5 3,384.2 2,619.8 2,278.0 71.6 270.1 764.4 453.1 311.4 1,029.4 166.9
         Apr 4,706.9 3,446.9 2,670.0 2,283.0 74.7 312.2 776.9 458.0 318.9 1,087.9 172.2
         May 4,682.9 3,426.6 2,656.1 2,286.6 76.1 293.4 770.5 457.3 313.2 1,078.6 177.8
         June 4,650.4 3,397.3 2,644.9 2,291.2 80.8 272.9 752.4 451.9 300.5 1,080.5 172.5
         July 4,665.0 3,400.1 2,646.8 2,288.6 80.4 277.9 753.2 455.8 297.4 1,091.8 173.1
         Aug 4,654.8 3,402.2 2,648.8 2,288.2 80.1 280.4 753.4 452.6 300.8 1,079.7 172.9
         Sep 4,684.5 3,407.5 2,666.3 2,303.8 80.2 282.3 741.2 447.7 293.5 1,103.6 173.4
         Oct 4,699.9 3,417.0 2,676.6 2,311.6 82.1 282.9 740.4 449.3 291.1 1,106.4 176.5
         Nov 4,722.5 3,421.6 2,678.8 2,308.0 83.5 287.3 742.8 441.6 301.2 1,117.8 183.1
         Dec 4,667.4 3,412.0 2,673.6 2,291.3 87.7 294.6 738.4 443.8 294.6 1,080.6 174.8
2006          Jan 4,754.2 3,463.2 2,717.0 2,321.5 88.4 307.1 746.2 445.9 300.3 1,120.2 170.8
         Feb 4,765.6 3,463.1 2,729.4 2,329.2 91.1 309.1 733.7 436.5 297.2 1,134.2 168.3
         Mar 4,791.8 3,478.9 2,743.5 2,334.6 93.4 315.5 735.4 436.5 298.9 1,145.0 167.9
         Apr 4,843.7 3,522.5 2,787.6 2,348.9 94.5 344.2 734.8 437.6 297.2 1,146.9 174.3
         May 4,843.9 3,518.0 2,777.3 2,346.0 95.5 335.8 740.7 430.1 310.6 1,145.4 180.5
         June 4,844.8 3,486.3 2,760.6 2,347.5 103.3 309.8 725.7 426.5 299.2 1,183.7 174.8
         July 4,829.6 3,481.0 2,755.7 2,342.0 103.9 309.7 725.3 428.3 297.0 1,174.3 174.3
         Aug 4,821.6 3,477.1 2,759.4 2,344.8 103.6 310.9 717.7 424.2 293.5 1,172.0 172.5
         Sep 4,884.7 3,497.1 2,788.4 2,367.7 108.4 312.3 708.7 420.2 288.5 1,209.8 177.8
         Oct 4,886.3 3,500.9 2,787.3 2,361.5 112.9 313.0 713.6 423.2 290.4 1,204.4 181.0
         Nov 4,933.0 3,510.9 2,790.3 2,357.2 117.9 315.2 720.6 423.7 296.9 1,234.4 187.7
         Dec 4,924.7 3,467.3 2,764.9 2,328.0 120.7 316.3 702.4 420.8 281.6 1,259.9 197.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
448.8 6,504.0 6,128.7 6,165.8 2,305.9 893.7 69.4 1,315.4 1,492.0 89.4 2004          Nov 
468.4 6,589.6 6,245.0 6,274.3 2,321.0 925.0 71.6 1,344.8 1,521.5 90.5          Dec 
459.9 6,624.1 6,248.9 6,284.3 2,340.9 901.5 71.4 1,347.7 1,532.6 90.2 2005          Jan 
463.6 6,660.8 6,254.4 6,291.8 2,340.3 900.0 70.9 1,354.9 1,534.9 90.8          Feb 
471.8 6,684.3 6,294.8 6,343.6 2,367.2 905.4 70.7 1,370.4 1,538.7 91.2          Mar 
481.1 6,730.8 6,347.1 6,396.8 2,391.8 922.5 71.6 1,375.9 1,544.3 90.7          Apr 
485.8 6,760.3 6,372.7 6,428.5 2,419.0 920.4 72.2 1,377.1 1,549.5 90.3          May
496.6 6,917.7 6,492.1 6,543.2 2,643.8 904.5 78.2 1,436.0 1,390.2 90.5          June
506.4 6,942.6 6,510.2 6,577.6 2,654.9 922.2 77.7 1,438.9 1,394.4 89.5          July
500.9 6,866.4 6,473.6 6,543.2 2,605.8 933.7 78.0 1,440.7 1,396.6 88.4          Aug 
507.1 6,956.1 6,545.1 6,614.2 2,653.1 950.0 83.3 1,443.5 1,397.4 86.9          Sep 
510.5 6,994.2 6,582.5 6,649.0 2,667.4 962.3 83.5 1,453.2 1,396.3 86.2          Oct 
514.5 7,028.0 6,604.5 6,672.0 2,683.8 955.2 86.9 1,465.8 1,393.8 86.4          Nov 
532.8 7,180.4 6,779.1 6,835.8 2,761.4 985.8 90.2 1,500.8 1,410.4 87.3          Dec 
520.8 7,193.1 6,763.2 6,829.8 2,745.8 974.5 91.1 1,506.5 1,424.0 87.9 2006          Jan 
524.8 7,226.8 6,775.3 6,853.1 2,734.7 990.4 94.7 1,519.5 1,425.5 88.2          Feb 
532.2 7,294.3 6,851.2 6,931.0 2,761.2 1,009.9 97.9 1,546.6 1,426.4 89.0          Mar 
540.3 7,380.7 6,944.3 7,020.6 2,802.8 1,044.5 99.7 1,560.3 1,423.9 89.4          Apr 
543.6 7,383.7 6,960.2 7,029.5 2,818.9 1,025.1 102.1 1,570.1 1,422.6 90.7          May
553.7 7,496.5 7,033.3 7,096.7 2,860.6 1,039.0 104.6 1,581.4 1,419.4 91.9          June
562.7 7,480.4 7,028.1 7,094.3 2,827.6 1,059.7 107.7 1,590.6 1,415.7 93.1          July
559.0 7,456.5 7,010.5 7,082.8 2,780.7 1,090.7 109.5 1,593.0 1,414.3 94.6          Aug 
563.2 7,570.7 7,092.8 7,175.2 2,837.7 1,122.1 113.4 1,595.7 1,410.4 95.9          Sep 
567.1 7,587.2 7,121.8 7,198.7 2,809.6 1,153.6 119.4 1,614.3 1,403.7 98.0          Oct 
571.5 7,651.4 7,183.0 7,247.9 2,838.1 1,166.8 124.6 1,622.4 1,395.3 100.7          Nov 
592.2 7,813.8 7,377.4 7,445.7 2,953.9 1,211.5 123.2 1,644.1 1,410.2 102.7          Dec 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
121.1 2,258.0 2,187.6 2,153.3 668.5 188.1 15.7 687.1 507.0 86.9 2004          Nov 
125.9 2,264.6 2,193.8 2,158.6 639.4 208.7 15.7 690.9 516.0 88.0          Dec 
123.9 2,275.5 2,203.9 2,167.3 661.1 193.9 15.7 691.8 517.0 87.8 2005          Jan 
124.9 2,278.8 2,208.6 2,170.9 664.8 189.0 15.7 695.8 517.3 88.3          Feb 
127.4 2,272.0 2,204.8 2,169.7 666.7 183.6 15.5 698.0 517.2 88.7          Mar 
129.7 2,279.1 2,210.9 2,177.8 669.1 192.2 15.7 695.3 517.3 88.2          Apr 
130.7 2,285.8 2,217.2 2,182.7 677.7 193.6 15.7 691.4 516.7 87.7          May
134.1 2,288.9 2,220.6 2,182.8 686.7 186.4 16.1 691.0 515.4 87.1          June
136.3 2,289.1 2,221.5 2,185.0 688.3 189.1 16.0 690.0 515.3 86.4          July
135.2 2,290.5 2,224.1 2,185.3 689.5 189.8 15.7 690.5 514.4 85.4          Aug 
136.2 2,296.5 2,229.3 2,191.8 697.8 189.7 15.9 690.1 514.4 83.9          Sep 
137.2 2,298.5 2,231.2 2,195.7 699.1 194.3 16.3 689.4 513.4 83.2          Oct 
139.3 2,315.7 2,249.4 2,211.4 714.1 193.8 16.6 691.3 512.2 83.5          Nov 
143.5 2,329.5 2,260.2 2,222.9 706.0 201.4 17.0 695.1 519.2 84.2          Dec 
140.6 2,334.4 2,263.0 2,225.0 709.0 199.9 17.3 695.9 518.0 84.9 2006          Jan 
141.1 2,331.8 2,266.9 2,225.6 704.7 199.3 17.6 701.3 517.5 85.2          Feb 
143.5 2,341.2 2,273.7 2,232.7 714.4 197.9 17.8 701.1 515.5 86.0          Mar 
145.5 2,365.1 2,296.3 2,255.8 723.6 209.2 18.1 705.1 513.7 86.2          Apr 
146.8 2,370.8 2,302.7 2,252.2 725.2 204.7 18.5 706.4 510.2 87.3          May
149.5 2,381.2 2,310.1 2,255.7 727.5 205.4 18.9 707.8 507.5 88.6          June
152.1 2,376.3 2,306.2 2,251.2 718.5 209.9 19.4 710.2 503.6 89.7          July
151.1 2,382.7 2,308.9 2,254.5 712.8 218.4 19.9 713.1 499.1 91.2          Aug 
151.5 2,392.8 2,315.6 2,261.1 714.0 227.0 20.5 711.9 495.3 92.4          Sep 
152.9 2,389.1 2,314.9 2,264.0 709.2 236.2 21.8 711.7 490.5 94.5          Oct 
154.7 2,423.5 2,346.4 2,286.5 733.7 235.9 22.6 712.8 484.4 97.1          Nov 
160.1 2,449.6 2,375.2 2,311.5 735.3 249.6 23.1 716.6 487.7 99.1          Dec 
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2004          Nov 182.8 155.4 89.2 39.2 1.2 21.6 3.7 0.5 223.9 220.9 613.3 2,061.5 1,646.8
         Dec 162.4 152.9 84.8 42.0 1.3 20.3 3.8 0.5 228.8 225.9 604.9 2,061.7 1,654.8
2005          Jan 180.6 159.3 92.4 41.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 228.7 225.5 616.4 2,086.6 1,663.7
         Feb 210.1 158.9 92.4 40.6 1.4 20.2 3.9 0.4 227.0 224.2 615.4 2,123.6 1,693.3
         Mar 187.4 153.3 87.4 40.0 1.4 20.3 3.8 0.5 226.9 223.2 614.5 2,145.5 1,702.8
         Apr 180.9 153.2 88.2 39.0 1.5 20.3 3.8 0.5 226.3 222.5 627.8 2,176.8 1,714.0
         May 173.5 158.2 90.6 41.3 1.5 20.4 4.0 0.5 239.2 235.2 634.8 2,203.7 1,721.3
         June 211.5 163.0 93.8 42.9 1.5 20.4 3.9 0.4 238.9 234.5 621.3 2,243.3 1,742.9
         July 210.8 154.3 87.2 40.8 1.6 20.3 3.9 0.5 238.6 235.3 635.1 2,249.8 1,742.0
         Aug 166.8 156.4 89.4 40.8 1.5 20.0 4.2 0.4 249.2 245.4 639.7 2,263.5 1,745.9
         Sep 182.4 159.4 90.8 42.5 1.5 19.9 4.2 0.4 234.4 230.8 631.5 2,284.1 1,755.1
         Oct 179.4 165.8 100.0 40.0 1.3 19.9 4.2 0.4 241.4 237.7 629.0 2,316.0 1,776.2
         Nov 185.1 170.9 104.4 40.5 1.3 20.2 4.0 0.4 239.3 235.9 629.6 2,334.1 1,774.6
         Dec 173.6 171.0 100.5 44.4 1.1 20.9 3.7 0.4 221.9 219.1 615.8 2,322.6 1,760.6
2006          Jan 191.6 171.7 101.4 44.3 1.1 20.8 3.6 0.4 237.0 233.7 608.4 2,337.1 1,772.6
         Feb 199.6 174.1 103.1 45.1 1.1 20.7 3.6 0.4 235.0 231.4 610.2 2,380.6 1,799.4
         Mar 193.1 170.1 94.8 49.3 1.2 20.9 3.6 0.4 235.9 231.6 603.1 2,402.7 1,827.1
         Apr 182.6 177.5 99.6 51.8 1.2 21.0 3.4 0.4 249.7 246.0 613.1 2,411.4 1,836.6
         May 167.2 187.0 104.2 56.2 1.3 21.4 3.5 0.4 258.2 253.7 621.6 2,437.0 1,852.7
         June 207.4 192.4 106.7 59.0 1.3 21.5 3.4 0.4 245.1 241.4 616.5 2,455.3 1,864.0
         July 194.3 191.8 106.2 59.3 1.2 21.4 3.2 0.4 250.5 246.7 627.4 2,469.9 1,872.5
         Aug 184.8 188.8 101.6 60.9 1.3 21.4 3.2 0.4 264.9 260.7 639.7 2,489.9 1,887.8
         Sep 202.9 192.6 104.0 61.8 1.6 21.6 3.2 0.4 263.8 259.7 645.6 2,509.3 1,896.4
         Oct 191.8 196.7 108.8 61.2 1.7 21.6 3.0 0.4 261.2 255.8 643.2 2,547.9 1,925.5
         Nov 192.6 210.9 116.3 67.1 1.7 22.6 2.9 0.4 260.8 256.8 636.8 2,571.3 1,950.8
         Dec 156.4 211.7 113.8 70.2 2.0 22.6 2.7 0.4 239.8 236.6 613.3 2,585.4 1,957.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2004          Nov 43.7 61.1 16.7 21.8 0.7 19.3 2.0 0.5 22.0 22.0 34.3 860.8 687.5
         Dec 43.8 62.2 16.0 24.8 0.6 18.1 2.2 0.5 14.8 14.8 30.5 850.2 678.1
2005          Jan 45.2 63.0 17.9 23.9 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 25.1 25.1 30.2 854.7 673.7
         Feb 44.3 63.5 19.2 23.2 0.6 18.0 2.1 0.4 27.3 27.3 30.5 856.4 671.1
         Mar 41.0 61.2 17.5 22.7 0.6 18.0 2.0 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 862.2 671.6
         Apr 41.8 59.4 17.5 20.9 0.6 18.0 1.9 0.5 28.6 28.6 32.6 875.9 676.5
         May 40.5 62.5 18.4 22.8 0.7 18.1 2.1 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 880.9 676.1
         June 41.3 64.9 19.6 23.9 0.7 18.1 2.2 0.4 28.3 28.3 32.4 890.3 681.5
         July 41.7 62.4 18.5 22.4 0.6 18.1 2.3 0.5 26.7 26.7 33.8 892.6 682.4
         Aug 41.6 63.6 19.1 23.1 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 30.6 30.6 34.0 893.4 678.4
         Sep 42.1 62.6 18.0 23.2 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 28.0 28.0 33.5 894.6 678.1
         Oct 40.9 61.9 19.6 20.9 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 32.3 32.3 31.1 896.4 679.9
         Nov 40.7 63.6 20.3 21.9 0.6 18.0 2.3 0.4 33.2 33.2 30.1 894.0 668.9
         Dec 41.6 65.1 19.8 24.1 0.6 18.2 2.0 0.4 19.5 19.5 30.1 883.3 660.2
2006          Jan 43.6 65.8 19.2 25.4 0.7 18.3 1.9 0.4 27.4 27.4 29.4 889.1 664.7
         Feb 37.5 68.7 20.9 26.5 0.7 18.3 1.9 0.4 29.6 29.6 30.0 896.4 665.8
         Mar 39.3 69.2 19.1 28.9 0.7 18.4 1.8 0.4 37.0 37.0 29.9 890.1 663.4
         Apr 39.1 70.2 18.9 29.8 0.8 18.5 1.8 0.4 35.6 35.6 29.8 882.1 656.5
         May 40.8 77.8 21.7 34.2 0.8 18.8 1.9 0.4 37.0 37.0 30.3 886.4 657.8
         June 42.7 82.9 22.8 38.0 0.9 18.9 1.9 0.4 35.7 35.7 31.2 893.5 663.3
         July 43.7 81.4 22.0 37.7 0.8 18.7 1.8 0.4 30.1 30.1 30.5 895.0 662.6
         Aug 46.7 81.4 21.2 38.3 0.9 18.8 1.9 0.4 34.9 34.9 30.3 893.6 661.1
         Sep 49.1 82.6 20.9 39.3 1.1 18.9 1.9 0.4 38.1 38.1 29.7 896.8 663.1
         Oct 46.3 78.8 19.0 37.4 1.2 19.1 1.8 0.4 32.1 32.1 29.7 896.1 657.2
         Nov 48.4 88.6 22.1 44.0 1.2 19.2 1.7 0.4 27.5 27.5 29.5 889.7 654.0
         Dec 45.5 92.6 24.8 45.1 1.5 19.1 1.6 0.4 17.1 17.1 29.3 889.2 647.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of central
liability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments
1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of
1 year  4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
78.3 27.0 1,956.1 2,904.7 1,055.7 44.1 1,921.4 − 2,913.7 5,528.9 6,469.7 4,438.6 185.9 2004          Nov 
76.5 27.2 1,958.0 2,842.2 1,051.6 33.6 1,842.9 − 2,948.9 5,632.3 6,568.2 4,465.7 192.8          Dec 
74.0 26.3 1,986.4 2,993.4 1,054.4 29.3 1,874.2 − 2,966.0 5,637.3 6,581.6 4,499.5 192.6 2005          Jan 
81.0 33.9 2,008.7 3,029.0 1,058.9 21.9 1,872.6 − 2,970.1 5,643.4 6,599.9 4,534.0 195.5          Feb 
75.1 31.5 2,038.9 3,110.5 1,068.0 0.4 1,912.3 − 2,997.6 5,680.4 6,627.8 4,589.2 194.2          Mar 
89.1 31.9 2,055.8 3,224.7 1,068.8 15.5 1,995.4 − 3,031.1 5,738.4 6,713.4 4,612.0 194.8          Apr 
84.4 29.9 2,089.4 3,310.2 1,081.1 − 12.2 2,032.9 − 3,064.1 5,778.4 6,766.0 4,658.8 194.1          May
87.2 32.5 2,123.6 3,251.9 1,133.2 − 14.7 2,125.4 − 3,304.4 5,851.9 6,830.7 4,804.1 196.6          June
87.5 32.3 2,130.0 3,288.1 1,136.2 − 15.6 2,121.9 − 3,321.8 5,890.0 6,882.9 4,815.3 200.9          July
87.2 34.8 2,141.5 3,279.6 1,143.0 1.9 2,125.6 − 3,268.6 5,852.9 6,862.8 4,834.0 201.9          Aug 
87.5 34.8 2,161.8 3,381.1 1,166.2 − 17.8 2,165.6 − 3,322.5 5,933.0 6,918.7 4,878.8 203.0          Sep 
92.7 30.1 2,193.2 3,446.6 1,163.5 − 11.2 2,152.3 − 3,349.3 5,970.3 6,962.0 4,916.5 204.7          Oct 
99.2 32.0 2,202.9 3,638.9 1,178.6 − 5.0 2,331.6 − 3,378.5 5,995.7 6,994.7 4,954.4 211.3          Nov 
94.7 32.1 2,195.9 3,545.6 1,200.6 13.7 2,239.7 − 3,479.6 6,152.9 7,116.8 5,005.8 222.6          Dec 
109.5 33.9 2,193.7 3,646.9 1,225.6 − 4.1 2,399.6 − 3,451.0 6,130.6 7,119.4 5,034.9 223.9 2006          Jan 
120.7 32.0 2,227.9 3,726.5 1,246.8 − 4.3 2,351.2 − 3,445.9 6,150.0 7,147.9 5,103.6 227.0          Feb 
129.8 33.3 2,239.6 3,764.0 1,255.2 22.6 2,340.2 − 3,469.8 6,202.9 7,205.0 5,151.7 226.4          Mar 
130.2 33.6 2,247.5 3,818.6 1,250.7 9.0 2,399.8 − 3,522.0 6,292.9 7,319.5 5,169.4 225.6          Apr 
137.8 36.0 2,263.3 3,843.2 1,239.2 4.8 2,419.7 − 3,544.5 6,302.2 7,355.7 5,185.1 224.8          May
125.4 36.3 2,293.6 3,732.0 1,243.5 14.0 2,340.5 − 3,598.7 6,373.2 7,396.6 5,232.3 225.6          June
120.8 39.5 2,309.6 3,810.3 1,274.0 15.3 2,351.7 − 3,573.6 6,369.3 7,407.4 5,289.0 226.0          July
138.1 41.1 2,310.7 3,825.7 1,272.8 10.5 2,343.5 − 3,516.5 6,347.1 7,430.9 5,292.9 225.8          Aug 
138.2 40.7 2,330.5 3,934.1 1,275.4 4.2 2,468.9 − 3,580.0 6,443.6 7,531.9 5,319.4 226.2          Sep 
152.5 41.9 2,353.5 4,034.0 1,283.3 − 1.4 2,497.4 − 3,562.9 6,457.8 7,556.6 5,371.2 229.7          Oct 
160.5 38.9 2,371.9 4,046.0 1,279.4 40.4 2,666.8 − 3,606.8 6,519.0 7,615.9 5,397.4 234.8          Nov 
146.6 47.8 2,391.1 4,028.2 1,273.3 8.4 2,592.6 − 3,746.8 6,723.1 7,770.4 5,434.2 243.4          Dec 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
29.5 22.7 808.7 669.7 277.1 − 73.6 510.9 63.1 685.2 1,420.6 1,529.0 1,879.6 − 2004          Nov 
27.5 22.5 800.2 627.6 277.6 − 69.5 516.2 63.4 655.4 1,423.3 1,518.6 1,875.2 −          Dec 
27.6 21.2 805.8 667.8 279.2 − 76.0 506.0 64.5 679.0 1,432.3 1,536.4 1,883.1 − 2005          Jan 
27.2 26.5 802.8 676.7 275.0 − 77.0 501.8 65.8 684.0 1,431.9 1,543.3 1,880.3 −          Feb 
23.6 26.1 812.6 695.2 276.1 − 95.6 510.3 67.9 684.1 1,425.8 1,535.8 1,893.9 −          Mar 
24.9 26.6 824.5 737.1 281.0 − 43.8 516.5 68.8 686.6 1,435.3 1,547.9 1,907.4 −          Apr 
25.1 24.4 831.5 745.4 282.5 − 89.5 517.3 71.3 696.1 1,447.7 1,557.5 1,911.5 −          May
27.0 25.0 838.4 693.3 290.0 − 95.1 522.3 72.0 706.3 1,451.0 1,563.7 1,925.0 −          June
25.2 24.8 842.6 702.5 291.6 − 98.3 526.9 72.6 706.8 1,452.5 1,563.0 1,929.1 −          July
27.0 25.7 840.7 694.3 292.3 − 111.5 531.3 74.1 708.5 1,454.8 1,572.1 1,927.1 −          Aug 
28.8 25.7 840.1 713.1 294.7 − 120.9 545.1 76.4 715.8 1,462.3 1,578.3 1,926.9 −          Sep 
28.8 26.5 841.0 720.5 298.7 − 131.6 554.0 76.5 718.8 1,466.8 1,585.5 1,930.5 −          Oct 
26.8 27.0 840.2 733.8 304.7 − 154.4 565.6 76.4 734.4 1,481.9 1,598.9 1,938.0 −          Nov 
26.2 27.7 829.4 678.1 306.9 − 134.4 554.4 75.1 725.8 1,490.1 1,593.6 1,934.2 −          Dec 
24.5 28.8 835.8 701.4 327.5 − 107.9 552.8 75.8 728.2 1,491.3 1,601.5 1,962.8 − 2006          Jan 
23.5 27.7 845.2 720.2 332.3 − 126.0 551.4 77.8 725.6 1,489.2 1,600.0 1,982.6 −          Feb 
23.8 29.2 837.2 729.6 336.7 − 134.5 561.8 78.2 733.4 1,496.1 1,616.0 1,979.6 −          Mar 
22.8 29.5 829.7 723.2 340.8 − 104.1 571.1 78.7 742.5 1,515.9 1,633.7 1,980.6 −          Apr 
23.0 31.5 831.9 729.4 336.0 − 122.8 576.7 79.5 746.9 1,517.1 1,639.0 1,980.8 −          May
20.8 33.4 839.4 712.3 336.5 − 114.0 568.3 80.6 750.3 1,522.8 1,643.8 1,991.6 −          June
18.9 34.3 841.9 698.3 348.5 − 118.1 569.0 81.2 740.4 1,513.6 1,627.3 2,009.4 −          July
20.8 36.8 836.0 703.2 344.1 − 137.3 570.2 83.9 734.1 1,512.5 1,635.3 2,003.5 −          Aug 
20.5 38.8 837.5 723.6 336.2 − 121.3 588.9 85.9 735.0 1,520.1 1,647.1 1,997.3 −          Sep 
19.5 40.0 836.7 723.2 340.0 − 118.7 594.8 86.5 728.2 1,517.1 1,638.3 2,002.4 −          Oct 
21.3 37.9 830.6 714.5 337.0 − 95.7 607.0 86.3 755.7 1,545.7 1,661.8 1,997.0 −          Nov 
20.3 38.2 830.7 697.1 336.0 − 106.9 613.4 84.3 760.0 1,568.7 1,673.6 2,002.0 −          Dec 
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2004          July 308.2 245.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 449.1 65.0 − 24.1 138.8 588.1
         Aug 300.8 253.6 75.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 460.9 61.1 − 31.8 139.1 600.1
         Sep 299.4 251.6 75.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 462.8 56.3 − 32.4 139.3 602.3
         Oct 298.8 256.4 75.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 465.1 58.2 − 32.1 139.3 604.4
         Nov 298.3 257.9 75.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 − 469.7 55.1 − 32.1 138.4 608.4
         Dec 298.0 265.7 75.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.5 475.4 60.2 − 36.0 138.5 614.1
2005          Jan 290.3 272.9 75.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 496.0 45.3 − 41.9 139.1 635.2
         Feb 280.6 276.6 78.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 487.1 63.8 − 55.5 140.0 627.2
         Mar 280.2 277.8 82.2 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 489.5 68.5 − 59.2 141.3 630.9
         Apr 282.1 278.2 86.9 0.2 − 0.1 − 498.6 67.4 − 62.1 143.3 642.0
         May 287.0 276.5 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 505.5 62.9 − 58.9 144.0 649.7
         June 286.8 273.1 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 512.8 53.5 − 62.0 145.5 658.5
         July 293.3 297.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.3 522.6 67.4 − 57.3 147.9 670.6
         Aug 305.5 309.5 90.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.0 532.6 67.4 − 45.0 149.8 682.7
         Sep 304.8 303.5 90.0 − 0.3 0.1 − 531.5 63.1 − 46.2 150.2 681.8
         Oct 307.9 288.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 531.6 47.9 − 44.6 151.4 683.1
         Nov 315.1 293.4 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 535.6 50.4 − 37.9 150.2 686.0
         Dec 313.2 301.3 90.0 0.0 − 0.1 0.3 539.8 51.0 − 39.6 153.0 692.9
2006          Jan 317.6 316.4 89.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 559.2 44.2 − 33.5 154.1 713.3
         Feb 325.2 310.0 96.2 0.0 0.3 0.1 − 548.4 56.6 − 28.7 155.4 703.9
         Mar 324.7 299.3 104.7 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 550.8 53.3 − 34.0 158.3 709.2
         Apr 327.9 290.1 113.7 0.1 0.7 0.3 − 556.4 51.6 − 35.2 159.5 716.2
         May 337.0 291.3 120.0 0.2 − 0.2 0.4 569.1 51.1 − 33.5 161.2 730.5
         June 336.9 287.0 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 572.0 45.5 − 37.0 163.3 735.4
         July 334.3 316.5 120.0 0.2 − 0.6 0.3 578.8 67.0 − 42.1 166.3 745.7
         Aug 327.6 329.7 120.0 0.2 − 0.1 0.6 588.2 73.0 − 51.5 167.1 755.4
         Sep 327.3 314.0 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 588.7 61.4 − 55.6 166.4 755.2
         Oct 326.7 308.7 120.0 0.1 0.3 0.2 − 588.5 59.1 − 59.1 167.0 755.7
         Nov 327.4 311.9 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 592.8 60.2 − 60.6 167.0 759.8
         Dec 327.0 313.1 120.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 598.6 54.9 − 66.4 173.2 771.8
2007          Jan 325.8 322.3 120.0 0.1 − 0.2 1.0 619.5 45.0 − 72.7 175.3 794.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2004          July 74.6 127.9 49.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 122.7 0.1 91.1 38.5 161.1
         Aug 72.1 136.9 50.3 0.0 − 0.1 − 126.2 0.1 94.7 38.3 164.6
         Sep 72.2 131.7 50.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 127.5 0.1 88.8 37.9 165.4
         Oct 72.1 129.8 48.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 127.7 0.1 84.8 37.5 165.3
         Nov 72.2 136.0 46.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 − 128.3 0.1 88.4 37.5 166.0
         Dec 72.2 142.4 46.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 129.9 0.1 93.4 37.6 167.5
2005          Jan 70.2 144.7 46.9 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 135.2 0.1 89.1 37.4 172.7
         Feb 67.7 137.7 49.4 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 133.2 0.1 83.8 37.9 171.1
         Mar 67.6 145.3 52.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.0 134.0 0.1 93.5 37.5 171.5
         Apr 68.1 133.3 53.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 136.6 0.0 79.8 38.0 174.7
         May 69.3 140.3 52.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 138.4 0.1 85.9 38.1 176.5
         June 69.5 139.3 52.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 141.2 0.1 81.5 38.5 179.7
         July 71.1 149.5 53.0 0.1 − 0.0 0.1 142.6 0.1 92.0 38.9 181.6
         Aug 74.1 155.6 53.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 145.2 0.0 98.9 39.4 184.7
         Sep 74.0 148.4 52.6 0.0 0.2 0.0 − 145.2 0.0 90.9 39.0 184.3
         Oct 75.1 149.4 55.1 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 145.1 0.1 95.2 39.0 184.2
         Nov 77.2 145.0 54.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 145.4 0.0 92.6 38.8 184.2
         Dec 77.2 140.9 54.4 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 146.9 0.0 86.0 39.3 186.3
2006          Jan 79.1 154.1 55.7 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 151.9 0.0 97.9 39.2 191.2
         Feb 81.6 158.1 61.6 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 149.7 0.1 112.1 39.6 189.3
         Mar 81.0 145.8 68.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 150.7 0.1 104.7 39.6 190.4
         Apr 82.5 137.8 74.3 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 151.5 0.0 103.6 39.7 191.3
         May 85.2 152.2 76.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 154.8 0.0 118.5 40.2 195.0
         June 84.9 153.9 73.7 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 156.2 0.1 115.5 40.6 197.0
         July 84.0 162.4 71.6 0.1 − 0.4 0.1 157.9 0.1 118.6 41.0 199.3
         Aug 82.3 171.6 72.1 0.1 − 0.0 0.5 160.1 0.1 124.3 41.2 201.3
         Sep 82.3 156.8 73.4 0.1 − 0.0 0.2 160.9 0.0 110.2 41.2 202.2
         Oct 82.6 155.6 76.7 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 160.5 0.1 113.7 40.9 201.5
         Nov 82.8 162.6 78.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 161.1 0.1 122.4 40.8 202.0
         Dec 82.7 155.3 78.4 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 162.4 0.1 112.6 41.4 203.8
2007          Jan 82.5 165.0 81.0 0.0 − 0.0 − 167.8 0.1 119.4 41.4 209.2
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
of the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of
the new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 3.1 + 20.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 12.8 − 3.0 + 1.7 + 8.0 2004          July
− 7.4 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 11.8 − 3.9 − 7.7 + 0.3 + 12.0          Aug 
− 1.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 − 4.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.2          Sep 
− 0.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.1          Oct 
− 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − + 4.6 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 4.0          Nov 
− 0.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.7 + 5.1 − 3.9 + 0.1 + 5.7          Dec 
− 7.7 + 7.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 20.6 − 14.9 − 5.9 + 0.6 + 21.1 2005          Jan 
− 9.7 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 8.9 + 18.5 − 13.6 + 0.9 − 8.0          Feb 
− 0.4 + 1.2 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 4.7 − 3.7 + 1.3 + 3.7          Mar 
+ 1.9 + 0.4 + 4.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 − 1.1 − 2.9 + 2.0 + 11.1          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 6.9 − 4.5 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 7.7          May
− 0.2 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.3 − 9.4 − 3.1 + 1.5 + 8.8          June
+ 6.5 + 24.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 9.8 + 13.9 + 4.7 + 2.4 + 12.1          July
+ 12.2 + 11.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 12.3 + 1.9 + 12.1          Aug 
− 0.7 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.9          Sep 
+ 3.1 − 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 15.2 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 1.3          Oct 
+ 7.2 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.0 + 2.5 + 6.7 − 1.2 + 2.9          Nov 
− 1.9 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.8 + 6.9          Dec 
+ 4.4 + 15.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 19.4 − 6.8 + 6.1 + 1.1 + 20.4 2006          Jan 
+ 7.6 − 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 10.8 + 12.4 + 4.8 + 1.3 − 9.4          Feb 
− 0.5 − 10.7 + 8.5 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.9 + 5.3          Mar 
+ 3.2 − 9.2 + 9.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 1.2 + 7.0          Apr 
+ 9.1 + 1.2 + 6.3 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 12.7 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 14.3          May
− 0.1 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 2.9 − 5.6 − 3.5 + 2.1 + 4.9          June
− 2.6 + 29.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 21.5 − 5.1 + 3.0 + 10.3          July
− 6.7 + 13.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.5 + 0.3 + 9.4 + 6.0 − 9.4 + 0.8 + 9.7          Aug 
− 0.3 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 11.6 − 4.1 − 0.7 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.6 − 5.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.5          Oct 
+ 0.7 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − + 4.3 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 4.1          Nov 
− 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 5.8 − 5.3 − 5.8 + 6.2 + 12.0          Dec 
− 1.2 + 9.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 20.9 − 9.9 − 6.3 + 2.1 + 23.1 2007          Jan 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 1.0 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 1.3 2004          July
− 2.5 + 9.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 3.5          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.3 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 + 0.8          Sep 
− 0.1 − 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 0.0 + 0.7          Nov 
− 0.0 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 1.6          Dec 
− 2.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 5.1 2005          Jan 
− 2.5 − 6.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 2.0 + 0.0 − 5.3 + 0.4 − 1.6          Feb 
− 0.0 + 7.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.7 − 0.4 + 0.4          Mar 
+ 0.4 − 12.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 13.7 + 0.5 + 3.2          Apr 
+ 1.3 + 7.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.7 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 0.1 + 1.8          May
+ 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 0.4 + 3.3          June
+ 1.7 + 10.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.4 + 1.8          July
+ 3.0 + 6.1 + 0.9 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.5 + 3.1          Aug 
− 0.2 − 7.2 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.4 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 2.1 − 4.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 + 0.1          Nov 
− 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 6.6 + 0.5 + 2.1          Dec 
+ 1.9 + 13.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 − 0.1 + 4.9 2006          Jan 
+ 2.5 + 4.0 + 5.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 2.3 + 0.0 + 14.2 + 0.3 − 1.9          Feb 
− 0.6 − 12.3 + 6.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 1.1          Mar 
+ 1.5 − 8.0 + 6.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9          Apr 
+ 2.7 + 14.4 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 14.9 + 0.5 + 3.7          May
− 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.6 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 0.9 + 8.4 − 2.1 − 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.4          July
− 1.7 + 9.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 2.0          Aug 
+ 0.0 − 14.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 14.1 + 0.1 + 0.8          Sep 
+ 0.3 − 1.2 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.4 − 0.7          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 7.0 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 8.7 − 0.1 + 0.5          Nov 
− 0.1 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.3 − 0.0 − 9.7 + 0.5 + 1.9          Dec 
− 0.2 + 9.8 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − + 5.3 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.0 + 5.3 2007          Jan 
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing
euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month  1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2006 June                 2 1,084.5 179.5 148.0 11.7 136.3 26.1 13.5 13.5 −
                                9 1,080.5 179.5 147.6 11.7 135.9 25.5 13.2 13.2 −
                              16 1,087.3 179.4 149.3 11.7 137.6 25.1 12.4 12.4 −
                              23 1,112.5 179.4 149.7 14.1 135.6 26.2 13.3 13.3 −
                              30 3 1,112.8 3 175.5 3 142.1 12.9 3 129.2 3 25.7 13.5 13.5 −
         July                 7 1,111.4 175.3 143.1 12.9 130.2 25.1 13.3 13.3 −
                              14 1,107.8 175.2 142.6 12.9 129.8 24.6 13.5 13.5 −
                              21 1,125.2 175.2 143.8 12.8 130.9 24.8 12.9 12.9 −
                              28 1,128.3 175.1 142.7 12.7 130.1 24.7 13.2 13.2 −
         Aug                  4 1,114.6 175.1 141.1 12.9 128.2 25.7 13.7 13.7 −
                              11 1,112.7 175.1 142.6 12.8 129.8 25.5 13.1 13.1 −
                              18 1,103.9 175.1 143.4 12.8 130.6 24.9 13.1 13.1 −
                              25 1,113.0 175.1 143.5 12.7 130.8 24.4 12.4 12.4 −
         Sep                  1 1,107.3 175.0 142.7 12.7 130.0 25.3 12.0 12.0 −
                                8 1,105.4 174.9 142.4 12.6 129.8 26.3 11.9 11.9 −
                              15 1,102.2 174.4 143.4 12.5 130.9 26.8 10.7 10.7 −
                              22 1,112.5 174.2 142.2 12.4 129.8 27.0 10.9 10.9 −
                              29 3 1,118.3 3 175.4 3 144.6 12.4 3 132.3 25.6 10.7 10.7 −
2006 Oct                  6 1,114.6 175.3 143.0 12.3 130.6 24.4 10.5 10.5 −
                              13 1,110.2 175.3 141.6 11.8 129.7 23.8 9.9 9.9 −
                              20 1,121.3 175.2 142.0 11.3 130.8 23.0 10.8 10.8 −
                              27 1,118.7 175.1 142.4 11.2 131.2 22.1 10.2 10.2 −
         Nov                  3 1,113.2 175.0 142.0 11.2 130.8 23.5 10.9 10.9 −
                              10 1,112.8 174.9 142.8 10.9 132.0 23.7 11.2 11.2 −
                              17 1,113.2 174.8 141.0 10.9 130.2 22.5 10.9 10.9 −
                              24 1,133.3 174.7 142.2 10.9 131.4 22.8 11.5 11.5 −
         Dec                  1 1,126.1 174.5 147.2 10.9 136.3 23.9 10.8 10.8 −
                                8 1,146.3 174.5 144.8 10.9 134.0 24.2 11.3 11.3 −
                              15 1,138.3 174.1 143.6 11.2 132.4 25.2 11.2 11.2 −
                              22 1,142.3 174.0 147.0 11.0 136.0 22.9 11.6 11.6 −
                              29 3 1,151.0 3 176.8 3 142.3 10.7 3 131.6 3 23.4 12.0 12.0 −
2007 Jan                  5 1,154.4 178.8 144.0 10.7 133.3 22.4 12.4 12.4 −
                              12 1,138.3 176.8 143.8 10.7 133.1 23.6 12.7 12.7 −
                              19 1,141.2 176.8 142.4 10.6 131.8 22.8 14.1 14.1 −
                              26 1,148.1 176.7 142.3 10.6 131.8 22.1 13.8 13.8 −
         Feb                  2 1,136.7 176.7 143.8 10.6 133.2 23.1 14.4 14.4 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2005          Mar 3 294.6 3 36.4 3 37.4 6.1 3 31.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 299.0 36.4 37.0 6.1 30.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 304.6 36.4 37.2 6.2 31.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 310.7 3 39.8 3 38.9 5.8 3 33.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 317.5 39.8 38.6 5.0 33.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 315.3 39.8 37.6 5.0 32.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 325.0 3 43.3 39.5 5.0 34.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 324.6 43.3 39.3 5.0 34.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 329.2 43.3 38.2 5.0 33.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 344.1 3 47.9 3 38.3 4.5 3 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
2006          Jan 338.9 47.9 38.3 4.5 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 335.1 47.9 36.7 3.8 32.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 340.5 3 53.2 3 36.0 3.8 3 32.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 344.9 53.2 34.5 3.7 30.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 357.5 53.1 35.6 3.4 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 359.1 3 52.0 3 33.9 3.6 3 30.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 364.4 52.0 34.3 3.5 30.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 358.2 52.0 33.6 3.5 30.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 362.4 52.3 33.6 3.4 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 366.4 52.3 33.2 3.1 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 359.2 52.3 33.3 3.1 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 373.7 3 53.1 3 31.7 3.0 3 28.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
2007          Jan 357.9 53.1 32.1 3.0 29.1 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other
 claims on
 euro-area
 credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/
refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  1 
Eurosystem 2
 
410.5 290.5 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 5.6 93.3 40.6 167.4 2006 June                  2
406.2 286.0 120.0 − − 0.2 − 5.5 94.2 40.6 168.3                                 9
412.0 292.0 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 6.1 93.8 40.6 168.5                               16
436.0 316.0 120.0 − − − − 6.1 92.1 40.6 169.1                               23
448.6 328.5 120.0 − − 0.1 0.0 6.1 91.6 40.0 3 169.6                               30
446.0 326.0 120.0 − − − − 5.9 91.5 40.0 171.1          July                  7
441.5 321.5 120.0 − − − − 5.9 89.6 40.0 174.9                               14
455.3 335.0 120.0 − − 0.3 0.0 6.4 88.7 40.0 178.1                               21
458.0 338.0 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 6.1 87.1 40.1 181.2                               28
444.0 324.0 120.0 − − − 0.0 6.3 85.9 40.1 182.8          Aug                  4
438.2 318.0 120.0 − − 0.1 − 6.6 85.8 40.1 185.7                               11
431.0 311.0 120.0 − − − 0.0 6.6 84.3 40.1 185.5                               18
437.5 317.5 120.0 − − − 0.0 7.6 84.7 40.0 187.8                               25
430.5 310.5 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 8.3 83.8 40.0 189.6          Sep                  1
427.0 307.0 120.0 − − − − 8.4 83.9 40.0 190.6                                 8
420.6 300.5 120.0 − − 0.1 − 9.3 83.9 40.0 193.0                               15
431.0 311.0 120.0 − − 0.0 − 9.1 83.1 40.0 194.9                               22
433.5 313.0 120.0 − − 0.5 0.0 9.2 81.6 40.0 197.7                               29
432.0 312.0 120.0 − − 0.0 − 9.4 81.6 40.0 198.4 2006 Oct                  6
428.0 308.0 120.0 − − 0.0 − 9.1 81.4 40.0 201.1                               13
438.5 318.5 120.0 − − − 0.0 8.9 81.0 40.0 201.9                               20
434.0 314.0 120.0 − − 0.0 − 10.1 80.9 40.0 203.9                               27
427.0 307.0 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 9.1 79.3 40.0 206.3          Nov                  3
423.0 303.0 120.0 − − − 0.0 9.1 79.8 40.0 208.3                               10
424.0 304.0 120.0 − − − − 10.1 79.4 40.0 210.4                               17
441.5 321.5 120.0 − − 0.0 0.0 9.4 79.0 40.0 212.2                               24
428.2 308.0 120.0 − − 0.2 − 9.8 79.0 40.0 212.7          Dec                  1
449.0 329.0 120.0 − − − 0.0 9.5 78.6 40.0 214.3                                 8
440.0 320.0 120.0 − − − − 10.4 78.4 39.9 215.4                               15
441.5 321.5 120.0 − − − − 10.8 78.0 39.9 216.7                               22
450.5 330.5 120.0 − − 0.1 − 11.4 77.6 39.4 3 217.7                               29
450.5 330.5 120.0 − − 0.0 − 12.9 80.7 39.4 215.2 2007 Jan                  5
430.5 310.5 120.0 − − 0.0 − 12.8 81.2 39.4 217.5                               12
432.5 312.5 120.0 − − 0.0 − 12.1 81.9 39.4 219.3                               19
437.5 317.5 120.0 − − 0.0 − 12.5 82.1 39.4 221.8                               26
422.5 292.5 130.0 − − − 0.0 11.6 82.2 39.3 223.2          Feb                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
184.4 129.9 52.1 − − 2.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 31.7 2005          Mar 
201.7 148.2 53.5 − − − − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Apr 
190.8 139.3 51.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 35.6          May
208.1 151.2 55.6 − − 1.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2          June
215.3 163.4 51.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          July
194.5 142.6 51.9 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 38.6          Aug 
211.2 156.0 54.8 − − 0.4 − 0.1 − 4.4 26.1          Sep 
203.0 148.6 54.2 − − 0.2 − 0.1 − 4.4 34.2          Oct 
195.0 140.8 54.2 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 47.8          Nov 
203.9 146.5 56.4 − − 0.9 − 0.1 − 4.4 49.2          Dec 
227.2 162.5 64.7 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 20.6 2006          Jan 
218.9 146.4 72.5 − − 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.4 26.6          Feb 
224.5 147.1 77.4 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 21.7          Mar 
233.0 158.0 74.9 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.2          Apr 
227.6 152.6 74.9 − − 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.4 36.2          May
248.8 177.3 71.5 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3          June
253.8 177.9 72.8 − − 3.2 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3          July
223.0 147.3 75.7 − − 0.0 − 1.6 − 4.4 43.4          Aug 
234.1 155.2 78.5 − − 0.5 − 3.0 − 4.4 34.7          Sep 
243.3 164.0 79.3 − − 0.0 − 3.0 − 4.4 29.9          Oct 
232.0 155.2 76.7 − − 0.0 − 3.0 − 4.4 34.0          Nov 
256.3 173.9 82.3 − − 0.1 − 3.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec 
232.5 150.1 82.3 − − 0.0 − 3.1 − 4.4 32.4 2007          Jan 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month  1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2006 June                 2 1,084.5 575.9 160.4 160.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 55.7 47.8 7.9
                                9 1,080.5 576.5 160.6 159.9 0.7 − − − 0.1 − 52.7 44.6 8.1
                              16 1,087.3 576.4 165.8 165.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 52.2 44.4 7.8
                              23 1,112.5 575.2 162.6 162.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 83.4 75.3 8.1
                              30 5 1,112.8 580.1 158.5 157.4 1.2 − − 0.0 0.1 − 94.0 86.2 7.9
         July                 7 1,111.4 585.3 168.6 168.5 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 77.5 69.5 7.9
                              14 1,107.8 586.6 168.3 168.2 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 72.9 64.9 8.0
                              21 1,125.2 586.2 168.3 168.3 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 87.5 79.6 7.9
                              28 1,128.3 588.4 162.3 162.2 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 94.8 86.8 8.0
         Aug                  4 1,114.6 593.9 167.9 167.8 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 70.4 62.3 8.1
                              11 1,112.7 594.2 167.4 167.4 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 66.8 58.7 8.1
                              18 1,103.9 590.7 169.2 169.1 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 61.1 53.1 8.1
                              25 1,113.0 584.9 166.1 166.1 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 78.4 70.4 8.0
         Sep                  1 1,107.3 587.2 170.3 170.2 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 65.2 57.1 8.1
                                8 1,105.4 589.2 165.1 165.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 65.8 57.9 7.9
                              15 1,102.2 587.9 168.0 167.5 0.5 − − 0.0 0.1 − 58.6 50.6 8.0
                              22 1,112.5 585.9 167.1 167.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 71.0 63.0 8.1
                              29 5 1,118.3 589.2 163.2 162.0 1.3 − − 0.0 0.1 − 74.5 66.4 8.1
2006 Oct                  6 1,114.6 592.9 165.8 165.8 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 68.5 60.3 8.2
                              13 1,110.2 592.9 166.0 166.0 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 65.0 57.1 7.9
                              20 1,121.3 591.0 168.2 168.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 75.3 66.9 8.4
                              27 1,118.7 592.0 165.5 165.4 0.0 − − 0.1 0.1 − 73.9 65.3 8.6
         Nov                  3 1,113.2 597.0 170.2 170.2 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 57.0 48.5 8.5
                              10 1,112.8 595.6 172.7 172.6 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 54.8 46.7 8.1
                              17 1,113.2 594.4 175.6 175.6 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 55.9 47.7 8.1
                              24 1,133.3 593.7 170.8 170.8 0.0 − − − 0.1 − 79.0 70.6 8.4
         Dec                  1 1,126.1 601.8 184.0 184.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 44.2 35.9 8.4
                                8 1,146.3 610.2 168.2 168.0 0.2 − − 0.0 0.1 − 73.7 64.9 8.7
                              15 1,138.3 613.9 176.3 176.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 53.9 44.3 9.7
                              22 1,142.3 628.0 177.2 177.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 40.5 32.2 8.4
                              29 5 1,151.0 628.2 174.1 173.5 0.6 − − 0.0 0.1 − 53.4 45.2 8.2
2007 Jan                  5 1,154.4 619.3 180.9 178.7 0.1 2.1 − − 0.1 0.1 61.3 53.0 8.3
                              12 1,138.3 611.2 169.1 166.9 0.1 2.1 − 0.0 0.1 0.0 61.1 52.6 8.6
                              19 1,141.2 606.1 176.5 174.6 0.0 1.9 − 0.0 0.1 0.0 62.5 53.4 9.1
                              26 1,148.1 602.7 177.9 176.1 0.0 1.7 − − 0.1 0.0 68.7 59.9 8.8
         Feb                  2 1,136.7 605.8 182.1 180.8 0.0 1.2 − 0.0 0.1 − 48.3 39.4 8.9
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2005          Mar 5 294.6 136.1 38.1 38.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.3
         Apr 299.0 137.9 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         May 304.6 139.4 41.3 41.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         June 5 310.7 142.6 34.6 33.7 0.8 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         July 317.5 145.2 39.7 39.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Aug 315.3 143.5 39.0 39.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Sep 5 325.0 145.0 38.8 38.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Oct 324.6 146.2 37.4 37.3 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Nov 329.2 147.3 41.9 41.7 0.2 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Dec 5 344.1 153.7 46.3 46.3 0.0 − − − 0.2 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2006          Jan 338.9 148.8 45.4 45.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Feb 335.1 149.9 38.5 38.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
         Mar 5 340.5 151.5 39.7 39.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Apr 344.9 154.7 38.8 38.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         May 357.5 155.3 51.4 51.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         June 5 359.1 157.8 39.9 39.4 0.5 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 364.4 160.3 52.4 52.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Aug 358.2 159.3 46.0 45.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Sep 5 362.4 160.3 46.2 45.5 0.7 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 366.4 161.8 48.0 47.8 0.2 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Nov 359.2 162.8 39.2 39.2 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Dec 373.7 170.9 48.0 47.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2007          Jan 357.9 163.6 37.8 37.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation
(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-
ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     On
to non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reporting
area residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/
denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
14.5 0.2 10.6 10.6 − 5.8 65.9 − 132.4 62.8 2006 June                  2
14.3 0.1 9.5 9.5 − 5.8 65.7 − 132.4 62.8                                 9
14.5 0.1 10.9 10.9 − 5.8 66.0 − 132.4 62.8                               16
14.5 0.1 10.0 10.0 − 5.8 65.7 − 132.4 62.8                               23
14.5 0.1 8.7 8.7 − 5.7 5 66.2 − 5 122.0 62.8                               30
14.5 0.1 9.2 9.2 − 5.7 65.6 − 122.0 62.8          July                  7
14.8 0.1 8.5 8.5 − 5.7 66.0 − 122.0 62.9                               14
15.3 0.1 10.3 10.3 − 5.7 66.7 − 122.0 62.9                               21
15.4 0.1 9.6 9.6 − 5.7 67.0 − 122.0 62.9                               28
15.3 0.1 9.1 9.1 − 5.7 67.2 − 122.0 62.9          Aug                  4
15.7 0.1 10.3 10.3 − 5.7 67.5 − 122.0 62.9                               11
16.0 0.1 10.3 10.3 − 5.7 64.4 − 122.0 64.4                               18
16.2 0.1 9.9 9.9 − 5.7 65.3 − 122.0 64.4                               25
16.2 0.1 9.9 9.9 − 5.7 66.2 − 122.0 64.4          Sep                  1
16.1 0.1 10.7 10.7 − 5.7 66.1 − 122.0 64.4                                 8
15.7 0.1 12.4 12.4 − 5.7 67.0 − 122.0 64.6                               15
16.9 0.1 12.2 12.2 − 5.7 67.0 − 122.0 64.6                               22
15.7 0.1 11.6 11.6 − 5.7 5 69.9 − 5 123.7 64.6                               29
15.9 0.2 8.3 8.3 − 5.7 68.7 − 123.7 64.6 2006 Oct                  6
16.1 0.1 6.8 6.8 − 5.7 69.1 − 123.7 64.6                               13
15.9 0.1 7.1 7.1 − 5.7 69.5 − 123.7 64.6                               20
16.1 0.1 6.7 6.7 − 5.7 70.3 − 123.7 64.6                               27
16.4 0.1 7.5 7.5 − 5.7 70.8 − 123.7 64.6          Nov                  3
16.3 0.1 8.6 8.6 − 5.7 70.6 − 123.7 64.6                               10
16.1 0.1 5.4 5.4 − 5.7 71.5 − 123.7 64.6                               17
16.3 0.1 6.9 6.9 − 5.7 72.3 − 123.7 64.6                               24
16.5 0.1 12.9 12.9 − 5.7 72.5 − 123.7 64.6          Dec                  1
16.0 0.1 10.6 10.6 − 5.7 73.4 − 123.7 64.6                                 8
16.2 0.1 10.2 10.2 − 5.7 73.6 − 123.7 64.6                               15
16.9 0.1 11.9 11.9 − 5.7 73.6 − 123.7 64.6                               22
16.6 0.1 12.6 12.6 − 5.6 73.8 − 5 122.0 64.6                               29
16.1 0.2 11.9 11.9 − 5.6 70.5 − 122.0 66.4 2007 Jan                  5
16.5 0.2 14.4 14.4 − 5.6 71.7 − 122.0 66.4                               12
16.8 0.2 13.4 13.4 − 5.6 71.7 − 122.0 66.4                               19
19.3 0.2 13.3 13.3 − 5.6 71.9 − 122.0 66.4                               26
16.7 0.2 15.8 15.8 − 5.6 73.7 − 122.0 66.4          Feb                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
3.2 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 9.4 67.9 5 30.1 5.0 2005          Mar 
3.4 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.4 9.5 68.8 30.1 5.0          Apr 
3.5 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.4 9.6 71.3 30.1 5.0          May
3.3 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.5 13.0 72.0 5 35.9 5.0          June
3.5 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 10.8 72.6 35.9 5.0          July
3.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.5 10.5 74.1 35.9 5.0          Aug 
3.5 0.0 4.1 4.1 − 1.5 11.0 76.4 5 39.2 5.0          Sep 
3.4 0.0 4.0 4.0 − 1.5 11.0 76.5 39.2 5.0          Oct 
3.4 0.0 2.9 2.9 − 1.5 11.2 76.4 39.2 5.0          Nov 
3.4 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.5 11.3 75.1 5 44.3 5.0          Dec 
3.4 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 11.5 75.8 44.3 5.0 2006          Jan 
3.5 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.5 12.0 77.8 44.3 5.0          Feb 
3.8 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.4 9.4 78.2 5 48.5 5.0          Mar 
3.6 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 1.4 12.7 78.7 48.5 5.0          Apr 
3.8 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.4 9.8 79.5 48.5 5.0          May
3.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.4 22.3 80.6 5 45.8 5.0          June
3.6 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.4 11.6 81.2 45.8 5.0          July
3.6 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.4 11.1 83.9 45.8 5.0          Aug 
3.6 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 11.8 85.9 5 46.4 5.0          Sep 
3.7 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 11.9 86.5 46.4 5.0          Oct 
3.9 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 1.4 12.4 86.3 46.4 5.0          Nov 
3.7 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 1.4 13.0 84.3 45.9 5.0          Dec 
3.8 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.4 12.9 85.5 45.9 5.0 2007          Jan 
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.8
1998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.5
1999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2005          Mar 6,723.0 13.6 2,215.6 1,757.1 1,123.7 633.4 458.5 325.4 133.0 3,379.8 3,084.0 2,475.2 2,216.6
         Apr 6,908.4 13.1 2,275.5 1,814.0 1,174.8 639.1 461.6 325.9 135.6 3,442.4 3,127.8 2,518.2 2,217.5
         May 6,892.0 13.8 2,284.9 1,808.0 1,167.1 640.9 477.0 338.3 138.6 3,422.1 3,107.1 2,500.9 2,220.6
         June 6,851.3 13.6 2,279.3 1,788.0 1,141.2 646.8 491.4 348.5 142.8 3,392.9 3,073.3 2,482.3 2,222.8
         July 6,871.3 14.0 2,282.1 1,797.8 1,149.9 647.8 484.3 342.6 141.7 3,395.6 3,082.2 2,488.3 2,224.4
         Aug 6,849.5 13.5 2,270.8 1,787.5 1,143.7 643.8 483.3 338.5 144.8 3,397.7 3,085.8 2,491.0 2,225.3
         Sep 6,873.8 14.0 2,271.5 1,770.2 1,129.9 640.3 501.3 353.7 147.6 3,403.1 3,089.8 2,505.3 2,238.3
         Oct 6,888.8 14.1 2,270.7 1,754.8 1,123.5 631.3 515.9 368.7 147.2 3,412.5 3,098.7 2,512.0 2,244.5
         Nov 6,924.1 13.3 2,287.0 1,760.4 1,133.3 627.1 526.6 373.7 152.9 3,417.1 3,093.2 2,510.3 2,240.3
         Dec 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006          Jan 6,940.6 13.3 2,275.4 1,739.2 1,128.2 610.9 536.2 374.0 162.3 3,458.7 3,123.8 2,542.5 2,251.5
         Feb 6,967.7 14.1 2,289.3 1,745.9 1,132.6 613.4 543.4 376.9 166.4 3,458.7 3,117.1 2,546.9 2,255.5
         Mar 7,004.8 13.3 2,302.4 1,736.7 1,123.2 613.4 565.7 392.7 172.9 3,474.5 3,127.4 2,556.8 2,258.4
         Apr 7,075.7 14.5 2,320.4 1,768.4 1,156.7 611.7 552.1 379.5 172.6 3,518.0 3,161.1 2,590.8 2,264.9
         May 7,102.2 14.0 2,347.5 1,787.1 1,170.6 616.5 560.4 381.7 178.7 3,513.5 3,160.4 2,584.0 2,264.5
         June 7,075.1 13.8 2,316.3 1,738.4 1,130.8 607.6 577.9 391.7 186.2 3,481.8 3,122.7 2,560.2 2,265.4
         July 7,040.0 13.7 2,299.7 1,733.4 1,133.2 600.1 566.3 379.1 187.2 3,476.6 3,119.5 2,555.2 2,261.1
         Aug 7,034.6 13.6 2,300.0 1,732.6 1,136.0 596.7 567.3 376.8 190.5 3,472.6 3,117.7 2,558.7 2,263.2
         Sep 7,077.2 14.2 2,278.0 1,705.0 1,111.7 593.3 573.0 374.8 198.2 3,492.6 3,122.1 2,571.2 2,280.7
         Oct 7,080.1 14.4 2,278.7 1,697.5 1,108.1 589.4 581.2 376.3 204.9 3,496.5 3,119.2 2,563.0 2,272.3
         Nov 7,141.2 13.6 2,293.7 1,712.4 1,126.3 586.2 581.3 365.9 215.3 3,506.4 3,123.3 2,560.4 2,268.4
         Dec 7,156.9 16.4 2,314.5 1,718.6 1,139.2 579.5 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.9 3,086.3 2,536.9 2,242.7
 Changes 1
1998 1,001.0 − 0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.2
1999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.4
2003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.4
2004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2005 197.2 0.1 101.8 13.2 25.7 − 12.5 88.6 50.5 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2005          Apr 183.0 − 0.5 59.4 56.8 51.1 5.7 2.6 0.5 2.1 63.2 44.4 43.7 1.4
         May − 32.5 0.7 9.2 − 6.1 − 7.7 1.6 15.3 12.4 2.9 − 21.7 − 21.4 − 18.0 2.6
         June − 46.3 − 0.2 − 5.5 − 19.8 − 25.9 6.1 14.4 10.2 4.2 − 27.7 − 32.1 − 16.7 4.4
         July 22.1 0.4 2.9 10.0 8.8 1.2 − 7.0 − 5.9 − 1.1 3.9 10.0 7.0 2.7
         Aug − 19.9 − 0.5 − 11.3 − 10.5 − 6.2 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 3.6 2.7 2.8 4.3 3.4 1.3
         Sep 20.2 0.5 0.7 − 17.3 − 13.8 − 3.5 18.0 15.2 2.8 5.1 4.0 14.0 12.8
         Oct 14.7 0.1 − 0.8 − 15.4 − 6.4 − 9.0 14.6 15.1 − 0.5 10.3 9.6 7.4 6.8
         Nov 29.4 − 0.8 16.6 5.9 9.8 − 3.8 10.7 4.9 5.7 4.2 − 5.7 − 1.8 − 4.0
         Dec − 64.0 2.0 − 10.8 2.3 15.2 − 12.9 − 13.1 − 17.4 4.3 − 7.7 − 6.1 − 3.9 − 11.8
2006          Jan 62.7 − 2.1 − 4.5 − 22.4 − 20.2 − 2.3 18.0 14.2 3.8 38.3 25.3 24.7 12.2
         Feb 19.1 0.8 13.8 6.7 4.4 2.4 7.1 2.9 4.1 0.2 − 6.0 5.1 4.7
         Mar 46.6 − 0.8 13.4 − 9.1 − 9.3 0.3 22.4 15.8 6.6 19.0 12.8 12.4 4.8
         Apr 81.7 1.2 18.2 31.8 33.4 − 1.7 − 13.5 − 13.3 − 0.2 44.8 34.4 34.6 6.8
         May 34.1 − 0.5 27.9 19.5 14.6 4.8 8.4 2.3 6.1 − 3.7 − 0.2 − 6.3 − 0.3
         June − 29.8 − 0.2 − 31.2 − 49.0 − 40.3 − 8.8 17.9 10.3 7.6 − 31.3 − 37.2 − 23.3 1.3
         July − 34.3 − 0.1 − 16.4 − 5.1 2.4 − 7.5 − 11.4 − 12.6 1.3 − 6.9 − 3.4 − 5.2 − 3.6
         Aug − 2.2 − 0.0 1.4 0.3 3.6 − 3.2 1.0 − 2.3 3.3 − 4.3 − 1.6 3.8 2.7
         Sep 76.9 0.6 14.6 9.0 7.3 1.7 5.6 − 2.0 7.6 23.7 8.4 16.4 18.1
         Oct 4.6 0.2 2.4 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 3.9 8.2 1.5 6.7 4.2 − 2.7 − 8.0 − 8.1
         Nov 75.6 − 0.8 15.3 15.1 18.2 − 3.0 0.2 − 10.3 10.5 12.6 6.1 − 0.6 − 1.9
         Dec 15.7 2.8 21.2 6.6 12.9 − 6.4 14.7 10.9 3.8 − 40.9 − 34.5 − 21.2 − 23.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997
394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998
233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
258.6 608.8 420.7 188.2 295.8 144.6 61.4 151.2 28.0 123.2 955.0 780.7 159.1 2005          Mar 
300.7 609.6 422.8 186.8 314.6 151.8 65.5 162.9 30.7 132.1 1,013.1 835.4 164.2          Apr 
280.3 606.2 421.7 184.5 315.0 155.2 66.0 159.8 31.1 128.7 1,001.3 821.1 169.8          May
259.5 591.0 416.2 174.7 319.6 162.6 68.4 157.0 31.2 125.8 1,001.0 815.4 164.5          June
263.9 593.9 418.9 175.0 313.4 158.5 64.2 154.9 32.4 122.5 1,014.5 830.9 165.1          July
265.8 594.8 417.0 177.8 311.9 157.7 62.9 154.2 31.1 123.0 1,002.5 815.7 164.9          Aug 
267.0 584.6 410.7 173.9 313.2 161.0 65.5 152.2 32.6 119.6 1,020.0 829.8 165.2          Sep 
267.5 586.7 413.2 173.6 313.8 164.6 67.0 149.2 31.7 117.5 1,023.2 832.3 168.2          Oct 
270.0 582.9 406.9 176.0 324.0 168.5 67.7 155.4 30.2 125.2 1,031.7 837.8 174.9          Nov 
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7          Dec 
291.0 581.2 409.8 171.4 334.9 174.4 69.9 160.5 31.6 128.9 1,030.5 831.4 162.8 2006          Jan 
291.4 570.2 401.1 169.1 341.5 182.5 73.6 159.1 31.0 128.1 1,045.4 846.5 160.2          Feb 
298.5 570.5 401.3 169.2 347.1 186.7 76.2 160.4 30.8 129.6 1,055.1 856.0 159.6          Mar 
325.9 570.3 402.8 167.4 356.9 196.8 84.1 160.1 30.4 129.8 1,056.7 859.5 166.0          Apr 
319.5 576.4 394.9 181.4 353.2 193.3 81.5 159.9 30.7 129.2 1,055.0 854.9 172.0          May
294.9 562.5 391.0 171.5 359.1 200.3 82.2 158.8 31.1 127.7 1,097.0 892.0 166.1          June
294.0 564.3 392.1 172.2 357.1 200.6 80.9 156.6 31.8 124.8 1,084.4 880.4 165.6          July
295.5 559.0 389.0 170.0 354.9 200.6 81.6 154.3 30.8 123.5 1,084.5 880.1 163.8          Aug 
290.5 550.9 387.9 163.0 370.5 217.2 87.0 153.3 27.8 125.5 1,123.3 904.0 169.2          Sep 
290.7 556.2 392.6 163.6 377.3 224.3 89.2 153.0 26.1 126.9 1,118.3 893.3 172.2          Oct 
292.0 562.9 393.2 169.8 383.2 229.9 88.8 153.2 26.1 127.2 1,148.4 916.9 179.0          Nov 
294.1 549.4 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,174.4 936.2 188.8          Dec 
Changes 1
92.3 25.8 28.1 − 2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 1998
30.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.1 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.7 31.6 − 22.2 2005
42.2 0.8 2.2 − 1.4 18.8 7.2 4.1 11.6 2.8 8.9 56.7 53.5 4.2 2005          Apr 
− 20.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 2.3 − 0.3 2.9 0.1 − 3.2 0.3 − 3.5 − 25.7 − 27.2 5.0          May
− 21.0 − 15.4 − 5.7 − 9.8 4.4 7.3 2.3 − 2.9 0.1 − 3.0 − 5.5 − 10.6 − 7.4          June
4.3 3.0 2.7 0.3 − 6.1 − 4.1 − 4.2 − 2.0 1.2 − 3.2 15.0 16.9 − 0.2          July
2.1 0.9 − 1.9 2.8 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 1.3 0.5 − 10.2 − 12.8 − 0.7          Aug 
1.2 − 10.0 − 6.2 − 3.9 1.2 3.1 2.4 − 2.0 1.4 − 3.4 14.3 11.1 − 0.4          Sep 
0.6 2.2 2.5 − 0.3 0.7 3.6 1.6 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 2.0 3.1 2.3 1.9          Oct 
2.2 − 3.9 − 6.3 2.4 9.9 3.8 0.5 6.1 − 1.5 7.6 3.2 0.7 6.3          Nov 
7.9 − 2.2 1.9 − 4.0 − 1.6 0.6 − 2.7 − 2.1 0.4 − 2.6 − 37.4 − 40.5 − 10.2          Dec 
12.5 0.6 0.9 − 0.3 13.0 5.3 4.8 7.7 1.2 6.5 36.8 34.4 − 5.9 2006          Jan 
0.4 − 11.0 − 8.7 − 2.3 6.1 7.7 3.4 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 8.1 9.1 − 3.8          Feb 
7.6 0.4 0.2 0.2 6.2 4.5 2.8 1.7 − 0.1 1.8 17.5 16.4 − 2.4          Mar 
27.7 − 0.2 1.6 − 1.8 10.4 10.6 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.2 11.8 12.9 5.7          Apr 
− 6.0 6.1 − 7.9 14.0 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 2.3 − 0.2 0.4 − 0.6 5.1 1.6 5.3          May
− 24.7 − 13.9 − 4.0 − 9.9 5.9 7.0 0.6 − 1.1 0.4 − 1.4 39.6 34.8 − 6.7          June
− 1.7 1.8 1.1 0.7 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 11.2 − 11.6 0.3          July
1.2 − 5.4 − 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.7 0.1 0.7 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.8 1.8 1.2 − 1.0          Aug 
− 1.6 − 8.1 − 1.0 − 7.1 15.3 16.4 5.3 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 33.3 23.1 4.7          Sep 
0.1 5.3 4.7 0.6 6.9 7.3 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.6 − 4.9 − 9.9 2.7          Oct 
1.3 6.8 0.5 6.2 6.5 6.1 0.1 0.4 0.0 0.4 42.2 34.7 6.2          Nov 
2.5 − 13.3 − 2.9 − 10.4 − 6.4 − 1.9 − 3.6 − 4.5 0.1 − 4.5 26.1 19.3 6.5          Dec 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 End of year or month
 
1997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.3
1998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.4
1999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2005          Mar 6,723.0 1,524.3 1,255.2 269.1 2,271.6 2,159.7 672.3 882.2 214.5 605.2 516.5 70.9 11.5
         Apr 6,908.4 1,630.5 1,328.3 302.2 2,278.7 2,170.3 675.5 890.0 220.1 604.8 516.6 66.5 10.7
         May 6,892.0 1,593.7 1,303.3 290.5 2,285.4 2,177.0 683.3 889.6 223.2 604.1 516.4 67.9 12.4
         June 6,851.3 1,577.1 1,301.4 275.7 2,288.5 2,179.8 691.4 885.7 218.6 602.7 515.6 67.4 14.5
         July 6,871.3 1,581.0 1,311.5 269.5 2,288.7 2,185.9 694.8 889.3 220.8 601.9 515.5 61.1 11.6
         Aug 6,849.5 1,557.4 1,290.4 267.0 2,290.1 2,188.2 697.1 890.7 221.6 600.4 515.0 60.2 11.0
         Sep 6,873.8 1,553.7 1,290.8 262.9 2,296.1 2,192.6 703.0 890.7 221.8 598.9 515.0 61.5 12.4
         Oct 6,888.8 1,553.0 1,276.7 276.3 2,298.0 2,196.8 706.7 892.9 223.8 597.2 513.9 60.3 11.6
         Nov 6,924.1 1,546.0 1,273.1 272.9 2,315.2 2,213.4 722.5 894.9 224.6 596.0 512.5 61.2 11.5
         Dec 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006          Jan 6,940.6 1,589.6 1,306.9 282.7 2,334.0 2,227.0 716.1 908.1 233.7 602.8 517.9 63.4 11.8
         Feb 6,967.7 1,583.4 1,303.2 280.2 2,331.2 2,233.0 714.3 916.1 235.7 602.6 517.4 60.7 10.8
         Mar 7,004.8 1,581.0 1,303.4 277.6 2,340.8 2,241.4 720.9 919.1 237.5 601.4 515.4 60.1 12.1
         Apr 7,075.7 1,635.0 1,340.8 294.3 2,364.7 2,257.5 725.7 932.0 246.2 599.8 513.6 68.1 16.3
         May 7,102.2 1,634.7 1,338.6 296.1 2,370.4 2,269.4 734.6 937.4 249.9 597.4 510.1 60.2 11.8
         June 7,075.1 1,617.7 1,334.0 283.6 2,380.7 2,276.8 735.1 945.6 256.2 596.1 507.5 61.3 14.8
         July 7,040.0 1,606.6 1,334.3 272.3 2,375.8 2,274.0 728.0 952.7 261.5 593.2 503.5 58.2 11.9
         Aug 7,034.6 1,589.9 1,310.8 279.1 2,382.3 2,278.6 723.0 965.3 271.0 590.3 499.1 57.0 10.7
         Sep 7,077.2 1,583.3 1,299.5 283.8 2,392.3 2,284.0 722.6 973.7 280.2 587.7 495.3 59.2 11.9
         Oct 7,080.1 1,586.2 1,303.4 282.8 2,388.6 2,280.6 715.3 980.2 286.7 585.0 490.5 61.8 12.4
         Nov 7,141.2 1,618.6 1,320.5 298.1 2,423.1 2,310.9 742.3 987.1 293.7 581.4 484.3 63.8 13.0
         Dec 7,156.9 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
 Changes 1
1998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.0
1999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.4
2002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.6
2003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 197.2 32.8 26.9 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2005          Apr 183.0 105.9 73.0 32.9 7.0 10.6 3.2 7.7 5.6 − 0.3 0.1 − 4.4 − 0.8
         May − 32.5 − 39.7 − 26.1 − 13.6 5.8 6.1 7.4 − 0.5 2.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 1.0 1.6
         June − 46.3 − 17.7 − 2.2 − 15.5 2.8 2.6 7.9 − 4.0 − 4.6 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 2.0
         July 22.1 4.3 10.2 − 6.0 3.0 6.2 3.4 3.6 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 2.8
         Aug − 19.9 − 23.2 − 21.0 − 2.3 1.0 2.3 2.3 1.5 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6
         Sep 20.2 − 4.4 0.2 − 4.5 5.8 4.2 5.8 − 0.1 0.2 − 1.5 0.1 1.2 1.4
         Oct 14.7 − 0.9 − 14.2 13.3 1.9 4.2 4.2 1.6 1.5 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.8
         Nov 29.4 − 8.2 − 4.1 − 4.1 16.9 16.4 15.7 1.9 0.7 − 1.2 − 1.4 0.8 − 0.1
         Dec − 64.0 23.8 27.8 − 4.0 13.9 12.0 − 6.6 11.3 8.8 7.4 6.6 1.0 − 1.9
2006          Jan 62.7 17.5 2.9 14.6 5.3 1.8 0.5 2.0 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 1.4 2.2
         Feb 19.1 − 7.6 − 4.3 − 3.3 − 3.3 5.7 − 2.0 7.9 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 1.0
         Mar 46.6 − 0.5 1.1 − 1.6 10.1 8.8 6.9 3.1 1.9 − 1.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 1.4
         Apr 81.7 55.5 37.7 17.8 24.5 16.4 5.1 12.9 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.9 8.2 4.2
         May 34.1 1.7 − 0.9 2.6 6.1 12.2 9.0 5.6 3.8 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 7.8 − 4.5
         June − 29.8 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 12.8 10.2 7.3 0.4 8.1 6.3 − 1.3 − 2.6 1.1 2.9
         July − 34.3 − 10.9 0.3 − 11.2 − 4.9 − 2.8 − 7.0 7.2 5.2 − 2.9 − 4.0 − 3.2 − 2.8
         Aug − 2.2 − 15.5 − 22.5 6.9 6.0 4.1 − 5.5 12.6 9.5 − 2.9 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.3
         Sep 76.9 24.4 20.1 4.3 11.2 6.7 − 0.6 9.9 9.2 − 2.6 − 3.8 2.2 1.2
         Oct 4.6 4.7 5.7 − 1.0 − 3.7 − 3.4 − 7.2 6.5 6.5 − 2.7 − 4.8 2.5 0.5
         Nov 75.6 34.6 17.9 16.7 35.2 30.9 27.5 7.0 7.1 − 3.5 − 6.1 2.2 0.6
         Dec 15.7 19.0 28.1 − 9.1 26.1 30.7 3.4 22.2 16.5 5.1 3.1 − 1.8 0.9
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 2001
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
56.3 8.0 3.1 2.6 41.0 40.5 28.3 34.0 1,585.3 114.8 639.3 334.6 305.7 2005          Mar 
52.8 9.3 3.1 2.5 41.8 39.4 28.6 34.4 1,606.5 117.7 680.0 341.0 308.7          Apr 
52.5 9.5 2.9 2.5 40.5 39.2 28.3 33.9 1,614.2 115.8 686.9 343.8 305.7          May
50.4 8.5 2.5 2.1 41.3 39.7 28.3 34.2 1,637.1 118.2 636.2 343.9 306.0          June
47.0 7.4 2.5 2.1 41.7 41.4 26.7 35.7 1,640.1 116.2 645.0 346.2 307.9          July
46.8 7.7 2.4 2.0 41.6 40.5 30.6 35.8 1,639.6 118.1 640.3 344.0 311.6          Aug 
46.6 7.6 2.4 2.0 42.1 40.8 28.0 35.6 1,637.1 117.9 657.6 344.2 321.5          Sep 
46.3 8.3 2.4 2.0 40.9 39.7 32.3 32.8 1,634.0 116.2 662.6 346.8 329.3          Oct 
47.3 8.4 2.4 2.0 40.7 38.7 33.2 31.8 1,631.2 113.8 679.3 348.6 338.8          Nov 
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5          Dec 
49.3 9.6 2.4 2.0 43.6 40.4 27.4 31.2 1,617.4 112.2 646.3 369.7 325.0 2006          Jan 
47.6 8.5 2.4 2.0 37.4 35.8 29.6 31.7 1,630.9 113.9 662.9 377.3 320.6          Feb 
45.6 7.8 2.4 2.0 39.3 37.0 37.0 31.6 1,632.1 119.8 667.6 384.1 330.7          Mar 
49.5 11.7 2.4 2.0 39.1 37.6 35.6 31.5 1,623.9 121.1 662.7 384.6 337.5          Apr 
46.0 8.3 2.3 1.9 40.8 37.0 37.0 32.1 1,632.9 125.9 667.8 386.5 340.7          May
44.2 6.9 2.3 1.9 42.6 39.3 35.7 33.0 1,641.1 126.7 652.0 387.2 327.8          June
43.9 6.3 2.3 1.9 43.7 40.3 30.1 32.4 1,641.7 124.8 640.2 387.9 325.2          July
44.0 6.5 2.3 1.9 46.7 44.1 34.9 32.2 1,638.1 127.2 646.0 387.2 324.1          Aug 
45.1 7.8 2.3 1.9 49.1 45.6 38.1 31.5 1,639.6 129.7 665.0 388.0 339.7          Sep 
47.1 9.9 2.3 1.9 46.3 43.4 32.1 32.0 1,644.6 134.3 663.9 389.1 343.6          Oct 
48.6 10.1 2.3 1.8 48.4 43.7 27.5 32.0 1,641.7 137.5 653.0 391.7 353.6          Nov 
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 356.2          Dec 
Changes 1
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001
− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002
− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.3 − 9.4 22.4 14.4 18.5 2005
− 3.6 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.8 − 1.1 0.3 0.4 20.1 3.0 39.7 5.7 3.9 2005          Apr 
− 0.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 2.4 − 1.9 − 3.1 1.7 1.1          May
− 2.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.8 0.5 − 0.1 0.3 21.0 2.4 − 54.2 − 0.3 1.9          June
− 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.4 1.7 − 1.5 1.5 1.5 − 2.1 10.0 2.5 0.8          July
− 0.2 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.2 3.9 0.1 0.0 1.9 − 3.6 − 2.1 4.0          Aug 
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 0.2 15.1 0.0 10.5          Sep 
− 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.1 4.3 − 2.9 − 3.2 − 1.6 4.7 2.6 8.1          Oct 
0.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 1.0 0.9 − 1.0 − 4.7 − 2.7 13.1 1.5 10.8          Nov 
2.9 1.3 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.0 − 13.6 − 0.1 − 19.1 − 0.1 − 52.6 − 1.7 − 14.8          Dec 
− 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.0 1.7 7.9 − 0.5 4.4 − 1.9 24.3 5.3 − 1.5 2006          Jan 
− 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 6.2 − 4.6 2.2 0.6 10.3 1.8 12.4 7.1 − 2.6          Feb 
− 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 1.3 7.4 − 0.1 5.5 5.9 9.4 7.5 7.4          Mar 
4.0 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 4.0 1.3 1.3 1.3 4.6          Apr 
− 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.7 − 0.6 0.6 0.6 11.8 4.8 9.2 2.3 1.8          May
− 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 2.3 − 1.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 17.5 0.6 − 4.6          June
− 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 1.0 − 5.6 − 0.6 0.7 − 1.9 − 11.4 0.7 − 2.4          July
0.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 3.9 4.8 − 0.2 − 2.5 2.4 6.7 − 0.1 − 1.3          Aug 
1.0 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.3 1.5 3.2 − 0.7 5.3 3.5 16.7 0.5 16.2          Sep 
2.0 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 2.2 − 6.0 0.5 4.8 4.6 − 1.1 1.2 4.2          Oct 
1.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.1 0.3 − 4.5 − 0.0 3.1 3.3 − 3.2 3.5 6.9          Nov 
− 2.7 − 0.8 0.0 0.0 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 10.5 0.0 − 5.0 − 1.2 − 14.5 − 2.0 2.6          Dec 
footnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than four with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data collected the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published together with money
separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the deposits market fund shares. 
with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt securities
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2006          July 2,068 7,074.2 65.9 2,824.9 2,029.4 773.1 3,773.0 472.1 2,598.9 2.5 687.2 154.9 255.6
         Aug 2,062 7,069.4 59.7 2,824.8 2,030.8 773.2 3,775.9 473.9 2,600.8 2.4 686.1 155.0 254.1
         Sep 2,055 7,113.3 61.5 2,828.3 2,028.8 776.9 3,802.2 490.5 2,602.4 2.4 696.4 155.9 265.4
         Oct 2,050 7,115.4 63.0 2,812.4 2,006.4 781.6 3,816.3 496.9 2,600.9 2.4 704.3 155.6 268.1
         Nov 2,047 7,175.8 54.9 2,858.0 2,040.9 793.1 3,833.2 491.4 2,606.7 2.3 720.8 155.4 274.3
         Dec 2,048 7,189.7 65.9 2,904.9 2,089.4 792.8 3,777.7 454.8 2,596.0 2.4 715.4 158.4 282.8
Commercial banks 5
2006          Nov 255 2,042.5 18.6 797.2 667.1 125.5 1,040.4 265.4 574.6 1.2 191.2 82.0 104.3
         Dec 256 2,048.6 23.5 838.2 704.5 128.8 998.7 239.7 566.5 1.3 184.8 84.3 103.8
   Big banks 6
2006          Nov 5 1,305.4 9.0 516.6 440.2 74.0 628.9 181.1 302.1 1.0 138.1 72.1 78.8
         Dec 5 1,298.6 13.3 542.2 461.7 77.7 591.2 159.4 294.5 1.0 131.8 74.3 77.7
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2006          Nov 158 611.8 8.0 214.0 164.1 47.8 358.3 62.7 246.2 0.2 47.9 9.8 21.7
         Dec 158 620.4 9.1 223.9 174.0 47.8 355.4 59.9 245.7 0.2 47.6 9.7 22.3
   Branches of foreign banks
2006          Nov 92 125.3 1.5 66.6 62.8 3.8 53.2 21.7 26.3 0.0 5.2 0.2 3.8
         Dec 93 129.5 1.2 72.2 68.8 3.3 52.1 20.4 26.2 0.1 5.4 0.3 3.8
Landesbanken
2006          Nov 12 1,444.0 3.7 775.9 569.7 191.8 587.7 93.4 386.3 0.2 104.2 26.0 50.8
         Dec 12 1,440.3 4.2 785.9 582.7 190.3 574.5 81.6 387.0 0.3 103.9 25.7 50.1
Savings banks
2006          Nov 457 1,015.7 17.3 239.3 93.2 144.7 722.7 62.1 552.5 0.5 107.5 16.0 20.3
         Dec 457 1,027.0 21.5 243.5 97.9 144.3 724.0 63.0 551.9 0.5 108.5 16.0 21.9
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2006          Nov 2 241.0 0.4 159.7 104.9 54.1 59.7 13.1 16.9 0.0 29.6 12.7 8.7
         Dec 2 242.5 1.0 163.5 109.0 53.7 56.6 9.8 17.0 0.0 29.2 12.8 8.7
Credit cooperatives
2006          Nov 1,257 604.1 12.7 154.8 68.2 84.1 409.5 36.3 323.1 0.3 49.7 9.7 17.5
         Dec 1,257 608.0 13.4 155.1 69.0 83.7 410.2 36.1 323.8 0.3 50.0 10.2 19.1
Mortgage banks
2006          Nov 22 871.5 1.2 254.4 152.1 102.2 592.7 11.9 433.2 − 147.6 2.6 20.6
         Dec 22 878.8 1.5 258.0 156.9 101.1 590.9 13.1 429.7 − 148.1 3.0 25.4
Building and loan associations
2006          Nov 26 194.1 0.1 57.0 42.4 14.6 119.3 1.5 103.8 . 14.0 0.4 17.4
         Dec 26 193.9 0.0 56.0 41.5 14.4 120.0 1.6 104.2 . 14.2 0.4 17.6
Special purpose banks
2006          Nov 16 762.8 0.9 419.9 343.3 76.1 301.2 7.7 216.3 − 77.0 6.1 34.8
         Dec 16 750.5 0.7 404.7 327.9 76.4 302.9 9.9 215.9 − 76.8 6.1 36.2
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2006          Nov 139 790.4 7.9 299.7 234.0 63.6 445.0 74.3 275.4 0.3 94.1 12.6 25.2
         Dec 139 799.3 8.4 315.2 248.7 64.3 438.7 64.4 275.2 0.4 97.8 12.6 24.4
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2006          Nov 47 665.1 6.4 233.1 171.2 59.8 391.8 52.7 249.2 0.3 88.8 12.4 21.4
         Dec 46 669.8 7.3 243.0 179.9 61.0 386.7 44.0 249.0 0.3 92.5 12.3 20.6
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,992.9 269.2 1,723.7 2,660.1 814.7 366.6 776.0 128.9 601.6 510.2 101.2 1,690.7 337.4 393.1 2006          July
1,968.8 264.9 1,703.8 2,684.5 821.4 378.7 784.0 142.8 598.6 505.6 101.8 1,687.0 336.8 392.3          Aug 
1,983.4 290.6 1,692.7 2,695.4 810.7 402.5 784.7 148.0 596.0 501.8 101.5 1,690.4 335.7 408.4          Sep 
1,987.1 268.6 1,718.4 2,684.0 799.3 401.8 783.9 138.4 593.2 496.9 105.8 1,695.9 336.3 412.1          Oct 
2,012.1 306.9 1,705.2 2,710.5 826.0 403.7 784.4 132.0 589.6 490.7 106.7 1,695.0 336.9 421.3          Nov 
2,038.1 293.5 1,744.6 2,704.7 829.8 394.2 778.2 109.2 594.9 493.9 107.6 1,687.6 337.2 422.1          Dec 
Commercial banks 5
735.7 164.5 571.1 823.5 392.8 201.9 120.9 102.1 96.8 86.7 11.1 229.0 101.8 152.6 2006          Nov 
753.9 165.6 588.2 815.5 391.5 195.5 119.8 88.9 97.4 87.1 11.2 230.7 102.1 146.5          Dec 
Big banks 6
483.9 119.4 364.5 489.1 204.1 144.0 75.2 95.8 62.5 60.5 3.2 167.2 60.0 105.2 2006          Nov 
484.9 116.9 368.0 483.5 203.7 138.0 75.9 82.4 62.8 60.7 3.2 166.9 60.0 103.2          Dec 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
158.4 27.9 130.5 309.7 173.6 52.1 42.1 6.2 34.2 26.2 7.8 61.8 38.7 43.2 2006          Nov 
170.7 29.6 141.1 307.9 173.6 51.5 40.2 6.5 34.7 26.4 7.9 63.7 38.8 39.2          Dec 
Branches of foreign banks
93.3 17.2 76.2 24.7 15.2 5.7 3.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 3.1 4.2 2006          Nov 
98.3 19.1 79.2 24.0 14.2 6.0 3.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 3.2 4.0          Dec 
Landesbanken
515.1 83.3 431.8 341.1 58.9 58.9 207.2 19.5 15.2 14.6 0.8 460.3 63.0 64.6 2006          Nov 
515.1 72.3 442.8 343.4 62.2 58.4 206.6 16.0 15.3 14.7 0.8 451.4 62.9 67.6          Dec 
Savings banks
210.5 5.5 205.0 656.2 216.7 57.0 13.0 − 299.4 238.2 70.0 45.1 52.0 52.0 2006          Nov 
217.6 8.3 209.4 662.6 218.9 57.8 12.9 − 302.2 239.5 70.8 45.5 52.1 49.2          Dec 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
136.0 36.6 99.4 44.2 9.2 15.9 17.8 10.2 − − 1.4 38.7 11.1 11.0 2006          Nov 
143.4 33.0 110.4 37.8 7.8 10.6 17.9 3.8 − − 1.4 38.8 11.1 11.4          Dec 
Credit cooperatives
78.4 2.7 75.7 425.4 142.5 56.3 26.7 − 177.1 150.0 22.7 36.6 35.1 28.8 2006          Nov 
78.0 3.2 74.8 428.5 141.6 58.4 27.1 − 178.7 151.4 22.8 37.1 35.2 29.3          Dec 
Mortgage banks
155.8 3.5 152.3 176.0 2.3 6.3 166.6 − 0.8 0.8 0.0 489.7 23.6 26.4 2006          Nov 
159.0 2.6 156.4 179.3 3.8 5.8 168.8 0.3 0.8 0.8 0.0 486.0 23.6 30.9          Dec 
Building and loan associations
30.3 2.3 28.0 126.1 0.3 1.2 123.9 − 0.3 0.3 0.4 3.7 7.4 26.6 2006          Nov 
29.0 1.7 27.3 129.0 0.4 1.2 126.7 − 0.4 0.3 0.4 3.7 7.4 24.8          Dec 
Special purpose banks
150.5 8.6 141.9 118.1 3.5 6.3 108.2 0.2 − − 0.2 392.0 42.9 59.4 2006          Nov 
142.1 6.9 135.3 108.7 3.7 6.5 98.3 0.4 − − 0.2 394.3 42.9 62.4          Dec 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
264.5 62.5 202.0 282.6 145.4 44.1 68.3 8.4 20.1 19.8 4.8 155.0 30.8 57.5 2006          Nov 
284.0 64.4 219.6 278.2 140.3 45.1 67.8 5.4 20.1 19.8 4.8 154.5 30.9 51.7          Dec 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
171.2 45.3 125.8 257.9 130.2 38.3 64.7 8.4 20.1 19.8 4.7 155.0 27.7 53.3 2006          Nov 
185.8 45.3 140.5 254.1 126.1 39.1 64.1 5.4 20.1 19.8 4.7 154.5 27.7 47.7          Dec 
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
1997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.3
1998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.8
1999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.9 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.3 1.9 3,000.8 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.6
2005          July 13.5 41.7 1,719.7 1,100.0 0.0 8.7 611.0 2.1 2,998.0 2,640.9 2.5 2.1 352.6
         Aug 13.0 39.7 1,712.2 1,095.9 0.0 9.8 606.5 2.1 3,001.1 2,639.8 2.4 2.0 356.9
         Sep 13.6 40.7 1,693.9 1,081.2 0.1 10.5 602.2 2.1 3,004.7 2,646.6 2.3 1.1 354.5
         Oct 13.7 37.7 1,684.9 1,081.2 0.0 9.9 593.8 2.1 3,012.9 2,655.3 2.4 4.2 351.0
         Nov 12.8 42.1 1,687.2 1,087.7 0.0 9.8 589.7 2.1 3,004.8 2,644.9 2.3 3.5 354.0
         Dec 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006          Jan 13.0 45.5 1,663.1 1,079.4 0.0 8.1 575.6 2.0 3,032.2 2,659.1 2.3 2.7 368.2
         Feb 13.7 42.4 1,672.9 1,086.9 0.0 8.5 577.5 2.0 3,023.3 2,654.5 2.1 1.5 365.1
         Mar 12.9 39.0 1,667.9 1,081.2 0.0 10.0 576.7 1.9 3,030.2 2,657.6 2.1 1.5 369.1
         Apr 14.1 40.3 1,698.4 1,113.6 0.0 10.9 573.9 2.7 3,066.0 2,665.6 2.1 1.9 396.5
         May 13.5 53.7 1,703.5 1,113.6 − 10.5 579.3 2.0 3,065.4 2,657.3 2.1 1.4 404.6
         June 13.4 43.3 1,665.7 1,085.0 − 9.7 571.0 1.9 3,028.2 2,654.0 2.1 2.0 370.0
         July 13.3 52.2 1,652.0 1,078.6 − 9.5 563.8 1.9 3,024.4 2,651.1 2.1 2.0 369.2
         Aug 13.2 46.0 1,657.3 1,087.1 − 9.1 561.1 1.9 3,022.5 2,650.1 2.1 1.3 369.0
         Sep 13.8 47.3 1,626.3 1,062.0 − 10.4 553.9 1.9 3,035.2 2,666.7 2.0 1.0 365.5
         Oct 14.0 48.6 1,617.7 1,057.0 − 11.0 549.8 1.9 3,033.2 2,662.9 2.0 1.4 366.9
         Nov 13.3 41.2 1,640.2 1,082.3 − 10.4 547.5 1.9 3,037.8 2,659.6 1.9 1.5 374.9
         Dec 16.0 49.4 1,637.9 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.3 1.9 3,000.8 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.6
Changes *
1998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.7
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.4 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.5 − 0.2 − 12.3 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.9
2005          July + 0.4 + 4.8 + 2.8 + 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 5.1
         Aug − 0.6 − 2.0 − 7.5 − 4.1 − + 1.1 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.3
         Sep + 0.6 + 1.0 − 18.3 − 14.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 4.3 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 6.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 2.3
         Oct + 0.2 − 2.9 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 8.4 + 0.0 + 8.3 + 8.6 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 3.5
         Nov − 0.9 + 4.4 + 2.3 + 6.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 8.1 − 10.4 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 3.1
         Dec + 2.3 + 5.8 − 2.8 + 9.2 − − 3.1 − 8.8 + 0.0 − 9.7 − 12.2 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 3.6
2006          Jan − 2.1 − 2.4 − 21.4 − 17.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 5.4 − 0.1 + 19.6 + 8.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 10.5
         Feb + 0.7 − 3.1 + 9.8 + 7.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 8.9 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 3.1
         Mar − 0.7 − 3.4 − 5.0 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 6.9 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.0
         Apr + 1.2 + 1.3 + 30.5 + 32.3 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 35.3 + 7.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 27.4
         May − 0.6 + 13.4 + 5.8 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 5.4 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.1
         June − 0.2 − 10.4 − 38.2 − 29.0 − − 0.8 − 8.4 − 0.1 − 37.2 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 34.6
         July − 0.1 + 8.9 − 13.7 − 6.5 − − 0.2 − 7.1 − 0.0 − 3.8 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8
         Aug − 0.1 − 6.2 + 6.3 + 9.5 − − 0.4 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3
         Sep + 0.6 + 1.3 + 9.3 + 6.5 − + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.7 + 16.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5
         Oct + 0.2 + 1.3 − 7.0 − 3.4 − + 0.5 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 2.0 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.4
         Nov − 0.8 − 7.4 + 22.5 + 25.3 − − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 4.7 − 3.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.9
         Dec + 2.8 + 8.3 − 2.2 + 4.6 − − 1.1 − 5.6 − − 36.3 − 28.6 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 8.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
76.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 1997
71.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 1998
37.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.4 125.4 1,223.0 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.8 962.7 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
0.0 58.2 104.0 1,312.0 121.9 1,190.0 0.1 26.9 2,245.4 695.2 854.4 601.9 93.8 43.4 2005          July
0.0 58.2 103.7 1,290.1 128.7 1,161.3 0.1 27.3 2,250.3 698.1 858.8 600.4 93.0 43.5          Aug 
− 56.6 104.7 1,290.6 121.0 1,169.6 0.1 27.2 2,254.2 704.0 858.9 598.9 92.4 42.0          Sep 
− 56.5 105.3 1,276.3 121.3 1,154.9 0.1 27.1 2,258.1 707.7 861.1 597.2 92.1 41.7          Oct 
− 56.7 107.9 1,272.8 126.0 1,146.6 0.1 26.8 2,274.6 723.6 863.2 596.0 91.9 42.1          Nov 
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4          Dec 
− 56.2 110.8 1,306.0 118.4 1,187.5 0.1 26.2 2,285.7 718.1 872.9 602.8 91.9 38.9 2006          Jan 
− 55.1 113.2 1,302.1 115.2 1,186.8 0.1 25.1 2,287.7 715.3 877.7 602.6 92.1 38.2          Feb 
− 54.0 115.8 1,302.7 110.3 1,192.3 0.1 23.2 2,303.4 722.4 887.1 601.4 92.4 37.8          Mar 
− 53.9 113.7 1,340.4 128.1 1,212.2 0.1 23.5 2,322.4 726.5 903.1 599.8 93.0 38.1          Apr 
− 53.8 113.6 1,338.3 132.3 1,205.9 0.1 22.7 2,333.8 742.5 900.6 597.4 93.3 37.9          May
− 53.7 113.2 1,333.2 116.2 1,216.9 0.1 22.5 2,342.7 742.0 911.0 596.1 93.6 37.4          June
− 53.3 113.8 1,333.5 117.5 1,216.0 0.0 22.1 2,336.9 730.6 919.0 593.2 94.1 37.5          July
− 53.4 113.9 1,310.4 114.2 1,196.2 0.0 22.3 2,347.5 725.6 936.9 590.3 94.7 37.5          Aug 
− 53.7 108.2 1,299.3 120.7 1,178.6 0.0 22.3 2,356.4 724.2 950.0 587.7 94.5 37.9          Sep 
− 53.5 107.2 1,303.3 113.4 1,189.9 0.0 22.5 2,348.2 716.9 950.5 585.0 95.8 38.0          Oct 
− 53.3 107.0 1,320.5 135.1 1,185.4 0.0 22.3 2,375.0 744.4 952.5 581.5 96.7 38.1          Nov 
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.4 125.4 1,223.0 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.8 962.7 586.5 97.5 37.8          Dec 
Changes *
− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998
− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.2 + 8.6 + 70.7 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.1 + 97.6 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 10.6 − 17.4 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 6.4 + 2.7 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 2005          July
− − 0.0 − 0.2 − 21.9 + 6.8 − 28.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 4.4 − 1.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          Aug 
− 0.0 − 1.6 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 7.7 + 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 5.9 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.4          Sep 
− − 0.1 + 0.6 − 14.3 + 0.3 − 14.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.9 + 4.1 + 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4          Oct 
− + 0.3 + 2.5 − 3.6 + 4.7 − 8.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 16.5 + 15.9 + 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.4          Nov 
− − 0.1 + 0.6 + 27.2 − 5.5 + 32.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.0 − 6.6 + 1.2 + 7.4 − 0.0 + 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.4 + 2.3 + 2.2 − 2.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 9.0 + 1.1 + 8.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 3.6 2006          Jan 
− − 1.1 + 2.4 − 3.9 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.0 − 2.8 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 1.1 + 2.7 + 0.8 − 4.9 + 5.7 − 0.0 − 2.0 + 15.7 + 7.1 + 9.5 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.4          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 2.1 + 37.1 + 17.7 + 19.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 19.0 + 4.0 + 16.0 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.3          Apr 
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.4 − 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 10.6 + 16.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.2          May
− − 0.1 − 0.4 − 5.1 − 15.9 + 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.9 − 0.5 + 10.4 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4          June
− − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 11.4 + 8.0 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.0          July
− + 0.1 + 0.1 − 22.2 − 2.7 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.0 − 5.6 + 17.9 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.1          Aug 
− + 0.3 − 5.7 + 20.5 + 7.5 + 13.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 10.4 − 1.4 + 13.1 − 2.6 + 1.2 + 0.4          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 0.9 + 5.7 − 5.6 + 11.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 7.3 + 0.5 − 2.7 + 1.3 + 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.2 − 0.3 + 17.2 + 21.7 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 26.8 + 27.5 + 2.0 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.0          Nov 
− − 0.3 − 0.6 + 27.9 − 9.7 + 37.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.5 + 3.4 + 10.3 + 5.1 + 0.8 − 0.3          Dec 
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.3
1998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.0
1999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2005          July 0.4 1,040.0 880.0 691.0 188.9 6.6 153.4 1.4 689.8 389.2 145.4 243.8 3.4 297.2
         Aug 0.5 1,023.0 860.2 668.5 191.7 7.0 155.8 1.5 691.9 387.1 144.0 243.0 4.8 300.0
         Sep 0.4 1,057.2 889.0 690.2 198.8 7.1 161.1 1.5 694.1 391.4 142.7 248.7 5.4 297.4
         Oct 0.4 1,073.5 905.2 704.2 201.0 6.9 161.4 1.5 697.3 392.8 144.1 248.7 5.5 298.9
         Nov 0.5 1,079.5 905.2 707.3 197.9 6.3 167.9 1.5 723.2 403.0 150.0 253.0 7.9 312.3
         Dec 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006          Jan 0.3 1,079.3 895.3 678.6 216.7 6.0 178.0 1.5 741.6 411.1 154.8 256.2 9.5 320.9
         Feb 0.4 1,111.4 920.5 701.9 218.6 6.7 184.2 1.5 736.8 406.7 144.3 262.5 7.5 322.6
         Mar 0.4 1,153.7 952.8 729.0 223.8 7.6 193.3 1.4 732.4 402.7 140.1 262.6 6.9 322.8
         Apr 0.4 1,136.1 933.9 710.2 223.8 8.6 193.6 1.4 747.2 419.3 160.6 258.7 8.0 319.9
         May 0.5 1,144.1 935.5 709.1 226.5 9.3 199.3 1.4 740.0 412.9 155.5 257.4 7.9 319.1
         June 0.4 1,201.7 981.5 748.5 232.9 12.0 208.2 1.0 745.9 414.7 151.9 262.8 9.3 321.9
         July 0.4 1,172.9 950.8 715.4 235.5 12.8 209.3 1.0 748.6 420.3 155.9 264.4 10.3 318.0
         Aug 0.4 1,167.5 943.7 706.9 236.8 11.7 212.1 0.9 753.4 425.0 159.6 265.4 11.3 317.1
         Sep 0.4 1,202.0 966.8 726.1 240.7 12.2 223.0 0.8 767.0 426.7 160.9 265.8 9.4 331.0
         Oct 0.4 1,194.8 949.5 708.7 240.7 13.5 231.8 0.7 783.1 435.3 166.2 269.1 10.4 337.4
         Nov 0.4 1,217.8 958.7 714.8 243.9 13.5 245.6 0.8 795.4 438.9 169.5 269.4 10.5 346.0
         Dec 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
Changes *
1998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.3
2002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2005          July − 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.4 − 2.2 + 5.6 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 3.5
         Aug + 0.0 − 15.9 − 18.1 − 21.7 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 2.1
         Sep − 0.1 + 32.2 + 26.8 + 20.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.6 − 1.8 + 4.5 + 0.6 − 3.0
         Oct − 0.0 + 16.4 + 16.2 + 14.1 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.6
         Nov + 0.2 + 3.1 − 2.7 + 1.2 − 3.9 − 0.6 + 6.4 + 0.0 + 22.7 + 7.5 + 5.1 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 12.9
         Dec − 0.3 − 40.5 − 45.0 − 58.8 + 13.7 − 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.0 − 11.0 − 14.8 − 17.1 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 2.5
2006          Jan + 0.1 + 35.3 + 29.9 + 32.9 − 3.0 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 0.0 + 32.8 + 25.5 + 23.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 6.8
         Feb + 0.1 + 28.2 + 21.5 + 20.6 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 6.1 + 0.0 − 8.8 − 7.3 − 11.4 + 4.2 − 2.2 + 0.7
         Mar − 0.0 + 46.9 + 36.6 + 30.1 + 6.5 + 1.0 + 9.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 − 0.5 + 1.2
         Apr + 0.0 − 11.7 − 13.0 − 14.8 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 20.4 + 20.8 + 21.3 − 0.5 + 1.2 − 1.6
         May + 0.1 + 11.9 + 4.9 + 1.2 + 3.8 + 0.7 + 6.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.0 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.5
         June − 0.1 + 56.8 + 45.3 + 38.9 + 6.4 + 2.8 + 8.8 − 0.4 + 4.4 + 0.4 − 3.9 + 4.4 + 1.3 + 2.6
         July − 0.1 − 28.3 − 30.4 − 33.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.3 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 4.6 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 2.7
         Aug + 0.0 − 4.4 − 6.2 − 7.8 + 1.6 − 1.1 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 5.9 + 5.4 + 3.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.6
         Sep − 0.0 + 30.8 + 21.1 + 17.8 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 9.2 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 4.5 − 1.9 + 7.9
         Oct − 0.0 − 7.3 − 17.4 − 17.3 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 8.8 − 0.1 + 16.1 + 10.2 + 5.2 + 4.9 + 1.1 + 4.9
         Nov − 0.0 + 31.1 + 16.8 + 11.4 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 14.2 + 0.1 + 18.5 + 8.3 + 4.0 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 9.9
         Dec + 0.0 + 49.0 + 44.3 + 29.7 + 14.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 0.0 − 18.6 − 18.1 − 13.5 − 4.6 − 3.4 + 2.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)
in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciary
loans  4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
15.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 1997
22.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 1998
13.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 2001
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 52.1 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
10.4 39.8 655.2 141.9 513.3 387.5 125.8 0.8 329.8 65.2 264.6 115.8 148.8 1.1 2005          July
10.7 39.8 655.0 143.1 511.9 385.9 126.0 0.7 323.7 61.7 262.0 115.5 146.5 1.0          Aug 
10.7 39.8 655.2 146.5 508.7 381.8 127.0 0.7 335.8 68.6 267.2 120.7 146.5 0.9          Sep 
10.6 39.2 680.8 142.4 538.4 410.2 128.2 0.6 330.9 65.8 265.0 122.5 142.6 1.3          Oct 
10.5 37.2 681.2 150.5 530.8 402.1 128.7 0.6 345.3 82.1 263.2 124.5 138.6 1.3          Nov 
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2          Dec 
7.0 38.8 666.4 143.6 522.7 397.4 125.3 0.6 339.5 86.0 253.5 119.6 134.0 1.1 2006          Jan 
7.1 39.5 691.3 136.8 554.5 428.8 125.7 0.6 326.4 79.4 247.0 114.1 133.0 1.7          Feb 
5.9 38.9 699.4 144.6 554.8 426.3 128.5 0.5 321.3 81.2 240.1 110.1 130.0 1.7          Mar 
5.8 39.4 712.0 151.1 560.9 433.7 127.2 0.5 323.9 76.9 247.0 119.0 128.0 1.7          Apr 
5.5 40.7 715.1 164.8 550.4 424.8 125.5 0.5 323.1 87.8 235.3 109.7 125.6 1.7          May
5.6 40.9 689.4 165.7 523.7 398.0 125.7 0.6 321.0 89.2 231.9 102.7 129.2 1.7          June
5.6 41.1 659.4 151.7 507.6 381.5 126.2 0.6 323.2 84.1 239.1 109.9 129.2 1.7          July
5.8 41.1 658.4 150.7 507.6 384.4 123.2 0.6 337.0 95.8 241.2 111.8 129.4 1.7          Aug 
6.0 47.8 684.1 169.9 514.1 389.1 125.0 0.5 339.0 86.5 252.5 123.3 129.2 1.7          Sep 
5.9 48.4 683.7 155.2 528.5 404.4 124.1 0.5 335.8 82.4 253.4 123.3 130.1 1.6          Oct 
5.9 48.4 691.6 171.7 519.8 394.7 125.1 0.4 335.4 81.6 253.8 124.2 129.6 1.7          Nov 
5.8 52.1 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5          Dec 
Changes *
+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 15.5 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 18.2 + 13.7 + 14.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 1.9 + 5.0 + 3.2 + 1.8 − 0.4 2005          July
+ 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 3.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.0          Aug 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 3.0 − 4.5 − 5.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 11.1 + 6.8 + 4.3 + 4.9 − 0.7 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.1 − 0.6 + 25.3 − 4.1 + 29.4 + 28.3 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 2.9 − 2.2 + 1.8 − 4.0 + 0.4          Oct 
− 0.1 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 7.6 − 9.8 − 9.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 12.9 + 16.0 − 3.1 + 1.6 − 4.7 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 29.1 − 47.5 + 18.3 + 18.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 28.6 − 20.1 − 8.6 − 5.0 − 3.5 − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 + 1.3 + 17.7 + 40.9 − 23.2 − 20.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 24.9 + 24.3 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 2006          Jan 
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 21.9 − 7.6 + 29.5 + 29.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 15.1 − 6.9 − 8.2 − 6.1 − 2.2 + 0.0          Feb 
− 1.2 − 0.2 + 11.8 + 8.6 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 3.8 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 2.1 − 4.9 − 3.3 − 1.7 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 + 0.8 + 17.2 + 7.5 + 9.7 + 10.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 5.1 − 4.0 + 9.1 + 9.7 − 0.6 − 0.1          Apr 
− 0.3 + 1.4 + 6.3 + 14.4 − 8.1 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 11.1 − 10.3 − 8.8 − 1.5 + 0.0          May
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 27.0 + 0.6 − 27.6 − 27.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.3 − 4.0 − 7.2 + 3.3 + 0.1          June
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 29.6 − 13.9 − 15.8 − 16.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 5.0 + 7.3 + 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 3.2 − 2.7 − + 14.0 + 11.8 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.0          Aug 
+ 0.2 + 6.5 + 24.0 + 18.7 + 5.2 + 3.8 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 9.5 + 10.5 + 11.2 − 0.7 − 0.0          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 14.6 + 16.8 + 15.2 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 5.9 − 4.1 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.0 + 0.5 + 13.8 + 17.9 − 4.1 − 6.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.1          Nov 
− 0.1 + 3.7 − 1.9 − 3.6 + 1.7 + 2.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 25.5 + 0.4 − 25.9 − 12.7 − 13.2 − 0.1          Dec 
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.4
1998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.4
1999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.8 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2005          July 2,998.0 2,643.3 323.1 284.0 283.0 1.0 39.1 38.0 1.1 2,674.9 2,120.4
         Aug 3,001.1 2,642.3 318.5 280.5 279.3 1.3 37.9 37.2 0.7 2,682.7 2,126.2
         Sep 3,004.7 2,649.0 326.2 293.5 292.9 0.6 32.7 32.2 0.5 2,678.4 2,126.9
         Oct 3,012.9 2,657.7 339.3 298.0 297.0 1.0 41.3 38.1 3.2 2,673.6 2,128.6
         Nov 3,004.8 2,647.2 325.1 288.7 288.1 0.6 36.4 33.5 2.9 2,679.7 2,133.6
         Dec 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006          Jan 3,032.2 2,661.3 325.0 282.8 282.0 0.8 42.2 40.3 1.9 2,707.3 2,168.5
         Feb 3,023.3 2,656.6 316.7 283.3 282.6 0.7 33.4 32.6 0.8 2,706.5 2,170.1
         Mar 3,030.2 2,659.7 329.2 292.7 291.7 0.9 36.5 35.9 0.6 2,701.1 2,167.3
         Apr 3,066.0 2,667.7 336.7 297.1 296.0 1.0 39.7 38.8 0.8 2,729.3 2,199.0
         May 3,065.4 2,659.4 326.4 293.2 292.4 0.7 33.2 32.5 0.7 2,739.0 2,196.1
         June 3,028.2 2,656.1 326.0 292.7 291.7 1.0 33.3 32.3 1.1 2,702.1 2,173.3
         July 3,024.4 2,653.2 320.7 285.5 284.6 0.9 35.2 34.1 1.1 2,703.7 2,175.1
         Aug 3,022.5 2,652.2 318.1 285.5 284.8 0.7 32.6 32.0 0.6 2,704.4 2,178.5
         Sep 3,035.2 2,668.7 333.0 301.3 300.5 0.8 31.8 31.5 0.3 2,702.1 2,183.5
         Oct 3,033.2 2,664.9 334.5 297.2 296.4 0.8 37.4 36.8 0.6 2,698.7 2,180.2
         Nov 3,037.8 2,661.5 325.7 290.2 289.4 0.8 35.5 34.8 0.7 2,712.2 2,185.1
         Dec 3,000.8 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
Changes *
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.3 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2005          July + 9.1 + 4.3 − 2.6 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 11.6 + 11.2
         Aug + 3.1 − 1.1 − 4.6 − 3.5 − 3.7 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 7.8 + 5.8
         Sep + 3.1 + 6.3 + 7.4 + 12.6 + 13.2 − 0.6 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.6
         Oct + 8.3 + 8.7 + 13.0 + 4.5 + 4.1 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 5.8 + 2.7 − 4.8 + 1.6
         Nov − 8.1 − 10.5 − 14.0 − 9.1 − 8.8 − 0.4 − 4.9 − 4.6 − 0.3 + 5.9 + 4.9
         Dec − 9.7 − 12.2 − 15.5 − 15.2 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 5.7 + 7.7
2006          Jan + 19.6 + 8.8 + 15.3 + 9.3 + 9.1 + 0.2 + 6.0 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 4.3 + 9.9
         Feb − 8.9 − 4.7 − 8.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 8.8 − 7.6 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 1.5
         Mar + 6.9 + 3.0 + 12.4 + 9.3 + 9.2 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.3 − 0.2 − 5.5 − 2.7
         Apr + 35.3 + 7.5 + 7.6 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 27.6 + 31.3
         May − 1.4 − 9.0 − 11.0 − 4.6 − 4.3 − 0.3 − 6.4 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 9.7 − 2.9
         June − 37.2 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 36.9 − 22.8
         July − 3.8 − 3.0 − 5.3 − 7.2 − 7.1 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.8
         Aug − 1.9 − 1.0 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 3.4
         Sep + 12.7 + 16.5 + 14.9 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 2.2 + 5.0
         Oct − 2.0 − 3.8 + 1.5 − 4.1 − 4.1 + 0.0 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 − 3.5 − 3.2
         Nov + 4.7 − 3.3 − 8.9 − 7.0 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 13.6 + 4.9
         Dec − 36.3 − 28.6 − 22.5 − 20.3 − 20.1 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 2.9 + 0.7 − 13.8 − 2.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
2,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 1997
3,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 1998
1,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,941.4 192.5 1,748.9 179.0 52.3 554.5 380.9 32.6 348.3 173.5 0.0 5.9 2005          July
1,946.0 195.4 1,750.6 180.2 52.3 556.5 379.8 33.1 346.6 176.7 0.0 5.9          Aug 
1,945.4 195.1 1,750.3 181.5 52.0 551.5 378.4 33.2 345.3 173.0 − 4.6          Sep 
1,947.5 194.3 1,753.2 181.0 51.9 545.1 375.1 33.1 342.0 169.9 − 4.6          Oct 
1,952.2 195.1 1,757.1 181.4 52.2 546.1 373.4 32.1 341.3 172.7 − 4.5          Nov 
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5          Dec 
1,969.5 193.0 1,776.5 199.0 51.8 538.7 369.6 31.8 337.8 169.2 − 4.4 2006          Jan 
1,972.9 193.5 1,779.4 197.1 50.7 536.5 368.5 32.2 336.3 168.0 − 4.4          Feb 
1,966.6 193.2 1,773.5 200.7 49.6 533.7 365.3 31.9 333.4 168.4 − 4.4          Mar 
1,968.9 192.6 1,776.3 230.2 49.4 530.3 364.0 31.9 332.2 166.3 − 4.5          Apr 
1,972.0 194.3 1,777.8 224.1 49.3 542.9 362.4 30.9 331.6 180.5 − 4.5          May
1,973.4 196.3 1,777.2 199.9 49.3 528.8 358.7 30.8 327.9 170.1 − 4.4          June
1,976.5 198.7 1,777.9 198.6 48.9 528.6 358.0 31.4 326.5 170.7 − 4.4          July
1,978.4 197.0 1,781.4 200.0 49.1 525.9 357.0 31.6 325.3 168.9 − 4.4          Aug 
1,980.2 198.9 1,781.3 203.3 49.0 518.7 356.4 30.8 325.6 162.2 − 4.7          Sep 
1,975.9 197.7 1,778.1 204.4 48.7 518.4 355.9 30.9 325.0 162.6 − 4.7          Oct 
1,978.9 198.2 1,780.7 206.1 48.6 527.1 358.4 31.4 327.0 168.7 − 4.7          Nov 
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8          Dec 
Changes *
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 6.8 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 4.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 2005          July
+ 4.6 + 2.9 + 1.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 3.2 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 4.9 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 1.3          Sep 
+ 2.1 − 0.8 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.3 − 3.1 − − 0.1          Oct 
+ 4.5 + 0.8 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 2.7 − − 0.0          Nov 
+ 1.2 − 0.4 + 1.6 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 2.9 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 1.2 − 1.7 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 0.3 − 5.6 − 5.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 0.6 − − 0.1 2006          Jan 
+ 3.4 + 0.5 + 2.9 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 2.2 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 6.3 − 0.3 − 6.0 + 3.5 − 1.1 − 2.7 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 2.9 + 0.4 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.8 − 0.6 + 2.4 + 29.5 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.3 − 2.1 − + 0.1          Apr 
+ 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 12.6 − 1.6 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 14.2 − + 0.0          May
+ 1.4 + 2.0 − 0.6 − 24.2 − 0.0 − 14.1 − 3.8 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 10.4 − − 0.0          June
+ 3.1 + 2.4 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.5 − − 0.0          July
+ 1.9 − 1.6 + 3.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 2.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.7 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 1.8 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 6.7 − + 0.4          Sep 
− 4.4 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − + 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.2 + 0.6 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 8.7 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 2.0 + 6.2 − − 0.0          Nov 
− 5.5 − 3.1 − 2.4 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 11.3 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 11.4 − + 0.1          Dec 
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2003 2,241.6 1,124.5 1,083.3 867.1 216.2 1,252.2 335.1 151.0 37.2 59.0 152.3 32.1 54.4 54.4
2004 2,224.2 1,127.7 1,086.0 869.7 216.3 1,211.6 320.4 136.7 37.1 53.0 141.4 31.9 56.1 60.0
2005          Dec 2,226.6 1,154.5 1,093.3 895.9 197.4 1,199.7 311.3 130.6 37.2 49.4 134.1 31.6 57.8 74.0
2006          Mar 2,258.6 1,172.5 1,109.3 915.2 194.0 1,229.7 320.7 130.3 37.6 50.0 131.2 32.1 59.0 97.7
         June 2,265.4 1,173.1 1,109.8 915.7 194.1 1,232.9 319.0 134.2 38.6 49.8 131.2 32.5 60.1 94.1
         Sep 2,281.0 1,180.7 1,114.7 921.4 193.3 1,241.5 318.1 136.3 39.2 49.4 130.1 33.0 61.0 103.3
         Dec 2,242.2 1,177.5 1,114.7 921.2 193.5 1,204.2 316.1 133.0 39.3 47.2 131.4 32.4 60.9 76.0
 Short-term lending
2003 313.9 − 14.1 − 14.1 266.7 8.9 46.6 4.2 13.2 55.9 3.9 8.0 25.8
2004 283.4 − 12.5 − 12.5 239.3 7.6 40.9 3.5 11.1 52.9 3.6 5.9 26.4
2005          Dec 273.2 − 11.2 − 11.2 230.0 6.7 38.8 3.2 9.7 49.2 3.3 6.1 32.8
2006          Mar 292.0 − 10.7 − 10.7 250.7 6.5 39.9 3.4 10.6 47.0 3.7 6.2 54.8
         June 292.0 − 10.5 − 10.5 250.6 6.4 42.9 3.4 10.4 47.4 3.7 5.9 51.2
         Sep 300.8 − 11.0 − 11.0 258.6 6.5 43.3 3.3 10.2 46.6 3.9 6.3 60.5
         Dec 269.6 − 10.5 − 10.5 228.6 6.3 39.6 3.1 8.8 48.6 3.2 5.5 35.0
 Medium-term lending
2003 195.0 − 38.2 − 38.2 121.2 12.0 17.5 2.3 6.0 11.9 3.4 10.9 6.5
2004 194.3 − 38.8 − 38.8 119.9 11.8 16.4 2.5 5.6 11.1 3.2 11.3 7.6
2005          Dec 194.6 − 35.7 − 35.7 122.5 10.7 15.6 2.1 5.2 11.4 3.0 10.6 10.8
2006          Mar 193.2 − 34.7 − 34.7 123.2 10.4 15.9 2.1 5.2 11.5 3.0 10.5 11.4
         June 196.3 − 34.8 − 34.8 125.5 10.6 17.0 2.2 5.2 11.5 3.0 10.3 11.7
         Sep 198.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 127.5 10.5 18.8 2.4 5.3 11.5 3.0 10.5 12.3
         Dec 194.5 − 34.4 − 34.4 124.6 10.5 18.5 2.2 5.1 11.4 2.9 10.6 11.7
 Long-term lending
2003 1,732.8 1,124.5 1,031.0 867.1 164.0 864.3 314.2 86.9 30.6 39.9 84.5 24.7 35.5 22.1
2004 1,746.5 1,127.7 1,034.7 869.7 165.0 852.4 301.0 79.4 31.2 36.2 77.3 25.0 38.9 26.0
2005          Dec 1,758.8 1,154.5 1,046.3 895.9 150.4 847.2 293.9 76.2 31.8 34.5 73.5 25.2 41.1 30.4
2006          Mar 1,773.5 1,172.5 1,063.9 915.2 148.7 855.8 303.8 74.5 32.1 34.2 72.7 25.5 42.3 31.5
         June 1,777.2 1,173.1 1,064.5 915.7 148.7 856.8 302.0 74.4 33.0 34.2 72.3 25.8 43.9 31.3
         Sep 1,781.3 1,180.7 1,069.1 921.4 147.8 855.4 301.2 74.2 33.5 33.8 72.0 26.1 44.2 30.6
         Dec 1,778.1 1,177.5 1,069.8 921.2 148.6 850.9 299.3 74.9 34.0 33.3 71.4 26.4 44.7 29.3
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2005          Q4 − 11.9 + 5.4 + 5.1 + 4.7 + 0.4 − 18.3 − 1.9 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 8.2
2006          Q1 + 14.7 − 1.3 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 18.9 − 2.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 23.6
         Q2 + 5.5 − 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 2.3 − 1.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 4.3
         Q3 + 15.6 + 4.1 + 4.4 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 8.5 − 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 8.5
         Q4 − 37.9 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 36.8 − 2.1 − 3.3 + 0.2 − 2.2 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 27.4
 Short-term lending
2005          Q4 − 19.7 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 20.0 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 9.7
2006          Q1 + 18.8 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 20.6 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 22.0
         Q2 − 0.9 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.4
         Q3 + 8.8 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 8.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 9.3
         Q4 − 31.2 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 29.9 − 0.2 − 3.7 − 0.2 − 1.4 + 1.8 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 25.4
 Medium-term lending
2005          Q4 − 0.5 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.4
2006          Q1 − 1.5 − − 1.1 − − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6
         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3
         Q3 + 2.6 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.6
         Q4 − 3.7 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6
 Long-term lending
2005          Q4 + 8.3 + 5.4 + 5.7 + 4.7 + 1.0 + 2.2 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.1
2006          Q1 − 2.6 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.0
         Q2 + 3.6 − 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.2
         Q3 + 4.2 + 4.1 + 4.2 + 4.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.4
         Q4 − 3.0 − 3.6 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 4.2 − 1.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.4
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balances
on wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
711.9 160.7 44.0 207.2 437.0 67.7 975.6 744.7 230.9 118.6 21.6 13.7 3.5 2003
695.5 163.7 42.5 204.2 419.0 61.7 999.4 762.4 237.0 129.2 19.9 13.2 3.2 2004
685.0 160.3 40.6 199.3 407.5 60.6 1,012.9 778.9 234.0 130.1 18.8 14.1 3.1 2005          Dec 
691.7 167.9 39.2 199.0 406.1 61.3 1,014.8 784.9 229.9 128.6 18.0 14.2 3.7 2006          Mar 
692.2 166.3 39.8 199.7 404.2 61.0 1,018.5 787.2 231.3 130.4 18.3 14.1 3.7          June
689.3 164.9 40.5 199.5 401.0 61.5 1,025.1 792.8 232.3 131.4 18.4 14.3 3.7          Sep 
684.0 164.2 39.5 197.0 396.6 60.2 1,023.4 795.0 228.4 130.6 17.6 14.7 3.7          Dec 
Short-term lending
109.1 17.9 14.6 31.2 49.4 12.9 45.9 5.1 40.8 2.4 21.6 1.2 0.0 2003
95.0 15.8 11.5 27.6 44.4 11.4 43.0 4.9 38.0 2.3 19.9 1.1 0.0 2004
86.9 14.1 10.3 23.9 40.1 10.6 41.8 4.5 37.3 2.6 18.8 1.4 0.0 2005          Dec 
85.1 13.5 10.0 22.7 39.6 11.5 40.2 4.1 36.0 2.5 18.0 1.2 0.0 2006          Mar 
85.6 13.1 11.0 22.9 39.1 11.4 40.4 4.2 36.2 2.6 18.3 1.1 0.0          June
84.5 13.4 10.3 22.5 38.2 11.1 41.0 4.5 36.5 2.8 18.4 1.2 0.0          Sep 
84.9 13.9 10.1 22.1 36.7 10.0 39.8 4.2 35.6 2.8 17.6 1.2 0.0          Dec 
Medium-term lending
62.7 5.7 5.6 18.0 30.4 4.5 73.2 26.2 47.0 37.1 − 0.6 0.1 2003
62.3 6.5 6.5 17.2 29.6 3.9 73.8 26.9 46.9 37.7 − 0.5 0.1 2004
63.7 7.3 6.5 15.9 29.8 3.8 71.5 25.0 46.5 37.2 − 0.7 0.1 2005          Dec 
63.6 7.6 6.0 15.7 29.3 3.7 69.4 24.2 45.2 36.2 − 0.6 0.1 2006          Mar 
64.6 7.8 6.0 16.1 28.8 3.8 70.2 24.1 46.1 37.3 − 0.6 0.1          June
63.8 6.9 6.8 16.1 28.6 3.8 70.8 23.9 46.8 37.9 − 0.6 0.0          Sep 
62.3 6.9 5.9 15.8 27.7 3.8 69.3 23.9 45.4 37.0 − 0.6 0.1          Dec 
Long-term lending
540.0 137.1 23.8 158.0 357.2 50.4 856.5 713.4 143.1 79.1 − 11.9 3.4 2003
538.2 141.5 24.5 159.5 345.0 46.4 882.6 730.6 152.0 89.2 − 11.5 3.1 2004
534.4 138.9 23.8 159.6 337.6 46.2 899.6 749.4 150.2 90.3 − 12.0 3.1 2005          Dec 
543.0 146.8 23.2 160.5 337.2 46.1 905.3 756.6 148.7 89.9 − 12.4 3.6 2006          Mar 
541.9 145.4 22.8 160.7 336.3 45.8 907.9 758.9 149.0 90.6 − 12.4 3.6          June
541.1 144.7 23.4 160.8 334.3 46.6 913.3 764.4 149.0 90.7 − 12.6 3.6          Sep 
536.9 143.4 23.4 159.1 332.1 46.5 914.3 766.8 147.4 90.8 − 12.9 3.6          Dec 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 4.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 0.8 + 6.0 + 7.1 − 1.1 − 1.6 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 2005          Q4
− 3.6 − 1.0 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 3.3 + 0.3 − 3.8 + 0.4 − 4.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 2006          Q1
+ 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 2.0 − 0.3 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
− 2.4 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 6.8 + 5.4 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q3
− 4.4 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 2.6 − 4.3 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 2.1 − 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
Short-term lending
− 5.3 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.0 2005          Q4
− 1.8 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.0 2006          Q1
+ 0.5 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 −          Q2
− 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          Q3
+ 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2005          Q4
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 1.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2006          Q1
+ 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.9 + 1.2 + 6.2 + 7.2 − 1.0 − 0.7 − − 0.1 − 0.1 2005          Q4
− 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 1.0 − 2.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.0 2006          Q1
− 1.2 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 5.5 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 0.8 − + 0.2 − 0.0          Q3
− 3.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 2.5 − 1.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. — loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2004 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.1
2005 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 231.3 633.1 8.2 624.9 603.4 91.9 42.4 31.6 12.6
2006 2,394.6 747.8 962.7 289.4 673.3 11.7 661.6 586.5 97.5 37.8 30.4 11.2
2006          Jan 2,285.7 718.1 872.9 237.1 635.9 8.4 627.5 602.8 91.9 38.9 31.7 18.4
         Feb 2,287.7 715.3 877.7 235.0 642.7 8.6 634.1 602.6 92.1 38.2 31.7 19.0
         Mar 2,303.4 722.4 887.1 243.8 643.4 8.6 634.8 601.4 92.4 37.8 31.6 25.0
         Apr 2,322.4 726.5 903.1 255.1 648.0 8.7 639.4 599.8 93.0 38.1 31.6 27.4
         May 2,333.8 742.5 900.6 250.1 650.4 8.9 641.6 597.4 93.3 37.9 31.5 27.5
         June 2,342.7 742.0 911.0 258.4 652.5 9.0 643.5 596.1 93.6 37.4 31.5 26.7
         July 2,336.9 730.6 919.0 263.5 655.5 9.1 646.3 593.2 94.1 37.5 31.2 22.7
         Aug 2,347.5 725.6 936.9 273.7 663.2 10.1 653.1 590.3 94.7 37.5 31.4 24.8
         Sep 2,356.4 724.2 950.0 285.9 664.1 10.7 653.5 587.7 94.5 37.9 30.4 26.9
         Oct 2,348.2 716.9 950.5 285.1 665.4 11.1 654.3 585.0 95.8 38.0 30.5 24.4
         Nov 2,375.0 744.4 952.5 286.1 666.3 11.2 655.1 581.5 96.7 38.1 30.4 20.6
         Dec 2,394.6 747.8 962.7 289.4 673.3 11.7 661.6 586.5 97.5 37.8 30.4 11.2
Changes *
2005 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 3.9 + 16.4 + 0.4 + 16.0 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 2.4
2006 + 118.0 + 30.1 + 97.6 + 57.4 + 40.2 + 3.5 + 36.6 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 2.2
2006          Jan + 9.0 + 1.1 + 8.5 + 5.8 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 0.1 + 5.9
         Feb + 2.0 − 2.8 + 4.7 − 2.1 + 6.8 + 0.2 + 6.6 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6
         Mar + 15.7 + 7.1 + 9.5 + 8.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 6.0
         Apr + 19.0 + 4.0 + 16.0 + 11.3 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 4.6 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 10.6 + 16.0 − 3.3 − 5.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 2.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8
         June + 8.9 − 0.5 + 10.4 + 8.3 + 2.1 + 0.2 + 1.9 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8
         July − 5.8 − 11.4 + 8.0 + 5.1 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.0
         Aug + 10.0 − 5.6 + 17.9 + 10.2 + 7.8 + 1.0 + 6.8 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.2
         Sep + 10.4 − 1.4 + 13.1 + 12.2 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 2.6 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 2.0
         Oct − 8.2 − 7.3 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.7 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.5
         Nov + 26.8 + 27.5 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 3.8
         Dec + 19.5 + 3.4 + 10.3 + 3.3 + 7.0 + 0.5 + 6.5 + 5.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.4
Domestic government End of year or month *
2004 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −
2005 103.7 21.0 78.7 31.7 47.0 0.5 46.5 2.4 1.5 32.3 1.0 −
2006 134.4 26.7 104.0 51.1 52.9 2.1 50.8 2.1 1.6 28.2 0.8 −
2006          Jan 106.1 21.2 81.1 33.7 47.3 0.6 46.8 2.3 1.5 29.5 1.0 −
         Feb 104.4 22.0 78.6 31.1 47.5 0.6 47.0 2.3 1.5 29.5 1.0 −
         Mar 106.2 20.6 81.9 35.1 46.7 0.6 46.1 2.3 1.5 29.2 1.0 −
         Apr 107.7 19.7 84.3 37.2 47.0 0.7 46.3 2.2 1.5 29.4 1.0 −
         May 114.7 22.6 88.3 40.8 47.4 0.7 46.7 2.3 1.6 29.2 0.9 −
         June 122.1 24.8 93.4 46.2 47.2 0.7 46.5 2.3 1.6 28.4 0.9 −
         July 121.6 24.6 93.2 45.8 47.4 0.7 46.7 2.2 1.6 28.4 0.7 −
         Aug 125.5 23.8 97.8 46.1 51.7 1.4 50.2 2.3 1.6 28.4 0.7 −
         Sep 128.1 22.5 101.6 50.0 51.6 1.7 49.8 2.3 1.6 28.7 0.7 −
         Oct 122.2 20.6 97.7 45.6 52.0 1.8 50.3 2.3 1.6 28.3 0.9 −
         Nov 132.3 24.2 104.3 51.9 52.4 1.8 50.6 2.2 1.6 28.4 0.8 −
         Dec 134.4 26.7 104.0 51.1 52.9 2.1 50.8 2.1 1.6 28.2 0.8 −
Changes *
2005 − 0.2 + 3.9 − 3.8 + 1.2 − 5.1 − 0.4 − 4.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.1 −
2006 + 30.7 + 5.7 + 25.3 + 19.4 + 5.9 + 1.6 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 −
2006          Jan + 2.5 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 0.0 −
         Feb − 1.7 + 0.7 − 2.4 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − −
         Mar + 1.8 − 1.4 + 3.2 + 4.0 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Apr + 1.4 − 1.0 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −
         May + 7.1 + 3.0 + 4.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         June + 7.4 + 2.1 + 5.2 + 5.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.0 −
         July − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 −
         Aug + 3.9 − 0.7 + 4.5 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.7 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Sep + 2.6 − 1.3 + 3.8 + 3.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − −
         Oct − 5.9 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 −
         Nov + 10.1 + 3.6 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Dec + 2.1 + 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2004 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.1
2005 2,173.0 696.0 785.7 199.5 586.1 7.7 578.4 601.0 90.3 10.2 30.7 12.6
2006 2,260.2 721.0 858.8 238.3 620.4 9.6 610.8 584.5 95.9 9.6 29.5 11.2
2006          Jan 2,179.6 696.8 791.9 203.3 588.6 7.8 580.7 600.5 90.3 9.3 30.7 18.4
         Feb 2,183.2 693.3 799.0 203.9 595.2 8.0 587.2 600.3 90.6 8.8 30.8 19.0
         Mar 2,197.2 701.8 805.3 208.7 596.6 8.0 588.6 599.1 90.9 8.6 30.7 25.0
         Apr 2,214.7 706.8 818.9 217.8 601.0 8.0 593.0 597.6 91.5 8.7 30.6 27.4
         May 2,219.1 719.9 812.3 209.3 603.0 8.1 594.9 595.1 91.7 8.6 30.6 27.5
         June 2,220.5 717.2 817.5 212.2 605.3 8.3 597.0 593.8 92.0 9.0 30.6 26.7
         July 2,215.2 706.0 825.7 217.7 608.0 8.4 599.6 591.0 92.5 9.1 30.5 22.7
         Aug 2,222.0 701.7 839.1 227.5 611.6 8.7 602.9 588.0 93.1 9.2 30.7 24.8
         Sep 2,228.3 701.6 848.4 235.8 612.5 8.9 603.6 585.4 92.9 9.2 29.7 26.9
         Oct 2,226.1 696.3 852.8 239.5 613.3 9.3 604.0 582.8 94.2 9.8 29.6 24.4
         Nov 2,242.8 720.2 848.2 234.3 613.9 9.4 604.5 579.3 95.1 9.7 29.6 20.6
         Dec 2,260.2 721.0 858.8 238.3 620.4 9.6 610.8 584.5 95.9 9.6 29.5 11.2
Changes *
2005 + 76.8 + 66.8 + 16.3 − 5.2 + 21.4 + 0.8 + 20.6 − 0.9 − 5.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 2.4
2006 + 87.3 + 24.3 + 72.3 + 38.0 + 34.2 + 1.9 + 32.4 − 16.5 + 7.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 2.2
2006          Jan + 6.5 + 0.9 + 6.1 + 3.8 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 5.9
         Feb + 3.7 − 3.5 + 7.1 + 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.2 + 6.4 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6
         Mar + 13.9 + 8.5 + 6.3 + 4.8 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 6.0
         Apr + 17.5 + 5.0 + 13.6 + 9.1 + 4.4 − 0.0 + 4.4 − 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 3.6 + 13.0 − 7.3 − 9.2 + 2.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8
         June + 1.5 − 2.6 + 5.2 + 2.9 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8
         July − 5.3 − 11.2 + 8.2 + 5.5 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 2.6 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.0
         Aug + 6.2 − 4.9 + 13.4 + 9.8 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 3.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.2
         Sep + 7.8 − 0.1 + 9.3 + 8.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 2.6 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 2.0
         Oct − 2.2 − 5.3 + 4.4 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.5
         Nov + 16.7 + 23.9 − 4.7 − 5.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 3.5 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.8
         Dec + 17.4 + 0.8 + 10.6 + 4.1 + 6.5 + 0.2 + 6.3 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.4
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2004 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.1
2005 809.9 233.2 550.8 108.7 442.0 2.4 439.6 5.0 21.0 9.7 19.4 12.6
2006 874.9 256.1 594.0 122.8 471.3 3.2 468.1 4.5 20.2 9.1 20.0 11.2
2006          Jan 817.6 235.1 556.5 112.4 444.1 2.6 441.5 5.0 21.0 8.9 19.5 18.4
         Feb 817.6 229.7 561.9 111.6 450.3 2.7 447.6 5.0 21.0 8.3 19.4 19.0
         Mar 829.0 237.4 565.7 114.7 451.0 2.6 448.4 5.0 20.8 8.1 19.4 25.0
         Apr 842.3 237.8 578.7 123.6 455.1 2.6 452.5 5.0 20.8 8.2 19.4 27.4
         May 847.7 250.7 571.4 114.3 457.1 2.7 454.4 4.9 20.8 8.2 19.4 27.5
         June 848.5 247.5 575.4 116.1 459.3 2.8 456.6 4.9 20.7 8.5 19.4 26.7
         July 846.2 240.7 580.2 117.9 462.3 2.9 459.4 4.7 20.6 8.6 19.3 22.7
         Aug 856.2 241.9 589.1 123.6 465.5 2.9 462.6 4.7 20.5 8.7 19.6 24.8
         Sep 864.8 244.3 595.3 129.0 466.2 3.1 463.2 4.7 20.6 8.8 19.9 26.9
         Oct 863.1 240.2 597.8 130.8 467.0 3.2 463.8 4.6 20.5 9.3 19.9 24.4
         Nov 869.2 253.6 590.7 123.2 467.6 3.2 464.4 4.5 20.3 9.2 20.0 20.6
         Dec 874.9 256.1 594.0 122.8 471.3 3.2 468.1 4.5 20.2 9.1 20.0 11.2
Changes *
2005 + 46.7 + 31.0 + 16.4 − 1.5 + 18.0 + 0.7 + 17.3 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 2.4
2006 + 63.5 + 22.3 + 42.5 + 13.3 + 29.1 + 0.7 + 28.4 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 2.2
2006          Jan + 7.6 + 1.9 + 5.7 + 3.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 5.9
         Feb − 0.0 − 5.4 + 5.4 − 0.8 + 6.2 + 0.1 + 6.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6
         Mar + 11.4 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 6.0
         Apr + 13.4 + 0.4 + 13.0 + 8.9 + 4.1 − 0.0 + 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 4.6 + 12.8 − 8.0 − 9.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8
         June + 0.8 − 3.1 + 4.0 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8
         July − 2.3 − 6.8 + 4.8 + 1.8 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.0
         Aug + 9.3 + 0.6 + 8.9 + 5.6 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.2
         Sep + 8.7 + 2.4 + 6.2 + 5.5 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.0
         Oct − 1.8 − 4.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.5
         Nov + 6.1 + 13.4 − 7.0 − 7.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.8
         Dec + 5.7 + 2.5 + 3.3 − 0.4 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 9.4
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2004 1,334.2 428.1 414.8 71.7 283.5 59.6 13.2 235.3 216.9 25.7 175.1 16.2
2005 1,363.1 462.8 448.1 79.7 305.1 63.2 14.8 234.9 217.0 23.7 179.0 14.2
2006 1,385.3 464.9 450.3 81.7 307.5 61.1 14.6 264.7 245.6 30.1 198.6 16.9
2006          July 1,369.0 465.3 449.6 79.1 306.2 64.3 15.7 245.5 228.0 26.4 186.5 15.0
         Aug 1,365.8 459.8 444.6 79.3 301.5 63.8 15.3 250.0 232.0 27.5 189.0 15.5
         Sep 1,363.5 457.3 442.1 78.0 300.7 63.5 15.2 253.1 234.7 28.2 190.7 15.8
         Oct 1,363.0 456.1 440.9 79.6 298.2 63.1 15.2 255.1 237.4 28.7 192.5 16.2
         Nov 1,373.6 466.6 451.2 79.9 309.9 61.4 15.5 257.4 239.6 29.1 194.3 16.3
         Dec 1,385.3 464.9 450.3 81.7 307.5 61.1 14.6 264.7 245.6 30.1 198.6 16.9
Changes *
2005 + 30.1 + 35.8 + 34.2 + 8.0 + 21.5 + 4.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 4.1 − 1.8
2006 + 23.8 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.9 − 0.8 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 29.8 + 28.7 + 5.8 + 19.9 + 3.0
2006          July − 3.0 − 4.4 − 3.9 + 0.9 − 4.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 0.4
         Aug − 3.2 − 5.5 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.5 + 4.0 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.5
         Sep − 0.9 − 2.5 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 1.7 + 0.3
         Oct − 0.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 1.6 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.4
         Nov + 10.6 + 10.6 + 10.3 + 0.4 + 9.3 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.3
         Dec + 11.8 − 1.7 − 0.9 + 1.9 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 7.3 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 0.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
 
 
 
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2004 103.6 41.4 0.8 5.8 34.8 0.0 12.9 15.1 2.7 2.2 10.2 0.1 21.5
2005 103.7 38.8 1.3 7.9 29.6 0.0 12.9 16.3 3.9 2.5 9.9 0.1 19.1
2006 134.4 41.9 2.1 6.2 33.6 0.0 9.5 18.0 5.4 2.5 10.0 0.1 18.5
2006          July 121.6 40.3 2.6 8.3 29.3 0.0 9.5 19.9 4.8 5.6 9.4 0.1 18.6
         Aug 125.5 44.1 2.6 8.1 33.4 0.0 9.5 17.5 3.4 4.6 9.4 0.1 18.5
         Sep 128.1 45.6 1.7 10.9 32.9 0.0 9.5 19.0 4.0 5.4 9.6 0.1 18.9
         Oct 122.2 43.4 1.7 8.5 33.2 0.0 9.5 16.6 3.2 3.7 9.7 0.1 18.5
         Nov 132.3 43.7 2.1 8.1 33.4 0.0 9.6 15.2 2.6 2.9 9.7 0.1 18.5
         Dec 134.4 41.9 2.1 6.2 33.6 0.0 9.5 18.0 5.4 2.5 10.0 0.1 18.5
Changes *
2005 − 0.2 − 3.0 + 0.1 + 2.1 − 5.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 2.4
2006 + 30.7 + 3.1 + 0.8 − 1.7 + 4.0 − 0.0 − 3.4 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.6
2006          July − 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug + 3.9 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.1 − − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Sep + 2.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 + 2.9 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Oct − 5.9 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.3 − − 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.7 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3
         Nov + 10.1 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Dec + 2.1 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
18.4 94.3 141.0 5.5 135.6 595.7 586.3 9.5 75.1 0.3 12.8 − 2004
17.9 90.8 144.1 5.3 138.8 596.0 586.4 9.6 69.3 0.5 11.3 − 2005
19.1 115.6 149.2 6.4 142.7 580.0 571.1 8.9 75.7 0.5 9.5 − 2006
17.5 99.8 145.7 5.6 140.2 586.3 576.9 9.4 71.9 0.5 11.2 − 2006          July
18.1 104.0 146.1 5.7 140.3 583.3 573.9 9.3 72.6 0.5 11.1 −          Aug 
18.4 106.8 146.3 5.9 140.4 580.7 571.5 9.3 72.3 0.5 9.8 −          Sep 
17.7 108.7 146.3 6.1 140.2 578.1 569.0 9.2 73.7 0.5 9.7 −          Oct 
17.8 111.1 146.3 6.2 140.1 574.7 565.9 8.9 74.8 0.5 9.6 −          Nov 
19.1 115.6 149.2 6.4 142.7 580.0 571.1 8.9 75.7 0.5 9.5 −          Dec 
Changes *
− 0.5 − 3.7 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 4.5 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 2005
+ 1.1 + 24.7 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 4.0 − 16.0 − 15.3 − 0.7 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2006
− 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 2006          July
+ 0.5 + 4.2 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug 
+ 0.4 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 −          Sep 
− 0.8 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Oct 
+ 0.1 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Nov 
+ 1.3 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.6 + 5.2 + 5.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Dec 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
25.7 10.5 9.6 2.3 3.3 0.3 21.4 2.9 12.9 4.8 0.8 0.0 2004
28.0 11.8 10.4 2.6 3.2 0.3 20.7 4.1 11.0 4.9 0.7 0.0 2005
30.5 11.5 12.7 3.4 3.0 0.3 44.0 7.8 29.7 6.0 0.6 0.0 2006
27.5 10.1 11.3 3.0 3.1 0.3 34.0 7.0 20.6 5.7 0.6 0.0 2006          July
30.4 11.0 13.1 3.1 3.2 0.3 33.4 6.7 20.3 5.7 0.7 0.0          Aug 
29.3 10.3 12.6 3.2 3.2 0.3 34.2 6.5 21.1 5.9 0.7 0.0          Sep 
27.7 9.6 11.8 3.2 3.1 0.3 34.4 6.1 21.7 5.9 0.6 0.0          Oct 
30.2 11.0 12.9 3.3 3.1 0.3 43.2 8.5 28.0 6.0 0.6 0.0          Nov 
30.5 11.5 12.7 3.4 3.0 0.3 44.0 7.8 29.7 6.0 0.6 0.0          Dec 
Changes *
+ 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 2005
+ 2.5 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 23.3 + 3.6 + 18.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2006
− 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2006          July
+ 2.9 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Aug 
− 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Sep 
− 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 −          Oct 
+ 2.5 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − + 8.7 + 2.4 + 6.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.7 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Dec 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2004 613.0 603.5 515.5 397.9 88.0 76.7 9.6 7.7 14.2 105.8 98.4 85.2 7.4
2005 611.9 603.4 519.2 404.2 84.2 74.4 8.5 6.8 13.3 99.3 91.9 77.5 7.4
2006 594.9 586.5 487.4 384.4 99.1 89.8 8.3 6.4 13.2 107.6 97.5 70.5 10.0
2006          Aug 598.6 590.3 499.1 393.0 91.2 82.0 8.3 6.5 0.3 101.8 94.7 73.9 7.1
         Sep 596.0 587.7 495.3 389.9 92.4 83.2 8.3 6.5 0.3 101.5 94.5 72.3 7.1
         Oct 593.2 585.0 490.5 386.1 94.5 85.3 8.2 6.4 0.4 105.8 95.8 71.8 10.0
         Nov 589.6 581.5 484.3 381.7 97.1 87.9 8.2 6.3 0.4 106.7 96.7 71.1 10.0
         Dec 594.9 586.5 487.4 384.4 99.1 89.8 8.3 6.4 9.5 107.6 97.5 70.5 10.0
Changes *
2005 − 2.2 − 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.5 − 4.0 − 2.6 − 1.1 − 0.8 . − 5.3 − 5.4 − 6.5 + 0.0
2006 − 17.0 − 16.8 − 31.7 − 20.4 + 14.9 + 15.5 − 0.2 − 0.4 . + 7.3 + 7.2 − 5.5 + 0.1
2006          Aug − 3.0 − 2.9 − 4.4 − 2.8 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.0
         Sep − 2.6 − 2.6 − 3.8 − 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 1.2 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Oct − 2.8 − 2.7 − 4.8 − 3.8 + 2.1 + 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.5
         Nov − 3.6 − 3.6 − 6.1 − 4.4 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 . + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.0
         Dec + 5.2 + 5.1 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 2.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 . + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
 
 
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2004 1,550.0 382.6 22.9 214.6 36.5 62.1 94.2 1,393.7 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.7
2005 1,608.7 400.7 25.3 274.5 32.0 61.8 94.8 1,452.1 1.5 0.2 0.5 0.8 45.8 2.5
2006 1,636.2 392.5 41.1 301.5 30.9 68.3 118.3 1,449.5 1.8 0.2 0.8 0.7 51.4 1.2
2006          Aug 1,639.3 399.6 34.4 288.9 32.9 66.6 109.7 1,463.0 1.6 0.2 0.7 0.7 47.7 2.6
         Sep 1,639.7 402.8 39.3 291.9 33.7 69.9 110.4 1,459.3 1.5 0.1 0.7 0.7 50.7 1.2
         Oct 1,645.2 394.9 40.1 298.5 32.6 71.2 114.3 1,459.7 1.6 0.1 0.7 0.7 50.7 1.2
         Nov 1,644.4 393.9 40.9 297.9 35.1 72.2 118.5 1,453.6 1.6 0.1 0.8 0.7 50.6 1.2
         Dec 1,636.2 392.5 41.1 301.5 30.9 68.3 118.3 1,449.5 1.8 0.2 0.8 0.7 51.4 1.2
Changes *
2005 + 56.1 + 16.2 + 3.4 + 59.8 − 5.6 − 0.3 − 5.8 + 62.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 2.6 + 0.0
2006 + 21.6 − 27.3 + 8.2 + 25.4 − 2.3 + 6.0 + 22.9 − 7.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.2
2006          Aug − 3.7 − 3.4 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Sep + 7.4 − 0.2 + 1.5 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 3.3 + 1.8 + 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.2
         Oct + 5.6 − 7.9 + 0.9 + 6.6 − 1.1 + 1.2 + 3.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 2.5 + 1.0 + 4.2 − 6.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Dec − 8.2 − 1.3 + 0.2 + 3.6 − 4.1 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tracts
ber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- entered
of Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2005 26 192.4 38.2 0.0 13.6 29.8 64.5 10.1 17.2 0.5 28.5 120.1 5.0 5.6 7.4 94.2
2006          Oct 26 193.7 42.1 0.0 14.3 27.7 66.1 11.2 14.3 0.4 29.7 121.1 5.0 3.7 7.4 7.3
         Nov 26 194.1 42.4 0.0 14.6 27.6 66.3 11.4 14.0 0.4 29.9 121.1 5.0 3.7 7.4 7.6
         Dec 26 193.9 41.5 0.0 14.4 27.4 66.7 11.7 14.2 0.4 28.6 123.8 5.2 3.7 7.4 8.6
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          Oct 15 141.7 30.3 0.0 8.3 17.5 49.1 10.3 8.9 0.3 23.5 81.6 4.8 3.7 4.8 4.6
         Nov 15 142.2 30.7 0.0 8.6 17.4 49.4 10.5 8.6 0.3 23.9 81.6 4.8 3.7 4.8 4.7
         Dec 15 141.8 29.6 0.0 8.7 17.3 49.8 10.8 8.7 0.3 22.7 83.3 5.0 3.7 4.8 5.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          Oct 11 52.1 11.7 0.0 6.0 10.2 17.0 1.0 5.4 0.1 6.2 39.5 0.2 − 2.6 2.8
         Nov 11 51.9 11.7 0.0 5.9 10.1 17.0 0.9 5.4 0.1 6.0 39.5 0.2 − 2.6 2.9
         Dec 11 52.2 12.0 0.0 5.8 10.1 16.9 0.9 5.5 0.1 5.9 40.5 0.2 − 2.6 3.2
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts  9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2005 26.1 3.3 5.7 41.0 27.1 36.5 16.6 4.1 6.5 3.3 13.5 11.1 7.7 13.8 11.5 0.5
2006          Oct 1.8 0.2 0.5 3.9 2.9 3.4 1.6 0.4 0.6 0.3 1.1 11.1 7.9 0.9 0.0
         Nov 1.9 0.2 0.5 3.2 2.2 3.2 1.5 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.2 10.8 7.6 0.9 0.0
         Dec 2.4 2.7 0.6 3.5 2.7 3.5 1.7 0.3 0.6 0.3 1.2 10.4 7.5 0.9 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          Oct 1.1 0.1 0.3 2.8 2.0 2.5 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.9 6.8 4.0 0.6 0.0
         Nov 1.2 0.2 0.3 2.2 1.3 2.4 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.0 6.5 3.7 0.6 0.0
         Dec 1.6 1.8 0.4 2.5 1.8 2.5 1.2 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.0 6.3 3.7 0.6 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2006          Oct 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.9 0.3 0.0
         Nov 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.9 0.3 0.0
         Dec 0.8 0.9 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.2 3.8 0.3 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
with
foreign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to market
foreign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2004 52 203 1,452.7 681.0 595.7 170.2 425.6 85.2 671.0 477.3 17.1 15.8 460.2 193.7 100.7
2005 54 211 1,626.5 713.1 640.8 180.1 460.7 72.3 805.8 587.7 22.0 21.5 565.7 218.1 107.6
2006          Feb 54 215 1,702.8 747.8 673.1 207.5 465.7 74.6 859.3 644.9 21.4 20.9 623.5 214.3 95.8
         Mar 54 212 1,713.8 748.6 676.6 214.2 462.4 72.0 870.9 666.5 21.2 20.6 645.3 204.4 94.3
         Apr 54 210 1,721.0 728.9 657.6 215.7 441.9 71.4 899.1 696.3 21.4 20.8 674.9 202.8 93.0
         May 54 212 1,716.6 733.8 665.5 224.3 441.2 68.2 897.3 684.9 19.6 19.0 665.3 212.5 85.5
         June 54 213 1,673.1 693.8 627.7 219.7 407.9 66.2 887.3 678.0 20.5 19.5 657.6 209.2 92.1
         July 54 212 1,706.2 717.3 649.0 199.5 449.6 68.3 882.0 665.9 20.7 19.8 645.3 216.1 106.8
         Aug 54 212 1,711.4 718.6 651.8 188.2 463.6 66.7 883.7 671.2 19.5 18.7 651.7 212.5 109.2
         Sep 53 211 1,719.6 703.5 635.5 205.3 430.1 68.0 912.0 697.3 19.9 19.1 677.4 214.7 104.1
         Oct 53 212 1,748.1 715.8 645.6 196.6 449.1 70.2 917.5 695.4 21.3 20.6 674.0 222.1 114.8
         Nov 53 213 1,766.3 712.9 641.3 196.1 445.1 71.6 918.4 696.2 19.7 19.0 676.4 222.2 135.1
Changes *
2004 − 3 + 1 +207.5 +100.7 + 90.1 − 15.4 +105.5 + 10.6 + 64.2 + 57.8 − 1.9 − 1.0 + 59.7 + 6.4 + 42.7
2005 + 2 + 8 + 74.0 − 4.9 + 10.6 + 10.0 + 0.6 − 15.5 + 80.1 + 70.1 + 4.9 + 5.7 + 65.2 + 10.0 − 1.1
2006          Feb − + 1 + 20.9 + 24.1 + 21.9 + 22.5 − 0.6 + 2.2 + 14.2 + 15.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 16.5 − 1.5 − 17.3
         Mar − − 3 + 31.1 + 7.9 + 10.0 + 6.8 + 3.3 − 2.1 + 23.6 + 30.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 31.1 − 7.3 − 0.4
         Apr − − 2 + 35.2 − 10.2 − 10.1 + 1.4 − 11.5 − 0.1 + 43.4 + 41.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 41.4 + 1.8 + 2.1
         May − + 2 + 12.8 + 10.9 + 13.7 + 8.6 + 5.1 − 2.8 + 8.6 − 3.2 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 1.4 + 11.8 − 6.7
         June − + 1 − 49.7 − 42.2 − 40.0 − 4.6 − 35.4 − 2.2 − 13.5 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 0.5 − 10.4 − 4.0 + 6.0
         July − − 1 + 34.1 + 24.1 + 21.9 − 20.3 + 42.1 + 2.2 − 4.7 − 11.7 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 11.9 + 7.0 + 14.7
         Aug − − + 9.4 + 2.8 + 4.4 − 11.3 + 15.6 − 1.5 + 4.0 + 7.1 − 1.1 − 1.0 + 8.2 − 3.0 + 2.5
         Sep − 1 − 1 − 2.2 − 19.1 − 20.2 + 17.1 − 37.3 + 1.1 + 22.4 + 21.5 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 21.1 + 0.9 − 5.5
         Oct − + 1 + 28.5 + 12.7 + 10.5 − 8.8 + 19.3 + 2.1 + 5.2 − 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.5 − 3.8 + 7.6 + 10.7
         Nov − + 1 + 49.1 + 7.3 + 5.3 − 0.4 + 5.7 + 2.1 + 20.1 + 15.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 + 17.2 + 4.6 + 21.6
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2004 45 170 647.7 304.4 236.1 117.1 119.0 68.3 282.1 211.9 38.6 35.0 173.3 70.2 61.2
2005 43 153 713.6 320.9 249.4 119.9 129.6 71.4 324.6 224.0 39.0 35.8 185.0 100.6 68.1
2006          Feb 44 153 752.3 336.9 259.7 123.4 136.3 77.2 333.0 219.3 37.5 35.8 181.8 113.7 82.4
         Mar 43 153 759.2 335.8 260.7 121.8 138.9 75.1 340.6 221.7 37.2 35.5 184.5 118.9 82.8
         Apr 43 152 762.2 338.2 259.7 123.6 136.2 78.4 336.3 218.6 37.6 35.9 181.0 117.7 87.8
         May 43 153 771.2 333.9 255.5 123.3 132.1 78.5 344.7 226.9 39.2 37.4 187.7 117.8 92.5
         June 43 151 756.6 330.6 253.4 121.2 132.1 77.2 348.4 227.6 42.4 40.6 185.2 120.9 77.6
         July 43 150 760.3 337.6 258.6 119.1 139.5 78.9 350.5 229.4 48.7 46.8 180.7 121.2 72.2
         Aug 42 149 748.9 331.4 251.6 118.3 133.3 79.8 349.1 227.4 48.2 46.3 179.2 121.6 68.4
         Sep 42 148 774.3 337.6 258.8 119.2 139.5 78.9 366.8 238.1 46.7 44.3 191.4 128.7 69.8
         Oct 42 147 765.2 337.9 259.8 117.1 142.7 78.1 360.3 229.4 46.5 44.2 182.9 130.9 67.0
         Nov 42 145 757.4 341.0 262.9 118.6 144.4 78.1 347.7 219.1 46.4 44.7 172.7 128.6 68.7
Changes *
2004 − 1 − 9 + 9.3 + 0.8 − 8.1 − 10.2 + 2.0 + 9.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 2.8 + 4.2 + 7.0 + 0.1
2005 − 2 − 17 + 49.9 + 7.0 + 7.6 + 2.7 + 4.9 − 0.6 + 36.8 + 6.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 6.1 + 30.3 + 6.1
2006          Feb − − 1 + 18.7 + 6.4 + 4.0 + 2.6 + 1.4 + 2.4 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 12.8
         Mar − 1 − + 10.6 + 1.2 + 2.2 − 1.7 + 3.8 − 1.0 + 8.7 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 5.2 + 0.7
         Apr − − 1 + 7.1 + 5.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.5 + 4.8 − 3.2 − 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.2 + 5.2
         May − + 1 + 11.4 − 2.5 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.3 + 1.1 + 9.1 + 9.0 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 7.3 + 0.1 + 4.8
         June − − 2 − 15.5 − 4.0 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 3.2 − 2.8 + 3.1 − 15.0
         July − − 1 + 4.0 + 7.1 + 5.3 − 2.1 + 7.4 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 6.3 + 6.2 − 4.3 + 0.3 − 5.4
         Aug − 1 − 1 − 10.6 − 5.6 − 6.8 − 0.9 − 6.0 + 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 3.8
         Sep − − 1 + 23.9 + 5.0 + 6.6 + 1.0 + 5.7 − 1.6 + 17.5 + 10.4 − 1.5 − 2.0 + 11.9 + 7.1 + 1.4
         Oct − − 1 − 9.0 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 2.1 + 3.1 − 0.7 − 6.5 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 8.4 + 2.1 − 2.8
         Nov − − 2 − 2.5 + 6.8 + 4.9 + 1.4 + 3.5 + 1.9 − 11.1 − 9.0 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 8.9 − 2.1 + 1.7
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 2003
1,226.9 798.4 295.2 503.2 428.4 61.8 55.7 52.4 6.1 5.8 366.6 139.9 21.7 64.3 2004
1,362.8 912.4 373.6 538.9 450.4 63.9 59.0 55.3 4.9 4.6 386.5 171.9 20.9 70.8 2005
1,421.7 924.0 357.9 566.0 497.8 70.5 62.4 58.8 8.1 7.8 427.2 175.7 21.4 84.0 2006          Feb 
1,425.6 941.6 355.5 586.1 484.1 70.0 62.0 59.3 8.0 7.7 414.1 180.3 21.6 86.3          Mar 
1,426.5 922.5 340.2 582.3 504.0 68.6 60.8 58.1 7.8 7.5 435.4 188.1 21.9 84.5          Apr 
1,422.8 911.5 342.4 569.1 511.3 70.1 62.5 59.6 7.6 7.4 441.1 185.0 22.5 86.4          May
1,393.7 907.3 391.4 515.9 486.4 64.7 57.1 54.1 7.7 7.4 421.6 168.9 22.5 88.1          June
1,418.7 942.7 358.5 584.2 476.0 67.0 59.0 56.5 8.0 7.3 409.0 173.2 22.5 91.7          July
1,414.9 943.8 356.0 587.8 471.1 67.4 59.5 56.5 8.0 7.3 403.7 180.2 22.5 93.9          Aug 
1,420.1 948.2 383.9 564.3 471.9 64.4 56.6 53.8 7.8 7.1 407.6 180.2 27.8 91.5          Sep 
1,446.6 966.0 378.8 587.2 480.6 61.3 53.6 50.7 7.7 7.1 419.3 185.5 28.0 88.0          Oct 
1,457.1 968.0 384.2 583.8 489.1 58.5 51.0 48.5 7.5 6.8 430.6 183.8 28.2 97.2          Nov 
Changes *
+ 186.4 + 93.2 + 28.1 + 65.1 + 93.3 − 4.4 − 4.8 − 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 97.7 + 0.4 − 8.7 + 29.4 2004
+ 59.5 + 69.4 + 78.4 − 8.9 − 10.0 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 12.0 + 32.1 − 0.8 − 16.7 2005
+ 19.8 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 4.7 + 29.2 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 31.0 + 7.5 + 0.0 − 6.3 2006          Feb 
+ 18.7 + 25.5 − 2.4 + 27.9 − 6.8 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 6.2 + 4.6 + 0.2 + 7.7          Mar 
+ 19.4 − 7.6 − 15.3 + 7.8 + 27.0 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 28.3 + 7.8 + 0.3 + 7.7          Apr 
+ 9.1 − 3.4 + 2.3 − 5.7 + 12.5 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 11.0 − 3.1 + 0.6 + 6.2          May
− 33.4 − 6.7 + 48.9 − 55.7 − 26.7 − 5.4 − 5.4 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 21.3 − 16.1 + 0.0 − 0.2          June
+ 26.0 + 36.0 − 32.8 + 68.9 − 10.1 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 12.4 + 4.3 − 0.0 + 3.9          July
− 0.6 + 3.4 − 2.5 + 6.0 − 4.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 + 7.0 − 0.0 + 3.1          Aug 
− 2.4 − 0.4 + 27.9 − 28.3 − 1.9 − 3.1 − 2.9 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 5.3 − 5.1          Sep 
+ 26.6 + 18.2 − 5.1 + 23.3 + 8.4 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 11.4 + 5.4 + 0.1 − 3.5          Oct 
+ 33.2 + 15.4 + 5.4 + 9.9 + 17.8 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 20.6 − 1.7 + 0.3 + 17.4          Nov 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003
462.3 277.5 83.4 194.1 184.9 31.8 27.3 26.5 4.5 4.3 153.1 73.5 39.1 72.7 2004
525.4 310.6 103.3 207.3 214.8 36.0 29.1 27.1 7.0 6.8 178.8 79.7 41.0 67.5 2005
553.4 329.6 101.2 228.5 223.8 34.4 26.4 25.3 8.0 7.9 189.4 87.9 41.0 70.0 2006          Feb 
557.1 336.0 108.7 227.3 221.1 34.8 26.8 25.7 8.0 7.9 186.3 90.8 41.1 70.3          Mar 
558.1 336.0 109.5 226.4 222.1 33.9 25.7 24.9 8.2 7.9 188.2 91.8 40.8 71.6          Apr 
564.2 341.0 115.4 225.6 223.2 36.5 28.1 27.0 8.3 8.1 186.7 91.8 41.2 74.0          May
557.4 333.4 124.8 208.5 224.0 33.9 25.5 24.6 8.4 8.2 190.1 89.2 40.3 69.7          June
559.9 335.0 117.9 217.1 224.9 35.4 27.0 25.3 8.4 8.3 189.5 89.1 40.8 70.5          July
549.3 330.1 115.5 214.6 219.1 35.2 26.8 24.5 8.4 8.3 183.9 88.2 40.7 70.7          Aug 
573.5 346.8 114.7 232.1 226.7 37.6 29.3 27.4 8.3 8.1 189.1 88.2 40.8 71.7          Sep 
558.6 334.9 116.3 218.6 223.7 37.5 29.2 26.6 8.2 8.1 186.2 91.2 41.0 74.4          Oct 
550.3 328.6 117.5 211.1 221.7 41.0 32.9 31.1 8.1 8.0 180.6 89.0 39.4 78.8          Nov 
Changes *
+ 1.4 − 0.7 − 16.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 5.4 − 2.2 + 4.7 2004
+ 48.6 + 24.2 + 19.9 + 4.3 + 24.4 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 20.2 + 6.2 + 1.9 − 6.7 2005
+ 16.5 + 6.0 + 0.2 + 5.8 + 10.5 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 9.1 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 2006          Feb 
+ 6.9 + 8.2 + 7.6 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − − 1.7 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.8          Mar 
+ 4.5 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 + 2.3 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.2 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 1.8          Apr 
+ 8.3 + 6.6 + 5.9 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.7          May
− 7.7 − 8.3 + 9.4 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 2.5 − 2.6 − 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 2.6 − 0.9 − 4.4          June
+ 2.6 + 1.8 − 6.9 + 8.7 + 0.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.0          July
− 10.2 − 4.5 − 2.4 − 2.1 − 5.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.5          Aug 
+ 23.0 + 15.9 − 0.8 + 16.7 + 7.1 + 2.3 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8          Sep 
− 14.9 − 11.9 + 1.6 − 13.5 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 3.0 + 0.2 + 2.8          Oct 
− 4.2 − 3.8 + 1.2 − 5.0 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 3.6 + 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 1.6 + 5.5          Nov 
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
 
 
 
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
 
 
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2006          June 8,304.2 166.1 0.5 165.6 166.3 0.7 0.0
         July 8,349.2 167.0 0.5 166.5 167.1 0.6 0.0
         Aug 8,315.4 166.3 0.5 165.8 166.4 0.6 0.0
         Sep 8,340.7 166.8 0.5 166.3 167.0 0.7 0.0
         Oct 8,336.5 166.7 0.5 166.2 167.0 0.8 0.0
         Nov 8,648.9 173.0 0.5 172.5 173.2 0.7 0.0
         Dec  8 8,749.1 175.0 0.5 174.5 175.3 1.0 0.0
2007          Jan  p ... ... ... 175.8 ... ... ...
         Feb ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2006          June 2,050,379 41,008 203 40,805 41,033 228 1
         July 2,060,065 41,201 203 40,999 41,165 166 1
         Aug 2,062,897 41,258 201 41,057 41,241 184 0
         Sep 2,043,453 40,869 201 40,668 40,869 201 0
         Oct 2,039,249 40,785 200 40,585 40,812 227 1
         Nov 2,068,309 41,366 200 41,166 41,354 188 1
         Dec 2,063,592 41,272 200 41,072 41,364 292 0
2007          Jan  p 2,095,164 41,903 199 41,704 ... ... ...
         Feb  p 2,137,948 42,759 199 42,560 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. — 8From 1 January 2007, including data of credit institutions in
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the Slovenia. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 2.25 3.25          Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2006 Mar                  8 1.50 2.50 3.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75          June                15 1.75 2.75 3.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          Aug                  9 2.00 3.00 4.00 2002 Jan                  1 2.71 2005 Jan                  1 1.21
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          Oct                11 2.25 3.25 4.25          to          July                  1 1.17
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Dec                13 2.50 3.50 4.50          Apr                  3
 2006 Jan                  1 1.37
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50          July                 1 1.95
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75 2007 Jan                  1 2.70
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2006 Dec                20 388,526 321,500 − 3.50 3.58 3.58 8
         Dec                28 379,862 330,500 − 3.50 3.58 3.68 7
2007 Jan                  4 395,644 330,500 − 3.50 3.57 3.58 6
         Jan                10 381,305 310,500 − 3.50 3.55 3.56 7
         Jan                17 412,215 312,500 − 3.50 3.55 3.56 7
         Jan                24 428,181 317,500 − 3.50 3.55 3.56 7
         Jan                31 399,269 292,500 − 3.50 3.56 3.56 7
         Feb                  7 381,952 279,500 − 3.50 3.54 3.55 7
         Feb                14 402,912 286,500 − 3.50 3.55 3.56 8
Longer-term refinancing operations
2006 Nov                30 72,782 40,000 − − 3.58 3.58 91
         Dec                21 74,150 40,000 − − 3.66 3.67 98
2007 Feb                  1 79,099 50,000 − − 3.72 3.74 85
Source: ECB. — *Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2007 to allotted or collected. 
include Slovenia. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2006          July 2.81 2.76 − 2.85 3.08 3.02 − 3.16 2.81 2.84 2.94 3.10 3.29 3.43 3.54
         Aug 2.97 2.66 − 3.09 3.21 3.14 − 3.26 2.97 3.05 3.09 3.23 3.41 3.53 3.62
         Sep 3.04 2.97 − 3.12 3.32 3.23 − 3.42 3.04 3.07 3.16 3.34 3.53 3.64 3.72
         Oct 3.28 3.04 − 3.39 3.49 3.39 − 3.56 3.28 3.32 3.35 3.50 3.64 3.74 3.80
         Nov 3.33 3.30 − 3.37 3.58 3.53 − 3.63 3.33 3.35 3.42 3.60 3.73 3.81 3.86
         Dec 3.50 4 3.26 − 3.85 3.67 3.60 − 3.72 3.50 3.57 3.64 3.68 3.79 3.87 3.92
2007          Jan 3.56 3.45 − 3.62 3.74 3.69 − 3.78 3.56 3.59 3.62 3.75 3.89 3.99 4.06
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. — 4 At end-December, 3.60% to 3.85%. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2006          Apr 2.21 3.01 2.53 3.51 4.63 4.16 4.52 8.10 6.73 5.75 4.59 4.05 4.34
         May 2.27 3.05 2.59 3.52 4.63 4.16 4.52 8.10 6.70 5.71 4.64 4.10 4.36
         June 2.34 3.08 2.72 3.53 4.67 4.20 4.55 8.10 6.75 5.73 4.72 4.19 4.40
         July 2.43 3.03 2.80 3.57 4.68 4.21 4.57 8.15 6.71 5.82 4.81 4.27 4.45
         Aug 2.52 3.05 2.93 3.64 4.72 4.23 4.60 8.21 6.72 5.82 4.85 4.33 4.48
         Sep 2.59 3.08 3.00 3.69 4.82 4.27 4.62 8.31 6.81 5.87 4.93 4.40 4.53
         Oct 2.69 3.10 3.15 3.80 4.90 4.29 4.65 8.36 6.81 5.88 5.07 4.51 4.57
         Nov 2.78 3.05 3.24 3.80 4.98 4.33 4.68 8.34 6.81 5.91 5.14 4.59 4.63
         Dec 2.89 3.01 3.42 3.86 5.01 4.35 4.71 8.43 6.81 5.94 5.24 4.66 4.68
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2006          Apr 0.79 2.40 2.81 2.49 2.00 2.42 1.16 2.51 2.93 3.71
         May 0.79 2.45 2.86 2.48 2.00 2.48 1.18 2.58 3.18 3.38
         June 0.81 2.57 2.88 2.57 2.04 2.53 1.22 2.70 3.22 3.27
         July 0.81 2.70 3.04 2.80 2.08 2.58 1.24 2.78 3.31 3.99
         Aug 0.85 2.79 2.97 2.82 2.23 2.63 1.32 2.92 3.25 3.78
         Sep 0.86 2.87 3.15 2.66 2.26 2.68 1.36 2.99 3.45 3.82
         Oct 0.90 3.04 3.30 2.87 2.30 2.75 1.45 3.19 3.58 4.24
         Nov 0.91 3.10 3.34 2.80 2.30 2.81 1.49 3.26 3.47 3.66
         Dec 0.93 3.27 3.31 2.80 2.33 2.87 1.51 3.47 4.92 3.88
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2006          Apr 9.76 7.76 7.06 6.31 7.92 4.29 3.84 4.07 4.33 4.17 4.30 4.85 4.62
         May 9.78 7.77 7.24 6.23 7.89 4.34 3.90 4.15 4.40 4.19 4.43 5.05 4.76
         June 9.84 7.71 7.11 6.31 7.82 4.42 4.00 4.19 4.48 4.25 4.52 5.09 4.71
         July 9.86 7.87 7.33 6.33 8.02 4.52 4.11 4.23 4.52 4.34 4.55 5.24 4.74
         Aug 9.95 8.12 7.86 6.39 8.15 4.59 4.21 4.36 4.60 4.39 4.65 5.26 4.94
         Sep 10.06 7.98 7.86 6.26 8.09 4.65 4.30 4.36 4.61 4.44 4.76 5.30 4.98
         Oct 10.04 7.77 7.50 6.02 8.17 4.72 4.42 4.45 4.58 4.46 4.93 5.18 4.80
         Nov 10.08 7.83 7.65 6.16 8.15 4.75 4.49 4.50 4.58 4.47 4.97 5.25 4.90
         Dec 10.03 7.72 7.54 6.08 7.94 4.80 4.54 4.56 4.55 4.47 4.92 5.23 4.81
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2006          Apr 5.40 4.34 4.73 4.15 3.51 3.94 4.22
         May 5.36 4.38 4.83 4.26 3.57 4.13 4.32
         June 5.45 4.47 4.84 4.33 3.74 4.12 4.23
         July 5.52 4.57 4.99 4.38 3.84 4.21 4.36
         Aug 5.56 4.70 5.09 4.60 3.97 4.33 4.49
         Sep 5.69 4.75 5.02 4.54 4.02 4.41 4.47
         Oct 5.76 4.91 5.16 4.57 4.24 4.37 4.45
         Nov 5.82 5.00 5.24 4.68 4.31 4.62 4.58
         Dec 5.83 5.08 5.24 4.68 4.50 4.76 4.62
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Dec 2.10 109,209 2.74 195,206 2.26 78,779 4.05 22,543
2006          Jan 2.13 110,140 2.72 194,850 2.28 78,905 4.04 22,655
         Feb 2.17 112,180 2.71 194,806 2.33 78,055 4.02 22,895
         Mar 2.29 114,677 2.69 195,260 2.48 79,671 3.99 22,943
         Apr 2.34 115,934 2.68 195,181 2.53 83,245 3.94 23,474
         May 2.39 117,353 2.67 194,825 2.60 82,547 3.94 23,648
         June 2.48 119,134 2.66 194,457 2.71 82,607 3.92 23,866
         July 2.59 123,786 2.65 193,837 2.82 84,840 3.91 23,381
         Aug 2.69 129,030 2.64 193,804 2.96 87,864 3.91 23,319
         Sep 2.74 133,242 2.64 192,264 3.03 89,398 3.92 23,918
         Oct 2.86 137,322 2.63 191,665 3.20 93,649 4.22 22,303
         Nov 2.92 141,570 2.62 191,012 3.28 91,322 4.23 22,310
         Dec 3.07 147,707 2.61 193,281 3.47 90,662 4.25 22,262
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2005          Dec 5.00 6,674 4.33 30,827 5.36 913,041 8.83 76,436 5.64 70,569 6.07 326,570
2006          Jan 5.07 6,339 4.31 30,241 5.34 920,556 8.91 74,655 5.57 70,145 6.04 326,777
         Feb 5.09 6,296 4.31 30,130 5.33 921,348 8.84 73,963 5.56 69,580 6.03 326,418
         Mar 5.17 6,205 4.30 29,959 5.30 921,392 9.01 74,505 5.57 68,684 6.04 323,755
         Apr 5.17 6,108 4.31 29,514 5.28 922,067 8.98 73,506 5.60 68,536 6.04 324,317
         May 5.21 5,999 4.31 29,958 5.27 922,561 9.09 72,925 5.57 69,051 6.04 324,795
         June 5.29 6,142 4.32 29,879 5.26 923,622 9.29 74,256 5.55 69,157 6.04 324,024
         July 5.29 6,019 4.32 29,697 5.25 925,008 9.27 73,385 5.55 69,213 6.05 323,342
         Aug 5.34 6,021 4.32 29,598 5.23 927,050 9.31 72,346 5.52 69,592 6.06 323,243
         Sep 5.39 6,431 4.33 29,571 5.22 929,104 9.41 73,812 5.53 69,624 6.07 322,587
         Oct 5.51 5,995 4.35 29,456 5.21 929,886 9.50 72,878 5.52 69,198 6.07 322,399
         Nov 5.57 5,847 4.36 29,155 5.20 931,063 9.43 70,535 5.50 69,528 6.06 322,042
         Dec 5.53 6,051 4.36 29,658 5.19 930,702 9.69 71,508 5.49 67,929 6.06 320,572
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Dec 4.62 155,094 3.98 85,524 4.91 480,327
2006          Jan 4.65 155,685 3.97 85,081 4.90 490,068
         Feb 4.76 151,426 4.02 86,030 4.89 492,375
         Mar 4.88 153,697 4.05 87,248 4.89 490,677
         Apr 4.92 157,411 4.09 87,594 4.88 492,493
         May 4.96 153,940 4.13 88,128 4.88 494,363
         June 5.07 157,956 4.14 90,560 4.88 494,890
         July 5.08 159,419 4.23 93,650 4.90 493,519
         Aug 5.15 156,471 4.28 92,296 4.90 496,535
         Sep 5.21 158,696 4.32 94,768 4.92 495,304
         Oct 5.32 157,742 4.43 94,563 4.93 494,286
         Nov 5.38 158,418 4.47 95,324 4.93 497,001
         Dec 5.53 154,064 4.57 93,668 4.94 497,331
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates may always be calculated either as annualised agreed intere st
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- balance sheet statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis purchase, including building and home improvements; including loan s
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well as
sample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are for their own account. — 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. —
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2005          Dec 1.20 463,399 2.06 31,326 2.73 1,124 2.35 3,036 1.99 518,955 2.31 83,921
2006          Jan 1.22 462,356 2.16 31,502 2.81 2,112 2.69 7,533 2.00 517,768 2.33 84,615
         Feb 1.23 464,324 2.21 27,206 2.72 1,715 2.60 4,571 2.00 517,281 2.35 84,898
         Mar 1.26 465,115 2.29 32,612 2.84 1,401 2.46 1,823 1.96 515,333 2.39 85,689
         Apr 1.31 469,686 2.32 28,341 3.09 1,529 2.55 2,024 1.99 513,543 2.43 85,904
         May 1.34 469,841 2.37 29,853 3.14 1,548 2.63 1,690 1.99 509,976 2.49 87,032
         June 1.35 470,361 2.49 31,399 3.23 1,592 2.55 1,922 2.05 507,349 2.54 88,337
         July 1.36 465,849 2.63 33,301 3.25 2,190 2.90 2,150 2.05 503,445 2.59 89,399
         Aug 1.41 460,404 2.75 34,694 3.40 1,347 2.78 3,537 2.09 498,932 2.65 90,923
         Sep 1.43 457,935 2.82 31,948 3.41 1,691 2.54 2,121 2.10 495,091 2.69 92,142
         Oct 1.47 456,615 2.97 35,094 3.52 2,495 2.82 2,531 2.17 490,334 2.75 94,253
         Nov 1.45 467,261 3.05 34,218 3.54 2,240 2.58 1,897 2.15 484,245 2.82 96,851
         Dec 1.49 465,225 3.23 39,245 3.60 2,069 2.67 1,582 2.20 487,476 2.87 98,851
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Dec 1.30 164,748 2.22 50,870 2.56 501 4.20 1,070
2006          Jan 1.34 156,885 2.24 47,599 2.66 203 4.08 866
         Feb 1.38 153,233 2.29 41,033 2.91 296 3.83 1,366
         Mar 1.47 153,285 2.51 47,007 3.10 392 3.56 948
         Apr 1.52 156,243 2.59 45,185 3.09 446 3.96 859
         May 1.51 157,638 2.55 51,722 3.78 252 4.14 529
         June 1.57 157,582 2.67 50,441 4.07 321 3.38 1,133
         July 1.61 158,281 2.77 46,614 3.52 554 4.21 1,292
         Aug 1.71 162,279 2.92 54,472 3.57 280 3.98 641
         Sep 1.71 160,811 3.00 51,870 3.79 488 4.04 797
         Oct 1.81 161,921 3.20 61,003 4.09 315 4.71 985
         Nov 1.87 167,499 3.25 56,101 3.82 256 3.88 1,290
         Dec 1.90 175,389 3.44 58,922 3.58 229 4.44 690
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2005          Dec 6.98 4.85 1,443 5.64 4,631 7.89 2,778 3.97 9,234 4.69 2,336 4.44 5,586
2006          Jan 7.75 5.18 1,652 5.81 4,330 8.99 2,942 3.93 9,920 4.75 1,922 4.39 3,668
         Feb 7.67 5.35 1,090 5.78 4,294 8.74 2,987 4.05 6,990 4.86 1,316 4.45 2,340
         Mar 7.53 5.17 1,368 5.62 5,483 8.64 3,733 4.11 8,250 4.91 2,132 4.62 3,635
         Apr 7.51 5.24 1,449 5.59 5,435 8.69 3,316 4.07 10,032 4.97 1,610 4.74 3,212
         May 7.48 5.49 933 5.49 7,186 8.67 3,338 4.14 8,538 5.19 1,890 4.84 3,161
         June 7.26 5.12 1,283 5.35 5,319 8.64 3,105 4.21 10,126 5.24 2,119 4.81 3,148
         July 7.51 5.54 1,271 5.41 5,564 8.98 3,048 4.27 11,070 5.36 1,793 4.94 2,500
         Aug 7.59 5.63 1,007 5.48 4,718 8.85 3,119 4.40 11,083 5.38 1,394 4.98 2,530
         Sep 7.43 5.60 1,046 5.29 5,422 8.90 2,858 4.41 10,978 5.30 1,861 5.08 2,323
         Oct 7.19 5.61 1,662 5.02 7,074 9.01 3,092 4.63 11,899 5.03 1,815 4.76 2,727
         Nov 7.03 5.56 940 4.92 6,222 8.85 3,030 4.63 10,908 5.20 1,407 4.90 2,379
         Dec 6.69 5.31 1,288 4.87 5,935 8.44 2,740 4.68 16,569 5.21 2,327 4.82 3,527
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Dec 10.47 49,066 4.34 4.44 2,522 4.25 3,138 4.19 8,514 4.32 5,545
2006          Jan 10.63 47,574 4.41 4.55 3,199 4.27 2,857 4.29 8,266 4.35 5,913
         Feb 10.54 47,294 4.40 4.58 2,049 4.32 2,275 4.28 6,081 4.31 4,479
         Mar 10.59 48,233 4.50 4.71 2,204 4.37 2,588 4.39 6,849 4.39 5,710
         Apr 10.61 46,939 4.60 4.74 3,072 4.42 2,364 4.45 6,204 4.56 4,470
         May 10.77 46,390 4.68 4.82 2,074 4.58 2,435 4.58 6,381 4.56 4,871
         June 10.86 47,657 4.75 4.91 2,338 4.61 2,395 4.66 6,108 4.63 4,902
         July 10.92 46,654 4.83 4.92 2,561 4.66 2,415 4.67 6,106 4.80 4,363
         Aug 11.00 45,734 4.87 5.12 2,229 4.80 2,398 4.71 5,777 4.76 4,498
         Sep 11.02 46,945 4.84 5.10 2,122 4.80 1,964 4.71 4,855 4.69 4,191
         Oct 11.10 46,782 4.81 5.10 2,781 4.80 2,254 4.65 5,609 4.65 4,527
         Nov 11.02 45,132 4.82 5.27 2,111 4.84 2,295 4.65 5,434 4.61 4,580
         Dec 11.27 46,290 4.80 5.23 2,316 4.86 2,495 4.60 5,666 4.56 4,530
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Dec 5.79 69,127 4.57 7,716 4.61 1,321 4.46 2,155
2006          Jan 5.86 68,636 4.49 6,725 4.74 1,206 4.48 1,513
         Feb 6.02 67,921 4.60 5,966 4.80 1,106 4.43 1,787
         Mar 6.04 68,216 4.71 8,373 4.82 1,470 4.46 2,130
         Apr 6.14 69,334 4.90 7,905 4.98 1,140 4.43 1,793
         May 6.13 69,129 4.98 8,997 5.08 1,433 4.53 2,132
         June 6.26 70,516 5.04 9,035 5.00 1,210 4.80 1,897
         July 6.29 68,078 5.11 8,108 5.14 1,232 4.88 1,895
         Aug 6.36 66,594 5.14 7,170 5.25 1,514 4.96 2,188
         Sep 6.37 67,633 5.37 8,144 5.09 1,185 4.91 1,677
         Oct 6.46 65,477 5.45 8,234 5.11 1,720 4.89 1,731
         Nov 6.46 67,111 5.53 7,461 5.16 1,243 4.96 2,014
         Dec 6.54 65,780 5.67 8,528 5.21 1,443 4.96 2,414
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2005          Dec 3.46 55,247 3.94 5,163 4.15 11,083
2006          Jan 3.40 44,581 4.04 5,404 4.17 6,838
         Feb 3.41 38,352 4.81 6,422 4.19 6,126
         Mar 3.75 48,056 4.03 4,699 4.38 6,675
         Apr 3.61 36,866 4.07 5,379 4.47 4,994
         May 3.76 36,909 4.37 5,659 4.61 6,865
         June 3.98 52,421 4.35 5,165 4.45 7,267
         July 4.00 46,079 4.59 4,567 4.74 5,697
         Aug 4.19 42,375 4.56 2,537 4.66 4,578
         Sep 4.24 46,903 4.62 5,533 4.65 7,369
         Oct 4.38 45,975 4.45 4,751 4.59 7,482
         Nov 4.36 40,795 4.81 3,452 4.62 5,945
         Dec 4.58 55,962 4.89 5,963 4.76 9,312
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building market
pur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,920
2003 177,847 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 43,392 86,554 35,748 50,806 − 91,293
2004 236,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 103,179 108,730 121,841 − 13,111 − 128,160
2005 258,684 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 148,142 102,658 61,740 40,918 − 156,026
2006 250,542 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 148,163 125,488 69,052 56,436 − 125,054
2006          Oct 41,749 23,106 8,694 164 14,248 18,643 23,512 14,687 8,825 − 18,238
         Nov 25,262 510 4,430 177 − 4,097 24,752 6,951 20,604 − 13,653 − 18,311
         Dec − 22,433 − 21,224 − 10,398 − 5,076 − 5,750 − 1,209 − 26,464 − 13,573 − 12,891 − 4,031
 
 
 
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
purchases shares  8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,932
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,678
1998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,728 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,193
2001 82,665 17,575 65,090 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,917
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 15,470 16,838 − 1,367 − 11,829 7,056 − 18,885 27,300
2004 3,316 10,157 − 6,842 15,410 5,045 10,365 − 12,094
2005 31,803 13,766 18,037 − 27,039 10,208 − 37,247 58,842
2006 21,851 9,061 12,791 − 12,101 11,317 − 23,418 33,952
2006          Oct − 587 252 − 839 − 7,240 − 1,632 − 5,608 6,653
         Nov 7,441 905 6,536 1,771 7,694 − 5,923 5,670
         Dec − 4,641 1,054 − 5,695 − 14,511 3,658 − 18,169 9,870
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,370
1997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,813
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2006          Sep 83,796 53,640 1,234 7,055 14,777 30,574 4,164 25,993 −
         Oct 76,663 52,039 1,001 9,516 9,650 31,872 1,647 22,977 −
         Nov 73,209 57,258 926 12,325 11,177 32,830 78 15,872 −
         Dec 62,828 43,879 982 2,823 6,540 33,533 2,005 16,944 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,582
1997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,413
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 69
2006          Sep 29,046 14,221 872 4,074 4,408 4,868 2,488 12,337 −
         Oct 24,370 12,426 291 3,670 1,566 6,899 1,298 10,646 −
         Nov 24,809 17,275 162 7,238 3,501 6,374 19 7,515 −
         Dec 18,824 11,299 520 1,688 1,794 7,297 1,938 5,587 −
Net sales  6 
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,951
1997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,181
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,208
2006          Sep 5,103 4,389 − 2,189 − 2,492 3,154 5,917 3,012 − 2,298 − 1,517
         Oct 20,721 9,034 − 4,469 1,732 6,786 4,986 − 251 11,937 − 2,141
         Nov 13,801 6,210 − 1,314 1,414 723 5,386 − 1,461 9,052 − 613
         Dec − 14,955 − 9,635 − 3,102 − 8,740 1,633 575 − 653 − 4,667 − 810
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,180
1997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,359
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2006          Oct 3,045,299 1,813,324 148,812 506,851 366,119 791,541 101,660 1,130,315 116,795
         Nov 3,059,100 1,819,534 147,499 508,265 366,843 796,927 100,198 1,139,367 116,183
         Dec 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-December 2006 
1,080,928 698,990 54,807 215,757 138,990 289,434 27,300 354,637 58,160    less than 2
705,836 465,349 36,224 151,101 95,573 182,449 17,970 222,517 34,081 2 to less than 4
433,567 237,874 29,820 70,201 39,171 98,683 18,026 177,667 8,903 4 to less than 6
275,604 138,388 14,182 30,673 27,373 66,160 15,603 121,615 5,453 6 to less than 8
304,386 171,113 8,759 21,349 20,832 120,174 7,426 125,846 3,116 8 to less than 10
48,066 32,544 549 4,982 17,523 9,490 2,333 13,189 2,298 10 to less than 15
26,938 13,249 50 1,898 7,091 4,209 1,059 12,630 2,075 15 to less than 20
168,821 52,393 4 3,564 21,926 26,900 9,829 106,598 1,287 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 553,110
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 723,077
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 1,040,769
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2006          Oct 163,143 − 414 114 276 2 9 − 9 − 27 − 780 1,222,893
         Nov 163,480 337 353 178 7 20 − 134 88 − 175 1,238,339
         Dec 163,764 284 150 983 16 0 − 35 − 665 − 166 1,279,638
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — oFrom January was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose shares are traded
1994, including the shares of east German companies (resultant increase in on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
share circulation: DM7,771 million). — 1Including shares issued out of Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse
company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on the Official Mar- AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
ket, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock market segment
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German German
more than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX share
and including and including Corporate managed index index € Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.69
1997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.69
1998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.39
1999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 3.2 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.0 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2006          Oct 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.1 4.2 4.2 117.59 98.09 385.11 6,268.92
         Nov 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.9 4.0 4.2 4.1 118.17 98.26 388.03 6,309.19
         Dec 3.9 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.3 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007          Jan 4.1 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.5 4.4 115.94 96.04 419.85 6,789.11
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutual
pur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 680
2003 46,738 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 2,795 48,496 − 2,658 734 51,154 2,061 − 1,758
2004 12,386 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 10,933 7,715 8,446 3,796 − 731 7,137 4,671
2005 81,581 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 39,863 80,648 21,290 7,761 59,358 32,102 933
2006 44,520 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 24,985 35,393 14,677 5,221 20,716 19,764 9,127
2006          Oct − 585 − 1,320 − 861 460 − 1,923 523 − 459 735 − 224 1,174 462 − 1,398 273 − 361
         Nov 2,822 − 130 − 1,399 − 40 − 1,595 114 1,269 2,952 2,155 1,239 657 916 2,295 667
         Dec 10,914 6,490 344 13 − 76 524 6,146 4,424 9,819 − 503 390 10,322 4,034 1,095
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  € billion
2004 2005 2006 
Item 2003 2004 2005 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Households 1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 58.3 49.2 43.9 24.3 9.6 12.2 2.9 19.2 9.4 12.2 1.3
Money market paper − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Bonds 20.5 36.9 15.3 − 3.1 16.0 1.6 2.5 − 4.7 23.1 4.9 16.9
Shares − 20.0 − 6.5 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 0.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 1.0
Other equity 3.1 3.2 3.0 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8
Mutual funds shares 26.5 − 7.5 19.4 − 10.9 5.0 6.0 9.7 − 1.3 − 0.5 0.7 − 7.5
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 46.0 48.5 50.1 15.7 14.9 9.8 10.8 14.6 13.9 10.7 12.1
Short-term claims 1.9 2.6 4.4 0.6 1.7 0.5 1.4 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.4
Longer-term claims 44.2 45.9 45.8 15.2 13.2 9.3 9.4 13.8 13.1 10.3 11.7
Claims from company
pension commitments 10.1 9.2 9.5 2.3 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.5 2.4 2.5
Other claims  3 − 1.7 1.5 1.4 0.4 − 0.2 0.2 0.9 0.5 0.5 0.2 0.2
Total 142.7 134.5 139.7 28.4 47.4 31.9 28.8 31.5 48.7 30.1 25.6
  II Financing
Loans 16.4 − 0.9 − 2.2 − 2.8 − 11.5 2.9 5.6 0.9 − 7.9 1.5 5.2
Short-term loans − 7.8 − 8.4 − 5.1 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 0.2
Longer-term loans 24.2 7.5 2.9 − 0.1 − 8.6 3.6 6.4 1.5 − 5.5 1.8 5.4
Other liabilities 1.2 2.0 0.7 1.7 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Total 17.6 1.1 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 11.3 2.9 5.8 1.0 − 7.8 1.6 5.3
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 32.0 27.8 38.7 8.9 4.5 8.0 18.1 8.2 − 2.1 2.7 9.4
Money market paper − 15.1 5.7 0.5 − 4.4 2.1 2.2 1.0 − 4.8 3.2 − 3.1 4.1
Bonds − 52.5 − 61.6 − 2.7 − 12.7 − 17.1 16.3 − 7.9 6.1 − 15.7 8.2 − 18.9
Financial derivatives 7.4 2.5 1.6 3.8 2.0 − 0.5 − 2.1 2.1 1.7 − 1.6 0.8
Shares 3.4 39.3 − 38.4 − 11.1 2.2 − 17.5 − 13.5 − 9.6 − 21.7 16.2 13.9
Other equity 8.9 − 22.1 7.3 − 4.0 − 1.7 − 2.2 9.8 1.4 4.4 12.9 12.7
Mutual funds shares 13.5 8.6 4.9 2.7 2.3 1.6 − 0.5 1.4 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 6.0
Loans 1.1 1.6 13.9 − 18.5 4.1 11.6 − 11.3 9.4 − 10.7 7.8 − 8.5
Short-term loans − 3.8 − 4.2 11.0 − 19.2 1.4 10.2 − 9.2 8.6 − 10.7 8.9 − 7.8
Longer-term loans 4.9 5.8 2.9 0.7 2.8 1.4 − 2.1 0.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.7
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 0.6 1.5 2.3 0.4 0.9 0.2 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.2 0.2
Short-term claims 0.6 1.5 2.3 0.4 0.9 0.2 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.2 0.2
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 28.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 33.4 − 13.7 − 12.8 11.1 14.5 33.6 − 2.2 7.9
Total 28.1 − 2.5 27.1 − 1.4 − 14.4 7.0 5.4 29.2 − 8.6 40.8 15.7
  II Financing
Money market paper 11.1 − 7.3 − 6.9 − 2.5 4.7 − 1.9 − 4.7 − 5.1 6.5 3.2 − 3.8
Bonds 15.9 9.4 10.1 − 0.1 2.5 0.8 3.4 3.4 3.7 6.3 8.0
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares − 7.7 2.1 6.0 − 0.5 1.3 0.6 2.6 1.5 − 0.9 2.5 1.8
Other equity 39.2 24.7 − 6.0 7.3 3.0 5.0 3.8 − 17.9 1.7 3.1 8.4
Loans − 23.8 − 80.8 − 3.9 − 13.0 − 13.1 0.1 − 19.3 28.5 − 27.3 18.6 9.5
Short-term loans − 4.5 − 39.7 0.0 − 6.9 − 7.9 2.6 − 7.6 13.0 − 8.9 4.6 8.2
Longer-term loans − 19.4 − 41.1 − 3.9 − 6.1 − 5.2 − 2.5 − 11.7 15.6 − 18.4 14.0 1.4
Claims from company
pension commitments 7.9 6.6 6.6 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.6
Other liabilities 1.3 11.9 11.2 0.4 4.1 − 1.1 11.5 − 3.2 9.0 − 14.4 − 4.2
Total 43.7 − 33.4 17.1 − 6.8 4.1 5.1 − 1.1 9.0 − 5.7 21.0 21.4
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2004 2005 2006 
Item 2003 2004 2005 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Households 1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,399.1 1,448.4 1,492.3 1,448.4 1,458.0 1,470.2 1,473.0 1,492.3 1,501.7 1,513.9 1,515.2
Money market paper 1.0 0.9 1.0 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Bonds 391.2 432.6 426.7 432.6 434.1 433.3 445.3 426.7 464.6 475.8 475.9
Shares 237.8 248.4 288.5 248.4 256.4 263.5 276.5 288.5 320.4 304.1 314.4
Other equity 179.4 198.5 214.4 198.5 200.1 208.8 211.6 214.4 220.9 219.2 224.3
Mutual funds shares 463.8 458.2 512.4 458.2 469.9 486.2 507.0 512.4 517.4 508.1 508.9
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 946.4 994.5 1,044.2 994.5 1,009.3 1,019.0 1,029.7 1,044.2 1,058.0 1,068.5 1,079.4
Short-term claims 72.2 74.9 79.2 74.9 76.6 77.0 78.4 79.2 80.0 80.4 80.8
Longer-term claims 874.1 919.6 964.9 919.6 932.7 942.0 951.3 964.9 977.9 988.0 998.6
Claims from company
pension commitments 223.9 233.1 242.6 233.1 235.5 237.8 240.2 242.6 245.0 247.5 249.9
Other claims  3 56.3 57.8 59.3 57.8 57.7 57.9 58.8 59.3 59.8 60.0 60.2
Total 3,899.0 4,072.4 4,281.3 4,072.4 4,121.9 4,177.8 4,243.0 4,281.3 4,389.0 4,398.6 4,430.1
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,554.1 1,557.6 1,557.1 1,557.6 1,545.9 1,550.1 1,556.2 1,557.1 1,557.4 1,559.3 1,563.8
Short-term loans 98.7 90.3 85.6 90.3 87.4 86.6 86.2 85.6 83.2 82.9 82.8
Longer-term loans 1,455.3 1,467.3 1,471.5 1,467.3 1,458.6 1,463.5 1,470.0 1,471.5 1,474.2 1,476.4 1,481.0
Other liabilities 9.5 11.5 12.2 11.5 11.8 11.8 12.0 12.2 12.3 12.3 12.4
Total 1,563.6 1,569.1 1,569.3 1,569.1 1,557.7 1,561.9 1,568.3 1,569.3 1,569.7 1,571.7 1,576.2
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 325.6 346.9 396.2 346.9 368.2 371.8 400.2 396.2 417.6 421.7 440.4
Money market paper 17.8 20.6 17.4 20.6 22.7 22.9 21.1 17.4 19.3 14.5 19.3
Bonds 105.8 45.6 41.1 45.6 27.0 43.1 36.2 41.1 26.9 35.5 15.3
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 555.6 588.0 652.5 588.0 613.9 614.4 623.6 652.5 696.9 687.1 735.3
Other equity 292.2 294.0 320.4 294.0 293.7 303.1 315.8 320.4 333.4 342.7 362.1
Mutual funds shares 99.6 106.8 108.8 106.8 108.3 111.8 112.3 108.8 108.4 104.3 101.6
Loans 121.6 113.7 125.5 113.7 119.7 130.7 119.1 125.5 118.6 127.2 118.1
Short-term loans 87.6 81.1 91.1 81.1 82.9 93.5 84.4 91.1 81.6 90.8 83.1
Longer-term loans 33.9 32.6 34.4 32.6 36.8 37.2 34.8 34.4 37.0 36.4 34.9
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 38.2 39.7 42.0 39.7 40.6 40.8 41.6 42.0 42.4 42.6 42.8
Short-term claims 38.2 39.7 42.0 39.7 40.6 40.8 41.6 42.0 42.4 42.6 42.8
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 348.0 360.4 377.0 360.4 358.0 360.1 369.5 377.0 393.3 401.7 406.6
Total 1,904.4 1,915.7 2,080.9 1,915.7 1,952.1 1,998.7 2,039.4 2,080.9 2,156.8 2,177.3 2,241.5
  II Liabilities
Money market paper 31.3 24.0 17.1 24.0 28.7 26.8 22.1 17.1 23.5 26.8 23.0
Bonds 67.6 79.4 89.6 79.4 80.9 84.2 88.2 89.6 90.9 93.8 94.7
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 928.8 979.2 1,137.4 979.2 1,007.0 1,046.4 1,095.1 1,137.4 1,273.1 1,230.9 1,251.8
Other equity 566.1 590.7 584.7 590.7 593.7 598.8 602.6 584.7 586.4 589.5 597.9
Loans 1,334.6 1,253.6 1,258.0 1,253.6 1,251.8 1,256.6 1,240.9 1,258.0 1,270.8 1,288.3 1,309.0
Short-term loans 370.8 330.3 329.7 330.3 323.2 325.3 316.4 329.7 322.4 327.5 339.1
Longer-term loans 963.8 923.4 928.3 923.4 928.6 931.3 924.5 928.3 948.4 960.8 969.9
Claims from company
pension commitments 194.0 200.5 207.1 200.5 202.2 203.8 205.4 207.1 208.7 210.4 212.0
Other liabilities 310.2 328.8 343.5 328.8 311.5 317.1 329.9 343.5 347.9 349.8 352.2
Total 3,432.6 3,456.3 3,637.3 3,456.3 3,475.7 3,533.7 3,584.3 3,637.3 3,801.4 3,789.4 3,840.6
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IXPublic finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2000 2 + 27.1 + 28.0 − 7.0 + 5.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0
2001 − 59.6 − 27.5 − 27.3 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 2.8 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.2
2002 − 78.3 − 36.0 − 30.6 − 5.0 − 6.8 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 0.3
2003 − 86.9 − 39.6 − 32.7 − 6.9 − 7.7 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.4
2004 − 82.5 − 52.2 − 26.8 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 3.7 − 2.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
2005 − 72.4 − 47.5 − 20.5 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 3.2 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2
2005          H1 − 40.5 − 34.6 − 10.7 − 0.1 + 4.9 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.5
         H2 − 32.2 − 13.1 − 9.7 − 0.9 − 8.4 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7
2006          H1 − 28.2 − 19.6 − 9.9 + 1.7 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0
Debt level 3 End of year or quarter
2000 1,231.0 793.3 351.1 101.9 1.9 59.7 38.5 17.0 4.9 0.1
2001 1,241.5 776.7 377.1 102.6 2.3 58.8 36.8 17.8 4.9 0.1
2002 1,293.0 798.1 404.1 104.3 3.0 60.3 37.2 18.9 4.9 0.1
2003 1,381.0 845.4 435.3 111.4 5.3 63.9 39.1 20.1 5.2 0.2
2004 1,451.1 887.1 459.7 116.1 4.2 65.7 40.2 20.8 5.3 0.2
2005 1,521.6 933.0 482.0 119.7 2.7 67.9 41.6 21.5 5.3 0.1
2005          Q1 1,479.4 908.4 466.4 116.6 3.9 67.0 41.1 21.1 5.3 0.2
         Q2 1,493.5 917.4 470.0 118.2 3.5 67.3 41.3 21.2 5.3 0.2
         Q3 1,513.8 932.7 474.8 118.4 3.4 67.8 41.8 21.3 5.3 0.2
         Q4 1,521.6 933.0 482.0 119.7 2.7 67.9 41.6 21.5 5.3 0.1
2006          Q1 1,540.4 944.5 488.0 121.3 2.3 68.2 41.8 21.6 5.4 0.1
         Q2 1,553.1 956.0 488.8 122.2 1.7 68.4 42.1 21.5 5.4 0.1
         Q3 1,568.2 972.0 488.7 121.3 1.7 68.6 42.5 21.4 5.3 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike according to the national accounts. Annual figures as at January 2007,
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined half-yearly figures as at August 2006. — 2Including proceeds of €50.8
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward billion from the sale of UMTS licences. — 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based
rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2000 957.5 499.0 378.4 80.1 2 930.4 532.7 166.1 65.1 36.2 2 130.4 2 + 27.1 893.1
2001 945.5 477.7 383.7 84.1 1,005.1 551.2 166.2 64.5 36.8 186.4 − 59.6 875.1
2002 952.5 477.5 390.7 84.3 1,030.8 579.8 168.7 62.7 36.1 183.6 − 78.3 879.2
2003 961.2 481.8 396.1 83.4 1,048.2 594.2 169.0 64.1 33.8 187.2 − 87.0 889.1
2004 957.1 481.2 396.7 79.2 1,039.6 592.8 169.4 62.5 31.4 183.5 − 82.5 888.2
2005 975.9 493.0 397.0 85.8 1,048.5 597.7 167.5 62.0 30.2 191.1 − 72.6 900.9
2006 pe 1,008.0 523.8 401.0 83.3 1,054.5 601.4 167.4 64.5 32.1 189.2 − 46.5 935.8
as a percentage of GDP
2000 46.4 24.2 18.3 3.9 2 45.1 25.8 8.1 3.2 1.8 2 6.3 2 + 1.3 43.3
2001 44.7 22.6 18.2 4.0 47.6 26.1 7.9 3.1 1.7 8.8 − 2.8 41.4
2002 44.4 22.3 18.2 3.9 48.1 27.1 7.9 2.9 1.7 8.6 − 3.7 41.0
2003 44.5 22.3 18.3 3.9 48.5 27.5 7.8 3.0 1.6 8.7 − 4.0 41.1
2004 43.4 21.8 18.0 3.6 47.1 26.9 7.7 2.8 1.4 8.3 − 3.7 40.2
2005 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.8 46.8 26.7 7.5 2.8 1.3 8.5 − 3.2 40.2
2006 pe 43.7 22.7 17.4 3.6 45.7 26.1 7.3 2.8 1.4 8.2 − 2.0 40.6
Percentage growth rates
2000 + 2.1 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.9 − 3.5 − 26.6 . + 2.8
2001 − 1.3 − 4.3 + 1.4 + 5.0 + 8.0 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 43.0 . − 2.0
2002 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 5.2 + 1.5 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 1.5 . + 0.5
2003 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 1.1 + 1.7 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 2.3 − 6.3 + 2.0 . + 1.1
2004 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 5.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 7.0 − 2.0 . − 0.1
2005 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 3.8 + 4.1 . + 1.4
2006 pe + 3.3 + 6.2 + 1.0 − 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 6.3 − 1.0 . + 3.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. — 2Including pro-
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ ceeds of €50.8 billion from the sale of UMTS licences deducted from other
data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still expenditure in the national accounts. 
54*IX. Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IX. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cial
transac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2000 612.3 467.3 12.6 595.5 169.3 205.7 67.6 40.7 15.7 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001 555.5 446.2 23.5 599.6 169.9 213.9 66.6 40.1 16.7 − 44.2 445.1 449.1 − 4.0 923.3 971.5 − 48.2
2002  p 554.7 441.7 20.5 610.9 173.3 226.9 66.1 38.7 11.3 − 56.2 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 927.7 992.2 − 64.5
2003  pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.3 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.3 467.7 474.3 − 6.6 925.4 999.3 − 73.9
2004  pe 544.0 442.8 23.5 609.1 173.5 236.9 64.7 34.4 9.3 − 65.1 470.3 468.8 + 1.5 925.4 989.1 − 63.6
2005  pe 567.9 452.1 30.8 621.2 172.4 244.9 64.0 33.3 14.1 − 53.2 468.8 471.6 − 2.9 947.1 1,003.2 − 56.1
2004          Q1 116.3 96.9 1.9 158.5 41.7 63.0 25.3 5.4 2.5 − 42.1 116.4 116.8 − 0.4 206.4 248.9 − 42.5
         Q2 132.9 112.9 3.2 141.5 41.5 59.4 10.0 6.8 2.1 − 8.6 115.8 116.4 − 0.6 226.0 235.2 − 9.2
         Q3 133.4 107.8 7.5 151.9 41.9 57.5 20.4 8.5 1.9 − 18.6 114.0 116.0 − 2.1 226.3 246.9 − 20.6
         Q4 159.7 125.6 10.6 157.3 46.7 56.1 8.7 12.6 2.6 + 2.4 121.6 118.7 + 2.9 263.6 258.3 + 5.3
2005          Q1 121.6 99.2 1.4 159.8 41.1 66.3 25.2 4.6 3.1 − 38.2 117.1 117.5 − 0.4 211.2 249.7 − 38.6
         Q2 138.9 112.5 7.7 144.8 41.2 62.8 10.1 6.4 2.4 − 6.0 117.3 118.2 − 0.9 233.5 240.4 − 6.9
         Q3 144.2 110.6 13.7 154.2 41.3 59.3 19.7 8.6 2.5 − 10.0 114.1 117.0 − 2.9 235.9 248.8 − 12.9
         Q4 p 162.4 129.5 7.8 161.9 47.1 55.4 8.8 12.5 6.0 + 0.5 118.1 118.3 − 0.2 264.3 264.0 + 0.3
2006          Q1 p 131.3 106.3 3.8 160.3 40.6 65.6 25.1 4.8 2.9 − 29.0 120.5 116.6 + 3.9 228.9 254.0 − 25.1
         Q2 p 144.3 121.8 4.1 139.9 40.7 59.9 9.5 6.4 2.5 + 4.5 122.2 117.1 + 5.0 245.1 235.6 + 9.5
         Q3 p 146.4 121.9 5.9 155.9 40.6 61.2 20.5 8.4 2.6 − 9.5 117.0 115.2 + 1.7 241.4 249.2 − 7.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- are estimated. — 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets but excluding the Post Office here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrep-
pension funds. Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations ancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local govern-
of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include muni- ment. — 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
cipal special purpose associations and various special accounts. — 2The of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Fed-
latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors eral Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Of fice. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2000  4 292.1 265.2 + 26.9 240.4 250.8 − 10.4 148.0 146.1 + 1.9
2001 240.6 261.3 − 20.7 230.9 255.5 − 24.6 144.2 148.3 − 4.1
2002 240.8 273.5 − 32.7 228.8 258.0 − 29.2 147.0 150.4 − 3.5
2003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 150.1 − 8.0
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 232.5 256.5 − 24.1 146.2 149.5 − 3.3
2005  pe 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 236.2 259.8 − 23.6 151.6 153.7 − 2.1
2004          Q1 44.8 73.4 − 28.6 53.0 64.1 − 11.0 31.2 35.3 − 4.1
         Q2 56.4 62.3 − 5.9 56.7 61.7 − 4.9 34.5 34.8 − 0.2
         Q3 58.3 71.2 − 12.9 56.8 61.6 − 4.8 36.1 36.7 − 0.6
         Q4 74.4 66.7 + 7.7 65.0 68.7 − 3.7 43.5 42.4 + 1.0
2005          Q1 46.0 74.9 − 28.9 56.0 64.7 − 8.7 31.3 34.9 − 3.6
         Q2 61.4 66.0 − 4.6 57.8 60.9 − 3.1 36.0 36.3 − 0.3
         Q3 68.8 73.2 − 4.4 55.9 62.1 − 6.3 37.9 37.9 + 0.0
         Q4 p 73.8 67.4 + 6.4 65.6 71.5 − 6.0 45.9 44.3 + 1.6
2006          Q1 p 52.7 74.1 − 21.4 57.3 64.9 − 7.6 33.8 36.4 − 2.6
         Q2 p 63.0 61.6 + 1.5 60.6 60.1 + 0.4 37.7 36.8 + 0.9
         Q3 p 64.7 73.8 − 9.1 60.5 62.5 − 2.1 40.3 38.1 + 2.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based
istical Office. — 1The Bundesbank’s profit is included only up to the max- on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly
imum amount of €3.5 billion that is to be assigned to the core budget. Rev- figures do not include various special accounts and municipal special pur-
enue over and above this amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund pose associations. — 4 Including proceeds from the sale of UMTS licences. 
for Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including the local authority level of the
55*IX. Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IX. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total  1 government  2 government European Union  3 government  4 tax shares  5 of energy tax
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 21,833 57,241 − 104 20,244
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 19,732 54,047 + 12 19,576
2002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 18,560 52,490 + 51 22,321
2003 442,238 390,437 214,002 155,510 20,925 51,673 + 127 22,067
2004 442,838 386,459 208,918 157,901 19,641 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,810 158,792 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 ... 421,150 225,799 173,209 22,142 ... ... 21,742
2005          Q1 99,997 85,690 42,002 35,980 7,708 10,924 + 3,382 5,418
         Q2 111,634 96,535 52,716 39,438 4,381 14,475 + 624 5,359
         Q3 111,103 96,077 52,065 38,840 5,172 14,903 + 122 5,453
         Q4 129,346 114,011 65,027 44,534 4,450 19,448 − 4,113 5,405
2006          Q1 106,907 90,827 45,234 38,702 6,892 12,391 + 3,689 5,491
         Q2 121,891 104,964 57,521 43,338 4,105 16,120 + 807 5,433
         Q3 121,711 104,015 55,601 42,798 5,616 17,594 + 103 5,448
         Q4 ... 121,344 67,444 48,371 5,529 ... ... 5,370
2005          Dec . 58,508 34,569 22,438 1,500 . . 1,802
2006          Dec . 60,919 35,253 23,813 1,852 . . 1,790
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- central government tax revenue. — 4Including local government taxes in
bank calculations. — 1Including receipts from the equalisation of burdens the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 5Difference between local
levies. — 2Before deducting supplementary central government grants and government’s share in the income taxes received by the state government
shares in energy tax revenue remitted to state government. — 3Custom cash offices in the period in question (for this total, see Table IX.6) and the
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from amounts passed on to local government during the same period. 
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,170
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,409
2004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,712 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,689 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2005          Q1 90,403 34,325 27,867 − 3,761 4,416 5,804 34,909 28,031 6,878 222 15,206 5,005 736 4,713
         Q2 102,224 40,747 29,030 3,359 2,715 5,643 33,009 25,180 7,829 1,454 20,556 5,673 786 5,689
         Q3 101,803 38,946 28,172 4,150 3,798 2,826 35,277 27,519 7,758 1,575 20,235 4,868 901 5,726
         Q4 120,926 47,942 33,850 6,017 5,405 2,670 36,517 27,709 8,808 2,967 27,511 5,034 955 6,915
2006          Q1 95,851 36,593 28,095 − 2,104 5,184 5,418 35,873 27,508 8,364 313 15,897 6,258 916 5,024
         Q2 111,206 47,844 29,772 5,856 5,173 7,042 35,236 26,345 8,891 1,611 20,438 5,130 948 6,242
         Q3 110,282 44,951 29,229 6,266 6,079 3,376 37,051 28,063 8,988 1,686 20,448 5,158 989 6,267
         Q4 128,800 53,227 35,516 7,549 6,461 3,701 38,529 29,402 9,127 3,403 27,432 5,183 1,026 7,456
2005          Dec 62,461 31,777 16,687 7,485 6,296 1,308 12,262 9,141 3,122 1,451 14,830 1,804 336 3,953
2006          Dec 65,129 33,622 17,336 8,422 6,256 1,607 13,284 10,175 3,109 1,660 14,497 1,738 327 4,210
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, income. — 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens levies, local ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in sectio n1
business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central,
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance state and local government in revenue for 2006: 51.4:46.5:2.1 (central
of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective percentage share of central, government plus €2.3 billion, state government minus this amount). The EU
state and local government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax share is deducted from central government’s share. — 6Respective percent-
42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, age share of central and state government for 2006: 22.9:77.1. — 7For the
withholding tax on interest income 44:44:12. — 3After deducting child bene- breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
fit. — 4Non-assessed taxes on earnings and withholding tax on interest
56*IX. Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IX. Public finances in Germany
  
7. Central, state and local government: specific taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax city tax tax Other tax buildings tax Other  2 Total tax taxes
2000 37,826 11,443 11,841 7,243 3,356 2,151 1,643 7,015 5,081 2,982 3,367 36,659 27,025 8,849
2001 40,690 12,072 11,069 7,427 4,322 2,143 1,554 8,376 4,853 3,069 3,330 34,399 24,534 9,076
2002 42,192 13,778 10,403 8,327 5,097 2,149 1,548 7,592 4,763 3,021 3,200 33,447 23,489 9,261
2003 43,188 14,094 10,280 8,870 6,531 2,204 1,442 7,336 4,800 3,373 3,205 34,477 24,139 9,658
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,673 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 ... ... ...
2005          Q1 4,407 2,499 2,541 3,854 1,200 335 370 2,149 1,197 905 754 9,816 7,367 2,275
         Q2 9,916 3,610 2,508 1,627 2,010 562 324 2,342 1,070 1,413 848 10,864 7,968 2,758
         Q3 9,776 3,951 2,387 1,709 1,589 512 311 2,107 1,184 849 727 10,875 7,745 2,984
         Q4 16,003 4,213 2,879 1,561 1,664 733 460 2,075 1,340 929 689 11,387 9,049 2,230
2006          Q1 4,480 2,786 2,628 3,792 1,492 399 320 2,718 1,681 1,049 811 11,370 8,874 2,321
         Q2 9,727 3,604 2,879 1,662 1,720 505 341 2,258 1,350 881 641 12,296 9,365 2,801
         Q3 10,045 3,700 2,665 1,705 1,468 536 329 2,020 1,501 904 733 13,115 9,948 3,026
         Q4 15,665 4,296 3,105 1,615 1,593 720 438 1,942 1,593 928 719 ... ... ...
2005          Dec 9,259 1,800 1,812 629 701 390 239 767 484 332 221 . . .
2006          Dec 8,621 2,098 1,893 678 564 435 208 662 545 315 216 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- betting, lottery and beer tax.   
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2Notably
 
 
8. German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total payments  3 insurance  4 surplus Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
2000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,889
2001  8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004  9 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006  p 240,657 168,065 71,379 233,272 200,689 13,044 + 7,385 10,049 9,785 115 45 103 4,960
2005          Q1 55,160 36,897 17,996 58,001 50,031 3,390 − 2,841 2,607 2,432 16 41 118 4,828
         Q2 56,913 38,647 17,911 58,286 49,929 3,413 − 1,373 1,195 1,020 16 42 118 4,874
         Q3 57,546 38,492 18,807 58,455 50,150 3,337 − 909 362 187 16 43 117 4,885
         Q4 59,408 42,224 16,834 58,412 50,050 3,300 + 996 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006          Q1 60,801 42,622 17,908 57,965 50,110 3,247 + 2,836 4,452 4,293 16 43 101 4,924
         Q2 60,537 42,351 17,877 58,328 50,143 3,257 + 2,209 7,406 7,241 16 45 105 4,956
         Q3 57,950 39,741 17,839 58,521 50,297 3,266 − 571 6,845 6,681 16 45 104 4,959
         Q4  p 61,369 43,351 17,755 58,459 50,140 3,274 + 2,910 10,049 9,785 115 45 103 4,960
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension institutions under section 50 of the fifth book of the Social Security Code
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for have been deducted from pension payments. — 4Including long-term care
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do not insurance for pensioners until 2004 Q1. — 5Largely corresponds to the
tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. In- sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. — 6Including cash. — 7Ex-
cluding financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending cluding loans to other social security funds. — 8Excluding income booked
and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government in connection with the revaluation of equity interests. — 9Revenue includes
cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX. Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IX. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loans
from
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 1,330 − 868 867
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 1,660 − 1,931 1,931
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 2,215 − 5,623 5,623
2003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,215
2004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2004          Q1 11,524 11,261 47 14,448 8,200 6,001 2,199 4,389 2,491 1,898 480 − 2,924 5,244
         Q2 12,042 11,419 394 13,949 7,782 5,673 2,109 4,268 2,510 1,758 465 − 1,907 1,946
         Q3 12,516 11,709 481 12,818 7,044 5,189 1,855 3,919 2,309 1,610 346 − 303 166
         Q4 14,233 12,821 753 13,275 6,721 4,958 1,762 4,267 2,522 1,745 350 + 958 − 3,181
2005          Q1 11,934 11,072 40 14,775 7,983 5,805 2,178 3,332 2,083 1,249 410 − 2,842 5,532
         Q2 13,283 11,449 324 13,697 7,394 5,376 2,018 3,062 1,956 1,105 440 − 414 223
         Q3 12,924 11,618 420 12,662 6,357 4,720 1,637 2,576 1,670 906 372 + 262 − 458
         Q4 14,551 12,850 652 11,954 5,920 4,431 1,489 2,620 1,712 908 228 + 2,597 − 4,900
2006          Q1 14,041 13,057 42 12,320 7,155 5,260 1,894 2,306 1,526 780 388 + 1,721 538
         Q2 13,827 12,848 275 11,742 6,362 4,691 1,670 2,266 1,505 761 300 + 2,084 − 538
         Q3 12,860 11,950 302 10,142 5,117 3,879 1,239 2,232 1,486 746 183 + 2,718 0
         Q4 14,656 13,321 504 9,958 4,616 3,518 1,098 2,455 1,669 787 218 + 4,698 0
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government health, pension and long-term care insurance schemes. 6Vocational
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a compen- measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agencies, compensation
satory amount to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit and top-up payments and business start-up grants. — 7Promotion of winter con-
short-time working benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory struction and insolvency compensation for employees. 
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Medical Thera- Other Adminis-
and peutical expend- trative
Contri- Federal Hospital dental Pharma- treatment Sickness iture on expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 grant Total treatment treatment  3 ceuticals and aids benefits benefits iture  4 surplus  5 
2000 133,808 130,053 . 133,823 44,540 32,734 20,121 9,431 7,058 2,524 7,296 − 15
2001 135,790 131,886 . 138,811 44,980 33,495 22,331 9,760 7,717 2,779 7,642 − 3,021
2002 139,707 136,208 . 143,026 46,308 34,899 23,449 9,304 7,561 2,998 8,019 − 3,320
2003 141,654 138,383 . 145,095 46,800 36,120 24,218 9,409 6,973 2,984 8,206 − 3,441
2004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,178 47,594 34,218 21,811 8,281 6,367 3,731 8,114 + 4,102
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 143,809 48,959 33,024 25,358 8,284 5,868 3,847 8,155 + 1,933
2004          Q1 34,835 34,107 − 33,676 11,687 8,752 4,891 1,853 1,689 342 1,796 + 1,159
         Q2 35,893 34,754 500 34,647 11,922 8,629 5,291 2,050 1,603 443 1,878 + 1,246
         Q3 35,212 34,432 − 34,949 12,101 8,290 5,539 2,082 1,527 408 1,893 + 262
         Q4 38,025 36,702 500 36,666 11,925 8,634 6,114 2,222 1,538 691 2,451 + 1,359
2005          Q1 34,630 33,989 − 34,452 12,171 8,280 5,795 1,827 1,539 347 1,765 + 178
         Q2 36,832 34,869 1,250 35,978 12,276 8,183 6,418 2,093 1,522 477 1,989 + 854
         Q3 35,380 34,674 − 35,530 12,102 8,133 6,425 2,087 1,400 391 1,904 − 150
         Q4 38,694 36,719 1,250 37,649 12,457 8,502 6,752 2,263 1,398 591 2,391 + 1,045
2006          Q1 34,744 34,034 − 35,968 12,834 8,483 6,384 1,881 1,477 283 1,836 − 1,224
         Q2 38,004 35,279 2,100 36,830 12,658 8,588 6,450 2,071 1,439 574 1,910 + 1,174
         Q3 36,001 35,156 − 36,226 12,551 8,254 6,301 2,048 1,363 515 1,931 − 225
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The annual figures do not tally with penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. —
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — 2In- 5Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen-
cluding contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. — sation scheme. 
3Including dentures. — 4Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-
58*IX. Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
IX. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2000 16,523 16,280 16,718 2,252 7,472 4,201 1,068 800 − 195
2001 16,843 16,581 16,890 2,301 7,739 4,134 980 816 − 47
2002 16,917 16,714 17,346 2,363 8,009 4,151 963 837 − 428
2003 16,844 16,665 17,468 2,361 8,178 4,090 952 853 − 624
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,345 4,049 940 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,511 4,050 890 875 − 366
2004          Q1 4,156 4,058 4,439 588 2,068 1,005 229 229 − 283
         Q2 4,132 4,091 4,374 577 2,071 1,021 240 216 − 242
         Q3 4,166 4,122 4,433 596 2,092 1,032 231 205 − 267
         Q4 4,415 4,368 4,445 606 2,114 1,026 227 199 − 31
2005          Q1 4,159 4,130 4,418 586 2,102 996 226 245 − 259
         Q2 4,315 4,288 4,439 596 2,118 1,011 220 215 − 123
         Q3 4,389 4,358 4,492 606 2,139 1,008 221 213 − 103
         Q4 4,629 4,600 4,509 607 2,153 1,037 227 198 + 121
2006          Q1 4,660 4,631 4,511 611 2,151 998 213 246 + 150
         Q2 4,655 4,629 4,447 582 2,157 994 214 222 + 208
         Q3 4,471 4,441 4,551 617 2,170 1,014 213 222 − 80
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The annual figures do not tally with 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — 2Since subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in 13. Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  1 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2000 + 122,725 + 1,755 − 5,563 − 940 2000 1,211,455 4,440 565,638 211 200,883 440,283
2001 + 135,018 − 14,719 + 3,595 − 1,495 2001 1,223,966 4,440 534,262 174 230,890 454,200
2002 + 178,203 + 24,327 + 2,221 + 22 2002 1,277,667 4,440 537,000 137 238,390 497,700
2003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 1,236 + 7,218 2003 1,358,137 4,440 530,800 341 298,356 524,200
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,200 430 296,412 585,100
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,600 488 298,801 666,700
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308
2004          Q1 + 79,880 + 34,302 + 12,976 + 4,916 2004          Q1 1,402,892 4,440 554,200 371 293,981 549,900
         Q2 + 39,100 + 1,741 − 5,695 − 2,343          Q2 1,411,551 4,440 558,000 371 299,540 549,200
         Q3 + 63,817 + 10,273 − 2,635 − 1,747          Q3 1,429,017 4,440 560,900 413 291,464 571,800
         Q4 + 44,644 − 1,906 − 2,802 − 25          Q4 1,430,582 4,440 544,200 430 296,412 585,100
2005          Q1 + 65,235 + 19,631 + 11,093 − 4,966 2005          Q1 1,457,430 4,440 552,700 474 290,516 609,300
         Q2 + 54,315 + 3,646 − 2,371 + 1,492          Q2 1,465,639 4,440 530,900 501 291,698 638,100
         Q3 + 59,325 + 11,140 + 788 + 7,444          Q3 1,480,384 4,440 535,600 501 290,343 649,500
         Q4 + 46,048 + 1,062 − 4,999 + 2,071          Q4 1,489,029 4,440 518,600 488 298,801 666,700
2006          Q1 + 75,788 + 12,526 + 8,174 − 7,296 2006          Q1 1,508,932 4,440 522,400 486 294,606 687,000
         Q2 + 56,445 + 14,238 + 8,228 + 14,649          Q2 1,525,012 4,440 528,400 485 306,387 685,300
         Q3 + 66,689 + 16,579 + 4,181 + 8,913          Q3 1,540,523 4,440 519,300 485 317,198 699,100
         Q4 + 22,952 − 10,686 − 17,326 − 9,958
Source: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 After deducting repurchases. Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
as a residual. 
59*IX. Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
IX. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security reunifica- isation
or quarter Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5,6 claims  6 Other  7 
Central, state and local government
2000 1,211,455 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 301 44,146 108
2001 1,223,966 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 123 8,986 108
2002 1,277,667 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 66 7,845 97
2003 1,358,137 36,022 246,414 153,611 12,810 471,115 396,832 341 34,163 33 6,711 86
2004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 379,984 430 53,672 2 5,572 82
2005          Q3 1,480,384 37,183 299,830 163,335 11,061 525,365 380,021 501 58,558 2 4,443 87
         Q4 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 367,056 488 62,687 2 4,443 86
2006          Q1 1,508,932 36,882 320,546 167,403 10,883 530,724 372,680 486 64,799 2 4,443 85
         Q2 1,525,012 37,450 323,930 177,720 10,399 529,499 374,338 485 66,664 2 4,443 83
         Q3 1,540,523 37,895 320,241 171,892 10,253 549,652 377,575 485 68,002 2 4,443 83
Central government 8,9
2000 715,835 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 301 44,146 107
2001 701,115 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 123 8,986 107
2002 725,443 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 66 7,845 97
2003 767,713 35,235 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 38,146 223 7,326 33 6,711 85
2004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 2 5,572 81
2005          Q3 885,192 35,989 106,836 163,284 11,061 514,173 38,303 408 10,608 2 4,443 86
         Q4 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 29,318 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
2006          Q1 898,780 36,130 111,773 167,352 10,883 519,889 36,917 408 10,899 2 4,443 84
         Q2 913,018 36,927 108,975 177,669 10,399 518,757 44,284 408 11,073 2 4,443 83
         Q3 929,597 37,772 106,419 171,841 10,253 539,023 48,236 408 11,119 2 4,443 83
         Q4 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 30,030 408 11,036 2 4,443 80
State government
2000 338,143 100 64,794 . . . 267,253 22 5,974 . . 1
2001 364,559 1,900 87,856 . . . 265,652 5 9,145 . . 1
2002 392,172 588 121,394 . . . 255,072 5 15,113 . . 1
2003 423,737 787 154,189 . . . 244,902 4 23,854 . . 1
2004 448,672 1,282 179,620 . . . 228,644 3 39,122 . . 1
2005          Q3 464,083 1,194 192,994 . . . 225,590 3 44,301 . . 1
         Q4 471,375 847 201,146 . . . 221,241 3 48,139 . . 1
2006          Q1 477,718 752 208,773 . . . 218,132 3 50,057 . . 1
         Q2 478,661 523 214,954 . . . 211,432 2 51,748 . . 1
         Q3 478,603 123 213,823 . . . 211,564 2 53,091 . . 1
Local government 10
2000 98,462 . 205 . . 1,015 95,153 147 1,941 . . .
2001 99,209 . 153 . . 913 96,051 136 1,955 . . .
2002 100,842 . 153 . . 913 97,624 124 2,027 . . .
2003 107,857 . 77 . . 734 104,469 106 2,471 . . .
2004 112,538 . − . . 812 108,231 86 3,410 . . .
2005          Q3 114,943 . − . . 722 110,722 90 3,410 . . .
         Q4 116,033 . − . . 466 111,889 77 3,601 . . .
2006          Q1 117,424 . − . . 466 113,278 75 3,605 . . .
         Q2 118,323 . − . . 374 114,269 75 3,605 . . .
         Q3 117,462 . − . . 260 113,522 75 3,605 . . .
Special funds 8,9,11
2000 59,015 − 275 2,634 . 37,382 18,201 13 510 . . .
2001 59,084 − 3,748 10,134 . 31,040 13,626 8 529 . . .
2002 59,210 − 3,820 10,185 . 32,828 11,832 8 537 . . .
2003 58,830 − 4,610 10,185 . 34,201 9,315 8 512 . . .
2004 57,250 − 4,538 9,685 . 34,355 8,274 8 389 . . .
2005          Q3 16,165 . − 51 . 10,470 5,406 − 238 . . .
         Q4 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 4,609 − 238 . . .
2006          Q1 15,011 . − 51 . 10,369 4,353 − 238 . . .
         Q2 15,011 . − 51 . 10,369 4,353 − 238 . . .
         Q3 14,860 . − 51 . 10,368 4,253 − 188 . . .
         Q4 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 3,950 − 188 . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 7Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- 8In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central govern-
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- ment and its special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans ratios. — 9On 1 January 2005 central government assumed joint responsi-
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- bility for the debts of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the afore -
vestment assistance levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing con- mentioned special fund is recorded under central government. — 10In-
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former cluding debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the year-end figures have been estimated. — 11ERP Special Fund, German
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
their home country. — 6Excluding offsets against outstanding claims. —
60*IX. Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
X Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
  2005   2006
  2003   2004   2005   2003   2004   2005   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 100.3 103.7 106.8 0.6 3.4 2.9 0.0 4.6 3.2 3.9 8.3 2.2 4.9
Construction 86.9 83.0 80.1 − 4.4 − 4.5 − 3.4 − 11.2 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 2.2 1.6 4.2
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel and
restaurant services, transport
and storage  1 101.6 105.1 106.5 − 1.0 3.5 1.3 − 0.2 2.6 1.9 0.8 4.0 1.9 3.2
Financing, renting and business
services  2 105.6 106.1 107.3 0.7 0.5 1.1 1.4 1.5 0.8 0.8 1.3 1.4 2.0
Public and private services  3 102.4 102.5 102.5 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.2 0.2
Gross value added 101.7 103.4 104.5 − 0.1 1.6 1.1 − 0.1 1.9 1.3 1.2 3.3 1.3 2.6
Gross domestic product  4 101.1 102.3 103.2 − 0.2 1.2 0.9 − 0.6 1.7 1.4 1.1 3.2 1.3 2.3
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 101.0 101.1 101.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 0.6 0.8 1.0 − 0.9 1.4 − 0.0 0.6
Government consumption 102.5 101.2 101.8 0.4 − 1.3 0.6 − 0.7 1.2 0.9 1.1 2.2 0.0 0.9
Machinery and equipment 89.0 92.8 98.5 − 0.1 4.2 6.1 5.4 9.6 4.1 5.4 10.8 6.1 6.8
Premises 88.4 85.0 82.0 − 1.6 − 3.8 − 3.6 − 10.8 − 1.7 − 1.3 − 1.6 2.0 1.6 3.3
Other investment  6 110.2 111.6 116.8 2.5 1.2 4.7 0.9 5.9 6.4 5.5 5.8 4.8 4.3
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . 0.7 0.3 0.2 − 0.1 0.8 − 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.2 0.3
Domestic use 98.1 98.1 98.6 0.6 0.0 0.5 − 1.2 2.1 0.5 0.5 2.9 0.8 1.7
Net exports  8 . . . − 0.8 1.2 0.4 0.6 − 0.2 0.9 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.6
Exports 113.7 124.6 133.2 2.4 9.6 6.9 4.5 5.5 9.4 8.0 14.9 9.3 10.7
Imports 105.1 112.4 119.8 5.4 6.9 6.5 3.5 7.4 7.7 7.3 16.2 9.2 10.2
Gross domestic product  4 101.1 102.3 103.2 − 0.2 1.2 0.9 − 0.6 1.7 1.4 1.1 3.2 1.3 2.3
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,281.8 1,302.9 1,321.1 1.4 1.7 1.4 0.6 1.8 2.3 0.8 3.2 1.5 1.7
Government consumption 417.2 415.1 419.6 1.3 − 0.5 1.1 0.0 1.8 1.5 1.1 3.6 0.9 0.8
Machinery and equipment 147.3 151.9 159.4 − 3.0 3.1 5.0 4.5 8.2 3.2 4.1 9.7 5.4 6.1
Premises 213.1 207.9 202.3 − 1.6 − 2.5 − 2.7 − 9.0 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.0 2.9 3.3 6.4
Other investment  6 24.3 24.7 25.2 − 0.9 1.5 2.1 0.7 2.3 2.4 2.9 2.2 2.6 2.5
Changes in inventories  7 − 7.7 − 6.1 − 2.6 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,076.0 2,096.3 2,125.0 1.5 1.0 1.4 − 0.2 2.8 1.4 1.4 4.3 2.3 2.7
Net exports 85.5 110.9 116.0 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 770.7 844.1 912.3 0.7 9.5 8.1 5.9 6.6 10.3 9.4 15.7 10.5 12.5
Imports 685.2 733.2 796.3 2.6 7.0 8.6 5.4 9.1 9.8 9.8 20.8 13.9 13.4
Gross domestic product  4 2,161.5 2,207.2 2,241.0 0.9 2.1 1.5 0.3 2.2 1.9 1.7 3.4 1.6 2.8
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 104.6 106.2 107.6 1.6 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.0 1.3 1.7 1.7 1.5 1.1
Gross domestic product 103.7 104.6 105.2 1.0 0.9 0.6 0.9 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.5
Terms of trade 102.9 102.8 101.9 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 3.2 − 3.0 − 1.3
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,131.7 1,136.8 1,129.3 0.3 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.7 0.2 1.1 1.5
Entrepreneurial and property
income 465.3 513.8 545.9 3.9 10.4 6.2 3.7 7.7 6.5 7.1 10.9 1.8 6.3
National income 1,597.0 1,650.6 1,675.1 1.3 3.4 1.5 0.8 2.1 1.6 1.5 3.8 1.3 3.2
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,145.8 2,209.4 2,248.2 1.4 3.0 1.8 1.0 2.4 2.1 1.6 3.4 1.7 2.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2006. — on products). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. —
1Including communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real es- 6Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and enter-
tate activities, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home ser- tainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including
vices. — 4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies net increase in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
 X Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-
Period total tion  2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
2002 98.3 88.6 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.4
2003 98.4 84.9 99.8 99.5 99.5 101.9 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.6
2004 100.8 80.7 102.7 102.5 103.3 105.7 87.4 98.0 104.6 103.7 101.2 111.9
2005 103.7 76.1 102.8 106.3 106.5 111.0 87.8 101.0 110.0 104.6 106.1 116.8
2006  + p 109.5 81.2 102.8 112.8 114.9 118.3 93.9 101.7 114.0 111.6 114.6 120.2
 
2005          Apr 102.6 80.4 101.3 104.8 106.1 109.3 87.1 97.4 108.6 106.1 101.2 122.5
         May 100.6 83.2 97.8 102.5 105.2 104.6 79.6 97.8 108.6 102.8 99.0 112.1
         June 106.3 88.5 92.5 109.5 109.3 117.3 90.5 99.2 108.0 107.7 115.5 122.3
         July 106.8 93.0 96.5 109.1 110.2 114.0 83.9 102.8 112.7 108.3 107.8 122.3
         Aug 95.6 84.2 92.4 97.1 101.5 94.8 70.0 98.7 108.2 96.1 92.0 90.4
         Sep 110.8 92.3 93.6 114.3 113.4 121.4 97.8 106.3 111.4 109.6 114.5 129.7
         Oct 113.0 93.2 104.0 115.9 115.6 119.6 100.4 112.7 118.0 112.8 108.1 131.5
         Nov 112.2 85.8 107.8 115.1 113.6 122.1 99.2 108.3 110.7 111.0 113.3 130.0
         Dec 100.4 61.4 115.5 102.3 94.4 115.5 81.6 97.9 100.9 84.5 128.5 95.7
2006          Jan 98.0 41.6 119.5 100.9 104.5 101.0 86.0 96.4 113.5 104.4 92.5 107.3
         Feb 100.3 45.6 109.1 104.3 105.2 109.3 89.5 95.8 109.6 106.7 99.5 121.6
         Mar 111.6 63.6 112.5 115.9 116.3 124.0 98.4 103.1 118.4 116.7 117.2 131.5
         Apr 108.0 86.4 101.9 110.7 113.7 114.2 92.6 101.7 114.0 111.0 108.7 121.0
         May 107.6 88.6 95.7 110.7 114.1 114.6 89.3 r 100.5 111.9 112.2 110.1 122.4
         June 112.5 94.0 94.2 116.1 119.1 122.9 92.9 101.4 114.8 117.2 119.4 126.4
         July  r 112.9 99.5 97.2 115.8 119.3 121.3 90.2 103.5 119.2 112.0 115.0 127.9
         Aug  r 103.1 90.4 92.7 105.5 112.7 103.3 78.9 100.5 112.7 104.5 105.3 92.2
         Sep  r 117.4 99.6 93.5 121.7 123.4 129.4 106.6 106.5 113.6 118.8 125.7 132.6
         Oct  + 117.1 97.5 100.5 120.7 124.6 124.9 105.0 107.6 119.4 120.8 119.9 126.6
         Nov  + 119.3 95.8 106.2 122.9 123.4 132.4 107.5 106.8 117.2 120.3 127.5 131.7
         Dec  + p 105.6 71.3 110.7 108.3 102.4 122.7 89.3 97.0 103.5 94.5 134.3 101.0
Annual percentage change  
  
2002 − 1.2 − 4.4 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.3
2003 + 0.1 − 4.2 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 5.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 + 2.1
2004 + 2.4 − 4.9 + 2.9 + 3.0 + 3.8 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 3.5 + 4.0
2005 + 2.9 − 5.7 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 5.0 + 0.5 + 3.1 + 5.2 + 0.9 + 4.8 + 4.4
2006  + p + 5.6 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 7.9 + 6.6 + 6.9 + 0.7 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 8.0 + 2.9
 
2005          Apr + 2.0 − 6.5 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 1.6 + 5.3 − 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 + 2.7 + 7.2
         May + 0.8 − 4.4 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 − 7.7 + 3.3 + 6.0 − 2.5 + 0.5 − 2.7
         June + 2.6 − 4.3 + 1.5 + 3.4 + 2.0 + 5.6 + 4.0 + 2.0 + 4.3 − 3.1 + 8.6 + 1.3
         July + 3.4 − 2.7 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 2.9 + 5.4 − 3.6 + 3.7 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 9.1
         Aug + 1.9 − 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 3.0 + 4.3 + 2.2 + 2.8 − 0.2
         Sep + 3.7 − 2.8 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 4.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 4.8 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 7.5
         Oct + 4.4 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 5.5 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 3.9 + 6.9 + 9.3 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 3.6
         Nov + 5.1 − 1.3 − 2.1 + 6.3 + 5.5 + 8.8 + 5.1 + 3.2 + 2.8 + 5.5 + 8.7 + 8.0
         Dec + 4.7 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 5.5 + 7.0 + 3.6 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 2.9
2006          Jan + 3.7 − 13.2 + 6.1 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 5.9 + 5.1 + 1.9 + 3.3 − 0.6 + 7.2 + 0.5
         Feb + 5.9 + 5.3 + 1.2 + 6.3 + 6.0 + 8.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 4.8 + 6.9 + 8.4
         Mar + 4.7 + 5.6 + 0.2 + 5.1 + 7.0 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 6.9 + 2.9 + 4.0
         Apr + 5.3 + 7.5 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 7.2 + 4.5 + 6.3 + 4.4 + 5.0 + 4.6 + 7.4 − 1.2
         May + 7.0 + 6.5 − 2.1 + 8.0 + 8.5 + 9.6 + 12.2 r + 2.8 + 3.0 + 9.1 + 11.2 + 9.2
         June + 5.8 + 6.2 + 1.8 + 6.0 + 9.0 + 4.8 + 2.7 + 2.2 + 6.3 + 8.8 + 3.4 + 3.4
         July  r + 5.7 + 7.0 + 0.7 + 6.1 + 8.3 + 6.4 + 7.5 + 0.7 + 5.8 + 3.4 + 6.7 + 4.6
         Aug  r + 7.8 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 8.7 + 11.0 + 9.0 + 12.7 + 1.8 + 4.2 + 8.7 + 14.5 + 2.0
         Sep  r + 6.0 + 7.9 − 0.1 + 6.5 + 8.8 + 6.6 + 9.0 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 8.4 + 9.8 + 2.2
         Oct  + + 3.6 + 4.6 − 3.4 + 4.1 + 7.8 + 4.4 + 4.6 − 4.5 + 1.2 + 7.1 + 10.9 − 3.7
         Nov  + + 6.3 + 11.7 − 1.5 + 6.8 + 8.6 + 8.4 + 8.4 − 1.4 + 5.9 + 8.4 + 12.5 + 1.3
         Dec  + p + 5.2 + 16.1 − 4.2 + 5.9 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 9.4 − 0.9 + 2.6 + 11.8 + 4.5 + 5.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — oUsing the facture of refined petroleum products. — 4Including mining and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities related to print-
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Build- ing. — +Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey for the
3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in particular, mining of fourth quarter 2006. 
coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas and manu-
62* X Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
 X Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 Durable goods Non-durable goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
total  
  
2002 98.2 − 0.1 96.4 + 0.5 99.5 + 0.1 99.0 − 2.4 95.7 − 4.1 101.0 − 1.4
2003 99.0 + 0.8 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.2 95.6 − 3.4 90.4 − 5.5 98.8 − 2.2
2004 105.1 + 6.2 105.0 + 7.4 107.6 + 6.9 95.1 − 0.5 89.3 − 1.2 98.7 − 0.1
2005 111.8 + 6.4 110.0 + 4.8 116.2 + 8.0 99.8 + 4.9 91.4 + 2.4 104.9 + 6.3
2006  p 123.6 + 10.6 124.6 + 13.3 127.5 + 9.7 104.6 + 4.8 97.0 + 6.1 109.4 + 4.3
 
2005          Dec 113.8 + 5.5 103.3 + 9.0 127.8 + 3.2 91.1 + 5.7 82.9 + 6.7 96.1 + 5.1
2006          Jan 116.6 + 9.0 115.5 + 5.7 121.3 + 12.6 100.5 + 3.4 91.8 + 4.0 105.8 + 3.1
         Feb 118.2 + 12.3 116.4 + 11.3 122.7 + 15.2 105.9 + 3.0 92.4 + 5.2 114.3 + 2.1
         Mar 127.2 + 8.4 125.9 + 10.3 131.7 + 7.9 112.7 + 4.1 103.1 + 6.1 118.7 + 2.9
         Apr 121.1 + 15.0 123.3 + 16.8 124.4 + 15.7 100.7 + 5.9 95.6 + 5.6 103.9 + 6.1
         May 119.1 + 12.7 123.2 + 15.6 121.1 + 11.4 98.1 + 8.0 93.9 + 10.1 100.7 + 6.9
         June 124.3 + 9.6 128.9 + 16.1 127.3 + 6.3 97.1 + 2.0 93.7 + 2.1 99.2 + 2.0
         July 125.5 + 9.7 128.3 + 13.0 128.6 + 8.8 104.0 + 2.8 91.3 + 3.0 111.9 + 2.7
         Aug 118.8 + 16.5 119.2 + 16.4 122.1 + 19.2 104.2 + 5.6 87.5 + 10.5 114.5 + 3.5
         Sep 129.8 + 10.5 130.7 + 14.3 133.5 + 8.4 111.7 + 6.1 106.1 + 7.1 115.2 + 5.5
         Oct 129.5 + 9.1 134.2 + 14.5 129.9 + 5.7 112.9 + 5.9 111.1 + 8.1 114.0 + 4.7
         Nov 130.7 + 8.0 134.4 + 14.1 132.2 + 3.8 113.3 + 8.1 109.9 + 6.2 115.4 + 9.3
         Dec  p 122.5 + 7.6 115.5 + 11.8 135.1 + 5.7 94.4 + 3.6 87.4 + 5.4 98.8 + 2.8
from the domestic market  
  
2002 94.6 − 3.1 94.6 − 1.9 94.7 − 3.4 94.6 − 5.3 92.0 − 7.5 96.3 − 3.9
2003 94.6 + 0.0 95.0 + 0.4 96.0 + 1.4 89.9 − 5.0 86.3 − 6.2 92.1 − 4.4
2004 98.3 + 3.9 100.4 + 5.7 100.1 + 4.3 87.2 − 3.0 83.0 − 3.8 89.8 − 2.5
2005 101.4 + 3.2 103.6 + 3.2 102.8 + 2.7 91.1 + 4.5 85.2 + 2.7 94.6 + 5.3
2006  p 110.7 + 9.2 116.4 + 12.4 111.1 + 8.1 93.6 + 2.7 90.1 + 5.8 95.8 + 1.3
 
2005          Dec 97.6 − 0.7 95.2 + 7.1 105.5 − 7.9 82.3 + 4.2 75.1 + 4.0 86.8 + 4.3
2006          Jan 102.3 + 5.1 106.9 + 3.9 102.2 + 7.7 89.2 + 1.0 86.3 + 4.0 91.0 − 0.5
         Feb 103.6 + 7.9 107.1 + 9.4 103.0 + 8.1 95.3 + 2.9 86.6 + 4.8 100.6 + 1.8
         Mar 112.8 + 5.6 115.6 + 8.4 114.3 + 4.4 100.4 + 0.6 95.3 + 3.7 103.6 − 1.1
         Apr 107.2 + 9.6 114.5 + 14.6 106.1 + 6.5 89.8 + 3.2 86.1 + 2.9 92.1 + 3.5
         May 107.3 + 11.5 115.3 + 15.1 106.3 + 9.7 87.6 + 5.8 86.0 + 9.4 88.6 + 3.7
         June 110.5 + 6.5 119.3 + 14.6 110.4 + 0.6 85.7 − 0.8 85.2 + 0.7 86.0 − 1.7
         July 112.6 + 8.7 121.0 + 12.6 112.0 + 7.9 90.4 − 1.4 83.4 − 0.1 94.7 − 2.1
         Aug 108.5 + 12.6 115.1 + 16.3 107.7 + 12.3 92.3 + 2.4 81.1 + 8.6 99.2 − 0.3
         Sep 119.3 + 13.1 122.1 + 14.2 123.1 + 14.6 100.7 + 4.5 99.4 + 7.7 101.5 + 2.6
         Oct 118.5 + 10.4 125.9 + 13.4 116.7 + 9.4 102.4 + 3.9 104.0 + 8.6 101.4 + 1.1
         Nov 119.1 + 10.0 126.9 + 13.4 117.2 + 7.8 102.5 + 6.0 105.0 + 8.4 100.9 + 4.5
         Dec  p 106.9 + 9.5 107.2 + 12.6 113.7 + 7.8 86.8 + 5.5 82.7 + 10.1 89.4 + 3.0
from abroad  
  
2002 102.7 + 3.6 99.1 + 4.2 104.1 + 3.5 108.6 + 3.6 103.9 + 3.5 111.4 + 3.7
2003 104.4 + 1.7 102.3 + 3.2 105.1 + 1.0 108.2 − 0.4 99.3 − 4.4 113.8 + 2.2
2004 113.6 + 8.8 112.2 + 9.7 114.5 + 8.9 112.5 + 4.0 103.1 + 3.8 118.4 + 4.0
2005 124.8 + 9.9 120.0 + 7.0 128.5 + 12.2 119.0 + 5.8 105.0 + 1.8 127.7 + 7.9
2006  p 139.7 + 11.9 137.5 + 14.6 142.7 + 11.1 129.1 + 8.5 112.1 + 6.8 139.6 + 9.3
 
2005          Dec 134.0 + 11.7 115.9 + 11.5 148.3 + 12.2 110.5 + 8.3 100.1 + 11.6 116.8 + 6.6
2006          Jan 134.5 + 12.8 129.0 + 8.1 139.0 + 16.3 125.4 + 7.2 104.0 + 4.0 138.7 + 8.9
         Feb 136.5 + 16.7 130.9 + 13.7 140.9 + 20.5 129.5 + 3.4 105.2 + 5.9 144.7 + 2.3
         Mar 145.1 + 11.2 142.0 + 12.9 147.8 + 10.5 140.0 + 10.1 120.3 + 10.7 152.2 + 9.7
         Apr 138.4 + 20.8 137.0 + 19.5 141.2 + 23.0 124.9 + 10.5 116.5 + 10.6 130.1 + 10.5
         May 133.9 + 14.0 135.5 + 16.3 134.8 + 12.8 121.3 + 11.9 111.3 + 11.4 127.7 + 12.3
         June 141.5 + 12.9 144.0 + 18.1 142.8 + 10.7 122.3 + 6.6 112.4 + 4.4 128.5 + 8.0
         July 141.7 + 10.9 139.6 + 13.6 144.0 + 9.5 134.2 + 9.8 108.6 + 8.9 150.2 + 10.3
         Aug 131.7 + 20.9 125.7 + 16.8 135.4 + 25.0 130.4 + 10.9 101.4 + 13.7 148.6 + 9.8
         Sep 142.9 + 7.8 144.2 + 14.5 143.1 + 4.0 136.1 + 8.8 120.9 + 6.1 145.6 + 10.3
         Oct 143.3 + 7.7 147.2 + 15.9 142.1 + 3.1 136.1 + 9.6 126.6 + 7.3 142.0 + 10.9
         Nov 145.3 + 6.2 146.0 + 15.1 146.1 + 1.0 137.2 + 11.9 120.7 + 2.4 147.5 + 17.5
         Dec  p 142.1 + 6.0 128.4 + 10.8 154.8 + 4.4 111.3 + 0.7 97.8 − 2.3 119.6 + 2.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
63* X Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
 X Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany  1 Eastern Germany  2 
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per-
 centage centage centage
Period change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2002 88.8 − 6.1 72.8 91.5 95.7 92.1 − 6.9 80.5 94.8 96.4 79.6 − 3.6 51.6 81.9 94.0
2003 79.3 − 10.7 67.5 78.6 87.5 82.0 − 11.0 75.6 79.7 88.7 71.9 − 9.7 45.1 75.4 84.3
2004 74.3 − 6.3 61.3 72.8 84.2 77.0 − 6.1 70.5 74.5 83.8 67.1 − 6.7 35.8 67.7 85.2
2005 73.8 − 0.7 56.9 74.4 83.5 77.8 + 1.0 66.5 78.0 84.7 62.6 − 6.7 30.5 64.2 80.1
   
2005          Nov 67.6 + 9.4 51.2 75.2 69.2 72.4 + 12.8 59.5 81.5 70.0 54.3 − 1.5 28.4 56.9 67.1
         Dec 74.9 + 7.8 59.3 84.6 73.6 78.6 + 9.5 68.9 87.8 74.2 64.6 + 2.5 32.9 75.5 72.1
2006          Jan 50.3 + 7.7 43.8 53.3 50.9 54.2 + 8.2 53.1 56.4 52.2 39.6 + 6.5 18.0 44.3 47.7
         Feb 59.1 + 13.4 46.9 64.7 60.4 64.9 + 17.6 54.5 70.9 64.5 43.3 + 0.0 26.0 46.7 50.0
         Mar 82.2 + 4.1 63.0 85.0 91.1 86.3 + 3.6 74.1 87.2 93.0 71.0 + 6.1 32.4 78.6 86.0
         Apr 80.5 + 13.5 63.5 80.9 90.7 84.9 + 14.4 73.5 83.7 93.4 68.6 + 11.4 36.1 72.5 83.8
         May 86.0 + 10.4 64.3 89.5 95.7 93.9 + 14.7 75.8 97.2 101.5 64.5 − 3.4 32.5 67.4 80.6
         June 93.5 + 5.6 70.9 87.8 113.9 97.9 + 4.7 82.8 87.2 119.9 81.2 + 8.6 38.2 89.4 98.4
         July 87.4 + 7.2 68.6 84.6 102.3 91.7 + 8.8 79.8 87.1 104.6 75.8 + 2.6 37.8 77.6 96.5
         Aug 84.2 + 2.2 59.9 86.9 96.2 88.3 + 1.7 70.6 89.6 98.0 72.8 + 3.7 30.6 79.1 91.5
         Sep 90.8 + 1.9 66.5 93.9 102.5 94.6 + 0.9 74.0 96.5 105.6 80.3 + 5.2 45.7 86.6 94.5
         Oct 76.5 + 2.7 58.0 84.4 79.2 81.2 + 2.4 68.7 87.2 82.1 63.6 + 3.6 28.4 76.2 71.6
         Nov 70.5 + 4.3 50.6 80.3 71.9 74.5 + 2.9 59.3 86.2 70.6 59.6 + 9.8 26.8 63.5 75.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications 0.2.8. — 1Excluding West Berlin. — 2Including West Berlin. — 3Including
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there- the railways and post office. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  2 of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco products leather goods ing materials sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2003 = 100
2000 100.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 91.5 + 2.0 87.9 + 6.0 111.7 − 0.1 113.4 + 2.5 98.6 + 1.4 + 0.3 92.6 − 2.1
2001 102.1 + 1.9 . 95.7 + 4.6 94.2 + 7.2 111.3 − 0.4 109.6 − 3.4 100.7 + 2.1 . 95.3 + 2.9
2002 100.5 − 1.6 − 1.3 98.3 + 2.7 97.5 + 3.5 105.7 − 5.0 100.9 − 7.9 99.9 − 0.8 − 0.8 98.1 + 2.9
2003  5 100.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 100.2 + 1.9 100.0 + 2.6 100.2 − 5.2 100.2 − 0.7 100.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 100.5 + 2.4
2004 101.6 + 1.5 + 1.6 103.1 + 2.9 99.7 − 0.3 103.1 + 2.9 103.4 + 3.2 101.9 + 1.7 + 1.3 102.5 + 2.0
2005  r 103.9 + 2.3 + 1.7 106.5 + 3.3 104.7 + 5.0 105.6 + 2.4 101.9 − 1.5 104.1 + 2.2 + 1.5 104.8 + 2.2
2006  6 105.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 106.8 + 0.3 107.4 + 2.6 108.3 + 2.6 106.1 + 4.1 106.6 + 2.4 + 1.6 111.9 + 6.8
 
2005          Dec  r 125.6 + 0.8 + 0.5 124.6 + 1.1 123.0 + 1.9 132.0 + 1.5 121.5 − 0.8 119.0 + 0.6 − 0.2 98.0 + 0.4
2006          Jan  6 98.4 + 2.5 + 1.8 100.2 + 1.9 103.8 + 8.1 94.4 + 5.1 95.5 + 1.1 95.6 + 2.2 + 1.1 86.2 + 0.8
         Feb 91.9 + 0.9 + 0.3 98.1 + 0.6 98.0 + 2.0 78.5 + 3.2 89.3 + 1.1 91.9 + 1.7 + 0.7 92.0 + 3.8
         Mar 105.5 − 0.5 − 0.9 108.7 − 0.8 109.0 + 3.2 104.8 + 0.2 106.4 − 0.6 107.8 + 0.0 − 0.9 116.7 + 1.4
         Apr 105.5 + 2.0 + 1.4 108.1 + 1.3 106.3 + 5.0 116.0 − 1.2 107.4 + 4.9 108.6 + 2.5 + 1.3 118.9 + 3.5
         May 104.7 + 0.7 − 0.1 108.2 − 1.5 105.9 + 2.2 112.3 + 6.5 104.3 + 3.6 107.6 + 1.6 + 0.5 116.3 + 3.7
         June 101.6 + 2.2 + 1.4 107.5 + 1.6 104.9 + 2.4 103.1 + 5.1 98.0 + 1.9 105.1 + 2.6 + 1.5 116.2 + 3.4
         July 103.2 + 1.3 + 0.4 110.8 + 4.4 108.4 + 0.6 103.7 + 0.9 97.7 − 0.9 106.4 + 1.8 + 0.6 115.7 + 2.5
         Aug 101.7 + 1.4 + 0.9 103.8 + 0.3 102.7 + 2.4 106.4 + 7.2 101.2 + 3.9 102.6 + 3.0 + 2.1 104.0 + 8.9
         Sep 100.8 − 0.3 − 0.9 100.9 + 0.1 103.7 − 0.6 102.8 − 1.5 103.2 + 4.6 103.1 + 1.3 + 0.5 110.3 + 6.7
         Oct 108.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 104.6 − 2.1 109.8 + 1.4 125.1 + 1.9 113.9 + 5.0 110.6 + 2.3 + 1.8 118.8 + 9.7
         Nov 110.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 105.9 − 1.9 110.7 + 2.2 115.1 + 0.8 118.7 + 8.6 113.0 + 3.0 + 2.2 125.6 + 12.8
         Dec 129.3 + 2.9 + 2.6 124.8 + 0.2 125.3 + 1.9 137.5 + 4.2 137.5 + 13.2 127.3 + 7.0 + 6.3 122.6 + 25.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding from 2001, at 2000 prices. — 5Figures for 2003 do not include Lower
value-added tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version Saxony. — 6Figures from January 2006 are provisional, some of them have
0.2.8. — 1Excluding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding been revised. Figures for recent months are particularly uncertain owing to
the sale of automotive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor estimates for missing returns. 
vehicle parts and accessories.— 4Up to (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices;
64* X Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
 X Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployed  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-
manu- ment pro- going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cational
ing Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  3 6,7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2004 38,875 + 0.4 + 150 34,656 + 0.0 6,019 769 151 117 184 9 4,381 9 +9 3 9 10.5 286
2005 38,822 − 0.1 − 53 34,466 − 0.5 5,931 719 126 60 114 10 4,861 10 + 479 10 11.7 11 413
2006 14 39,110 14 + 0.7 14 + 288 ... ... ... ... ... 13 5013 119 4,487 − 374 10.8 564
2006          Jan 38,391 + 0.0 + 18 5,863 655 96 49 120 5,010 − 76 12.1 415
         Feb 38,389 + 0.0 + 3 34,048 − 0.1 5,853 636 101 46 113 5,048 − 241 12.2 464
         Mar 38,510 + 0.2 + 73 5,857 672 105 45 110 4,977 − 289 12.0 506
         Apr 38,742 + 0.5 + 181 5,858 708 83 45 110 4,790 − 262 11.5 546
         May 39,004 + 0.7 + 282 34,518 + 0.6 5,861 720 72 49 114 4,538 − 346 12 10.9 565
         June 39,171 + 0.9 + 367 5,888 729 62 51 118 4,399 − 382 10.5 581
         July 39,169 + 1.0 + 398 5,895 732 54 51 114 4,386 − 451 10.5 627
         Aug 39,245 + 1.0 + 396 34,852 + 0.9 5,932 741 48 51 110 4,372 − 426 10.5 619
         Sep 39,552 + 1.0 + 389 5,948 743 46 51 124 4,237 − 409 10.1 621
         Oct 39,738 + 1.0 + 406 5,934 737 ... 55 131 4,084 − 471 9.8 626
         Nov 39,790 + 1.1 + 452 ... ... 5,934 734 ... 13 5513 135 3,995 − 536 9.6 609
         Dec 14 39,622 14 + 1.3 14 + 492 ... ... ... 13 5113 132 4,008 − 597 9.6 592
2007          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 4413 121 4,247 − 764 10.2 594
Western Germany o)  
  
2004 . . . . . 5,380 562 122 24 121 9 2,783 9 +8 9 9 8.5 239
2005 . . . . . 5,214 529 101 12 76 10 3,247 10 + 464 10 9.9 11 325
2006 . . . . . ... ... ... 13 1013 82 3,007 − 240 9.1 436
2006          Jan . . . . . 5,147 488 79 9 79 3,362 + 53 10.2 327
         Feb . . . . . 5,137 477 81 9 75 3,370 − 116 10.2 367
         Mar . . . . . 5,139 504 83 9 74 3,318 − 159 10.1 397
         Apr . . . . . 5,139 526 67 9 74 3,201 − 138 9.7 419
         May . . . . . 5,139 533 58 9 78 3,049 − 193 12 9.2 435
         June . . . . . 5,162 538 50 10 81 2,966 − 222 8.9 445
         July . . . . . 5,165 539 43 10 78 2,961 − 279 8.9 486
         Aug . . . . . 5,195 545 38 10 76 2,941 − 297 8.8 480
         Sep . . . . . 5,206 546 38 10 87 2,835 − 305 8.5 478
         Oct . . . . . 5,190 542 ... 10 93 2,738 − 360 8.2 473
         Nov . . . . . 5,188 540 ... 13 1013 95 2,672 − 409 8.0 464
         Dec . . . . . ... ... ... 13 913 91 2,670 − 450 8.0 458
2007          Jan . . . . . ... ... ... 13 913 82 2,805 − 557 8.4 463
Eastern Germany +  
  
2004 . . . . . 639 207 29 93 63 9 1,599 9 +4 9 18.4 47
2005 . . . . . 717 189 25 48 38 10 1,614 10 +1 6 10 18.7 11 88
2006 . . . . . ... ... ... 13 4013 38 1,480 − 134 17.3 129
2006          Jan . . . . . 716 167 17 41 41 1,648 − 129 19.2 87
         Feb . . . . . 716 160 19 37 38 1,677 − 125 19.5 97
         Mar . . . . . 717 168 22 36 36 1,660 − 129 19.3 110
         Apr . . . . . 719 181 17 36 36 1,589 − 124 18.5 127
         May . . . . . 722 187 14 39 37 1,490 − 153 12 17.4 131
         June . . . . . 725 191 11 41 37 1,432 − 160 16.8 135
         July . . . . . 730 193 11 41 36 1,426 − 171 16.7 142
         Aug . . . . . 737 196 9 41 34 1,430 − 129 16.7 139
         Sep . . . . . 742 196 8 41 36 1,402 − 104 16.4 143
         Oct . . . . . 744 195 ... 44 38 1,346 − 111 15.7 153
         Nov . . . . . 745 194 ... 13 4513 40 1,323 − 127 15.5 145
         Dec . . . . . ... ... ... 13 4213 41 1,337 − 148 15.7 134
2007          Jan . . . . . ... ... ... 13 3513 38 1,441 − 207 16.9 130
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual (SAM). — 7Mid-month level; end of month figures up to December 2004. —
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- 8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — 9From January 2004, un-
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- employed persons excluding all those participating in occupational aptitude
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Work-place concept; aver- testing and training schemes. — 10From January 2005, unemployed persons
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — including recipients of social assistance who are able to work. — 11From
3Up to December 2004, western Germany including West Berlin and east- January 2005, including offers of job opportunities. — 12From May 2006, cal-
ern Germany excluding West Berlin. — 4The figures refer to the economic culated on the basis of new labour force figures. — 13Annualised data
classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or from the Federal Employment Agency based on information received so
parts thereof; civil engineering”. — 5Mid-month level. — 6Employees in- far. — 14 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 
volved in job creation schemes and structural adjustment measures
65* X Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
 X Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Period Total Food Energy  1 rents  2 rents market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 index  2,3 materials  7 energy  1,2 
2000 = 100  
  
2002 8 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 104.9 102.6 100.2 8 102.4 100.0 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.1
2003 9 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 9 104.1 101.3 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.9
2004 10 11  106.2 105.7 102.9 114.8 108.9 104.8 101.4 11 105.8 99.7 101.1 97.2 101.4 96.3
2005 12 108.3 105.8 103.8 126.6 111.1 105.9 102.7 12 110.7 98.8 102.4 101.4 139.5 105.4
2006 13 110.1 107.7 104.4 137.3 112.1 107.0 105.3 13 116.8 ... 104.8 106.7 163.9 131.5
 
2005          Apr 107.7 106.4 103.7 123.3 109.7 105.7 109.9 98.4 102.1 100.1 128.2 103.1
         May 108.0 107.1 103.6 123.0 110.9 105.8 102.5 109.9 98.4 102.0 99.7 124.3 102.3
         June 108.1 107.0 103.5 125.8 110.6 105.9 110.4 98.5 102.2 101.3 144.6 106.6
         July 108.6 105.9 103.2 129.0 112.1 106.0 111.0 97.5 102.4 101.9 151.8 107.0
         Aug 108.7 104.9 103.1 130.9 112.5 106.0 102.7 111.3 98.7 102.4 102.8 160.9 105.9
         Sep 12 109.1 104.8 104.2 135.1 111.3 106.0 12 111.8 98.4 102.8 103.3 160.5 105.8
         Oct 109.1 104.4 104.3 135.6 111.2 106.1 112.6 98.8 103.0 103.7 154.0 108.0
         Nov 108.6 104.6 104.4 130.9 110.4 106.2 103.0 112.5 100.4 103.0 103.5 148.5 112.0
         Dec 109.6 105.5 104.2 131.0 113.7 106.3 112.8 101.4 103.1 103.8 152.0 115.8
2006          Jan 109.1 106.6 103.7 134.4 110.7 106.5 114.1 101.1 103.3 104.7 163.7 120.1
         Feb 109.5 107.1 104.0 134.7 111.6 106.7 103.7 114.9 103.3 103.7 105.1 160.9 124.5
         Mar 109.5 107.0 104.4 135.0 111.3 106.7 115.5 104.8 104.0 105.6 163.6 123.7
         Apr 109.9 107.4 104.4 139.2 111.2 106.8 116.6 105.9 104.5 107.0 177.8 129.3
         May 110.1 108.4 104.3 139.8 111.3 106.9 104.4 116.7 106.2 104.8 107.2 171.6 134.5
         June 110.3 108.5 104.2 140.7 111.7 107.0 117.1 106.9 104.8 107.0 172.7 130.0
         July 110.7 108.1 103.9 142.1 113.6 107.1 117.7 105.9 105.2 108.3 182.1 135.6
         Aug 110.6 107.7 103.8 141.3 113.3 107.2 105.9 117.9 109.8 105.2 108.5 178.5 134.3
         Sep 110.2 108.0 104.4 136.1 112.3 107.2 117.5 109.6 105.2 107.1 155.4 133.7
         Oct 13 110.3 107.5 105.2 135.4 112.2 107.3 13 117.8 108.4 105.6 106.8 146.8 139.0
         Nov 110.2 107.8 105.4 134.6 111.6 107.4 107.1 117.8 p 110.9 105.7 106.4 144.9 137.7
         Dec 111.1 108.3 105.3 134.6 114.8 107.4 117.8 ... 105.6 106.1 148.7 136.3
2007          Jan 14 s 110.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 133.2 138.8
Annual percentage change  
  
2002 8 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 8 − 0.6 − 6.6 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.9
2003 9 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 9 + 1.7 + 1.3 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.6
2004 10 11  + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.5 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 11 + 1.6 − 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 22.3 + 10.8
2005 12 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 10.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.3 12 + 4.6 − 0.9 + 1.3 + 4.3 + 37.6 + 9.4
2006 13 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 0.6 + 8.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 2.5 13 + 5.5 ... + 2.3 + 5.2 + 17.5 + 24.8
 
2005          Apr + 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 9.0 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 4.6 − 5.8 + 1.0 + 3.3 + 35.1 − 1.9
         May + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 2.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 4.1 − 5.6 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 18.9 + 1.2
         June + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 10.2 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 4.6 − 8.1 + 1.1 + 4.4 + 43.5 + 7.6
         July + 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 4.6 − 7.1 + 1.2 + 4.7 + 45.0 + 9.6
         Aug + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 11.6 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 4.6 − 1.1 + 0.9 + 4.7 + 40.8 + 11.9
         Sep 12 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 15.9 + 1.9 + 1.0 12 + 4.9 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 5.1 + 42.4 + 13.2
         Oct + 2.3 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 12.6 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 4.6 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 4.3 + 25.2 + 17.4
         Nov + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 11.7 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.4 + 5.5 + 37.4 + 22.5
         Dec + 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 14.4 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 5.2 + 2.7 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 57.0 + 29.8
2006          Jan + 2.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 15.5 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 1.8 + 6.8 + 52.3 + 25.5
         Feb + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 14.6 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 5.9 + 4.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 44.4 + 25.5
         Mar + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 4.8 + 1.9 + 5.5 + 30.6 + 20.0
         Apr + 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 12.9 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 6.1 + 7.6 + 2.4 + 6.9 + 38.7 + 25.4
         May + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 13.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 6.2 + 7.9 + 2.7 + 7.5 + 38.1 + 31.5
         June + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 6.1 + 8.5 + 2.5 + 5.6 + 19.4 + 22.0
         July + 1.9 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 6.0 + 8.6 + 2.7 + 6.3 + 20.0 + 26.7
         Aug + 1.7 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 7.9 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 5.9 + 11.2 + 2.7 + 5.5 + 10.9 + 26.8
         Sep + 1.0 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 11.4 + 2.3 + 3.7 − 3.2 + 26.4
         Oct 13 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.1 13 + 4.6 + 9.7 + 2.5 + 3.0 − 4.7 + 28.7
         Nov + 1.5 + 3.1 + 1.0 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 4.0 + 4.7 p + 10.5 + 2.6 + 2.8 − 2.4 + 22.9
         Dec + 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 4.4 ... + 2.4 + 2.2 − 2.2 + 17.7
2007          Jan 14 s + 1.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 18.6 + 15.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — consumer price index: increase in insurance tax. — 9From January 2003,
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data increase in tax on energy consumption, increase in tobacco tax. — 10From
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Previously: Overall construc- January 2004, increase in healthcare prices. — 11From March as well as
tion price level. — 4Excluding value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in December 2004, increase in tobacco tax. — 12From September 2005,
euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as increase in tobacco tax. — 13From October 2006, increase in the prices of
industrial raw materials. — 8From January 2002, increase in tax on energy tobacco products. — 14From January 2007, increase in the standard rate of
consumption, increase in tobacco tax; additionally in the case of the VAT and in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. 
66* X Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
X Economic conditions
  
8 Households’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999 € billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change DM / € change %
1995 1,575.1 3.2 1,034.9 0.8 553.5 4.6 1,588.4 2.1 2,344.9 3.0 257.6 − 0.6 11.0
1996 1,592.5 1.1 1,029.9 − 0.5 599.0 8.2 1,629.0 2.6 2,386.5 1.8 251.7 − 2.3 10.5
1997 1,589.7 − 0.2 1,012.9 − 1.7 613.2 2.4 1,626.1 − 0.2 2,427.6 1.7 245.4 − 2.5 10.1
1998 1,623.0 2.1 1,036.3 2.3 625.0 1.9 1,661.3 2.2 2,474.2 1.9 249.4 1.7 10.1
1999 854.6 3.0 547.5 3.3 330.5 3.4 878.0 3.4 1,297.7 2.6 122.7 − 3.8 9.5
2000 883.4 3.4 569.6 4.0 339.9 2.8 909.5 3.6 1,337.4 3.1 123.2 0.4 9.2
2001 902.0 2.1 590.0 3.6 353.8 4.1 943.9 3.8 1,389.5 3.9 130.9 6.2 9.4
2002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.9
2003 908.1 − 0.0 588.6 − 0.6 377.7 2.7 966.3 0.7 1,429.1 1.9 147.4 5.8 10.3
2004 914.3 0.7 603.1 2.5 377.9 0.0 981.0 1.5 1,454.8 1.8 151.9 3.1 10.4
2005 911.4 − 0.3 601.4 − 0.3 377.4 − 0.1 978.8 − 0.2 1,477.9 1.6 156.9 3.3 10.6
2004          Q4 252.7 0.2 165.4 1.8 94.1 − 1.1 259.5 0.8 374.0 2.6 33.8 4.9 9.0
2005          Q1 213.6 − 0.2 141.4 0.4 95.0 − 1.6 236.4 − 0.4 367.6 1.0 52.1 3.1 14.2
         Q2 219.6 − 0.4 142.8 − 0.2 94.5 0.8 237.3 0.2 365.2 2.1 36.7 4.2 10.1
         Q3 226.2 − 0.5 152.8 − 0.7 93.9 0.5 246.7 − 0.2 367.3 2.3 33.3 2.8 9.1
         Q4 251.9 − 0.3 164.4 − 0.6 94.1 − 0.0 258.5 − 0.4 377.8 1.0 34.8 2.9 9.2
2006          Q1 214.1 0.2 139.9 − 1.1 95.3 0.4 235.2 − 0.5 378.5 3.0 53.0 1.9 14.0
         Q2 222.6 1.4 142.4 − 0.3 94.8 0.3 237.2 − 0.0 370.7 1.5 37.3 1.5 10.1
         Q3 229.5 1.5 153.5 0.5 94.0 0.1 247.5 0.4 373.0 1.6 33.3 0.0 8.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2006. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
  
  
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (workplace concept)  2 (workplace concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change change 2000 = 100
1995 89.8 4.9 90.2 4.6 94.8 3.1 88.3 6.1 89.5 5.5 89.9 4.1
1996 92.1 2.6 92.3 2.4 96.2 1.4 91.7 3.8 92.1 2.9 92.5 2.9
1997 93.5 1.5 93.7 1.5 96.3 0.2 93.4 1.9 93.6 1.7 94.2 1.7
1998 95.3 1.9 95.4 1.8 97.2 0.9 95.1 1.8 95.1 1.7 95.7 1.6
1999 98.0 2.9 98.1 2.8 98.6 1.4 98.0 3.1 98.0 3.0 97.4 1.8
2000 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 1.5 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.7
2001 102.0 2.0 101.9 1.9 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.7 1.7 102.2 2.2
2002 104.7 2.7 104.6 2.7 103.2 1.3 105.0 3.2 104.9 3.1 104.3 2.0
2003 106.8 2.0 106.8 2.1 104.5 1.2 107.7 2.5 107.4 2.4 . .
2004 108.1 1.2 108.2 1.3 105.1 0.6 109.7 1.8 109.4 1.9 . .
2005 109.1 1.0 109.5 1.1 105.4 0.2 111.3 1.5 111.0 1.5 . .
2006 110.3 1.1 110.9 1.3 . . 113.5 1.9 113.5 2.2 . .
2005          Q1 101.1 1.3 101.4 1.4 99.7 0.3 101.5 1.6 101.3 1.6 . .
         Q2 101.3 1.0 101.6 1.2 102.1 0.5 101.4 1.2 101.2 1.2 . .
         Q3 112.4 0.9 112.8 1.1 104.6 0.3 118.6 1.6 118.3 1.6 . .
         Q4 121.8 0.8 122.1 0.8 115.0 0.0 123.7 1.5 123.4 1.5 . .
2006          Q1 102.1 0.9 102.5 1.1 100.0 0.3 103.2 1.7 103.3 2.0 . .
         Q2 102.9 1.6 103.4 1.8 102.8 0.8 104.0 2.6 104.1 2.8 . .
         Q3 112.8 0.3 113.4 0.5 105.2 0.6 120.4 1.5 120.5 1.8 . .
         Q4 123.6 1.5 124.3 1.8 . . 126.1 1.9 126.3 2.4 . .
2006          June 102.2 1.1 102.7 1.3 . . 103.4 1.9 103.4 2.2 . .
         July 133.5 − 0.4 134.2 − 0.2 . . 154.6 1.6 154.7 1.9 . .
         Aug 102.5 0.9 103.0 1.1 . . 103.5 1.6 103.5 1.9 . .
         Sep 102.4 0.7 103.0 0.9 . . 103.2 1.4 103.2 1.7 . .
         Oct 102.7 0.0 103.2 0.2 . . 103.8 − 0.0 103.8 0.3 . .
         Nov 163.8 1.8 164.9 2.2 . . 167.8 1.5 168.2 1.9 . .
         Dec 104.3 2.5 105.0 2.8 . . 106.8 4.7 107.0 5.1 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal
reports. — 2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in Statistical Office, using the old and new classifications of the economic
November 2006. — 3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and sectors. 
hot water supply, and excluding installation and building completion work.
67*X Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2006
Item 2003 2004 2005 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep Oct Nov
Current account + 32,441 + 55,595 − 8,231 − 12,843 − 10,488 − 4,538 + 1,525 + 1,520 + 1,652A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,036,848 1,132,365 1,224,275 329,749 342,218 340,999 121,047 127,917 129,526
Imports (fob) 931,865 1,028,889 1,176,105 332,574 335,840 333,003 115,338 122,129 123,561
Balance + 104,983 + 103,473 + 48,170 − 2,826 + 6,377 + 7,996 + 5,709 + 5,788 + 5,964
2 Services
Receipts 334,174 364,839 400,260 96,596 106,917 114,389 37,366 37,389 34,067
Expenditure 312,220 334,069 364,305 91,822 95,005 103,659 32,899 33,501 32,775
Balance + 21,955 + 30,769 + 35,953 + 4,773 + 11,912 + 10,730 + 4,467 + 3,888 + 1,292
3 Income − 38,136 − 19,833 − 22,201 + 1,383 − 13,113 − 438 − 443 − 407 + 1,755
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 82,796 81,647 85,060 29,620 17,321 15,410 4,861 4,895 5,329
Transfers to non-residents 139,158 140,462 155,216 45,792 32,985 38,236 13,070 12,644 12,688
Balance − 56,363 − 58,816 − 70,155 − 16,172 − 15,664 − 22,826 − 8,209 − 7,749 − 7,359
Capital account + 12,340 + 16,605 + 11,936 + 2,010 + 1,265 + 1,917 + 152 + 449 + 1,008B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 490 − 21,089 + 37,430 + 65,740 + 48,536 + 52,092 + 44,326 − 4,298 − 17,745C)
1 Direct investment − 11,416 − 64,182 − 202,294 − 31,540 − 16,403 − 41,333 − 27,130 − 15,322 − 11,622
By resident units abroad − 146,433 − 154,832 − 294,007 − 50,546 − 109,217 − 69,036 − 47,797 − 20,105 − 11,665
By non-resident units in the euro area + 135,018 + 90,648 + 91,712 + 19,005 + 92,813 + 27,703 + 20,667 + 4,783 + 44
2 Portfolio investment + 73,607 + 68,237 + 156,896 + 22,857 + 96,304 + 28,363 + 44,222 + 22,487 + 45,077
By resident units abroad − 278,993 − 342,325 − 406,065 − 194,243 − 41,901 − 121,796 − 50,116 − 48,778 − 46,258
Equity − 80,039 − 106,639 − 134,631 − 97,069 + 18,984 − 30,977 − 8,630 − 6,658 − 8,017
Bonds and notes − 176,936 − 177,286 − 257,237 − 89,943 − 49,452 − 67,823 − 34,709 − 37,026 − 34,782
Money market instruments − 22,016 − 58,400 − 14,196 − 7,229 − 11,434 − 22,995 − 6,777 − 5,095 − 3,459
By non-resident units in the euro area + 352,600 + 410,561 + 562,961 + 217,099 + 138,205 + 150,159 + 94,338 + 71,264 + 91,335
Equity + 110,397 + 123,931 + 282,784 + 121,235 + 35,737 + 67,779 + 28,716 + 16,725 + 29,042
Bonds and notes + 200,022 + 272,086 + 242,522 + 80,841 + 113,779 + 75,883 + 59,295 + 45,596 + 51,369
Money market instruments + 42,183 + 14,543 + 37,655 + 15,024 − 11,312 + 6,499 + 6,328 + 8,943 + 10,924
3 Financial derivatives − 14,383 − 6,641 − 10,687 − 8,512 − 2,795 + 7,685 + 6,930 + 6,884 − 4,347
4 Other investment − 76,122 − 30,885 + 75,500 + 76,803 − 27,168 + 60,600 + 21,360 − 18,411 − 46,016
Eurosystem + 9,817 + 7,561 + 6,092 + 3,289 + 3,083 + 5,131 + 3,056 − 1,163 + 3,781
General government − 3,647 − 5,097 + 2,787 + 3,989 − 10,854 + 18,845 + 9,706 − 4,409 − 2,374
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 17,810 − 16,821 + 81,633 + 85,783 − 47,150 + 41,310 − 1,049 − 16,630 − 42,089
Long-term + 1,553 − 12,979 − 46,932 − 434 + 6,185 − 11,488 − 9,083 − 50,071 − 2,306
Short-term − 19,363 − 3,840 + 128,566 + 86,216 − 53,335 + 52,799 + 8,035 + 33,441 − 39,783
Other sectors − 64,482 − 16,529 − 15,013 − 16,258 + 27,751 − 4,689 + 9,646 + 3,791 − 5,334
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 27,823 + 12,382 + 18,016 + 6,133 − 1,401 − 3,221 − 1,055 + 64 − 837
Errors and omissions − 44,291 − 51,111 − 41,131 − 54,910 − 39,313 − 49,471 − 46,002 + 2,329 + 15,085D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errors
on current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  1,2 items  3,4 Services  5 Income transfers assets Total  6 value  7 Omissions
DM million
1993 − 31,450 + 60,304 − 3,217 − 52,549 + 19,095 − 55,083 − 1,915 + 43,448 + 22,795 − 10,082
1994 − 49,418 + 71,762 − 1,318 − 62,803 + 2,393 − 59,451 − 2,637 + 60,708 + 2,846 − 8,653
1995 − 42,363 + 85,303 − 4,294 − 63,985 − 3,975 − 55,413 − 3,845 + 50,117 − 10,355 − 3,909
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 79
1997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,613
1998 − 28,695 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,294
2001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,775
2001 + 425 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,757
2002 + 43,375 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,328 − 18,022 − 27,511 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,716
2003 + 40,291 + 129,921 − 11,149 − 34,274 − 15,925 − 28,282 + 312 − 48,054 + 445 + 7,451
2004 + 81,925 + 156,096 − 15,243 − 31,254 + 635 − 28,309 + 430 − 114,695 + 1,470 + 32,340
2005 + 90,270 + 158,179 − 20,148 − 27,484 + 8,643 − 28,921 − 1,268 − 103,765 + 2,182 + 14,763
2006  p + 100,904 + 161,930 − 19,824 − 24,420 + 9,762 − 26,544 − 192 − 157,218 + 2,934 + 56,506
2004          Q1 + 24,233 + 41,359 − 3,325 − 6,993 − 1,151 − 5,656 + 280 + 482 + 205 − 24,996
         Q2 + 24,091 + 43,303 − 3,510 − 5,945 − 2,401 − 7,357 + 177 − 61,906 − 339 + 37,638
         Q3 + 13,814 + 36,436 − 4,269 − 11,476 + 1,555 − 8,432 + 191 − 23,665 + 1,568 + 9,660
         Q4 + 19,787 + 34,998 − 4,139 − 6,841 + 2,632 − 6,863 − 218 − 29,606 + 37 + 10,037
2005          Q1 + 29,157 + 43,196 − 4,421 − 5,405 + 3,135 − 7,348 − 1,491 − 22,212 − 181 − 5,454
         Q2 + 22,545 + 40,670 − 4,677 − 5,755 − 1,307 − 6,386 + 107 − 24,952 + 1,230 + 2,300
         Q3 + 19,141 + 40,695 − 5,182 − 12,038 + 3,294 − 7,628 + 60 − 15,553 − 783 − 3,648
         Q4 + 19,426 + 33,619 − 5,868 − 4,287 + 3,520 − 7,558 + 57 − 41,048 + 1,916 + 21,566
2006          Q1  r + 25,841 + 39,242 − 4,657 − 5,983 + 3,276 − 6,037 + 153 − 40,869 + 1,082 + 14,875
         Q2  r + 20,971 + 36,904 − 4,872 − 4,111 − 2,113 − 4,837 + 13 − 52,327 + 367 + 31,343
         Q3  r + 18,682 + 39,453 − 5,142 − 11,331 + 3,269 − 7,566 − 253 − 16,712 + 844 − 1,717
         Q4  p + 35,410 + 46,332 − 5,153 − 2,995 + 5,330 − 8,103 − 105 − 47,309 + 642 + 12,004
2004          July + 6,300 + 13,572 − 1,722 − 2,426 + 178 − 3,301 + 164 + 2,957 + 847 − 9,421
         Aug + 2,543 + 10,917 − 1,411 − 4,865 + 300 − 2,398 + 80 − 7,626 + 517 + 5,003
         Sep + 4,972 + 11,947 − 1,135 − 4,184 + 1,078 − 2,733 − 52 − 18,996 + 204 + 14,077
         Oct + 6,360 + 12,387 − 1,438 − 2,820 + 709 − 2,478 − 22 − 1,620 + 839 − 4,718
         Nov + 7,293 + 11,763 − 1,336 − 1,592 + 906 − 2,448 − 186 − 19,467 − 182 + 12,360
         Dec + 6,134 + 10,848 − 1,365 − 2,429 + 1,017 − 1,938 − 10 − 8,520 − 621 + 2,396
2005          Jan + 7,778 + 13,312 − 1,621 − 1,857 + 581 − 2,637 − 1,221 + 12,632 − 353 − 19,189
         Feb + 9,450 + 13,616 − 1,372 − 1,385 + 963 − 2,372 − 107 − 8,536 + 494 − 807
         Mar + 11,929 + 16,268 − 1,428 − 2,163 + 1,591 − 2,340 − 164 − 26,308 − 322 + 14,543
         Apr + 5,995 + 12,407 − 1,474 − 1,737 − 1,809 − 1,392 − 199 − 17,735 + 404 + 11,939
         May + 5,363 + 11,966 − 1,376 − 2,271 − 809 − 2,146 + 272 + 8,006 − 141 − 13,641
         June + 11,187 + 16,296 − 1,826 − 1,746 + 1,312 − 2,848 + 34 − 15,223 + 967 + 4,002
         July + 7,420 + 13,545 − 1,662 − 2,913 + 876 − 2,426 + 104 − 5,743 + 324 − 1,781
         Aug + 3,703 + 12,235 − 1,707 − 5,364 + 883 − 2,345 − 86 + 580 + 932 − 4,196
         Sep + 8,018 + 14,915 − 1,813 − 3,761 + 1,535 − 2,858 + 42 − 10,389 − 2,039 + 2,329
         Oct + 5,769 + 11,788 − 2,350 − 2,757 + 1,425 − 2,337 + 329 − 7,280 + 207 + 1,181
         Nov + 8,032 + 12,951 − 1,851 − 1,027 + 1,059 − 3,100 − 108 − 15,291 + 1,059 + 7,366
         Dec + 5,624 + 8,880 − 1,668 − 503 + 1,036 − 2,121 − 165 − 18,478 + 650 + 13,018
2006          Jan  r + 6,048 + 12,377 − 1,714 − 3,043 + 815 − 2,386 + 7 − 11,489 − 26 + 5,433
         Feb  r + 10,778 + 12,743 − 1,217 − 924 + 1,552 − 1,376 + 283 − 15,867 + 1,534 + 4,806
         Mar  r + 9,015 + 14,122 − 1,726 − 2,016 + 910 − 2,274 − 137 − 13,514 − 426 + 4,636
         Apr  r + 6,770 + 11,023 − 1,489 − 1,067 + 539 − 2,237 − 144 − 9,868 + 1,475 + 3,241
         May  r + 3,694 + 12,752 − 1,577 − 1,618 − 4,753 − 1,109 − 282 − 13,147 − 1,067 + 9,734
         June  r + 10,506 + 13,129 − 1,806 − 1,426 + 2,100 − 1,491 + 439 − 29,312 − 41 + 18,368
         July  r + 6,956 + 12,979 − 1,916 − 2,294 + 785 − 2,598 − 228 + 6,852 − 332 − 13,580
         Aug  r + 2,270 + 11,024 − 1,575 − 5,670 + 764 − 2,273 + 146 − 10,535 + 698 + 8,119
         Sep  r + 9,456 + 15,449 − 1,651 − 3,368 + 1,720 − 2,695 − 171 − 13,030 + 478 + 3,744
         Oct  r + 11,474 + 17,141 − 1,828 − 2,261 + 1,534 − 3,112 + 5 − 4,189 + 401 − 7,290
         Nov + 14,145 + 18,342 − 1,847 − 1,333 + 1,512 − 2,529 − 75 − 19,885 − 102 + 5,815
         Dec  p + 9,792 + 10,849 − 1,478 + 599 + 2,284 − 2,462 − 35 − 23,235 + 342 + 13,478
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, goods returned and value of goods for repair. — 4See footnote 2. —
exports fob. — 2From January 1993, including additional estimates for 5Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are import figure. — 6Financial account balance including change in reserve
included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. — assets. Capital exports: − . — 7 Increase: − . 
3Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2006
Country / group of countries  2003  2004  2005 Jan / Nov Aug Sep  4 Oct 4 Nov 4 Dec p 
All countries  1 Exports 664,455 731,544 786,266 820,128 69,163 79,232 83,754 84,925 73,476
Imports 534,534 575,448 628,087 669,047 58,139 63,783 66,613 66,583 62,627
Balance + 129,921 + 156,096 + 158,179 + 151,081 +11,024 +15,449 +17,141 +18,342 +10,849
I Exports 490,672 541,395 581,611 606,830 50,370 57,707 61,771 61,543 ...European countries
Imports 384,939 408,698 443,508 472,082 40,072 44,738 46,535 46,989 ...
Balance + 105,733 + 132,697 + 138,103 + 134,748 +10,298 +12,970 +15,236 +14,554 ...
Exports 426,342 466,326 498,558 514,061 42,281 47,943 51,311 50,613 ... 1 EU member states (25)
Imports 324,043 342,636 366,580 385,334 32,058 36,364 38,943 39,034 ...
Balance + 102,299 + 123,691 + 131,978 + 128,728 +10,223 +11,579 +12,368 +11,579 ...
Memo item
Exports 369,776 404,770 429,698 437,171 35,470 40,370 43,170 42,757 ...  EU member states (15)
Imports 266,404 285,049 306,627 320,097 26,342 29,928 31,940 32,356 ...
Balance + 103,372 + 119,720 + 123,071 + 117,074 + 9,128 +10,442 +11,230 +10,401 ...
Euro-area Exports 288,668 317,696 339,583 346,567 27,377 31,867 34,574 34,160 ...
countries Imports 215,705 230,717 246,124 260,142 21,263 24,518 26,362 26,512 ...
Balance + 72,963 + 86,979 + 93,459 + 86,425 + 6,115 + 7,349 + 8,213 + 7,648 ...
of which
Austria Exports 35,857 40,244 43,305 44,997 3,854 4,305 4,618 4,482 ...
Imports 21,453 24,020 26,048 27,202 2,215 2,647 2,775 2,769 ...
Balance + 14,404 + 16,224 + 17,256 + 17,795 + 1,639 + 1,658 + 1,843 + 1,713 ...
Belgium and Exports 38,413 43,992 47,512 49,352 4,166 4,432 4,923 4,633 ...
Luxembourg Imports 26,132 28,818 31,426 35,659 3,028 3,498 3,550 3,567 ...
Balance + 12,282 + 15,173 + 16,085 + 13,693 + 1,138 + 933 + 1,373 + 1,066 ...
France Exports 69,025 74,360 79,039 79,214 5,986 7,249 7,814 7,998 ...
Imports 48,545 51,535 53,700 58,161 4,366 5,310 6,117 6,352 ...
Balance + 20,480 + 22,825 + 25,339 + 21,053 + 1,620 + 1,939 + 1,697 + 1,646 ...
Italy Exports 48,414 51,479 53,855 55,369 3,822 5,090 5,511 5,505 ...
Imports 34,259 35,676 36,348 36,910 2,978 3,417 3,913 3,763 ...
Balance + 14,156 + 15,803 + 17,507 + 18,459 + 844 + 1,672 + 1,599 + 1,743 ...
Netherlands Exports 42,219 46,730 49,033 51,210 4,477 4,556 5,104 4,962 ...
Imports 42,301 46,204 51,823 55,445 4,905 5,294 5,284 5,501 ...
Balance − 83 + 526 − 2,789 − 4,234 − 428 − 738 − 179 − 539 ...
Spain Exports 32,364 36,249 40,018 38,861 2,890 3,586 3,975 3,855 ...
Imports 16,518 17,426 18,070 17,896 1,310 1,575 1,865 1,880 ...
Balance + 15,846 + 18,823 + 21,948 + 20,966 + 1,580 + 2,011 + 2,110 + 1,975 ...
Other EU member Exports 137,674 148,630 158,975 167,494 14,904 16,076 16,737 16,453 ...
states Imports 108,337 111,919 120,456 125,191 10,796 11,846 12,581 12,521 ...
Balance + 29,336 + 36,711 + 38,520 + 42,303 + 4,108 + 4,230 + 4,155 + 3,932 ...
of which
United Exports 55,597 59,986 60,394 60,353 5,437 5,503 5,509 5,490 ...
Kingdom Imports 31,712 34,466 39,069 39,042 3,366 3,433 3,446 3,816 ...
Balance + 23,885 + 25,520 + 21,325 + 21,311 + 2,071 + 2,070 + 2,062 + 1,674 ...
Exports 64,331 75,069 83,053 92,769 8,089 9,764 10,460 10,930 ... 2 Other European
Imports 60,897 66,062 76,928 86,748 8,013 8,374 7,592 7,955 ... countries
Balance + 3,434 + 9,007 + 6,125 + 6,021 + 76 + 1,391 + 2,868 + 2,975 ...
II Exports 172,329 188,782 203,229 214,260 18,905 21,486 22,121 23,517 ...Non-European
Imports 148,895 166,132 183,940 196,342 18,010 18,984 20,017 19,534 ... countries
Balance + 23,434 + 22,650 + 19,289 + 17,918 + 895 + 2,502 + 2,104 + 3,983 ...
Exports 12,072 13,785 14,807 15,037 1,350 1,548 1,533 1,537 ... 1 Africa
Imports 10,239 11,092 13,762 15,217 1,378 1,749 1,400 1,473 ...
Balance + 1,832 + 2,694 + 1,045 − 180 − 28 − 201 + 133 + 65 ...
Exports 79,629 84,694 91,994 95,848 7,934 9,458 9,715 10,630 ... 2 America
Imports 51,948 54,679 58,574 64,582 6,394 6,009 6,888 5,787 ...
Balance + 27,681 + 30,016 + 33,420 + 31,266 + 1,540 + 3,448 + 2,827 + 4,843 ...
of which
Exports 61,654 64,860 69,299 71,621 5,891 7,004 7,217 7,680 ... United States
Imports 39,231 40,709 41,798 44,190 4,101 4,054 4,599 4,041 ...
Balance + 22,423 + 24,151 + 27,501 + 27,431 + 1,790 + 2,950 + 2,618 + 3,639 ...
Exports 75,620 84,789 90,498 97,535 9,083 9,853 10,269 10,659 ... 3 Asia
Imports 84,783 98,177 109,304 114,191 9,989 11,040 11,445 12,067 ...
Balance − 9,162 − 13,388 − 18,805 − 16,656 − 906 − 1,187 − 1,176 − 1,408 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 15,511 17,357 20,420 20,886 1,933 2,037 2,044 2,355 ...
Imports 4,469 4,398 5,077 5,785 492 617 565 580 ...
Balance + 11,043 + 12,959 + 15,343 + 15,101 + 1,441 + 1,420 + 1,479 + 1,775 ...
Japan Exports 11,889 12,719 13,338 12,777 1,081 1,304 1,411 1,189 ...
Imports 19,684 21,583 21,772 21,613 1,881 1,987 2,083 2,093 ...
Balance − 7,795 − 8,865 − 8,434 − 8,836 − 800 − 682 − 671 − 904 ...
Exports 18,265 20,992 21,235 25,041 2,445 2,486 2,681 2,973 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 25,681 32,791 40,845 44,137 3,815 4,180 4,614 5,100 ... of China  2 
Balance − 7,417 − 11,800 − 19,610 − 19,096 − 1,370 − 1,694 − 1,933 − 2,128 ...
Exports 5,008 5,513 5,930 5,841 537 627 605 692 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 1,925 2,184 2,301 2,353 248 186 284 207 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,083 + 3,329 + 3,629 + 3,488 + 289 + 441 + 320 + 484 ...
Memo item
Exports 24,515 26,838 27,538 28,806 2,676 3,063 2,946 3,032 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 27,119 30,012 31,520 31,113 2,795 2,967 3,082 3,230 ... South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 2,603 − 3,174 − 3,982 − 2,307 − 120 + 96 − 136 − 199 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. —
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other 4For all countries and non-EU countries: exports and balance positively
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. — influenced by later reports. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2002 − 35,328 − 35,154 + 2,789 + 1,424 − 1,549 + 5,237 − 8,075 − 2,073 + 506 − 1,418 − 16,603
2003 − 34,274 − 36,761 + 1,791 + 1,365 − 748 + 5,088 − 5,009 − 1,836 + 1,485 − 1,241 − 14,684
2004 − 31,254 − 34,813 + 3,885 + 1,316 − 480 + 5,349 − 6,511 − 1,364 + 973 − 940 + 1,575
2005 − 27,484 − 34,957 + 6,358 + 1,629 + 114 + 3,592 − 4,221 − 1,701 + 832 − 1,618 + 10,262
2006 − 24,420 − 34,473 + 5,637 + 1,854 − 1,599 + 3,511 + 650 − 1,792 + 759 − 1,705 + 11,467
2005          Q2 − 5,755 − 8,045 + 1,465 + 494 − 246 + 833 − 256 − 398 + 107 − 487 − 819
         Q3 − 12,038 − 14,207 + 1,830 + 283 − 323 + 853 − 473 − 420 + 87 − 972 + 4,266
         Q4 − 4,287 − 6,482 + 2,049 + 442 − 344 + 882 − 833 − 549 + 514 − 382 + 3,902
2006          Q1 − 5,983 − 6,382 + 1,006 + 451 − 521 + 730 − 1,268 − 414 − 34 + 179 + 3,097
         Q2 − 4,111 − 7,976 + 1,554 + 466 − 229 + 1,016 + 1,058 − 425 + 327 − 461 − 1,653
         Q3 − 11,331 − 13,841 + 1,509 + 428 − 596 + 824 + 345 − 427 + 225 − 1,017 + 4,286
         Q4 − 2,995 − 6,274 + 1,567 + 509 − 253 + 940 + 516 − 526 + 242 − 407 + 5,737
2006          Feb − 924 − 1,626 + 413 + 162 + 10 + 246 − 131 − 114 + 90 + 60 + 1,492
         Mar − 2,016 − 2,377 + 282 + 113 − 145 + 299 − 188 − 146 − 21 + 60 + 850
         Apr − 1,067 − 2,633 + 542 + 88 − 225 + 375 + 786 − 110 + 121 − 146 + 685
         May − 1,618 − 2,637 + 632 + 291 − 33 + 289 − 160 − 175 + 130 − 169 − 4,584
         June − 1,426 − 2,706 + 380 + 86 + 29 + 353 + 431 − 140 + 76 − 146 + 2,246
         July − 2,294 − 3,470 + 684 + 111 − 408 + 252 + 536 − 123 + 91 − 341 + 1,126
         Aug − 5,670 − 5,833 + 514 + 121 − 112 + 270 − 629 − 144 + 66 − 341 + 1,104
         Sep − 3,368 − 4,539 + 311 + 196 − 76 + 302 + 438 − 160 + 69 − 335 + 2,055
         Oct − 2,261 − 3,804 + 720 + 261 − 205 + 247 + 521 − 144 − 3 − 155 + 1,689
         Nov − 1,333 − 1,443 + 439 + 205 − 43 + 305 − 796 − 175 + 99 − 139 + 1,651
         Dec + 599 − 1,027 + 408 + 43 − 5 + 389 + 791 − 207 + 145 − 113 + 2,397
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2002 − 27,511 − 15,710 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 2,665 − 11,801 − 3,470 − 8,331 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,205
2003 − 28,282 − 18,277 − 15,428 − 13,731 − 2,849 − 10,005 − 3,332 − 6,672 + 312 − 1,238 + 1,550
2004 − 28,309 − 17,128 − 14,307 − 12,730 − 2,821 − 11,180 − 3,180 − 8,000 + 430 − 1,094 + 1,524
2005 − 28,921 − 17,907 − 16,253 − 14,725 − 1,654 − 11,014 − 2,926 − 8,088 − 1,268 − 3,419 + 2,151
2006 − 26,544 − 15,700 − 16,068 − 14,581 + 368 − 10,843 − 2,927 − 7,917 − 192 − 1,927 + 1,736
2005          Q2 − 6,386 − 3,253 − 3,762 − 3,322 + 509 − 3,134 − 732 − 2,402 + 107 − 315 + 422
         Q3 − 7,628 − 4,927 − 4,457 − 4,138 − 470 − 2,702 − 732 − 1,970 + 60 − 331 + 391
         Q4 − 7,558 − 5,057 − 4,296 − 4,071 − 762 − 2,501 − 732 − 1,769 + 57 − 734 + 791
2006          Q1 − 6,037 − 3,479 − 2,934 − 2,433 − 545 − 2,558 − 732 − 1,826 + 153 − 310 + 463
         Q2 − 4,837 − 1,762 − 3,575 − 3,234 + 1,813 − 3,075 − 732 − 2,343 + 13 − 663 + 676
         Q3 − 7,566 − 5,021 − 4,708 − 4,519 − 314 − 2,545 − 732 − 1,813 − 253 − 424 + 171
         Q4 − 8,103 − 5,438 − 4,851 − 4,395 − 586 − 2,666 − 732 − 1,934 − 105 − 530 + 425
2006          Feb − 1,376 − 538 − 156 + 22 − 381 − 839 − 244 − 595 + 283 − 77 + 359
         Mar − 2,274 − 1,387 − 1,376 − 1,313 − 11 − 887 − 244 − 644 − 137 − 152 + 16
         Apr − 2,237 − 1,327 − 1,480 − 1,375 + 152 − 910 − 244 − 666 − 144 − 80 − 64
         May − 1,109 + 82 − 1,480 − 1,385 + 1,562 − 1,191 − 244 − 947 − 282 − 137 − 145
         June − 1,491 − 517 − 615 − 474 + 98 − 974 − 244 − 730 + 439 − 446 + 885
         July − 2,598 − 1,735 − 1,576 − 1,476 − 158 − 864 − 244 − 620 − 228 − 206 − 23
         Aug − 2,273 − 1,395 − 1,258 − 1,204 − 136 − 878 − 244 − 634 + 146 − 107 + 253
         Sep − 2,695 − 1,892 − 1,874 − 1,838 − 19 − 803 − 244 − 559 − 171 − 111 − 60
         Oct − 3,112 − 2,373 − 2,091 − 1,892 − 282 − 739 − 244 − 495 + 5 − 145 + 150
         Nov − 2,529 − 1,688 − 1,407 − 1,274 − 281 − 841 − 244 − 597 − 75 − 170 + 95
         Dec − 2,462 − 1,376 − 1,353 − 1,229 − 23 − 1,086 − 244 − 842 − 35 − 215 + 180
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2006
Item 2004 2005 2006 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Oct Nov Dec
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 260,875 − 371,910 − 430,007 − 167,991 − 92,573 − 69,465 − 99,977 − 24,490 − 65,170 − 10,317
1 Direct investment  1 − 1,516 − 36,695 − 51,979 − 16,070 − 10,288 − 16,866 − 8,755 − 7,798 − 298 − 659
Equity capital + 17,642 − 16,779 − 45,991 − 6,493 − 10,069 − 19,937 − 9,492 − 2,936 − 3,519 − 3,037
Reinvested earnings  2 − 5,605 − 9,715 − 13,407 − 3,182 − 1,727 − 3,376 − 5,122 − 2,108 − 2,315 − 699
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 13,553 − 10,201 + 7,419 − 6,394 + 1,508 + 6,447 + 5,859 − 2,754 + 5,536 + 3,076
2 Portfolio investment − 110,592 − 210,891 − 168,091 − 62,144 − 30,427 − 22,095 − 53,425 − 17,415 − 33,566 − 2,444
Shares 3 + 3,520 − 22,884 + 5,055 − 1,220 + 11,279 − 1,875 − 3,128 + 1,963 − 5,862 + 771
Mutual fund shares  4 − 10,933 − 39,864 − 24,984 − 18,413 + 2,664 − 1,125 − 8,111 − 735 − 2,952 − 4,424
Bonds and notes  5 − 90,734 − 143,604 − 140,318 − 42,262 − 36,382 − 17,616 − 44,058 − 16,769 − 23,782 − 3,507
Money market instruments − 12,445 − 4,540 − 7,844 − 250 − 7,988 − 1,479 + 1,873 − 1,874 − 970 + 4,716
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 5,412 − 4,697 − 6,797 − 5,457 + 2,001 − 318 − 3,024 − 1,983 − 1,418 + 377
4 Other investment − 144,826 − 121,810 − 206,073 − 85,401 − 54,226 − 31,031 − 35,415 + 2,305 − 29,786 − 7,933
MFIs  7,8 − 121,833 − 85,781 − 207,679 − 107,125 − 56,824 + 889 − 44,619 + 7,244 − 25,739 − 26,124
Long-term + 5,854 − 69,977 − 71,638 − 15,280 − 17,094 − 14,278 − 24,987 − 4,912 − 9,854 − 10,221
Short-term − 127,687 − 15,804 − 136,041 − 91,845 − 39,731 + 15,167 − 19,632 + 12,156 − 15,884 − 15,904
Enterprises and households − 22,284 − 17,112 − 23,773 − 13,003 + 1,341 − 5,818 − 6,293 − 3,314 − 7,886 + 4,907
Long-term − 7,482 − 8,924 − 21,298 − 3,220 − 2,825 − 6,278 − 8,975 − 3,180 − 2,585 − 3,210
Short-term  7 − 14,802 − 8,188 − 2,475 − 9,783 + 4,166 + 460 + 2,682 − 134 − 5,301 + 8,117
General government + 2,143 + 3,156 + 891 + 7,438 − 13,165 + 1,031 + 5,586 − 6,466 + 7,971 + 4,081
Long-term + 49 + 7,695 + 7,353 + 244 + 250 + 6,533 + 325 + 30 + 26 + 269
Short-term  7 + 2,094 − 4,539 − 6,462 + 7,194 − 13,415 − 5,502 + 5,261 − 6,496 + 7,945 + 3,813
Bundesbank − 2,851 − 22,073 + 24,488 + 27,288 + 14,422 − 27,133 + 9,911 + 4,841 − 4,132 + 9,203
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) + 1,470 + 2,182 + 2,934 + 1,082 + 367 + 844 + 642 + 401 − 102 + 342
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 146,180 + 268,145 + 272,789 + 127,121 + 40,246 + 52,753 + 52,668 + 20,302 + 45,284 − 12,918
1 Direct investment  1 − 12,172 + 26,264 + 27,289 + 297 + 5,813 + 3,848 + 17,332 + 2,417 + 2,368 + 12,547
Equity capital + 27,493 + 12,103 + 12,646 − 487 + 1,370 + 2,232 + 9,530 + 2,301 + 384 + 6,845
Reinvested earnings  2 + 677 + 6,530 + 5,824 + 1,789 + 946 + 2,196 + 893 + 1,421 − 228 − 299
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors − 40,343 + 7,632 + 8,820 − 1,006 + 3,496 − 580 + 6,909 − 1,305 + 2,213 + 6,001
2 Portfolio investment + 120,068 + 196,987 + 163,116 + 60,906 + 20,849 + 26,131 + 55,231 + 23,225 + 24,295 + 7,711
Shares  3 − 12,763 + 40,030 + 28,934 + 656 + 8,550 + 6,478 + 13,251 + 5,348 + 5,317 + 2,586
Mutual fund shares + 4,671 + 932 + 9,127 + 4,976 + 1,509 + 1,240 + 1,401 − 361 + 667 + 1,095
Bonds and notes  5 + 142,689 + 158,690 + 125,394 + 45,965 + 8,177 + 22,714 + 48,538 + 14,143 + 17,893 + 16,502
Money market instruments − 14,529 − 2,665 − 340 + 9,308 + 2,612 − 4,301 − 7,959 + 4,095 + 418 − 12,471
3 Other investment + 38,285 + 44,893 + 82,384 + 65,919 + 13,585 + 22,775 − 19,895 − 5,340 + 18,621 − 33,176
MFIs  7,8 + 32,337 + 22,455 + 60,352 + 58,864 + 833 + 12,142 − 11,485 − 3,831 + 18,931 − 26,585
Long-term − 10,083 − 9,830 − 12,042 − 2,988 + 28 − 950 − 8,132 − 191 + 4,692 − 12,634
Short-term + 42,421 + 32,285 + 72,395 + 61,852 + 805 + 13,091 − 3,353 − 3,640 + 14,239 − 13,952
Enterprises and households + 11,057 + 20,803 + 24,632 + 9,842 + 15,119 + 6,610 − 6,940 − 1,655 − 539 − 4,745
Long-term + 7,810 + 7,836 + 13,021 + 79 + 9,316 + 2,951 + 675 + 238 + 1,997 − 1,560
Short-term  7 + 3,247 + 12,967 + 11,611 + 9,763 + 5,803 + 3,659 − 7,615 − 1,894 − 2,536 − 3,185
General government − 2,658 + 3,740 − 1,314 − 2,850 − 1,980 + 4,873 − 1,357 + 71 − 34 − 1,394
Long-term − 1,425 + 2,818 − 273 − 1,264 − 329 + 328 + 992 − 302 + 800 + 494
Short-term  7 − 1,233 + 922 − 1,040 − 1,586 − 1,651 + 4,545 − 2,348 + 373 − 834 − 1,887
Bundesbank − 2,451 − 2,105 − 1,287 + 63 − 387 − 850 − 114 + 75 + 263 − 452
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 114,695 − 103,765 − 157,218 − 40,869 − 52,327 − 16,712 − 47,309 − 4,189 − 19,885 − 23,235
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
in the
Inter- Liabilities
national arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from external
Fund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
 
 
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-
national claims on
Monetary Other residents
Fund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 less
or month Total Total rights reserves (net)  2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2005          Aug 109,966 76,342 39,121 4,990 32,231 350 32,397 878 5,456 104,511
         Sep 103,805 82,825 43,325 4,994 34,506 350 19,747 883 7,580 96,225
         Oct 111,515 82,506 43,325 4,979 34,202 350 27,777 882 7,374 104,141
         Nov 127,813 85,143 46,240 5,012 33,890 350 41,420 901 6,411 121,403
         Dec 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006          Jan 104,778 89,064 51,820 4,477 32,766 350 14,499 865 6,307 98,471
         Feb 109,677 88,029 51,646 3,829 32,554 350 20,450 847 5,663 104,013
         Mar 105,884 89,157 53,173 3,755 32,229 350 15,543 834 6,286 99,598
         Apr 100,233 89,433 56,106 3,685 29,643 350 9,606 844 4,632 95,601
         May 120,684 89,520 55,979 3,356 30,184 350 29,950 865 6,070 114,614
         June 88,241 85,905 51,983 3,639 30,284 350 1,121 866 5,839 82,402
         July 102,264 89,167 54,918 3,465 30,784 350 11,852 894 6,183 96,081
         Aug 124,938 86,736 53,253 3,501 29,982 350 36,940 912 5,374 119,564
         Sep 115,371 85,854 52,302 3,440 30,111 350 28,254 913 4,980 110,391
         Oct 110,016 85,341 52,080 3,097 30,164 350 23,414 912 5,043 104,973
         Nov 114,116 85,307 53,218 3,048 29,040 350 27,546 914 5,273 108,843
         Dec 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007          Jan 114,714 87,385 54,853 2,998 29,534 350 26,011 969 5,415 109,299
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2003 362,099 86,627 275,472 159,653 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2004 377,540 98,632 278,908 159,764 119,144 112,342 6,802 506,434 50,211 456,223 361,111 95,112 63,762 31,350
2005 409,493 97,333 312,160 179,738 132,422 125,497 6,925 548,107 65,557 482,550 375,114 107,436 73,270 34,166
2006 449,311 117,723 331,588 189,378 142,210 134,062 8,148 614,986 88,069 526,917 406,055 120,862 79,898 40,964
2006          July 435,078 104,969 330,109 192,538 137,571 129,774 7,797 589,802 88,028 501,774 391,399 110,375 69,899 40,476
         Aug 439,317 113,127 326,190 191,936 134,254 126,493 7,761 590,614 91,409 499,205 390,705 108,500 67,259 41,241
         Sep 450,057 117,373 332,684 191,992 140,692 133,037 7,655 609,715 95,945 513,770 399,433 114,337 73,094 41,243
         Oct 457,213 119,591 337,622 196,093 141,529 133,652 7,877 608,657 93,782 514,875 398,452 116,423 74,574 41,849
         Nov  r 460,191 125,044 335,147 188,983 146,164 138,209 7,955 614,759 94,636 520,123 402,475 117,648 76,126 41,522
         Dec 449,311 117,723 331,588 189,378 142,210 134,062 8,148 614,986 88,069 526,917 406,055 120,862 79,898 40,964
Industrial countries 1
 
2003 310,454 85,390 225,064 144,980 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,220
2004 335,809 97,485 238,324 148,649 89,675 84,903 4,772 468,592 48,304 420,288 349,293 70,995 53,480 17,515
2005 362,704 95,847 266,857 167,314 99,543 94,278 5,265 508,106 63,924 444,182 364,680 79,502 60,907 18,595
2006 395,732 115,269 280,463 173,862 106,601 100,546 6,055 562,471 86,610 475,861 388,518 87,343 66,208 21,135
2006          July 383,669 103,302 280,367 177,640 102,727 96,498 6,229 544,587 86,112 458,475 378,713 79,762 58,354 21,408
         Aug 387,507 111,112 276,395 176,877 99,518 93,338 6,180 544,742 89,504 455,238 378,282 76,956 55,313 21,643
         Sep 397,650 115,406 282,244 176,743 105,501 99,468 6,033 561,522 94,158 467,364 385,545 81,819 60,326 21,493
         Oct 404,453 117,128 287,325 181,123 106,202 99,978 6,224 559,904 91,991 467,913 384,564 83,349 61,586 21,763
         Nov  r 406,400 122,626 283,774 173,350 110,424 104,134 6,290 566,330 93,163 473,167 388,150 85,017 63,058 21,959
         Dec 395,732 115,269 280,463 173,862 106,601 100,546 6,055 562,471 86,610 475,861 388,518 87,343 66,208 21,135
EU member states 1
 
2003 230,673 81,430 149,243 94,092 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,642
2004 259,480 92,867 166,613 101,254 65,359 61,563 3,796 376,461 43,838 332,623 284,173 48,450 36,494 11,956
2005 270,808 91,882 178,926 108,523 70,403 66,156 4,247 414,377 60,186 354,191 300,022 54,169 41,305 12,864
2006 308,726 108,982 199,744 121,929 77,815 72,908 4,907 471,521 79,393 392,128 332,319 59,809 45,200 14,609
2006          July 292,064 97,952 194,112 119,760 74,352 69,398 4,954 451,885 81,363 370,522 315,491 55,031 40,081 14,950
         Aug 298,509 105,795 192,714 120,990 71,724 66,827 4,897 454,389 84,618 369,771 316,943 52,828 37,790 15,038
         Sep 309,519 109,498 200,021 123,430 76,591 71,779 4,812 476,517 88,838 387,679 331,520 56,159 41,236 14,923
         Oct 312,999 110,809 202,190 124,364 77,826 72,828 4,998 475,645 87,323 388,322 330,692 57,630 42,571 15,059
         Nov  r 317,207 116,548 200,659 119,362 81,297 76,229 5,068 481,133 88,527 392,606 333,981 58,625 43,628 14,997
         Dec 308,726 108,982 199,744 121,929 77,815 72,908 4,907 471,521 79,393 392,128 332,319 59,809 45,200 14,609
of which:  Euro-area member states 
 
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,404
2004 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 305,864 28,295 277,569 244,860 32,709 24,258 8,451
2005 175,532 59,160 116,372 69,048 47,324 44,369 2,955 332,261 29,443 302,818 268,483 34,335 25,225 9,110
2006 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 368,944 38,178 330,766 292,176 38,590 28,338 10,252
2006          July 187,653 61,642 126,011 76,753 49,258 45,772 3,486 355,886 38,722 317,164 283,332 33,832 23,846 9,986
         Aug 194,154 68,785 125,369 78,289 47,080 43,679 3,401 360,502 43,335 317,167 284,649 32,518 22,189 10,329
         Sep 200,153 70,425 129,728 79,426 50,302 47,055 3,247 372,489 45,304 327,185 291,709 35,476 25,124 10,352
         Oct 201,775 70,427 131,348 80,479 50,869 47,485 3,384 371,508 43,952 327,556 291,240 36,316 25,879 10,437
         Nov  r 205,427 75,669 129,758 76,632 53,126 49,680 3,446 374,464 43,612 330,852 293,622 37,230 26,812 10,418
         Dec 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 368,944 38,178 330,766 292,176 38,590 28,338 10,252
Emerging economies and developing countries 2
 
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,249
2004 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,835
2005 46,789 1,486 45,303 12,424 32,879 31,219 1,660 40,001 1,633 38,368 10,434 27,934 12,363 15,571
2006 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 52,515 1,459 51,056 17,537 33,519 13,690 19,829
2006          July 51,409 1,667 49,742 14,898 34,844 33,276 1,568 45,215 1,916 43,299 12,686 30,613 11,545 19,068
         Aug 51,810 2,015 49,795 15,059 34,736 33,155 1,581 45,872 1,905 43,967 12,423 31,544 11,946 19,598
         Sep 52,407 1,967 50,440 15,249 35,191 33,569 1,622 48,193 1,787 46,406 13,888 32,518 12,768 19,750
         Oct 52,760 2,463 50,297 14,970 35,327 33,674 1,653 48,753 1,791 46,962 13,888 33,074 12,988 20,086
         Nov  r 53,791 2,418 51,373 15,633 35,740 34,075 1,665 48,429 1,473 46,956 14,325 32,631 13,068 19,563
         Dec 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 52,515 1,459 51,056 17,537 33,519 13,690 19,829
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. — 1From May
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in 2004, including the new member states: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Es tonia,
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- Slovenia. — 2 All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. 
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2004          July 1.7135 1.6220 10.1622 7.4355 134.08 8.4751 9.1962 1.5270 0.66576 1.2266
         Aug 1.7147 1.6007 10.0830 7.4365 134.54 8.3315 9.1861 1.5387 0.66942 1.2176
         Sep 1.7396 1.5767 10.1134 7.4381 134.51 8.3604 9.0920 1.5431 0.68130 1.2218
         Oct 1.7049 1.5600 10.3423 7.4379 135.97 8.2349 9.0620 1.5426 0.69144 1.2490
         Nov 1.6867 1.5540 10.7536 7.4313 136.09 8.1412 8.9981 1.5216 0.69862 1.2991
         Dec 1.7462 1.6333 11.0967 7.4338 139.14 8.2207 8.9819 1.5364 0.69500 1.3408
2005          Jan 1.7147 1.6060 10.8588 7.4405 135.63 8.2125 9.0476 1.5469 0.69867 1.3119
         Feb 1.6670 1.6128 10.7719 7.4427 136.55 8.3199 9.0852 1.5501 0.68968 1.3014
         Mar 1.6806 1.6064 10.9262 7.4466 138.83 8.1880 9.0884 1.5494 0.69233 1.3201
         Apr 1.6738 1.5991 10.7080 7.4499 138.84 8.1763 9.1670 1.5475 0.68293 1.2938
         May 1.6571 1.5942 10.5062 7.4443 135.37 8.0814 9.1931 1.5449 0.68399 1.2694
         June 1.5875 1.5111 10.0683 7.4448 132.22 7.8932 9.2628 1.5391 0.66895 1.2165
         July 1.6002 1.4730 9.8954 7.4584 134.75 7.9200 9.4276 1.5578 0.68756 1.2037
         Aug 1.6144 1.4819 9.9589 7.4596 135.98 7.9165 9.3398 1.5528 0.68527 1.2292
         Sep 1.6009 1.4452 9.9177 7.4584 136.06 7.8087 9.3342 1.5496 0.67760 1.2256
         Oct 1.5937 1.4149 9.7189 7.4620 138.05 7.8347 9.4223 1.5490 0.68137 1.2015
         Nov 1.6030 1.3944 9.5273 7.4596 139.59 7.8295 9.5614 1.5449 0.67933 1.1786
         Dec 1.5979 1.3778 9.5746 7.4541 140.58 7.9737 9.4316 1.5479 0.67922 1.1856
2006          Jan 1.6152 1.4025 9.7630 7.4613 139.82 8.0366 9.3111 1.5494 0.68598 1.2103
         Feb 1.6102 1.3723 9.6117 7.4641 140.77 8.0593 9.3414 1.5580 0.68297 1.1938
         Mar 1.6540 1.3919 9.6581 7.4612 140.96 7.9775 9.4017 1.5691 0.68935 1.2020
         Apr 1.6662 1.4052 9.8361 7.4618 143.59 7.8413 9.3346 1.5748 0.69463 1.2271
         May 1.6715 1.4173 10.2353 7.4565 142.70 7.7988 9.3310 1.5564 0.68330 1.2770
         June 1.7104 1.4089 10.1285 7.4566 145.11 7.8559 9.2349 1.5601 0.68666 1.2650
         July 1.6869 1.4303 10.1347 7.4602 146.70 7.9386 9.2170 1.5687 0.68782 1.2684
         Aug 1.6788 1.4338 10.2141 7.4609 148.53 7.9920 9.2098 1.5775 0.67669 1.2811
         Sep 1.6839 1.4203 10.0971 7.4601 148.99 8.2572 9.2665 1.5841 0.67511 1.2727
         Oct 1.6733 1.4235 9.9651 7.4555 149.65 8.3960 9.2533 1.5898 0.67254 1.2611
         Nov 1.6684 1.4635 10.1286 7.4564 151.11 8.2446 9.1008 1.5922 0.67397 1.2881
         Dec 1.6814 1.5212 10.3356 7.4549 154.82 8.1575 9.0377 1.5969 0.67286 1.3213
2007          Jan 1.6602 1.5285 10.1238 7.4539 156.56 8.2780 9.0795 1.6155 0.66341 1.2999
*Calculated from daily values; for additional euro reference exchange statistics. — 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from
rates, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in Stage III of Economic and Monetary Union
Since Country Currency ISO currency code Euro 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Tolar SIT 239.640
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
February 2007
XI. External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo  item Effective nominal exchange rates of
Indicators of the German economy’s selected foreign currencies against the
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  1,2 currencies of 19 industrial countries  1,3
EER-24  4 EER-44  5 19 industrial countries  3 49 countries  6
In real terms
based on the
In real terms unit labour In real terms
based on the In real terms costs of the based on the based on the
consumer based on the national consumer deflators of Pound Japanese
Period yen Nominal prices GDP deflator  7economy  7 Nominal prices total sales  7based on consumer prices US dollar sterling
1999 96.3 96.0 95.6 96.6 96.5 95.8 97.7 98.1 97.7 100.8 102.3 105.1
2000 87.0 86.4 85.6 85.4 87.9 85.8 91.3 92.7 91.2 105.4 105.2 117.9
2001 87.8 87.1 86.4 84.9 90.4 87.1 91.3 93.2 91.5 112.0 103.6 106.7
2002 90.2 90.4 89.4 87.9 94.9 91.0 92.3 94.1 92.6 110.7 104.2 100.8
2003 100.7 101.3 100.0 97.9 106.8 101.8 95.7 97.8 97.3 97.7 99.2 99.9
2004 104.4 105.1 103.0 101.8 111.2 105.6 96.0 99.2 98.8 89.8 103.4 101.7
2005 103.3 104.1 100.8 99.4 109.7 103.7 94.9 99.5 97.6 88.7 102.9 99.8
2006 103.6 104.4 ... ... 110.0 103.4 p 94.3 99.9 97.2 88.3 104.0 93.8
2002          Dec 93.8 94.0 99.7 95.1 95.4 94.5 106.0 104.0 99.6
2003          Jan 96.1 96.5 102.5 97.8 96.1 95.5 103.0 102.6 100.4
         Feb 97.4 97.8 96.3 94.2 103.9 99.1 94.6 96.8 96.4 102.2 101.2 99.2
         Mar 98.2 98.7 104.6 99.7 97.1 96.5 101.4 99.3 99.8
         Apr 98.8 99.3 104.8 99.8 97.2 96.5 101.4 98.7 98.6
         May 102.5 103.1 100.8 98.3 108.7 103.5 96.2 98.7 98.1 96.7 96.9 97.7
         June 103.0 103.7 109.0 104.0 98.9 98.4 96.1 98.9 96.3
         July 101.8 102.5 107.5 102.5 98.4 97.5 97.8 98.5 97.3
         Aug 100.6 101.5 100.5 98.7 106.2 101.5 95.8 97.9 96.9 99.1 98.1 98.3
         Sep 100.4 101.4 106.1 101.3 97.5 96.9 97.2 98.2 101.1
         Oct 102.1 102.9 108.2 103.2 98.0 97.6 93.3 98.8 103.7
         Nov 102.0 102.8 102.5 100.3 108.2 103.1 96.1 98.1 97.7 93.0 99.5 103.9
         Dec 104.9 105.5 111.4 106.0 99.0 99.0 90.6 99.5 102.9
2004          Jan 106.0 106.6 112.7 107.1 99.8 99.7 88.9 101.6 102.9
         Feb 105.9 106.5 104.3 102.9 112.5 107.0 96.7 99.5 99.5 89.3 104.1 102.4
         Mar 104.0 104.7 110.4 105.0 99.0 98.7 90.9 104.2 102.1
         Apr 102.3 103.1 108.5 103.2 98.5 97.8 91.8 104.3 104.0
         May 103.1 103.8 101.6 100.5 109.8 104.4 95.3 98.7 98.3 93.4 103.7 100.0
         June 102.9 103.5 109.8 104.3 98.4 98.2 91.9 104.9 101.6
         July 103.4 104.0 110.3 104.7 98.8 98.3 90.9 105.0 101.2
         Aug 103.2 104.0 101.9 101.0 110.1 104.7 95.7 99.0 98.5 91.3 104.6 100.5
         Sep 103.6 104.4 110.5 104.9 99.1 98.4 90.7 102.8 100.8
         Oct 104.7 105.5 111.8 106.0 99.5 99.0 88.9 101.8 100.8
         Nov 106.0 106.6 104.2 102.9 113.3 107.3 96.2 99.9 99.4 85.4 101.4 102.6
         Dec 107.3 108.0 114.7 108.6 100.7 100.1 84.3 102.8 102.0
2005          Jan 106.2 106.8 113.2 107.0 100.3 99.2 85.3 101.7 103.6
         Feb 105.4 106.0 103.1 102.1 112.2 106.0 96.3 100.0 98.8 86.1 102.9 102.4
         Mar 106.2 106.9 113.1 107.0 100.4 99.1 85.3 103.0 101.4
         Apr 105.3 106.0 112.1 106.0 99.9 98.6 86.8 104.0 100.4
         May 104.3 105.2 101.2 100.5 110.8 104.8 95.1 99.6 98.0 87.8 103.2 102.0
         June 101.6 102.5 107.8 102.0 98.5 96.6 89.6 104.4 102.0
         July 102.2 103.0 108.2 102.3 99.0 96.9 90.7 101.6 99.8
         Aug 102.7 103.6 99.8 98.2 108.9 103.0 94.4 99.2 97.2 89.2 102.4 99.9
         Sep 102.1 103.0 108.4 102.5 99.4 97.3 88.8 103.4 99.5
         Oct 101.8 102.7 107.9 101.9 99.2 96.9 90.5 102.7 97.1
         Nov 101.2 102.0 99.0 96.9 107.0 100.9 93.8 99.1 96.5 92.3 102.7 95.2
         Dec 101.2 102.0 107.0 100.9 99.2 96.4 91.6 102.9 94.7
2006          Jan 101.9 102.7 107.7 101.5 99.1 96.3 90.0 102.2 96.3
         Feb 101.2 102.0 99.0 96.8 106.8 100.6 93.8 99.0 96.0 91.0 102.5 94.9
         Mar 102.0 102.9 107.6 101.4 99.2 96.2 90.8 101.7 95.2
         Apr 103.1 104.0 108.8 102.5 99.6 96.7 89.7 101.5 94.5
         May 104.0 104.8 100.8 98.4 110.5 104.0 p 94.2 99.9 97.4 86.1 103.8 96.7
         June 104.2 104.9 111.1 104.4 99.9 97.6 87.2 103.3 94.7
         July 104.6 105.4 111.3 104.7 100.2 97.9 87.6 103.3 93.8
         Aug 104.6 105.4 101.4 98.5 111.3 104.6 p 94.4 99.9 97.4 87.0 105.4 93.0
         Sep 104.4 105.2 111.1 104.3 100.1 97.5 87.4 105.6 92.4
         Oct 103.9 104.7 110.4 103.6 100.2 97.4 88.4 105.9 91.6
         Nov 104.5 105.2 ... ... 111.1 104.1 p 94.6 100.7 97.8 87.4 106.1 91.7
         Dec 105.6 106.0 112.3 104.9 100.9 98.0 86.6 107.1 90.7
2007          Jan 104.9 105.3 111.5 104.0 100.8 97.5 88.3 108.5 88.9
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of in these calculations are based on manufactured goods trade betwee n 1999
the currency concerned. — 1The method of calculation is consistent with and 2001 and capture third-market effects. Where consumer prices were not
the procedure used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of yet available, estimates have been used. For details of the methodology, see
the euro (see Monthly Bulletin, November 2001, pp 51−65). In contrast to ECB, Monthly Bulletin, September 2004, pp 69−72 and the ECB’s Occasional
footnote 4, the weights used are based on the relevant trade in the period Paper No 2, which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website
from 1995 to 1997. — 2Decline in the figures implies an increase in (www.ecb.int). — 5ECB calculations. In addition to the countries belonging
competitiveness. — 3Euro-area countries (except Slovenia) as well as to the EER-24 group (see footnote 4), this group also includes the following
Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India, Indo nesia,
and United States. — 4ECB calculations based on the weighted averages of Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russian
the effective exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. —
following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Cyprus, Czech 6Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-44 group except
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Bulgaria, Chile, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta and Venezuela. — 7Annual
Malta, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, Slovakia, South Korea, and quarterly averages. 
Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. The weights used
76*XI. External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic and
statistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are available
in both English and German, in printed
form and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a
file which is updated monthly and
contains approximately 40,000 time
series published by the Bundesbank
can be obtained on magnetic tape cas-
sette or CD-ROM from the Division
Statistical data processing, math-
ematical methods. Orders should be
sent, in writing, to one of the ad-
dresses listed on the reverse of the title
page. Selected time series can also be
downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2006 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2007 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007

Monthly Report articles
March 2006
– German balance of payments in 2005
– New legal and regulatory framework for the
German securitisation and Pfandbrief market
– A disaggregated framework for analysing
public finances: Germany’s fiscal track record
between 2000 and 2005
April 2006
– Determinants of the term structure of interest
rates – approaches to combining arbitrage-free
models and monetary macroeconomics
– The creation of a single list of eligible collateral
throughout the euro area
May 2006
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2006
June 2006
– Investment and financing in 2005
– Concentration risk in credit portfolios
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2004
July 2006
– Recent developments in German banks’ lend-
ing to domestic enterprises and households
– State government finances in Germany
– Derivatives and their feedback effects on the
spot markets
August 2006
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2006September 2006
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2005
– German foreign direct investment (FDI) rela-
tionships: recent trends and macroeconomic
effects
– The evolution of labour market-related ex-
penditure
October 2006
– How informative survey data on private sector
inflation expectations are for monetary policy-
makers
– Current trends and structural changes in the
public bond market
November 2006
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2006
December 2006
– Germany in the globalisation process
– The economic situation of small and medium-
sized enterprises in Germany since 1997
– Transporting the new Basel capital rules into
German law
– Recent developments in payment cards and
innovative electronic payment procedures
January 2007
– Investment activity in Germany under the influ-
ence of technological change and competition
among production locations
– The labour market in Germany: general devel-
opments seen in an international context
February 2007
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2006-07
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)
5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19962
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 19972
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19992
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20032
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-
rungsunion, April 20052
European economic and monetary union,
September 2005
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20062
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200332 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, December 20062,4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20002
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2005,
July 20065
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
2006
6 Ratios from financial statements of German
enterprises 2002 to 2003, December 20055
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, February 20052
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 International capital links,
April 20061, 5
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2006
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20062
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2007
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available in German only.
3Solely available on the internet, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Stat-
istics”, “External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
4Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.
5Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
February 2007
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
41/2006
The macroeconomic effects of exogenous fiscal
policy shocks in Germany: a disaggregated SVAR
analysis
42/2006
How good are dynamic factor models at forecast-
ing output and inflation? A meta-analytic approach
43/2006
Regionalw/C228hrungen in Deutschland – Lokale Kon-
kurrenz f/C252r den Euro?
44/2006
Precautionary saving and income uncertainty in
Germany – new evidence from microdata
45/2006
The role of technology in M&As: a firm-level com-
parison of cross-border and domestic deals
46/2006
Price adjustment in German manufacturing: evi-
dence from two merged surveys
47/2006
A new mixed multiplicative-additive model for sea-
sonal adjustment
48/2006
Industries and the bank lending effects of bank
credit demand and monetary policy in Germany
01/2007
The effect of FDI on job separation
02/2007
Threshold dynamics of short-term interest rates:
empirical evidence and implications for the term
structureSeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
11/2006
Limits to international banking consolidation
12/2006
Money market derivatives and the allocation of
liquidity risk in the banking sector
01/2007
Granularity adjustment for BaselII
02/2007
Efficient, profitable and safe banking: an oxy-
moron? Evidence from a panel VAR approach
03/2007
Slippery slopes of stress: ordered failure events in
German banking
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20012
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20012
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19992
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Mark
or more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the internet.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

