MONTHLY REPORT
NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH
2007
Vol 59
No 1 1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 11 am on 16 November 2007.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
bank can be downloaded from our website.
The statistical data are also published on the
website.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-
tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-
tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in autumn 2007 5
Overview 6
Global and European setting 12
The diverging tendencies in new orders
and manufacturing production
in the euro area 20
Monetary policy and banking business 23
Money market management and
liquidity needs 25
Financial markets 35
Portfolio shifts as a measure of general
risk perception in the financial markets 42
Economic conditions in Germany 46
The revision of the ILO unemployment
figures for Germany 51
Measured, perceived and expected
price developments 54
Public finances 60
Extension of the period of entitlement
to unemployment benefit I 70
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*
Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem 16*
Banks 20*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
Minimum reserves 42*
Interest rates 43*
Capital market 48*
Financial accounts 52*
Public finances in Germany 54*
Economic conditions in Germany 61*
External sector 68*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
5The economic scene
in Germany
in autumn 2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
6OverviewRobust economic growth, but less
favourable price environment
The world economy continued to grow
strongly in the third quarter. One reason for
this was the ongoing dynamic expansion of
the emerging market economies (EMEs). An-
other was that growth in the euro area and in
Japan strengthened appreciably. In addition,
the US economy continued to expand vigor-
ously. However, given the correction and ad-
justment processes now under way in the
financial markets and the renewed price
surge in various commodity markets, the
overall setting for the near term no longer
looks as favourable.
The crisis in the US real estate market and the
general reassessment of credit risks which it
triggered initially led to a marked increase in
the market players’ risk aversion. This sharply
impaired trade in complex financial products,
in particular. Share prices, which had touched
multi-year peaks at the start of the third quar-
ter, also came under strong pressure. Follow-
ing the Federal Reserve’s easing of its monet-
ary policy stance and in view of the overall ro-
bust state of the world economy, the stock
markets were able to recoup some of the
losses as the reporting period progressed.
Longer-term interest rates in the euro area
and, in particular, the USA were pushed
down by a flight to safe-haven investments.
By the time this report went to press, long-
term government bond yields in the euro-
area capital markets had fallen by1/C252percent-
age point to just under 4%. In the foreign ex-
change markets the parities between the
major currencies shifted perceptibly to theInternational
setting
Financial
markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
7detriment of the US dollar while the euro
continued to appreciate. At the beginning ofNovember, the euro reached a new highagainst the US dollar of over US$1.47. How-ever, on a trade-weighted average againstthe 24 most important currencies, the eurowas only some 3
1/C252% higher than it was be-
fore the financial market turbulence broke
out during the summer despite its relatively
strong appreciation against the US dollar.
The crisis in the subprime segment of the US
mortgage market was reflected in tension inthe euro money market, which ultimately ex-pressed the particularly high degree of uncer-tainty about the banks’ associated liquidity re-quirements. This was visible in the evolution
of the interest rate at which banks trade over-night liquidity. Although this rate is usuallyquoted at slightly above the marginal allot-ment rate of the main refinancing operations,it initially rose significantly at the beginning ofAugust after the banks were confronted withunexpected liquidity risks. In order to reducethe tensions and to counter the functionalshortcomings in the longer-term maturity
segments of the money market, the Eurosys-
tem repeatedly carried out generous fine-tuning operations in addition to its regularmain refinancing operations. The purpose ofthese measures was to prevent long-term anddestabilising liquidity shortages for the finan-cial system as a whole and thus to boost con-fidence in the markets during this particularlycritical period. Moreover, the ECB GoverningCouncil kept the central bank rates un-changed given the high degree of uncertaintywith regard to assessing the implications ofthe financial market turmoil. This has not,however, altered the general orientation of
monetary policy to maintaining price stability.
Hence the calmer state of the money marketshas put the spotlight back onto the growinginflationary risks after a sharp rise in energy
prices and an increase in the prices of foodand other consumer goods increasinglyfuelled concern. Thus whereas in the thirdquarter consumer prices in the euro area rose
by an average of 1.9% over 12 months, inOctober the year-on-year increase widened
significantly to 2.6%.
The cyclical upturn in the German economy
continued and intensified in the third quarterof 2007. According to initial figures from the
Federal Statistical Office, aggregate outputwent up between July and September by0.7%, after adjustment for seasonal and cal-endar effects, compared with 0.3% in thesecond quarter. The year-on-year rate ofgrowth was 2.5% after calendar adjustment.This suggests that overall capacity utilisationhas risen further so far this year.
After pre-emptive purchases ahead of the
VAT hike at the beginning of the year and theensuing dent in demand thereafter had sub-stantially curbed the development of privateconsumption and housing construction in thefirst half of the year, the cyclical momentumbegan to reassert itself in the quarter underreview. Although there are no detailed figuresyet on the development of the individual de-mand components in the third quarter, theavailable indicators point to stronger domes-tic impulses. It is thus likely that privateconsumption, which had already recoveredsomewhat during the second quarter after
Monetary
policy
German
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
8reaching a low in the first three months of
this year, contributed further to overall
growth. Besides this, enterprises stepped up
their investment activities.
Foreign trade, too, remained an important
driver of German economic growth in the
third quarter. Of late this has been the case
not only for exporters of capital goods, who
are traditionally heavily export-oriented, but
also for manufacturers of consumer goods.
The fact that most sectors were able to profit
from this indicates both the broadly based na-
ture of the cyclical upturn and German firms’
favourable market position, especially in the
euro area. Imports have likewise become
more significant on the back of growing do-
mestic demand and particularly in connection
with increased stockbuilding, meaning that,
on balance, foreign trade made only a neutral
contribution to overall economic growth.
Accelerated economic growth has also
helped to improve the employment situation.
The number of persons in employment rose
by 98,000 in the third quarter after adjust-
ment for seasonal variations. The year-on-
year increase amounted to 638,000 persons
or 1.6%. Therefore growth was almost as
strong as the average for the first half of
2007. In particular, jobs subject to social
security contributions grew at an above-
average rate. Some 3.74 million people, or
8.9% of the dependent labour force, were
registered as unemployed during the third
quarter (after seasonal adjustment) compared
with an unemployment rate of 9.2% in the
second quarter and 10.6% one year earlier.
The drop in unemployment equally benefitedlong-term unemployed persons receiving
the basic welfare allowance “unemployment
benefit II” and shorter-term jobless claimants
of the insurance-related “unemployment
benefit I”. The decline in unemployment con-
tinued in October. The unemployment rate
fell to 8.7%.
Older workers benefited to a greater extent
from the higher rate of employment than
other groups of persons. The reforms imple-
mented some time ago regarding pension re-
ceipt and unemployment insurance played a
crucial part in this. The extension and stag-
gering of the maximum period of entitlement
to unemployment benefit for older workers,
which has now been agreed, will partly re-
verse those reforms. It not only contradicts
the fundamental character of the statutory
unemployment insurance scheme as an insur-
ance policy against the risk of losing one’s
job, but also represents a setback in the ef-
forts to create a more favourable institutional
framework for greater employment. Thus the
job risk of older workers, in particular, has
tended to increase again.
Wage agreements this year have also been
slightly higher owing to the improved labour
market situation. This is gradually being re-
flected in the development of contractually
agreed basic rates of pay, which were up
1.7% on the year in the third quarter. How-
ever, in the production sector, which has par-
ticularly benefited from the economic upturn,
negotiated wages increased by 3.1% on the
year in the third quarter, which is a much
higher rate than the average for the economy
as a whole. Despite higher negotiated rates,Labour market
Wages

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
9wage cost pressure has remained quite mod-
erate overall so far this year. This is due, firstly,to the fact that in the services sector wagesettlements from previous years are cominginto effect which foresee no or only smallwage increases for the current year. Secondly,some wage agreements have expired withouta replacement agreement having been nego-tiated as yet. Thirdly, some new wage agree-ments do not envisage an increase until2008.
Recent price developments were influenced
more strongly by external influences. Along-side higher crude oil prices, increases in foodprices have particularly contributed to this.On average, the increase in the HarmonisedIndex of Consumer Prices amounted to 2.2%in the third quarter and 2.7% in October.Consumer prices are expected to continue torise sharply in the coming months. Energy inparticular is likely to become even moreexpensive due to the fact that the latest in-creases in crude oil prices only began to bepassed on to the consumer in November.Sharp rises in electricity and gas prices havealready been announced for the beginning of2008. Moreover, the effects of the boom onthe international agricultural markets are onlylikely to fade slowly. Year-on-year rates areunlikely to start receding to more moderate
levels before the second quarter of 2008,given an incipient return to normal on theinternational markets and as a consequenceof baseline effects relating to the VAT hike inJanuary 2007 and the introduction of tuition
fees in April 2007.Parallel to the marked deterioration in the
price environment, the risks to overall eco-nomic activity also increased in the third quar-ter. To a certain extent the two must be seenas being directly related. Thus the unfavour-able rate of price development is placing astrain not only on households’ currentbudgets but also on their future real incomeprospects. Moreover, the further steep rise inoil prices is engendering ongoing risks toglobal economic momentum. Furthermore,negative repercussions of the financial marketturmoil are to be expected to a certain extent.From Germany’s point of view, by contrast,the most recent exchange rate fluctuationsare rather ambivalent. On the one hand, theyare helping to alleviate the price environmentand to form a certain counterweight to theoil-price related deterioration in the terms oftrade. On the other hand, they are squeezingprofit margins and hampering sales oppor-tunities abroad. However, the positive under-lying trend of economic development is notunder threat.
This assessment is notably based on the ro-
bust condition of industry. Thus the forwardreach of existing orders has stood at the un-usually long margin of around three monthssince the turn of the year. Surveys of currentbusiness conditions and future expectations
in trade and industry support this conclusion.They suggest that, although enterprises havecontinuously lowered their exceptionally fa-vourable and optimistic assessments over thepast few months in the wake of rising crude
oil and commodity prices, the euro’s appreci-ation and the temporary acute tensions onthe financial markets, the current situation in
PricesOutlook

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
10the German economy continues to be charac-
terised by a very confident underlying senti-
ment. This conclusion is strengthened by the
fact that enterprises’ export expectations
have deteriorated only moderately in com-
parison with the other expectation indicators.
This is particularly noteworthy in view of the
generally anticipated slowdown in the US
economy, which has been adversely affected
by the real estate and mortgage crises. The
persistently high growth expectations for the
emerging market economies, the OPEC coun-
tries and the east European transition coun-
tries evidently represent a sufficient counter-
weight, especially as the German economy’s
product profile is tailor-made to suit the high
demand for capital goods in these regions.
Given the fact that enterprises are currently
utilising their existing capacities to the full,
continued buoyant foreign business should
cause them to invest more in the coming
months. This is aided by the fact that expend-
iture on movables enjoys favourable tax treat-
ment until the end of this year as a result of
the improved depreciation facility. Not least
against the backdrop of Germany’s regained
attractiveness as a production location, indus-
trial construction, which usually lags behind
investment in machinery and equipment,
may be expected to increase. By contrast, the
future outlook of the housing construction
sector is less favourable.
With respect to private consumption, the
dampening effects of the VAT increase are
likely to have largely petered out by now. This
is indicated, inter alia , by the sharp increase in
new passenger car registrations by privateowners in the third quarter, although the
level is still clearly subdued. The higher rate of
employment is likely to support private con-
sumption over the coming period. The recent
surges in energy and some food prices have,
however, reduced consumers’ purchasing
power. Another factor which should not be
underestimated in this context is an uncer-
tainty component based, for the most part,
on subjective perceptions which since the
third quarter has considerably depressed the
propensity to purchase in anticipation of ris-
ing prices. In this context it seems all the
more important that European monetary pol-
icy remains a reliable anchor of stability.
The public finance situation in Germany im-
proved perceptibly in 2007. For the first time
since German reunification, the general gov-
ernment budget should be balanced after a
deficit of 1.6% of GDP was run up last year.
Although the favourable course of economic
development has also had its part to play in
this decrease, it is attributable in large meas-
ure to structural improvements, in particular
the increase in VAT and the continued moder-
ate development of expenditure. This makes
it possible to attain a balanced budget this
year, also in structural terms. This means that
a key objective of the Stability and Growth
Pact, which the Federal Government had not
planned to achieve until 2010, can already be
attained in 2007. If this target is also met in
the coming years or if a structural budgetary
surplus is generated, then the debt ratio
could be brought below the reference value
of 60% within a reasonable period of time.
The resulting relative easing of the debt ser-
vice burden would provide a cushion for cop-Public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
11ing with the likely expansion of expenditure
ensuing, in particular, from the ageing of thepopulation. Structural surpluses would makean important contribution to this as well asadditionally easing the burden on youngerand future generations. The outlook for 2008shows that expenditure growth has to con-tinue to be tightly curbed to ensure that thebudgetary consolidation achieved so far isnot endangered and to create scope to pos-sibly reduce taxes and social contributions.Given the danger that the surge in revenuefrom profit-related taxes that has been ob-served so far will not continue indefinitelyand that the turbulence on the financial mar-kets is generating additional risks for govern-ment budgets, any straying from the consoli-dation course would be problematic.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
12Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
In the third quarter, the world economy once
again grew strongly. One reason for this was
the continued fast pace of growth in the
emerging market economies (EMEs). Another
was that growth in the euro area and Japan
went back up appreciably after having been
rather sluggish or even slightly negative in the
second quarter owing to one-off factors. In
addition, the US economy continued to ex-
pand vigorously. In the third quarter, the ef-
fects on the real economy of the financial
market turmoil that had originated in the
US subprime mortgage market were restrict-
ed to housing construction. The other com-
ponents of private final demand and exports
grew vibrantly. At +3/C254% after adjustment for
seasonal and calendar-day variation, the
growth of real gross domestic product (GDP)
in the industrial countries as a whole was
stronger than in the second quarter (+1/C252%).
Year-on-year growth stood at 21/C252%.
However, given the correction and adjust-
ment processes now underway in the finan-
cial markets and the renewed price surge in
the commodity markets, the overall picture
no longer looks as rosy for the near future.
From a global perspective, however, the oil
price and exchange rate effects initially only
represent the redistribution or redirection of
income flows. As key economic areas are
otherwise in a rather robust condition, it is
still not clear whether this will result in fric-
tional demand shortfalls. However, the neces-
sary repricing of risk exposures for certain
financial products will create a certain strain,
at least in the short term, even though a risk-Strong global
growth in the
third quarter ...
... yet a certain
slowdown on
the horizon

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
13adjusted repricing would be quite conducive
to the sustainability of the global growth pro-cess in terms of allocative efficiency. Thisaspect also needs to be borne in mind from astability policy perspective, especially as theglobal price climate has been much lessfriendly for some time, a phenomenon thatcannot be explained by statistical baselineeffects or temporary swings alone.
In the third quarter, the global economy once
again received considerable expansionarystimuli from the Chinese economy, though itsoverall output growth, at 11
1/C252% on the year,
did not quite match its second-quarter
growth (12%). At the same time, the price
climate deteriorated further. Inflation aver-
aged 6.2% over the months from July toOctober, compared with 3.6% in the second
quarter and 1.5% in 2006. The sharp rises infood prices are the main factor behind thestrong price surge. The cyclical dynamics alsoremained strong in the other south and eastAsian emerging market economies (EMEs).
Thanks to the boom in domestic activity, thelooming slowdown in export growth – causedby the slumping demand, particularly fromthe USA – will probably initially do little todampen overall growth in China and theother EMEs in the area. However, there areno signs at present that the region coulduncouple structurally and cyclically from theindustrial countries.
1In particular, China’s im-
ports from the other south and east Asian
EMEs are highly correlated with its exports to
the industrial countries.
The rapid growth in south and east Asia,
which is relatively commodity-intensive,played a major role in the sharp rise in global
demand for commodities (including energy)towards the end of the reporting period. Thebooming retail business and record spotprices benefited the countries of the Com-monwealth of Independent States (CIS),which have already been on a steep growthpath since 1999. Real GDP in Russia, havingbeen up 7
3/C254% on the year in the second
quarter, probably rose slightly less rapidly in
the third quarter; at all events, year-on-year
growth of Russian industrial output was
much more sluggish than in the two preced-ing periods. Because of the sharp upward
pressure on wages given strong monetary ex-pansion and the distinct rise in food prices,consumer price inflation went back up againas of late. Year-on-year inflation stood at9.4% in September following 8.6% in
August and 7.4% in March 2007. In October,the government agreed with the major pro-ducers and retailers to freeze prices for basicfoodstuffs until early 2008 and reduced im-port tariffs on milk and dairy products. Inaddition, Russia has imposed an export tariffon wheat starting in November of this year toincrease the domestic supply.
Also, most Latin American countries were
able to achieve distinct gains in earnings fromcommodity exports. Brazil saw not only exter-nal impulses but also perceptible expansion-ary stimuli caused by the distinct reduction incentral bank lending rates, which boostednot only investment but also private con-sumption. Inflation in September ran at 4.2%
1See Asian Development Bank, Uncoupling Asia: Myth
and Reality. Asian Development Outlook, 2007, Manila,
pp 66-82.South and east
Asian emerging
market
economies
(EMEs) still
growing at
fast pace but
no uncouplingStill benefiting
from the
commodity
boom: CIS
and ...
... Latin
America

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
14compared with 3.7% in June and 3.0% in
April. Even though the Mexican economy re-
ceived a strong boost from rising oil prices in
the past few months, oil exports were im-
paired by terrorist attacks and hurricanes. The
further outlook is strongly dependent on cyc-
lical developments in the United States,
which absorbs a large portion of Mexico’s
exports of goods. Consumer price inflation in
the July-October period, at 3.9%, overshot
the 3% inflation target quite distinctly.
Against this background, the central bank
recently raised its lending rates by 25 basis
points to 7.5%.
According to the OECD’s Composite Leading
Indicators (CLI), economic activity in the
OECD area will weaken somewhat. By con-
trast, for the large BRIC (Brazil, Russia, Indiaand China) EMEs, the CLI continued to trend
upwards. In October, the IMF confirmed its
forecast of global growth in 2007 vis-/C224-vis the
interim forecast of July at 51/C254% but reduced
its forecast for 2008 by nearly one-half per-
centage point to 43/C254%. The downside risk to
this prediction was assessed much higher
than in the past owing to the financial market
turbulence. The projection for world trade
growth was scaled back perceptibly for both
years and is now at 61/C252% and 63/C254% respect-
ively. These corrections represent, in particu-
lar, a more prudent assessment of US eco-
nomic activity; the mid-year prediction that
growth would accelerate from 21/C254% this year
to 23/C254% in 2008 has now made way for a
forecast of just under 2% for each of the two
years. Much smaller downward revisions
were made for the industrial countries as a
group. The IMF staff, having still assumed in
July that the industrial countries would in-
crease their growth next year by1/C254percent-
age point to 23/C254%, has now forecast a weak-
ening to 21/C254%. Consumer price inflation for
this group of countries, according to the IMF,
will fall in 2007 by 0.2 percentage point to
2.1% and in 2008 to 2.0%.
However, the IMF’s price forecast for 2008 is
still based on an oil price of US$75 for a bas-
ket consisting of Brent, West Texas Inter-
mediate and Dubai oil. Oil prices have ex-
ceeded this price level by far in the past few
weeks. It remains to be seen whether the
growing downward disparity between for-
ward and spot quotations, which is a signal
of a certain calming in the oil markets for the
near future, will actually materialise in the
spot markets. Quotations for Brent crude oil,IMF forecast for 2007 and 2008
Item 2005 2006 2007 2008
Real gross domestic
product Annual percentage change
Advanced
economies 1 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 2.2
of which
United States + 3.1 + 2.9 + 1.9 + 1.9
Japan + 1.9 + 2.2 + 2.0 + 1.7
Euro area + 1.5 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 2.1
Consumer prices 2
Advanced
economies 1 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 2.1 + 2.0
of which
United States + 3.4 + 3.2 + 2.7 + 2.3
Japan – 0.3 + 0.3 0.0 + 0.5
Euro area + 2.2 + 2.2 + 2.0 + 2.0
Unemployment Number of unemployed persons as a
percentage of the labour force
Advanced
economies 1 6.0 5.6 5.3 5.5
of which
United States 5.1 4.6 4.7 5.7
Japan 4.4 4.1 4.0 4.0
Euro area 8.6 7.8 6.9 6.8
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, October 2007. — 1Includ-
ing Slovenia, Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore. —
2Consumer price index; for the euro area, HICP.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Global leading
indicators
somewhat
weaker; IMF
forecast down
for 2008Oil price hit
new peaks in
early autumn

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
15denominated in US dollars, went up by no
less than one-quarter from early July to mid-November. After hitting a new all-time highof US$94
1/C254at the beginning of November,
crude oil prices trended back down some-
what. The increase in euro terms following
mid-year was not as strong (+15%) owing to
the euro’s distinct appreciation against the USdollar; a barrel of oil was 61
1/C254as this report
went to press. One of the main reasons for
the surge in crude oil prices was the con-
tinued growth in the demand for oil. The
tight inventories in the United States and the– mostly weather-related – production stop-
pages in the Gulf of Mexico and the NorthSea are other reasons. At last report, geopol-itical factors, especially the danger of a mili-tary conflict in northern Iraq, have regainedimportance. In addition, speculative activity in
the oil markets has risen.
World market prices for food, beverages and
tobacco likewise continued their stronggrowth, going up between mid-year andearly November by 14
3/C254% in US dollar terms
and 51/C252% in euro terms. This reflected the
impact of, above all, the renewed surge in
the price of grain, oilseeds and oils. By con-
trast, the upward pressure on prices of indus-
trial raw materials has eased in the past fewmonths. Denominated in US dollars, quota-
tions in early November were somewhatlower on the month and 5
1/C254% below their
level in May, when they had peaked. In euro
terms, the figure was 12%. The overall index
of commodity prices (excluding energy),
weighted appropriately for the euro-areamember states, was at last report 7% lower
(denominated in euro) than half a year earlier.Developments in the oil markets have left a
powerful mark on consumer price inflation in
the industrial countries over the past fewmonths. Inflation in August, given falling oilprices, decreased to 1.6%. After the turn-around in the oil markets and owing to the
baseline effect caused by falling crude oilprices a year ago, consumer prices resurged
in September, by 2.0% (or 2.4% excludingJapan). This tendency continued in October,Log scale
US$
or €World market prices
for crude oil *
Sources: Thomson Financial Datastream and
Global Insight. — * Price for a barrel of
Brent crude oil.
Deutsche BundesbankUS$ Futures prices
14 November 2007
16 August 2007
Spot 3 M 6 M 9 M 12 M 15 M 18 M90
85
80
75
70
65Spot prices
in US dollars
in euro80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
22
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Diverging
trends for the
remaining types
of raw
materials
Resurgent
consumer price
inflation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
16as information already available for individual
countries is showing. There are many signs
that price pressure will continue to rise. This is
mainly because the price of crude oil has con-
tinued to rise throughout the reporting
period. In addition, the low refining margins
of the third quarter seem to be returning to
normal. Core inflation excluding energy and
food held firm at 1.9% in September; exclud-
ing Japan, it went back down slightly to
2.1%.
In the July to September period – according
to preliminary calculations which, as experi-
ence has shown, are subject to major correc-
tions – the US economy grew, after seasonal
and calendar-day adjustment, by just under
1% on the second quarter, in which it grew at
the same pace. It grew by 21/C252% on the year.
The main factor behind the good provisional
result was the buoyant growth in consump-
tion, coming in at a seasonally adjusted3/C254%;
this, in turn, was buoyed by the strong
growth in purchases of furniture and house-
hold appliances. This stands in stark contrast
to the considerable decline in consumer con-
fidence in the past few months. In addition,
non-residential private fixed investments,
especially construction, and the build-up of
inventories boosted growth. Government ex-
penditure likewise went back up distinctly.
Moreover, at a seasonally adjusted 4%, real
exports recorded the strongest growth in a
long time, not least owing to the depreciating
dollar. Given a relatively moderate rise in real
imports, foreign trade made a positive contri-
bution of one-quarter percentage point to
growth. The only roadblock to overall eco-
nomic growth was housing investment, thedecline in which accelerated to a seasonally
adjusted 5%; since last peaking at the end of
2005, its decline is now at nearly one-quarter.
The current quarter is likely to see the US
economy grow at a visibly slower pace. There
is no end in sight to the adjustment process in
housing construction. In addition, US con-
sumption activity seemed to have lost some
of its steam as this report went to press.
In September and October, consumer prices
rose detectably over time (by 0.3% for each
month) after having remained practically un-
changed in the two preceding months. The
visible rise in the prices of energy and food as
well as of healthcare was the main reason.
The increase in year-on-year consumer price
inflation was particularly prominent owing to
the marked decline a year earlier; it was up by
1.5 percentage points to 3.5%. The rise in
the consumer price index excluding energy
and food accelerated slightly in October to
2.2%; however, it had stood at 2.7% at the
beginning of the year. The deflator for per-
sonal consumption expenditure, which has
thus far been the US Federal Reserve’s
preferred instrument for price analysis, fell
between January and September by 0.6 per-
centage point to 1.8%.
According to initial estimates, real GDP in
Japan grew by just over1/C252% (after seasonal
adjustment) in the third quarter after having
shrunk in the second quarter by1/C252% under
the influence of various special factors. Over-
all output rose by 2% on the year. The great-
er buoyancy of Japanese economic activity in
the third quarter is due primarily to the strong
growth in real exports, which were up by 3%USA
Japan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
17on their second-quarter levels. Given a rela-
tively moderate increase in imports, the con-tribution of net trade to economic expansionstood at just under one-half percentagepoint, or two-thirds of overall GDP growth.At a seasonally adjusted +
1/C254%, private con-
sumption remained on the flat growth path
onto which it had embarked in the second
quarter. Commercial investment picked up
again distinctly in the third quarter (+13/C254%)
after having fallen in the two preceding quar-
ters. By contrast, the decline in housing in-
vestment accelerated to -73/C254% on the second
quarter and -11% on the year. This was linked
mainly to the entry into force of new con-
struction regulations for improving earth-
quake protection in June 2007, which led toa distinct slowdown in the construction ap-
provals process and, as a result, to a contrac-tion in housing starts. Although the permitbacklog will probably dissolve soon, construc-tion activity is expected to return to normalonly gradually. Government investment like-
wise tended further downwards. The year-on-year consumer price inflation rate re-mained unchanged in September at -0.2%.The rise in crude oil price quotations wascushioned strongly by the yen’s appreciationagainst the US dollar. In addition, consumerdurables and mobile phone charges saw ap-preciable price reductions once more. Pricesexcluding energy and food were down 0.3%as this report went to press.
The housing market in the United Kingdom
seems to be calming down significantly. InSeptember-October, house prices fell by aseasonally adjusted
3/C254% from July-August.
Owing to a subsiding of construction activityand negative wealth effects, this could put
the brakes on the pace of growth in the over-all economy in the coming months. Therecould be the added effect of slower business
conditions in the financial sector due to theturbulence in the money and capital markets.In the third quarter, however, real GDP con-
tinued to grow strongly; according to initialcalculations, it went up by
3/C254% (after adjust-
ment for seasonal and calendar-day vari-Thou-
sand
Months
%Months
%
Memo item
Real private construction
investment, totalQuarterly percentage change,
seasonally and calendar-day adjusted
Real residential constructionLin scale
Supply of new single-family
homes for sale
Long-term average since 19632,400
2,100
1,800
1,500
1,200Seasonally adjusted
Log scale
Construction permits
(annualised)Residential construction
in the United States
Sources: US Census Bureau and Bureau of
Economic Analysis.
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−
6−69
58
47
36
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
United
Kingdom

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
18ations) on the previous period, in which it had
grown by the same rate. The respective year-
on-year growth was 31/C254%. In terms of origin,
the main stimuli were generated once again
by the services sector, the real value added of
which, at 1%, grew as dynamically as in the
four preceding quarters. Construction output
went up by3/C254%. The value added of the
manufacturing industry (excluding construc-
tion), by contrast, increased by only1/C254%, and
in agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing, it
was even -3/C254%, above all owing to the animal
diseases that broke out in the third quarter.
On the demand side, private consumption
was probably the key pillar; at all events, real
retail sales growth in the third quarter, at a
seasonally adjusted 13/C254% over the second-
quarter months, was much more buoyant
than in the first half of the year. Calmer price
developments also contributed to this turn of
events. For instance, the year-on-year rate of
price increase fell from 2.6% in the second
quarter to 1.8% in the third. Excluding en-
ergy and unprocessed food, this rate was
down by one-half percentage point to 1.7%.
In the eleven new EU member states (exclud-
ing Slovenia, which joined the euro area on
1 January 2007), the strong economic growth
persisted in the third quarter. After seasonal
adjustment, third-quarter industrial output
was an estimated 11/C252% up on the period and
73/C254% up on the same period a year earlier.
Among the major economies in this group of
countries, Hungary saw a particularly sharp
jump in industrial output in July-August (in-
formation is not yet available for September)
on the second quarter. This provides evidence
of a revival of GDP growth, which hadflagged quite significantly in the first half of
the year in response to the measures required
in order to consolidate public sector budgets.
Rising prices for energy and food caused an
appreciable rise in consumer price inflation in
the new EU member states, from 3.9% in
August to 4.4% in September and 5.2% in
October. As this report went to press, Latvia
and Bulgaria were once again recording
double-digit price increases, while inflation in
Malta remained below the 2% mark.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Euro-area economic growth in the third quar-
ter, seasonally adjusted, went back up to3/C254%
after having been rather low a quarter earlier,
at1/C254%, owing to special factors. Overall eco-
nomic output was up by 21/C252% on the year.
More buoyant activity in Germany and France
made a key contribution to the vibrant activ-
ity in the summer months. GDP growth in
Italy, too, was up on the second quarter, yet it
remained short of the euro-area average.
Spain’s economy likewise grew sharply, albeit
at a visibly more moderate pace than in the
first half of the year. All in all, the financial
market turmoil did not lead to any percep-
tible burdens on the real economy in the third
quarter. For the current quarter, however, the
available leading indicators are pointing to
somewhat more subdued economic growth.
In terms of origin, the stronger GDP growth
in the third quarter is particularly the work of
more lively growth of industrial output, which
was up by a seasonally adjusted 11/C252%f r o m
its second-quarter figure. Producers of capitalNew EU
member statesThird-quarter
dip in growth
overcome
Sharper upturn
in industrial
activity in third
quarter

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
19goods and consumer durables, as well as
energy producers, fared better than average,whereas the production of intermediategoods and non-durable goods grew distinctlymore slowly. Capacity utilisation in manufac-turing was very high throughout the report-ing period, which is consistent with a pictureof brisk industrial activity. It is true that ordersreceived in the manufacturing industry rosefairly sluggishly in July-August in terms of vol-ume (+
1/C254%) on the second quarter, in which
an above-average number of large orders had
been received.2However, excluding “other
transport equipment”, where the large ordershave their greatest effect, the result is an in-
crease of 2
3/C254% in orders received (see also
the box on page 20).
However, going by the results of important
surveys of economic activity, the fast pace of
economic growth in the industrial sector isnot expected to continue. For instance, thePurchasing Managers’ Index for the manufac-turing sector fell in October for the third timein succession; at 51
1/C252points, it stood at the
lower edge of the growth zone, which begins
at 50 points. Industrial confidence, measured
in the EU survey, likewise continued its des-
cent, yet it still remained distinctly above itsmulti-year average. This was due mainly to a
somewhat less favourable assessment oforder books and warehouse stocks, whereasproduction expectations continued to beassessed positively. The consumer sentimentindicator remained unchanged in OctoberSeasonally adjusted,
quarterly percentage change
Spain
2007ItalyFranceGermanyEuro areaGrowth trends
in the euro area
Sources: national statistics, Eurostat and the
ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
01.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.0
0.5
0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
2The volume of new orders received was calculated by
deflating the value of new orders received published by
Eurostat with producer prices.Survey results
no longer as
favourable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
20Deuts che Bun desbankThe diver ging ten dencies in new or ders an d manufa cturin g pro duction
in the euro area
Industry in the euro area has been expan ding sin ce 
mid-2003. In the July-Au gust 2007 perio d, output 
(in cluding ener gy pro duction but ex cluding constru c-
tion output) was up 13¼ % from the se con d quarter 
of 2003; a ccording to the re gularly pu blishe d Eurostat 
ﬁ gures, new or ders in crease d by as mu ch as 34½ %.1 
The differen ces in the pa ce of growth were no smaller 
in Germany, althou gh the un derlyin g growth rate was 
stron ger. In dustrial output rose by 21¼ % in Germany 
durin g that perio d, while new or ders in the or der-
base d manufa cturin g industry in crease d by as mu ch as 
42½ % according to Eurostat ﬁ  gures.
The marke d an d sustaine d diver gence between new 
orders an d pro duction can initially be explaine d by 
con ceptual differen ces. Unlike output, whi ch is meas-
ure d by the volume of goo ds pro duced, the deman d 
indicator measures the value of the or ders, meanin g 
that its growth in the past few years also reﬂ  ects 
pri ce in creases. In a ddition, only new or ders in the 
order- base d manufa cturin g in dustry, whi ch has seen 
a somewhat more dynami c development in the euro 
area than overall in dustrial output, are re corded.2
A more consistent pi cture is o btaine d by deﬂ atin g the 
value of new or ders usin g pro ducer pri ces. Furthermore, 
it woul d seem appropriate to compare pri ce-a djuste d 
new or ders with output in the or der- base d manu-
facturin g in dustry rather than with overall in dustrial 
output. However, Germany is not only maintainin g its 
growth lea d over its partners; it is in creasin g even more 
marke dly in or der volumes than in the correspon ding 
values owin g to lower rates of inﬂ  ation in Germany. 
After pri ce a djustment, new or ders in Germany are 
growin g signiﬁ cantly more dynami cally than output in 
the or der- base d manufa cturin g in dustry. By contrast, 
leavin g asi de the usual lea d/lag relationships, the two 
indicators for the euro area ex cluding Germany were 
lar gely parallel.The backlo g of or ders bein g experien ced by German 
industry in dicates that Germany’s lea d will not be 
reduced an d may even in crease in the comin g months. 
Admitte dly, the availa ble pro duction capa city must also 
be taken into consi deration. A more sustaine d growth 
in the volume of or ders coul d lea d to bottlene cks in 
pro cessin g. In the European Commission’s most re cent 
quarterly survey in O ctober, more than half of German 
manufa cturers surveye d state d again that capa city was 
not sufﬁ  cient in view of the sto ck of or ders. For the 
euro area as a whole, by contrast, the survey results 
indicate that pro duction capa city is sufﬁ  cient. It is 
therefore to be expe cted that non-resi dential invest-
ment in Germany, whi ch, at an annual avera ge rate of 
5% in 2005-0 6, alrea dy rose by 1½ per centa ge point 
more than in the other euro-area countries, will con-
tinue to expan d comparatively rapi dly.
1 As the new or ders data for the euro area are currently 
only availa ble up until Au gust, for compara bility purposes 
only in dustrial output until Au gust has been taken into 
consi der ation even thou gh the data for Septem ber have 
alrea dy been pu blishe d. This also applies to the two German 
series. — 2 However, the new or ders in dex pu blishe d on a monthly basis by Eurostat comprises only those e conomi c 
sectors in whi ch or der- base d pro duction is si gniﬁ cant. This 
“manufa cturin g workin g on or ders”, as Eurostat calls it, 
accounts for almost two-thir ds of total manufa cturin g turn-
over in the euro area.2000 = 100, seasonally a djuste d, quarterly, lo g scale
Euro area ex cluding Germany
New or ders (volume)July-
AugPro duction in or der-base d
manufa cturin g industryGermany
New or ders (volume)July-
AugPro duction in or der-base d
manufa cturin g industryEuro area
New or ders (values)Industrial pro duction
(including ener gy)July-
AugNew or ders an d
industrial pro duction
Sour ce: Eurostat an d Bun desbank calculations.120
110
100
90130
120
110
100
90130
120
110
100
90
- - -  
- - 
- 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 200 62007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
21after having sagged somewhat in the preced-
ing months.
In the third quarter, aggregate demand – as
far as can be told looking at the indicatorsavailable thus far – has been supported by,among other things, exports to non-euro-area countries; in terms of value, in July-August they were up by a seasonally adjusted3
1/C254% from their second-quarter figure.
Although import growth, at 3%, was likewise
quite strong, this is largely attributable to
higher energy prices, which means that the
price-adjusted rise will probably be lowerthan that of exports. Another key factor was
that real retail sales (excluding vehicles) roseperceptibly again in the third quarter afterseasonal adjustment (+
3/C254%) after having
gone up only slightly in the two precedingperiods, especially owing to the consumer re-
action to the increase in value added tax inGermany. In addition, new passenger carregistrations increased again significantly. Themoderate rise in construction output, more-over, is a sign of increased investment in newbuildings.
The calmer economic growth over the course
of the current year compared with the verydynamic growth in 2006 has impacted on thelabour market with a certain time-lag. Follow-ing decreases in unemployment by 396,000
and 252,000 after seasonal adjustment in thefirst and second quarters respectively, thethird-quarter decline, at 161,000, was much
more muted. In all, a seasonally adjusted11.25 million people were out of paid workin the third quarter in the euro area. This wasSeasonally adjusted
%
2006 Q3
2007 Q3
FR GR 1 BE DE FI ES PT IT 1 LU AT NL IE SLEuro-area averageUnemployment *in the euro area
*Standardised unemployment rates as defined by the ILO. — 1Figures available only for 2007 Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank11
10
9
8
7654
3
2
10
Lively
aggregate
demand in the
third quarter
Labour marketrecovery
continuing

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
221.03 million fewer than in the same period a
year before. The unemployment rate fell from
7.6% in the first half to 7.4% in the third
quarter.3Employment, for which figures up
to mid-year are available, was up by 1.7% on
the year in the second quarter. Although the
labour market situation is still favourable in a
longer-term comparison, wage growth in the
second quarter remained moderate, at 0.7%
after seasonal adjustment. Its year-on-year
growth amounted to 2.5%. A perceptible ac-
celeration is to be expected for the second
half of the year, however.
Euro-area inflation, which had temporarily
slackened somewhat after mid-year – partly
because of the intermittent decline in crude
oil prices – picked up again in September as
crude oil prices went up. In the third quarter
as a whole, the Harmonised Index of Con-
sumer Prices was up by 1.9% on the year – as
in the second quarter. During the summer
months, however, year-on-year growth accel-
erated from 1.8% in July to 2.1% in Septem-ber. This was due in part to baseline effects
resulting from crude oil price movements in
2006. Owing to the change in supply and de-
mand conditions in the international agricul-
tural markets, food prices, moreover, trended
distinctly upwards, especially prices for milk
products. In Germany, the increase was par-
ticularly sharp in September (see the explana-
tory notes on pp 53, 56). The prices of indus-
trial goods (excluding energy) rose at a rate
similar to that of the preceding quarters. The
same applies to services. Euro-area inflation
increased appreciably in October. Year-on-
year HICP went up to 2.6%. One major con-
tributory factor was that the prices of pro-
cessed foods – albeit with a certain time-lag
to Germany – also went up more strongly in
other euro-area countries.
3The data on euro-area unemployment were adjusted
owing to new figures for Germany (for more see the ex-
planatory notes on page 51 of this Monthly Report). Prior
to the revision, euro-area unemployment had stood at
7.1 % in the first half of 2007.Consumer price
inflation
decelerated
somewhat

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
23Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the money
market
The Governing Council of the European Cen-
tral Bank left the Eurosystem’s key interest
rates unchanged in the third quarter. Since
the last interest rate increase on 13 June, the
main refinancing operations have been con-
ducted consistently with a minimum bid rate
of 4%; the interest rates on the marginal
lending facility and the deposit facility have
been 5% and 3%, respectively. A steady
monetary policy course was justified by the
particularly large degree of uncertainty in as-
sessing the possible impact of the financial
market turbulence, which was brought about
by the problems in the US subprime mort-
gage loan market. Furthermore, the tempor-
ary tension in the money market strongly
confirmed the advisability of keeping the cen-
tral bank rates unchanged. However, the
monetary policy’s primary objective of main-
taining price stability was not affected by this.
With the subsequently progressive relaxation
of tension in the money markets, the increas-
ing inflationary risks were also brought into
sharper focus again. This was due to the fact
that there was a steep rise in energy prices
and the increase in the prices of food and
other consumer goods and services increas-
ingly gave rise to such concerns.
Since the beginning of August, interest rate
developments in the money market have
been reflecting the increased level of uncer-
tainty in banks’ liquidity management. This
development was due to the effects of the
crisis in the US subprime market and is par-
ticularly evident in changes in the EONIAInterest rate
policy course
remains steady
Interest rate
developments
in money
market
characterised
by financial
market
turbulence

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
24overnight rate at which banks trade over-
night liquidity. Although this rate is usually
slightly above the marginal allotment rate, it
initially rose significantly at the beginning of
August when the banks were confronted
with considerably higher liquidity risks. These
risks stemmed from the danger that the
banks’ own financing and securitisation ve-
hicles, which had invested either directly or
indirectly in the US subprime market, would
draw on their credit lines unexpectedly with
respect to both timing and scale. In order to
reduce the tensions and to offset the associ-
ated functional shortcomings in the longer
maturity segments of the money market, the
ECB expressed its willingness to counter the
sudden liquidity shortages by offering gener-
ous refinancing facilities. To this end, the
Eurosystem again carried out generousliquidity-providing fine-tuning operations in
addition to the regular main refinancing oper-
ations, especially at the beginning of the tur-
moil in the money markets. Later, the long-
term tender operations were also supple-
mented by means of additional special refi-
nancing operations with a three-month ma-
turity (see the table on page 27). Only in ex-
ceptional cases did banks feel compelled to
take greater recourse to the significantly
more expensive marginal lending facility.
However, the abundant supply of liquidity
meant that, subsequently, the overnight
interest rate fell well below the minimum bid
rate, a development which was later correct-
ed again using Eurosystem liquidity-absorbing
fine-tuning operations. The purpose of these
supportive Eurosystem measures was to pre-
vent long-term and destabilising liquidity
shortages for the financial system as a whole
and thus to boost confidence in the markets
during this particularly critical period.
The high degree of nervousness that reigned
among market participants for a time was
also reflected in the development of the
somewhat longer-term money market rates,
which had gone up significantly at the begin-
ning of the turbulence in the financial mar-
kets owing to the sharp rise in risk premiums
on the uncollateralised money market. For ex-
ample, the interest rate premium for uncolla-
teralised three-month money (Euribor) initially
went up to a total of just over3/C254percentage
point vis-/C224-vis collateralised three-month
money (Eurepo). This interest rate spread did
not start to decline again until about mid-
October. As this report went to press, the
interest rate spread, at1/C252percentage point,%
Basis
points
Difference between uncollateralised and
collateralised
three-month
money 1Three-month Euribor
EONIA
Minimum bid rate for main
refinancing operationsMoney market interest rates
in the euro area
1Three-month Euribor less three-month
Eurepo.
Deutsche Bundesbank100
75
50
25
04.75
4.50
4.25
4.00
3.75
3.50
Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov
2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
25Money market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods between
11 July and 9 October 2007, euro-area credit institutions’
need for central bank liquidity, which is determined by
autonomous liquidity factors, rose by 55.3 billion net.
The volume of banknotes in circulation continued toexpand robustly, absorbing 56.0 billion. In the period
under review, this volume reached its highest level forthe current year, peaking at 5645.0 billion on 3 August
2007. General government deposits with the Eurosystemincreased by a total of 59.8 billion and likewise raised li-
quidity needs. If the net foreign reserves and the otherfactors are taken together, which eliminates liquidity-
neutral valuation effects, there was a decline of 510.5 bil-
lion in banks’ liquidity needs over the three periods,
which were therefore at around the prior-year level. This
decline was mainly caused by Eurosystem purchases of
financial assets which are unrelated to monetary policy.
Credit institutions were comfortably able to meet the
minimum reserve requirement, which expanded by 54.1
billion over the three maintenance periods (see the tableon page 26).
During the reporting period, liquidity management
within the Eurosystem had to contend with some par-
ticular challenges on account of the tensions which arose
in the money market in early August 2007. In order to
keep the money market functioning as normally as pos-
sible, the Eurosystem not only provided generous liquid-
ity but also enabled the banks to fulfil their reserve re-
quirements earlier within the maintenance period by
changing the structure of liquidity provision (frontload-
ing). In addition, the mix of maturities for the open mar-
ket operations was adjusted to give three-month refi-
nancing operations a greater weight than those with a
weekly maturity. All in all, the Eurosystem did not pro-
vide any more liquidity than it had done in the preceding
periods. Nevertheless, within the reserve maintenance
period, liquidity was distributed differently. On the
whole, the monetary policy framework of the Euro-
system demonstrated that it was capable of responding
effectively and flexibly to special liquidity situations.
During the July-August maintenance period, no signs of
perceptible strains in the money market had yet been
registered in the EONIA.
In the August-September maintenance period overnight
funds ran low on 9 August despite the (ECB’s) generous
allotment policy and the rates climbed during the day to
a level of 4.60% owing to shortages in the US dollar
money market. This prompted the ECB to conduct
liquidity-providing fine-tuning operations. In four con-
secutive operations, the volumes were 594.8 billion,
561.1 billion, 547.7 billion and 57.7 billion (see the table
on page 27). As liquidity needs were not easy to quantify,
the first fine-tuning operation was conducted as a fixed-
rate tender at 4.00% with pre-announced full allotment
of the bids received. All three subsequent procedures,
however, were conducted using normal tender proced-ures, ie as variable rate tenders with a minimum bid rate
and without pre-announced allotment amounts. Follow-
ing these operations, the EONIA was fixed at 4.05%, thus
returning to a level close to the minimum bid rate. These
rapidly acting operations were supplemented by a sub-
stantial topping-up of the regular (weekly) main refinan-
cing operations (MROs) as well as a further long-term
tender with a volume of 540.0 billion. The main reason
for this was that only a small group of commercial bankstook part in the fine-tuning operations. The volumes al-
lotted above the MRO benchmark amount were 573.5
billion, 546.0 billion, 514.5 billion and 55.0 billion. While
the size of the last allotment was consistent with the ECB
communication on the gradual reduction of amounts
allotted above the benchmark, the market found it so in-
adequate that on the value date of the MRO the EONIA
climbed to 4.59%. A liquidity-providing fine-tuning op-
eration on the following day with a volume of 542.2 bil-
lion succeeded in bringing the EONIA back down to4.05%. The maintenance period ended with a liquidity-
absorbing fine-tuning operation with a volume of 560.0
billion and the EONIA standing at 3.87%.
The September-October maintenance period was like-
wise characterised by banks’ hoarding behaviour and the
volatility of overnight funds. Owing to dried-up longer-
term segments of the money market, the bulk of liquid-
ity continued to be rolled over in the overnight segment.
In order to relieve the pressure on this segment and, at
the same time, revive maturities of one week or longer,
the Eurosystem conducted an additional supplementary
long-term tender with a volume of 575.0 billion. Despite
this, there was little discernible easing of the situation,as the excess liquidity was again being traded almost ex-
clusively in the overnight market, not least as a result of
many banks’ cautious lending policies. With respect to
the MROs, volumes were being allotted well above the
benchmark amount at 510.0 billion, 536.0 billion, 533.0
billion and 57.5 billion. A striking factor was the very
high marginal rate of 4.27% which applied to the MRO
of 26 September 2007 despite a generous allotment pol-
icy. There were various reasons for this. First, the precau-
tionary demand for central bank liquidity remained
high. Second, the tender encompassed the end of the
quarter. Third, banks placed additional safety bids, hav-
ing received a zero allotment in the previous week’s ten-
der. Over the course of the entire maintenance period
the EONIA fluctuated between 3.57% and 4.29%. A
liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operation resulted in the
EONIA standing at 3.95% on the final day of the main-
tenance period.
With the onset of the October-November maintenance
period in 2007, the EONIA rate gradually stabilised at a
level close to the minimum bid rate of 4.00%. Even so,
the MRO rates remained at a high level with the margin-
al allotment rate for the tender standing at 4.14% on
7 November.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
26was still significantly higher than it had been
in July, for example, when it stood at less
than 0.1 percentage point – ie before the
outbreak of the financial market turbulence.
Monetary developments in the euro area
At a seasonally adjusted annual rate of just
over 111/C252%, the euro-area money stock M3
grew much more sharply in the third quarter
than in the second quarter when the pace of
growth decelerated somewhat for a time. As
in previous quarters, German investors were
less inclined to increase their sight deposits,
which often bear only a low rate of interest,
or their cash holdings and were more intent
on augmenting, above all, M3 components
which are remunerated at market rates. Dur-
ing the period under review, there was a par-
ticularly sharp rise in short-term time de-
posits, repurchase agreements and bank debt
securities with an original maturity of up to
two years. While short-term time deposits
have been expanded sharply since key Euro-
system interest rates were tightened in the
fourth quarter of 2005, it is only in the past
few months that there has again been notice-
ably greater demand for short-term bank
debt securities and repurchase agreements.
The increase in short-term repurchase agree-
ments – ie domestic non-banks’ deposits at
euro-area banks which are backed by secur-
ities – is likely to be linked to the recent ten-
sion in the money market. However, the
strong growth in outstanding short-term
bank debt securities outside the banking sec-
tor is also likely to be due to the develop-
ments in the money market as this short-Factors determining bank liquidity*
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
2007
Item11 Jul
to
7 Aug8 Aug
to
11 Sep12 Sep
to
9 Oct
I Provision (+) or absorption (–)
of central bank balances due
to changes in autonomous
factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) – 8.4 + 0.5 + 1.9
2 General government
deposits with the Eurosystem
(increase: –) + 1.6 + 0.0 – 11.4
3 Net foreign reserves1– 6.3 + 0.6 + 4.6
4 Other factors1+ 9.4 + 2.0 + 0.2
Total – 3.7 + 3.1 – 4.7
II Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations + 6.3 – 33.0 – 74.4
(b) Longer-term refinanc-
ing operations +_0.0 + 21.7 + 90.6
(c) Other operations – 0.1 + 9.0 – 9.9
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending
facility – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
(b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) – 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.2
Total + 6.0 – 2.3 + 5.2
III Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I + II) + 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.7
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) – 2.9 – 0.6 – 0.6
*For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s
contribution, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Sec-
tion of this Monthly Report .—1Including end-of-quarter
valuation adjustments with no impact on liquidity.
Deutsche BundesbankMonetary
growth
accelerates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
27dated paper is traditionally remunerated close
to the Euribor, which had risen substantiallyin the quarter under review. By contrast, in-vestors’ demand for money market funds,some of which were also indirectly invested inthe US market, declined substantially follow-ing the refusal of some funds to conduct firesales during this period of turmoil in order torepurchase their own shares. This is likely tohave contributed to the significant decline inmoney market fund shares in the quarter
under review, which fell by a seasonally ad-justed and annualised 11%. In the previousquarter, this form of investment benefited, inparticular, from the fairly low interest rate dif-ferentials between money and capital mar-
kets.The private sector’s strong demand for credit
is still the main driving force behind monetaryexpansion. In seasonally adjusted and annual-ised terms, the increase amounted to 12
1/C252%
in the third quarter, compared with 131/C252%i n
the previous quarter. This means that in the
case of non-financial corporations, in particu-
lar, the increase in bank lending rates, of be-
tween 1.1 percentage points and 2.2 per-centage points, recorded over the past two
years has not had a dampening effect on bor-rowing. One reason for this is likely to be thegreater credit utilisation for corporate take-overs and mergers during this period. How-ever, data provided by banks participating in
the Bank Lending Survey show a discernibletightening of credit standards for enterprisesin the third quarter, especially in the case oflending for corporate takeovers. There wasOpen market operations of the Eurosystem
Value
dateType oftrans-action
1Maturityin daysActualallotmentin5billionDeviationfrom thebenchmarkin5billionMarginalrate/fixedrate%Allotmentratio%Weightedrate%Cover ratio%
2Numberof bidders
08.08.07 MRO 7 292.5 1.0 4.06 27.24 4.07 1.34 31909.08.07 FTO (+) 1 94.8 – fixed: 4.00 – – 1.00 4910.08.07 FTO (+) 3 61.1 – 4.05 – 4.08 1.80 62
13.08.07 FTO (+) 1 47.7 – 4.06 – 4.07 1.77 59
14.08.07 FTO (+) 1 7.7 – 4.07 – 4.07 5.97 4115.08.07 MRO 7 310.0 73.5 4.08 47.99 4.10 1.38 34422.08.07 MRO 7 275.0 46.0 4.08 25.82 4.09 1.60 35524.08.07 S-LTRO 91 40.0 – 4.49 75.20 4.61 3.14 14629.08.07 MRO 7 210.0 14.5 4.08 79.30 4.09 1.68 32030.08.07 LTRO 91 50.0 – 4.56 37.65 4.62 2.40 16805.09.07 MRO 7 256.0 5.0 4.15 25.78 4.19 1.67 35606.09.07 FTO (+) 1 42.2 – 4.06 – 4.13 2.15 4611.09.07 FTO (–) 1 – 60.0 – 4.00 90.38 – 1.11 3712.09.07 MRO 7 269.0 10.0 4.14 68.24 4.17 1.51 38113.09.07 S-LTRO 90 75.0 – 4.35 22.58 4.52 1.85 140
19.09.07 MRO 7 155.0 36.0 4.15 69.03 4.16 2.30 37126.09.07 MRO 7 190.0 33.0 4.27 18.59 4.29 1.94 37827.09.07 LTRO 84 50.0 – 4.50 72.08 4.63 1.71 15903.10.07 MRO 7 163.0 7.5 4.14 92.97 4.16 1.83 31609.10.07 FTO (–) 1 – 24.5 – 4.00 60.89 – 1.64 1810.10.07 MRO 7 218.0 40.0 4.12 36.10 4.16 1.48 34212.10.07 FTO (–) 5 – 30.0 – 4.00 74.85 – 1.34 2217.10.07 MRO 7 171.0 18.0 4.11 78.59 4.14 1.66 34924.10.07 MRO 7 182.0 14.5 4.11 2.88 4.14 1.67 24531.10.07 MRO 7 170.0 9.5 4.14 62.59 4.16 1.69 30801.11.07 LTRO 91 50.0 – 4.45 77.43 4.53 1.75 15707.11.07 MRO 7 160.0 3.5 4.14 65.69 4.15 1.72 30013.11.07 FTO (–) 1 – 27.8 – 4.00 100.00 – 1.00 1014.11.07 MRO 7 182.0 20.0 4.15 83.72 4.16 1.54 298
1MRO: main refinancing operation, LTRO: longer-term
refinancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-
term refinancing operation, FTO: fine-tuning operation(+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing
operation). — 2Ratio of total bids to the allotment
amount.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Heavy lending
to private
sector
continues ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
28also a sharp rise in unsecuritised lending to
other financial intermediaries at the end of
the period under review. The financial assist-
ance given by banks to their securitisation
subsidiaries is also likely to have had an im-
pact here. By contrast, the declining trend in
loans to households observed over the past
few quarters continued. Although housing
loans were still 7.8% up on the year at the
end of the period under review, this figure
was as high as 8.4% in June. The more sub-
dued momentum in the real estate markets in
some euro-area countries evidently had a
dampening effect on the demand for loans.
The effects of the higher mortgage rates and
the first signs of the slight tightening of
banks’ credit standards in the third quarter re-
ported by a number of euro-area countries
were also apparent in this important sub-
segment of the European credit markets.
Consumer credit and other lending to house-
holds, with annual growth rates of 5% and
3.4% respectively, continued to develop at a
visibly more sluggish pace than housing loans
in the quarter under review.
Outside the traditional credit business, euro-
area banks once again significantly increased
their holdings of securities issued by domestic
enterprises in the third quarter. In doing so,
they acquired exclusively fixed-income secur-
ities, which were predominantly denomin-
ated in euro. By contrast, they sold domestic
shares and other equities after they had pur-
chased these on a large scale in the previous
quarter.
In contrast to events in preceding quarters,
the expansionary effect of the large volumeSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
€b n%
+ 1,200
+ 1,000
+    800
+    600
+    400
+    200
0
−    200
−    400
−    600
−    800of which
Net external asset position 1, 3
Net external asset
position
External
assets
External
liabilities4
1999 2007... counterparts
Loans to the
private sector 1Net external
asset position1
Monetary capital 1, 2 Remaining balance
sheet items 1, 2
M3Growth rate of M3 and
the contributions to growth in ...
... components of the money stock
M1 1M2 − M1 1
M3 − M2 1M3Components and counterparts
of the money stock
in the euro area
1 Calculated from the changes cumulated
over 12 months. — 2Taken in isolation, an
increase curbs M3 growth. — 3Not sea-
sonally adjusted. — 4Increase: −.
Deutsche Bundesbank24+
20+
16+
12+
8+
4+
0
4−
8−
12−16+
12+
8+
4+
0
4−
00 01 02 03 04 05 06... while banks
increase
securities
acquisitions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
29of lending on M3 growth was not dampened
by a sharp rise in monetary capital formation.
The longer-term bank deposits and even
more so the longer-term bank debt securities
showed only a comparatively moderate in-
crease. Bank debt securities rose at no more
than a seasonally adjusted annual rate of just
under 3% in the third quarter, which was the
weakest annual rise recorded since the
second quarter of 2001. This was probably
due to the significant narrowing of the spread
between longer-term and shorter-term bank
debt securities, which was caused by the rise
in three-month interest rates as a result of the
financial market turmoil. While German and
Dutch banks redeemed net amounts of such
paper, Spanish banks, in particular, issued sig-
nificantly fewer longer-term bank debt secur-
ities than in previous quarters. Domestic in-
vestors were also far less inclined to increase
their longer-term time deposits. These were
expanded by a seasonally adjusted 51/C252% dur-
ing the reporting period after they had in-
creased by an annualised rate of 13% in the
second quarter. Other financial intermediar-
ies, in particular, contributed to this slow-
down, which was probably due to the fact
that, owing to the financial market turbu-
lence, they had recorded far smaller inflows
of funds through credit securitisation busi-
ness, which had previously proved so profit-
able.
There was a marked decline in banks’ net ex-
ternal asset position in the third quarter, and
this, in itself, had a significant dampening ef-
fect on monetary expansion in the euro area.
Between July and September, substantial out-
flows of funds from non-banks to countriesoutside the euro area were observed primarily
in France, the Netherlands and Ireland,
whereas German non-banks recorded net in-
flows of funds from non-euro-area countries.
From a monetary policy perspective, the ac-
celeration in monetary and credit growth is
still a cause for concern. The recent develop-
ments in the financial markets have played a
very limited role in this respect. Although the
higher risk premiums are also likely to be re-
flected in the interest rates of banks and have
a certain dampening effect on credit growth,
the knock-on effects of the financial market
turbulence on the credit and money creation
policies of banks have been quite moderate
so far. Given the growing importance of the
price impulses stemming from oil price devel-
opments and the food sector, the adequate
supply of liquidity of non-banks remains a ser-
ious risk factor.
German banks’ deposit and lending
business with domestic customers
As in the rest of the euro area, short-term
bank deposits of domestic customers showed
a further perceptibly sharp rise in the third
quarter; they went up by a seasonally adjust-
ed and annualised rate of 131/C252%. As in the
preceding quarters, there was strong demand
for short-term time deposits remunerated at
market rates, in particular. Following the lat-
est interest rate increase by the Governing
Council of the ECB, the banks raised their
rates for time deposits with an agreed matur-
ity of up to two years by around1/C254percent-
age point, whereas interest rates on short-Moderate rise
in longer-term
investment
with banks
Significant
decline in
banks’ net
external asset
positionMonetary
analysis
indicates
continuation of
longer-term
inflation risks
Sharp increase
in shorter-term
bank deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
30term savings deposits increased only slightly.
In some cases, there are likely to have been
further shifts away from short-term savings
deposits, which were significantly reduced
during the reporting period. Furthermore,
funds from other investment areas are also
likely to have been moved into short-term
time deposits. Much the same applies to in-
vestments in money market funds, which re-
corded strong outflows of funds in Germany
in the third quarter. In view of the recent fi-
nancial market turmoil, funds which, in the
past, tended to be invested in longer-term
bank debt securities and which recently
showed a sharp decline could also have been
temporarily parked in high-interest-bearing
short-term time deposits while waiting to see
how the yields developed in the money and
capital markets. In contrast to what hap-pened in the two preceding quarters, how-
ever, there was also substantial growth in
overnight deposits. These were used mainly
by other financial intermediaries, which, evi-
dently, built up their liquidity buffer with
banks to a large extent to ensure that they
were always able to meet any payment obli-
gations resulting from the return of share cer-
tificates and other securities issues.
Whereas investors were clearly reluctant to
invest in longer-term bank debt securities,
they continued to show interest in longer-
term bank deposits at the end of the period
under review. In the reporting quarter, these
bank deposits were built up at a seasonally
adjusted annual rate of 41/C252%, compared
with 31/C252% in the previous quarter. The oper-
ations of domestic insurance companies,
which, in times of uncertain interest rate pro-
spects, tend to prefer longer-term time de-
posits, often in the form of registered bank
debt certificates, were major contributing fac-
tors in this. Households also stocked up their
long-term savings deposits.
In contrast to lending in other euro-area
countries, lending by German banks to do-
mestic customers developed only weakly. Fur-
thermore, German credit institutions reduced
their investments in the domestic securities
markets. They reduced their loans to domes-
tic general government by an even greater
amount. Increases were recorded only in the
area of loans to enterprises and households in
Germany in the third quarter, albeit by little
more than 1% in seasonally adjusted and an-
nualised terms.Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)
in Germany*
5billion
2007 2006
ItemJuly to
SepJuly to
Sep
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 8.5 – 13.1
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years + 45.5 + 23.9
of over 2 years + 4.5 + 5.7
Redeemable at agreed notice
of up to 3 months – 13.2 – 12.2
of over 3 months + 1.4 + 3.8
Lending
to domestic enterprises and
households
Unsecuritised + 17.5 + 17.2
Securitised – 0.9 – 2.1
to domestic government
Unsecuritised – 6.2 – 3.0
Securitised – 6.3 – 8.7
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-
cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money market
funds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of the
Monthly Report .—1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche BundesbankInterest also
shown in
longer-term
bank deposits
Slight increase
in loans to
private sector ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
31With regard to the individual sectors, for
which only seasonally unadjusted figures areavailable, it was primarily the non-financialenterprises which again took recourse tobank loans. Loans to these enterprises were2.9% up on the year at the end of the periodunder review. Although other financial inter-mediaries also stepped up their unsecuritisedborrowing from German banks, this increasewas much lower than it had been in the pre-ceding two years. The stagnation in lendingto households also had a dampening effecton domestic credit growth in the reportingquarter. In the previous year, households sub-stantially increased their borrowing from Ger-man banks in the third quarter, especially forthe purpose of housing construction. On thewhole, banks’ lending to German householdswas 0.9% down on the year.
The reasons for the weakness in credit
growth are still to be found mainly on the de-mand side: the sluggish pace of growth inhousing construction has been curbingbanks’ real estate financing business for anumber of years now. Furthermore, the fa-vourable earnings situation of enterprises hasbeen enabling them to finance their buoyantinvestment from their own financial re-sources. Consequently, according to informa-tion provided by German banks participating
in the Eurosystem’s Bank Lending Survey,there were still no particular additional con-straints on credit supply in the third quarter of2007, despite the turmoil in the credit mar-kets. In fact, as in the previous quarter, the
credit supply policy of German banks was lesstense than in the euro area as a whole. Thus,the credit standards for both housing loansand consumer credit were eased again slight-
ly, whereas they remained virtually un-changed in the case of corporate loans onthe whole. The margins for average-risk ex-posures declined significantly, while the mar-gins for riskier loans tended to increase some-what.
The survey participants also reported that the
lending conditions for loans to householdswere unaffected by the turmoil in the finan-
cial markets.
1If viewed in isolation, it was
only in the area of corporate lending that the
developments in the financial markets con-Seasonally adjusted
€b n
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change2,330
2,300
2,270
2,240
2,210
2,180Log scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank5
4
3
2
1
0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
1A few additional questions were added to the Bank
Lending Survey in the third quarter to take account of
the isolated effects of the turmoil in the financial markets
on the lending policies of the participating institutions. A
selection of the responses to these questions is shown in
the chart above.... with quite
heterogeneous
sectoral
developments
Credit
standards still
unchanged to
expansionary
despite
financial
market
turbulence
Impact offinancial
market
turbulence on
lending only
minor in
reporting
quarter

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
32Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year and up
to 5 years. — 3 With an initial rate fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years. — 4 According to Bank Lending
Survey; percentage difference between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and
“tightened somewhat” and the numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased
considerably”. — 5 Expectations for 2007 Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank% pa 
%
%Loans to non-financial corporations
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Changes in loan margins4
Loans to enterprises
Average loansRiskier loansChanges in credit standards4
Loans to enterprises
5Bank interest rates (new business) 1
Loans to enterprises ...
... up to € 1 million with an initial rate fixation
    of up to 1 year
... over € 1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of over 5 years
... over € 1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
120+
90+
60+
30+
0
30−
60−
90−60+
30+
0
30−
60−6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0% pa 
%%Loans to households
Consumer credit
Average loansRiskier loans
02 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Housing loans
Average loansRiskier loansConsumer credit
5Housing loans
5Consumer credit2
Housing loans3
60+
30+
0
30−
60−60+
30+
0
30−
60−30+
0
30−30+
0
30−7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
33tributed to a somewhat more restrictive lend-
ing policy on the part of the banks participat-ing in the survey. This primarily affected loansto large enterprises and the financing of mer-gers and acquisitions. By contrast, loans tosmall and medium-sized enterprises were af-fected to a lesser extent.
Banks are expecting that the current develop-
ments will continue in the fourth quarter aswell. They are anticipating somewhat more
restrictive credit standards in the corporatesector with the exception of small andmedium-sized enterprises and largely un-changed standards for loans to households.
Owing to market developments, especially in
the shorter-term maturity segment, Germanbanks’ lending and deposit rates went upagain in the third quarter. Contributory fac-
tors were not only the tightening of the Euro-system’s interest rate policy but also the gen-eral reassessment of risks, which was reflect-ed in the higher interest rate spreads. Therewere, however, no major adjustments, suchas the sharp rise in interest rate premiumsseen in the interbank money market. Overall,interest rates for loans to enterprises went upby an average of
1/C254percentage point. Thus,
at the end of the period under review, institu-
tions were demanding interest rates of be-
tween 5.4% and 6.4% for short-term loans
and between 5.4% and 5.6% for long-termloans, depending on the size of the loan. The
cost of loans for house purchase also went upin the period under review. The terms forloans with an interest rate fixation of over tenyears stood at 5.1% in the quarter under re-Mean
Standard deviation 1
Loans2to enterprises
by firm size
small and medium-sized enterprises2007 Q3
2007 Q4 expected
large enterprises
by purpose
fixed investment
inventories and working capital
mergers/acquisitions and
corporate restructuring
Loans to households
loans for house purchase
consumer credit and other lending
significant ... minor ... none ...
... tightening of the credit standards3Effects of financial market turbulence on the credit standards
of German banks participating in the Bank Lending Survey *
*Additional questions relating to these effects are published on the Bundesbank’s website at www.bun-
desbank.de/volkswirtschaft/vo_veroeffentlichungen.en.php. — 1The indicated spread includes a standard
deviation. In purely mathematical terms, the spread can also lie outside the range of possible responses. —
2Including credit lines. — 3Means and standard deviations are calculated on the basis of the following
quantification: 1 = Contributed considerably to tightening of credit standards; 2 = Contributed somewhat totightening of credit standards; 3 = Has basically had no impact on credit standards.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Little effect
expected for
fourth quarter
as well
Lending and
deposit rates
rise in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
34view, compared with 5.0% in the second
quarter. The terms for consumer credit inten-
sified in the medium-term maturity band, in
particular, whereas they eased somewhat at
the long end of the maturity spectrum. The
time deposits of households with a maturityof up to one year benefited the most from
the improved interest rate conditions in de-
posit business with German banks. With an
average interest rate of 4.0%, rates were
1/C254percentage point higher than at the end of
June.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
35Financial marketsFinancial market trends
Especially at the beginning of the third quar-
ter, events in the international financial mar-
kets were shaped by the impact of the crisis
in the US mortgage market. In the course of
a reassessment of credit risks, there was ini-
tially a marked increase in the market players’
aversion to risk, which led to a considerable
impairment of the trade in complex credit
products, such as structured securitisations.
At the same time, corporate bond spreads
widened markedly, and share prices, which
had hitherto been reaching multi-year peaks,
came under heavy pressure accompanied by
declining yields on government bonds. Given
an easing of the Federal Reserve’s monetary
policy and the overall robust state of the
world economy, the stock markets were able
to make up some of the losses again as the
reporting period progressed, however. The
turbulence in the money and capital markets
also affected the forex markets. There was a
sharp increase in exchange rate uncertainty
for a time and the exchange rate relationships
among the major currencies have shown a
marked shift.
Exchange rates
The US dollar, in particular, was under consid-
erable pressure in the summer and autumn
months. By contrast, the euro was tending to
appreciate – above all, against the dollar.
After reaching an interim peak of just over
US$1.38 at the end of July, the euro depreci-
ated somewhat temporarily against a back-
drop of profit-taking, a surprisingly high rateFinancial
market setting
Euro exchange
rate against
the US dollar, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
36of growth in US GDP for the second quarter
and an increased demand for dollar liquidity.
Thereafter, however, sentiment reversed again
in favour of the euro. The crisis in the mort-
gage market as well as weak data from the
real estate and labour markets in the United
States strengthened the expectation of a re-
orientation in US monetary policy. In actual
fact, at its meeting on 18 September 2007,
the US Federal Open Market Committee de-cided to cut the target for the federal funds
rate by 50 basis points to 4.75%. As the Gov-
erning Council of the ECB had left key rates
unchanged at its meeting before, the result
was a narrowing of the interest rate spread
over the euro, which subsequently rose above
the US$1.40 mark for the first time.
In October, unfavourable US economic data
and, in some cases, weak quarterly results of
US banks led to the euro continuing to firm
up against the dollar. Surprisingly large net
capital exports in US portfolio investment in
August may also have played a part in these
exchange rate gains. Added to this was a
second interest rate cut by the Fed, even
though this had largely been expected by the
markets. The upshot of this was that, in early
November, the euro reached a new all-time
peak of more than US$1.47.1Most recently,
the euro was only slightly below this at
US$1.46, which was roughly 11% up on its
level at the beginning of the year.
According to market reports, investors’
heightened risk-aversion in the wake of the
financial market turbulence resulted in a
large-scale unwinding of carry trade positions
in the first half of August. As a consequence,
there was a broad rise in the Japanese yen,
which is frequently involved in such transac-
tions on the financing side – a movement
which the euro, too, was unable to evade.
The euro-yen exchange rate showed a
marked fall to roughly ¥153, compared withLog scale
US$
££¥
¥
1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 06Nominal effective exchange rate 1
1999 Q1 = 100... pound sterling... yenagainst the ...
... US dollar
*Monthly averages; from 2007, daily
data. — 1As calculated by the ECB against
the currencies of 24 countries. 
Deutsche BundesbankExchange rate of the euro *
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.57110
100
931.45
1.35
1.25
1.15
1.05
0.95
0.85 0.85
2007JA S O N120
110
100
90
800.70
0.650.75
0.70170
160
150
140
130
120
110
1From a German perspective, this means the US dollar
was at its all-time lowest level. The US dollar’s previous
low against the Deutschemark of DEM1.3620/US$1 – ap-
plying a conversion rate of DEM1.95583/ 31 – corres-
ponds to a euro-US dollar exchange rate of US$1.4360/ 31.... against the
yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
37as much as just under ¥169 in mid-July. The
slight calming in the financial markets begin-ning in the second half of August, which wasalso reflected in a decline in the implied euro-yen volatility, soon reversed the trend in fa-vour of the euro again, however. Given, too,the Bank of Japan’s decision to leave the tar-get rate on hold in August and September,the euro had appreciated to more than ¥167by mid-October. As this report went to press,the euro was somewhat lower again at ¥162,which was just over 3% up on the beginningof the year.
Against the pound sterling, the euro initially
stayed within a narrow range around £0.68up to early September. Following news of thedifficulties of the Northern Rock mortgagebank, which the Bank of England had to sup-port with an emergency loan, the euro appre-ciated to £0.70, however. Furthermore, thecooling of the UK property market appears tohave tempered the Bank of England’s infla-tion concerns somewhat, with the marketplayers in the United Kingdom therefore ex-pecting a trend decline in central bank rates.These expectations were confirmed at theend of the reporting period with the publica-tion of the Bank of England’s Inflation Report.
This led to the euro’s exchange rate againstthe pound sterling going up to just over
£0.71, which was 6
1/C252% up on the start of
the year.
The euro depreciated against a number of
other currencies, such as the Canadian dollar,
the Polish zloty and the Czech coruna, how-ever. On a weighted average, the euro’s ex-change rate was therefore more than 5% upon its level at the beginning of 2007 and over
7
1/C252% up on its level at the launch of monet-
ary union. In real terms, ie taking account of
the simultaneous inflation differentials be-
tween the euro area and the major trading
partners, the effective exchange rate of theeuro was well above its longer-term average.
2
Overall, the euro’s appreciation dampened
the strong inflation impulses acting on thedomestic European economy in recent months29 December 2006 to 15 November 2007
%US dollar
Won (Republic
of Korea)
Renminbi yuan
(China)Pound sterling
EER-24 1
Yen
Swiss francSwedish krona
Forint (Hungary)
Czech coruna
Zloty (Poland)Canadian dollarAppreciation / depreciation
of the euro against
selected currencies
1 Nominal effective euro exchange rate
against the currencies of 24 major trading
partners.
Deutsche Bundesbank12+9+6+3+0 3−6−9−
2Real exchange rates are an important measure of an
economy’s price competitiveness. From Germany’s point
of view, the recent appreciation of the euro has been
tending to lead to a deterioration in price competitive-
ness. Nevertheless, at more than 3%, its price competi-
tiveness is to be rated as more favourable at present than
on a long-term average, which, for the sake of simplicity,
may be interpreted as a “neutral” level of competitive-
ness. In this context, German enterprises – especially with
regard to competitors from other euro-area countries –
are benefiting from the comparatively moderate develop-
ments in prices and costs over the past few years.... and against
the pound
sterling
Effective euro
exchange rate

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
38which stemmed from the international com-
modity and agricultural markets.
Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
In the bond market, European government
bond yields have been fluctuating and have
fallen by just under1/C252percentage point since
early July to 41/C254% in the wake of the US
mortgage crisis. Following a pronounced de-
cline up to mid-September, which was also
driven by the flight to safe assets, the Fed’s
interest rate cut of 50 basis points and the de-
cision by the Governing Council of the ECB to
put euro-area key interest rates on hold for
the time being marked the start of a brief
countermovement. Along with the marked
revisions of US growth expectations and
gloomier sentiment indicators on both sides
of the Atlantic, yields went down again in
mid-October, however.3In line with the sub-
dued economic outlook, the decline in inter-
est rates in the euro area was accompanied
by a low real interest rate level, while long-
term inflation expectations – derived from
the spread between nominal and real interest
rates – showed hardly any increase despite re-
cord oil price levels.4
The decline in yields in the dollar area was
even more marked than in the European
bond market. With a US interest rate level of
less than 41/C254% at the end of the period
under review, the yields of US Treasuries were
lower than those of comparable European
bonds. In particular, the fear that the crisis in
the subprime market could affect the econ-omy as a whole led in the United States to a
downward revision of long-term growth ex-
pectations as well, whereas the outlook in
Europe deteriorated less strongly.5Added to
this were interest rate cuts by the Fed and fur-
ther expectations of lower interest rates,
which impacted on the yield level at the long
end.
Uncertainty about the future performance of
the bond market, measured by the implied
volatility of options on the Bund future, de-
veloped as a mirror image of interest rates.
Following a marked rise up to the middle of
September, there was a briefly calmer period
up to mid-October and then an acceleration
again. At present, the implied volatility for a
constant three-month horizon is moving at a
level that is above the average of the past five
years. The market players are therefore still
unsettled.
This uncertainty has had a particularly marked
effect on the financing conditions for enter-
prises in the bond market. Despite the decline
in government bond yields, financing condi-
tions have deteriorated in the past few
months as a result of reassessed credit risks.
In the wake of rating downgrades, the diffi-
3In line with the interest rate policy decisions of the Gov-
erning Council of the ECB and less favourable sentiment
and expectation indicators, the entire yield curve for list-
ed Federal securities showed a downward shift in the re-
porting period. The expectations of higher interest rates,
which had still been prevalent in the market at the begin-
ning of the third quarter, have now subsided in the short
to medium-term maturity segment. At the same time,
the yield spread between ten and two-year bonds, ie the
slope of the yield curve, has increased again compared
with the end of the first half of the year.
4Real interest rates calculated from Consensus Econom-
ics surveys and yields of inflation-linked government
bonds.
5Source: Consensus Economics.Falling capital
market rates in
the euro area ...
... and in the
dollar areaContinued
nervousness
in the bond
market
Premiums on
corporate
bonds reflect
course of
subprime crisis

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
39culties of some hedge funds and the liquidity
problems not only of US mortgage financiersbut also of some German and British banks,the spread of long-term BBB-rated corporatebonds over government bonds soared bymore than half to values of 165 basis pointsat the end of July. The Fed’s distinct rate cutin September then marked the beginning of aperiod of stabilisation and the bond spreadsdeclined somewhat for a time. In November,they then went up once more and, at the endof the period under review, were again at165 basis points. On balance, however theyields on seven to ten-year BBB-rated bondsin mid-November were no more 25 basispoints up on their level at the start of thethird quarter, however. Nevertheless, in somecases, the financing conditions for non-investment-grade enterprises were consider-ably less favourable; in summer, the spreadshad grown very sharply and were still at ahigher level at the end of the period underreview.
With gross sales of domestic debt securities
amounting to 3313
1/C252billion in the third quar-
ter, issuance activity in the German bond
market was stronger than in the preceding
quarter. However, after deducting markedly
higher redemptions and changes in issuers’holdings of their own bonds, German issuers
repurchased debt securities worth around338 billion net. Domestic debt securities worth
as much as 345 billion had been sold in the
preceding quarter. In the reporting period,foreign bonds and money market instruments
were likewise sold on a much smaller scale inthe German market ( 32 billion) than in sum-
mer ( 342
1/C252billion). Overall, only foreign, non-euro-denominated debt securities were soldin the German market ( 312
1/C252billion). By con-
trast, euro-denominated debt securities from
euro-area partner countries, which had been
in demand from domestic investors in the
preceding months owing to the fact that theycarry a slightly higher rate of interest than the
benchmark Bund, were sold for 310
1/C252billion
net. This means that, between July and Sep-
tember, the outstanding amount of domestic
and foreign debt securities in the German
market fell by 336 billion, compared with net
sales of 388 billion in the period from April to
June.
The domestic public sector, in particular, re-
duced its bonded debt in the third quarter
– by just under 331 billion – whereas it had
issued debt securities for 325 billion in theWeekly average
%
Per-
centage
pointsSpread of BBB-rated
corporate bonds over
government bonds
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Yield on seven to ten-yearbonds outstanding
Government
bondsBBB-rated corporate bondsCorporate and government
bond yields in the euro area
Sources: Merrill Lynch and Thomson Finan-
cial Datastream.
Deutsche Bundesbank2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
06.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
Net repurchase
of German debt
securities ...
... due mainly
to marked
reduction
in public
sector debt
instruments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
40preceding three-month period. On balance, it
was only state government that tapped the
capital market ( 321/C252billion). Given buoyant
tax revenues, the Federal government re-
duced its market debt by the record figure of
333 billion. On balance, it redeemed five-year
Federal notes (Bobls) for 3171/C252billion, ten-
year Bunds for 311 billion, and two-year Fed-
eral Treasury notes (Sch/C228tze) for 351/C252bil-
lion. Additionally, it reduced the outstanding
amount of Treasury discount paper (Bubills)
by31/C252billion. It was only in the very long-
term segment that Federal government ex-
panded its market debt somewhat ( 32 billion)
with the issuance of 30-year bonds.
The credit institutions, too, reduced their cap-
ital market debt in the period from July to
September (by 381/C252billion). This was likewisedue to a high level of redemption and repur-
chasing. In the preceding quarter, the credit
institutions had issued their own bonds for
3151/C252billion net. They reduced their public
Pfandbrief debt by 314 billion and their mort-
gage Pfandbrief debt by 331/C252billion. A posi-
tive amount was raised, however, from the is-
suance of debt securities by specialised credit
institutions and from the category of “other
bank debt securities”, which can be struc-
tured flexibly; in the third quarter, the figures
for these reached 35 billion and 34 billion re-
spectively.
In the reporting period, non-financial corpor-
ations, unlike other issuers, increased the net
circulation of their own bonds and money
market instruments by 311/C252billion, issuing
short-term and longer-term instruments in
roughly equal amounts. Net redemptions of
money market instruments in August and
September are masked in the quarterly fig-
ures, however. Tensions in the European
money market occurred at this time, which
made new issues of short-dated bonds con-
siderably more difficult.
As in the second quarter, German debt secur-
ities were purchased mainly by foreign invest-
ors in the third quarter, too. They acquired
private sector debt instruments for 347 billion
and public sector debt instruments for 34 bil-
lion. Credit institutions swapped domestic
debt securities for foreign debt securities; on
balance, there was no change in their overall
bond holdings. Domestic non-banks, on the
other hand, sold debt securities amounting to
3861/C252billion. In terms of domestic instru-
ments, they sold mainly bank bonds and cor-Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2006 2007
Item Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents 4.2 22.9 – 86.8
Credit institutions – 0.8 25.3 – 0.2
of which
Foreign debt securities 10.0 32.4 13.8
Non-banks 5.1 – 2.4 – 86.6
of which
Domestic debt securities – 1.7 – 12.7 – 74.7
Non-residents 18.5 65.1 50.9
Shares
Residents 16.9 – 2.0 – 9.8
Credit institutions 3.7 – 13.0 – 4.0
of which
Domestic shares – 2.5 – 18.5 – 2.8
Non-banks 13.2 10.9 – 5.8
of which
Domestic shares 4.8 8.7 2.3
Non-residents 1.8 12.3 1.6
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 5.7 1.0 – 1.2
Investment in funds open to the
general public – 3.9 – 0.7 – 6.9
of which: Share-based funds – 1.1 – 2.8 – 2.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
Credit
institutions’
market debt
also fallenNet issuance
of corporate
bonds
Purchases of
debt securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
41porate bonds ( 3461/C252billion) but also public
sector instruments ( 3281/C252billion). Domestic
non-banks redeemed foreign bonds for 312
billion.
In the third quarter, the international stock
markets felt the impact of the turbulence inthe credit markets. When the crisis in the USmortgage market became distinctly moreacute in July and August and many creditrisks were being reassessed, investors – givena greater aversion to risk – undertook consid-
erable shifts in their portfolios away fromstocks into secure government bonds. Crucialfactors in this are likely to have been concernsabout the adverse implications of the finan-cial market turbulence for the profitability ofthe financial institutions, for business withmergers and acquisitions, which had hithertobeen driving stock prices, as well as for eco-nomic activity as a whole. This “flight to se-
curity” led initially to sharp price falls in the
third quarter, especially of equities from thefinancial sector. At the same time, there wasa marked increase in uncertainty about futurestock market prices, reaching figures thatwere above the long-term average.
6
In mid-September, the distortions in the credit
markets took a backseat somewhat when theFed cut its target for the federal funds rate by
50 basis points. Following this, the market
players’ uncertainty and risk aversion recededagain somewhat. In a setting of generally ro-
bust global economic activity, stock pricesmade good some of their earlier losses des-pite somewhat gloomier sentiment indicatorsin the euro area and increasing concernsabout the economy in the United States. Onecontributory factor in this was that the mar-
kets had anticipated the further interest ratecut made by the Fed at the end of October.Another, major supporting factor on bothsides of the Atlantic was the expected year-
on-year growth in corporate profits – which,despite the financial market turbulence, actu-ally showed an increase in the third quarter.Monthly data
Lin scale
Price-earnings ratio3
in relation to the ...
... DAX
... Dow Jones
    EuroStoxxLog scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx 1, 2
DAX 1, 2Share price movements and
earnings estimates for
European and German
public limited companies
1January 2002 = 100. — 2Source: Deutsche
Börse AG. — 3Based on year-on-year
I / B / E / S analyst estimates (earnings before
goodwill). Source: Thomson Financial Data-
stream.
Deutsche Bundesbank20
18
1614
12
10140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
45
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
6Measured by indices of implied volatility (VDAX, VIX).Stock markets
under
pressure ...
... but relatively
robust overall

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
42Deuts che Bun desbankPortfolio shifts as a measure of general risk per ception in the ﬁ  nan cial markets
In the wake of the re cent tur bulen ce in the ﬁ  nan cial 
markets, investors have evi dently carrie d out portfolio 
shifts from sto cks into se cure government bonds. The 
analysis of su ch portfolio shifts allows inferen ces to be 
drawn concernin g the general risk propensity of the 
market players. In this context, the correlation between 
returns from sto cks an d lon g-term government bonds is 
a suita ble measure of risk aversion, sin ce chan ges in risk 
propensity have a stron ger impa ct on the sto ck markets 
than on the markets for government bonds. In times of 
hightene d risk aversion, it is therefore often possi ble to 
observe that investors deman d higher equity risk premi-
ums or un dertake shifts from sto cks into se cure govern-
ment bonds (safe haven ﬂ  ows). The resultin g contrastin g 
pri ce developments of sto cks an d government se curities 
are a ccompanie d by a ne gative correlation. By contrast, 
in calm perio ds, the pri ces of both shoul d develop in par-
allel, sin ce lower interest rates in crease the present value 
of future gains an d thus lea d to hi gher sto ck pri ces.
The easiest way of calculatin g the correlation between 
sto cks an d government bonds is by means of a movin g 
win dow. In this approa ch, su dden chan ges of the cor-
relation are capture d as a smoothe d development. This 
means that some extreme correlation values inﬂ  uen ce 
the measure d correlation, depen ding on the s cope of 
the win dow, for an exten ded time. One pro blem of this 
approa ch is that all the data within the win dow are 
wei ghte d equally an d data outsi de of the win dow are 
not consi dere d at all. Another pro blem is that the s cope 
of the win dow has to be chosen at ran dom. In or der to 
avoi d these pro blems, a GAR CH(1,1) mo del is estimate d 
below, whi ch can be use d to capture the correlation 
between both time series as it varies over time. A version 
of the BEKK mo del,1 whi ch is often use d in pra ctice, is 
chosen as the spe ciﬁ cation of the GAR CH(1,1) mo del.
The estimate is ma de on the basis of the returns (meas-
ure d as the daily lo garithmi c pri ce differential) of the total 
return in dices of CDAX an d the Merrill Lyn ch In dex for 
European government bonds in the o bservation perio d from the beginnin g of 1999 to 12 Novem ber 2007. With 
regard to the re cent tur bulen ce in the credit markets, it 
can be seen that the correlation has decline d sin ce mi d-
June an d, sin ce July, has move d clearly below the mean 
value determine d in the o bservation perio d (see chart 
above, strai ght line). In mi d-June, ratin g agency Moo dy‘s 
announ ced that it woul d down grade many se curities 
collateralise d by mort gages from the su bprime se gment. 
This was followe d by a general reassessment of the credit 
risks. When the Fe deral Reserve cut its key fun ds rate by 
50 basis points on 18 Septem ber 2007 an d sto ck pri ces 
subsequently went up si gniﬁ cantly, the downwar d tren d 
reverse d an d the correlation in crease d again somewhat 
owin g to an evi dently lower aversion to risk. At the en d 
of the perio d un der review, it was at a level similar to 
that followin g the temporary sto ck pri ce losses in Mar ch 
of this year, althou gh it remaine d ne gative, as almost 
throu ghout 2007.
In or der to estimate the current state of risk propensity 
as a ccurately as possi ble, it appears lo gical to make an 
1 The name “BEKK mo del“ has its ori gins in a paper by Ba ba, En gle, 
Kraft an d Kroner (1989), an earlier version of R En gle an d K Kroner 
(1995), Multivariate Simultaneous Generalize d AR CH, E conometri c 
Theory, 11, pp 122-150. In this mo del, the correlation is calculate d from the conditional varian ce-covarian ce matrix Ht , whi ch is spe ciﬁ ed as 
Ht =C+A[εt-1 εt-1´ ]A´+BHt-1 B´, with A, B an d C as 2x2 matrixes, A an d B are 
assume d to be diagonal, an d the 2x1 ve ctor εt correspon ds to the errors 
from a re gression of the sto ck an d bond returns on their mean values. Daily values
18 Septem ber 2007
Mean valueConditional correlation between
sto ck market an d bond market
0
0.1–
0.2–
0.3–
0.4–
0.5–
0.6–
0.7–
0.8–
J FMAM JJ A S OND
2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
43assessment a gainst the backgroun d of its past lon g-term 
development, too. To avoi d isolate d extreme values of 
the correlation givin g a distorte d pi cture of risk pro-
pensity, the analysis of a smoothe d development is an 
obvious option. The cited pro blems in calculatin g the 
correlation with the ai d of a movin g win dow are over-
come by means of a re gression of the equity returns on 
a constant (α) an d the bond returns with a time-vari-
able beta parameter. The relationship between the daily 
CDAX returns an d the returns of the Merrill Lyn ch In dex 
for government bonds are therefore analyse d below in 
a time-varia ble context. For this purpose, the re gression 
equation is transforme d to a state-spa ce form, estimate d 
time-varia bly usin g the Kalman ﬁ  lter an d then smoothe d 
by means of the smoothin g equation usin g all the availa-
ble data.2 This estimation pro cedure avoi ds the pro blems 
of an i denti cal wei ghtin g of all the data within the win-
dow an d of an ar bitrarily chosen win dow s cope, whi ch 
are asso ciate d with a movin g win dow re gression.
In most cases, the smoothe d beta coefﬁ cient an d the con-
ditional correlation show the same tren d in the o bserve d 
perio d. Sudden, merely temporary chan ges of the cor-
relation between the equity market an d the bond mar-
ket were reﬂ  ected in the conditional correlation only as 
“outliers“, without chan ging its lon ger-term tren d. The 
heavy sto ck pri ce losses followin g accountin g scandals in 
the U SA an d in the run-up to the conﬂ ict in Iraq between 
mid-2002 an d the se cond quarter of 2003 are reﬂ  ected 
more clearly by the beta coefﬁ cient. In this perio d, the 
conditional correlation also droppe d to similarly low val-
ues as seen re cently durin g the tur bulen ce in the credit 
markets. However, the lon g duration of this sto ck-market 
slump, alon g with simultaneously in creasin g bond pri ces 
is expresse d more clearly in the smoothe d values of the 
beta coefﬁ cient. The very low values of the beta coef-
ﬁ cient si gnal – amon g other thin gs – the evi dently per-
sistent perio d of portfolio shifts from sto cks into se cure 
government se curities at that time a gainst the backdrop 
of an ex ceptionally hi gh aversion to risk on the part of 
the market parti cipants.Compare d with this perio d, the current development 
of the beta coefﬁ cient shows a less tense pi cture of the 
situation in the ﬁ  nan cial markets. Followin g the decline 
in July, the coefﬁ cient rose a gain espe cially in Septem-
ber an d October, with the result that the last value is 
only mar ginally below the lon ger-term avera ge for the 
observation perio d an d thus points at present to a rather 
mo derate risk aversion. When interpretin g this result, 
however, it must be taken into a ccount that the analy-
sis presente d here fo cuses solely on the relationships 
between the returns on government bonds an d sto cks. 
Hen ce, it mainly mo dels the general risk per ception of 
the market. Of course, it cannot capture investors‘ cau-
tion concernin g in dividual pro duct cate gories – as, for 
example, in the case of stru cture d securitisations.
See also European Central Bank, Box 2, Monthly Bulletin, De cem ber 
2004, pp 18 –19. — 2 In this case, it is assume d that the beta coefﬁ cient 
follows a ran dom walk an d thus may vary su bstantially. State-spa cemo dels an d the Kalman ﬁ  lter are described in detail, for example, in 
K Cuth bertson, SG Hall an d MP Taylor (1992), Applie d econometri c 
techniques, New York.Weekly avera ges
Conditional correlation
(left-han d scale)
Mean value
Beta coeffi cient
(right-han d scale)+ 5.124
+ 3.843
+ 2.5 62
+ 1.281
0
– 1.281
– 2.5 62
– 3.843
– 5.124
–6.405
–7 . 686
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 200 62007Measures of portfolio
shifts between sto ck
market an d bond market
0.8+
0.6+
0.4+
0.2+
0
0.2–
0.4–
0.6–
0.8–
1.0–
1.2–

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
44Overall, as measured on the broad CDAX
share price index, German equities showed
losses of 5% since the end of June, while the
European Dow Jones EuroStoxx and the US
S&P 500 lost 6% and 3% respectively. At the
end of the period under review, all the cited
indices were still up on their end-2006 level,
however.
Against the backdrop of the financial market
turbulence, issuance activity in the domestic
stock market weakened again in the third
quarter. German enterprises issued only
31 billion worth of new shares, compared
with 321/C252billion in the second quarter. These
were mostly listed equities. Moreover, resi-
dents sold foreign shares for 391/C252billion net.
In the German stock market, domestic non-
banks were the largest group of buyers of
German equities in the third quarter, at 321/C252
billion. At the same time, they sold foreign
shares amounting to 38 billion. Foreign in-
vestors increased their investment in the Ger-
man equity market by 311/C252billion. They re-
duced their holdings in the form of portfolio
investments by 331/C252billion, but stepped up
their direct investment (see also page 45).
German credit institutions took domestic and
foreign equity out of their portfolios ( 33 bil-
lion and 31 billion respectively).
Domestic investment companies recorded
outflows of funds amounting to 38 billion in
the third quarter after raising funds of 31/C252bil-
lion in the preceding three months. At 37 bil-
lion, the outflows were predominantly to the
detriment of mutual funds open to the gen-
eral public, while the specialised funds re-Major items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2006 2007
Item Q3 Q2 Q3
I Current account 1,2 + 21.7 + 35.6 + 37.7
Foreign trade 1,3 + 38.7 + 48.8 + 50.1
Services 1 – 11.2 – 3.3 – 10.2
Income 1 + 6.9 – 2.1 + 9.1
Current transfers 1 – 8.1 – 4.8 – 8.6
II Capital transfers 1,4 – 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.4
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 12.8 – 89.0 – 20.4
1 Direct investment – 14.6 – 22.3 – 19.4
German investment
abroad – 19.7 – 24.1 – 34.1
Foreign investment in
Germany + 5.0 + 1.8 + 14.7
2 Portfolio investment + 5.8 + 12.9 + 49.7
German investment
abroad – 20.2 – 62.5 + 1.4
Shares – 2.8 – 2.8 + 5.3
Mutual fund shares – 0.6 – 16.9 – 2.1
Debt securities – 16.8 – 42.7 – 1.9
Bonds and notes 5 – 15.1 – 39.6 + 3.6
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes – 13.1 – 33.4 + 10.6
Money market
instruments – 1.6 – 3.1 – 5.5
Foreign investment
in Germany + 26.0 + 75.3 + 48.3
Shares + 6.3 + 8.6 – 3.5
Mutual fund shares + 1.2 + 1.6 + 0.8
Debt securities + 18.5 + 65.1 + 50.9
Bonds and notes 5 + 22.3 + 60.6 + 31.8
of which
Public bonds and
notes + 9.1 + 27.1 + 3.6
Money market
instruments – 3.8 + 4.5 + 19.1
3 Financial derivatives 6 – 1.1 – 12.0 – 32.2
4 Other investment 7 – 3.7 – 66.2 – 18.1
Monetary financial
institutions 8 + 13.0 – 60.8 – 24.7
of which: short-term + 28.3 – 40.4 + 10.3
Enterprises and
households + 5.2 + 13.7 + 5.9
of which: short-term + 8.7 + 23.3 + 10.0
General government + 6.1 – 23.4 + 28.6
of which: short-term – 1.0 – 23.1 + 29.1
Bundesbank – 28.0 + 4.3 – 27.9
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 + 0.8 – 1.4 – 0.3
IV Errors and omissions – 8.6 + 52.5 – 17.7
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). From January 2007, excluding supplies
of goods for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December
2006, were deducted via the supplementary foreign trade
items. — 4Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced
non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of more than one
year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options as well as finan-
cial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and trade credits,
bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the Bundesbank. —
9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due to
value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDecline in stock
market
borrowing
Share
purchases
Sales of mutual
fund shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
45served for institutional investors were less se-
verely affected ( 31 billion). In the case of the
mutual funds open to the general public, the
outflows – against the backdrop of the ten-
sions in the European and US financial mar-
kets – affected mainly money market funds
(35 billion), although bond-based funds ( 33
billion) and equity-based funds ( 321/C252billion)
were affected, too. By contrast, open-end
real estate funds and mixed security-based
funds sold shares for 32 billion and 311/C252bil-
lion, respectively. Foreign mutual funds re-
corded inflows of funds of 32 billion.
Mutual fund shares were purchased solely by
foreign investors in the third quarter ( 31 bil-
lion). By contrast, both domestic non-banks
and domestic credit institutions reduced their
investment in mutual fund shares on balance
by34 billion and 321/C252billion respectively.
Direct investment
Net capital imports of 3491/C252billion in port-
folio investment – not least owing to the in-
creasing risk aversion of internationally oper-ating investors – contrasted with net outflows
of funds of 3191/C252billion in direct investment
in the third quarter; net capital exports had
been at 3221/C252billion in the second quarter.
The key factor, as in the preceding quarter,
was investment by German proprietors,
which provided their foreign branches with
capital amounting to a total of 334 billion, a
large part of which was in the form of intra-
group financial credits ( 3211/C252billion). Among
the preferred locations for investment were
the countries of the European Union, includ-
ing – apart from some large international re-
structuring measures within affiliated enter-
prises – Italy ( 381/C252billion) and the Nether-
lands ( 35 billion).
Foreign firms likewise strengthened their in-
vestment in Germany, investing 3141/C252billion
net in the reporting period. In the preceding
quarter, foreign investment in Germany had
been considerably more subdued at 32 bil-
lion. The vast majority of the inflowing funds
came from European countries, principally
the Netherlands and France.Purchases of
mutual fund
shares
Net capital
exports in direct
investment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
46Economic conditions
in GermanyOverall economic developments
The cyclical upturn in the German economy
continued in the third quarter of 2007 at a
faster pace. According to initial figures from
the Federal Statistical Office, overall output
went up by 0.7% after adjustment for sea-
sonal and calendar effects, compared with
0.3% in the second quarter. The year-on-year
increase after calendar adjustment was
2.5%. This means that overall capacity utilisa-
tion is likely to have shown a further increase
during the year. The sharp increase in VAT at
the beginning of the year as well as the short-
falls in demand as a reaction to the earlier an-
ticipatory effects was placing a strain on pri-
vate consumption and housing construction
in the first half of the year. The expansionary
cyclical forces began to have a greater influ-
ence again in the quarter under review, how-
ever.
No detailed figures on the development of
the individual demand components are avail-
able yet for the third quarter. However, the
available indicators point to stronger domes-
tic impulses. As a result, private consumption,
which had already recovered somewhat in
the second quarter from its low in the first
quarter, is likely to have continued to make a
contribution to growth. The main reason for
this was the sharp rise in expenditure on new
cars, while traditional retail sales increased
only slightly. Towards the end of last year,
there had been, in particular, a large number
of new car purchases in anticipation of the
VAT increase, which led to a considerable de-
cline in demand during the first half of this
year.Faster pace of
growth in Q3
Stronger
domestic
demand stimuli

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
47Enterprises simultaneously increased their in-
vestment. In view of the high level of capacity
utilisation and the continuing buoyant de-
mand for labour, the incentive to expand, as
before, played a key role. This is consistent
with underlying sentiment in the German
economy, which remains more than averagely
positive, although the survey indicators in the
third quarter failed to maintain the peak fig-
ures of the second quarter. Given the euro’s
appreciation, the renewed increase in oil
prices, and the risks – which are difficult to
estimate – in connection with the turbulence
in the financial markets, the somewhat more
cautious assessment of future economic de-
velopments was reflected mainly in the ex-
pectation components. Construction invest-
ment, along with investment in machinery
and equipment, contributed to overall eco-
nomic growth in the third quarter. So far this
year, the pattern of growth has been quite
volatile, however. This was due not only to
pronounced anticipatory effects but also to
weather-induced delays in production during
the first half of the year. The recovery in con-
struction activity in the third quarter probably
stemmed largely from industrial building,
whereas housing construction continued to
show a weak trend.
Foreign trade also remained a major driver of
growth in the German economy in the third
quarter. Recently this has been the case not
only for manufacturers of capital goods,
which are traditionally heavily dependent on
exports, but also for sales of consumer
goods. The fact that the vast majority of sec-
tors were able to benefit from this indicates
both the breadth of the cyclical upturn andGerman firms’ favourable market position,
especially in the euro area. Moreover, along
with increasing domestic demand and, not
least, in connection with the increased accu-
mulation of stocks, imports gained in import-
ance. In net terms, foreign trade therefore
made a neutral contribution, at most, to over-
all economic growth.
Sectoral trends
In terms of production, overall economic
growth continued to be driven mainly by in-
dustry. With quarter-on-quarter growth of
2% in the third quarter, industrial output
clearly gained renewed momentum following
an increase of no more than1/C252% in the
second quarter. The fact that industrial activ-2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 2007Log scale  
Real GDP 1Economic growth
1Price-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−110
108
106
104
102
100
98
Buoyant
foreign trade
Strong
industrial
output

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
48ity was decidedly buoyant was evident, on
the one hand, in the case of manufacturers
of intermediate and capital goods. Among
the individual subsectors, mechanical engin-
eering, in particular, showed strong growth
again. In line with demand, there was, on the
other hand, a further significant increase in
the production of consumer goods. It was
only in the manufacture of non-durablegoods that there was a slight fall on the quar-
ter.
Industrial output has been on a strong up-
ward path for some time and has recently
shown a further acceleration. This has now
led to a sharp increase in capacity utilisation
in this sector. At plant level, processing orders
as swiftly as possible has been helped by
greater flexibility in the deployment of labour.
This was only made possible by matching
agreements between both sides of industry
and, not least, by structural reforms in the la-
bour market in recent years. Nevertheless,
capacity shortages are already becoming ap-
parent in some subsectors, such as mechanic-
al engineering and the electrical engineering
industry. Furthermore, many enterprises are
complaining about a growing shortage of
skilled labour.
In construction, the economic picture re-
mained mixed up to the end of the period
under review, although output in the third
quarter showed an increase of 11/C254% on the
preceding three-month period after seasonal
and calendar adjustment. This result also has
to be seen against the backdrop of a marked
seasonally adjusted decline in construction
activity in the second quarter, however. Ac-
cordingly, output in the third quarter was still
more than 3% below its depressed level of
the first half of the year. The finishing trades,
which also benefited especially from
government-sponsored assistance pro-
grammes for the environmentally friendly re-
newal of the housing stock, performed better
than construction. In the first half of the year,
the number of hours worked in the construc-2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted,quarterly
%%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 2007Log scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−15+20+25+30+105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70 70 7010+
5+
0
5−120
115
110
105
100
95Continuing
high capacity
utilisation
Construction
output
recovered
slightly from
low level

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
49tion industry fell by a seasonally adjusted
41/C254% compared with the second half of
2006, whereas the number of hours worked
in the finishing trades during the same period
went up by 51/C252%.
In the wake of strong industrial activity, both
commercial service providers and the trans-
port sector are likely to have grown strongly.
The ports and logistics enterprises, in particu-
lar, reported capacity shortages. In the case
of services as a whole, the business situation
indicator of the Ifo institute points to a slight
weakening in the third quarter, however,
compared with a marked increase in the
second quarter. According to the ZEW subin-
dicator “Service Providers of the Information
Society”, too, those surveyed also assessed
the business climate more cautiously at the
end of the period under review than in the
second quarter, when the indicator had risen.
Employment and unemployment
The gratifying development in the labour
market continued in the third quarter. The
number of persons in work went up by a sea-
sonally adjusted 98,000, or 0.2%, to 39.80
million. The year-on-year increase was
638,000, or 1.6%. This means that the rise
was almost as sharp as on an average of the
first half of 2007. In particular, employment
subject to social security contributions again
benefited most from this. According to esti-
mations by the Federal Employment Agency,
which are available up to August, there was
an increase of 589,000, or 2.2%, on the year.
Almost half of the increase was attributableto the “finance, renting and business ser-
vices” sector, which also includes temporary
and subcontracted work. By contrast, other
forms of employment (self-employment,
“mini-jobs”, government-assisted forms of
employment) showed noticeably lower rates
of growth.
In the third quarter, a seasonally adjusted
3.74 million persons were registered as un-
employed at the Federal Employment Agency.
This was 105,000 fewer than in the previous
quarter and a fall of 677,000 on the year,
which largely reflects the gain in employ-
ment. The demographic decline in the supply
of labour was offset by an increase in labour
market participation. The fall in unemploy-
ment benefited the long-term unemployed
receiving unemployment benefit II to much
the same extent as recipients of unemploy-
ment benefit I (-306,000 compared with
-371,000 in the previous year). The seasonally
adjusted unemployment rate fell from 9.2%
in the second quarter to 8.9% in the third
quarter. The figure one year earlier had been
as high as 10.6%. The decline in unemploy-
ment continued in October. The unemploy-
ment rate, as defined nationally, fell to 8.7%.
The standardised unemployment rate, calcu-
lated according to International Labour Or-
ganization (ILO) criteria, was 3.55 million in
the third quarter with a matching rate of
8.2%. The standardised data were calculated
for the first time on the basis of the continu-
ous labour force survey. This involved a revi-
sion of the data for the past years (see The re-
vision of the ILO unemployment figures for
Germany, page 51).More cautious
assessment of
situation for
service
providers
Further rise in
employment...and further
decline in
unemployment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
50The leading indicators available suggest that
the favourable development in the labour
market will continue in the near future, albeit
no longer at the rapid pace of the first three
quarters of this year. The seasonally adjusted
number of job vacancies reported to the Fed-
eral Employment Agency showed a further
slight rise on the second quarter. However,
the Ifo employment barometer for trade and
industry was pointing to somewhat more
cautious employment arrangements at the
end of the period under review. Furthermore,
there are already signs that it is becoming in-
creasingly difficult to recruit additional staff in
some areas of the labour market
Wages and prices
With the improvement in the labour market
situation, pay agreements have been some-
what higher in the current year. This is grad-
ually being reflected in the negotiated basic
rates of pay, which were up 1.7% on the year
in the third quarter. Including one-off pay-
ments, the increase was somewhat lower
than in the second quarter, however. This was
due, first, to substantial one-off payments in
the metal-working industry in the second
quarter and, second, to the fact that, in the
third quarter, the volume of lump-sum pay-
ments included in pay agreements was only
slightly larger than in the previous year. Des-
pite higher negotiated rates, wage cost pres-
sure has remained quite moderate overall so
far this year. This is due, first, to the fact that,
in the services sector, wage negotiations from
previous years are still in effect; these provide
for no or only small wage increases (as in theSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
Thou-
sand
Million
Thou-
sand
%Unemployment rate
0
12OctOctLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed
- 
OctLin. scale
Employed
Year-on-year changeof which
Employees subject to social
security contributions
July-
AugLog scale
EmployedLabour market
1From January 2004, unemployed ex-
cluding participants in aptitude testing and
training measures. — 2From January 2005,
unemployed including persons formerly
receiving social assistance but able to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9
8600+
300+
0
300−
600−
900−5.0
4.4
4.1
3.8
3.54.7
3.5500+
0
500−28.0
27.5
27.0
26.5
26.040.0
39.5
39.0
38.5
- 
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Favourable
outlook for
employment
Negotiated pay
rates increasing
more sharply
with marked
sectoral
differentiation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
51Deuts che Bun desbankThe revision of the ILO unemployment ﬁ  gures for Germany
From the reportin g month of Septem ber 2007, 
the German unemployment statisti cs have been 
colle cted on a new re cording basis. The Inter-
national La bour Or ganization (ILO) deﬁ nes the 
unemploye d as those persons who are not in pai d 
employment but are a ctively seekin g an d imme-
diately availa ble for work. The unemployment 
ﬁ gures an d the mat chin g unemployment rates 
are use d mainly for international comparisons 
sin ce, in this context, the irre gular inﬂ  uen ces 
of differin g so cial se curity systems an d re gistra-
tion re quirements are lar gely eliminate d. In 
contrast to re gistere d unemployment, whi ch is 
derive d from the current statisti cs of the la bour 
exchan ges, the level of jo blessness is calculate d 
with the ai d of househol d surveys.
In Germany, this is now done by means of the 
continuous mi crocensus, an ofﬁ  cial multi-pur-
pose sample. This repla ces the telephone survey, 
whi ch ha d been use d from mi d-2003 onwar ds 
while chan ging over from the earlier usual 
annual mi crocensus to the more fre quent survey 
require d by the EU.1 The continuous mi crocensus 
surveys starte d in early 2005 but the initial results 
were deeme d not to be ro bust. 
As the group of those surveye d in the continu-
ous mi crocensus differs from month to month 
– the persons provi ding information in any given 
month are not surveye d again until a further 12 
months have passe d – an d the monthly samples 
are therefore lar gely in depen dent of one other, 
month-on-month comparisons present pro blems. 
These pro blems are exa cerbate d by the fa ct that 
data on a compara ble basis are availa ble only 
from January 2007, whi ch means that seasonal 
adjustment is not yet possi ble. The seasonally 
adjuste d monthly ILO unemployment ﬁ  gures are 
therefore derive d from the Fe deral Employment 
Agency’s seasonally a djuste d series of re gistere d 
unemployment, as use d to be the case when the labour for ce was surveye d annually. This is now 
done with a level corre ction via the quotients of 
centre d movin g 12-month avera ges of unem-
ploye d persons an d persons without work.2 The 
data on employment re quire d for calculatin g the 
unemployment rate are likewise derive d from 
the monthly employment ﬁ  gure of the national 
accounts an d not from the mi crocensus.
The re basin g of the ILO data on the continuous 
microcensus has le d to a marke d upwar d revi-
sion of the data on unemployment. Instea d of a 
seasonally a djuste d rate of 6.9% for the ﬁ  rst half 
of 2007, 8. 6% is now reporte d. Similarly lar ge 
chan ges have resulte d for 2005 an d 200 6. One 
crucial reason for the marke d revisions is likely 
to be the fa ct that the continuous mi crocensus 
records fewer instan ces of mar ginal employment 
than were capture d by the earlier telephone 
survey. In a ddition, the questions on the jo b-
seekin g behaviour of the unemploye d are now 
wor ded differently.
1 The telephone survey was for a limite d perio d until April 
2007, whi ch meant that a further interim solution ha d to be 
foun d for the followin g months. The last seasonally a djuste d 
unemployment level re corded usin g the telephone survey 
was carrie d forwar d with the chan ge in re gistere d unemploy-ment a ccording to the Fe deral Employment A gency. — 2 At 
the current en d, the extrapolation fa ctor is carrie d forwar d 
usin g the most re cent 12-month avera ge an d then su cces-
sively revise d. — 3 Base d on the rates calculate d by Eurostat.Seasonally a djuste d, quarterly
%
0ILO unemployment rate
Former level3
New levelRevision of
the unemployment statisti cs
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
2003 2004 2005 200 6 2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
52public sector). Second, wage agreements
have expired without a follow-up agreement
having been negotiated yet (as in the retail
and insurance sectors). In some sectors (such
as cleaning services), new pay agreements do
not provide for an increase until 2008. In the
production sector, which is particularly bene-
fiting from economic developments, negoti-
ated rates of pay increased by 3.1% on the
year in the third quarter, which is a much
higher rate than the average for the economy
as a whole.1
Prices were influenced more strongly by ex-
ternal factors after mid-year. Seasonally ad-
justed import prices increased by only 0.4%
on an average of the third quarter, however,
compared with 1.5% in the quarter before.
One factor was that the pressure on energy
prices was eased for a time by a temporary
slowdown in the rise of oil prices. Another
was that the cost of imports of other goods
fell by a seasonally adjusted 0.2% owing to
the strong appreciation of the euro. Lower
prices for intermediate and capital goods and
hardly any change in the prices of durable
consumer goods masked sharp price in-
creases in the case of non-durable consumer
goods, however. This sharp increase in the
cost of non-durables was caused by the sharp
rises in the prices of food and animal feeds
due to the tense situation in the international
markets for agricultural products. Overall, im-
ports were 0.4% more expensive than in the
same period last year. As export prices de-
veloped along similar lines to import prices,
there was no change in the terms of trade in
seasonal adjusted terms. In year-on-year
terms, there was an increase of 1.2%Upward pressure on prices eased temporarily
in the second quarter at the producer level,
too. The seasonally adjusted price level of
goods intended for domestic sale went up by
0.3% in the third quarter, compared with
+0.6% in spring. Temporary price reductions
for energy made a noticeably smaller contri-
bution to this than did the marked slowdown
in the rise in the cost of intermediate goods,
which was caused by cheaper imports. Never-
theless, as there was stronger upward pres-
sure on the prices of consumer goods, the
seasonally adjusted increase in the cost of in-
dustrial goods (excluding energy), at 0.6%,
was only slightly weaker than in the previous
quarter. This was mainly attributable to mark-
edly higher selling prices of the food and
drink industry. The factory gate prices of in-
dustrial products rose by a total of 1.2% on
the year, or 2.5% if energy is excluded. The
upward trend in farm gate prices continued.
Farmers earned almost 17% more for vege-
table products and around 131/C252% more for
animal products than in 2006. Construction
work became even more expensive in the
third quarter. All subsectors of the construc-
tion industry were affected by this. There was
a 7% rise on the year.
At a seasonally adjusted 0.6%, the increase
in consumer prices in the third quarter was
much the same as in the second quarter.
1After difficult wage negotiations in August, manage-
ment and labour in the construction sector finally agreed
to incorporate the provisions of the June arbitration pro-
posal into a pay agreement. This proposal envisaged an
agreement running for an overall period of 24 months
with a phased increase in remuneration totalling 6.2% as
well as supplementary lump-sum payments and an in-
crease in minimum wages. The pay dispute at Deutsche
Bahn continues, however.Temporary
easing in price
increases for
imports......and slight
deceleration at
domestic
producer level
Continuing
sharp rise in
consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
53Seen over four quarters, the rate of consumer
price increase has clearly accelerated, how-ever. Higher crude oil prices and the introduc-tion of tuition fees in a number of federalstates as of the 2007 summer semester keptinflationary pressure at a high level in thesecond quarter. In the third quarter this wasdue mainly to food products. These increasedby as much as 1.6% on the quarter and2.4% on the year. There was a 1.8% increasein the case of goods (excluding energy) and a2.8% increase for services. The increase inVAT and insurance tax at the beginning of theyear also played a part in this. If the rises inenergy prices (2.7%) and housing costs(1.0%) are also taken into account, the year-on-year increase in the national consumerprice index (CPI) for the third quarter was2.1%. The rate also increased over four quar-ters owing to a baseline effect – crude oilprices had fallen for a time one year previous-ly – of 1.9% in July and August and 2.4% inSeptember. Measured by the HarmonisedIndex of Consumer Prices (HICP), the inflationrate, in fact, went up, from 2.0% to 2.7%.
2
The increase in consumer prices was particu-
larly marked in the case of dairy products.The consumer price of milk increased by 21%
within the space of a few months (from May
to October), while farm cheese ( Speisequark )
went up by 34% and butter by as much as
43%. In the case of cheese, the price risewhich did not begin until September, has, up2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
%
OctLin scale
Year-on-year change 1Consumer prices2Construction prices 1Producer prices of
agricultural productsProducer prices of
industrial productsLog scale
Import pricesImport, producer and
consumer prices
1  Not seasonally adjusted, quarterly. —
2 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
2+
1+
0115
110
105
100115
110
105
100115125
110120
105115
100
95100120
105115
110 110110
105
100
95
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2Of the relatively large 0.3 percentage point gap be-
tween the annualised CPI and HICP rates in September
and October 2007, 0.2 percentage point may be ex-
plained by the combined effects of marked relative price
changes and differing baskets of goods. The remainder is
due to rounding effects.Very sharp
increases in the
price of dairy
products

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
54Deuts che Bun desbankMeasure d, per ceive d an d expe cted pri ce developments
On ce a month, the market resear ch institution, Gesell-
schaft für Konsumfors chun g (GfK) surveys 2,000 house-
hol ds in Germany on how they per ceive pri ce develop-
ments in re cent months an d on their expe ctations of 
inﬂ ation in the next 12 months. The ﬁ  ndings of this survey are in corporate d into the colle ction of sentiment 
indicators pu blishe d ea ch month by the European Com-
mission.1 This is the only survey whi ch provi des informa-
tion on how consumers in Germany have per ceive d past 
pri ce developments an d what they expe ct for the near 
future. Calculations of per ceive d inﬂ ation, are, by con-
trast, base d on assumptions re garding how househol ds 
may have per ceive d the (avera ge) chan ge in in dividual 
pri ces as capture d in the ofﬁ  cial consumer pri ce statisti cs. 
The informative value of su ch calculations can be calle d 
into question for a num ber of reasons.2
The GfK does not ask househol ds dire ctly a bout the 
per centa ge chan ge in consumer pri ces but instea d asks 
for qualitative assessments of whether pri ces have risen 
sharply, mo derately or har dly at all or have, in fa ct, fallen. 
Househol ds are also aske d whether pri ces will in crease 
more sharply, rou ghly at the same rate as before or more 
slowly than before, stay rou ghly the same or even fall.
The European Commission calculates wei ghte d “bal-
ance statisti cs” whi ch, in the case of Germany, go back 
to 1985. “Extreme” responses are emphasise d twi ce as 
stron gly as the more mo derate assessments. The mi ddle 
cate gory response is not taken into consi deration. Ana-
lysin g these wei ghte d balan ces can provi de initial infor-
mation on both per ceive d an d expe cted pri ce develop-
ments. It shoul d, however, be note d that the question 
about future pri ce developments is linke d to the assess-
ment of past developments. Therefore, the relevant 
responses an d balan ces cannot be interprete d meanin g-
fully on their own. For analyti cal purposes, it is a dvisa ble 
to analyse the responses by their in dividual cate gories or 
to quantify them usin g a less ri gid framework.
1 www.e c.europa.eu/e conomy_finan ce/in dicators/ businessan dcon-
sumersurveys_en.htm. — 2 See J Hoffmann, H-A Leifer an d A Lorenz 
(2005), In dex of Per ceive d Inﬂ ation or EU Consumer Surveys? – An 
assessment of Professor H W Bra chin ger’s approa ch, in Review of Euro-
pean E conomi c Poli cy, Vol 41, Intere conomi cs, May 200 6 pp 142 – 50. — 
3 This phenomenon has been o bserve d in many euro-area countries. 
See, for example, L Au cremanne, M Collin an d T Stra gier (2007), 
Assessin g the Gap between O bserve d an d Per ceive d Inﬂ ation in the Euro Area: Is the Credibility of the HI CP at Stake?, BNB Workin g Paper 
No 112 an d the literature cite d there. — 4 See Deuts che Bun desbank, 
How informative survey data on private se ctor inﬂ  ation expe cta-
tions are for monetary poli cymakers, Monthly Report, O ctober 200 6, 
pp 15 – 28, an d C Gerberding (200 6), Househol d versus Expert Fore casts 
of Inﬂ  ation: New Evi dence from European Survey Data, in Peter Sin-
clair (e d), The Role of Inﬂ  ation Expe ctations in Mo dellin g an d Mon-
etary-poli cy Makin g, forth comin g. — 5 The quantiﬁ  cation pro cedure %
%How do you expe ct pri ces to develop over the
next 12 months?
increase more sharplyincrease rou ghly at the same ratestay rou ghly the sameslight fall don’t knowWhat is your view of how pri ces have develope d
in the past 12 months?
mo derate in creaserou ghly the sameslight fall don’t knowGfK survey in Germany
100
80
60
40
20
0100
80
60
40
20
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 200 6 2007increase at a slower ratesharp in creasehar dly any in crease

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
55Over time, distin ct shifts in the per centa ges between the 
individual cate gories become apparent, whi ch are closely 
relate d, to a greater or lesser extent, with the measure d 
inﬂ ation rates. For instan ce, over the past three months, 
in parallel with the sharp rise in the consumer pri ces 
for dairy pro ducts (an d consumer pri ces in general), the 
per centa ges of persons who have per ceive d a sharp rise 
in pri ces has shown a marke d in crease. By contrast, the 
“mo derate in crease” an d “rou ghly the same” response 
cate gories were chosen si gniﬁ cantly less often. At the 
same time, the share of those expe ctin g a stron ger rate 
of pri ce in crease in the future ﬁ  rst went up to 25 % in 
Au gust 2007 before goin g down sli ghtly in the follow-
ing two months. Almost half of those surveye d expe ct 
a continuation of the hefty sur ge in pri ces over the next 
12 months with only a quarter expe ctin g a mo deration 
(somewhat fewer in Au gust, somewhat more in O cto-
ber). Hen ce, the pri ce climate in Germany has become 
consi dera bly gloomier sin ce the mi ddle of the year.
Against this backgroun d, the question arises as to 
whether a major discrepan cy has emer ged between the 
pri ce per ception of consumers an d ofﬁ cially measure d 
inﬂ ation3 – as happene d followin g the intro duction of 
euro banknotes an d coins. To she d light on this matter, 
it is ne cessary to transform the qualitative data of the 
consumer surveys into quantitative results, whi ch can 
be done usin g certain simplifyin g assumptions (in par-
ticular, that the per ception of past pri ce developments is 
un biase d on a lon g–term avera ge basis).4 With this quali-
ﬁ cation, it becomes apparent that the per ceive d pri ce 
increase in O ctober was no hi gher than the ofﬁ  cial sta-
tisti c.5 Nevertheless, the per ceive d rate of inﬂ  ation in the 
past few months rose mu ch faster than measure d inﬂ a-tion. A ccording to this calculation, the expe cted inﬂ a-
tion rate in fa ct more than dou bled within the spa ce of 
just three months.6
A similar pi cture emer ges from the survey results for the 
euro area. There has been an even bigger chan ge in the 
per ception of pri ce developments than in the measure d 
inﬂ ation rate.7 Here a gain, as far as the future outlook 
for pri ce sta bility is con cerne d, consumers are mu ch more 
pessimisti c than they were just a few months a go.8
use d here is J Berk (1999), Measurin g Inﬂ ation Expe ctations: A Survey 
Data Approa ch in Applie d Economi cs, 31, pp 14 67–1480. — 6 Apply-
ing a sli ghtly mo diﬁ ed conversion metho d (J Döpke et al, European 
Inﬂ ation Expe ctations Dynami cs, Deuts che Bun desbank Resear ch 
Centre, Dis cussion Paper, Series 1, No 37/2005, p 21, metho d 5) results 
in a more su bdued in crease in terms of both the per ceive d an d the 
expe cted inﬂ ation rates. — 7 The survey results show that, unlike in 
Germany, the “overshootin g” of inﬂ  ation per ception, whi ch began with the chan geover to euro banknotes an d coins, has not yet re ceded 
in a num ber of countries in the euro area. For this reason, the quanti-
ﬁ ed per ception of inﬂ  ation is mu ch hi gher here than the measure d 
inﬂ ation rate. — 8 The mo diﬁ ed conversion metho d after Döpke et al 
also in dicates a somewhat more mo derate reverse in inﬂ  ation per cep-
tion an d expe ctation for the euro area, too. — 9 In a ccordance with 
the Berk pro cedure usin g GfK data.Year-on-year chan ge
%
%
Euro area
HICPPer ception
Expe ctationGermany
CPIPer ception
Expe ctationPer ceive d an d expe cted
pri ce developments9
6+
5+
4+
3+
2+
1+6+
5+
4+
3+
2+
1+
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 200 6 2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
56to now, been less marked at 11%. Although
these products (in the subcomponent “dairy
products and eggs, edible fats and oils”) only
take up a small part of the budget of an aver-
age household and, accordingly, have only a
relatively low weighting of 1.7% in the con-
sumer price index, these extremely sharp
price increases are likely to have had an ad-
verse impact on the perception of general
price developments and on inflation expect-
ations (see the explanatory notes on page 54-
55). The sharp price movements were due to
external factors. The price of dairy products
has increased worldwide owing to shortfalls
in production and an increasing demand. The
German dairy industry has been achieving
higher prices in exports since as long ago as
summer 2006. Prices paid out to farmers
have increased sharply since spring 2007. The
wholesale prices charged by the dairy industry
to retail chains in Germany, which are fixed
at fairly long intervals in negotiations, first
showed a marked rise in June 2007 after pre-
viously showing a rather subdued increase.
Essentially, the retail chains generally passed
on the increased wholesale prices to con-
sumers from August onwards. The consumer
prices of dairy products had already gone up
by 11/C252% since May and then increased in the
three following months by a further 13%.
In October, consumer prices showed a further
marked rise at a seasonally adjusted 0.3% on
the month, although the higher crude oil
prices had not yet been passed on to the
prices of fuel and heating oil. Food, in par-
ticular, showed further perceptible price rises.
The prices of goods (excluding energy) and of
services, including housing costs, increased2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Consumer pricesProducer prices of
industrial productsProducer prices of
agricultural productsLog scale
Export pricesDairy products, eggs,
edible fats and oils *
*Components weighted together by
weighting shares of CPI with 2000 as the
base year. — 1Not seasonally adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank15+
12+
9+
6+
3+
0
3−110120
105115
100110105120
100115
110
105110130
105125
100120
95115
110135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
2006 2007Unfavourable
price trend
continues in
October

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
57moderately. The year-on-year increase in both
the national CPI and the HICP remained un-
changed in October at 2.4% and 2.7% re-
spectively. There was a dampening effect on
the rate of inflation due to the fact that the
price adjustments of tobacco products to the
higher rate of VAT had been anticipated in
October 2006 and “dropped out” of the
year-on-year rate of change.
Consumer prices are expected to go on rising
sharply up to the end of 2007. Energy, in par-
ticular, is likely to become significantly more
expensive due to the fact that higher crude
oil prices only began to be passed on to con-
sumers in November. Sharp increases in elec-
tricity and gas prices have already been an-
nounced for the beginning of 2008. More-
over, the effects of the boom in the inter-
national agricultural markets are likely to fade
only slowly. Given an incipient return to nor-
mal conditions in the international agricul-
tural markets and owing to baseline effects
resulting from the VAT increase in January
2007 as well as the introduction of tuition
fees in April 2007, the year-on-year rates are
unlikely to go back down to more moderate
levels until the second quarter of 2008.
Orders received and outlook
In parallel with the marked deterioration in
the price climate, the cyclical risks increased
in the third quarter. To some extent, these are
to be seen as being directly related. The un-
favourable rate of inflation is placing a strain
not only on household’s current budgets but
also on their fucture real income prospects,for example. Moreover, the renewed sharp in-
crease in oil prices harbours severe risks for
the world economy. Furthermore, the finan-
cial market turbulence may be expected to
have negative repercussions to a certain ex-
tent. From a German point of view, recent ex-
change rate movements are ambivalent in
character. On the one hand, they are helping
to ease the price climate and are forming a
certain counterweight to the deterioration in
the terms of trade due to oil prices. On the
other hand, they are impinging on profit mar-
gins and reducing sales opportunities abroad.
The economy is, therefore, currently subject
to quite a number of strains. Nevertheless,
the positive underlying trend is not open to
doubt over the coming months.
This assessment is based, in particular, on the
robust condition of industry. In purely math-
ematical terms, the volume of orders received
in the third quarter was 13/C254% down on the
quarter in seasonal and calendar-adjusted
terms. However, it should be taken into ac-
count that some extremely large orders, espe-
cially in the aircraft and aerospace industry,
had a major impact in the second quarter.
The cyclical component is easier to identify if
the volume of orders is adjusted for extremely
large orders.3When calculated in this way,
there was an increase of1/C252% in the third
quarter, compared with 2% in the preceding
period. Orders are invariably accompanied by
a large number of orders on hand. Since the
turn of the year, the reach of the order books
3As orders starting from a value of more than 31 million
are counted in the statistics as large orders and these are
by no means rare, it would not be appropriate to adjust
for all large orders.Outlook
Economic
outlook still
positiveOrders received
by industry

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
58has stood at the exceptionally high level of
around three months. The ratio between the
order volume of order-based manufacturing
industry and available production capacity is
still pointing to a comfortable order situation
on the whole.4
Business conditions and expectations in trade
and industry support this conclusion. Accord-
ingly, enterprises have steadily been lowering
their extremely positive and optimistic estima-
tions over the past few months in the wake
of rising crude oil and commodities prices,
the appreciation of the euro, and the occa-
sionally increasing tensions in the financial
markets. Nevertheless, the current situation is
characterised by a continuing quite confident
underlying sentiment in the German econ-
omy. This assessment is also reinforced by the
fact that enterprises’ export expectations
have declined, if anything, only moderately in
comparison with the other expectation indi-
cators. This is also particularly noteworthy in
view of the economic outlook in the United
States, which has been adversely affected by
the real estate and mortgage crisis. The still
high growth expectations for the emerging
market economies, the OPEC countries and
east European transition countries evidently
represent a sufficiently large counterweight,
especially as the German economy offers a
very attractive range of products to meet the
notably strong demand for capital goods in
those countries. The relatively low price elasti-
city of such goods makes it easier to copeVolume, 2000 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
July-
Aug
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 2007Total construction orders
July-
AugDomesticLog scale
ForeignLin scale
Year-on-year-changeLog scale
Total industrial ordersDemand for industrial goods
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−10+105
90100
8595
8090
75
70
65110
105
100
95
90115110125
105120
100115
95110
9013013514014515015515+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
- 
4For the methodology used, see Deutsche Bundesbank,
Industrial orders and production: how informative is the
order capacity index?, Monthly Report, February 2007,
pp 52-53 and Deutsche Bundesbank: Economic condi-
tions in Germany, Monthly Report, August 2007, p 54.Positive
underlying
sentiment,
trend more
cautious

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
59with shifts in the exchange rate pattern, es-
pecially as less expensive imports of inter-mediate goods potentially afford relief, andprofitability, which is good on average, couldcushion some of the exchange-rate-inducedfluctuations for a time.
Given the fact that enterprises are currently
utilising their existing capacities to the full,continued buoyant foreign business shouldcause them to invest more in the comingmonths. This will be aided by the fact that ex-penditure on movables enjoys preferential taxtreatment until the end of this year owing tothe improved depreciation facility. Not leastagainst the backdrop of Germany’s regainedattractiveness as a production location,growth may also be expected in industrialconstruction, which lags behind investmentin machinery and equipment in cyclical terms.By contrast, the outlook for housing con-struction is less favourable. Measured by con-struction orders, the construction permits is-sued and increased building costs, there arecurrently no stimuli in place in the new-buildsector. The trend in the area of housing mod-ernisation is, however, much better.
With regard to private consumption, the
dampening effects of the VAT increase havenow probably petered out to a considerableextent. This is also indicated by the sharp in-crease in new passenger car registrations byprivate owners in the third quarter, althoughthe level is still clearly depressed. The higherlevel of employment is likely to support pri-vate consumption over the coming period.The recent price surges in energy and somefood items are reducing consumer budgets’purchasing power, however. Another factorwhich should not be underestimated in thiscontext is an uncertainty component based,for the most part, on subjective perceptions.In view of rising prices, this has clearly beendepressing the propensity to purchase againsince the third quarter. In this context, itseems all the more important that Europeanmonetary policy remains a reliable anchor ofstability.
Investment
activity still
strongGood
fundamentals
for private
consumption.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
60Public financesGeneral government budget
The public finance situation in Germany im-
proved perceptibly in 2007. For the first time
since German reunification, the general gov-
ernment budget (as defined in the national
accounts)1should be balanced after a deficit
of 1.6% of GDP was run up last year. Al-
though the favourable course of economic
development has also had its part to play in
this decrease, it is attributable in large meas-
ure to structural improvements, in particular
the increase in VAT and the continued moder-
ate development of expenditure. The debt
ratio, which declined only slightly to 67.5%
in 2006, is falling significantly in 2007. Never-
theless, the 60% ceiling stipulated by the EC
Treaty will continue to be overshot by a con-
siderable amount.
Despite increases in taxes and social security
contributions, the general government rev-
enue ratio will increase only slightly. Legisla-
tive changes which came into force at the
start of the year have, on balance, led to con-
siderable increases in receipts. Additional rev-
enue, especially from the 3 percentage point
rise in the standard rate of VAT and of insur-
ance tax and the higher contribution rates to
the statutory pension insurance and health
insurance schemes, are more than compen-
sating for the shortfalls resulting from the 2.3
percentage point cut in the contribution rate
to the Federal Employment Agency. In add-
ition, profit-related taxes are this year again
likely to grow much more strongly than
would have been expected based on the
1Excluding extraordinary proceeds from UMTS licences
in 2000.Close to
balance govern-
ment budget
expected in
2007
Revenue ratio
rising at best
marginally
despite tax
and social
contribution
hikes

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
61changes in legislation and the sharp growth
in entrepreneurial and investment income,which is used as an indicator for the tax as-sessment base. In contrast to these revenueimprovements, major macroeconomic refer-ence variables for government revenue, suchas gross wages and salaries but above all pre-tax private consumption, are increasing moreslowly than nominal GDP , which is expandingfaster as a result of the price effect of thehigher excise taxes. This is offset only partlyby the continued favourable development ofentrepreneurial and property income. Finally,non-tax revenue is expected to stagnate inabsolute terms.
Although the growth of government spend-
ing has accelerated somewhat comparedwith last year, it is likewise well below thepronounced rise in nominal GDP , whichmeans that the expenditure ratio could fall byaround 1
1/C252percentage points. This sharp fall
is partly related to the positive cyclical mo-
mentum which, as well as having a lowering
effect via the ratio’ s denominator, also reduces
labour market-related expenditure. Further-more, the expenditure ratio has also fallen
considerably in structural terms. Overall wagedevelopments, which have been moderate todate, are not only having a dampening effecton the growth of government revenue butare also substantially curbing government ex-
penditure – without being associated withany active fiscal consolidation measures. Thusmany social benefits, such as pensions andunemployment benefit I, are pegged to thepreceding growth in per capita earnings.
Wage increases in the public sector are simi-larly connected to developments in the pri-vate sector, and in fact the recent barely risingnegotiated rates of pay are likely to curb thisgrowth even more. In addition, legislativemeasures, such as the shortening of the max-imum period of entitlement to unemploy-ment benefit I, which was decided in 2003,the cuts in social contributions for recipientsof unemployment benefit II and the abolitionof the grant to new homebuyers, are alsocontributing to the subdued expendituregrowth.
2By contrast, government investment
is being stepped up significantly.
The budgetary situation of general govern-
ment is likely to worsen in 2008. Thereby, the
ongoing positive cyclical influence anticipatedon the basis of current expectations will par-tially mask the underlying deterioration. Thiswill be attributable inter alia to the trend in
profit-related taxes, the revenue from whichwill be curtailed considerably, first by short-
falls owing to the business tax reform thatwill enter into force in 2008 and, second, bythe fact that in 2007 the recent surge inprofit-related tax receipts might have reacheda level which is well above average. Conse-quently, the latest official tax estimate fore-casts a weak development of revenue fromprofit-related taxes not only as a result of thetax cuts. In addition, the turbulence on the fi-
nancial markets is also likely to lead to tax
revenue shortfalls, although these cannot bereliably estimated at the moment. Social con-tributions will also develop comparatively
2However, the cut in pension insurance contribution
payments on behalf of recipients of unemployment bene-
fit II reduces the social security funds’ contribution re-
ceipts by the same amount and thus initially results mere-
ly in a contraction of the general government balance
sheet.Moderate
spending
growth and
favourable
economic
development
reducing
expenditure
ratioCyclically
adjusted fiscal
balance set to
worsen in 2008

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
62weakly owing to the planned sharp cut in the
Federal Employment Agency’s contribution
rate. Overall, the general government rev-
enue ratio could therefore decrease signifi-
cantly. However, the expenditure ratio will
also decline – albeit to a lesser extent – as
pension and labour-market expenditure, in
particular, is expanding at a slower rate than
nominal GDP . Expenditure will nonetheless in-
crease at a much faster pace than in previous
years.
Public finances have recently developed ex-
tremely favourably. This makes it possible to
attain a balanced budget this year, also in
structural terms.3This means that a key ob-
jective of the Stability and Growth Pact,
which the Federal Government had not
planned to achieve until 2010, can already be
attained in 2007. If this target is also met in
the coming years or if a structural budgetary
surplus is generated, then the debt ratio
could be brought below the reference value
of 60% within a reasonable period of time.
The resulting relative easing of the debt ser-
vice burden would provide a cushion for cop-
ing with the likely expansion of expenditure
ensuing, in particular, from the ageing of the
population. Structural surpluses would make
an important contribution to this as well as
additionally easing the burden on younger
and future generations.
The outlook for 2008 shows that expenditure
growth has to continue to be tightly curbed
to ensure that the budgetary consolidation
achieved so far is not endangered and to cre-
ate scope to possibly reduce taxes and social
contributions. It must be remembered thatachieving a structurally balanced budget dur-
ing a cyclical upturn means surpluses in un-
adjusted terms. However, the unadjusted
position – and, even more so, the structural
position – is expected to deteriorate in 2008.
Furthermore, current fiscal policy discussions
are, for the most part, characterised by calls
for deficit-increasing measures. Given the
danger that the surge in revenue from profit-
related taxes that has been observed so far
will not continue indefinitely and that the tur-
bulence on the financial markets is generat-
ing additional risks for government budgets,
any straying from the consolidation course
would be problematic.
Budgetary development of central,
state and local government4
Tax revenue
The third quarter of 2007 saw a further sharp
increase of 91/C252%(3101/C252billion) in tax rev-
enue5on the year (for more information, see
the table on page 64). This was due to the
15% increase in turnover tax receipts as a re-
sult of the VAT hike at the start of the year
and to the 81/C252% increase in revenue from in-
come tax in the wake of the buoyant macro-
3“Structural”, in the sense of the European budgetary
surveillance procedure, means a budget position that has
been adjusted for cyclical influences and temporary
measures. With regard to the German budget position in
2007, it should be noted that the extremely erratic devel-
opment of revenue from profit-related taxes is currently
likely to be at an abnormally high level, which is a factor
that cannot be fully allowed for in this adjustment.
4The following analysis is based on the budgetary figures
as defined in the government’s financial statistics.
5Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the last quarter recorded.Favourable
budgetary
development ...
... should not
be endangered
by deficit-
increasing
measuresFurther sharp
rise in tax
revenue in Q3

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
63economic momentum. The rise in wage tax
(+71/C252%) was due to the perceptible growth
of gross wages and salaries and also to the ef-
fects of tax progression. Furthermore, deduc-
tions from cash receipts in the form of child
benefit decreased, while the restriction of taxallowances claimable by commuters boosted
revenue.
6Receipts from profit-related taxes
also increased sharply (+10%), although the
pace of growth slowed compared with the
first half of the year. This deceleration result-
ed chiefly from the fact that in the first sixmonths of 2007 revenue was lifted signifi-
cantly by smaller deductions for grants tohomebuyers, which are being phased out,and lower rebates to employees.
The latest official tax estimate predicts a
sharp rise in tax revenue for the year as awhole (including local government taxes,+10
1/C252%) and an increase in the tax ratio (as
defined in the government’s financial statis-
tics) of 1.2 percentage point to 22.2%. This
reflects above all the higher tax rates for turn-
over tax and insurance tax as well as thesharp rise in taxes on income and earnings.
Revenue expectations have been revised up-wards by 34
1/C252billion since the last official tax
estimate in May. Part of the upward revision
results from the development of the economy
as a whole, which is now assessed more posi-
tively.7The greater part, however, is attribut-
able to growth in profit-related taxes, which
is even larger than expected and cannot be
explained by the increase in the macroeco-
nomic reference variables (entrepreneurialand investment income) and the estimated
effect of legislative changes.For 2008 total revenue is expected to increase
by 3% and the tax ratio to decrease to
22.1%. The legislative changes due in 2008will reduce revenue on balance. A certaincounterswing to the extreme growth inprofit-related taxes over the previous years isalso anticipated, although no serious negative
effects from the financial market turbulencewere assumed. On the other hand, the effectof income tax progression owing to compara-
tively strong growth in average gross wagesYear-on-year change, quarterly
%Tax revenue *
*Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes which are not yet known
for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank16+
14+
12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
2005 2006 2007
6Cases are currently pending at the Federal Constitu-
tional Court questioning the constitutionality of the re-
vised rules for the standard travel allowance for com-
muters, which came into effect in 2007, so that, for the
time being, these tax-free allowances can again be con-
tinually claimed.
7The Federal Government now estimates nominal GDP
growth for 2007 at 4.4% (May estimate: 4.0%) and real
GDP growth at 2.4% (2.3%). However, lower growth is
now expected for 2008: nominal 3.5% (3.7%) and real
2.0% (2.4%).Tax estimate for
2007 raised
Expectationsfor 2008 not
unfavourable ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
64and salaries per se will lead to a higher tax
ratio. All in all, the expectations have not
been significantly revised compared with the
May estimate. But the financial effects of the
business tax reform, which is to come into ef-
fect in 2008 and which was not adopted until
after the May estimate,8have been included
for the first time, and the Federal Govern-
ment predicts that this will lead to revenue
losses of 361/C252billion. The Federal Govern-
ment is also expecting that tax revenue losses
following the ruling of the European Court of
Justice in the Meilicke9case will now no long-
er occur chiefly in 2008 – as forecast in May –
but in 2009. Excluding the impact of legisla-
tive changes which have since been adopted
and excluding any adjustments resulting from
the Meilicke case, the projections for 2008
have been revised upwards by 34 billion com-pared with the May estimate, especially be-
cause of the higher baseline level in 2007.
However, the forecast for 2008 is subject to
major estimation risks due to the uncertainty
concerning the future development of profit-
related taxes. These taxes are likely to have
exceeded their normal medium-term level as
a result of the very steep growth that they
have recorded in the recent past, meaning
that a counterswing is to be expected, al-
though the scale and timing of this can only
be guessed. Furthermore, it is very difficult to
gauge the financial implications of the busi-Tax revenue
Q1–Q3 Q3Estimate
for
2007 1
2006 2007 2006 2007
Year-on-year
changeYear-on-year
changeYear-on-
year
Type of tax 5billionin5
billion as % 5billionin5
billion as %change
as %
Tax revenue, total 2 317.3 356.5 + 39.1 + 12.3 110.3 120.6 + 10.4 + 9.4 + 11.0
of which
Wage tax 87.1 94.1 + 7.0 + 8.1 29.2 31.4 + 2.2 + 7.5 + 8.1
Profit-related taxes 3 42.3 53.7 + 11.4 + 26.9 15.7 17.3 + 1.6 + 10.2 + 20.8
of which
Assessed income tax 10.0 16.3 + 6.3 + 62.9 6.3 7.3 + 1.0 + 16.5 + 43.2
Investment income taxes 4 15.8 20.1 + 4.3 + 27.0 3.4 4.5 + 1.1 + 32.0 + 26.0
Corporation tax 16.4 17.2 + 0.8 + 4.8 6.1 5.6 – 0.5 – 8.4 – 0.8
Turnover taxes 5 108.2 125.7 + 17.5 + 16.2 37.1 42.6 + 5.6 + 15.0 + 15.9
Energy tax 24.3 23.7 – 0.6 – 2.4 10.0 9.9 – 0.1 – 1.4 – 1.4
Tobacco tax 10.1 10.2 + 0.1 + 0.6 3.7 3.8 + 0.1 + 2.0 – 0.3
1According to November 2007 official tax estimate. —
2Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes which are not
yet known for the last quarter recorded. — 3Employeerebates and grants paid to home owners and investors
deducted from revenue. — 4Non-assessed taxes on
earnings and withholding tax on interest income. —
5Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8For information on the business tax reform, see
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, February 2007,
p6 2f f .
9This case relates to a claim to retroactively include for-
eign corporation tax payments when taxing shareholders’
dividends under the corporation tax imputation system,
which was abolished in 2001.... but subject
to major
uncertainty

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
65ness tax reform and of the recent financial
market turmoil.
Central government budgetIn the third quarter, central government’s def-
icit decreased only slightly compared with thesame quarter in 2006 to 38
1/C252billion. At 51/C252%
or331/C252billion, the increase in revenue was
somewhat more moderate than in the previ-
ous quarters. The continued strong growth in
tax receipts (+11% or 36 billion) was damp-
ened perceptibly by the sharp decline in pro-
ceeds from asset realisations (- 32 billion) and
the fall in the compensatory amount paid by
the Federal Employment Agency (- 31/C252billion).
At the same time, expenditure rose again sig-
nificantly (+4%). Transfers to the social secur-
ity funds increased by 32 billion, in particular
as a result of the VAT-financed grant to the
Federal Employment Agency, which was
introduced in 2007. In addition, interest pay-ments were also 31 billion higher on the year,
not least owing to significantly higher interestrates for short-term debt instruments and theassumption of the debts of the ERP Special
Fund in the middle of the year. Investmentgrants – in particular to the German railways(Deutsche Bahn) – were almost 31 billion
higher than in the third quarter of 2006. Onthe other hand, expenditure on the basic al-lowance for job seekers sank by almost 31 bil-
lion. This was chiefly attributable to the cut incontributions paid to the statutory pension in-surance scheme on behalf of recipients of un-employment benefit II and the positive devel-opment on the labour market.The favourable development of tax revenuehas since been taken into account in a sup-plementary Federal budget for 2007. Projec-tions have been revised upwards by a total of311 billion. The main reason for the supple-
mentary budget, however, is to finance a
new special fund for extending childcare intowhich central government intends to payover 32 billion to contribute to corresponding
investment by state and local government.
10
As the expenditure was not contained in the
main budget and is not to be booked in fu-ture budgets either, it was necessary to secure
authorisation by means of a supplementary
budget. At the same time, proceeds fromasset realisations have now been revised
downwards substantially. At 314
1/C252billion,
central government’s deficit for 2007 should
be over 35 billion lower than predicted in the
original budget. Overall, part of the revenue
windfalls will be used to increase expenditure.Setting up off-budget special funds and shift-
ing asset realisations back and forth (in partby involving other government-controlled en-tities) makes it more difficult to analyse theunderlying budgetary development and di-minishes the reliability of the usual budgetary
figures.
11
Following the Budget Committee’s adjust-
ment meeting, new net borrowing by centralgovernment is planned to be reduced to 312
billion in 2008. Hence the additional revenue
of31 billion according to the latest tax esti-
10See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Trends in local gov-
ernment finances since 2000, Monthly Report, July 2007,
p 40.
11For more on the issue of enhancing transparency, see
Deutsche Bundesbank, Reform of German budgetaryrules, Monthly Report, October 2007, p 47 ff.Only moderate
fall in deficit
in Q3Supplementary
budget only
envisages a
slight decrease
in net
borrowing
Hardly any
progress
towards
consolidation
planned in
2008

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
66mate will be reflected in an improvement of
the deficit. However, the Committee recently
also resolved to increase expenditure, which
is to be offset by marginally downsizing the
appropriations, in particular, for interest pay-
ments and grants to the statutory pension in-
surance scheme. As well as the revenue
shortfalls from the business tax reform, the
budget will be strained, in particular, by the
fact that the Post Office pension fund has
since used up the funds generated by securi-
tisation activities and so central government
will have to finance practically the entire
spending on benefits of 36 billion from
200812– in 2007 only 31/C252billion was ear-
marked for this purpose. Furthermore, higher
turnover tax-financed grants to the Federal
Employment Agency and greater total ex-
penditure on parental benefits and child-raising benefit, which is being phased out,
have each led to extra costs of 31 billion vis-
/C224-vis the targeted figure for 2007. These fac-
tors were cited as major reasons why the tar-
geted figure for expenditure for 2008 ex-
ceeds the projections from the 2007 supple-
mentary budget by 4%. Other major factors
are increased interest expenditure resulting
from a rise in interest rates, in particular for
short-term maturities, and from assuming the
debt of the ERP Special Fund, and additional
expenditure on important political projects
such as development aid and external and in-
ternal security. This extra spending obscures
cost savings compared with 2007, for ex-
ample due to the dropout of expenditure on
expanding childcare and to lower payments
for retired rail staff civil servants, war victims’
welfare benefits and the all-day school pro-
gramme. If the budget plans are adjusted for
proceeds from asset realisations, which, at
3121/C252billion, are to be almost doubled in
2008, and other one-off proceeds in order to
identify the underlying development, the def-
icit declines at best by a very limited amount
between the current and the coming year.
With the deficit still at an overall high level,
the 2008 Federal budget is not in line with
the intention of the principle agreed at Euro-
pean level to accelerate the reduction of def-
icits in economically favourable times.€b n
€b n Cumulative
200520062007
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
2005
2006
2007Central government fiscal
deficit / surplus since 2005
Deutsche Bundesbank10−
15−
20−
25−
30−
35−
40−15+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
30−
12While the central government budget was relieved by
securitisation in the period from 2005 to 2007, it is now
having to do without the associated incoming payments
amounting to 311/C252billion per year. Ultimately this has the
same effect as outright borrowing. This is also how the
transaction was recorded in the national accounts.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
67State government13
The positive trend in state government fi-
nances continued in the third quarter. After a
deficit of 32 billion last year, state govern-
ments recorded a surplus of 32 billion this
time round. This was attributable to a consid-
erable further increase in revenue (+8%) – in
particular tax receipts – along with a com-
paratively slow rate of expenditure growth
(+1%). Transfers to local government are also
likely to have increased sharply as a result of
the positive trend in tax receipts.
The favourable development of tax revenue,
which the Working Group on Tax Estimates
has recently predicted will rise by a further
321/C252billion vis-/C224-vis its May forecast, and a
moderate increase in expenditure indicate
that the state government budgets will re-
cord a surplus for the year as a whole, too.
They will thus conclude the year significantly
better than predicted in the budget plans,
which currently still forecast an overall deficit
of311 billion. The budget plans for 2008,
which have so far only been slightly adjusted
for recent developments, anticipate a deficit
of38 billion. However, with considerable rev-
enue losses from the business tax reform and
an expected accelerated increase in personnel
expenditure, the outturn for 2008 is likely to
be less favourable than in 2007, but better
than current predictions.14A number of
states are still a long way from attaining a bal-
anced budget. For example, the budget plans
most recently reported for 2008 by Saarland
and Bremen, but also by Rhineland-
Palatinate, show no appreciable decline in
their net borrowing, which is still at a relative-ly high level, while Schleswig-Holstein even
reports that it expects its net borrowing to in-
crease again. Yet it was agreed, notably in
the European Stability and Growth Pact, that
economically favourable times should be
used to accelerate the reduction of deficits. In
this respect, too, a tightening of debt incur-
rence regulations in the state government
constitutions needs to be discussed in the
second phase of the reform of the federal
structure.15
Social security funds16
Statutory pension insurance scheme
In the third quarter of 2007, the statutory
pension insurance fund recorded a deficit of
31 billion, which was almost twice as high as
in the same period last year. Although the
contribution rate was raised from 19.5% to
19.9% at the beginning of the year and the
employment and pay trends had a positive
impact on the financing of the statutory pen-
sion insurance scheme, employees’ compul-
sory contributions increased by only 11/C252%.
However, the outturn in the third quarter of
13The most recently published data on local government
finances are analysed in the short articles in the Bundes-
bank Monthly Report of October 2007.
14According to the latest tax estimate, revenue is ex-
pected to be 31/C252billion lower than in the May forecast.
However, the losses arising from the business tax reform
of approximately 321/C252billion, which have now been in-
cluded in the estimate for the first time, are already con-
tained in the budget plans for most state governments.
15See also Deutsche Bundesbank, October 2007, loc cit,
p5 8f f .
16The financial development of the statutory health and
long-term care insurance schemes in the second quarter
of 2007 was analysed in the short articles of the Monthly
Report of September 2007. These are the most recent
data available.State govern-
ment surplus
in Q3 ...
... and probably
also for the
year as a whole
amid big
differences for
individual states Stagnating
revenue and
slight increase
in expenditure
in Q3

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
682006 benefited from the fact that one-off
additional revenue was received up to and in-
cluding July in connection with the earlier
transfer deadline for social security contribu-
tions.17Pension contributions made on behalf
of recipients of unemployment benefit I and II
actually plummeted (-39%). This was due to
a significant decrease in the number of recipi-
ents of unemployment benefit I. Another
contributory factor was that the contribution
for each recipient of unemployment benefit II
was almost halved – this should lighten the
load on the Federal budget by approximately
32 billion over the full year. On balance, the
revenue generated by the statutory pension
insurance scheme has hardly changed on the
year despite a small rise in the Federal grant.
Expenditure in the third quarter rose at a rate
of almost 1%. This was due to a mid-yearadjustment to pensions by 0.54% across the
board. Total pension expenditure increased by
3/C254%. In addition, significant extra spending
on health insurance for pensioners was in-
curred amounting to almost 61/C252%, which
was due to sharp increases in the contribu-
tion rates of the statutory health insurance in-
stitutions.
By the end of the year, the deficit of over
321/C252billion that has accumulated so far
should be converted to a surplus. Overall,
contributions are tending to increase at a
more rapid pace than pension expenditure
owing to the favourable development of
gross wages and salaries. This development is
likely to continue in 2008, even though the
adjustment of pensions on 1 July 2008 is like-
ly to be larger than in 2007. In the medium-
term, too, the financial outlook of the statu-
tory pension insurance scheme is likely to re-
main positive based on present-day expect-
ations. However, this is likely to change at the
beginning of the next decade with the retire-
ment of the baby-boom generation born in
the post-war years, which will push up the
number of pensioners, particularly in relation
to contribution payers.
Federal Employment Agency
In the third quarter of 2007, the Federal Em-
ployment Agency recorded a surplus of 32
billion, which was over 31/C252billion smaller
than in the same period of 2006. AlthoughQuarterly
€b n
€b nLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
ExpenditureRevenueFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−62
60
58
56
54
2005 2006 2007
17In August and September, for which an unbiased
comparison with 2006 is possible, revenue from employ-
ees’ compulsory contributions rose by over 41/C252%. A good
2 percentage points of this, however, was due to the rise
in contribution rates.Favourable
medium-term
outlook with
continued
positive labour
market
development
Surplus in Q3
despite clear
fall in revenue

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
69expenditure was cut by 17%, revenue de-
creased at a faster rate (191/C252%). On the rev-
enue side, the lowering of the contribution
rate from 6.5% to 4.2% led to much lower
inflows. Furthermore, in this scheme, too,
there was a continuing negative baseline ef-fect owing to the one-off revenue windfalls
resulting from the advancement of the trans-fer deadlines, which were recorded up to July2006. Overall, revenue from contributionswas 35% down on the year. However, adjust-ed for the reduced contribution rate, this
would have resulted in an increase of justover
1/C252% as a result of the positive trends in
employment and pay.18In total, the decline in
revenue was muted, mainly because the rule-
based Federal grant of just over 311/C252billion
per quarter has been paid since the beginningof this year.
On the expenditure side, spending on un-
employment benefit I, in particular, again felldrastically, albeit at a gradually declining rate(-24%). This is mainly due to the sustained fa-vourable labour market development but alsoto the shortening of the maximum eligibilityperiod for claiming this benefit to 12 months
in general and 18 months for those over theage of 55. The number of unemployed fell by15
1/C252% on the year and the number of recipi-
ents of unemployment benefit I for whom
the Federal Employment Agency is respon-
sible declined at an even faster rate of over
23%. The Federal Employment Agency’s ex-penditure on active labour market policy
measures also decreased (-11%). The com-pensatory amount due to be paid to centralgovernment in the third quarter was onlyabout half as much as one year previously.This is consistent with the observation that
the labour market recovery is increasingly re-ducing the number of long-term un-
employed.
In the first three quarters of the year, the sur-
plus of the Federal Employment AgencyQuarterly
€b n
€b n€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment
   benefit and short-time
   working benefits
...vocational training2Log scale
Expenditure,
totalRevenue 1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding central government liquidity
assistance. — 2Sharp decline in 2005 caused
by shifting responsibility for training for
recipients of unemployment benefit II to
central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−8.0
7.2
6.4
5.6
4.8
4.0
3.2
2.4
2.016.0
14.0
12.0
10.0
8.0
2005 2006 2007
18An unbiased comparison with last year is possible only
for August and September. This resulted in 31/C252% growth
in adjusted revenue from contributions.Sharp fall in
spending due
to favourable
labour market
development
High surplus
expected again
for 2007 as a
whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
70Extension of the period of entitlement to unemployment benefit I
Until the mid-1980s, the period of entitlement to
insurance-related unemployment benefit (now known as
unemployment benefit I) was not differentiated according
to the recipient’s age. Depending on how long the person
had been insured beforehand (in 1984 at least three years),
unemployment benefit was paid for a maximum of one
year. It was not until 1 January 1985 that older un-
employed persons were given preferential treatment with
the introduction of a progressively extended entitlement
period. Most recently, those over the age of 57 could claim
unemployment benefit I for up to 32 months.
In addition, claiming unemployment benefit I was made
easier (unemployed persons could receive unemployment
benefit I upon reaching 58 years of age without being
available for work) and unemployed persons were allowed
to draw an early pension (until 1996 without actuarial de-
ductions) from the age of 60. Furthermore, claiming a dis-
ability pension was made easier if the individual concerned
was thought to no longer have a chance of finding em-
ployment. Up to 1995, the total annual number of people
taking up a retirement pension due to unemployment in-
creased to almost 300,000 claimants. Only after that did
the figure gradually decline, doubtless partly on account
of the actuarial deductions in cases of early retirement.
However, this decline was limited by the government-as-
sisted partial retirement scheme introduced in 1996 as a
new instrument promoting early retirement.
The Act to Reform the Labour Market, which was passed in
2003, reduced the standard period of entitlement to un-
employment benefit I to 12 months. However, for un-
employed persons aged 55 or more the period of entitle-
ment was extended to 18 months. The revised rules apply
to individuals who became unemployed after 31 January
2006. Consequently, an easing of the financial burden of
the Federal Employment Agency was not expected until
2007. A permanent reduction in the Federal Employment
Agency’s financial burden of 54 billion per year was quan-
tified in the 2003 draft law, which was based on a more
pessimistic forecast of labour market developments. How-
ever, this is accompanied by sizeable, albeit appreciably
smaller, additional spending on the welfare-related un-
employment benefit II.
The government coalition parties have now decided to
partially revoke the shortening of the entitlement period.
Thus persons aged 50 and over are to be paid unemploy-
ment benefit I for 15 instead of 12 months and persons
aged 58 and over for 24 instead of 18 months. Statistics
from the Institute for Employment Research ( Institut f/C252r
Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung ) on the breakdown of
recipients of unemployment benefit I and of the expend-
iture generated by them according to age and payment
duration allow the fiscal costs of implementing this pro-
posal to be gauged. Based on the current legal situation,
the average number of recipients of unemployment bene-
fit I in 2005 and 2006, when the effects of shortening the
period of entitlement were not yet felt directly, would
have amounted not to 1.59 million but rather only 1.45
million. By contrast, under the proposed extension of en-
titlement, the number of recipients would have come to
1.50 million.It can be inferred from this that, based on 2005 and 2006
data, 1extending the period of entitlement to unemploy-
ment benefit I would cause initial additional expenditure
of around 53/C254billion a year compared with the legislative
status quo . This includes social security contributions paid
to the statutory pension, health and long-term care insur-
ance schemes on behalf of unemployed persons. If the
period of entitlement to unemployment benefit I is ex-
tended, the Federal Employment Agency will also have fi-
nancial responsibility for active labour market policy meas-
ures for a longer period of time. On the other hand, sav-
ings can be expected as a result of the required longer in-
surance qualification period before claiming. Overall, gross
additional expenditure could come to around 51 billion or
just over 0.1 percentage point of the contribution rate.
This will be accompanied by additional revenue from con-
tributions made on behalf of unemployment benefit I re-
cipients to the other statutory social security schemes.
During the current year the labour market situation has
continued to improve considerably, due to the favourable
macroeconomic situation and also, not least, as a result of
the labour market reforms. Therefore, it is likely that the
costs of extending the period of entitlement to unemploy-
ment benefit I will initially be lower. However, extending
the length of time that the benefit is granted will partly re-
verse an important part of the reforms.
As regards the financial implications for general govern-
ment, lower central government expenditure on un-
employment benefit II and the other benefits that fall
within the basic allowance for job seekers may be expect-
ed. However, this is likely to be significantly less than the
additional expenditure arising from extending the period
of entitlement to unemployment benefit I, inter alia be-
cause the preconditions for receiving unemployment bene-
fit II are that the individual has no claims to maintenance
from family members or partners and no assets.
All in all, it is quite conceivable that extending the period
of entitlement to unemployment benefit I will lower the
number of older persons in employment by reducing the
incentive to search for a job and raising the temptation on
the part of both employees and employers to resort to the
instrument of early retirement. International studies show
that a longer period of drawing on wage substitutes is
more likely to reduce the chances of finding employment
(again). 2Ultimately, policymakers need to make a funda-
mental decision concerning the extent of unemployment
insurance cover, the financing of which should be secured.
It would be wrong, however, to reckon with a continuation
of the current cyclically induced positive financial situation
of the Federal Employment Agency. As significantly higher
costs are to be expected in economic downturns, this
would make a procyclical rise in contributions more likely.
The revised rules that have been agreed also further dilute
the risk insurance nature of the statutory unemployment
insurance scheme. However, it seems questionable
whether, especially in view of the demographic changes,
the rough realisation of an implicit savings contract within
a pay-as-you-go social security scheme is preferable to pri-
vate provision for periods of unemployment.
1With regard to the 2005 and 2006 average, firstly the dif-
ferent economic situations have to be taken into account.
Secondly, for 2006, certain “foreshadowing effects” of the
shortened period of eligibility to unemployment benefit I
cannot be ruled out. At the end of 2006 barely 2% of un-
employment benefit I recipients had been claiming the
benefit for more than 12 months. At the beginning of2006 the figure was still 16%. — 2See A Bassanini and R
Duval, The Determinants of Unemployment Across OECD
Countries: Reassessing the Role of Policies and Institutions,
OECD Economic Studies No 42, 2006/1 or also R Lalive, How
Do Extended Benefits Affect Unemployment Duration? A
Regression Discontinuity Approach, Journal of Econome-
trics (2007), doi: 10.1016/j.jeconom.2007.05.013.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
71amounted to almost 331/C252billion. However,
the fourth quarter usually sees particularly
high revenue from contributions and low ex-
penditure on unemployment benefit. It is
therefore possible that the surplus will havedoubled by the end of the year. The reserves
of approximately 311 billion that were accu-
mulated by the end of 2006 are likely to in-crease accordingly. 32.5 billion of these re-
serves is to be earmarked for a civil servantpension fund.
19This amount is therefore no
longer available to offset cyclical fluctuations
in income and expenditure. A further share of
the financial reserves is required to absorb
fluctuations in liquidity that arise during thecourse of the year.
20The reserves available to
prevent increases in contribution rates in fu-
ture downturns are correspondingly lower.
Despite relatively favourable macroeconomic
perspectives, the financial outlook for theFederal Employment Agency is clouded be-cause its budget is threatened by consider-able burdens resulting from discretionaryinterventions. For example, the compensatoryamount payable to central government,
which is likely to total almost 32 billion this
year, is to be replaced by a reintegration pay-ment that is likely to be more than twice ashigh. With this payment the Federal Employ-ment Agency will assume half of the costs ofreintegration measures and of the administra-tive expenses related to unemployment bene-fit II. Moreover, central government is also nolonger paying contributions for persons rais-
ing children, who will thus be compulsorily in-sured without having to pay contributions in
the future. Ultimately, this means that thestatutory unemployment insurance schemewill take on responsibility for activities thatare not consistent with the insurance purposebut nevertheless have to be financed by the
contribution payers. Furthermore, the contri-bution rate is to be reduced to 3.3% (andthus well below the amount of 3.9% envis-aged hitherto) while benefits are concurrentlyexpanded. In particular, the maximum period
of eligibility for the receipt of unemploymentbenefit I is to be extended for older persons.This will lead to considerable additional costs
that might mushroom even higher if recipi-ents adapt their behaviour and make onlyhalf-hearted efforts to find a new job (seebox on page 70). All in all, there are indications
for the scenario – which has often prevailedin the past – that taxes and social security
contributions are lowered and expenditureraised during an economic upturn. It is to befeared that this may happen on a scale whichcannot be sustained in the long term, whichwould make the need for procyclical counter-measures in the next downturn inevitable.
19This is intended to fully cover the existing pension
claims of Federal Employment Agency civil servants. Fu-
ture claims will be financed on an accruals basis by
means of contributions to the pension fund calculated
using actuarial methods. In return, the ongoing pension
payments from the Federal Employment Agency’s budget
will cease.
20Spending on benefits is typically particularly high dur-
ing the winter quarter at the beginning of the year,
whereas receipts tend to be weak. However, this situation
usually reverses itself by the end of the year. The monthly
deficits run up at the beginning of the year can therefore
usually be offset only by subsequent surpluses generated
during the later part of the year.Financial
outlook
clouded by
discretionary
interventions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
72

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors of
economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*
5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financialsectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
individual taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*
6 Labour market 65*
7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in
Stage III of Economic and MonetaryUnion 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2006          Jan 10.0 8.3 7.5 7.6 8.5 10.0 8.7 2.33 2.51 3.4
         Feb 9.8 8.6 7.9 8.0 8.8 10.8 8.9 2.35 2.60 3.5
         Mar 10.0 9.0 8.5 8.4 9.6 11.6 8.8 2.52 2.72 3.7
         Apr 10.1 9.5 8.8 8.7 9.7 11.9 8.9 2.63 2.79 4.0
         May 10.3 9.2 8.9 8.7 9.5 11.9 8.8 2.58 2.89 4.1
         June 9.1 9.0 8.4 8.4 9.2 11.5 8.0 2.70 2.99 4.1
         July 7.5 8.2 7.8 8.1 9.3 11.9 8.6 2.81 3.10 4.1
         Aug 7.3 8.4 8.2 8.1 9.2 12.0 8.4 2.97 3.23 4.0
         Sep 7.2 8.4 8.5 8.4 9.4 12.2 8.3 3.04 3.34 3.8
         Oct 6.3 8.2 8.5 8.8 9.1 12.0 8.4 3.28 3.50 3.9
         Nov 6.7 8.9 9.4 9.3 8.7 11.9 8.5 3.33 3.60 3.8
         Dec 7.5 9.3 9.9 9.8 8.2 11.5 8.5 3.50 3.68 3.9
2007          Jan 6.9 9.1 10.1 10.0 8.1 11.3 8.6 3.56 3.75 4.1
         Feb 6.7 8.9 10.1 10.4 7.9 10.8 8.4 3.57 3.82 4.1
         Mar 7.0 9.5 11.0 10.5 7.8 10.9 9.2 3.69 3.89 4.0
         Apr 6.0 8.8 10.3 10.6 7.6 10.8 9.1 3.82 3.98 4.2
         May 5.9 9.3 10.6 10.6 8.3 11.1 8.8 3.79 4.07 4.3
         June 6.1 9.5 11.0 11.1 8.6 11.6 9.4 3.96 4.15 4.6
         July 6.8 10.4 11.7 11.4 8.7 11.6 9.2 4.06 4.22 4.6
         Aug 6.7 10.5 11.6 11.5 8.8 11.8 9.3 4.05 4.54 4.4
         Sep 6.1 10.2 11.3 ... 8.7 11.7 8.8 4.03 4.74 4.3
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.94 4.69 4.4
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares /units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
 
 
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2006          Jan − 9,696 − 6,532 + 3,484 − 1,844 − 41,795 + 49,578 − 2,454 1.2103 101.8 102.7
         Feb − 3,690 + 390 + 22,514 − 31,999 + 23,321 + 29,221 + 1,971 1.1938 101.2 102.0
         Mar − 1,146 + 2,630 + 46,776 − 1,532 + 33,976 + 7,956 + 6,375 1.2020 101.9 103.0
         Apr − 5,729 + 1,144 + 12,114 + 1,974 − 15,304 + 26,650 − 1,207 1.2271 103.0 104.0
         May − 10,571 + 365 + 25,600 − 6,217 + 40,405 − 6,851 − 1,738 1.2770 104.0 104.9
         June + 9,116 + 5,310 + 1,381 − 15,794 + 70,440 − 54,670 + 1,405 1.2650 104.2 105.0
         July − 1,220 + 4,095 + 8,218 − 10,783 + 7,981 + 12,330 − 1,311 1.2684 104.5 105.5
         Aug − 5,883 − 2,203 + 3,667 − 5,490 − 25,009 + 34,984 − 818 1.2811 104.6 105.5
         Sep + 1,441 + 5,582 + 39,069 − 27,672 + 47,288 + 20,509 − 1,055 1.2727 104.4 105.2
         Oct − 826 + 5,601 + 5,109 − 10,003 + 37,159 − 22,107 + 60 1.2611 103.9 104.7
         Nov + 4,791 + 7,213 − 11,001 − 12,909 + 56,896 − 54,375 − 614 1.2881 104.5 105.3
         Dec + 13,685 + 5,008 − 39,873 − 36,534 + 26,246 − 27,696 − 1,889 1.3213 105.5 106.1
2007          Jan − 3,694 − 4,178 + 42,659 − 13,775 + 38,510 + 20,929 − 3,005 1.2999 104.9 105.6
         Feb − 3,586 + 2,615 + 1,958 − 3,248 + 15,003 − 9,279 − 517 1.3074 105.4 106.1
         Mar + 7,093 + 10,125 − 39,925 + 2,420 + 59,887 − 104,137 + 1,904 1.3242 106.1 106.7
         Apr − 3,611 + 4,505 + 40,795 − 7,417 − 7,131 + 56,863 − 1,520 1.3516 107.1 107.8
         May − 11,634 + 4,425 + 1,958 − 24,227 + 1,671 + 25,243 − 729 1.3511 107.3 107.9
         June + 13,833 + 11,329 − 19,505 − 37,443 + 60,917 − 41,068 − 1,911 1.3419 106.9 107.4
         July + 4,839 + 9,406 + 47,137 + 76 + 19,405 + 30,848 − 3,191 1.3716 107.6 108.2
         Aug + 732 + 3,859 + 52,757 − 8,537 + 819 + 59,154 + 1,321 1.3622 107.1 107.7
         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3896 108.2 108.8
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.4227 109.4 110.0
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-24 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Slovenia Spain area
Real gross domestic product 1 
2004 3.0 1.1 3.7 2.5 4.7 4.3 1.2 4.9 2.2 2.3 1.5 4.4 3.3 2.0
2005 1.7 0.8 2.9 1.7 3.7 5.9 0.1 5.0 1.5 2.0 0.5 4.0 3.6 1.5
2006 2.8 2.9 5.0 2.0 4.3 5.7 1.9 6.1 3.0 3.3 1.3 5.2 3.9 2.8
2006          Q2 2.7 1.6 4.7 1.7 4.1 3.9 1.4 6.3 3.1 2.8 0.9 4.7 4.0 2.9
         Q3 2.7 2.7 3.2 2.0 ... 8.0 1.3 6.2 2.8 3.0 1.5 5.6 3.5 2.9
         Q4 2.7 3.7 7.4 2.1 ... 4.5 2.7 5.4 2.7 3.4 1.6 5.5 4.1 3.3
2007          Q1 3.3 3.3 5.5 1.8 ... 8.1 2.3 4.9 2.5 3.5 2.0 7.2 4.3 3.2
         Q2 2.8 2.5 4.5 1.1 ... 5.4 2.0 5.0 2.6 3.3 1.6 5.9 3.9 2.5
         Q3 1.9 2.4 ... 2.0 ... ... ... ... 4.1 3.4 ... ... ... 2.6
Industrial production 1,2 
2004 3.2 3.1 4.9 1.9 1.2 0.3 − 0.3 3.8 4.1 6.2 − 2.7 4.6 1.6 2.2
2005 − 0.3 3.3 0.3 0.2 − 0.9 3.0 − 0.8 0.8 − 1.1 4.2 0.3 3.9 0.6 1.3
2006 5.1 5.9 8.1 0.9 0.5 5.1 2.6 2.4 1.2 7.7 2.7 6.5 3.9 4.0
2006          Q2 5.6 5.9 14.4 1.8 0.4 9.8 1.6 3.5 0.9 7.2 1.7 5.1 4.0 4.3
         Q3 4.0 6.4 10.2 0.7 0.0 6.3 1.4 − 0.3 0.2 9.4 3.5 7.8 4.2 4.1
         Q4 4.7 6.0 4.0 0.4 0.6 1.5 3.9 2.0 0.3 8.9 4.3 7.2 4.6 4.0
2007          Q1 3.9 6.8 1.6 0.8 2.9 14.4 1.1 2.4 − 3.2 8.3 4.2 9.7 4.2 3.9
         Q2 2.6 5.8 0.0 0.1 0.7 − 1.4 0.6 2.0 0.4 5.7 1.6 8.2 2.4 2.7
         Q3 2.6 7p 5.9 0.3 2.6 p 2.5 p 8.7 1.0 p − 7.2 6.0 ... 1.6 7.0 1.1 e 3.9
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2005 79.4 82.9 84.9 83.2 72.1 74.2 76.4 82.3 82.0 81.7 80.0 82.2 80.2 81.2
2006 82.7 85.5 86.0 85.0 75.7 75.7 77.6 85.2 82.0 83.4 78.4 83.9 80.5 83.0
2007 83.2 87.5 87.3 86.6 76.9 76.6 78.2 87.3 83.6 85.2 81.8 85.9 81.0 84.4
2006          Q3 83.9 86.4 88.1 85.7 77.2 76.3 78.0 86.7 81.4 84.0 79.4 84.7 79.4 83.6
         Q4 83.5 86.8 85.4 86.3 76.7 76.5 78.1 87.2 83.0 84.3 77.4 84.1 80.6 83.9
2007          Q1 83.4 87.6 89.3 86.0 76.9 76.8 78.2 87.4 83.4 85.1 79.7 85.6 81.2 84.4
         Q2 83.2 88.2 86.9 86.2 76.9 77.1 78.9 88.8 83.3 85.5 81.7 86.2 81.3 84.8
         Q3 82.8 87.1 86.7 86.4 76.7 75.9 78.2 86.5 83.8 85.2 84.3 85.9 81.4 84.3
         Q4 83.4 87.0 86.3 87.6 77.1 76.4 77.4 86.5 83.8 84.8 81.3 86.0 80.0 84.2
Unemployment rate 4 
2004 8.4 r 9.7 8.8 9.6 10.5 4.5 8.0 5.1 4.6 4.8 6.7 6.3 10.6 8.9
2005 8.4 r 10.7 8.4 9.7 9.8 4.3 7.7 4.5 4.7 5.2 7.6 6.5 9.2 8.9
2006 8.2 r 9.8 7.7 9.5 8.9 4.4 6.8 4.7 3.9 4.7 7.7 6.0 8.5 8.3
2007          Apr 7.9 r 8.5 6.9 8.9 8.4 4.6 5.9 4.9 3.3 4.4 8.3 5.0 8.1 7.5
         May 7.7 r 8.5 6.9 8.8 8.4 4.6 5.9 4.9 3.3 4.3 8.2 4.9 8.1 7.5
         June 7.6 r 8.4 6.9 8.7 8.4 4.6 5.9 4.9 3.3 4.3 8.2 4.9 8.1 7.5
         July 7.6 r 8.3 6.9 8.7 ... 4.8 ... 4.9 3.2 4.3 8.2 4.9 8.1 7.4
         Aug 7.5 r 8.3 6.9 8.6 ... 4.8 ... 4.9 3.2 4.3 8.3 4.8 8.1 7.4
         Sep 7.4 r 8.1 6.9 8.6 ... 4.8 ... 4.8 3.1 4.2 8.3 4.7 8.1 7.3
         Oct 7.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.2 ... ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2004 1.9 1.8 0.1 2.3 3.0 2.3 2.3 3.2 1.4 2.0 2.5 3.7 3.1 2.1
2005 2.5 1.9 0.8 1.9 3.5 2.2 2.2 3.8 1.5 2.1 2.1 2.5 3.4 2.2
2006 2.3 1.8 1.3 1.9 3.3 2.7 2.2 3.0 1.7 1.7 3.0 2.5 3.6 2.2
2007          Apr 1.8 2.0 1.5 1.3 2.6 2.9 1.8 2.5 1.9 1.8 2.8 2.9 2.5 5 1.9
         May 1.3 2.0 1.3 1.2 2.6 2.7 1.9 2.3 2.0 1.9 2.4 3.1 2.4 1.9
         June 1.3 2.0 1.4 1.3 2.6 2.8 1.9 2.3 1.8 1.9 2.4 3.8 2.5 1.9
         July 1.3 2.0 1.6 1.2 2.7 2.7 1.7 2.0 1.4 2.0 2.3 4.0 2.3 1.8
         Aug 1.2 2.0 1.3 1.3 2.7 2.3 1.7 1.9 1.1 1.7 1.9 3.4 2.2 1.7
         Sep 1.4 2.7 1.7 1.6 3.0 2.9 1.7 2.5 1.3 p 2.1 2.0 3.6 2.7 2.1
         Oct 2.2 2.7 1.8 2.1 3.1 3.0 2.3 3.6 p 1.6 ... ... 5.1 3.6 p 2.6
General government financial balance 6 
2004 0.0 − 3.8 2.3 − 3.6 − 7.3 1.3 − 3.5 − 1.2 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 3.4 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.8
2005 − 2.3 − 3.4 2.7 − 2.9 − 5.1 1.2 − 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.6 − 6.1 − 1.5 1.0 − 2.6
2006 0.4 − 1.6 3.8 − 2.5 − 2.5 2.9 − 4.4 0.7 0.6 − 1.4 − 3.9 − 1.2 1.8 − 1.6
General government debt 6 
2004 94.2 65.6 44.1 64.9 98.6 29.5 103.8 6.4 52.4 63.8 58.3 27.6 46.2 69.5
2005 92.2 67.8 41.4 66.7 98.0 27.4 106.2 6.2 52.3 63.4 63.7 27.4 43.0 70.3
2006 88.2 67.5 39.2 64.2 95.3 25.1 106.8 6.6 47.9 61.7 64.8 27.1 39.7 68.6
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central sonally adjusted. — 5  Including Slovenia from January 2007 onwards. —
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — 6  As a percentage of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece, Portugal and the euro area (ESA 1995), member states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and definition). — 7  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
energy; adjusted for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Produc-
seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and tion Survey for the third quarter 2007. 
October. — 4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; sea-
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2006          Feb 92.8 109.6 28.3 − 16.8 − 7.2 − 26.1 18.6 44.7 57.9 12.4 0.3 25.0 20.2
         Mar 141.9 129.1 44.7 12.8 8.7 0.4 71.6 71.2 48.1 17.6 0.8 21.8 7.9
         Apr 162.3 161.5 64.1 0.7 0.1 − 16.4 79.5 95.9 25.7 14.9 0.4 17.9 − 7.4
         May 43.2 71.4 3.9 − 28.2 − 17.7 6.4 49.8 43.4 28.1 10.4 1.3 21.8 − 5.4
         June 52.2 47.8 − 30.1 4.4 1.8 70.3 − 49.7 − 119.9 48.0 10.9 1.2 21.8 14.1
         July 69.4 89.8 13.5 − 20.4 − 16.6 3.9 83.6 79.7 47.6 9.2 1.2 16.3 20.9
         Aug − 14.1 12.7 − 5.3 − 26.8 − 21.2 − 19.0 1.6 20.6 5.3 2.4 1.5 5.5 − 4.1
         Sep 126.9 134.5 21.8 − 7.6 − 13.7 17.2 120.5 103.3 28.2 4.3 1.4 14.4 8.2
         Oct 81.4 84.5 30.5 − 3.1 − 5.8 25.8 118.1 92.2 51.3 15.8 2.1 29.0 4.4
         Nov 110.7 105.9 11.6 4.8 6.5 69.2 144.7 75.5 28.3 10.6 2.6 23.0 − 7.9
         Dec − 8.2 44.6 2.3 − 52.8 − 58.6 81.1 51.4 − 29.7 50.3 24.1 2.1 18.7 5.5
2007          Jan 120.5 103.2 14.9 17.3 21.2 − 22.9 143.9 166.9 14.4 4.0 1.9 7.8 0.7
         Feb 70.9 69.5 3.3 1.4 4.3 40.6 124.9 84.4 53.0 2.8 1.9 39.9 8.4
         Mar 146.6 154.5 46.8 − 7.9 − 6.5 84.3 125.6 41.2 90.2 31.3 0.9 28.1 29.8
         Apr 153.2 169.7 77.7 − 16.6 − 17.0 − 40.2 151.4 191.6 26.8 12.9 0.3 17.6 − 4.0
         May 136.2 105.1 30.5 31.1 36.4 − 12.3 78.9 91.2 10.4 16.5 − 0.2 22.4 − 28.3
         June 93.0 102.3 − 18.4 − 9.3 − 8.7 46.8 − 5.4 − 52.2 87.3 19.7 0.7 31.7 35.2
         July 86.6 106.0 5.9 − 19.4 − 20.8 6.0 64.1 58.1 42.7 14.6 0.8 8.1 19.2
         Aug − 3.5 33.0 − 6.4 − 36.5 − 29.9 − 51.7 − 11.2 40.5 7.6 − 4.5 0.2 8.1 3.8
         Sep 124.6 135.2 25.1 − 10.6 − 10.8 − 21.0 32.9 53.8 5.2 − 2.4 1.2 − 7.0 13.4
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2006          Feb 0.2 12.8 4.7 − 12.6 − 3.2 − 7.1 6.9 14.0 17.0 5.3 0.3 6.2 5.2
         Mar 19.0 16.8 9.3 2.1 2.0 3.0 17.9 14.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.8 − 4.1 3.2
         Apr 44.8 45.1 30.1 − 0.4 − 1.6 9.7 10.3 0.6 2.4 4.2 0.2 − 3.3 1.2
         May − 3.7 − 9.6 − 6.9 5.9 13.4 − 4.6 6.2 10.8 3.1 1.7 1.1 4.9 − 4.6
         June − 31.3 − 16.3 − 18.3 − 15.0 − 11.3 58.4 39.5 − 18.9 7.5 1.5 1.3 0.2 4.5
         July − 6.9 − 5.4 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 2.5 2.7 − 11.0 − 13.7 14.6 2.2 1.1 2.4 8.9
         Aug − 4.3 3.9 0.6 − 8.2 − 4.2 − 4.9 1.1 6.1 − 3.1 2.9 1.5 − 4.9 − 2.6
         Sep 23.7 32.8 9.5 − 9.1 − 7.9 14.9 32.8 17.8 − 5.8 0.4 1.2 − 4.2 − 3.3
         Oct 4.2 − 0.7 5.1 4.9 1.2 − 4.6 − 5.1 − 0.5 5.1 − 0.1 2.1 − 0.9 4.0
         Nov 12.6 5.5 7.3 7.2 6.6 42.0 42.1 0.1 − 0.8 1.3 2.6 − 0.3 − 4.3
         Dec − 40.7 − 22.9 4.2 − 17.8 − 14.9 43.0 25.4 − 17.6 5.2 3.9 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.7
2007          Jan 36.3 25.6 12.0 10.7 12.2 − 11.2 17.8 29.0 18.7 − 0.2 1.8 5.8 11.3
         Feb − 7.0 0.8 − 7.1 − 7.8 − 3.4 5.7 26.9 21.2 5.7 0.8 2.0 − 0.6 3.5
         Mar 10.4 14.4 6.4 − 4.0 2.2 14.9 20.6 5.7 − 5.3 − 0.8 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.4
         Apr 32.6 33.4 35.6 − 0.9 − 2.8 − 12.4 25.2 37.6 8.8 2.8 0.2 3.6 2.2
         May − 13.9 − 16.0 − 15.2 2.1 5.0 − 2.5 10.9 13.4 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 6.6 − 8.6
         June − 27.5 − 11.9 − 24.8 − 15.6 − 10.1 58.7 24.1 − 34.6 9.6 2.1 0.6 − 3.8 10.7
         July 7.2 7.3 5.8 − 0.1 − 5.4 17.4 13.1 − 4.3 9.7 1.4 0.6 − 0.7 8.4
         Aug − 3.9 13.9 − 3.8 − 17.8 − 11.9 − 10.1 5.6 15.7 − 10.3 0.2 0.2 − 8.8 − 1.8
         Sep 10.3 19.6 5.7 − 9.4 − 3.2 24.4 48.3 23.9 − 0.3 3.5 0.6 − 3.0 − 1.4
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
8.0 − 29.5 − 30.2 20.3 − 2.5 4.0 − 6.5 19.4 3.4 − 2.1 3.2 8.8 2006          Feb 
− 6.5 31.2 − 69.4 59.0 27.9 7.4 20.5 29.3 1.8 1.0 − 0.8 10.3          Mar 
− 10.5 0.2 − 130.5 106.1 65.9 8.1 57.8 41.7 − 1.5 13.9 10.1 0.4          Apr 
− 15.4 − 1.2 − 38.0 7.4 18.9 3.3 15.6 − 10.7 − 0.8 7.8 9.9 12.9          May
41.1 − 3.9 − 37.2 63.9 47.6 10.1 37.5 19.0 − 2.8 − 11.6 − 5.2 − 9.8          June
− 13.1 25.2 − 13.6 − 4.3 − 25.6 9.0 − 34.6 24.4 − 3.1 5.3 12.0 0.6          July
− 9.5 − 43.2 − 14.3 − 21.2 − 56.6 − 3.7 − 52.9 35.4 0.1 14.5 2.7 18.3          Aug 
18.0 5.2 − 92.5 96.8 64.7 4.2 60.5 36.0 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 4.9 1.8          Sep 
− 9.8 38.4 − 27.3 12.1 − 17.9 3.9 − 21.8 37.0 − 7.1 − 2.5 2.2 15.5          Oct 
0.8 69.2 − 81.7 68.8 47.9 4.4 43.5 29.0 − 8.2 − 0.4 13.2 0.1          Nov 
− 36.5 − 107.9 − 167.0 201.5 139.9 20.7 119.2 47.7 13.9 − 12.8 − 22.1 0.4          Dec 
11.2 66.6 − 5.4 − 59.9 − 83.4 − 17.0 − 66.4 23.1 0.4 14.2 28.9 22.2 2007          Jan 
19.0 3.2 − 36.1 7.3 − 6.5 3.1 − 9.6 25.1 − 11.3 6.6 11.5 10.7          Feb 
− 5.4 − 15.4 − 161.5 125.3 62.1 9.7 52.4 65.4 − 2.2 13.2 14.1 8.9          Mar 
− 9.9 25.5 − 70.6 52.0 18.5 6.3 12.2 41.0 − 7.5 − 0.4 17.6 1.4          Apr 
25.9 11.1 − 76.4 45.2 22.9 2.8 20.1 26.1 − 3.8 3.6 16.0 11.6          May
21.2 − 44.5 − 75.8 95.6 67.3 7.3 60.0 34.6 − 6.3 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 12.3          June
− 41.5 41.1 − 50.4 34.2 − 17.2 8.0 − 25.2 61.6 − 10.2 4.9 14.4 − 3.1          July
− 6.5 − 69.1 − 12.8 − 14.7 − 77.2 − 2.3 − 74.9 70.5 − 8.0 10.7 − 6.9 23.7          Aug 
22.1 − 23.8 − 100.1 102.9 74.4 − 0.1 74.6 34.9 − 6.4 − 0.9 − 25.1 23.1          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 6.2 − 15.9 2.0 0.5 − 1.8 − 2.8 0.7 − 0.4 2.2 0.6 − 2.1 2006          Feb 
1.8 3.8 0.5 2.4 16.4 8.1 1.3 − 2.0 7.4 − 0.1 1.7          Mar 
− 0.2 34.1 0.4 2.0 18.1 9.3 12.7 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.7          Apr 
1.7 − 17.8 0.8 1.2 4.8 4.5 0.5 − 3.5 0.6 0.4 2.2          May
1.9 14.5 1.1 2.7 3.3 3.4 4.9 − 2.6 − 1.4 0.9 − 1.9          June
1.0 − 3.3 0.6 2.6 − 16.5 − 9.8 4.6 − 4.0 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 1.0          July
3.0 − 16.6 2.7 − 1.0 7.5 − 6.8 9.8 − 4.5 4.8 − 0.2 4.4          Aug 
2.3 29.5 2.0 0.4 12.7 0.7 10.5 − 3.8 3.2 − 0.6 2.7          Sep 
− 2.8 6.1 0.6 1.3 − 8.8 − 6.8 8.6 − 4.8 − 6.0 0.0 0.1          Oct 
2.1 29.2 − 0.1 1.8 24.1 28.0 7.3 − 6.2 − 4.5 − 0.2 − 0.3          Nov 
− 2.9 − 11.7 − 2.0 5.4 11.8 4.3 15.7 3.1 − 10.5 − 0.2 − 0.6          Dec 
− 1.9 0.1 1.1 − 4.3 8.3 − 1.1 2.7 − 6.2 8.0 0.2 4.7 2007          Jan 
0.2 − 12.3 1.1 0.7 5.1 − 0.6 4.2 − 3.9 4.7 − 0.7 1.5          Feb 
− 0.3 15.9 1.0 2.5 15.0 3.8 8.1 − 3.3 0.1 1.2 5.0          Mar 
0.3 1.3 0.0 2.2 9.8 − 2.6 17.4 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.5          Apr 
5.2 − 29.5 2.9 − 0.0 10.2 8.3 6.4 − 4.2 − 1.5 0.3 0.9          May
0.9 − 1.1 1.2 2.6 21.9 9.8 12.3 − 4.1 3.2 1.5 − 0.7          June
− 7.3 18.7 0.5 2.3 3.5 2.7 9.3 − 5.8 − 7.0 − 0.4 4.7          July
− 0.3 − 19.9 2.3 − 0.9 16.5 − 7.5 26.9 − 3.9 2.7 − 3.8 2.2          Aug 
− 1.3 7.9 1.8 − 0.5 28.3 13.0 16.2 − 3.6 7.9 − 3.7 − 1.6          Sep 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2005          Aug 17,069.9 11,566.3 9,205.2 7,984.8 506.0 714.4 2,361.1 827.2 1,533.9 3,717.9 1,785.7
         Sep 17,308.3 11,669.2 9,310.1 8,073.4 507.0 729.7 2,359.1 832.9 1,526.2 3,830.8 1,808.3
         Oct 17,442.4 11,766.5 9,370.1 8,140.3 523.6 706.2 2,396.5 830.1 1,566.4 3,885.5 1,790.4
         Nov 17,887.3 11,956.0 9,480.0 8,223.5 544.6 711.8 2,476.0 824.4 1,651.6 4,056.4 1,875.0
         Dec 17,870.7 11,992.3 9,549.8 8,285.7 553.6 710.5 2,442.5 847.5 1,595.0 3,989.7 1,888.7
2006          Jan 18,162.0 12,129.8 9,670.4 8,384.4 558.0 728.0 2,459.4 842.3 1,617.2 4,088.8 1,943.4
         Feb 18,295.2 12,227.2 9,784.4 8,467.1 569.6 747.7 2,442.8 832.8 1,610.0 4,137.4 1,930.5
         Mar 18,450.2 12,355.4 9,910.3 8,550.1 575.8 784.4 2,445.2 836.7 1,608.5 4,174.1 1,920.8
         Apr 18,671.1 12,506.1 10,065.7 8,642.7 587.0 836.0 2,440.4 837.2 1,603.2 4,217.4 1,947.6
         May 18,748.8 12,533.3 10,127.7 8,706.5 595.3 825.9 2,405.5 826.7 1,578.9 4,247.6 1,967.9
         June 18,712.1 12,574.4 10,172.0 8,783.0 602.4 786.6 2,402.4 829.3 1,573.1 4,192.7 1,945.1
         July 18,838.8 12,649.5 10,264.5 8,857.7 614.5 792.3 2,385.0 826.3 1,558.7 4,284.2 1,905.1
         Aug 18,860.3 12,647.3 10,287.3 8,874.1 613.9 799.3 2,360.0 820.7 1,539.4 4,280.2 1,932.9
         Sep 19,232.3 12,768.7 10,413.4 8,983.9 620.2 809.3 2,355.2 824.0 1,531.3 4,418.2 2,045.3
         Oct 19,416.4 12,850.0 10,500.2 9,036.7 634.9 828.6 2,349.7 825.9 1,523.8 4,540.9 2,025.5
         Nov 19,715.5 12,945.4 10,592.9 9,118.2 638.2 836.5 2,352.5 824.1 1,528.4 4,620.9 2,149.2
         Dec 19,743.5 12,933.3 10,639.1 9,161.0 648.3 829.9 2,294.2 830.2 1,464.0 4,681.5 2,128.7
2007          Jan 20,097.3 13,086.0 10,769.5 9,276.4 646.8 846.3 2,316.5 826.1 1,490.5 4,851.0 2,160.3
         Feb 20,284.1 13,153.7 10,834.7 9,337.6 660.6 836.5 2,319.0 823.0 1,496.0 4,941.4 2,189.1
         Mar 20,649.7 13,296.0 10,987.2 9,441.6 687.9 857.6 2,308.8 821.1 1,487.7 5,044.2 2,309.5
         Apr 20,919.1 13,442.3 11,151.9 9,526.6 708.5 916.8 2,290.4 821.4 1,469.0 5,157.9 2,318.9
         May 21,219.3 13,585.8 11,264.5 9,600.5 736.0 928.0 2,321.3 816.2 1,505.1 5,256.8 2,376.7
         June 21,414.0 13,667.8 11,356.9 9,713.2 763.4 880.3 2,310.9 816.0 1,494.9 5,243.0 2,503.2
         July 21,462.9 13,747.5 11,455.5 9,810.4 779.2 865.9 2,292.0 817.4 1,474.6 5,285.5 2,430.0
         Aug 21,453.4 13,743.1 11,486.3 9,849.5 782.5 854.2 2,256.8 810.9 1,446.0 5,278.2 2,432.1
         Sep 21,702.5 13,853.1 11,608.6 9,947.7 804.5 856.4 2,244.5 810.9 1,433.6 5,249.2 2,600.2
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2005          Aug 4,654.8 3,402.2 2,648.8 2,288.2 80.1 280.4 753.4 452.6 300.8 1,079.7 172.9
         Sep 4,684.5 3,407.5 2,666.3 2,303.8 80.2 282.3 741.2 447.7 293.5 1,103.6 173.4
         Oct 4,699.9 3,417.0 2,676.6 2,311.6 82.1 282.9 740.4 449.3 291.1 1,106.4 176.5
         Nov 4,722.5 3,421.6 2,678.8 2,308.0 83.5 287.3 742.8 441.6 301.2 1,117.8 183.1
         Dec 4,667.4 3,412.0 2,673.6 2,291.3 87.7 294.6 738.4 443.8 294.6 1,080.6 174.8
2006          Jan 4,754.2 3,463.2 2,717.0 2,321.5 88.4 307.1 746.2 445.9 300.3 1,120.2 170.8
         Feb 4,765.6 3,463.1 2,729.4 2,329.2 91.1 309.1 733.7 436.5 297.2 1,134.2 168.3
         Mar 4,791.8 3,478.9 2,743.5 2,334.6 93.4 315.5 735.4 436.5 298.9 1,145.0 167.9
         Apr 4,843.7 3,522.5 2,787.6 2,348.9 94.5 344.2 734.8 437.6 297.2 1,146.9 174.3
         May 4,843.9 3,518.0 2,777.3 2,346.0 95.5 335.8 740.7 430.1 310.6 1,145.4 180.5
         June 4,844.8 3,486.3 2,760.6 2,347.5 103.3 309.8 725.7 426.5 299.2 1,183.7 174.8
         July 4,829.6 3,481.0 2,755.7 2,342.0 103.9 309.7 725.3 428.3 297.0 1,174.3 174.3
         Aug 4,821.6 3,477.1 2,759.4 2,344.8 103.6 310.9 717.7 424.2 293.5 1,172.0 172.5
         Sep 4,884.7 3,497.1 2,788.4 2,367.7 108.4 312.3 708.7 420.2 288.5 1,209.8 177.8
         Oct 4,886.3 3,500.9 2,787.3 2,361.5 112.9 313.0 713.6 423.2 290.4 1,204.4 181.0
         Nov 4,933.0 3,510.9 2,790.3 2,357.2 117.9 315.2 720.6 423.7 296.9 1,234.4 187.7
         Dec 4,922.2 3,466.6 2,764.1 2,327.2 120.7 316.2 702.4 420.8 281.6 1,258.1 197.5
2007          Jan 4,972.0 3,501.3 2,788.2 2,343.3 118.1 326.9 713.1 419.4 293.6 1,279.4 191.3
         Feb 4,987.2 3,491.8 2,786.6 2,349.6 120.5 316.5 705.2 415.0 290.2 1,300.8 194.5
         Mar 5,010.4 3,500.9 2,800.3 2,357.3 123.5 319.5 700.6 408.3 292.4 1,316.2 193.3
         Apr 5,064.5 3,530.4 2,830.8 2,353.3 130.1 347.4 699.6 410.1 289.5 1,333.0 201.1
         May 5,076.7 3,516.3 2,814.6 2,352.1 131.6 330.9 701.7 407.3 294.5 1,346.5 213.9
         June 5,070.7 3,488.8 2,801.2 2,364.9 133.7 302.6 687.6 402.2 285.3 1,368.3 213.5
         July 5,084.0 3,494.2 2,806.6 2,365.9 139.8 300.9 687.6 407.6 280.0 1,377.5 212.4
         Aug 5,097.5 3,490.3 2,820.4 2,383.6 141.2 295.6 669.8 401.7 268.1 1,387.0 220.3
         Sep 5,152.6 3,497.4 2,837.2 2,394.9 145.2 297.1 660.2 395.5 264.7 1,423.6 231.6
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
500.9 6,866.4 6,473.6 6,543.2 2,605.8 933.7 78.0 1,440.7 1,396.6 88.4 2005          Aug 
507.1 6,956.1 6,545.1 6,614.2 2,653.1 950.0 83.3 1,443.5 1,397.4 86.9          Sep 
510.5 6,994.2 6,582.5 6,649.0 2,667.4 962.3 83.5 1,453.2 1,396.3 86.2          Oct 
514.5 7,025.7 6,602.2 6,669.7 2,683.8 955.2 86.9 1,463.5 1,393.8 86.4          Nov 
532.8 7,178.0 6,776.7 6,833.5 2,761.4 985.8 90.2 1,498.4 1,410.4 87.3          Dec 
520.8 7,190.8 6,760.8 6,827.5 2,745.9 974.5 91.0 1,504.2 1,424.0 87.9 2006          Jan 
524.8 7,224.4 6,773.0 6,850.7 2,734.7 990.4 94.7 1,517.3 1,425.4 88.2          Feb 
532.2 7,291.9 6,848.9 6,928.7 2,761.3 1,009.8 97.9 1,544.3 1,426.3 89.0          Mar 
540.3 7,378.4 6,941.9 7,018.3 2,802.8 1,044.5 99.7 1,558.1 1,423.9 89.4          Apr 
543.6 7,381.3 6,957.9 7,027.1 2,819.0 1,025.0 102.1 1,567.8 1,422.5 90.7          May
553.7 7,494.2 7,031.0 7,094.4 2,860.6 1,038.9 104.5 1,579.1 1,419.3 91.9          June
562.7 7,478.0 7,025.7 7,091.9 2,827.7 1,059.6 107.6 1,588.3 1,415.6 93.1          July
559.0 7,454.2 7,008.1 7,080.5 2,780.8 1,090.6 109.5 1,590.7 1,414.2 94.6          Aug 
563.2 7,568.4 7,090.5 7,173.0 2,837.7 1,122.2 113.4 1,593.4 1,410.4 95.9          Sep 
567.1 7,582.0 7,115.3 7,192.2 2,809.6 1,152.3 119.4 1,609.2 1,403.7 98.0          Oct 
571.5 7,646.2 7,176.6 7,241.4 2,838.1 1,165.4 124.6 1,617.3 1,395.3 100.7          Nov 
592.2 7,816.5 7,375.3 7,445.8 2,961.1 1,209.5 123.7 1,640.9 1,407.8 102.7          Dec 
575.6 7,815.2 7,354.2 7,435.6 2,909.5 1,235.7 129.6 1,647.5 1,408.0 105.4 2007          Jan 
578.7 7,839.6 7,363.6 7,440.8 2,900.3 1,250.8 136.5 1,649.5 1,396.5 107.3          Feb 
588.4 7,980.2 7,496.8 7,589.8 2,956.5 1,304.2 146.2 1,680.7 1,394.0 108.2          Mar 
594.7 8,023.3 7,548.5 7,637.9 2,962.0 1,339.0 148.9 1,692.7 1,386.7 108.5          Apr 
597.6 8,113.2 7,601.9 7,690.7 2,979.7 1,357.1 152.5 1,709.6 1,383.5 108.3          May
604.9 8,240.4 7,710.4 7,794.6 3,038.1 1,384.2 156.7 1,729.2 1,377.4 109.0          June
612.9 8,239.2 7,735.2 7,827.7 3,006.6 1,437.6 162.7 1,743.3 1,367.8 109.8          July
610.5 8,212.7 7,719.5 7,808.8 2,933.5 1,498.4 168.2 1,739.1 1,359.7 110.0          Aug 
610.4 8,328.7 7,798.9 7,894.1 3,000.5 1,524.9 169.8 1,734.3 1,353.4 111.2          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
135.2 2,290.5 2,224.1 2,185.3 689.5 189.8 15.7 690.5 514.4 85.4 2005          Aug 
136.2 2,296.5 2,229.3 2,191.8 697.8 189.7 15.9 690.1 514.4 83.9          Sep 
137.2 2,298.5 2,231.2 2,195.7 699.1 194.3 16.3 689.4 513.4 83.2          Oct 
139.3 2,315.7 2,249.4 2,211.4 714.1 193.8 16.6 691.3 512.2 83.5          Nov 
143.5 2,329.5 2,260.2 2,222.9 706.0 201.4 17.0 695.1 519.2 84.2          Dec 
140.6 2,334.4 2,263.0 2,225.0 709.0 199.9 17.3 695.9 518.0 84.9 2006          Jan 
141.1 2,331.8 2,266.9 2,225.6 704.7 199.3 17.6 701.3 517.5 85.2          Feb 
143.5 2,341.2 2,273.7 2,232.7 714.4 197.9 17.8 701.1 515.5 86.0          Mar 
145.5 2,365.1 2,296.3 2,255.8 723.6 209.2 18.1 705.1 513.7 86.2          Apr 
146.8 2,370.8 2,302.7 2,252.2 725.2 204.7 18.5 706.4 510.2 87.3          May
149.5 2,381.2 2,310.1 2,255.7 727.5 205.4 18.9 707.8 507.5 88.6          June
152.1 2,376.3 2,306.2 2,251.2 718.5 209.9 19.4 710.2 503.6 89.7          July
151.1 2,382.7 2,308.9 2,254.5 712.8 218.4 19.9 713.1 499.1 91.2          Aug 
151.5 2,392.8 2,315.6 2,261.1 714.0 227.0 20.5 711.9 495.3 92.4          Sep 
152.9 2,389.1 2,314.9 2,264.0 709.2 236.2 21.8 711.7 490.5 94.5          Oct 
154.7 2,423.5 2,346.4 2,286.5 733.7 235.9 22.6 712.8 484.4 97.1          Nov 
160.1 2,449.6 2,375.2 2,311.5 735.3 249.6 23.1 716.6 487.7 99.1          Dec 
155.7 2,445.2 2,372.5 2,313.6 737.8 252.4 24.2 716.6 481.6 100.9 2007          Jan 
156.4 2,447.5 2,373.6 2,314.3 735.9 255.1 25.4 717.3 477.6 102.9          Feb 
158.9 2,456.2 2,381.8 2,323.9 740.7 261.0 26.6 716.7 474.4 104.4          Mar 
161.1 2,470.3 2,398.3 2,336.5 737.5 276.8 27.7 719.5 470.3 104.6          Apr 
161.1 2,485.8 2,408.2 2,340.0 744.1 277.2 28.7 719.4 466.2 104.4          May
163.7 2,507.3 2,427.9 2,359.0 755.7 284.4 30.2 721.5 462.2 105.0          June
166.0 2,508.5 2,434.9 2,365.2 756.8 291.7 31.7 722.9 456.5 105.6          July
165.1 2,524.5 2,451.5 2,377.8 751.5 311.8 32.7 723.4 452.7 105.8          Aug 
164.6 2,551.8 2,476.1 2,400.8 761.4 323.9 33.7 726.2 449.1 106.4          Sep 
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2005          Aug 166.8 156.4 89.4 40.8 1.5 20.0 4.2 0.4 249.2 245.4 639.7 2,263.5 1,745.9
         Sep 182.4 159.4 90.8 42.5 1.5 19.9 4.2 0.4 234.4 230.8 631.5 2,284.1 1,755.1
         Oct 179.4 165.8 100.0 40.0 1.3 19.9 4.2 0.4 241.4 237.7 628.9 2,316.0 1,776.2
         Nov 185.1 170.9 104.4 40.5 1.3 20.2 4.0 0.4 239.3 235.9 629.6 2,334.1 1,774.6
         Dec 173.6 171.0 100.5 44.4 1.1 20.9 3.7 0.4 221.9 219.1 615.8 2,322.6 1,760.6
2006          Jan 191.6 171.7 101.4 44.3 1.1 20.9 3.6 0.4 237.0 233.7 608.4 2,337.1 1,772.6
         Feb 199.6 174.1 103.1 45.1 1.1 20.8 3.6 0.4 235.0 231.4 610.2 2,380.6 1,799.4
         Mar 193.1 170.1 94.8 49.3 1.2 20.9 3.6 0.4 235.9 231.6 603.1 2,402.7 1,827.1
         Apr 182.6 177.5 99.6 51.8 1.2 21.0 3.4 0.4 249.7 246.0 613.1 2,411.4 1,836.6
         May 167.2 187.0 104.2 56.1 1.3 21.4 3.5 0.4 258.2 253.7 621.6 2,437.0 1,852.7
         June 207.4 192.4 106.7 59.0 1.3 21.5 3.4 0.4 245.1 241.4 616.5 2,455.3 1,864.0
         July 194.3 191.8 106.2 59.3 1.2 21.4 3.2 0.4 250.5 246.7 627.4 2,469.7 1,872.3
         Aug 184.8 188.8 101.6 60.9 1.3 21.4 3.2 0.4 264.9 260.7 639.7 2,489.8 1,887.7
         Sep 202.9 192.6 104.0 61.8 1.6 21.6 3.2 0.4 263.8 259.7 645.6 2,509.2 1,896.2
         Oct 193.1 196.7 108.8 61.2 1.7 21.6 3.0 0.4 261.3 255.8 644.7 2,554.3 1,930.0
         Nov 193.9 210.9 116.3 67.1 1.7 22.6 2.9 0.4 260.8 256.8 636.9 2,569.7 1,949.2
         Dec 157.9 212.8 114.5 70.4 2.1 22.6 2.7 0.4 248.0 244.8 614.1 2,587.9 1,958.5
2007          Jan 170.4 209.2 112.1 68.8 2.4 22.8 2.6 0.4 262.3 258.7 641.5 2,625.3 1,984.5
         Feb 189.5 209.4 111.5 69.6 2.4 22.8 2.6 0.4 268.8 264.1 652.5 2,668.2 2,024.7
         Mar 183.8 206.6 107.5 71.2 2.5 22.4 2.5 0.4 282.0 277.3 666.3 2,701.6 2,053.4
         Apr 173.9 211.5 111.6 72.2 2.5 22.3 2.5 0.4 281.6 276.6 681.9 2,710.9 2,058.6
         May 199.8 222.6 117.1 77.8 2.6 22.5 2.3 0.4 285.2 280.4 702.5 2,750.7 2,082.7
         June 221.0 224.8 116.3 80.1 3.5 22.3 2.2 0.5 282.2 278.0 699.1 2,772.9 2,088.7
         July 180.1 231.4 121.9 81.1 3.6 22.2 2.1 0.5 287.1 282.5 712.6 2,774.1 2,089.8
         Aug 173.6 230.3 116.3 85.6 3.7 22.3 2.0 0.5 297.8 292.9 706.1 2,807.0 2,121.2
         Sep 195.7 238.9 121.7 88.4 3.7 22.8 1.9 0.5 293.5 288.6 681.9 2,804.8 2,139.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2005          Aug 41.6 63.6 19.1 23.1 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 30.6 30.6 34.0 893.4 678.4
         Sep 42.1 62.6 18.0 23.2 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 28.0 28.0 33.5 894.6 678.1
         Oct 40.9 61.9 19.6 20.9 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 32.3 32.3 31.1 896.4 679.9
         Nov 40.7 63.6 20.3 21.9 0.6 18.0 2.3 0.4 33.2 33.2 30.1 894.0 668.9
         Dec 41.6 65.1 19.8 24.1 0.6 18.2 2.0 0.4 19.5 19.5 30.1 883.3 660.2
2006          Jan 43.6 65.8 19.2 25.4 0.7 18.3 1.9 0.4 27.4 27.4 29.4 889.1 664.7
         Feb 37.5 68.7 20.9 26.5 0.7 18.3 1.9 0.4 29.6 29.6 30.0 896.4 665.8
         Mar 39.3 69.2 19.1 28.9 0.7 18.4 1.8 0.4 37.0 37.0 29.9 890.1 663.4
         Apr 39.1 70.2 18.9 29.8 0.8 18.5 1.8 0.4 35.6 35.6 29.8 882.1 656.5
         May 40.8 77.8 21.7 34.2 0.8 18.8 1.9 0.4 37.0 37.0 30.3 886.4 657.8
         June 42.7 82.9 22.8 38.0 0.9 18.9 1.9 0.4 35.7 35.7 31.2 893.5 663.3
         July 43.7 81.4 22.0 37.7 0.8 18.7 1.8 0.4 30.1 30.1 30.5 895.0 662.6
         Aug 46.7 81.4 21.2 38.3 0.9 18.8 1.9 0.4 34.9 34.9 30.3 893.6 661.1
         Sep 49.1 82.6 20.9 39.3 1.1 18.9 1.9 0.4 38.1 38.1 29.7 896.8 663.1
         Oct 46.3 78.8 19.0 37.4 1.2 19.1 1.8 0.4 32.1 32.1 29.7 896.1 657.2
         Nov 48.4 88.6 22.1 44.0 1.2 19.2 1.7 0.4 27.5 27.5 29.5 889.7 654.0
         Dec 45.5 92.6 24.8 45.1 1.5 19.1 1.6 0.4 17.1 17.1 29.3 888.7 646.5
2007          Jan 43.7 88.0 21.3 43.7 1.8 19.1 1.6 0.4 25.0 25.0 29.5 903.2 655.3
         Feb 43.8 89.4 22.4 43.9 1.9 19.2 1.6 0.4 29.7 29.7 28.3 901.1 655.8
         Mar 43.4 88.9 21.3 44.8 1.9 18.9 1.6 0.4 29.8 29.8 29.5 899.9 659.5
         Apr 43.6 90.1 22.1 45.3 1.8 18.9 1.5 0.4 29.4 29.4 28.5 898.9 663.0
         May 48.9 97.0 23.9 50.3 1.9 19.0 1.4 0.4 28.0 28.0 28.8 907.9 667.6
         June 49.7 98.5 22.1 52.9 2.8 18.9 1.3 0.5 32.7 32.7 30.3 902.7 658.2
         July 43.0 100.4 23.6 53.3 2.9 18.9 1.2 0.5 25.7 25.7 29.9 906.0 665.5
         Aug 42.6 104.1 21.6 59.0 2.9 18.9 1.2 0.5 28.4 28.4 26.0 900.2 662.3
         Sep 41.3 109.7 24.1 61.8 2.9 19.3 1.1 0.5 36.3 36.3 22.4 889.3 655.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of central
liability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments
1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of
1 year  4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
87.2 34.8 2,141.5 3,279.6 1,143.0 1.9 2,125.6 − 3,268.6 5,852.9 6,862.8 4,834.0 201.9 2005          Aug 
87.5 34.8 2,161.8 3,381.1 1,166.2 − 17.8 2,165.6 − 3,322.5 5,933.0 6,918.7 4,878.8 203.0          Sep 
92.7 30.1 2,193.2 3,446.6 1,163.5 − 11.2 2,152.3 − 3,349.3 5,970.3 6,962.0 4,916.5 204.7          Oct 
99.2 32.0 2,202.9 3,639.0 1,178.6 − 5.0 2,331.6 − 3,378.5 5,995.7 6,994.7 4,952.1 211.3          Nov 
94.7 32.1 2,195.9 3,545.6 1,200.6 13.7 2,239.7 − 3,479.6 6,152.9 7,116.8 5,003.5 222.6          Dec 
109.5 33.9 2,193.7 3,646.9 1,225.6 − 4.1 2,399.5 − 3,443.1 6,122.5 7,111.3 5,032.7 215.9 2006          Jan 
120.7 32.0 2,227.9 3,726.5 1,246.8 − 4.3 2,351.1 − 3,442.0 6,146.1 7,143.9 5,101.3 223.1          Feb 
129.8 33.3 2,239.6 3,764.0 1,255.2 22.7 2,342.5 − 3,468.2 6,201.2 7,203.3 5,149.4 224.8          Mar 
130.2 33.6 2,247.5 3,818.6 1,250.7 9.1 2,399.8 − 3,532.3 6,303.1 7,329.7 5,167.1 235.9          Apr 
137.8 35.9 2,263.3 3,843.3 1,239.2 4.9 2,419.7 − 3,550.1 6,307.7 7,361.2 5,182.9 230.4          May
125.4 36.3 2,293.6 3,732.0 1,243.5 14.1 2,357.7 − 3,598.1 6,372.5 7,395.9 5,230.0 225.0          June
120.8 39.5 2,309.4 3,810.3 1,274.0 15.4 2,350.8 − 3,572.5 6,368.0 7,406.2 5,286.6 224.8          July
138.0 41.0 2,310.7 3,825.8 1,272.8 10.6 2,343.5 − 3,515.9 6,346.3 7,430.0 5,290.6 225.1          Aug 
138.1 40.6 2,330.5 3,934.3 1,275.6 4.0 2,468.2 − 3,581.4 6,445.1 7,533.2 5,317.3 227.6          Sep 
152.3 42.0 2,360.0 4,027.8 1,283.8 − 1.5 2,497.0 − 3,563.5 6,457.1 7,557.3 5,373.0 230.3          Oct 
160.6 38.9 2,370.2 4,046.0 1,279.9 38.1 2,666.3 − 3,609.7 6,520.5 7,617.6 5,391.2 237.7          Nov 
151.2 47.7 2,389.0 4,026.5 1,276.5 15.7 2,566.1 − 3,756.5 6,728.4 7,789.3 5,432.2 244.4          Dec 
166.2 54.6 2,404.4 4,218.6 1,283.7 18.3 2,656.8 − 3,681.8 6,686.5 7,811.1 5,464.1 242.2 2007          Jan 
173.5 58.4 2,436.4 4,270.3 1,296.0 35.8 2,674.1 − 3,674.0 6,690.6 7,843.7 5,512.3 241.7          Feb 
179.9 60.1 2,461.7 4,295.3 1,341.8 18.7 2,775.4 − 3,735.3 6,814.2 8,002.5 5,615.3 241.2          Mar 
174.6 67.8 2,468.4 4,451.2 1,345.1 − 8.0 2,838.5 − 3,752.7 6,862.5 8,068.4 5,637.5 242.4          Apr 
180.7 74.3 2,495.6 4,562.2 1,316.4 13.2 2,878.4 − 3,776.3 6,909.4 8,152.1 5,652.8 239.3          May
167.8 75.4 2,529.8 4,502.9 1,346.8 − 4.1 2,968.8 − 3,844.8 7,005.4 8,229.8 5,737.6 242.1          June
155.1 85.2 2,533.9 4,542.2 1,366.2 7.8 2,920.8 − 3,826.9 7,037.7 8,277.6 5,775.8 241.5          July
174.3 86.3 2,546.4 4,586.1 1,368.3 − 19.3 2,884.2 − 3,750.0 7,023.7 8,288.2 5,786.5 245.8          Aug 
194.8 88.3 2,521.8 4,574.2 1,386.1 − 24.7 3,047.5 − 3,821.5 7,119.4 8,377.8 5,776.6 244.7          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
27.0 25.7 840.7 694.3 292.3 − 111.5 531.3 74.1 708.5 1,454.8 1,572.1 1,927.1 − 2005          Aug 
28.8 25.7 840.1 713.1 294.7 − 120.9 545.1 76.4 715.8 1,462.3 1,578.3 1,926.9 −          Sep 
28.8 26.5 841.0 720.5 298.7 − 131.6 554.0 76.5 718.8 1,466.8 1,585.5 1,930.5 −          Oct 
26.8 27.0 840.2 733.8 304.7 − 154.4 565.6 76.4 734.4 1,481.9 1,598.9 1,938.0 −          Nov 
26.2 27.7 829.4 678.1 306.9 − 134.4 554.4 75.1 725.8 1,490.1 1,593.6 1,934.2 −          Dec 
24.5 28.8 835.8 701.4 327.5 − 107.9 552.8 75.8 728.2 1,491.3 1,601.5 1,962.8 − 2006          Jan 
23.5 27.7 845.2 720.2 332.3 − 126.0 551.4 77.8 725.6 1,489.2 1,600.0 1,982.6 −          Feb 
23.8 29.2 837.2 729.6 336.7 − 134.5 561.8 78.2 733.4 1,496.1 1,616.0 1,979.6 −          Mar 
22.8 29.5 829.7 723.3 340.8 − 104.1 571.1 78.7 742.5 1,515.9 1,633.7 1,980.6 −          Apr 
23.0 31.5 831.9 729.4 336.0 − 122.8 576.7 79.5 746.9 1,517.1 1,639.0 1,980.8 −          May
20.8 33.4 839.4 712.3 336.5 − 114.0 568.3 80.6 750.3 1,522.8 1,643.8 1,991.6 −          June
18.9 34.3 841.9 698.3 348.5 − 118.1 569.0 81.2 740.4 1,513.6 1,627.3 2,009.4 −          July
20.8 36.8 836.0 703.2 344.1 − 137.3 570.2 83.9 734.1 1,512.5 1,635.3 2,003.5 −          Aug 
20.5 38.8 837.5 723.6 336.2 − 121.3 588.9 85.9 735.0 1,520.1 1,647.1 1,997.3 −          Sep 
19.5 40.0 836.7 723.2 340.0 − 118.7 594.8 86.5 728.2 1,517.1 1,638.3 2,002.4 −          Oct 
21.3 37.9 830.6 714.5 337.0 − 95.7 607.0 86.3 755.7 1,545.7 1,661.8 1,997.0 −          Nov 
20.3 38.2 830.2 697.1 336.0 − 106.4 610.9 84.3 760.0 1,568.7 1,673.6 2,001.5 −          Dec 
20.6 42.7 839.9 729.6 348.1 − 119.2 610.7 85.5 759.1 1,564.5 1,682.2 2,025.1 − 2007          Jan 
20.2 44.5 836.4 745.5 353.5 − 134.7 616.3 86.5 758.3 1,563.8 1,686.6 2,029.7 −          Feb 
22.2 47.4 830.2 748.7 350.3 − 131.7 627.7 87.5 762.0 1,572.3 1,701.4 2,021.0 −          Mar 
19.6 49.6 829.7 780.5 352.6 − 131.8 636.2 87.5 759.7 1,583.2 1,710.3 2,025.7 −          Apr 
17.2 52.9 837.7 796.4 342.6 − 149.7 636.9 90.4 768.0 1,593.7 1,720.6 2,023.6 −          May
14.7 54.7 833.4 761.0 352.3 − 162.7 647.1 91.6 777.8 1,611.6 1,744.0 2,031.6 −          June
14.4 60.4 831.2 753.5 361.7 − 148.8 647.6 92.1 780.4 1,617.7 1,748.0 2,040.8 −          July
15.2 59.9 825.1 772.0 360.3 − 170.4 656.6 94.4 773.0 1,633.3 1,762.8 2,033.9 −          Aug 
16.8 57.0 815.5 785.8 362.4 − 172.4 676.9 96.1 785.5 1,658.1 1,790.7 2,030.3 −          Sep 
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2005          Apr 282.1 278.2 86.9 0.2 − 0.1 − 498.6 67.4 − 62.1 143.3 642.0
         May 287.0 276.5 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 505.5 62.9 − 58.9 144.0 649.7
         June 286.8 273.1 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 512.8 53.5 − 62.0 145.5 658.5
         July 293.3 297.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.3 522.6 67.4 − 57.3 147.9 670.6
         Aug 305.5 309.5 90.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.0 532.6 67.4 − 45.0 149.8 682.7
         Sep 304.8 303.5 90.0 − 0.3 0.1 − 531.5 63.1 − 46.2 150.2 681.8
         Oct 307.9 288.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 531.6 47.9 − 44.6 151.4 683.1
         Nov 315.1 293.4 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 535.6 50.4 − 37.9 150.2 686.0
         Dec 313.2 301.3 90.0 0.0 − 0.1 0.3 539.8 51.0 − 39.6 153.0 692.9
2006          Jan 317.6 316.4 89.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 559.2 44.2 − 33.5 154.1 713.3
         Feb 325.2 310.0 96.2 0.0 0.3 0.1 − 548.4 56.6 − 28.7 155.4 703.9
         Mar 324.7 299.3 104.7 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 550.8 53.3 − 34.0 158.3 709.2
         Apr 327.9 290.1 113.7 0.1 0.7 0.3 − 556.4 51.6 − 35.2 159.5 716.2
         May 337.0 291.3 120.0 0.2 − 0.2 0.4 569.1 51.1 − 33.5 161.2 730.5
         June 336.9 287.0 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 572.0 45.5 − 37.0 163.3 735.4
         July 334.3 316.5 120.0 0.2 − 0.6 0.3 578.8 67.0 − 42.1 166.3 745.7
         Aug 327.6 329.7 120.0 0.2 − 0.1 0.6 588.2 73.0 − 51.5 167.1 755.4
         Sep 327.3 314.0 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 588.7 61.4 − 55.6 166.4 755.2
         Oct 326.7 308.7 120.0 0.1 0.3 0.2 − 588.5 59.1 − 59.1 167.0 755.7
         Nov 327.4 311.9 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 592.8 60.2 − 60.6 167.0 759.8
         Dec 327.0 313.1 120.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 598.6 54.9 − 66.4 173.2 771.8
2007          Jan 325.8 322.3 120.0 0.1 − 0.2 1.0 619.5 45.0 − 72.7 175.3 794.9
         Feb 322.1 300.5 124.6 0.1 0.1 0.1 1.5 604.6 47.9 − 83.1 176.5 781.2
         Mar 321.6 288.7 134.6 0.0 − 0.5 0.8 606.2 47.1 − 90.0 180.6 787.2
         Apr 323.6 281.7 145.7 0.5 − 0.3 0.9 614.8 48.2 − 95.2 182.6 797.7
         May 326.1 281.6 150.0 0.3 − 0.5 0.1 620.0 51.3 − 97.2 183.2 803.8
         June 326.4 284.9 150.0 0.3 − 0.2 0.2 625.2 49.1 − 99.4 186.2 811.7
         July 323.0 295.4 150.0 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 631.3 53.9 − 106.4 189.6 821.2
         Aug 316.7 301.7 150.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 639.7 52.3 − 115.8 192.0 832.1
         Sep 317.3 268.7 171.7 0.2 10.7 0.4 1.7 639.2 52.3 − 117.8 192.7 832.4
         Oct 321.9 194.3 262.3 0.3 − 1.6 0.9 637.3 63.7 − 118.0 193.4 832.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
2005          Apr 68.1 133.3 53.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 136.6 0.0 79.8 38.0 174.7
         May 69.3 140.3 52.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 138.4 0.1 85.9 38.1 176.5
         June 69.5 139.3 52.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 141.2 0.1 81.5 38.5 179.7
         July 71.1 149.5 53.0 0.1 − 0.0 0.1 142.6 0.1 92.0 38.9 181.6
         Aug 74.1 155.6 53.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 145.2 0.0 98.9 39.4 184.7
         Sep 74.0 148.4 52.6 0.0 0.2 0.0 − 145.2 0.0 90.9 39.0 184.3
         Oct 75.1 149.4 55.1 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 145.1 0.1 95.2 39.0 184.2
         Nov 77.2 145.0 54.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 145.4 0.0 92.6 38.8 184.2
         Dec 77.2 140.9 54.4 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 146.9 0.0 86.0 39.3 186.3
2006          Jan 79.1 154.1 55.7 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 151.9 0.0 97.9 39.2 191.2
         Feb 81.6 158.1 61.6 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 149.7 0.1 112.1 39.6 189.3
         Mar 81.0 145.8 68.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 150.7 0.1 104.7 39.6 190.4
         Apr 82.5 137.8 74.3 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 151.5 0.0 103.6 39.7 191.3
         May 85.2 152.2 76.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 154.8 0.0 118.5 40.2 195.0
         June 84.9 153.9 73.7 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 156.2 0.1 115.5 40.6 197.0
         July 84.0 162.4 71.6 0.1 − 0.4 0.1 157.9 0.1 118.6 41.0 199.3
         Aug 82.3 171.6 72.1 0.1 − 0.0 0.5 160.1 0.1 124.3 41.2 201.3
         Sep 82.3 156.8 73.4 0.1 − 0.0 0.2 160.9 0.0 110.2 41.2 202.2
         Oct 82.6 155.6 76.7 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 160.5 0.1 113.7 40.9 201.5
         Nov 82.8 162.6 78.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 161.1 0.1 122.4 40.8 202.0
         Dec 82.7 155.3 78.4 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 162.4 0.1 112.6 41.4 203.8
2007          Jan 82.5 165.0 81.0 0.0 − 0.0 − 167.8 0.1 119.4 41.4 209.2
         Feb 82.2 153.7 86.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 164.8 0.1 115.7 41.9 206.7
         Mar 82.0 135.0 95.7 0.0 − 0.2 − 165.3 0.1 104.5 42.8 208.2
         Apr 82.7 128.2 103.9 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 167.1 0.1 104.2 43.2 210.4
         May 83.4 130.6 107.1 0.2 − 0.1 0.0 168.3 0.1 109.2 43.5 212.0
         June 83.6 124.0 108.7 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 170.6 0.1 101.4 44.1 214.8
         July 82.7 125.1 108.8 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 171.8 0.1 99.7 45.0 216.8
         Aug 81.1 135.4 104.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 173.9 0.1 102.6 44.9 218.8
         Sep 81.1 125.0 114.2 0.2 4.1 0.3 0.6 174.1 0.1 104.4 45.2 219.6
         Oct 82.4 93.2 142.9 0.2 − 0.9 0.2 173.5 0.1 98.8 45.2 219.6
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
of the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of
the new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 1.9 + 0.4 + 4.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 − 1.1 − 2.9 + 2.0 + 11.1 2005          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 6.9 − 4.5 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 7.7          May
− 0.2 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.3 − 9.4 − 3.1 + 1.5 + 8.8          June
+ 6.5 + 24.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 9.8 + 13.9 + 4.7 + 2.4 + 12.1          July
+ 12.2 + 11.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 12.3 + 1.9 + 12.1          Aug 
− 0.7 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.9          Sep 
+ 3.1 − 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 15.2 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 1.3          Oct 
+ 7.2 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.0 + 2.5 + 6.7 − 1.2 + 2.9          Nov 
− 1.9 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.8 + 6.9          Dec 
+ 4.4 + 15.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 19.4 − 6.8 + 6.1 + 1.1 + 20.4 2006          Jan 
+ 7.6 − 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 10.8 + 12.4 + 4.8 + 1.3 − 9.4          Feb 
− 0.5 − 10.7 + 8.5 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.9 + 5.3          Mar 
+ 3.2 − 9.2 + 9.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 1.2 + 7.0          Apr 
+ 9.1 + 1.2 + 6.3 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 12.7 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 14.3          May
− 0.1 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 2.9 − 5.6 − 3.5 + 2.1 + 4.9          June
− 2.6 + 29.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 21.5 − 5.1 + 3.0 + 10.3          July
− 6.7 + 13.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.5 + 0.3 + 9.4 + 6.0 − 9.4 + 0.8 + 9.7          Aug 
− 0.3 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 11.6 − 4.1 − 0.7 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.6 − 5.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.5          Oct 
+ 0.7 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − + 4.3 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 4.1          Nov 
− 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 5.8 − 5.3 − 5.8 + 6.2 + 12.0          Dec 
− 1.2 + 9.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 20.9 − 9.9 − 6.3 + 2.1 + 23.1 2007          Jan 
− 3.7 − 21.8 + 4.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 14.9 + 2.9 − 10.4 + 1.2 − 13.7          Feb 
− 0.5 − 11.8 + 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.6 − 0.8 − 6.9 + 4.1 + 6.0          Mar 
+ 2.0 − 7.0 + 11.1 + 0.5 − − 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 5.2 + 2.0 + 10.5          Apr 
+ 2.5 − 0.1 + 4.3 − 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.2 + 3.1 − 2.0 + 0.6 + 6.1          May
+ 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 5.2 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 3.0 + 7.9          June
− 3.4 + 10.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 6.1 + 4.8 − 7.0 + 3.4 + 9.5          July
− 6.3 + 6.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − + 8.4 − 1.6 − 9.4 + 2.4 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 0.6 − 33.0 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.3          Sep 
+ 4.6 − 74.4 + 90.6 + 0.1 − 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 11.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.4 − 12.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 13.7 + 0.5 + 3.2 2005          Apr 
+ 1.3 + 7.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.7 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 0.1 + 1.8          May
+ 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 0.4 + 3.3          June
+ 1.7 + 10.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.4 + 1.8          July
+ 3.0 + 6.1 + 0.9 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.5 + 3.1          Aug 
− 0.2 − 7.2 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.4 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 2.1 − 4.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 + 0.1          Nov 
− 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 6.6 + 0.5 + 2.1          Dec 
+ 1.9 + 13.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 − 0.1 + 4.9 2006          Jan 
+ 2.5 + 4.0 + 5.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 2.3 + 0.0 + 14.2 + 0.3 − 1.9          Feb 
− 0.6 − 12.3 + 6.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 1.1          Mar 
+ 1.5 − 8.0 + 6.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9          Apr 
+ 2.7 + 14.4 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 14.9 + 0.5 + 3.7          May
− 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.6 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 0.9 + 8.4 − 2.1 − 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.4          July
− 1.7 + 9.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 2.0          Aug 
+ 0.0 − 14.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 14.1 + 0.1 + 0.8          Sep 
+ 0.3 − 1.2 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.4 − 0.7          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 7.0 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 8.7 − 0.1 + 0.5          Nov 
− 0.1 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.3 − 0.0 − 9.7 + 0.5 + 1.9          Dec 
− 0.2 + 9.8 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − + 5.3 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.0 + 5.3 2007          Jan 
− 0.4 − 11.4 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 2.9 − 0.0 − 3.7 + 0.5 − 2.4          Feb 
− 0.1 − 18.7 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.0 − 11.2 + 0.9 + 1.5          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 6.8 + 8.2 + 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.2          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.6          May
+ 0.1 − 6.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 7.8 + 0.6 + 2.8          June
− 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 2.0          July
− 1.6 + 10.3 − 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 2.0          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 10.4 + 9.3 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.7          Sep 
+ 1.3 − 31.9 + 28.7 + 0.1 − 4.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.1          Oct 
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing
euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month  1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2007 Mar                  2 1,148.2 176.5 142.5 10.0 132.5 22.2 15.6 15.6 −
                                9 1,139.8 176.4 141.6 10.0 131.6 22.1 15.5 15.5 −
                              16 1,130.0 176.2 140.2 9.9 130.4 22.7 15.5 15.5 −
                              23 1,142.7 176.0 141.7 9.9 131.9 22.9 15.9 15.9 −
                              30 3 1,162.6 3 181.4 3 140.7 9.8 3 130.9 23.2 15.7 15.7 −
         Apr                  5 1,171.4 181.2 139.2 9.8 129.5 23.7 14.3 14.3 −
                              13 1,161.6 181.2 140.6 9.8 130.8 23.6 14.6 14.6 −
                              20 1,164.2 180.9 140.3 9.8 130.6 24.9 15.4 15.4 −
                              27 1,176.3 180.7 142.1 9.6 132.4 25.0 14.5 14.5 −
         May                 4 1,165.4 180.5 141.4 9.6 131.8 25.3 15.1 15.1 −
                              11 1,164.2 180.5 142.4 9.6 132.9 25.0 15.0 15.0 −
                              18 1,169.0 180.2 142.3 9.7 132.6 24.6 15.1 15.1 −
                              25 1,187.1 180.0 142.5 10.0 132.6 25.0 14.9 14.9 −
         June                 1 1,178.4 180.0 143.3 10.1 133.2 25.4 15.4 15.4 −
                                8 1,176.3 179.9 143.9 10.1 133.8 25.6 15.3 15.3 −
                              15 1,180.3 179.9 144.2 10.1 134.2 24.6 16.1 16.1 −
                              22 1,186.7 179.9 143.4 10.0 133.4 26.0 15.8 15.8 −
                              29 3 1,208.5 3 172.8 3 141.6 9.9 3 131.8 24.4 16.7 16.7 −
2007 July                 6 1,191.8 172.7 144.4 9.8 134.5 22.8 16.5 16.5 −
                              13 1,185.4 172.6 143.2 9.8 133.4 23.9 15.9 15.9 −
                              20 1,196.4 172.3 143.6 9.8 133.8 23.5 16.3 16.3 −
                              27 1,212.6 172.1 143.2 9.7 133.5 24.3 16.2 16.2 −
         Aug                  3 1,195.1 172.1 146.1 9.7 136.5 22.5 16.5 16.5 −
                              10 1,253.1 172.1 145.2 9.7 135.4 23.7 17.2 17.2 −
                              17 1,207.7 172.0 144.5 9.7 134.8 24.5 17.4 17.4 −
                              24 1,216.9 172.0 143.5 9.7 133.8 24.9 18.1 18.1 −
                              31 1,157.5 172.0 144.2 9.7 134.5 26.4 17.5 17.5 −
         Sep                  7 1,207.4 171.9 144.7 9.7 135.1 25.2 15.9 15.9 −
                              14 1,299.3 171.9 145.4 9.7 135.7 23.9 16.3 16.3 −
                              21 1,189.6 171.9 147.0 9.6 137.4 23.2 14.8 14.8 −
                              28 3 1,250.4 3 186.2 3 142.0 9.4 3 132.6 3 23.9 16.1 16.1 −
         Oct                  5 1,228.4 186.1 141.9 9.4 132.6 25.0 15.4 15.4 −
                              12 1,289.1 186.0 143.4 9.4 134.0 23.4 16.2 16.2 −
                              19 1,249.3 185.8 146.6 9.3 137.3 20.5 17.0 17.0 −
                              26 1,263.5 185.7 142.2 9.3 132.9 23.8 18.1 18.1 −
         Nov                  2 1,256.3 185.5 144.4 9.3 135.1 22.8 18.0 18.0 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2005          Dec 3 344.1 3 47.9 3 38.3 4.5 3 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
2006          Jan 338.9 47.9 38.3 4.5 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 335.1 47.9 36.7 3.8 32.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 340.5 3 53.2 3 36.0 3.8 3 32.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 344.9 53.2 34.5 3.7 30.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 357.5 53.1 35.6 3.4 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 359.1 3 52.0 3 33.9 3.6 3 30.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 364.4 52.0 34.3 3.5 30.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 358.2 52.0 33.6 3.5 30.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 362.4 52.3 33.6 3.4 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 366.4 52.3 33.2 3.1 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 359.2 52.3 33.3 3.1 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 373.7 3 53.1 3 31.7 3.0 3 28.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
2007          Jan 357.9 53.1 32.1 3.0 29.1 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 365.5 53.1 31.5 2.7 28.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 371.4 3 54.8 31.3 2.6 28.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 370.9 54.8 32.5 2.6 29.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 377.2 54.8 33.2 2.7 30.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 373.5 3 52.8 3 32.0 2.7 3 29.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 382.1 52.8 31.9 2.6 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 369.6 52.8 31.9 2.6 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 394.0 3 57.2 3 31.4 2.5 3 28.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 394.6 57.2 31.1 2.5 28.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other
 claims on
 euro-area
 credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/
refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  1 
Eurosystem 2
 
429.0 289.0 140.0 − − − 0.0 12.8 86.5 39.3 223.9 2007 Mar                  2
420.0 280.0 140.0 − − − − 13.6 86.8 39.3 224.4                                 9
411.5 271.5 140.0 − − 0.0 0.0 13.5 87.7 39.3 223.4                               16
422.0 282.0 140.0 − − − − 14.4 88.1 39.3 222.3                               23
433.6 283.5 150.0 − − 0.1 − 14.8 88.9 39.3 3 225.1                               30
443.5 291.5 150.0 − − 2.0 − 14.8 90.3 39.3 225.0          Apr                  5
430.7 280.0 150.0 − − 0.7 − 14.7 90.6 39.3 226.4                               13
431.5 281.5 150.0 − − 0.0 0.0 14.2 90.5 39.3 227.3                               20
440.0 288.5 150.0 − − 1.5 − 15.8 92.4 39.2 226.7                               27
429.7 279.5 150.0 − − 0.2 − 14.0 93.1 38.7 227.6          May                  4
426.1 276.0 150.0 − − 0.1 − 14.1 93.5 37.7 230.0                               11
431.2 281.0 150.0 − − 0.2 − 13.8 93.4 37.7 230.7                               18
445.7 295.5 150.0 − − 0.2 0.0 14.1 94.5 37.7 232.5                               25
434.5 284.5 150.0 − − 0.0 − 14.4 94.9 37.6 233.0          June                  1
429.2 279.0 150.0 − − 0.2 − 14.1 96.2 37.6 234.6                                 8
432.0 282.0 150.0 − − 0.0 − 14.4 95.8 37.6 235.6                               15
438.1 288.0 150.0 − − 0.1 − 14.4 93.9 37.6 237.4                               22
464.6 313.5 150.0 − − 1.1 0.0 13.8 3 93.7 37.1 3 243.7                               29
448.2 298.0 150.0 − − 0.0 0.2 13.6 93.9 37.1 242.6 2007 July                  6
442.0 292.0 150.0 − − − − 14.2 93.1 37.1 243.4                               13
451.8 301.5 150.0 − − 0.3 − 14.0 93.3 37.1 244.4                               20
465.7 315.5 150.0 − − 0.2 0.0 14.0 94.2 37.1 245.6                               27
448.0 298.0 150.0 − − − 0.0 14.1 93.1 37.1 245.4          Aug                  3
503.6 292.5 150.0 61.1 − − − 13.0 94.2 37.1 247.1                               10
460.0 310.0 150.0 − − − 0.0 12.8 91.6 37.1 247.6                               17
465.2 275.0 190.0 − − 0.2 − 12.8 92.3 37.1 250.9                               24
400.1 210.0 190.0 − − 0.1 0.0 11.8 93.3 37.1 255.2                               31
446.3 256.0 190.0 − − 0.3 0.0 11.1 94.9 37.1 260.3          Sep                  7
534.0 269.0 265.0 − − 0.0 0.0 11.3 94.7 37.1 264.7                               14
420.6 155.0 265.0 − − 0.6 0.0 12.8 94.5 37.1 267.6                               21
455.2 190.0 265.0 − − 0.2 0.0 13.3 3 95.4 37.1 3 281.2                               28
428.0 163.0 265.0 − − 0.0 0.0 13.9 97.3 37.1 283.7          Oct                  5
483.0 218.0 265.0 − − − 0.0 15.1 96.6 37.1 288.3                               12
436.0 171.0 265.0 − − − 0.0 15.2 95.8 37.1 295.2                               19
447.0 182.0 265.0 − − 0.0 0.0 15.4 95.8 37.1 298.3                               26
435.0 170.0 265.0 − − 0.0 0.0 17.5 95.7 37.1 300.2          Nov                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
203.9 146.5 56.4 − − 0.9 − 0.1 − 4.4 49.2 2005          Dec 
227.2 162.5 64.7 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 20.6 2006          Jan 
218.9 146.4 72.5 − − 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.4 26.6          Feb 
224.5 147.1 77.4 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 21.7          Mar 
233.0 158.0 74.9 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.2          Apr 
227.6 152.6 74.9 − − 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.4 36.2          May
248.8 177.3 71.5 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3          June
253.8 177.9 72.8 − − 3.2 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3          July
223.0 147.3 75.7 − − 0.0 − 1.6 − 4.4 43.4          Aug 
234.1 155.2 78.5 − − 0.5 − 3.0 − 4.4 34.7          Sep 
243.3 164.0 79.3 − − 0.0 − 3.0 − 4.4 29.9          Oct 
232.0 155.2 76.7 − − 0.0 − 3.0 − 4.4 34.0          Nov 
256.3 173.9 82.3 − − 0.1 − 3.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec 
232.5 150.1 82.3 − − 0.0 − 3.1 − 4.4 32.4 2007          Jan 
235.0 143.5 91.5 − − 0.0 − 3.1 − 4.4 38.0          Feb 
237.3 130.8 106.4 − − 0.1 − 3.1 − 4.4 40.1          Mar 
247.4 139.6 107.5 − − 0.4 − 3.1 − 4.4 28.3          Apr 
236.9 126.6 110.3 − − 0.0 − 3.2 − 4.4 44.5          May
243.4 136.2 107.0 − − 0.2 − 3.2 − 4.4 37.3          June
248.5 146.0 102.4 − − − − 3.3 − 4.4 41.0          July
210.4 89.9 120.5 − − 0.0 − 3.3 − 4.4 66.5          Aug 
223.3 83.8 139.3 − − 0.2 − 4.3 − 4.4 3 73.1          Sep 
202.2 62.9 139.3 − − 0.0 − 7.0 − 4.4 92.4          Oct 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month  1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2007 Mar                  2 1,148.2 608.5 183.1 182.6 0.0 0.5 − − 0.1 − 57.7 49.2 8.4
                                9 1,139.8 609.8 179.2 178.6 0.1 0.4 − − 0.1 − 52.3 43.8 8.5
                              16 1,130.0 609.2 182.2 181.9 0.0 0.3 − − 0.1 − 45.7 37.2 8.5
                              23 1,142.7 608.3 178.8 178.4 0.0 0.3 − 0.0 0.1 − 62.0 53.4 8.6
                              30 5 1,162.6 613.6 181.0 179.8 1.1 0.2 − 0.0 0.1 − 65.8 57.1 8.7
         Apr                  5 1,171.4 626.0 185.9 185.1 0.6 0.2 − 0.0 0.1 − 60.1 51.3 8.8
                              13 1,161.6 619.4 183.7 183.5 0.1 0.1 − − 0.1 − 57.6 48.6 8.9
                              20 1,164.2 615.8 183.8 183.6 0.0 0.1 − 0.0 0.1 − 64.6 55.6 9.0
                              27 1,176.3 619.7 183.7 183.6 0.0 0.1 − 0.0 0.1 − 70.0 60.8 9.1
         May                 4 1,165.4 624.0 182.0 182.0 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 55.8 46.8 9.0
                              11 1,164.2 623.1 186.1 185.9 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 49.3 40.0 9.3
                              18 1,169.0 624.1 189.9 189.6 0.2 − − 0.0 0.1 − 49.9 41.2 8.6
                              25 1,187.1 623.4 187.4 187.2 0.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 68.8 60.2 8.6
         June                 1 1,178.4 626.8 188.2 188.0 0.2 − − − 0.2 − 54.6 46.1 8.5
                                8 1,176.3 629.3 185.7 185.6 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 51.1 42.6 8.5
                              15 1,180.3 628.2 192.1 192.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 50.2 41.6 8.6
                              22 1,186.7 627.9 189.6 189.5 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 58.5 49.9 8.6
                              29 5 1,208.5 633.1 183.2 182.1 1.1 − − − 0.2 − 77.9 69.7 8.2
2007 July                 6 1,191.8 638.2 191.6 190.5 1.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 56.9 49.4 7.5
                              13 1,185.4 638.8 193.1 193.0 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 50.1 42.5 7.6
                              20 1,196.4 638.2 190.2 190.1 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 63.8 56.1 7.6
                              27 1,212.6 639.0 196.8 195.2 1.6 − − − 0.2 − 71.0 63.6 7.5
         Aug                  3 1,195.1 645.0 189.7 189.6 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 52.9 45.1 7.8
                              10 1,253.1 644.1 256.8 256.7 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 44.4 36.6 7.8
                              17 1,207.7 641.9 210.5 210.3 0.3 − − − 0.2 − 48.7 41.1 7.6
                              24 1,216.9 636.1 209.4 209.1 0.3 − − − 0.2 − 63.5 56.0 7.5
                              31 1,157.5 637.2 132.6 132.3 0.3 − − − 0.2 − 73.2 65.4 7.8
         Sep                  7 1,207.4 639.2 182.6 181.5 1.0 − − − 0.1 − 68.1 60.1 7.9
                              14 1,299.3 637.5 276.3 274.6 1.7 − − 0.0 0.1 − 64.3 56.6 7.7
                              21 1,189.6 635.0 155.1 154.7 0.4 − − 0.0 0.1 − 76.3 68.7 7.6
                              28 5 1,250.4 637.3 192.2 186.7 5.5 − − 0.0 0.2 − 73.6 66.1 7.4
         Oct                  5 1,228.4 641.3 169.9 165.3 4.6 − − 0.0 0.1 − 67.9 60.3 7.5
                              12 1,289.1 640.6 232.0 201.6 0.3 30.0 − 0.0 0.1 − 64.5 57.1 7.4
                              19 1,249.3 638.7 193.5 192.8 0.7 − − 0.0 0.1 − 61.6 54.4 7.3
                              26 1,263.5 637.8 191.9 191.7 0.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 76.6 69.4 7.2
         Nov                  2 1,256.3 643.5 192.2 192.0 0.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 58.3 50.8 7.4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2005          Dec 5 344.1 153.7 46.3 46.3 0.0 − − − 0.2 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2006          Jan 338.9 148.8 45.4 45.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Feb 335.1 149.9 38.5 38.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
         Mar 5 340.5 151.5 39.7 39.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Apr 344.9 154.7 38.8 38.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         May 357.5 155.3 51.4 51.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         June 5 359.1 157.8 39.9 39.4 0.5 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 364.4 160.3 52.4 52.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Aug 358.2 159.3 46.0 45.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Sep 5 362.4 160.3 46.2 45.5 0.7 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 366.4 161.8 48.0 47.8 0.2 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Nov 359.2 162.8 39.2 39.2 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Dec 373.7 170.9 48.0 47.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2007          Jan 357.9 163.6 37.8 37.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Feb 365.5 164.1 43.7 43.6 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar 5 371.4 166.6 47.9 47.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Apr 370.9 169.7 43.3 43.0 0.2 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         May 377.2 169.9 45.1 45.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         June 5 373.5 171.9 39.8 39.6 0.3 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         July 382.1 173.9 46.6 46.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Aug 369.6 173.1 31.8 31.5 0.2 − − − − − 0.3 0.0 0.3
         Sep 5 394.0 173.1 47.0 42.2 4.8 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Oct 394.6 174.3 43.3 43.1 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.3
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation
(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-
ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     On
to non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reporting
area residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/
denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
18.1 0.2 13.9 13.9 − 5.6 71.9 − 122.0 67.2 2007 Mar                  2
18.4 0.2 12.9 12.9 − 5.6 72.2 − 122.0 67.2                                 9
18.1 0.2 11.9 11.9 − 5.6 67.7 − 122.0 67.2                               16
18.3 0.2 13.2 13.2 − 5.6 66.9 − 122.0 67.2                               23
18.8 0.2 13.5 13.5 − 5.6 5 71.1 − 5 125.5 67.5                               30
18.4 0.2 12.6 12.6 − 5.6 68.9 − 125.5 68.3          Apr                  5
18.9 0.2 13.2 13.2 − 5.6 69.0 − 125.5 68.4                               13
18.5 0.2 14.1 14.1 − 5.6 67.7 − 125.5 68.3                               20
19.5 0.3 15.9 15.9 − 5.6 67.8 − 125.5 68.3                               27
19.5 0.2 15.6 15.6 − 5.6 68.7 − 125.5 68.3          May                  4
19.5 0.2 16.2 16.2 − 5.6 70.4 − 125.5 68.3                               11
20.1 0.2 14.8 14.8 − 5.6 70.6 − 125.5 68.3                               18
20.1 0.2 15.5 15.5 − 5.6 72.1 − 125.5 68.3                               25
20.3 0.2 16.4 16.4 − 5.6 72.4 − 125.5 68.3          June                  1
20.2 0.2 17.3 17.3 − 5.6 73.0 − 125.5 68.3                                 8
19.9 0.2 16.8 16.8 − 5.6 73.3 − 125.5 68.3                               15
19.5 0.2 17.8 17.8 − 5.6 73.6 − 125.5 68.3                               22
28.1 0.2 16.1 16.1 − 5.5 5 78.9 − 5 117.0 68.3                               29
19.5 0.2 17.2 17.2 − 5.5 77.2 − 117.0 68.3 2007 July                  6
18.9 0.2 16.9 16.9 − 5.5 76.3 − 117.0 68.3                               13
18.8 0.2 17.0 17.0 − 5.5 77.2 − 117.0 68.3                               20
18.7 0.3 17.3 17.3 − 5.5 78.4 − 117.0 68.3                               27
18.9 0.2 18.5 18.5 − 5.5 78.9 − 117.0 68.3          Aug                  3
19.1 0.1 18.4 18.4 − 5.5 79.2 − 117.0 68.3                               10
19.1 0.1 18.2 18.2 − 5.5 77.5 − 117.0 68.8                               17
19.5 0.2 17.1 17.1 − 5.5 79.5 − 117.0 68.8                               24
20.9 0.1 19.4 19.4 − 5.5 82.5 − 117.0 68.9                               31
20.9 0.1 18.6 18.6 − 5.5 86.3 − 117.0 68.9          Sep                  7
22.1 0.6 18.1 18.1 − 5.5 88.9 − 117.0 68.9                               14
21.8 0.6 18.5 18.5 − 5.5 90.7 − 117.0 68.9                               21
23.9 0.6 5 18.1 5 18.1 − 5.4 5 99.2 − 5 131.1 68.9                               28
23.9 0.3 19.1 19.1 − 5.4 100.4 − 131.1 68.9          Oct                  5
25.0 0.3 19.1 19.1 − 5.4 102.1 − 131.1 68.9                               12
25.2 0.3 19.7 19.7 − 5.4 104.8 − 131.1 68.9                               19
25.4 0.2 18.6 18.6 − 5.4 107.5 − 131.1 68.9                               26
27.3 0.3 19.7 19.7 − 5.4 109.3 − 131.1 68.9          Nov                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
3.4 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.5 11.3 75.1 5 44.3 5.0 2005          Dec 
3.4 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 11.5 75.8 44.3 5.0 2006          Jan 
3.5 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.5 12.0 77.8 44.3 5.0          Feb 
3.8 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.4 9.4 78.2 5 48.5 5.0          Mar 
3.6 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 1.4 12.7 78.7 48.5 5.0          Apr 
3.8 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.4 9.8 79.5 48.5 5.0          May
3.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.4 22.3 80.6 5 45.8 5.0          June
3.6 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.4 11.6 81.2 45.8 5.0          July
3.6 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.4 11.1 83.9 45.8 5.0          Aug 
3.6 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 11.8 85.9 5 46.4 5.0          Sep 
3.7 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 11.9 86.5 46.4 5.0          Oct 
3.9 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 1.4 12.4 86.3 46.4 5.0          Nov 
3.7 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 1.4 13.0 84.3 45.9 5.0          Dec 
3.8 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.4 12.9 85.5 45.9 5.0 2007          Jan 
3.7 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 1.4 13.5 86.5 45.9 5.0          Feb 
3.8 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 10.1 87.5 5 47.4 5.0          Mar 
3.8 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.4 10.0 87.5 47.4 5.0          Apr 
4.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.4 10.8 90.4 47.4 5.0          May
3.8 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.4 12.4 91.6 5 44.9 5.0          June
4.1 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.4 11.6 92.1 44.9 5.0          July
4.1 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.4 12.6 94.4 44.9 5.0          Aug 
5.4 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.3 13.6 96.1 5 49.5 5.0          Sep 
7.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.3 13.0 97.5 49.5 5.0          Oct 
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.5
1999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2005          Dec 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006          Jan 6,940.6 13.3 2,275.4 1,739.2 1,128.2 610.9 536.2 374.0 162.3 3,458.7 3,123.8 2,542.5 2,251.5
         Feb 6,967.7 14.1 2,289.3 1,745.9 1,132.6 613.4 543.4 376.9 166.4 3,458.7 3,117.1 2,546.9 2,255.5
         Mar 7,004.8 13.3 2,302.4 1,736.7 1,123.2 613.4 565.7 392.7 172.9 3,474.5 3,127.4 2,556.8 2,258.4
         Apr 7,075.7 14.5 2,320.4 1,768.4 1,156.7 611.7 552.1 379.5 172.6 3,518.0 3,161.1 2,590.8 2,264.9
         May 7,102.2 14.0 2,347.5 1,787.1 1,170.6 616.5 560.4 381.7 178.7 3,513.5 3,160.4 2,584.0 2,264.5
         June 7,075.1 13.8 2,316.3 1,738.4 1,130.8 607.6 577.9 391.7 186.2 3,481.8 3,122.7 2,560.2 2,265.4
         July 7,040.0 13.7 2,299.7 1,733.4 1,133.2 600.1 566.3 379.1 187.2 3,476.6 3,119.5 2,555.2 2,261.1
         Aug 7,034.6 13.6 2,300.0 1,732.6 1,136.0 596.7 567.3 376.8 190.5 3,472.6 3,117.7 2,558.7 2,263.2
         Sep 7,077.2 14.2 2,278.0 1,705.0 1,111.7 593.3 573.0 374.8 198.2 3,492.6 3,122.1 2,571.2 2,280.7
         Oct 7,080.1 14.4 2,278.7 1,697.5 1,108.1 589.4 581.2 376.3 204.9 3,496.5 3,119.2 2,563.0 2,272.3
         Nov 7,141.2 13.6 2,293.7 1,712.4 1,126.3 586.2 581.3 365.9 215.3 3,506.4 3,123.3 2,560.4 2,268.4
         Dec 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007          Jan 7,192.4 13.3 2,308.2 1,711.1 1,138.1 573.0 597.1 378.2 218.9 3,496.9 3,109.2 2,554.6 2,252.7
         Feb 7,230.9 13.4 2,332.2 1,717.7 1,146.7 570.9 614.5 386.6 227.9 3,487.3 3,096.0 2,547.2 2,256.2
         Mar 7,288.3 13.5 2,364.4 1,749.8 1,180.5 569.3 614.6 378.3 236.3 3,496.5 3,100.8 2,555.8 2,261.3
         Apr 7,357.2 14.4 2,379.0 1,736.7 1,167.0 569.7 642.3 406.1 236.2 3,525.9 3,128.3 2,580.7 2,256.9
         May 7,389.3 14.7 2,398.4 1,744.1 1,167.2 576.9 654.3 414.7 239.6 3,511.9 3,106.1 2,558.9 2,253.1
         June 7,381.7 14.2 2,396.3 1,724.1 1,156.2 567.9 672.3 423.8 248.5 3,484.4 3,071.9 2,538.0 2,261.7
         July 7,371.2 13.9 2,373.0 1,708.4 1,146.0 562.5 664.6 415.4 249.2 3,489.7 3,080.8 2,541.9 2,265.9
         Aug 7,417.4 14.1 2,405.9 1,735.3 1,178.1 557.2 670.5 419.3 251.2 3,485.8 3,071.6 2,544.4 2,271.6
         Sep 7,500.9 14.4 2,438.4 1,756.8 1,201.2 555.6 681.5 429.9 251.7 3,493.0 3,074.0 2,552.6 2,278.5
 Changes 1
1999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.4
2003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.4
2004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2005 197.2 0.1 101.8 13.2 25.7 − 12.5 88.6 50.5 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 349.0 1.1 76.2 − 2.4 25.2 − 27.6 78.6 17.3 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2006          Jan 62.7 − 2.1 − 4.5 − 22.4 − 20.2 − 2.3 18.0 14.2 3.8 38.3 25.3 24.7 12.2
         Feb 19.1 0.8 13.8 6.7 4.4 2.4 7.1 2.9 4.1 0.2 − 6.0 5.1 4.7
         Mar 46.6 − 0.8 13.4 − 9.1 − 9.3 0.3 22.4 15.8 6.6 19.0 12.8 12.4 4.8
         Apr 81.7 1.2 18.2 31.8 33.4 − 1.7 − 13.5 − 13.3 − 0.2 44.8 34.4 34.6 6.8
         May 34.1 − 0.5 27.9 19.5 14.6 4.8 8.4 2.3 6.1 − 3.7 − 0.2 − 6.3 − 0.3
         June − 29.8 − 0.2 − 31.2 − 49.0 − 40.3 − 8.8 17.9 10.3 7.6 − 31.3 − 37.2 − 23.3 1.3
         July − 34.3 − 0.1 − 16.4 − 5.1 2.4 − 7.5 − 11.4 − 12.6 1.3 − 6.9 − 3.4 − 5.2 − 3.6
         Aug − 2.2 − 0.0 1.4 0.3 3.6 − 3.2 1.0 − 2.3 3.3 − 4.3 − 1.6 3.8 2.7
         Sep 76.9 0.6 14.6 9.0 7.3 1.7 5.6 − 2.0 7.6 23.7 8.4 16.4 18.1
         Oct 4.6 0.2 2.4 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 3.9 8.2 1.5 6.7 4.2 − 2.7 − 8.0 − 8.1
         Nov 75.6 − 0.8 15.3 15.1 18.2 − 3.0 0.2 − 10.3 10.5 12.6 6.1 − 0.6 − 1.9
         Dec 13.9 2.8 21.3 6.6 12.9 − 6.4 14.7 10.9 3.8 − 40.7 − 34.3 − 21.0 − 23.5
2007          Jan 33.9 − 3.1 − 6.5 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 36.3 26.8 21.3 9.8
         Feb 46.3 0.1 23.7 6.7 8.7 − 1.9 17.0 8.4 8.7 − 7.0 − 11.6 − 5.9 4.8
         Mar 61.6 0.1 32.3 32.2 33.8 − 1.6 0.1 − 8.3 8.4 10.4 5.8 9.6 5.8
         Apr 77.8 0.9 13.0 − 14.6 − 14.0 − 0.6 27.6 27.6 − 0.0 32.6 29.9 27.2 − 3.2
         May 28.0 0.3 19.0 7.4 0.2 7.2 11.6 8.2 3.4 − 13.9 − 22.3 − 21.9 − 3.7
         June − 6.0 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 19.0 − 9.9 − 9.0 18.0 9.0 9.0 − 27.5 − 34.3 − 21.0 8.1
         July − 4.4 − 0.3 − 23.3 − 15.0 − 9.5 − 5.4 − 8.3 − 8.8 0.5 7.2 10.4 5.5 4.4
         Aug 42.1 0.2 32.8 26.9 32.2 − 5.3 5.9 3.9 2.0 − 3.9 − 9.3 2.4 5.8
         Sep 83.5 0.3 32.5 21.5 23.1 − 1.6 11.0 10.5 0.5 7.6 2.9 8.6 7.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998
233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005          Dec 
291.0 581.2 409.8 171.4 334.9 174.4 69.9 160.5 31.6 128.9 1,030.5 831.4 162.8 2006          Jan 
291.4 570.2 401.1 169.1 341.5 182.5 73.6 159.1 31.0 128.1 1,045.4 846.5 160.2          Feb 
298.5 570.5 401.3 169.2 347.1 186.7 76.2 160.4 30.8 129.6 1,055.1 856.0 159.6          Mar 
325.9 570.3 402.8 167.4 356.9 196.8 84.1 160.1 30.4 129.8 1,056.7 859.5 166.0          Apr 
319.5 576.4 394.9 181.4 353.2 193.3 81.5 159.9 30.7 129.2 1,055.0 854.9 172.0          May
294.9 562.5 391.0 171.5 359.1 200.3 82.2 158.8 31.1 127.7 1,097.0 892.0 166.1          June
294.0 564.3 392.1 172.2 357.1 200.6 80.9 156.6 31.8 124.8 1,084.4 880.4 165.6          July
295.5 559.0 389.0 170.0 354.9 200.6 81.6 154.3 30.8 123.5 1,084.5 880.1 163.8          Aug 
290.5 550.9 387.9 163.0 370.5 217.2 87.0 153.3 27.8 125.5 1,123.3 904.0 169.2          Sep 
290.7 556.2 392.6 163.6 377.3 224.3 89.2 153.0 26.1 126.9 1,118.3 893.3 172.2          Oct 
292.0 562.9 393.2 169.8 383.2 229.9 88.8 153.2 26.1 127.2 1,148.4 916.9 179.0          Nov 
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8          Dec 
301.9 554.5 389.0 165.5 387.7 233.6 90.5 154.1 26.0 128.1 1,191.3 947.7 182.6 2007          Jan 
291.0 548.8 384.8 164.0 391.3 239.4 93.4 151.9 25.8 126.1 1,212.1 955.0 185.9          Feb 
294.5 545.0 379.2 165.8 395.7 244.5 96.0 151.2 24.7 126.5 1,229.3 969.4 184.6          Mar 
323.9 547.6 380.6 167.0 397.6 250.0 96.4 147.6 25.0 122.5 1,245.5 980.9 192.3          Apr 
305.8 547.2 378.5 168.7 405.8 255.7 99.0 150.1 24.3 125.8 1,259.2 979.3 205.1          May
276.3 533.9 372.3 161.6 412.5 263.2 103.1 149.2 25.5 123.8 1,282.6 996.3 204.3          June
276.1 538.9 378.0 160.9 408.9 264.6 100.0 144.3 25.2 119.1 1,291.5 1,004.7 203.1          July
272.8 527.2 371.6 155.6 414.3 276.0 112.0 138.2 25.7 112.5 1,300.5 1,005.8 211.0          Aug 
274.0 521.4 366.1 155.3 419.0 284.7 116.4 134.3 24.9 109.5 1,334.3 1,039.6 220.9          Sep 
Changes 1
30.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.1 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.7 31.6 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.9 165.7 9.8 2006
12.5 0.6 0.9 − 0.3 13.0 5.3 4.8 7.7 1.2 6.5 36.8 34.4 − 5.9 2006          Jan 
0.4 − 11.0 − 8.7 − 2.3 6.1 7.7 3.4 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 8.1 9.1 − 3.8          Feb 
7.6 0.4 0.2 0.2 6.2 4.5 2.8 1.7 − 0.1 1.8 17.5 16.4 − 2.4          Mar 
27.7 − 0.2 1.6 − 1.8 10.4 10.6 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.2 11.8 12.9 5.7          Apr 
− 6.0 6.1 − 7.9 14.0 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 2.3 − 0.2 0.4 − 0.6 5.1 1.6 5.3          May
− 24.7 − 13.9 − 4.0 − 9.9 5.9 7.0 0.6 − 1.1 0.4 − 1.4 39.6 34.8 − 6.7          June
− 1.7 1.8 1.1 0.7 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 11.2 − 11.6 0.3          July
1.2 − 5.4 − 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.7 0.1 0.7 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.8 1.8 1.2 − 1.0          Aug 
− 1.6 − 8.1 − 1.0 − 7.1 15.3 16.4 5.3 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 33.3 23.1 4.7          Sep 
0.1 5.3 4.7 0.6 6.9 7.3 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.6 − 4.9 − 9.9 2.7          Oct 
1.3 6.8 0.5 6.2 6.5 6.1 0.1 0.4 0.0 0.4 42.2 34.7 6.2          Nov 
2.5 − 13.3 − 2.9 − 10.4 − 6.4 − 1.9 − 3.6 − 4.5 0.0 − 4.5 25.8 19.0 4.8          Dec 
11.5 5.5 − 1.2 6.7 9.4 4.2 3.8 5.2 − 0.3 5.5 17.3 9.9 − 10.2 2007          Jan 
− 10.7 − 5.7 − 4.3 − 1.4 4.6 6.7 3.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 27.4 13.5 2.2          Feb 
3.8 − 3.8 − 5.6 1.8 4.6 4.8 2.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 0.4 20.6 17.4 − 1.8          Mar 
30.4 2.7 1.5 1.2 2.7 6.3 1.0 − 3.5 0.4 − 4.0 23.9 18.5 7.4          Apr 
− 18.2 − 0.4 − 2.1 1.7 8.4 5.9 2.9 2.5 − 0.7 3.3 10.1 − 4.9 12.4          May
− 29.1 − 13.2 − 6.1 − 7.1 6.8 9.2 4.8 − 2.3 0.6 − 3.0 24.6 19.4 − 1.7          June
1.1 4.9 5.6 − 0.7 − 3.2 1.7 − 2.9 − 5.0 − 0.2 − 4.8 13.3 12.4 − 1.3          July
− 3.4 − 11.7 − 6.4 − 5.3 5.4 11.5 12.0 − 6.2 0.5 − 6.6 5.4 − 2.5 7.5          Aug 
1.3 − 5.8 − 5.4 − 0.3 4.8 8.6 4.4 − 3.8 − 0.8 − 3.0 33.7 33.8 9.3          Sep 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
1998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.4
1999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2005          Dec 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006          Jan 6,940.6 1,589.6 1,306.9 282.7 2,334.0 2,227.0 716.1 908.1 233.7 602.8 517.9 63.4 11.8
         Feb 6,967.7 1,583.4 1,303.2 280.2 2,331.2 2,233.0 714.3 916.1 235.7 602.6 517.4 60.7 10.8
         Mar 7,004.8 1,581.0 1,303.4 277.6 2,340.8 2,241.4 720.9 919.1 237.5 601.4 515.4 60.1 12.1
         Apr 7,075.7 1,635.0 1,340.8 294.3 2,364.7 2,257.5 725.7 932.0 246.2 599.8 513.6 68.1 16.3
         May 7,102.2 1,634.7 1,338.6 296.1 2,370.4 2,269.4 734.6 937.4 249.9 597.4 510.1 60.2 11.8
         June 7,075.1 1,617.7 1,334.0 283.6 2,380.7 2,276.8 735.1 945.6 256.2 596.1 507.5 61.3 14.8
         July 7,040.0 1,606.6 1,334.3 272.3 2,375.8 2,274.0 728.0 952.7 261.5 593.2 503.5 58.2 11.9
         Aug 7,034.6 1,589.9 1,310.8 279.1 2,382.3 2,278.6 723.0 965.3 271.0 590.3 499.1 57.0 10.7
         Sep 7,077.2 1,583.3 1,299.5 283.8 2,392.3 2,284.0 722.6 973.7 280.2 587.7 495.3 59.2 11.9
         Oct 7,080.1 1,586.2 1,303.4 282.8 2,388.6 2,280.6 715.3 980.2 286.7 585.0 490.5 61.8 12.4
         Nov 7,141.2 1,618.6 1,320.5 298.1 2,423.1 2,310.9 742.3 987.1 293.7 581.4 484.3 63.8 13.0
         Dec 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007          Jan 7,192.4 1,619.6 1,334.6 285.1 2,444.8 2,341.1 744.5 1,014.4 313.0 582.2 481.3 60.0 14.2
         Feb 7,230.9 1,623.5 1,339.1 284.4 2,447.0 2,345.0 744.5 1,020.2 317.4 580.3 477.4 58.2 13.4
         Mar 7,288.3 1,652.4 1,368.1 284.3 2,455.8 2,350.8 745.9 1,026.3 324.4 578.5 474.2 61.7 15.7
         Apr 7,357.2 1,669.5 1,370.7 298.7 2,469.9 2,366.6 745.8 1,046.2 342.2 574.6 470.0 59.6 13.5
         May 7,389.3 1,664.2 1,356.6 307.6 2,485.4 2,376.3 751.7 1,054.5 349.9 570.1 465.8 60.3 16.0
         June 7,381.7 1,653.4 1,357.7 295.7 2,506.8 2,394.5 760.0 1,067.8 360.3 566.7 461.7 62.6 17.4
         July 7,371.2 1,650.1 1,351.7 298.5 2,508.2 2,401.0 764.7 1,074.7 366.9 561.6 456.0 64.2 15.4
         Aug 7,417.4 1,665.0 1,359.9 305.1 2,523.9 2,418.3 759.1 1,101.4 393.4 557.8 452.1 63.0 13.6
         Sep 7,500.9 1,698.6 1,380.9 317.7 2,551.3 2,441.3 768.5 1,117.9 405.7 554.8 448.5 68.6 16.6
 Changes 1
1999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.4
2002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.6
2003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 197.2 32.8 26.9 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 349.0 105.5 81.5 24.0 123.0 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.4
2006          Jan 62.7 17.5 2.9 14.6 5.3 1.8 0.5 2.0 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 1.4 2.2
         Feb 19.1 − 7.6 − 4.3 − 3.3 − 3.3 5.7 − 2.0 7.9 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 1.0
         Mar 46.6 − 0.5 1.1 − 1.6 10.1 8.8 6.9 3.1 1.9 − 1.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 1.4
         Apr 81.7 55.5 37.7 17.8 24.5 16.4 5.1 12.9 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.9 8.2 4.2
         May 34.1 1.7 − 0.9 2.6 6.1 12.2 9.0 5.6 3.8 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 7.8 − 4.5
         June − 29.8 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 12.8 10.2 7.3 0.4 8.1 6.3 − 1.3 − 2.6 1.1 2.9
         July − 34.3 − 10.9 0.3 − 11.2 − 4.9 − 2.8 − 7.0 7.2 5.2 − 2.9 − 4.0 − 3.2 − 2.8
         Aug − 2.2 − 15.5 − 22.5 6.9 6.0 4.1 − 5.5 12.6 9.5 − 2.9 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.3
         Sep 76.9 24.4 20.1 4.3 11.2 6.7 − 0.6 9.9 9.2 − 2.6 − 3.8 2.2 1.2
         Oct 4.6 4.7 5.7 − 1.0 − 3.7 − 3.4 − 7.2 6.5 6.5 − 2.7 − 4.8 2.5 0.5
         Nov 75.6 34.6 17.9 16.7 35.2 30.9 27.5 7.0 7.1 − 3.5 − 6.1 2.2 0.6
         Dec 13.9 19.1 28.2 − 9.1 26.1 30.7 3.4 22.2 16.5 5.1 3.1 − 1.8 0.9
2007          Jan 33.9 − 19.2 − 14.3 − 4.9 − 5.0 − 0.8 − 1.4 5.0 2.8 − 4.4 − 6.2 − 2.2 0.3
         Feb 46.3 4.9 4.9 0.1 2.6 4.2 0.2 5.9 4.4 − 1.8 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 0.8
         Mar 61.6 29.4 29.3 0.1 9.2 5.9 1.5 6.1 7.0 − 1.8 − 3.3 3.6 2.3
         Apr 77.8 18.6 3.2 15.4 14.0 15.6 − 0.4 20.0 17.9 − 3.9 − 4.1 − 1.9 − 2.1
         May 28.0 − 5.8 − 14.3 8.5 15.3 9.5 5.8 8.2 7.7 − 4.5 − 4.2 0.6 2.4
         June − 6.0 − 9.0 2.7 − 11.7 21.5 18.3 8.4 13.4 10.5 − 3.5 − 4.1 2.4 1.5
         July − 4.4 − 2.7 − 5.8 3.1 1.0 6.7 4.8 7.0 6.6 − 5.1 − 5.7 1.6 − 2.0
         Aug 42.1 14.7 8.1 6.5 15.3 16.9 − 5.7 26.3 26.4 − 3.7 − 3.9 − 1.3 − 1.8
         Sep 83.5 33.6 21.0 12.6 27.5 23.1 9.4 16.7 12.5 − 3.0 − 3.6 5.7 3.0
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 2001
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 2006
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005          Dec 
49.3 9.6 2.4 2.0 43.6 40.4 27.4 31.2 1,617.4 112.2 646.3 369.7 325.0 2006          Jan 
47.6 8.5 2.4 2.0 37.4 35.8 29.6 31.7 1,630.9 113.9 662.9 377.3 320.6          Feb 
45.6 7.8 2.4 2.0 39.3 37.0 37.0 31.6 1,632.1 119.8 667.6 384.1 330.7          Mar 
49.5 11.7 2.4 2.0 39.1 37.6 35.6 31.5 1,623.9 121.1 662.7 384.6 337.5          Apr 
46.0 8.3 2.3 1.9 40.8 37.0 37.0 32.1 1,632.9 125.9 667.8 386.5 340.7          May
44.2 6.9 2.3 1.9 42.6 39.3 35.7 33.0 1,641.1 126.7 652.0 387.2 327.8          June
43.9 6.3 2.3 1.9 43.7 40.3 30.1 32.4 1,641.7 124.8 640.2 387.9 325.2          July
44.0 6.5 2.3 1.9 46.7 44.1 34.9 32.2 1,638.1 127.2 646.0 387.2 324.1          Aug 
45.1 7.8 2.3 1.9 49.1 45.6 38.1 31.5 1,639.6 129.7 665.0 388.0 339.7          Sep 
47.1 9.9 2.3 1.9 46.3 43.4 32.1 32.0 1,644.6 134.3 663.9 389.1 343.6          Oct 
48.6 10.1 2.3 1.8 48.4 43.7 27.5 32.0 1,641.7 137.5 653.0 391.7 353.6          Nov 
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7          Dec 
43.5 9.2 2.3 1.9 43.7 40.6 25.0 31.9 1,653.8 145.9 667.6 393.0 356.6 2007          Jan 
42.5 8.9 2.3 1.8 43.8 41.8 29.7 31.6 1,657.3 149.5 682.1 399.7 359.9          Feb 
43.6 10.0 2.3 1.9 43.4 42.2 29.8 32.7 1,659.7 158.3 681.3 405.5 371.2          Mar 
43.8 9.5 2.3 1.8 43.6 43.2 29.4 33.6 1,657.7 158.0 708.9 410.7 377.5          Apr 
42.0 8.2 2.3 1.8 48.9 46.9 28.0 33.9 1,666.3 158.4 720.2 416.8 374.6          May
42.9 10.0 2.3 1.8 49.7 46.6 32.7 35.3 1,670.4 162.2 685.8 417.8 379.5          June
46.6 12.6 2.3 1.8 43.0 41.8 25.7 34.9 1,673.2 168.2 675.2 426.0 378.0          July
47.1 13.1 2.3 1.8 42.6 41.1 28.4 32.3 1,665.5 169.2 694.4 423.3 384.6          Aug 
49.8 16.5 2.3 1.7 41.3 39.6 36.3 30.3 1,651.5 170.7 703.6 426.5 402.7          Sep 
Changes 1
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001
− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002
− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.3 − 9.4 22.4 14.4 18.5 2005
− 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.2 0.3 34.3 21.7 32.1 27.9 29.2 2006
− 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.0 1.7 7.9 − 0.5 4.4 − 1.9 24.3 5.3 − 1.5 2006          Jan 
− 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 6.2 − 4.6 2.2 0.6 10.3 1.8 12.4 7.1 − 2.6          Feb 
− 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 1.3 7.4 − 0.1 5.5 5.9 9.4 7.5 7.4          Mar 
4.0 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 4.0 1.3 1.3 1.3 4.6          Apr 
− 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.7 − 0.6 0.6 0.6 11.8 4.8 9.2 2.3 1.8          May
− 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 2.3 − 1.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 17.5 0.6 − 4.6          June
− 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 1.0 − 5.6 − 0.6 0.7 − 1.9 − 11.4 0.7 − 2.4          July
0.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 3.9 4.8 − 0.2 − 2.5 2.4 6.7 − 0.1 − 1.3          Aug 
1.0 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.3 1.5 3.2 − 0.7 5.3 3.5 16.7 0.5 16.2          Sep 
2.0 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 2.2 − 6.0 0.5 4.8 4.6 − 1.1 1.2 4.2          Oct 
1.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.1 0.3 − 4.5 − 0.0 3.1 3.3 − 3.2 3.5 6.9          Nov 
− 2.7 − 0.8 0.0 0.0 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 10.5 0.0 − 4.6 − 1.2 − 14.8 − 2.0 0.5          Dec 
− 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 1.4 8.0 − 0.0 14.7 9.5 26.0 3.8 5.8 2007          Jan 
− 1.0 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 1.1 4.7 − 0.3 6.5 3.6 19.2 7.2 1.5          Feb 
1.2 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.4 0.1 1.0 4.2 8.9 1.5 6.0 10.2          Mar 
0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 1.0 − 0.4 0.9 2.1 − 0.3 32.5 6.0 4.0          Apr 
− 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 5.2 3.7 − 1.5 0.3 7.1 0.4 9.0 5.8 − 2.2          May
1.0 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.9 − 0.3 3.2 1.5 4.8 3.7 − 33.7 1.1 4.5          June
3.7 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 5.3 − 7.0 − 0.4 3.4 5.2 − 7.7 8.4 0.6          July
0.5 0.4 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 2.7 − 2.7 − 8.6 2.8 16.4 − 2.9 7.1          Aug 
2.7 3.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 7.9 − 1.9 − 15.0 0.5 9.2 4.3 17.9          Sep 
2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2007          Apr 2,038 7,389.1 59.3 3,007.7 2,168.9 809.4 3,883.0 515.5 2,577.8 2.1 777.5 152.2 286.9
         May 2,037 7,420.1 60.4 3,022.8 2,171.8 820.8 3,884.6 509.0 2,585.2 2.1 778.2 152.7 299.6
         June 2,037 7,409.7 55.5 3,043.3 2,189.7 817.9 3,858.7 510.2 2,592.1 2.2 743.4 153.6 298.5
         July 2,032 7,399.1 62.3 3,026.8 2,177.3 812.5 3,858.5 512.5 2,592.2 2.1 743.8 155.5 296.0
         Aug 2,026 7,447.4 47.5 3,070.4 2,222.1 809.9 3,870.0 513.9 2,609.1 2.1 731.5 155.6 303.9
         Sep 2,022 7,532.6 56.7 3,127.7 2,277.9 812.0 3,878.9 525.0 2,605.8 1.9 729.7 155.8 313.4
Commercial banks 5
2007          Aug 256 2,190.9 13.8 905.4 764.3 132.5 1,064.9 284.4 586.1 1.1 188.9 78.3 128.6
         Sep 258 2,229.7 22.2 934.1 791.9 133.6 1,060.9 281.0 586.2 1.0 188.4 78.3 134.2
   Big banks 6
2007          Aug 5 1,382.6 5.3 579.9 494.2 80.0 632.7 191.0 295.3 0.8 143.5 67.3 97.4
         Sep 5 1,419.8 11.6 611.9 524.9 81.5 628.6 188.1 293.3 0.7 144.8 67.3 100.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2007          Aug 158 669.7 7.8 254.9 201.9 50.1 369.5 69.6 255.6 0.3 42.0 10.6 26.9
         Sep 158 671.4 9.5 252.6 199.9 49.7 369.8 68.8 256.6 0.2 42.1 10.6 28.9
   Branches of foreign banks
2007          Aug 93 138.6 0.7 70.6 68.2 2.4 62.6 23.8 35.3 0.1 3.4 0.4 4.3
         Sep 95 138.5 1.1 69.6 67.2 2.3 62.5 24.1 36.3 0.1 1.5 0.4 4.9
Landesbanken
2007          Aug 12 1,503.0 3.1 817.1 604.1 192.2 601.8 96.3 395.6 0.2 103.5 25.6 55.4
         Sep 12 1,534.5 2.1 840.3 628.9 192.8 610.9 103.6 395.3 0.2 101.7 25.4 55.7
Savings banks
2007          Aug 447 1,020.1 16.3 243.5 102.3 138.7 721.5 60.5 553.3 0.5 107.2 19.0 19.8
         Sep 447 1,024.1 17.9 243.6 104.4 136.4 723.2 62.6 552.8 0.4 107.3 19.3 20.1
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2007          Aug 2 257.5 1.2 167.5 111.1 55.2 65.6 13.3 16.6 0.0 35.6 13.1 10.0
         Sep 2 265.8 0.1 173.7 116.5 55.6 68.7 14.0 17.3 0.0 36.7 13.2 10.2
Credit cooperatives
2007          Aug 1,246 618.0 11.9 161.1 72.6 84.6 414.8 35.0 328.6 0.2 50.9 10.4 19.8
         Sep 1,240 619.2 12.1 161.2 72.7 84.1 415.6 36.1 328.8 0.2 50.3 10.4 19.9
Mortgage banks
2007          Aug 22 843.7 0.7 254.9 147.3 107.6 564.8 12.3 407.3 − 145.2 2.8 20.5
         Sep 22 840.9 0.8 252.8 145.8 107.0 562.0 12.4 404.3 − 144.7 2.8 22.4
Building and loan associations
2007          Aug 25 190.4 0.0 54.2 41.8 12.0 119.9 1.8 105.2 . 12.9 0.4 16.0
         Sep 25 190.7 0.1 54.1 41.8 11.9 120.1 1.9 105.4 . 12.8 0.4 16.1
Special purpose banks
2007          Aug 16 823.9 0.5 466.7 378.5 87.2 316.7 10.3 216.4 − 87.4 6.1 33.9
         Sep 16 827.6 1.4 467.9 375.9 90.7 317.4 13.3 215.6 − 87.6 6.1 34.9
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2007          Aug 137 859.4 6.3 364.6 294.4 67.3 452.6 75.1 280.9 0.4 95.6 6.6 29.3
         Sep 139 861.0 7.2 360.6 291.2 66.6 456.9 78.7 281.3 0.3 95.6 6.6 29.8
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2007          Aug 44 720.8 5.6 294.0 226.2 64.9 390.0 51.3 245.7 0.3 92.2 6.2 25.1
         Sep 44 722.6 6.1 291.1 224.0 64.2 394.4 54.5 245.0 0.3 94.1 6.2 24.9
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,123.3 344.1 1,779.2 2,754.6 848.1 428.4 781.5 131.4 583.0 476.4 113.6 1,720.2 346.8 444.2 2007          Apr 
2,114.0 350.2 1,763.8 2,783.9 872.1 434.6 783.2 146.1 578.5 472.1 115.6 1,732.8 348.9 440.5          May
2,084.5 348.4 1,736.0 2,794.4 880.3 434.5 787.3 135.6 575.0 467.9 117.3 1,736.7 350.1 444.1          June
2,080.2 341.4 1,738.7 2,779.0 870.5 426.4 792.0 111.4 569.8 462.2 120.3 1,742.4 355.4 442.0          July
2,114.7 314.0 1,800.7 2,797.0 861.1 456.2 791.6 116.2 566.1 458.2 122.1 1,734.1 353.4 448.2          Aug 
2,166.1 355.9 1,810.1 2,823.9 876.8 466.8 794.0 117.9 563.1 454.6 123.2 1,723.2 353.7 465.7          Sep 
Commercial banks 5
771.0 175.9 595.1 882.9 416.0 227.0 126.1 93.0 100.5 83.7 13.2 248.2 107.6 181.2 2007          Aug 
792.7 204.3 588.4 896.9 419.9 232.9 130.7 90.0 100.4 83.2 13.1 246.6 107.8 185.7          Sep 
Big banks 6
501.4 127.5 373.9 507.6 218.4 148.1 75.4 86.0 61.2 58.5 4.5 182.3 64.0 127.4 2007          Aug 
526.9 148.2 378.7 518.2 225.4 147.7 79.7 82.7 60.9 58.2 4.5 181.6 64.0 129.1          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
169.1 26.7 142.4 345.7 180.4 72.0 45.4 6.9 39.3 25.2 8.6 65.9 40.3 48.7 2007          Aug 
165.9 31.9 134.0 349.1 177.0 78.6 45.6 7.3 39.4 24.9 8.5 65.0 40.4 51.1          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
100.5 21.7 78.8 29.6 17.2 6.9 5.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 3.4 5.2 2007          Aug 
99.9 24.3 75.6 29.6 17.5 6.6 5.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 3.5 5.5          Sep 
Landesbanken
562.9 71.3 491.6 347.0 60.0 67.0 204.5 20.3 14.5 14.0 1.0 461.8 65.0 66.2 2007          Aug 
579.1 82.1 497.0 359.5 71.3 69.8 203.0 24.4 14.4 13.9 1.1 465.2 65.0 65.7          Sep 
Savings banks
199.7 10.0 189.7 666.2 221.7 67.1 13.1 − 284.0 219.6 80.4 49.7 54.2 50.3 2007          Aug 
201.1 10.3 190.8 666.2 220.2 69.1 13.1 − 282.4 217.8 81.4 50.1 54.2 52.6          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
150.6 34.7 116.0 38.7 8.4 10.7 18.1 2.8 − − 1.5 44.8 11.0 12.3 2007          Aug 
154.3 34.5 119.8 41.8 11.1 11.1 18.1 3.1 − − 1.5 45.6 11.0 13.2          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
79.6 3.4 76.2 431.6 146.7 65.9 27.9 − 166.0 139.9 25.0 39.8 37.5 29.6 2007          Aug 
81.2 4.3 76.9 430.2 145.5 66.3 28.2 − 164.9 138.7 25.3 39.4 37.5 30.9          Sep 
Mortgage banks
156.3 3.6 152.7 190.0 5.0 7.8 176.1 − 0.7 0.7 0.4 449.0 23.8 24.6 2007          Aug 
162.5 5.1 157.4 189.5 4.5 7.7 176.2 − 0.7 0.7 0.4 437.9 23.8 27.2          Sep 
Building and loan associations
23.9 2.4 21.5 127.4 0.4 1.3 125.1 − 0.3 0.3 0.4 6.8 7.3 25.0 2007          Aug 
24.0 2.4 21.5 127.2 0.4 1.3 125.0 − 0.3 0.3 0.3 6.7 7.3 25.5          Sep 
Special purpose banks
170.6 12.7 157.9 113.2 3.0 9.3 100.7 0.1 − − 0.2 434.1 47.0 59.0 2007          Aug 
171.3 12.9 158.4 112.6 4.0 8.6 99.8 0.4 − − 0.2 431.9 47.0 64.9          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
283.4 57.0 226.4 309.3 149.8 65.0 71.7 10.3 17.6 17.3 5.2 155.0 35.1 76.6 2007          Aug 
281.6 66.5 215.1 314.6 151.7 67.9 72.7 10.5 17.1 16.8 5.2 151.2 35.2 78.3          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
182.9 35.3 147.6 279.7 132.6 58.1 66.4 10.2 17.5 17.2 5.1 155.0 31.8 71.4 2007          Aug 
181.8 42.3 139.5 285.0 134.2 61.3 67.3 10.5 17.0 16.7 5.1 151.2 31.8 72.8          Sep 
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
1997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.3
1998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.8
1999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2006          Apr 14.1 40.3 1,698.4 1,113.6 0.0 10.9 573.9 2.7 3,066.0 2,665.6 2.1 1.9 396.5
         May 13.5 53.7 1,703.5 1,113.6 − 10.5 579.3 2.0 3,065.4 2,657.3 2.1 1.4 404.6
         June 13.4 43.3 1,665.7 1,085.0 − 9.7 571.0 1.9 3,028.2 2,654.0 2.1 2.0 370.0
         July 13.3 52.2 1,652.0 1,078.6 − 9.5 563.8 1.9 3,024.4 2,651.1 2.1 2.0 369.2
         Aug 13.2 46.0 1,657.3 1,087.1 − 9.1 561.1 1.9 3,022.5 2,650.1 2.1 1.3 369.0
         Sep 13.8 47.3 1,626.3 1,062.0 − 10.4 553.9 1.9 3,035.2 2,666.7 2.0 1.0 365.5
         Oct 14.0 48.6 1,617.7 1,057.0 − 11.0 549.8 1.9 3,033.2 2,662.9 2.0 1.4 366.9
         Nov 13.3 41.2 1,640.2 1,082.3 − 10.4 547.5 1.9 3,037.8 2,659.6 1.9 1.5 374.9
         Dec 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007          Jan 13.0 39.5 1,639.9 1,095.8 0.0 10.3 533.8 1.9 3,024.5 2,640.0 1.8 1.6 381.2
         Feb 12.9 43.7 1,643.2 1,101.0 − 11.7 530.4 2.0 3,011.3 2,639.3 1.7 1.7 368.6
         Mar 13.1 49.4 1,669.5 1,128.8 0.0 13.2 527.5 1.9 3,016.1 2,638.8 1.6 1.8 373.9
         Apr 13.9 44.9 1,660.0 1,118.8 0.0 12.8 528.4 1.9 3,043.3 2,635.9 1.6 2.4 403.4
         May 14.2 45.6 1,668.3 1,119.7 0.0 13.4 535.1 1.9 3,021.0 2,630.0 1.6 1.3 388.0
         June 13.7 41.3 1,651.1 1,112.2 0.0 16.7 522.2 1.9 2,986.2 2,632.4 1.7 1.7 350.5
         July 13.4 48.4 1,629.8 1,095.7 0.0 17.2 517.0 1.8 2,993.2 2,642.2 1.6 1.3 348.1
         Aug 13.5 33.2 1,670.8 1,141.6 0.0 17.7 511.5 1.8 2,984.1 2,641.6 1.6 1.3 339.6
         Sep 14.0 42.2 1,683.5 1,155.8 0.0 18.8 508.9 1.8 2,986.2 2,643.2 1.4 1.9 339.7
Changes *
1998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.7
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2006          Apr + 1.2 + 1.3 + 30.5 + 32.3 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 35.3 + 7.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 27.4
         May − 0.6 + 13.4 + 5.8 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 5.4 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.1
         June − 0.2 − 10.4 − 38.2 − 29.0 − − 0.8 − 8.4 − 0.1 − 37.2 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 34.6
         July − 0.1 + 8.9 − 13.7 − 6.5 − − 0.2 − 7.1 − 0.0 − 3.8 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8
         Aug − 0.1 − 6.2 + 6.3 + 9.5 − − 0.4 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3
         Sep + 0.6 + 1.3 + 9.3 + 6.5 − + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.7 + 16.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5
         Oct + 0.2 + 1.3 − 7.0 − 3.4 − + 0.5 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 2.0 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.4
         Nov − 0.8 − 7.4 + 22.5 + 25.3 − − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 4.7 − 3.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.9
         Dec + 2.8 + 8.3 − 2.4 + 4.5 − − 1.1 − 5.8 − − 36.4 − 28.6 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 8.4
2007          Jan − 3.0 − 9.9 + 2.2 + 9.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 8.4 − 0.0 + 24.3 + 6.6 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 18.2
         Feb − 0.1 + 4.1 + 3.3 + 5.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 12.5
         Mar + 0.2 + 5.7 + 26.3 + 27.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 4.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 5.3
         Apr + 0.9 − 4.5 − 11.0 − 10.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 28.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 30.6
         May + 0.3 + 0.7 + 8.2 + 0.9 − + 0.6 + 6.7 − 0.0 − 22.4 − 5.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 15.4
         June − 0.5 − 4.3 − 16.1 − 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 12.9 + 0.0 − 35.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 37.5
         July − 0.3 + 7.1 − 20.6 − 15.9 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 8.1 + 9.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.9
         Aug + 0.1 − 15.2 + 41.0 + 46.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 5.5 − 0.0 − 9.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 8.5
         Sep + 0.5 + 9.0 + 12.7 + 14.2 − + 1.0 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 2.2 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
76.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 1997
71.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 1998
37.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 53.9 113.7 1,340.4 128.1 1,212.2 0.1 23.5 2,322.4 726.5 903.1 599.8 93.0 38.1 2006          Apr 
− 53.8 113.6 1,338.3 132.3 1,205.9 0.1 22.7 2,333.8 742.5 900.6 597.4 93.3 37.9          May
− 53.7 113.2 1,333.2 116.2 1,216.9 0.1 22.5 2,342.7 742.0 911.0 596.1 93.6 37.4          June
− 53.3 113.8 1,333.5 117.5 1,216.0 0.0 22.1 2,336.9 730.6 919.0 593.2 94.1 37.5          July
− 53.4 113.9 1,310.4 114.2 1,196.2 0.0 22.3 2,347.5 725.6 936.9 590.3 94.7 37.5          Aug 
− 53.7 108.2 1,299.3 120.7 1,178.6 0.0 22.3 2,356.4 724.2 950.0 587.7 94.5 37.9          Sep 
− 53.5 107.2 1,303.3 113.4 1,189.9 0.0 22.5 2,348.2 716.9 950.5 585.0 95.8 38.0          Oct 
− 53.3 107.0 1,320.5 135.1 1,185.4 0.0 22.3 2,375.0 744.4 952.5 581.5 96.7 38.1          Nov 
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8          Dec 
− 53.5 106.9 1,334.2 130.9 1,203.2 0.0 21.9 2,401.4 746.2 973.6 582.2 99.4 38.9 2007          Jan 
− 53.3 107.3 1,338.9 128.1 1,210.8 0.0 21.8 2,409.8 746.2 982.5 580.3 100.8 38.8          Feb 
− 52.9 107.5 1,367.4 135.9 1,231.4 0.0 21.7 2,417.2 747.5 988.7 578.6 102.5 38.5          Mar 
− 54.2 107.9 1,370.2 143.6 1,226.6 0.0 21.3 2,434.0 756.1 999.6 574.6 103.7 38.3          Apr 
− 53.8 108.0 1,356.0 142.1 1,213.9 0.0 21.2 2,445.1 761.0 1,008.9 570.1 105.0 37.6          May
− 53.5 108.5 1,357.0 137.8 1,219.2 0.0 21.0 2,464.9 772.5 1,019.0 566.7 106.6 37.5          June
− 52.2 110.3 1,351.2 131.5 1,219.7 0.0 20.6 2,464.7 775.2 1,019.2 561.6 108.7 36.6          July
− 52.0 110.3 1,359.0 134.5 1,224.5 0.0 20.4 2,483.3 769.5 1,045.6 557.8 110.3 36.4          Aug 
− 51.7 110.3 1,380.6 135.8 1,244.7 0.0 20.3 2,510.3 782.1 1,061.8 554.8 111.6 36.4          Sep 
Changes *
− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998
− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 0.1 − 2.1 + 37.1 + 17.7 + 19.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 19.0 + 4.0 + 16.0 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.3 2006          Apr 
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.4 − 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 10.6 + 16.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.2          May
− − 0.1 − 0.4 − 5.1 − 15.9 + 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.9 − 0.5 + 10.4 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4          June
− − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 11.4 + 8.0 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.0          July
− + 0.1 + 0.1 − 22.2 − 2.7 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.0 − 5.6 + 17.9 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.1          Aug 
− + 0.3 − 5.7 + 20.5 + 7.5 + 13.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 10.4 − 1.4 + 13.1 − 2.6 + 1.2 + 0.4          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 0.9 + 5.7 − 5.6 + 11.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 7.3 + 0.5 − 2.7 + 1.3 + 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.2 − 0.3 + 17.2 + 21.7 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 26.8 + 27.5 + 2.0 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.0          Nov 
− − 0.3 − 0.6 + 27.6 − 9.7 + 37.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.5 + 3.3 + 10.3 + 5.1 + 0.8 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.4 + 0.6 − 14.0 + 5.6 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.7 − 1.5 + 10.9 − 4.4 + 1.6 − 0.1 2007          Jan 
− − 0.3 + 0.4 + 4.7 − 2.9 + 7.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 − 0.1 + 8.8 − 1.8 + 1.4 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 0.4 + 0.2 + 28.5 + 7.9 + 20.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 1.3 + 6.2 − 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.3          Mar 
− + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 7.7 − 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 16.2 + 8.1 + 10.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.3 + 0.1 − 14.2 − 1.5 − 12.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 11.1 + 4.9 + 9.3 − 4.5 + 1.4 − 0.7          May
− − 0.4 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 4.4 + 6.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 18.3 + 11.5 + 8.6 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 0.1          June
− − 0.7 + 1.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 2.6 − 0.3 − 5.1 + 2.0 − 0.4          July
− − 0.3 + 0.0 + 7.8 + 3.0 + 4.8 − − 0.3 + 18.2 − 5.7 + 26.2 − 3.7 + 1.4 − 0.1          Aug 
− − 0.2 + 0.0 + 21.6 + 1.4 + 20.3 − − 0.1 + 27.0 + 12.6 + 16.2 − 3.0 + 1.2 − 0.1          Sep 
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.3
1998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.0
1999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2006          Apr 0.4 1,136.1 933.9 710.2 223.8 8.6 193.6 1.4 747.2 419.3 160.6 258.7 8.0 319.9
         May 0.5 1,144.1 935.5 709.1 226.5 9.3 199.3 1.4 740.0 412.9 155.5 257.4 7.9 319.1
         June 0.4 1,201.7 981.5 748.5 232.9 12.0 208.2 1.0 745.9 414.7 151.9 262.8 9.3 321.9
         July 0.4 1,172.9 950.8 715.4 235.5 12.8 209.3 1.0 748.6 420.3 155.9 264.4 10.3 318.0
         Aug 0.4 1,167.5 943.7 706.9 236.8 11.7 212.1 0.9 753.4 425.0 159.6 265.4 11.3 317.1
         Sep 0.4 1,202.0 966.8 726.1 240.7 12.2 223.0 0.8 767.0 426.7 160.9 265.8 9.4 331.0
         Oct 0.4 1,194.8 949.5 708.7 240.7 13.5 231.8 0.7 783.1 435.3 166.2 269.1 10.4 337.4
         Nov 0.4 1,217.8 958.7 714.8 243.9 13.5 245.6 0.8 795.4 438.9 169.5 269.4 10.5 346.0
         Dec 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007          Jan 0.4 1,275.2 1,001.6 734.0 267.6 15.4 258.3 0.9 805.1 440.8 176.7 264.1 7.9 356.5
         Feb 0.5 1,303.2 1,018.2 750.8 267.4 15.8 269.2 0.8 818.5 442.3 178.4 263.9 8.1 368.2
         Mar 0.4 1,315.7 1,020.2 752.4 267.8 16.2 279.3 0.8 826.5 448.1 181.4 266.7 7.8 370.6
         Apr 0.5 1,347.6 1,050.3 778.5 271.8 16.2 281.1 0.7 839.7 457.9 192.1 265.8 7.7 374.1
         May 0.5 1,354.6 1,052.3 776.9 275.4 16.5 285.7 0.7 863.6 464.6 193.0 271.6 8.8 390.2
         June 0.5 1,392.2 1,077.8 799.8 278.0 18.6 295.8 0.8 872.5 470.4 192.3 278.1 9.2 392.9
         July 0.5 1,397.0 1,081.9 802.4 279.4 19.6 295.6 0.7 865.3 463.0 184.7 278.3 6.6 395.7
         Aug 0.6 1,399.5 1,080.7 794.4 286.4 20.4 298.4 0.6 886.0 481.8 195.3 286.5 12.2 391.9
         Sep 0.4 1,444.2 1,122.4 829.1 293.3 18.8 303.0 0.6 892.6 488.0 200.0 288.0 14.6 390.0
Changes *
1998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.3
2002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2006          Apr + 0.0 − 11.7 − 13.0 − 14.8 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 20.4 + 20.8 + 21.3 − 0.5 + 1.2 − 1.6
         May + 0.1 + 11.9 + 4.9 + 1.2 + 3.8 + 0.7 + 6.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.0 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.5
         June − 0.1 + 56.8 + 45.3 + 38.9 + 6.4 + 2.8 + 8.8 − 0.4 + 4.4 + 0.4 − 3.9 + 4.4 + 1.3 + 2.6
         July − 0.1 − 28.3 − 30.4 − 33.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.3 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 4.6 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 2.7
         Aug + 0.0 − 4.4 − 6.2 − 7.8 + 1.6 − 1.1 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 5.9 + 5.4 + 3.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.6
         Sep − 0.0 + 30.8 + 21.1 + 17.8 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 9.2 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 4.5 − 1.9 + 7.9
         Oct − 0.0 − 7.3 − 17.4 − 17.3 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 8.8 − 0.1 + 16.1 + 10.2 + 5.2 + 4.9 + 1.1 + 4.9
         Nov − 0.0 + 31.1 + 16.8 + 11.4 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 14.2 + 0.1 + 18.5 + 8.3 + 4.0 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 9.9
         Dec + 0.0 + 49.0 + 44.3 + 29.7 + 14.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 0.0 − 18.6 − 18.1 − 13.5 − 4.6 − 3.4 + 2.9
2007          Jan − 0.0 + 5.1 − 4.7 − 12.5 + 7.9 + 2.1 + 7.7 − + 24.9 + 17.3 + 19.8 − 2.5 + 0.7 + 6.8
         Feb + 0.1 + 31.4 + 20.6 + 19.4 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 10.5 − 0.1 + 18.1 + 4.7 + 2.8 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 13.2
         Mar − 0.0 + 14.6 + 3.9 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 10.3 − 0.1 + 10.0 + 7.2 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 3.0
         Apr + 0.0 + 36.2 + 34.1 + 29.1 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 18.2 + 13.5 + 11.8 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 4.8
         May + 0.1 + 4.6 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 0.0 + 22.2 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 15.7
         June + 0.0 + 38.1 + 25.9 + 23.2 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 9.7 + 7.7 + 0.9 + 6.8 − 1.0 + 2.9
         July − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 2.7 + 3.6
         Aug + 0.1 + 2.5 − 1.1 − 8.1 + 7.0 + 0.8 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 17.1 + 15.3 + 7.1 + 8.2 + 5.6 − 3.9
         Sep − 0.2 + 52.9 + 49.4 + 40.0 + 9.4 − 1.6 + 5.1 − 0.0 + 15.5 + 12.5 + 7.0 + 5.4 + 2.7 + 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)
in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciary
loans  4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
15.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 1997
22.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 1998
13.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 2001
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.8 39.4 712.0 151.1 560.9 433.7 127.2 0.5 323.9 76.9 247.0 119.0 128.0 1.7 2006          Apr 
5.5 40.7 715.1 164.8 550.4 424.8 125.5 0.5 323.1 87.8 235.3 109.7 125.6 1.7          May
5.6 40.9 689.4 165.7 523.7 398.0 125.7 0.6 321.0 89.2 231.9 102.7 129.2 1.7          June
5.6 41.1 659.4 151.7 507.6 381.5 126.2 0.6 323.2 84.1 239.1 109.9 129.2 1.7          July
5.8 41.1 658.4 150.7 507.6 384.4 123.2 0.6 337.0 95.8 241.2 111.8 129.4 1.7          Aug 
6.0 47.8 684.1 169.9 514.1 389.1 125.0 0.5 339.0 86.5 252.5 123.3 129.2 1.7          Sep 
5.9 48.4 683.7 155.2 528.5 404.4 124.1 0.5 335.8 82.4 253.4 123.3 130.1 1.6          Oct 
5.9 48.4 691.6 171.7 519.8 394.7 125.1 0.4 335.4 81.6 253.8 124.2 129.6 1.7          Nov 
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5          Dec 
5.8 44.6 704.6 170.0 534.6 408.8 125.8 0.3 317.2 88.2 229.0 114.6 114.4 1.5 2007          Jan 
5.7 44.6 709.9 177.7 532.1 406.6 125.6 0.3 324.0 93.2 230.8 118.1 112.7 1.5          Feb 
5.8 44.3 723.0 200.3 522.6 398.3 124.3 0.3 312.1 90.2 221.9 112.2 109.7 1.4          Mar 
5.7 44.3 753.1 200.5 552.6 429.8 122.8 0.3 320.6 91.9 228.7 118.5 110.2 3.2          Apr 
5.7 44.7 757.9 208.0 549.9 424.0 125.9 0.3 338.8 111.1 227.8 116.9 110.8 3.2          May
5.8 45.2 727.5 210.6 516.9 390.7 126.1 0.2 329.5 107.7 221.8 111.5 110.3 3.1          June
5.7 45.2 729.0 210.0 519.1 394.5 124.6 0.2 314.3 95.3 219.0 105.2 113.9 3.1          July
5.7 45.3 755.8 179.5 576.3 452.1 124.2 0.2 313.7 91.6 222.1 109.5 112.6 3.1          Aug 
5.7 45.5 785.5 220.1 565.3 443.0 122.3 0.2 313.5 94.7 218.9 108.5 110.4 3.1          Sep 
Changes *
+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006
− 0.1 + 0.8 + 17.2 + 7.5 + 9.7 + 10.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 5.1 − 4.0 + 9.1 + 9.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 2006          Apr 
− 0.3 + 1.4 + 6.3 + 14.4 − 8.1 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 11.1 − 10.3 − 8.8 − 1.5 + 0.0          May
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 27.0 + 0.6 − 27.6 − 27.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.3 − 4.0 − 7.2 + 3.3 + 0.1          June
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 29.6 − 13.9 − 15.8 − 16.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 5.0 + 7.3 + 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 3.2 − 2.7 − + 14.0 + 11.8 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.0          Aug 
+ 0.2 + 6.5 + 24.0 + 18.7 + 5.2 + 3.8 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 9.5 + 10.5 + 11.2 − 0.7 − 0.0          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 14.6 + 16.8 + 15.2 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 5.9 − 4.1 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.0 + 0.5 + 13.8 + 17.9 − 4.1 − 6.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.1          Nov 
− 0.1 + 1.9 − 1.9 − 3.6 + 1.7 + 2.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 25.5 + 0.4 − 25.9 − 12.7 − 13.2 − 0.1          Dec 
− 0.0 − 5.8 + 12.1 + 1.3 + 10.9 + 9.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 5.8 − 0.2 + 2.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 2007          Jan 
− 0.0 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 8.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 8.6 + 5.3 + 3.4 + 4.2 − 0.8 − 0.1          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 14.6 + 23.0 − 8.4 − 7.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 10.8 − 2.9 − 8.0 − 5.5 − 2.4 − 0.1          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 1.2 + 33.0 + 33.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 10.2 + 2.0 + 8.2 + 6.9 + 1.3 + 1.8          Apr 
− 0.0 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 7.1 − 4.1 − 6.9 + 2.8 − + 17.4 + 19.0 − 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.3 − 0.0          May
+ 0.0 + 0.5 − 29.8 + 2.8 − 32.6 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 9.2 − 3.3 − 5.9 − 5.4 − 0.6 − 0.1          June
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 10.6 − 12.1 + 1.5 − 2.5 + 4.0 + 0.0          July
− + 0.1 + 26.6 − 30.5 + 57.1 + 57.5 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 3.4 − 5.0 + 1.7 + 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.0          Aug 
+ 0.0 + 0.6 + 36.8 + 41.5 − 4.8 − 3.8 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 3.8 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0          Sep 
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.4
1998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.4
1999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2006          Apr 3,066.0 2,667.7 336.7 297.1 296.0 1.0 39.7 38.8 0.8 2,729.3 2,199.0
         May 3,065.4 2,659.4 326.4 293.2 292.4 0.7 33.2 32.5 0.7 2,739.0 2,196.1
         June 3,028.2 2,656.1 326.0 292.7 291.7 1.0 33.3 32.3 1.1 2,702.1 2,173.3
         July 3,024.4 2,653.2 320.7 285.5 284.6 0.9 35.2 34.1 1.1 2,703.7 2,175.1
         Aug 3,022.5 2,652.2 318.1 285.5 284.8 0.7 32.6 32.0 0.6 2,704.4 2,178.5
         Sep 3,035.2 2,668.7 333.0 301.3 300.5 0.8 31.8 31.5 0.3 2,702.1 2,183.5
         Oct 3,033.2 2,664.9 334.5 297.2 296.4 0.8 37.4 36.8 0.6 2,698.7 2,180.2
         Nov 3,037.8 2,661.5 325.7 290.2 289.4 0.8 35.5 34.8 0.7 2,712.2 2,185.1
         Dec 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007          Jan 3,024.5 2,641.8 313.0 278.9 278.2 0.7 34.1 33.2 0.9 2,711.5 2,191.4
         Feb 3,011.3 2,641.0 316.4 284.1 283.2 1.0 32.2 31.5 0.8 2,695.0 2,178.8
         Mar 3,016.1 2,640.4 324.2 291.8 291.1 0.6 32.4 31.3 1.2 2,691.9 2,179.7
         Apr 3,043.3 2,637.5 327.9 291.1 290.1 1.0 36.8 35.4 1.4 2,715.4 2,205.0
         May 3,021.0 2,631.6 319.3 284.2 283.3 0.9 35.1 34.7 0.4 2,701.6 2,189.7
         June 2,986.2 2,634.1 321.7 293.5 292.7 0.8 28.2 27.3 0.9 2,664.6 2,159.1
         July 2,993.2 2,643.8 331.2 295.7 294.9 0.8 35.5 35.0 0.5 2,662.0 2,158.9
         Aug 2,984.1 2,643.2 321.9 292.0 291.4 0.7 29.9 29.3 0.6 2,662.2 2,165.0
         Sep 2,986.2 2,644.7 328.8 300.2 299.8 0.4 28.5 27.1 1.4 2,657.5 2,164.8
Changes *
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2006          Apr + 35.3 + 7.5 + 7.6 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 27.6 + 31.3
         May − 1.4 − 9.0 − 11.0 − 4.6 − 4.3 − 0.3 − 6.4 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 9.7 − 2.9
         June − 37.2 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 36.9 − 22.8
         July − 3.8 − 3.0 − 5.3 − 7.2 − 7.1 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.8
         Aug − 1.9 − 1.0 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 3.4
         Sep + 12.7 + 16.5 + 14.9 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 2.2 + 5.0
         Oct − 2.0 − 3.8 + 1.5 − 4.1 − 4.1 + 0.0 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 − 3.5 − 3.2
         Nov + 4.7 − 3.3 − 8.9 − 7.0 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 13.6 + 4.9
         Dec − 36.4 − 28.6 − 22.5 − 20.3 − 20.1 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 2.9 + 0.7 − 13.9 − 2.5
2007          Jan + 24.3 + 6.5 + 9.9 + 9.0 + 8.9 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 14.4 + 10.1
         Feb − 13.2 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 5.3 + 5.0 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 16.5 − 12.6
         Mar + 4.8 − 0.5 + 7.9 + 7.6 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.9
         Apr + 28.1 − 3.1 + 3.7 − 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 4.4 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 24.4 + 26.1
         May − 22.4 − 5.9 − 8.6 − 6.8 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 13.8 − 15.2
         June − 35.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 8.4 + 8.5 − 0.2 − 6.9 − 7.4 + 0.5 − 37.3 − 30.8
         July + 8.1 + 9.4 + 9.9 + 2.7 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 7.2 + 7.7 − 0.4 − 1.9 + 0.5
         Aug − 9.2 − 0.7 − 9.3 − 3.7 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 5.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.1
         Sep + 2.2 + 1.5 + 6.8 + 8.2 + 8.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 2.2 + 0.8 − 4.7 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
2,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 1997
3,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 1998
1,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,968.9 192.6 1,776.3 230.2 49.4 530.3 364.0 31.9 332.2 166.3 − 4.5 2006          Apr 
1,972.0 194.3 1,777.8 224.1 49.3 542.9 362.4 30.9 331.6 180.5 − 4.5          May
1,973.4 196.3 1,777.2 199.9 49.3 528.8 358.7 30.8 327.9 170.1 − 4.4          June
1,976.5 198.7 1,777.9 198.6 48.9 528.6 358.0 31.4 326.5 170.7 − 4.4          July
1,978.4 197.0 1,781.4 200.0 49.1 525.9 357.0 31.6 325.3 168.9 − 4.4          Aug 
1,980.2 198.9 1,781.3 203.3 49.0 518.7 356.4 30.8 325.6 162.2 − 4.7          Sep 
1,975.9 197.7 1,778.1 204.4 48.7 518.4 355.9 30.9 325.0 162.6 − 4.7          Oct 
1,978.9 198.2 1,780.7 206.1 48.6 527.1 358.4 31.4 327.0 168.7 − 4.7          Nov 
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8          Dec 
1,974.6 198.6 1,776.0 216.9 48.8 520.1 355.8 31.6 324.2 164.3 − 4.7 2007          Jan 
1,973.1 197.3 1,775.7 205.8 48.6 516.1 353.3 31.5 321.8 162.8 − 4.7          Feb 
1,970.1 196.5 1,773.6 209.6 48.2 512.2 347.9 31.4 316.5 164.4 − 4.7          Mar 
1,966.8 195.7 1,771.1 238.1 49.5 510.5 345.2 31.6 313.6 165.3 − 4.7          Apr 
1,969.8 199.1 1,770.7 219.9 49.2 511.9 343.8 32.2 311.6 168.1 − 4.7          May
1,969.0 198.8 1,770.3 190.1 48.8 505.4 345.0 33.9 311.1 160.4 − 4.6          June
1,970.9 199.0 1,772.0 188.0 47.6 503.1 343.0 33.3 309.7 160.1 − 4.6          July
1,980.2 202.7 1,777.5 184.8 47.4 497.1 342.3 33.9 308.4 154.8 − 4.6          Aug 
1,978.7 203.2 1,775.5 186.1 47.2 492.7 339.1 33.3 305.7 153.6 − 4.6          Sep 
Changes *
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 1.8 − 0.6 + 2.4 + 29.5 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.3 − 2.1 − + 0.1 2006          Apr 
+ 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 12.6 − 1.6 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 14.2 − + 0.0          May
+ 1.4 + 2.0 − 0.6 − 24.2 − 0.0 − 14.1 − 3.8 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 10.4 − − 0.0          June
+ 3.1 + 2.4 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.5 − − 0.0          July
+ 1.9 − 1.6 + 3.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 2.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.7 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 1.8 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 6.7 − + 0.4          Sep 
− 4.4 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − + 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.2 + 0.6 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 8.7 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 2.0 + 6.2 − − 0.0          Nov 
− 5.5 − 3.1 − 2.4 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 11.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 11.4 − + 0.1          Dec 
− 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 11.3 − 0.4 + 4.3 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 6.9 − − 0.0 2007          Jan 
− 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 11.1 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 1.4 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.4 + 3.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 5.4 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 1.5 − − 0.0          Mar 
− 3.5 − 0.8 − 2.7 + 29.6 + 1.3 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − + 0.0          Apr 
+ 3.0 + 3.4 − 0.5 − 18.2 − 0.3 + 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.7 − 2.0 + 2.8 − − 0.0          May
− 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 29.9 − 0.4 − 6.4 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 7.7 − − 0.0          June
+ 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.3 − − 0.0          July
+ 9.3 + 3.8 + 5.5 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 6.0 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 1.3 − 5.3 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 1.5 + 0.5 − 2.0 + 1.3 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 3.3 − 0.6 − 2.7 − 1.2 − + 0.0          Sep 
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2004 2,224.2 1,127.7 1,086.0 869.7 216.3 1,211.6 320.4 136.7 37.1 53.0 141.4 31.9 56.1 60.0
2005 2,226.6 1,154.5 1,093.3 895.9 197.4 1,199.7 311.3 130.6 37.2 49.4 134.1 31.6 57.8 74.0
2006          Sep 2,281.0 1,180.7 1,114.7 921.4 193.3 1,241.5 318.1 136.3 39.2 49.4 130.1 33.0 61.0 103.3
         Dec 2,242.2 1,177.5 1,114.7 921.2 193.5 1,204.2 316.1 133.0 39.3 47.2 131.4 32.4 60.9 76.0
2007          Mar 2,261.5 1,174.9 1,110.9 918.8 192.0 1,229.1 314.4 138.5 39.6 47.7 128.7 32.5 61.2 102.5
         June 2,262.0 1,172.6 1,106.6 917.4 189.2 1,230.7 311.4 141.2 39.6 48.0 130.6 33.2 62.5 100.6
         Sep 2,278.8 1,172.1 1,105.7 917.6 188.2 1,246.4 309.5 141.5 40.0 47.9 131.9 33.6 63.3 106.9
 Short-term lending
2004 283.4 − 12.5 − 12.5 239.3 7.6 40.9 3.5 11.1 52.9 3.6 5.9 26.4
2005 273.2 − 11.2 − 11.2 230.0 6.7 38.8 3.2 9.7 49.2 3.3 6.1 32.8
2006          Sep 300.8 − 11.0 − 11.0 258.6 6.5 43.3 3.3 10.2 46.6 3.9 6.3 60.5
         Dec 269.6 − 10.5 − 10.5 228.6 6.3 39.6 3.1 8.8 48.6 3.2 5.5 35.0
2007          Mar 291.4 − 10.5 − 10.5 251.6 6.1 42.6 3.5 9.5 46.2 3.4 5.6 58.6
         June 292.9 − 9.6 − 9.6 252.5 5.0 45.3 3.1 9.7 46.9 3.8 6.1 55.2
         Sep 300.0 − 9.0 − 9.0 260.4 4.9 44.4 3.6 9.3 48.6 3.8 6.3 59.4
 Medium-term lending
2004 194.3 − 38.8 − 38.8 119.9 11.8 16.4 2.5 5.6 11.1 3.2 11.3 7.6
2005 194.6 − 35.7 − 35.7 122.5 10.7 15.6 2.1 5.2 11.4 3.0 10.6 10.8
2006          Sep 198.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 127.5 10.5 18.8 2.4 5.3 11.5 3.0 10.5 12.3
         Dec 194.5 − 34.4 − 34.4 124.6 10.5 18.5 2.2 5.1 11.4 2.9 10.6 11.7
2007          Mar 196.5 − 33.5 − 33.5 128.2 10.5 20.5 2.1 5.1 11.3 2.9 10.5 14.6
         June 198.8 − 33.1 − 33.1 131.2 10.6 20.3 2.1 5.3 12.4 2.9 11.1 15.6
         Sep 203.2 − 32.5 − 32.5 135.8 10.3 21.1 2.2 5.5 12.7 3.0 11.8 16.9
 Long-term lending
2004 1,746.5 1,127.7 1,034.7 869.7 165.0 852.4 301.0 79.4 31.2 36.2 77.3 25.0 38.9 26.0
2005 1,758.8 1,154.5 1,046.3 895.9 150.4 847.2 293.9 76.2 31.8 34.5 73.5 25.2 41.1 30.4
2006          Sep 1,781.3 1,180.7 1,069.1 921.4 147.8 855.4 301.2 74.2 33.5 33.8 72.0 26.1 44.2 30.6
         Dec 1,778.1 1,177.5 1,069.8 921.2 148.6 850.9 299.3 74.9 34.0 33.3 71.4 26.4 44.7 29.3
2007          Mar 1,773.6 1,174.9 1,066.8 918.8 148.0 849.3 297.9 75.5 34.0 33.1 71.2 26.2 45.1 29.3
         June 1,770.3 1,172.6 1,063.9 917.4 146.5 847.0 295.8 75.5 34.3 33.0 71.3 26.4 45.3 29.9
         Sep 1,775.5 1,172.1 1,064.2 917.6 146.6 850.2 294.3 76.0 34.2 33.0 70.6 26.8 45.2 30.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2006          Q3 + 15.6 + 4.1 + 4.4 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 8.5 − 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 8.5
         Q4 − 37.9 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 36.8 − 2.1 − 3.3 + 0.2 − 2.2 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 27.4
2007          Q1 + 16.2 − 1.7 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 21.6 − 1.7 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 22.7
         Q2 − 0.8 − 5.8 − 3.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 3.0
         Q3 + 16.4 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 16.0 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 5.7
 Short-term lending
2006          Q3 + 8.8 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 8.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 9.3
         Q4 − 31.2 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 29.9 − 0.2 − 3.7 − 0.2 − 1.4 + 1.8 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 25.4
2007          Q1 + 21.8 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 23.0 − 0.2 + 3.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 23.5
         Q2 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 4.3
         Q3 + 7.5 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 7.9 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.2
 Medium-term lending
2006          Q3 + 2.6 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.6
         Q4 − 3.7 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6
2007          Q1 − 1.2 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Q2 + 2.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.8
         Q3 + 4.5 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.4
 Long-term lending
2006          Q3 + 4.2 + 4.1 + 4.2 + 4.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.4
         Q4 − 3.0 − 3.6 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 4.2 − 1.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.4
2007          Q1 − 4.4 − 1.7 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1
         Q2 − 3.5 − 5.8 − 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6
         Q3 + 4.5 − 2.0 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 1.1 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balances
on wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
695.5 163.7 42.5 204.2 419.0 61.7 999.4 762.4 237.0 129.2 19.9 13.2 3.2 2004
685.0 160.3 40.6 199.3 407.5 60.6 1,012.9 778.9 234.0 130.1 18.8 14.1 3.1 2005
689.3 164.9 40.5 199.5 401.0 61.5 1,025.1 792.8 232.3 131.4 18.4 14.3 3.7 2006          Sep 
684.0 164.2 39.5 197.0 396.6 60.2 1,023.4 795.0 228.4 130.6 17.6 14.7 3.7          Dec 
678.4 163.0 40.3 195.2 392.7 59.7 1,017.9 792.7 225.2 129.8 16.9 14.6 3.7 2007          Mar 
675.1 162.4 41.6 193.4 390.5 59.9 1,017.0 791.6 225.4 129.6 17.6 14.3 3.6          June
681.4 163.2 45.0 194.1 388.1 59.5 1,018.2 792.6 225.5 130.9 17.2 14.2 3.6          Sep 
Short-term lending
95.0 15.8 11.5 27.6 44.4 11.4 43.0 4.9 38.0 2.3 19.9 1.1 0.0 2004
86.9 14.1 10.3 23.9 40.1 10.6 41.8 4.5 37.3 2.6 18.8 1.4 0.0 2005
84.5 13.4 10.3 22.5 38.2 11.1 41.0 4.5 36.5 2.8 18.4 1.2 0.0 2006          Sep 
84.9 13.9 10.1 22.1 36.7 10.0 39.8 4.2 35.6 2.8 17.6 1.2 0.0          Dec 
82.2 12.6 10.1 22.1 36.2 10.3 38.9 4.5 34.4 2.6 16.9 1.0 0.0 2007          Mar 
82.4 12.5 11.0 22.0 36.2 10.3 39.5 4.6 35.0 2.6 17.6 0.9 0.0          June
85.0 12.7 13.1 21.6 35.3 10.0 38.8 4.1 34.8 2.6 17.2 0.8 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
62.3 6.5 6.5 17.2 29.6 3.9 73.8 26.9 46.9 37.7 − 0.5 0.1 2004
63.7 7.3 6.5 15.9 29.8 3.8 71.5 25.0 46.5 37.2 − 0.7 0.1 2005
63.8 6.9 6.8 16.1 28.6 3.8 70.8 23.9 46.8 37.9 − 0.6 0.0 2006          Sep 
62.3 6.9 5.9 15.8 27.7 3.8 69.3 23.9 45.4 37.0 − 0.6 0.1          Dec 
61.2 6.5 6.3 15.7 27.5 3.8 67.7 23.0 44.7 36.9 − 0.6 0.0 2007          Mar 
61.5 6.5 6.8 16.0 27.4 3.8 66.9 22.5 44.4 36.8 − 0.7 0.0          June
62.7 7.0 6.8 16.6 27.5 3.8 66.8 22.2 44.6 36.9 − 0.6 0.0          Sep 
Long-term lending
538.2 141.5 24.5 159.5 345.0 46.4 882.6 730.6 152.0 89.2 − 11.5 3.1 2004
534.4 138.9 23.8 159.6 337.6 46.2 899.6 749.4 150.2 90.3 − 12.0 3.1 2005
541.1 144.7 23.4 160.8 334.3 46.6 913.3 764.4 149.0 90.7 − 12.6 3.6 2006          Sep 
536.9 143.4 23.4 159.1 332.1 46.5 914.3 766.8 147.4 90.8 − 12.9 3.6          Dec 
535.0 143.9 24.0 157.5 328.9 45.7 911.3 765.2 146.1 90.3 − 12.9 3.7 2007          Mar 
531.2 143.4 23.8 155.4 326.9 45.8 910.5 764.6 146.0 90.3 − 12.7 3.6          June
533.7 143.5 25.1 155.9 325.2 45.7 912.6 766.3 146.2 91.4 − 12.7 3.6          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 2.4 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 6.8 + 5.4 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 2006          Q3
− 4.4 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 2.6 − 4.3 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 2.1 − 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 5.3 − 1.2 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 2.1 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 2007          Q1
− 3.4 − 0.5 + 1.2 − 2.0 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1          Q2
+ 6.7 + 0.8 + 3.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
Short-term lending
− 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2006          Q3
+ 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 2.6 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 2007          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
+ 2.6 + 0.2 + 2.1 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
− 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2006          Q3
− 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2007          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
− 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 5.5 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 0.8 − + 0.2 − 0.0 2006          Q3
− 3.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 2.5 − 1.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.1 2007          Q1
− 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 2.3 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.1          Q2
+ 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. — loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2004 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.1
2005 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 231.3 633.1 8.2 624.9 603.4 91.9 42.4 31.6 12.6
2006 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 289.5 673.3 11.7 661.6 586.5 97.5 37.8 30.4 11.2
2006          Oct 2,348.2 716.9 950.5 285.1 665.4 11.1 654.3 585.0 95.8 38.0 30.5 24.4
         Nov 2,375.0 744.4 952.5 286.1 666.3 11.2 655.1 581.5 96.7 38.1 30.4 20.6
         Dec 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 289.5 673.3 11.7 661.6 586.5 97.5 37.8 30.4 11.2
2007          Jan 2,401.4 746.2 973.6 296.4 677.3 12.4 664.9 582.2 99.4 38.9 30.3 19.8
         Feb 2,409.8 746.2 982.5 302.4 680.1 12.7 667.4 580.3 100.8 38.8 30.1 23.1
         Mar 2,417.2 747.5 988.7 309.0 679.7 13.2 666.4 578.6 102.5 38.5 30.0 24.3
         Apr 2,434.0 756.1 999.6 316.6 683.0 13.5 669.5 574.6 103.7 38.3 30.0 24.2
         May 2,445.1 761.0 1,008.9 324.3 684.6 13.9 670.8 570.1 105.0 37.6 29.8 22.0
         June 2,464.9 772.5 1,019.0 329.6 689.4 15.3 674.1 566.7 106.6 37.5 30.2 23.9
         July 2,464.7 775.2 1,019.2 327.8 691.5 16.0 675.5 561.6 108.7 36.6 33.4 22.0
         Aug 2,483.3 769.5 1,045.6 353.1 692.5 16.4 676.0 557.8 110.3 36.4 33.3 23.9
         Sep 2,510.3 782.1 1,061.8 364.8 697.1 17.0 680.0 554.8 111.6 36.4 34.2 29.3
Changes *
2005 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 3.9 + 16.4 + 0.4 + 16.0 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 2.4
2006 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 + 57.5 + 40.2 + 3.5 + 36.6 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 2.2
2006          Oct − 8.2 − 7.3 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.7 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.5
         Nov + 26.8 + 27.5 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 3.8
         Dec + 19.5 + 3.3 + 10.3 + 3.3 + 7.0 + 0.5 + 6.5 + 5.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.4
2007          Jan + 6.7 − 1.5 + 10.9 + 6.9 + 4.1 + 0.7 + 3.4 − 4.4 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 8.6
         Feb + 8.4 − 0.1 + 8.8 + 6.0 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 − 1.8 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.3
         Mar + 7.4 + 1.3 + 6.2 + 6.6 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Apr + 16.2 + 8.1 + 10.9 + 7.6 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 3.0 − 3.9 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 11.1 + 4.9 + 9.3 + 7.7 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 − 4.5 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 2.2
         June + 18.3 + 11.5 + 8.6 + 3.8 + 4.8 + 1.4 + 3.4 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5
         July − 0.8 + 2.6 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 5.1 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 2.7 − 2.0
         Aug + 18.2 − 5.7 + 26.2 + 25.3 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 3.7 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.0
         Sep + 27.0 + 12.6 + 16.2 + 11.7 + 4.6 + 0.6 + 4.0 − 3.0 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 5.4
Domestic government End of year or month *
2004 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −
2005 103.7 21.0 78.7 31.7 47.0 0.5 46.5 2.4 1.5 32.3 1.0 −
2006 134.4 26.7 104.0 51.1 52.9 2.1 50.8 2.1 1.6 28.2 0.8 −
2006          Oct 122.2 20.6 97.7 45.6 52.0 1.8 50.3 2.3 1.6 28.3 0.9 −
         Nov 132.3 24.2 104.3 51.9 52.4 1.8 50.6 2.2 1.6 28.4 0.8 −
         Dec 134.4 26.7 104.0 51.1 52.9 2.1 50.8 2.1 1.6 28.2 0.8 −
2007          Jan 128.6 23.0 102.0 48.4 53.6 2.5 51.1 2.0 1.6 29.3 0.8 −
         Feb 131.1 24.1 103.4 49.5 53.8 2.5 51.3 2.1 1.6 29.2 0.8 −
         Mar 131.0 22.8 104.6 51.3 53.2 2.5 50.7 2.1 1.6 29.0 0.8 −
         Apr 133.3 23.7 106.0 52.6 53.4 2.5 51.0 2.0 1.6 28.9 0.8 −
         May 143.8 25.4 115.0 61.3 53.7 2.5 51.2 1.9 1.6 28.8 0.8 −
         June 145.0 25.4 116.3 61.6 54.6 3.4 51.2 1.8 1.5 28.7 1.3 −
         July 142.1 26.0 112.9 57.6 55.3 3.5 51.8 1.7 1.5 27.8 4.6 −
         Aug 145.1 23.1 118.8 63.5 55.3 3.5 51.8 1.6 1.5 27.7 4.5 −
         Sep 149.3 26.6 119.6 64.4 55.1 3.6 51.6 1.6 1.5 27.6 4.5 −
Changes *
2005 − 0.2 + 3.9 − 3.8 + 1.2 − 5.1 − 0.4 − 4.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.1 −
2006 + 30.7 + 5.7 + 25.3 + 19.4 + 5.9 + 1.6 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 −
2006          Oct − 5.9 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 −
         Nov + 10.1 + 3.6 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Dec + 2.1 + 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
2007          Jan − 6.0 − 3.7 − 2.2 − 2.7 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 2.5 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Mar − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.2 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 −
         Apr + 2.2 + 0.9 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         May + 10.5 + 1.7 + 8.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         June + 1.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         July − 3.4 + 0.6 − 3.9 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 2.7 −
         Aug + 3.0 − 2.9 + 6.0 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Sep + 4.2 + 3.5 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2004 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.1
2005 2,173.0 696.0 785.7 199.5 586.1 7.7 578.4 601.0 90.3 10.2 30.7 12.6
2006 2,260.2 721.0 858.8 238.4 620.4 9.6 610.8 584.5 95.9 9.6 29.5 11.2
2006          Oct 2,226.1 696.3 852.8 239.5 613.3 9.3 604.0 582.8 94.2 9.8 29.6 24.4
         Nov 2,242.8 720.2 848.2 234.3 613.9 9.4 604.5 579.3 95.1 9.7 29.6 20.6
         Dec 2,260.2 721.0 858.8 238.4 620.4 9.6 610.8 584.5 95.9 9.6 29.5 11.2
2007          Jan 2,272.9 723.2 871.7 247.9 623.7 9.9 613.8 580.2 97.9 9.6 29.4 19.8
         Feb 2,278.7 722.1 879.1 252.9 626.2 10.2 616.0 578.3 99.3 9.6 29.3 23.1
         Mar 2,286.1 724.6 884.1 257.6 626.5 10.7 615.7 576.5 100.9 9.6 29.2 24.3
         Apr 2,300.7 732.4 893.6 264.0 629.5 11.0 618.5 572.6 102.1 9.4 29.1 24.2
         May 2,301.3 735.6 893.9 263.0 631.0 11.4 619.6 568.3 103.5 8.8 29.0 22.0
         June 2,319.9 747.1 902.8 268.0 634.8 11.9 622.9 564.9 105.2 8.8 28.9 23.9
         July 2,322.6 749.2 906.4 270.2 636.2 12.5 623.7 559.9 107.2 8.8 28.8 22.0
         Aug 2,338.2 746.4 926.8 289.6 637.2 12.9 624.2 556.2 108.8 8.8 28.8 23.9
         Sep 2,361.1 755.5 942.3 300.3 641.9 13.5 628.4 553.3 110.1 8.8 29.7 29.3
Changes *
2005 + 76.8 + 66.8 + 16.3 − 5.2 + 21.4 + 0.8 + 20.6 − 0.9 − 5.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 2.4
2006 + 87.3 + 24.3 + 72.3 + 38.1 + 34.2 + 1.9 + 32.4 − 16.5 + 7.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 2.2
2006          Oct − 2.2 − 5.3 + 4.4 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.5
         Nov + 16.7 + 23.9 − 4.7 − 5.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 3.5 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.8
         Dec + 17.4 + 0.7 + 10.7 + 4.1 + 6.5 + 0.2 + 6.3 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.4
2007          Jan + 12.7 + 2.3 + 13.1 + 9.5 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 3.2 − 4.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.6
         Feb + 5.8 − 1.1 + 7.4 + 4.9 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.2 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.3
         Mar + 7.4 + 2.6 + 5.0 + 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Apr + 14.0 + 7.2 + 9.5 + 6.4 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.8 − 3.9 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
         May + 0.6 + 3.2 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 4.4 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.2
         June + 17.2 + 11.5 + 7.3 + 3.5 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 3.3 − 3.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5
         July + 2.7 + 2.1 + 3.6 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 5.0 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Aug + 15.2 − 2.8 + 20.3 + 19.4 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 3.7 + 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.0
         Sep + 22.8 + 9.0 + 15.5 + 10.7 + 4.8 + 0.6 + 4.2 − 2.9 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 5.4
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2004 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.1
2005 809.9 233.2 550.8 108.7 442.0 2.4 439.6 5.0 21.0 9.7 19.4 12.6
2006 874.9 256.1 594.1 122.8 471.3 3.2 468.1 4.5 20.2 9.1 20.0 11.2
2006          Oct 863.1 240.2 597.8 130.8 467.0 3.2 463.8 4.6 20.5 9.3 19.9 24.4
         Nov 869.2 253.6 590.7 123.2 467.6 3.2 464.4 4.5 20.3 9.2 20.0 20.6
         Dec 874.9 256.1 594.1 122.8 471.3 3.2 468.1 4.5 20.2 9.1 20.0 11.2
2007          Jan 891.4 263.5 602.9 128.4 474.5 3.4 471.1 4.6 20.4 9.1 20.0 19.8
         Feb 891.5 257.5 609.1 132.0 477.1 3.5 473.6 4.6 20.4 9.1 19.9 23.1
         Mar 893.5 258.8 609.6 132.9 476.7 3.7 473.0 4.6 20.6 9.1 19.9 24.3
         Apr 906.5 263.7 617.7 137.8 479.9 3.8 476.1 4.5 20.5 8.9 19.9 24.2
         May 903.6 263.8 614.9 133.4 481.5 3.9 477.6 4.5 20.4 8.3 19.8 22.0
         June 913.4 268.4 620.2 134.9 485.3 4.1 481.2 4.4 20.4 8.3 19.7 23.9
         July 919.2 273.9 620.7 133.8 486.9 4.3 482.7 4.3 20.3 8.3 19.8 22.0
         Aug 926.1 267.8 634.0 146.2 487.8 4.3 483.4 4.1 20.1 8.3 19.8 23.9
         Sep 944.4 277.7 642.7 150.9 491.8 4.5 487.3 4.0 20.0 8.3 20.8 29.3
Changes *
2005 + 46.7 + 31.0 + 16.4 − 1.5 + 18.0 + 0.7 + 17.3 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 2.4
2006 + 63.5 + 22.2 + 42.5 + 13.4 + 29.1 + 0.7 + 28.4 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 2.2
2006          Oct − 1.8 − 4.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.5
         Nov + 6.1 + 13.4 − 7.0 − 7.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.8
         Dec + 5.7 + 2.5 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 9.4
2007          Jan + 16.5 + 7.4 + 9.1 + 5.6 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 8.6
         Feb + 0.1 − 6.0 + 6.2 + 3.6 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.3
         Mar + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2
         Apr + 12.4 + 4.3 + 8.1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         May − 2.8 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 4.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.2
         June + 8.3 + 4.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5
         July + 5.8 + 5.5 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.0
         Aug + 6.7 − 6.1 + 13.2 + 12.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.0
         Sep + 18.3 + 9.8 + 8.7 + 4.7 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 3.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 5.4
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2004 1,334.2 428.1 414.8 71.7 283.5 59.6 13.2 235.3 216.9 25.7 175.1 16.2
2005 1,363.1 462.8 448.1 79.7 305.1 63.2 14.8 234.9 217.0 23.7 179.0 14.2
2006 1,385.3 464.9 450.3 81.7 307.4 61.1 14.6 264.7 245.7 30.1 198.6 16.9
2007          Apr 1,394.2 468.7 453.0 82.0 309.4 61.6 15.7 275.9 256.1 31.1 206.3 18.7
         May 1,397.7 471.8 455.5 81.8 311.2 62.5 16.3 279.0 258.7 32.0 207.6 19.1
         June 1,406.5 478.7 462.5 81.6 317.4 63.6 16.1 282.6 261.7 32.5 209.6 19.7
         July 1,403.4 475.3 459.7 82.5 313.8 63.4 15.6 285.6 265.0 33.2 211.6 20.1
         Aug 1,412.2 478.6 463.2 84.7 314.6 64.0 15.4 292.8 271.1 34.9 215.2 20.9
         Sep 1,416.7 477.8 462.6 81.5 317.1 64.0 15.2 299.6 277.1 36.4 218.8 21.8
Changes *
2005 + 30.1 + 35.8 + 34.2 + 8.0 + 21.5 + 4.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 4.1 − 1.8
2006 + 23.8 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.9 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 29.8 + 28.7 + 5.8 + 19.9 + 3.0
2007          Apr + 1.6 + 2.9 + 3.1 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.2
         May + 3.4 + 3.1 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.4
         June + 8.8 + 6.9 + 7.0 − 0.2 + 6.2 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.6 + 3.0 + 0.5 + 2.0 + 0.6
         July − 3.1 − 3.4 − 2.8 + 1.0 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.0 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 2.1 + 0.4
         Aug + 8.5 + 3.3 + 3.5 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 7.1 + 6.0 + 1.7 + 3.5 + 0.8
         Sep + 4.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 3.2 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 6.7 + 6.0 + 1.5 + 3.6 + 0.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
 
 
 
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2004 103.6 41.4 0.8 5.8 34.8 0.0 12.9 15.1 2.7 2.2 10.2 0.1 21.5
2005 103.7 38.8 1.3 7.9 29.6 0.0 12.9 16.3 3.9 2.5 9.9 0.1 19.1
2006 134.4 41.9 2.1 6.2 33.6 0.0 9.5 18.0 5.4 2.5 10.0 0.1 18.5
2007          Apr 133.3 43.2 1.6 7.5 34.0 0.0 9.1 20.7 5.9 5.0 9.8 0.1 19.5
         May 143.8 46.9 1.6 11.2 34.1 0.0 9.1 20.0 4.8 5.3 9.8 0.1 19.4
         June 145.0 46.6 3.4 8.9 34.2 0.0 9.1 22.6 5.1 7.6 9.7 0.1 19.3
         July 142.1 41.8 2.4 4.5 34.8 0.0 8.3 24.0 6.3 7.9 9.7 0.1 19.2
         Aug 145.1 41.1 1.6 4.7 34.8 0.0 8.3 24.7 4.2 10.6 9.7 0.1 19.1
         Sep 149.3 39.6 2.6 2.9 34.1 0.0 8.2 30.4 6.8 13.8 9.8 0.1 19.1
Changes *
2005 − 0.2 − 3.0 + 0.1 + 2.1 − 5.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 2.4
2006 + 30.7 + 3.1 + 0.8 − 1.7 + 4.0 − 0.0 − 3.4 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.6
2007          Apr + 2.2 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 10.5 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
         June + 1.2 − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.3 + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         July − 3.4 − 5.3 − 1.0 − 4.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug + 3.0 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Sep + 4.2 − 1.5 + 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.6 − − 0.1 + 5.8 + 2.6 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
18.4 94.3 141.0 5.5 135.6 595.7 586.3 9.5 75.1 0.3 12.8 − 2004
17.9 90.8 144.1 5.3 138.8 596.0 586.4 9.6 69.3 0.5 11.3 − 2005
19.1 115.6 149.2 6.4 142.7 580.0 571.1 8.9 75.7 0.5 9.5 − 2006
19.8 126.2 149.6 7.2 142.4 568.1 559.7 8.4 81.5 0.5 9.2 − 2007          Apr 
20.3 129.5 149.5 7.4 142.0 563.8 555.4 8.4 83.1 0.5 9.2 −          May
20.9 133.1 149.5 7.8 141.7 560.5 552.2 8.3 84.8 0.5 9.1 −          June
20.7 136.3 149.3 8.2 141.1 555.6 547.4 8.1 86.9 0.5 9.0 −          July
21.7 143.4 149.4 8.6 140.8 552.1 544.0 8.0 88.7 0.5 9.0 −          Aug 
22.5 149.4 150.1 9.0 141.1 549.2 541.2 8.0 90.1 0.5 8.9 −          Sep 
Changes *
− 0.5 − 3.7 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 4.5 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 2005
+ 1.1 + 24.7 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 4.0 − 16.0 − 15.3 − 0.7 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2006
+ 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 3.8 − 3.6 − 0.2 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2007          Apr 
+ 0.6 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 4.3 − 4.3 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          May
+ 0.5 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 3.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 − − 0.1 −          June
− 0.2 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.1 + 2.1 − − 0.1 −          July
+ 1.1 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug 
+ 0.7 + 6.0 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Sep 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
25.7 10.5 9.6 2.3 3.3 0.3 21.4 2.9 12.9 4.8 0.8 0.0 2004
28.0 11.8 10.4 2.6 3.2 0.3 20.7 4.1 11.0 4.9 0.7 0.0 2005
30.5 11.5 12.7 3.4 3.0 0.3 44.0 7.8 29.7 6.0 0.6 0.0 2006
29.6 10.1 13.0 3.5 2.9 0.3 39.8 6.0 27.1 6.1 0.6 0.0 2007          Apr 
33.7 11.2 16.1 3.6 2.8 0.3 43.2 7.8 28.7 6.2 0.5 0.0          May
32.5 10.7 15.6 3.6 2.8 0.3 43.3 6.2 29.5 7.2 0.4 0.0          June
32.3 10.3 15.9 3.5 2.7 0.3 43.9 7.0 29.3 7.2 0.4 0.0          July
36.1 11.4 18.5 3.5 2.7 0.3 43.2 5.9 29.7 7.3 0.4 0.0          Aug 
34.7 10.3 18.3 3.6 2.6 0.3 44.5 6.9 29.5 7.7 0.4 0.0          Sep 
Changes *
+ 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 2005
+ 2.5 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 23.3 + 3.6 + 18.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2006
+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2007          Apr 
+ 4.2 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 3.5 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          May
− 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.1 −          June
− 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 −          July
+ 3.7 + 1.1 + 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug 
− 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 −          Sep 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2004 613.0 603.5 515.5 397.9 88.0 76.7 9.6 7.7 14.2 105.8 98.4 85.2 7.4
2005 611.9 603.4 519.2 404.2 84.2 74.4 8.5 6.8 13.3 99.3 91.9 77.5 7.4
2006 594.9 586.5 487.4 384.4 99.1 89.8 8.3 6.4 13.2 107.6 97.5 70.5 10.0
2007          May 578.5 570.1 465.8 369.7 104.4 96.1 8.3 6.3 0.3 115.6 105.0 67.2 10.6
         June 575.0 566.7 461.7 366.2 105.0 96.8 8.3 6.2 0.3 117.3 106.6 66.8 10.7
         July 569.8 561.6 456.0 362.3 105.6 97.5 8.3 6.2 0.4 120.3 108.7 66.4 11.6
         Aug 566.1 557.8 452.1 359.9 105.8 97.9 8.2 6.1 0.4 122.1 110.3 66.0 11.8
         Sep 563.1 554.8 448.5 357.7 106.3 98.4 8.2 6.1 0.3 123.2 111.6 65.6 11.7
Changes *
2005 − 2.2 − 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.5 − 4.0 − 2.6 − 1.1 − 0.8 . − 5.3 − 5.4 − 6.5 + 0.0
2006 − 17.0 − 16.8 − 31.7 − 20.4 + 14.9 + 15.5 − 0.2 − 0.4 . + 7.3 + 7.2 − 5.5 + 0.1
2007          May − 4.5 − 4.5 − 4.2 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 . + 2.0 + 1.4 − 0.6 + 0.6
         June − 3.5 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 1.7 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.1
         July − 5.1 − 5.1 − 5.7 − 3.8 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 . + 3.0 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 1.0
         Aug − 3.7 − 3.7 − 3.9 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 . + 1.6 + 1.4 − 0.6 + 0.1
         Sep − 3.0 − 3.0 − 3.6 − 2.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
 
 
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2004 1,550.0 382.6 22.9 214.6 36.5 62.1 94.2 1,393.7 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.7
2005 1,608.7 400.7 25.3 274.5 32.0 61.8 94.8 1,452.1 1.5 0.2 0.5 0.8 45.8 2.5
2006 1,636.2 392.5 41.1 301.5 30.9 68.3 118.3 1,449.5 1.8 0.2 0.8 0.7 51.4 1.2
2007          May 1,680.8 384.0 49.2 315.9 38.6 81.3 143.3 1,456.2 1.7 0.1 1.0 0.6 52.0 1.3
         June 1,684.0 380.9 49.6 319.8 39.8 85.3 142.8 1,455.8 1.8 0.1 1.0 0.6 52.7 1.3
         July 1,689.2 378.7 50.2 318.5 41.7 88.9 148.2 1,452.1 1.7 0.1 1.0 0.6 53.3 1.3
         Aug 1,680.9 376.1 51.5 315.6 43.0 89.6 147.9 1,443.4 1.7 0.1 1.0 0.6 53.2 1.3
         Sep 1,670.2 375.1 52.8 313.4 44.2 94.1 148.0 1,428.1 1.8 0.1 1.0 0.6 53.0 1.2
Changes *
2005 + 56.1 + 16.2 + 3.4 + 59.8 − 5.6 − 0.3 − 5.8 + 62.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 2.6 + 0.0
2006 + 21.6 − 27.3 + 8.2 + 25.4 − 2.3 + 6.0 + 22.9 − 7.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.2
2007          May + 12.5 − 1.7 + 1.8 + 8.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June + 3.2 − 3.1 + 0.3 + 3.9 + 1.2 + 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0
         July + 4.3 − 2.7 + 0.7 − 1.3 + 1.9 + 3.6 + 4.5 − 3.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0
         Aug − 8.6 − 2.7 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 1.6 − 10.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Sep − 10.7 − 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.2 + 1.3 + 4.5 + 0.1 − 15.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tracts
ber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- entered
of Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2006 26 193.9 41.5 0.0 14.4 27.4 66.7 11.7 14.2 0.4 28.6 123.8 5.2 3.7 7.4 95.2
2007          July 26 190.6 41.0 0.0 12.4 27.4 67.3 12.2 14.0 0.3 23.5 122.6 5.2 6.9 7.3 7.5
         Aug 25 190.4 41.8 0.0 12.4 27.4 67.4 12.3 12.9 0.3 23.7 122.2 5.2 6.8 7.3 7.3
         Sep 25 190.7 41.8 0.0 12.3 27.5 67.6 12.3 12.8 0.3 23.7 122.1 5.1 6.7 7.3 7.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2007          July 15 138.8 27.6 0.0 7.4 17.3 50.9 11.3 8.7 0.2 18.3 82.0 5.0 6.9 4.7 4.7
         Aug 15 138.7 28.2 0.0 7.3 17.4 51.1 11.3 7.8 0.2 18.6 81.8 5.0 6.8 4.7 4.6
         Sep 15 139.0 28.1 0.0 7.3 17.4 51.3 11.3 7.8 0.2 18.7 81.7 4.9 6.7 4.7 4.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2007          July 11 51.9 13.4 0.0 5.1 10.0 16.4 0.9 5.3 0.1 5.2 40.6 0.2 − 2.6 2.8
         Aug 10 51.7 13.6 0.0 5.0 10.0 16.3 0.9 5.0 0.1 5.1 40.5 0.2 − 2.6 2.8
         Sep 10 51.8 13.7 0.0 5.0 10.1 16.2 0.9 5.0 0.1 5.0 40.4 0.2 − 2.6 2.6
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts  9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2006 25.1 3.7 6.5 42.4 29.8 38.6 18.5 4.1 6.8 3.4 13.3 10.4 7.5 11.4 9.5 0.5
2007          July 1.9 0.1 0.6 4.5 3.3 4.4 2.0 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.5 10.7 7.7 0.9 0.0
         Aug 1.9 0.1 0.6 3.6 2.7 3.5 1.7 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.1 10.5 7.6 0.8 0.0
         Sep 1.9 0.0 0.5 3.5 2.6 3.3 1.6 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.0 10.4 7.6 0.8 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2007          July 1.2 0.0 0.3 3.1 2.1 3.2 1.4 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.3 6.4 3.8 0.6 0.0
         Aug 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.8 2.6 1.2 0.3 0.5 0.2 0.9 6.3 3.8 0.6 0.0
         Sep 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.4 1.7 2.3 1.1 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.8 6.2 3.8 0.6 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2007          July 0.7 0.0 0.3 1.4 1.2 1.2 0.6 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.2 4.3 3.8 0.3 0.0
         Aug 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.2 3.8 0.3 0.0
         Sep 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.1 4.2 3.8 0.3 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
with
foreign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to market
foreign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2004 52 203 1,452.7 681.0 595.7 170.2 425.6 85.2 671.0 477.3 17.1 15.8 460.2 193.7 100.7
2005 54 211 1,626.5 713.1 640.8 180.1 460.7 72.3 805.8 587.7 22.0 21.5 565.7 218.1 107.6
2006          Nov 53 213 1,766.3 712.9 641.3 196.1 445.1 71.6 918.4 696.2 19.7 19.0 676.4 222.2 135.1
         Dec 53 213 1,743.7 711.6 635.5 194.1 441.4 76.1 897.7 671.8 18.5 17.9 653.3 226.0 134.3
2007          Jan 53 214 1,876.7 758.9 679.9 208.4 471.5 79.0 970.4 749.8 19.2 18.4 730.6 220.6 147.4
         Feb 53 214 1,917.0 757.3 677.1 208.1 469.0 80.2 1,018.4 786.9 22.5 21.7 764.4 231.4 141.4
         Mar 53 215 1,910.2 739.8 661.9 225.4 436.5 77.9 1,040.2 814.0 23.0 22.2 791.0 226.2 130.2
         Apr 53 214 1,902.2 736.1 658.6 225.9 432.7 77.5 1,024.4 798.6 25.0 24.3 773.6 225.8 141.6
         May 53 215 1,962.5 763.0 684.6 232.9 451.8 78.3 1,057.5 822.4 26.8 26.0 795.6 235.1 142.1
         June 53 216 2,037.9 801.8 714.6 224.6 490.0 87.2 1,076.4 837.3 26.1 25.3 811.2 239.1 159.7
         July 52 216 2,091.4 806.6 724.4 221.4 503.0 82.2 1,133.0 880.6 24.2 23.2 856.4 252.4 151.7
         Aug 52 216 2,077.6 828.5 748.5 238.5 509.9 80.1 1,095.6 822.5 23.0 22.2 799.5 273.0 153.5
Changes *
2004 − 3 + 1 +207.5 +100.7 + 90.1 − 15.4 +105.5 + 10.6 + 64.2 + 57.8 − 1.9 − 1.0 + 59.7 + 6.4 + 42.7
2005 + 2 + 8 + 74.0 − 4.9 + 10.6 + 10.0 + 0.6 − 15.5 + 80.1 + 70.1 + 4.9 + 5.7 + 65.2 + 10.0 − 1.1
2006          Nov − + 1 + 49.1 + 7.3 + 5.3 − 0.4 + 5.7 + 2.1 + 20.1 + 15.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 + 17.2 + 4.6 + 21.6
         Dec − − − 22.6 − 1.1 − 5.7 − 2.0 − 3.6 + 4.5 − 20.9 − 24.6 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 23.4 + 3.7 − 0.6
2007          Jan − + 1 +119.1 + 42.7 + 40.2 + 14.3 + 25.9 + 2.5 + 64.1 + 71.4 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 70.7 − 7.4 + 12.2
         Feb − − + 57.7 + 4.0 + 2.4 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 58.8 + 45.8 + 3.3 + 3.3 + 42.5 + 13.0 − 5.2
         Mar − + 1 + 2.3 − 14.8 − 12.7 + 17.3 − 30.0 − 2.1 + 27.2 + 31.4 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 30.9 − 4.2 − 10.1
         Apr − − 1 + 11.3 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 0.0 − 3.4 − 5.7 + 2.0 + 2.0 − 7.8 + 2.3 + 12.3
         May − + 1 + 51.1 + 23.8 + 23.2 + 7.0 + 16.2 + 0.6 + 27.2 + 19.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 17.3 + 8.1 + 0.1
         June − + 1 + 77.9 + 39.7 + 30.8 − 8.2 + 39.0 + 8.9 + 20.5 + 16.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 16.7 + 4.5 + 17.8
         July − 1 − + 63.6 + 5.5 + 10.3 − 3.2 + 13.5 − 4.8 + 65.8 + 51.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 + 53.1 + 14.7 − 7.7
         Aug − − − 15.2 + 21.5 + 23.6 + 17.1 + 6.5 − 2.1 − 38.3 − 58.6 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 57.5 + 20.2 + 1.6
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2004 45 170 647.7 304.4 236.1 117.1 119.0 68.3 282.1 211.9 38.6 35.0 173.3 70.2 61.2
2005 43 153 713.6 320.9 249.4 119.9 129.6 71.4 324.6 224.0 39.0 35.8 185.0 100.6 68.1
2006          Nov 42 145 757.4 341.0 262.9 118.6 144.4 78.1 347.7 219.1 46.4 44.7 172.7 128.6 68.7
         Dec 40 142 761.2 341.9 262.8 124.1 138.7 79.1 347.3 218.7 38.0 36.4 180.7 128.6 72.1
2007          Jan 40 113 603.6 298.9 224.9 122.7 102.2 74.0 248.9 134.1 36.2 34.1 97.9 114.8 55.8
         Feb 40 113 597.2 292.1 218.9 115.6 103.3 73.2 248.0 133.2 35.5 34.1 97.7 114.8 57.1
         Mar 40 113 603.5 299.1 224.8 118.9 105.8 74.3 247.9 133.1 34.9 33.6 98.2 114.7 56.6
         Apr 40 112 602.3 295.8 221.3 115.0 106.3 74.5 250.7 136.5 35.1 33.7 101.4 114.3 55.8
         May 40 112 613.6 299.0 222.3 112.2 110.1 76.6 255.0 138.2 36.5 35.1 101.7 116.8 59.6
         June 40 112 608.2 286.4 210.5 106.1 104.4 75.9 261.9 141.6 36.3 35.0 105.2 120.3 59.9
         July 40 109 599.3 280.8 208.2 103.7 104.5 72.6 259.7 143.6 36.2 34.8 107.4 116.1 58.7
         Aug 40 109 595.1 274.9 204.2 102.6 101.6 70.7 263.2 145.8 36.6 35.2 109.2 117.4 57.0
Changes *
2004 − 1 − 9 + 9.3 + 0.8 − 8.1 − 10.2 + 2.0 + 9.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 2.8 + 4.2 + 7.0 + 0.1
2005 − 2 − 17 + 49.9 + 7.0 + 7.6 + 2.7 + 4.9 − 0.6 + 36.8 + 6.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 6.1 + 30.3 + 6.1
2006          Nov − − 2 − 2.5 + 6.8 + 4.9 + 1.4 + 3.5 + 1.9 − 11.1 − 9.0 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 8.9 − 2.1 + 1.7
         Dec − 2 − 3 + 4.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 5.7 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 8.4 − 8.3 + 8.1 − 0.1 + 3.4
2007          Jan − − 29 −159.7 − 44.5 − 38.7 − 1.5 − 37.3 − 5.8 − 98.9 − 85.0 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 83.2 − 13.8 − 16.3
         Feb − − − 3.9 − 5.0 − 5.0 − 7.1 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.3
         Mar − − + 7.6 + 7.8 + 6.3 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.5
         Apr − − 1 + 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.7 − 3.9 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.6 + 4.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.7
         May − − + 9.9 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 2.8 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 2.5 + 3.7
         June − − − 5.1 − 12.4 − 11.8 − 6.1 − 5.7 − 0.6 + 7.0 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.6 + 3.6 + 0.4
         July − − 3 − 7.3 − 4.5 − 1.8 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 2.6 − 1.7 + 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.5 − 4.1 − 1.1
         Aug − − − 4.2 − 6.0 − 4.0 − 1.1 − 2.9 − 2.0 + 3.5 + 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 1.7
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 2003
1,226.9 798.4 295.2 503.2 428.4 61.8 55.7 52.4 6.1 5.8 366.6 139.9 21.7 64.3 2004
1,362.8 912.4 373.6 538.9 450.4 63.9 59.0 55.3 4.9 4.6 386.5 171.9 20.9 70.8 2005
1,457.1 968.0 384.2 583.8 489.1 58.5 51.0 48.5 7.5 6.8 430.6 183.8 28.2 97.2 2006          Nov 
1,442.7 984.9 398.5 586.4 457.8 53.8 49.3 46.2 4.6 4.1 403.9 181.5 27.8 91.7          Dec 
1,542.1 1,003.5 399.1 604.4 538.6 61.6 56.8 53.2 4.8 4.2 477.0 191.5 27.9 115.2 2007          Jan 
1,588.9 1,011.3 398.7 612.6 577.6 60.9 56.0 52.5 4.9 4.2 516.7 204.0 27.6 96.6          Feb 
1,592.4 1,014.8 406.6 608.2 577.5 60.6 55.8 52.2 4.8 4.2 517.0 201.0 28.0 88.9          Mar 
1,565.0 996.5 382.1 614.4 568.5 58.0 53.2 50.1 4.8 4.2 510.5 210.0 28.9 98.2          Apr 
1,611.6 1,012.2 386.5 625.7 599.4 59.0 54.1 50.2 4.8 4.2 540.4 217.9 29.8 103.3          May
1,677.2 1,076.6 442.8 633.8 600.6 59.0 54.6 50.2 4.5 3.8 541.5 214.8 29.7 116.2          June
1,725.9 1,097.9 438.6 659.3 628.0 58.1 53.6 51.3 4.5 4.0 569.9 219.8 29.7 115.9          July
1,715.8 1,139.6 466.2 673.4 576.2 65.6 61.1 56.9 4.6 4.0 510.6 213.5 30.1 118.3          Aug 
Changes *
+ 186.4 + 93.2 + 28.1 + 65.1 + 93.3 − 4.4 − 4.8 − 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 97.7 + 0.4 − 8.7 + 29.4 2004
+ 59.5 + 69.4 + 78.4 − 8.9 − 10.0 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 12.0 + 32.1 − 0.8 − 16.7 2005
+ 33.2 + 15.4 + 5.4 + 9.9 + 17.8 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 20.6 − 1.7 + 0.3 + 17.4 2006          Nov 
− 14.6 + 16.9 + 14.3 + 2.6 − 31.5 − 4.7 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 2.7 − 26.8 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.4          Dec 
+ 89.0 + 12.2 + 0.6 + 11.6 + 76.8 + 7.7 + 7.5 + 7.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 69.0 + 10.0 + 0.0 + 20.0 2007          Jan 
+ 59.3 + 15.0 − 0.4 + 15.4 + 44.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 45.0 + 12.5 − 0.3 − 13.8          Feb 
+ 10.0 + 7.2 + 8.0 − 0.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 3.0 + 0.5 − 5.1          Mar 
− 12.6 − 9.7 − 24.5 + 14.8 − 2.9 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 9.0 + 0.9 + 14.0          Apr 
+ 39.5 + 11.7 + 4.4 + 7.3 + 27.8 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 26.9 + 7.9 + 0.9 + 2.8          May
+ 67.8 + 65.9 + 56.3 + 9.6 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 1.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 + 13.4          June
+ 56.3 + 21.1 − 4.3 + 25.4 + 35.2 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 36.1 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.2          July
− 11.4 + 39.3 + 27.7 + 11.6 − 50.6 + 7.5 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 58.1 − 6.4 + 0.4 + 2.2          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003
462.3 277.5 83.4 194.1 184.9 31.8 27.3 26.5 4.5 4.3 153.1 73.5 39.1 72.7 2004
525.4 310.6 103.3 207.3 214.8 36.0 29.1 27.1 7.0 6.8 178.8 79.7 41.0 67.5 2005
550.3 328.6 117.5 211.1 221.7 41.0 32.9 31.1 8.1 8.0 180.6 89.0 39.4 78.8 2006          Nov 
557.3 329.4 121.5 207.9 227.9 40.8 33.0 31.6 7.8 7.7 187.1 87.9 40.0 76.0          Dec 
446.1 278.8 111.5 167.3 167.3 39.1 31.5 30.6 7.6 7.5 128.2 65.5 28.7 63.3 2007          Jan 
440.7 274.8 109.1 165.8 165.9 40.5 31.8 30.5 8.6 8.5 125.4 66.4 28.3 61.8          Feb 
447.2 277.5 110.2 167.4 169.6 41.4 32.8 31.1 8.6 8.5 128.2 66.8 28.6 60.9          Mar 
446.9 276.6 109.5 167.2 170.3 43.3 34.9 33.0 8.5 8.3 127.0 67.0 28.0 60.3          Apr 
457.7 282.7 106.4 176.2 175.1 43.0 34.4 32.4 8.6 8.4 132.1 66.7 28.2 61.0          May
453.4 280.8 114.7 166.1 172.5 41.2 32.7 30.6 8.5 8.4 131.3 66.6 28.5 59.7          June
445.9 278.4 111.0 167.4 167.5 37.7 30.7 29.4 7.1 7.0 129.7 66.7 27.9 58.8          July
442.7 278.7 121.5 157.2 164.0 38.3 31.3 30.2 7.0 6.9 125.7 65.6 28.1 58.7          Aug 
Changes *
+ 1.4 − 0.7 − 16.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 5.4 − 2.2 + 4.7 2004
+ 48.6 + 24.2 + 19.9 + 4.3 + 24.4 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 20.2 + 6.2 + 1.9 − 6.7 2005
− 4.2 − 3.8 + 1.2 − 5.0 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 3.6 + 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 1.6 + 5.5 2006          Nov 
+ 7.0 + 0.9 + 4.0 − 3.1 + 6.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 6.3 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.6          Dec 
− 113.1 − 51.6 − 10.1 − 41.5 − 61.4 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 59.7 − 22.4 − 11.4 − 12.9 2007          Jan 
− 3.4 − 2.9 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 1.0          Feb 
+ 7.4 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 2.1 + 4.2 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6          Mar 
+ 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.1 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 9.8 + 5.4 − 3.0 + 8.5 + 4.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 4.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4          May
− 4.1 − 1.6 + 8.3 − 9.9 − 2.5 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.2          June
− 6.3 − 1.8 − 3.7 + 1.8 − 4.4 − 3.5 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.6          July
− 3.3 + 0.2 + 10.4 − 10.3 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.0          Aug 
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
 
 
 
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
 
 
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2007          Mar 9,117.3 182.3 0.5 181.8 182.6 0.8 0.0
         Apr 9,136.2 182.7 0.5 182.2 183.2 1.0 0.0
         May 9,291.6 185.8 0.5 185.3 186.2 0.9 0.0
         June 9,441.8 188.8 0.5 188.3 189.6 1.2 0.0
         July 9,588.2 191.8 0.5 191.3 192.0 0.7 0.0
         Aug 9,618.1 192.4 0.5 191.9 192.7 0.9 0.0
         Sep 9,650.1 193.0 0.5 192.5 193.4 0.9 0.0
         Oct  p ... ... ... 193.7 ... ... ...
         Nov ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2007          Mar 2,153,768 43,075 199 42,876 43,186 309 0
         Apr 2,163,044 43,261 199 43,062 43,538 476 7
         May 2,196,880 43,938 199 43,739 44,124 385 2
         June 2,225,699 44,514 198 44,316 45,009 693 2
         July 2,240,603 44,812 198 44,614 44,879 265 1
         Aug 2,248,867 44,977 197 44,780 45,221 441 1
         Sep 2,253,006 45,060 197 44,864 45,217 353 1
         Oct  p 2,292,287 45,846 196 45,649 ... ... ...
         Nov  p 2,327,494 46,550 196 46,353 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. 
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 2.25 3.25          Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2006 Mar                  8 1.50 2.50 3.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75          June                15 1.75 2.75 3.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          Aug                  9 2.00 3.00 4.00 2002 Jan                  1 2.71 2005 Jan                  1 1.21
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          Oct                11 2.25 3.25 4.25          to          July                  1 1.17
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Dec                13 2.50 3.50 4.50          Apr                  3
 2006 Jan                  1 1.37
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50 2007 Mar                14 2.75 3.75 4.75          July                  1 1.95
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25          June                13 3.00 4.00 5.00
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75 2007 Jan                  1 2.70
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25          July                 1 3.19
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2007 Sep                26 368,995 190,000 − 4.00 4.27 4.29 7
         Okt                 3 298,721 163,000 − 4.00 4.14 4.16 7
         Okt               10 322,684 218,000 − 4.00 4.12 4.16 7
         Okt               17 283,439 171,000 − 4.00 4.11 4.14 7
         Okt               24 304,089 182,000 − 4.00 4.11 4.14 7
         Okt               31 287,241 170,000 − 4.00 4.14 4.16 7
         Nov                  7 275,580 160,000 − 4.00 4.14 4.15 7
         Nov                14 280,458 182,000 − 4.00 4.15 4.16 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2007 Aug                30 119,755 50,000 − − 4.56 4.62 91
         Sep                13 139,021 75,000 − − 4.35 4.52 90
         Sep                27 85,353 50,000 − − 4.50 4.63 84
         Nov                  1 87,587 50,000 − − 4.45 4.53 91
Source: ECB. — *Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2007 to allotted or collected. 
include Slovenia. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2007          Apr 3.81 3.63 − 3.89 3.96 3.89 − 4.01 3.82 3.85 3.86 3.98 4.10 4.19 4.25
         May 3.79 3.20 − 3.86 4.05 3.99 − 4.12 3.79 3.85 3.92 4.07 4.20 4.30 4.37
         June 3.95 3.60 − 4.19 4.13 4.09 − 4.18 3.96 4.04 4.10 4.15 4.28 4.40 4.51
         July 4.06 3.99 − 4.10 4.20 4.15 − 4.26 4.06 4.08 4.11 4.22 4.36 4.47 4.56
         Aug 4.05 3.74 − 4.75 4.52 4.23 − 4.75 4.05 4.14 4.31 4.54 4.59 4.63 4.67
         Sep 4.03 3.35 − 4.65 4.71 4.66 − 4.79 4.03 4.22 4.43 4.74 4.75 4.73 4.72
         Oct 3.95 3.60 − 4.13 4.65 4.54 − 4.80 3.94 4.10 4.24 4.69 4.66 4.65 4.65
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2007          Feb 3.07 3.12 3.49 3.92 5.11 4.46 4.79 8.66 6.95 5.96 5.37 4.83 4.83
         Mar 3.16 3.05 3.61 3.93 5.14 4.45 4.79 8.62 6.88 5.95 5.44 4.90 4.84
         Apr 3.23 3.06 3.67 3.93 5.14 4.48 4.80 8.67 6.96 5.97 5.50 4.94 4.87
         May 3.30 3.03 3.72 3.96 5.16 4.48 4.83 8.71 6.95 5.97 5.50 4.98 4.90
         June 3.39 3.04 3.87 3.99 5.20 4.53 4.86 8.68 6.94 6.01 5.62 5.09 4.96
         July 3.49 3.02 3.92 4.00 5.28 4.57 4.89 8.80 6.95 6.06 5.70 5.15 5.00
         Aug 3.58 3.03 4.03 4.07 5.35 4.58 4.90 8.85 6.97 6.08 5.76 5.24 5.05
         Sep 3.68 3.05 4.13 4.09 5.36 4.64 4.94 9.02 7.00 6.13 5.91 5.33 5.13
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2007          Feb 1.00 3.37 3.64 2.72 2.35 3.07 1.64 3.48 3.80 4.15
         Mar 1.02 3.51 3.65 2.68 2.39 3.14 1.71 3.67 3.84 3.72
         Apr 1.04 3.59 3.68 2.78 2.42 3.20 1.75 3.74 4.01 3.87
         May 1.06 3.62 3.51 2.72 2.43 3.25 1.78 3.74 3.80 3.72
         June 1.08 3.78 3.79 2.64 2.42 3.32 1.77 3.94 4.09 4.16
         July 1.10 3.86 3.90 2.97 2.45 3.40 1.81 4.01 4.16 4.51
         Aug 1.14 3.93 3.93 3.01 2.53 3.46 1.89 4.08 4.33 4.20
         Sep 1.15 4.06 3.98 2.93 2.58 3.50 1.91 4.14 4.35 4.42
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2007          Feb 10.31 8.28 7.69 6.83 8.27 4.90 4.71 4.71 4.70 4.61 5.27 5.38 5.14
         Mar 10.22 8.14 7.51 6.68 8.34 4.94 4.79 4.76 4.71 4.62 5.26 5.60 5.20
         Apr 10.29 8.15 7.77 6.69 8.24 5.00 4.85 4.73 4.75 4.67 5.29 5.57 5.21
         May 10.32 8.27 8.10 6.73 8.30 5.02 4.88 4.80 4.81 4.74 5.38 5.65 5.32
         June 10.38 8.25 8.07 6.66 8.25 5.15 5.00 4.93 4.90 4.82 5.49 5.77 5.37
         July 10.49 8.35 8.06 6.76 8.30 5.26 5.06 4.93 5.02 4.91 5.54 5.80 5.41
         Aug 10.55 8.48 8.43 6.85 8.31 5.24 5.15 4.98 5.08 4.90 5.36 5.93 5.47
         Sep 10.56 8.53 8.47 6.82 8.37 5.36 5.22 4.99 5.08 4.98 5.46 5.87 5.44
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2007          Feb 6.03 5.21 5.44 4.86 4.51 4.69 4.71
         Mar 6.04 5.30 5.45 4.88 4.66 4.81 4.87
         Apr 6.12 5.37 5.47 4.88 4.70 4.99 4.90
         May 6.12 5.43 5.57 4.95 4.72 5.10 5.12
         June 6.17 5.53 5.70 5.03 4.89 5.28 5.17
         July 6.30 5.58 5.77 5.09 4.90 4.95 5.17
         Aug 6.35 5.77 5.86 5.17 5.01 5.46 5.29
         Sep 6.49 5.93 5.88 5.17 5.20 5.58 5.40
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insuran ce. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          Sep 2.74 133,242 2.64 192,264 3.03 89,398 3.92 23,918
         Oct 2.86 137,322 2.63 191,665 3.20 93,649 4.22 22,303
         Nov 2.92 141,570 2.62 191,012 3.28 91,322 4.23 22,310
         Dec 3.07 147,707 2.61 193,277 3.47 90,662 4.25 22,252
2007          Jan 3.16 154,215 2.60 192,300 3.50 93,632 4.26 22,342
         Feb 3.21 157,913 2.59 191,354 3.52 93,871 4.24 21,929
         Mar 3.33 163,774 2.58 191,196 3.67 94,996 4.23 22,215
         Apr 3.40 167,316 2.57 190,215 3.71 95,725 4.25 22,243
         May 3.46 172,864 2.56 189,352 3.78 96,130 4.28 22,042
         June 3.55 178,758 2.55 188,711 3.90 95,736 4.27 22,252
         July 3.66 184,931 2.55 187,763 3.98 99,560 4.29 22,518
         Aug 3.77 194,424 2.54 187,298 4.12 106,493 4.29 22,603
         Sep 3.86 202,544 2.54 187,402 4.24 109,745 4.30 22,710
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2006          Sep 5.39 6,431 4.33 29,571 5.22 929,104 9.41 73,812 5.53 69,624 6.07 322,587
         Oct 5.51 5,995 4.35 29,456 5.21 929,886 9.50 72,878 5.52 69,198 6.07 322,399
         Nov 5.57 5,847 4.36 29,155 5.20 931,063 9.43 70,535 5.50 69,528 6.06 322,042
         Dec 5.53 6,043 4.36 29,536 5.19 930,830 9.69 71,510 5.48 67,373 6.06 320,395
2007          Jan 5.58 5,652 4.38 29,312 5.17 928,584 9.79 69,358 5.48 66,954 6.06 319,205
         Feb 5.60 5,804 4.39 29,068 5.17 928,119 9.77 68,726 5.48 66,426 6.06 318,745
         Mar 5.64 6,270 4.41 28,581 5.16 927,728 9.84 69,704 5.47 66,593 6.07 317,772
         Apr 5.65 5,893 4.43 28,304 5.14 926,985 9.87 69,322 5.52 65,831 6.07 317,188
         May 5.67 5,944 4.44 28,090 5.13 926,349 9.94 68,725 5.53 66,151 6.07 316,791
         June 5.70 6,343 4.45 27,849 5.13 926,985 10.04 70,236 5.53 66,528 6.08 316,288
         July 5.85 5,643 4.48 27,778 5.12 926,457 10.17 69,915 5.55 66,991 6.10 316,380
         Aug 5.89 5,676 4.50 27,649 5.12 927,312 10.19 67,464 5.56 67,238 6.10 316,776
         Sep 5.94 5,759 4.53 27,515 5.12 928,318 10.25 69,308 5.58 66,891 6.12 316,023
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          Sep 5.21 158,696 4.32 94,768 4.92 495,304
         Oct 5.32 157,742 4.43 94,563 4.93 494,286
         Nov 5.38 158,418 4.47 95,324 4.93 497,001
         Dec 5.53 154,061 4.57 93,621 4.94 497,339
2007          Jan 5.59 154,768 4.65 94,733 4.97 498,816
         Feb 5.66 154,784 4.68 94,268 4.97 500,380
         Mar 5.79 156,009 4.76 94,383 4.98 500,891
         Apr 5.81 157,892 4.81 94,834 4.99 501,087
         May 5.80 159,526 4.84 97,867 5.00 502,283
         June 5.94 161,936 4.98 97,605 5.02 502,136
         July 6.00 161,742 4.98 97,599 5.04 503,967
         Aug 6.02 161,502 5.08 99,908 5.06 508,115
         Sep 6.16 167,064 5.17 101,492 5.10 509,124
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates may always be calculated either as annualised agreed intere st
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- balance sheet statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis purchase, including building and home improvements; including loan s
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well as
sample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are for their own account. — 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. —
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2006          Sep 1.43 457,935 2.82 31,948 3.41 1,691 2.54 2,121 2.10 495,091 2.69 92,142
         Oct 1.47 456,615 2.97 35,094 3.52 2,495 2.82 2,531 2.17 490,334 2.75 94,253
         Nov 1.45 467,261 3.05 34,218 3.54 2,240 2.58 1,897 2.15 484,245 2.82 96,851
         Dec 1.49 465,228 3.23 39,250 3.60 2,069 2.67 1,582 2.20 487,476 2.87 98,851
2007          Jan 1.58 460,252 3.34 47,561 3.69 2,974 2.98 1,639 2.22 481,378 2.98 100,630
         Feb 1.61 465,012 3.33 37,779 3.89 3,178 2.84 1,389 2.23 477,454 3.08 102,659
         Mar 1.63 466,577 3.48 40,365 3.92 2,715 2.76 1,316 2.27 474,191 3.15 104,158
         Apr 1.67 469,364 3.54 41,888 3.96 2,647 2.85 1,547 2.36 470,120 3.21 104,368
         May 1.70 472,490 3.60 40,887 4.02 1,934 3.00 1,169 2.35 465,973 3.26 104,138
         June 1.73 479,163 3.72 44,261 4.19 3,006 2.92 1,582 2.33 461,997 3.32 104,744
         July 1.77 475,744 3.84 49,733 4.28 2,928 3.25 1,619 2.33 456,327 3.40 105,360
         Aug 1.85 479,145 3.94 53,951 4.29 2,424 3.23 2,175 2.38 452,446 3.47 105,719
         Sep 1.85 478,416 4.01 55,918 4.29 2,811 3.11 1,422 2.44 448,931 3.51 106,318
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          Sep 1.71 160,811 3.00 51,870 3.79 488 4.04 797
         Oct 1.81 161,921 3.20 61,003 4.09 315 4.71 985
         Nov 1.87 167,499 3.25 56,101 3.82 256 3.88 1,290
         Dec 1.90 175,389 3.44 58,936 3.58 229 4.44 690
2007          Jan 2.01 170,634 3.48 61,502 4.18 700 4.45 1,021
         Feb 2.03 167,001 3.50 56,356 3.99 331 4.66 908
         Mar 2.12 167,475 3.67 59,631 4.09 447 4.10 898
         Apr 2.20 174,310 3.72 54,853 4.12 248 4.52 900
         May 2.23 173,628 3.76 54,833 4.18 290 4.33 265
         June 2.27 174,943 3.90 54,211 4.26 781 4.53 719
         July 2.33 174,104 4.01 61,305 4.42 742 4.83 1,864
         Aug 2.34 174,373 4.07 67,761 4.51 808 4.36 728
         Sep 2.34 173,246 4.12 66,463 4.57 532 4.22 607
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2006          Sep 7.43 5.60 1,046 5.29 5,422 8.90 2,858 4.41 10,978 5.30 1,861 5.08 2,323
         Oct 7.19 5.61 1,662 5.02 7,074 9.01 3,092 4.63 11,899 5.03 1,815 4.76 2,727
         Nov 7.03 5.56 940 4.92 6,222 8.85 3,030 4.63 10,908 5.20 1,407 4.90 2,379
         Dec 6.71 5.31 1,288 4.85 5,931 8.45 2,734 4.68 16,567 5.21 2,326 4.82 3,524
2007          Jan 7.85 5.63 1,472 5.62 4,034 9.29 2,872 4.80 11,776 5.39 1,793 4.95 3,064
         Feb 8.04 5.74 1,072 5.91 3,680 9.13 2,501 4.90 6,720 5.21 1,468 5.09 2,194
         Mar 7.88 5.71 1,589 5.81 5,349 9.15 3,973 4.94 13,362 5.60 2,087 5.17 2,622
         Apr 7.81 5.35 1,121 5.89 5,126 9.08 3,213 4.97 15,958 5.58 1,488 5.16 2,556
         May 7.86 5.99 916 5.88 4,881 9.02 3,252 5.01 13,774 5.66 1,743 5.21 2,492
         June 7.80 5.97 1,179 5.75 4,703 8.92 3,157 5.18 15,090 5.76 2,009 5.30 2,899
         July 8.03 6.31 1,352 5.93 5,248 9.06 3,332 5.22 18,606 5.77 1,697 5.44 3,442
         Aug 7.90 6.44 1,003 5.96 4,003 8.67 3,376 5.04 23,231 5.89 1,346 5.43 2,895
         Sep 7.88 6.41 856 5.93 4,399 8.70 2,772 5.12 24,156 5.84 1,477 5.48 2,287
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          Sep 11.02 46,945 4.84 5.10 2,122 4.80 1,964 4.71 4,855 4.69 4,191
         Oct 11.10 46,782 4.81 5.10 2,781 4.80 2,254 4.65 5,609 4.65 4,527
         Nov 11.02 45,132 4.82 5.27 2,111 4.84 2,295 4.65 5,434 4.61 4,580
         Dec 11.27 46,268 4.80 5.23 2,315 4.86 2,494 4.60 5,664 4.56 4,528
2007          Jan 11.40 44,820 4.85 5.44 2,619 4.87 2,744 4.64 6,651 4.67 5,200
         Feb 11.36 44,645 4.96 5.45 1,824 4.98 2,009 4.78 4,898 4.78 4,032
         Mar 11.47 45,010 4.95 5.46 2,506 4.99 2,565 4.78 6,003 4.76 5,329
         Apr 11.52 44,326 4.99 5.54 2,286 4.99 2,315 4.80 6,525 4.81 5,131
         May 11.59 44,228 5.04 5.56 2,012 5.06 2,167 4.87 6,281 4.85 5,236
         June 11.66 45,364 5.19 5.64 2,372 5.22 2,128 5.01 6,144 5.03 5,466
         July 11.76 44,782 5.33 5.69 2,745 5.37 2,484 5.14 6,855 5.16 5,229
         Aug 11.85 43,748 5.37 5.93 2,220 5.36 2,207 5.18 5,578 5.16 4,883
         Sep 11.94 44,980 5.31 5.86 2,286 5.34 1,967 5.12 4,717 5.08 4,242
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          Sep 6.37 67,633 5.37 8,144 5.09 1,185 4.91 1,677
         Oct 6.46 65,477 5.45 8,234 5.11 1,720 4.89 1,731
         Nov 6.46 67,111 5.53 7,461 5.16 1,243 4.96 2,014
         Dec 6.54 65,780 5.67 8,528 5.21 1,440 4.96 2,414
2007          Jan 6.59 65,849 5.61 7,463 5.25 1,389 4.87 2,675
         Feb 6.67 66,262 5.72 7,165 5.44 1,055 5.03 2,402
         Mar 6.78 68,119 5.73 9,581 5.42 1,375 5.09 1,958
         Apr 6.78 66,910 5.89 7,609 5.46 1,217 5.12 1,981
         May 6.84 65,747 5.93 7,749 5.53 1,065 5.11 2,515
         June 6.89 69,428 6.09 8,714 5.67 1,407 5.27 2,293
         July 6.96 68,935 6.08 8,903 5.75 1,555 5.38 3,056
         Aug 7.05 64,559 6.26 8,510 5.83 1,110 5.41 2,393
         Sep 7.06 69,487 6.43 10,118 5.89 1,130 5.42 1,989
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          Sep 4.24 46,903 4.62 5,533 4.65 7,369
         Oct 4.38 45,975 4.45 4,751 4.59 7,482
         Nov 4.36 40,795 4.81 3,452 4.62 5,945
         Dec 4.58 55,961 4.89 5,963 4.76 9,312
2007          Jan 4.63 45,112 4.84 6,013 4.86 5,322
         Feb 4.70 35,257 4.69 3,117 4.76 4,820
         Mar 4.90 47,651 4.82 5,945 4.95 7,272
         Apr 4.94 37,983 5.05 6,685 5.01 5,430
         May 4.86 41,431 5.13 5,479 5.05 6,565
         June 5.08 52,140 5.50 4,054 5.19 9,513
         July 5.12 44,655 5.17 3,937 5.24 7,317
         Aug 5.21 44,384 5.55 3,737 5.27 7,867
         Sep 5.42 49,458 5.71 3,763 5.64 6,111
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building market
pur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,122
2004 232,863 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 99,152 106,949 121,841 − 14,892 − 125,914
2005 252,775 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,233 96,314 61,740 34,574 − 156,461
2006 243,664 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 141,285 119,885 68,893 50,992 − 123,779
2007          July 146 1,257 8,441 3,328 − 10,512 − 1,111 − 18,032 − 87 − 17,945 − 18,178
         Aug − 27,766 − 32,565 − 13,934 − 655 − 17,976 4,799 − 43,528 − 1,755 − 41,773 − 15,762
         Sep − 8,239 − 6,455 − 2,997 − 1,055 − 2,403 − 1,784 − 25,247 1,664 − 26,911 − 17,008
 
 
 
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
purchases shares  8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,932
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,678
1998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 1,818 10,157 − 11,974 11,865 5,045 6,820 − 13,684
2005 25,117 13,766 11,350 − 15,282 10,208 − 25,490 40,398
2006 23,997 9,061 14,937 − 8,276 11,323 − 19,599 32,272
2007          July − 1,990 272 − 2,262 4,163 − 4,908 9,071 − 6,153
         Aug − 3,051 290 − 3,341 − 13,436 − 4,858 − 8,578 10,385
         Sep − 3,188 464 − 3,652 − 527 5,769 − 6,296 − 2,661
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,370
1997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,813
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007          June 79,211 57,041 827 6,261 11,053 38,899 1,372 20,799 −
         July 88,199 61,645 706 5,313 16,709 38,917 1,182 25,372 −
         Aug 71,605 55,656 305 7,922 14,221 33,207 1,227 14,722 −
         Sep 88,799 63,052 1,820 9,268 18,977 32,988 2,410 23,337 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,582
1997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,413
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 69
2007          June 23,373 14,446 454 3,414 3,276 7,303 1,296 7,630 −
         July 28,779 16,099 470 2,971 7,218 5,440 1,162 11,519 −
         Aug 22,505 13,376 151 1,362 2,268 9,594 1,185 7,944 −
         Sep 22,194 10,873 950 1,252 1,931 6,741 2,352 8,969 −
Net sales  6 
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,951
1997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,181
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,208
2007          June − 11,075 − 11,200 − 1,703 − 5,307 2,161 − 6,352 − 683 808 − 1,063
         July 6,388 6,394 − 802 − 8,078 4,841 10,433 − 275 269 − 4,195
         Aug − 16,488 − 3,607 − 924 − 131 − 3,656 1,105 660 − 13,541 − 366
         Sep 822 156 − 1,926 − 6,665 4,882 3,865 368 298 − 1,218
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,180
1997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,359
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007          July 3,122,742 1,869,985 135,921 468,848 408,557 856,659 96,532 1,156,226 99,986
         Aug 3,106,254 1,866,378 134,997 468,717 404,901 857,763 97,192 1,142,684 99,621
         Sep 3,107,076 1,866,534 133,071 462,052 409,783 861,628 97,561 1,142,982 98,403
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-September 2007 
1,148,019 772,386 53,162 203,596 170,308 345,321 20,017 355,616 59,676    less than 2
719,858 471,844 34,859 147,910 93,313 195,763 20,914 227,101 22,314 2 to less than 4
436,953 241,124 31,171 57,929 49,228 102,795 18,436 177,392 4,241 4 to less than 6
272,843 135,755 6,232 25,861 24,585 79,076 15,235 121,853 5,149 6 to less than 8
265,110 137,651 6,945 15,751 24,428 90,527 5,410 122,049 2,973 8 to less than 10
43,411 33,077 647 5,665 16,324 10,441 2,255 8,079 952 10 to less than 15
40,083 14,547 54 1,780 7,581 5,132 1,320 24,216 1,912 15 to less than 20
180,799 60,149 − 3,557 24,018 32,573 13,973 106,677 1,186 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 553,110
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 723,077
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 1,040,769
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007          July 164,576 92 110 120 35 6 18 − 118 − 78 1,452,848
         Aug 164,362 − 214 87 274 1 7 − 356 − 183 − 46 1,423,385
         Sep 164,785 425 182 130 7 226 34 − 11 − 145 1,463,189
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including shares are traded on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the
on the Official Market, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock Deutsche Börse AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
market segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German German
more than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX share
and including and including Corporate managed index index € Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.69
1997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.69
1998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.39
1999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 3.2 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.0 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007          July 4.6 4.6 4.5 4.5 4.7 4.8 5.5 4.9 114.42 94.45 459.72 7,584.14
         Aug 4.4 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.6 4.6 5.5 4.8 115.13 94.97 459.38 7,638.17
         Sep 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.5 4.5 5.6 4.8 114.71 94.63 471.60 7,861.51
         Oct 4.4 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.6 5.5 4.8 115.66 94.95 484.52 8,019.22
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutual
pur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 680
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,793
2004 13,601 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,148 9,016 8,446 3,796 570 8,352 4,585
2005 85,243 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,525 84,144 21,290 7,761 62,854 35,764 1,099
2006 43,960 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 24,425 34,611 14,676 5,221 19,935 19,204 9,349
2007          July 5,615 711 290 − 319 − 1,084 1,584 420 4,904 5,218 571 680 4,647 4,224 397
         Aug − 9,210 − 5,106 − 5,332 − 2,718 − 2,657 17 226 − 4,104 − 9,467 − 1,478 721 − 7,989 − 4,825 257
         Sep − 2,518 − 3,775 − 1,900 − 2,091 − 198 322 − 1,875 1,257 − 2,652 − 1,757 − 544 − 895 1,801 134
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  € billion
2005 2006 2007 
Item 2004 2005 2006 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households 1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 49.2 43.9 42.5 2.8 19.2 9.4 12.2 1.3 19.6 8.9 22.1
Money market paper − 0.1 0.1 1.0 − 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.1 − 0.1
Bonds 35.6 11.6 36.7 1.5 − 5.5 22.0 6.4 19.3 − 10.9 7.0 − 17.3
Shares − 6.5 − 4.0 − 5.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0
Other equity 3.2 3.0 2.9 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7
Mutual funds shares − 6.2 22.6 − 7.0 10.7 − 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 8.4 1.1 11.7 9.9
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 48.3 59.5 55.4 10.8 24.0 15.5 12.2 13.6 14.2 15.2 12.4
Short-term claims 2.7 2.7 3.0 1.4 − 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7
Longer-term claims 45.6 56.8 52.5 9.4 24.8 14.8 11.4 12.8 13.4 14.5 11.7
Claims from company
pension commitments 9.3 7.3 10.3 1.8 1.9 2.5 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.7
Other claims  3 1.5 − 6.2 − 4.9 0.9 − 7.2 − 1.2 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.2
Total 134.5 137.7 132.0 28.3 32.1 48.4 31.2 27.2 25.3 44.0 28.1
  II Financing
Loans − 0.9 − 3.4 − 7.2 3.6 2.2 − 8.3 1.4 6.0 − 6.2 − 10.1 − 1.1
Short-term loans − 8.4 − 5.1 − 5.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 2.0 0.7
Longer-term loans 7.5 1.7 − 1.7 4.4 2.8 − 5.9 1.6 6.1 − 3.6 − 8.0 − 1.8
Other liabilities 2.0 − 2.6 0.4 0.2 − 1.6 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Total 1.1 − 6.0 − 6.8 3.8 0.6 − 8.1 1.7 5.9 − 6.2 − 10.0 − 0.9
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 27.1 41.0 20.9 18.5 9.8 − 1.5 6.1 4.4 11.8 22.3 1.4
Money market paper 6.2 2.4 7.6 − 1.3 − 6.4 3.3 − 1.4 3.9 1.9 5.7 0.1
Bonds − 61.4 − 12.1 − 28.3 − 10.8 1.9 − 13.9 12.9 − 25.2 − 2.1 − 7.5 − 1.6
Financial derivatives 5.5 2.9 1.4 − 2.2 2.3 1.3 − 1.7 1.3 0.6 6.0 6.3
Shares 38.2 − 8.8 − 17.4 − 7.4 − 3.6 − 8.9 18.9 11.3 − 38.7 6.6 42.4
Other equity − 13.2 − 6.7 30.4 11.1 − 15.8 1.0 7.9 12.8 8.7 4.5 2.2
Mutual funds shares 8.6 4.9 − 8.1 − 0.5 1.4 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 6.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 5.3
Loans 1.5 45.2 16.7 − 10.5 37.0 − 10.1 7.4 − 8.0 27.4 − 21.6 12.3
Short-term loans − 4.2 38.3 11.0 − 9.2 36.0 − 12.3 7.8 − 7.7 23.2 − 18.8 7.6
Longer-term loans 5.7 6.8 5.7 − 1.4 1.1 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 4.2 − 2.8 4.7
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 1.5 1.7 1.5 0.7 − 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
Short-term claims 1.5 1.7 1.5 0.7 − 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims − 3.7 − 10.2 47.6 5.6 12.7 30.0 2.0 9.9 5.6 24.9 − 4.7
Total 10.3 60.1 72.4 3.2 39.2 0.0 52.2 4.7 15.5 39.7 53.4
  II Financing
Money market paper − 7.3 − 6.9 1.8 − 4.7 − 5.1 6.5 3.2 − 3.8 − 4.1 6.1 4.1
Bonds 9.4 10.1 15.6 3.4 3.4 3.7 6.3 8.0 − 2.4 − 1.8 − 1.0
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 2.1 6.0 4.7 2.6 1.5 − 0.9 2.5 2.8 0.3 1.9 2.6
Other equity 30.5 − 1.6 18.7 4.2 − 14.2 2.9 2.3 9.3 4.3 5.7 − 0.2
Loans − 80.8 − 2.7 40.8 − 17.4 21.4 − 19.5 22.8 11.5 26.0 − 6.1 15.4
Short-term loans − 38.5 2.6 25.1 − 10.1 13.3 − 4.9 7.0 8.3 14.7 2.5 14.1
Longer-term loans − 42.3 − 5.3 15.7 − 7.3 8.1 − 14.6 15.7 3.2 11.3 − 8.6 1.3
Claims from company
pension commitments 6.6 5.5 8.2 1.4 1.4 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1
Other liabilities 14.2 6.0 − 5.0 10.1 − 4.6 9.4 − 5.5 − 2.2 − 6.8 14.1 − 5.1
Total − 25.3 16.4 84.8 − 0.5 3.9 4.2 33.6 27.5 19.4 22.0 17.9
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2005 2006 2007 
Item 2004 2005 2006 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households 1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,448.4 1,492.3 1,534.8 1,473.0 1,492.3 1,501.7 1,513.9 1,515.2 1,534.8 1,543.7 1,565.8
Money market paper 0.9 1.0 2.0 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0 1.9
Bonds 429.9 419.9 462.9 439.2 419.9 451.4 455.4 452.0 462.9 476.3 442.5
Shares 276.2 324.5 378.5 307.4 324.5 359.1 343.2 353.0 378.5 403.6 420.9
Other equity 183.3 214.6 225.4 200.0 214.6 212.4 211.3 216.0 225.4 211.0 209.5
Mutual funds shares 460.6 518.7 524.7 511.4 518.7 524.1 514.3 513.9 524.7 538.7 558.8
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 994.2 1,053.2 1,107.8 1,029.5 1,053.2 1,068.6 1,080.6 1,094.0 1,107.8 1,122.9 1,135.2
Short-term claims 74.9 77.6 80.6 78.4 77.6 78.4 79.1 79.9 80.6 81.3 82.1
Longer-term claims 919.3 975.6 1,027.2 951.0 975.6 990.2 1,001.5 1,014.1 1,027.2 1,041.5 1,053.2
Claims from company
pension commitments 233.2 240.5 250.8 238.7 240.5 243.0 245.6 248.1 250.8 253.5 256.1
Other claims  3 57.9 51.6 46.7 58.8 51.6 50.5 49.2 48.0 46.7 45.5 44.3
Total 4,084.7 4,316.4 4,533.7 4,258.8 4,316.4 4,412.0 4,414.8 4,442.0 4,533.7 4,597.2 4,635.1
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,557.6 1,555.9 1,556.1 1,553.7 1,555.9 1,555.8 1,557.6 1,562.8 1,556.1 1,546.7 1,545.6
Short-term loans 90.3 85.6 80.2 86.2 85.6 83.2 82.9 82.8 80.2 78.5 79.2
Longer-term loans 1,467.3 1,470.3 1,475.9 1,467.5 1,470.3 1,472.6 1,474.7 1,480.0 1,475.9 1,468.2 1,466.4
Other liabilities 16.2 12.8 9.7 16.1 12.8 12.7 11.5 11.1 9.7 10.9 10.9
Total 1,573.8 1,568.7 1,565.8 1,569.8 1,568.7 1,568.5 1,569.1 1,573.9 1,565.8 1,557.6 1,556.5
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 346.9 396.1 438.7 400.2 396.1 420.4 424.6 443.3 438.7 474.4 474.8
Money market paper 32.9 31.1 36.6 37.3 31.1 34.2 31.3 35.7 36.6 42.3 44.8
Bonds 51.8 37.6 8.7 36.8 37.6 24.6 37.4 10.3 8.7 1.3 1.1
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 690.6 817.7 966.0 763.1 817.7 895.5 887.2 934.5 966.0 1,042.0 1,126.7
Other equity 240.5 271.1 312.4 268.2 271.1 268.5 274.0 292.0 312.4 295.9 295.0
Mutual funds shares 106.8 108.8 99.9 112.3 108.8 108.4 104.3 101.6 99.9 97.8 93.1
Loans 113.7 126.1 146.6 119.1 126.1 119.2 127.8 118.5 146.6 128.7 143.5
Short-term loans 81.1 91.1 107.3 84.4 91.1 81.6 90.8 83.1 107.3 96.9 107.6
Longer-term loans 32.6 35.0 39.3 34.8 35.0 37.6 37.0 35.4 39.3 31.8 36.0
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 39.7 41.4 42.8 41.6 41.4 41.7 42.1 42.5 42.8 43.2 43.6
Short-term claims 39.7 41.4 42.8 41.6 41.4 41.7 42.1 42.5 42.8 43.2 43.6
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 390.7 399.5 446.4 388.1 399.5 413.0 419.1 428.6 446.4 464.0 468.7
Total 2,013.6 2,229.4 2,498.1 2,166.8 2,229.4 2,325.5 2,347.9 2,407.0 2,498.1 2,589.5 2,691.3
  II Liabilities
Money market paper 24.0 17.1 18.9 22.1 17.1 23.5 26.8 23.0 18.9 25.0 29.1
Bonds 79.4 89.6 93.7 88.2 89.6 90.9 93.8 94.7 93.7 92.4 89.5
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 979.2 1,137.4 1,359.8 1,095.1 1,137.4 1,273.1 1,230.9 1,251.8 1,359.8 1,439.5 1,597.1
Other equity 599.1 597.5 616.2 611.8 597.5 600.4 602.7 612.0 616.2 621.9 621.7
Loans 1,258.1 1,259.1 1,328.8 1,249.6 1,259.1 1,273.8 1,293.8 1,315.1 1,328.8 1,338.6 1,360.0
Short-term loans 334.7 334.8 361.6 322.8 334.8 330.7 337.4 349.1 361.6 365.4 381.6
Longer-term loans 923.4 924.3 967.2 926.8 924.3 943.1 956.4 966.0 967.2 973.2 978.4
Claims from company
pension commitments 200.5 206.1 214.3 204.7 206.1 208.1 210.2 212.2 214.3 216.3 218.4
Other liabilities 350.2 357.1 384.4 354.6 357.1 361.3 365.2 368.2 384.4 394.9 405.6
Total 3,490.7 3,663.9 4,016.1 3,626.1 3,663.9 3,831.1 3,823.2 3,876.9 4,016.1 4,128.6 4,321.3
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2001 − 59.6 − 27.5 − 27.3 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 2.8 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.2
2002 − 78.3 − 36.0 − 30.6 − 5.0 − 6.8 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 0.3
2003 − 87.2 − 39.6 − 32.7 − 7.1 − 7.7 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.4
2004 p − 83.6 − 52.1 − 27.8 − 2.3 − 1.3 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
2005 p − 75.4 − 47.5 − 23.0 − 0.9 − 4.0 − 3.4 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
2006 p − 37.0 − 34.6 − 10.7 + 4.9 + 3.5 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2
2005          H1  p − 41.7 − 34.6 − 12.1 − 0.0 + 5.0 − 3.8 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.5
         H2  p − 33.9 − 13.1 − 10.9 − 0.8 − 9.1 − 2.9 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8
2006          H1  p − 23.0 − 20.6 − 5.9 + 1.7 + 1.8 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
         H2  p − 14.3 − 14.4 − 4.9 + 3.3 + 1.7 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1
2007          H1  pe + 1.2 − 11.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.4
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2001 1,241.5 776.7 377.1 102.6 2.3 58.8 36.8 17.8 4.9 0.1
2002 1,293.0 798.1 404.1 104.3 3.0 60.3 37.2 18.9 4.9 0.1
2003 1,381.0 845.4 435.3 111.4 5.3 63.8 39.1 20.1 5.1 0.2
2004 1,451.1 887.1 459.7 116.1 4.2 65.6 40.1 20.8 5.3 0.2
2005 1,521.5 933.0 481.9 119.7 2.7 67.8 41.6 21.5 5.3 0.1
2006 1,568.5 968.6 491.5 122.0 1.7 67.5 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.1
2005          Q1 1,479.3 908.4 466.3 116.6 3.9 66.9 41.1 21.1 5.3 0.2
         Q2 1,493.2 917.4 469.8 118.2 3.5 67.2 41.3 21.1 5.3 0.2
         Q3 1,513.4 932.7 474.5 118.4 3.4 67.7 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.2
         Q4 1,521.5 933.0 481.9 119.7 2.7 67.8 41.6 21.5 5.3 0.1
2006          Q1 1,540.2 944.5 487.8 121.3 2.3 68.0 41.7 21.5 5.4 0.1
         Q2 1,560.2 963.5 488.5 122.2 1.7 68.5 42.3 21.4 5.4 0.1
         Q3 1,575.3 979.5 488.3 121.3 1.7 68.6 42.6 21.3 5.3 0.1
         Q4 1,568.5 968.6 491.5 122.0 1.7 67.5 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.1
2007          Q1  pe 1,573.1 973.0 492.5 121.0 1.4 66.9 41.4 21.0 5.1 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,591.8 995.5 488.9 120.9 1.5 67.0 41.9 20.6 5.1 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined according to the national accounts. — 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2001 945.5 477.7 383.7 84.1 1,005.1 551.2 166.2 64.5 36.8 186.4 − 59.6 875.1
2002 952.5 477.5 390.7 84.3 1,030.8 579.8 168.7 62.7 36.1 183.6 − 78.3 879.2
2003 961.9 481.8 396.3 83.9 1,049.2 594.2 169.2 64.3 33.9 187.6 − 87.3 889.3
2004 p 958.1 481.3 396.9 80.0 1,041.7 592.7 169.5 62.4 31.6 185.5 − 83.6 888.4
2005 p 977.0 493.0 396.9 87.1 1,052.6 598.2 168.5 62.5 30.7 192.8 − 75.6 900.8
2006 p 1,017.2 530.5 401.1 85.7 1,054.5 600.1 167.7 64.9 32.8 189.1 − 37.3 942.8
as a percentage of GDP
2001 44.7 22.6 18.2 4.0 47.6 26.1 7.9 3.1 1.7 8.8 − 2.8 41.4
2002 44.4 22.3 18.2 3.9 48.1 27.1 7.9 2.9 1.7 8.6 − 3.7 41.0
2003 44.5 22.3 18.3 3.9 48.5 27.5 7.8 3.0 1.6 8.7 − 4.0 41.1
2004 p 43.3 21.8 17.9 3.6 47.1 26.8 7.7 2.8 1.4 8.4 − 3.8 40.2
2005 p 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.9 46.9 26.6 7.5 2.8 1.4 8.6 − 3.4 40.1
2006 p 43.8 22.8 17.3 3.7 45.4 25.8 7.2 2.8 1.4 8.1 − 1.6 40.6
Percentage growth rates
2001 − 1.3 − 4.3 + 1.4 + 5.0 + 8.0 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 43.0 . − 2.0
2002 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 5.2 + 1.5 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 1.5 . + 0.5
2003 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.6 − 6.1 + 2.2 . + 1.1
2004 p − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 4.7 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 6.7 − 1.1 . − 0.1
2005 p + 2.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 8.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 3.0 + 3.9 . + 1.4
2006 p + 4.1 + 7.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 3.7 + 6.9 − 1.9 . + 4.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cial
transac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2000 612.3 467.3 12.6 595.5 169.3 205.7 67.6 40.7 15.7 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001 555.5 446.2 23.5 599.6 169.9 213.9 66.6 40.1 16.7 − 44.2 445.1 449.1 − 4.0 923.3 971.5 − 48.2
2002 p 554.7 441.7 20.5 610.9 173.3 226.8 66.1 38.7 11.3 − 56.2 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 927.7 992.2 − 64.5
2003 pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.3 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.3 467.7 474.3 − 6.6 925.4 999.3 − 73.9
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.7 173.4 237.0 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.8 470.3 468.8 + 1.5 927.3 990.7 − 63.3
2005 pe 569.3 452.1 31.1 622.6 172.4 245.0 64.1 33.2 14.5 − 53.3 468.8 471.6 − 2.8 948.5 1,004.6 − 56.1
2006 pe 590.5 488.4 18.1 626.1 169.6 252.0 64.4 33.5 12.0 − 35.6 486.7 467.1 + 19.6 987.7 1,003.7 − 16.0
2005          Q1 121.6 99.2 1.4 159.8 41.1 66.3 25.2 4.6 3.1 − 38.2 117.1 117.5 − 0.4 211.2 249.7 − 38.6
         Q2 138.9 112.5 7.7 144.8 41.2 62.8 10.1 6.4 2.4 − 6.0 117.3 118.2 − 0.9 233.5 240.4 − 6.9
         Q3 144.2 110.6 13.7 154.2 41.3 59.3 19.7 8.6 2.5 − 10.0 114.1 117.0 − 2.9 235.9 248.8 − 12.9
         Q4 p 162.4 129.5 7.8 161.9 47.1 55.4 8.8 12.5 6.0 + 0.5 118.1 118.3 − 0.2 264.3 264.0 + 0.3
2006          Q1 p 131.3 106.3 3.8 160.3 40.6 65.6 25.1 4.8 2.9 − 29.0 120.5 116.6 + 3.9 228.9 254.0 − 25.1
         Q2 p 144.3 121.8 4.1 139.9 40.7 59.9 9.5 6.4 2.5 + 4.5 122.2 117.1 + 5.0 245.1 235.6 + 9.5
         Q3 p 146.4 121.9 5.9 156.0 40.6 61.2 20.5 8.4 2.6 − 9.5 117.0 115.2 + 1.7 241.4 249.2 − 7.8
         Q4 p 166.0 138.6 4.0 167.8 46.1 64.1 9.0 12.9 3.5 − 1.8 127.2 117.2 + 10.0 271.1 263.0 + 8.1
2007          Q1 p 149.4 122.3 2.8 164.5 42.7 64.9 25.5 5.3 3.4 − 15.1 112.2 115.6 − 3.4 238.4 256.9 − 18.5
         Q2 p 158.5 136.9 3.0 144.5 43.9 58.4 10.0 6.7 2.5 + 14.0 119.0 116.3 + 2.7 253.8 237.0 + 16.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- are estimated. — 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets but excluding the Post Office here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrep-
pension funds. Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations ancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local govern-
of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include muni- ment. — 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
cipal special purpose associations and various special accounts. — 2The of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Fed-
latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors eral Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Of fice. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2000 4 292.1 265.2 + 26.9 240.4 250.8 − 10.4 148.0 146.1 + 1.9
2001 240.6 261.3 − 20.7 230.9 255.5 − 24.6 144.2 148.3 − 4.1
2002 240.8 273.5 − 32.7 228.8 258.0 − 29.2 147.0 150.4 − 3.5
2003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 150.1 − 8.0
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.4 − 3.4
2005 pe 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 236.8 260.3 − 23.5 152.3 154.6 − 2.3
2006 pe 254.7 282.9 − 28.2 250.7 259.7 − 9.0 160.6 158.2 + 2.4
2005          Q1 46.0 74.9 − 28.9 56.0 64.7 − 8.7 31.3 34.9 − 3.6
         Q2 61.4 66.0 − 4.6 57.8 60.9 − 3.1 36.0 36.3 − 0.3
         Q3 68.8 73.2 − 4.4 55.9 62.1 − 6.3 37.9 37.9 + 0.0
         Q4 p 73.8 67.4 + 6.4 65.6 71.5 − 6.0 45.9 44.3 + 1.6
2006          Q1 p 52.7 74.1 − 21.4 57.3 64.9 − 7.6 33.8 36.4 − 2.6
         Q2 p 63.0 61.6 + 1.5 60.6 60.1 + 0.4 37.7 36.8 + 0.9
         Q3 p 64.7 73.8 − 9.1 60.5 62.5 − 2.1 40.3 38.1 + 2.2
         Q4 p 74.2 73.4 + 0.8 70.5 71.2 − 0.7 46.9 44.5 + 2.5
2007          Q1 p 61.1 74.6 − 13.6 63.5 66.5 − 3.0 35.4 37.6 − 2.1
         Q2 p 69.7 64.4 + 5.3 67.6 61.9 + 5.7 40.4 37.3 + 3.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based
istical Office. — 1The Bundesbank’s profit is included only up to the max- on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly
imum amount of €3.5 billion that is to be assigned to the core budget. Rev- figures do not include various special accounts and municipal special pur-
enue over and above this amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund pose associations. — 4 Including proceeds from the sale of UMTS licences. 
for Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including the local authority level of the
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total  1 government  2 government European Union  3 government  4 tax shares  5 of energy tax
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 21,833 57,241 − 104 20,244
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 19,732 54,047 + 12 19,576
2002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 18,560 52,490 + 51 22,321
2003 442,238 390,438 214,002 155,510 20,926 51,673 + 127 22,067
2004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2005          Q1 99,997 85,690 42,005 35,976 7,708 10,924 + 3,382 5,418
         Q2 111,634 96,535 52,716 39,438 4,381 14,475 + 624 5,359
         Q3 111,103 96,077 52,065 38,840 5,172 14,903 + 122 5,453
         Q4 129,346 114,011 64,993 44,568 4,450 19,448 − 4,113 5,405
2006          Q1 106,907 90,827 45,203 38,733 6,892 12,391 + 3,689 5,491
         Q2 121,891 104,964 57,521 43,338 4,105 16,120 + 807 5,433
         Q3 121,711 104,015 55,601 42,798 5,616 17,594 + 103 5,448
         Q4 137,935 121,345 67,310 48,505 5,529 21,211 − 4,620 5,370
2007          Q1 122,550 104,537 53,928 43,916 6,693 13,313 + 4,700 5,362
         Q2 136,963 118,090 65,298 49,069 3,724 18,217 + 655 5,408
         Q3 ... 113,712 61,592 46,875 5,246 ... ... 5,524
2006          Sep . 41,180 22,124 17,061 1,995 . . 1,834
2007          Sep . 45,387 24,630 18,884 1,873 . . 1,841
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- central government tax revenue. — 4Including local government taxes in
bank calculations. — 1Including receipts from the equalisation of burdens the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 5Difference between local
levies. — 2Before deducting supplementary central government grants and government’s share in the income taxes received by the state government
shares in energy tax revenue remitted to state government. — 3Custom cash offices in the period in question (for this total, see Table IX.6) and the
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from amounts passed on to local government during the same period. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,169
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,409
2004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2005          Q1 90,403 34,325 27,867 − 3,761 4,416 5,804 34,909 28,031 6,878 222 15,207 5,005 736 4,713
         Q2 102,224 40,747 29,030 3,359 2,715 5,643 33,009 25,180 7,829 1,454 20,556 5,673 786 5,688
         Q3 101,803 38,946 28,172 4,150 3,798 2,826 35,278 27,520 7,758 1,575 20,235 4,868 901 5,726
         Q4 120,926 47,942 33,850 6,017 5,405 2,670 36,518 27,710 8,808 2,967 27,511 5,034 955 6,915
2006          Q1 95,851 36,593 28,095 − 2,104 5,184 5,418 35,873 27,508 8,364 313 15,897 6,258 916 5,024
         Q2 111,206 47,844 29,772 5,856 5,173 7,042 35,236 26,345 8,891 1,611 20,438 5,130 948 6,242
         Q3 110,282 44,951 29,229 6,266 6,079 3,376 37,051 28,063 8,988 1,686 20,448 5,158 989 6,267
         Q4 128,800 53,227 35,516 7,549 6,461 3,701 38,529 29,402 9,127 3,403 27,432 5,183 1,026 7,455
2007          Q1 110,577 43,694 30,464 829 5,434 6,966 42,037 32,624 9,413 153 17,377 6,354 962 6,040
         Q2 125,236 55,351 32,244 8,191 6,224 8,693 41,001 30,642 10,359 1,705 20,694 5,493 992 7,145
         Q3 120,644 48,742 31,416 7,299 5,571 4,456 42,612 31,724 10,888 1,850 20,750 5,671 1,019 6,932
2006          Sep 43,881 22,408 8,961 7,046 5,531 870 12,191 9,161 3,030 10 7,305 1,613 353 2,701
2007          Sep 48,415 24,789 9,672 8,125 5,903 1,089 14,289 10,648 3,640 2 7,367 1,673 296 3,028
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, income. — 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens levies, local ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in sectio n1
business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central,
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance state and local government in revenue for 2006: 51.4:46.5:2.1 (central
of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective percentage share of central, government plus €2.3 billion, state government minus this amount). The EU
state and local government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax share is deducted from central government’s share. — 6Respective percent-
42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, age share of central and state government for 2006: 22.9:77.1. — 7For the
withholding tax on interest income 44:44:12. — 3After deducting child bene- breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
fit. — 4Non-assessed taxes on earnings and withholding tax on interest
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax city tax tax Other tax buildings tax Other  2 Total tax taxes
2000 37,826 11,443 11,841 7,243 3,356 2,151 1,643 7,015 5,081 2,982 3,367 36,659 27,025 8,849
2001 40,690 12,072 11,069 7,427 4,322 2,143 1,554 8,376 4,853 3,069 3,330 34,399 24,534 9,076
2002 42,192 13,778 10,403 8,327 5,097 2,149 1,548 7,592 4,763 3,021 3,200 33,447 23,489 9,261
2003 43,188 14,094 10,280 8,870 6,531 2,204 1,442 7,336 4,800 3,373 3,205 34,477 24,139 9,658
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2005          Q1 4,407 2,499 2,541 3,854 1,200 335 370 2,149 1,197 905 754 9,816 7,367 2,275
         Q2 9,916 3,610 2,508 1,627 2,010 562 324 2,342 1,070 1,413 848 10,864 7,968 2,758
         Q3 9,776 3,951 2,387 1,709 1,589 512 311 2,108 1,184 849 727 10,875 7,745 2,984
         Q4 16,003 4,213 2,879 1,561 1,664 733 460 2,075 1,340 929 690 11,387 9,049 2,230
2006          Q1 4,480 2,786 2,628 3,792 1,492 399 320 2,718 1,681 1,049 811 11,370 8,874 2,321
         Q2 9,727 3,604 2,879 1,662 1,720 505 341 2,258 1,350 881 641 12,296 9,365 2,801
         Q3 10,045 3,700 2,665 1,705 1,468 536 329 2,020 1,501 904 733 13,115 9,948 3,026
         Q4 15,665 4,296 3,105 1,615 1,593 720 438 1,942 1,593 928 719 12,538 10,182 2,250
2007          Q1 4,540 2,916 2,949 4,504 1,647 416 406 2,636 1,828 1,150 740 12,126 9,541 2,408
         Q2 9,230 3,462 3,249 1,912 1,997 493 352 2,206 1,606 1,006 675 13,432 10,457 2,841
         Q3 9,904 3,774 2,875 2,049 1,319 509 322 2,098 1,860 1,043 670 ... ... ...
2006          Sep 3,578 1,271 1,279 409 516 153 101 611 506 283 213 . . .
2007          Sep 3,423 1,211 1,407 493 549 175 110 540 629 289 215 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- betting, lottery and beer tax.   
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2Notably
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total payments  3 insurance  4 surplus Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
2000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,889
2001 8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004 9 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2005          Q1 55,160 36,897 17,996 58,001 50,031 3,390 − 2,841 2,607 2,432 16 41 118 4,828
         Q2 56,913 38,647 17,911 58,286 49,929 3,413 − 1,373 1,195 1,020 16 42 118 4,874
         Q3 57,546 38,492 18,807 58,455 50,150 3,337 − 909 362 187 16 43 117 4,885
         Q4 59,408 42,224 16,834 58,412 50,050 3,300 + 996 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006          Q1 60,801 42,622 17,908 57,965 50,110 3,247 + 2,836 4,452 4,293 16 43 101 4,924
         Q2 60,537 42,351 17,877 58,328 50,143 3,257 + 2,209 7,406 7,241 16 45 105 4,956
         Q3 57,950 39,741 17,839 58,521 50,297 3,266 − 571 6,845 6,681 16 45 104 4,959
         Q4 61,369 43,351 17,755 58,459 50,140 3,274 + 2,910 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007          Q1 56,177 37,771 18,118 58,275 50,369 3,279 − 2,098 7,955 7,585 215 46 108 4,889
         Q2 59,068 40,501 18,180 58,595 50,282 3,432 + 473 8,890 8,573 165 48 103 4,881
         Q3 57,996 39,494 18,115 59,054 50,633 3,470 − 1,058 8,025 7,598 265 45 117 4,868
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension institutions under section 50 of the fifth book of the Social Security Code
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for have been deducted from pension payments. — 4Including long-term care
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do not insurance for pensioners until 2004 Q1. — 5Largely corresponds to the
tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. In- sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. — 6Including cash. — 7Ex-
cluding financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending cluding loans to other social security funds. — 8Excluding income booked
and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government in connection with the revaluation of equity interests. — 9Revenue includes
cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loans
from
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 1,330 − 868 867
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 1,660 − 1,931 1,931
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 2,215 − 5,623 5,623
2003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,215
2004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2005          Q1 11,934 11,072 40 14,775 7,983 5,805 2,178 3,332 2,083 1,249 410 − 2,842 5,532
         Q2 13,283 11,449 324 13,697 7,394 5,376 2,018 3,062 1,956 1,105 440 − 414 223
         Q3 12,924 11,618 420 12,662 6,357 4,720 1,637 2,576 1,670 906 372 + 262 − 458
         Q4 14,551 12,850 652 11,954 5,920 4,431 1,489 2,620 1,712 908 228 + 2,597 − 4,900
2006          Q1 14,041 13,057 42 12,320 7,155 5,260 1,894 2,306 1,526 780 388 + 1,721 538
         Q2 13,827 12,848 275 11,742 6,362 4,691 1,670 2,266 1,505 761 300 + 2,084 − 538
         Q3 12,860 11,950 302 10,142 5,117 3,879 1,239 2,232 1,486 746 183 + 2,718 −
         Q4 14,656 13,321 504 9,958 4,616 3,518 1,098 2,455 1,669 787 218 + 4,698 −
2007          Q1 9,932 7,738 78 10,044 5,321 3,971 1,350 2,032 1,370 662 408 − 113 −
         Q2 10,837 7,910 303 9,383 4,598 3,440 1,157 2,089 1,423 666 259 + 1,454 −
         Q3 10,366 7,765 232 8,357 3,910 2,979 931 1,985 1,363 622 160 + 2,010 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government health, pension and long-term care insurance schemes. 6Vocational
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a compen- measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agencies, compensation
satory amount to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit and top-up payments and business start-up grants. — 7Promotion of winter con-
short-time working benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory struction and insolvency compensation for employees. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Medical Thera- Other Adminis-
and peutical expend- trative
Contri- Federal Hospital dental Pharma- treatment Sickness iture on expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 grant Total treatment treatment  3 ceuticals and aids benefits benefits iture  4 surplus  5 
2000 133,808 130,053 . 133,823 44,540 32,734 20,121 9,431 7,058 2,524 7,296 − 15
2001 135,790 131,886 . 138,811 44,980 33,495 22,331 9,760 7,717 2,779 7,642 − 3,021
2002 139,707 136,208 . 143,026 46,308 34,899 23,449 9,304 7,561 2,998 8,019 − 3,320
2003 141,654 138,383 . 145,095 46,800 36,120 24,218 9,409 6,973 2,984 8,206 − 3,441
2004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,178 47,594 34,218 21,811 8,281 6,367 3,731 8,114 + 4,102
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 143,809 48,959 33,024 25,358 8,284 5,868 3,847 8,155 + 1,933
2006 149,929 142,184 4,200 147,973 50,327 34,260 25,835 8,303 5,708 4,526 8,110 + 1,956
2005          Q1 34,630 33,989 − 34,452 12,171 8,280 5,795 1,827 1,539 347 1,765 + 178
         Q2 36,832 34,869 1,250 35,978 12,276 8,183 6,418 2,093 1,522 477 1,989 + 854
         Q3 35,380 34,674 − 35,530 12,102 8,133 6,425 2,087 1,400 391 1,904 − 150
         Q4 38,693 36,719 1,250 37,649 12,457 8,502 6,752 2,263 1,398 591 2,391 + 1,044
2006          Q1 34,744 34,034 − 35,968 12,834 8,483 6,384 1,881 1,477 283 1,836 − 1,224
         Q2 38,004 35,279 2,100 36,830 12,658 8,588 6,450 2,071 1,439 574 1,910 + 1,174
         Q3 36,001 35,156 − 36,226 12,551 8,254 6,301 2,048 1,363 515 1,931 − 225
         Q4 40,770 37,745 2,100 38,553 12,348 8,888 6,739 2,290 1,412 881 2,384 + 2,217
2007          Q1 36,437 35,693 − 37,147 12,948 8,793 6,687 1,918 1,525 347 1,879 − 710
         Q2 39,316 37,306 1,250 38,299 12,893 8,860 6,862 2,160 1,510 635 1,930 + 1,017
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The annual figures do not tally with penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. —
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — 2In- 5Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen-
cluding contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. — sation scheme. 
3Including dentures. — 4Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2000 16,523 16,280 16,718 2,252 7,476 4,201 1,067 800 − 195
2001 16,843 16,581 16,890 2,301 7,744 4,134 979 816 − 47
2002 16,917 16,714 17,346 2,363 8,014 4,151 962 837 − 428
2003 16,844 16,665 17,468 2,361 8,183 4,090 951 853 − 624
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2005          Q1 4,159 4,130 4,418 586 2,103 996 226 245 − 259
         Q2 4,315 4,288 4,439 596 2,120 1,011 220 215 − 123
         Q3 4,389 4,358 4,492 606 2,140 1,008 221 213 − 103
         Q4 4,629 4,600 4,509 607 2,154 1,037 227 198 + 121
2006          Q1 4,660 4,631 4,511 611 2,152 998 213 246 + 150
         Q2 4,655 4,629 4,447 582 2,158 994 214 222 + 208
         Q3 4,471 4,441 4,551 617 2,171 1,014 213 222 − 80
         Q4 4,699 4,657 4,526 611 2,191 1,009 218 200 + 173
2007          Q1 4,301 4,265 4,591 624 2,191 1,014 212 238 − 290
         Q2 4,469 4,432 4,528 595 2,192 993 213 231 − 59
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The annual figures do not tally with 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — 2Since subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  1 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2000 + 122,725 + 1,755 − 5,563 − 940 2000 1,211,455 4,440 565,638 211 200,883 440,283
2001 + 135,018 − 14,719 + 3,595 − 1,495 2001 1,223,966 4,440 534,262 174 230,890 454,200
2002 + 178,203 + 24,327 + 2,221 + 22 2002 1,277,667 4,440 536,900 137 238,390 497,800
2003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 1,236 + 7,218 2003 1,358,137 4,440 530,700 341 301,956 520,700
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,200 430 307,212 574,300
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 313,101 652,500
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,900 480 329,577 702,300
2005          Q1 + 65,235 + 19,631 + 11,093 − 4,966 2005          Q1 1,457,430 4,440 552,700 474 302,916 596,900
         Q2 + 54,315 + 3,646 − 2,371 + 1,492          Q2 1,465,639 4,440 530,900 501 305,598 624,200
         Q3 + 59,325 + 11,140 + 788 + 7,444          Q3 1,480,384 4,440 535,600 501 304,143 635,700
         Q4 + 46,048 + 1,062 − 4,999 + 2,071          Q4 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 313,101 652,500
2006          Q1 + 75,788 + 12,526 + 8,174 − 7,296 2006          Q1 1,508,932 4,440 522,400 486 308,606 673,000
         Q2 + 56,445 + 14,238 + 8,228 + 14,649          Q2 1,525,012 4,440 528,500 485 320,187 671,400
         Q3 + 66,689 + 16,579 + 4,181 + 8,913          Q3 1,540,523 4,440 519,300 485 331,898 684,400
         Q4 + 22,952 − 10,686 − 17,326 − 9,958          Q4 1,533,697 4,440 496,900 480 329,577 702,300
2007          Q1 + 68,285 + 4,600 + 12,649 − 11,200 2007          Q1 1,538,621 4,440 513,900 480 324,601 695,200
         Q2 + 54,415 + 22,020 + 5,792 + 27,209          Q2 1,556,684 4,440 505,600 480 325,864 720,300
         Q3 + 51,413 − 20,291 − 4,783 − 27,450
Source: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 After deducting repurchases. Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
as a residual. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security reunifica- isation
or quarter Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5,6 claims  6 Other  7 
Central, state and local government
2001 1,223,966 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 123 8,986 108
2002 1,277,667 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 66 7,845 97
2003 1,358,137 36,022 246,414 153,611 12,810 471,115 396,832 341 34,163 33 6,711 86
2004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 379,984 430 53,672 2 5,572 82
2005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 366,978 488 62,765 2 4,443 86
2006          Q2 1,525,012 37,450 323,930 177,720 10,399 529,386 374,452 485 66,664 2 4,443 83
         Q3 1,540,523 37,895 320,241 171,892 10,253 549,652 377,575 485 68,002 2 4,443 83
         Q4 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 356,511 480 71,892 2 4,443 81
2007          Q1 1,538,621 38,627 323,595 166,620 10,276 560,413 367,054 480 67,032 2 4,443 80
         Q2 1,556,684 38,577 326,230 175,567 10,114 567,582 362,906 480 70,705 2 4,443 79
Central government 8,9,10
2001 701,115 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 123 8,986 107
2002 725,443 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 66 7,845 97
2003 767,713 35,235 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 38,146 223 7,326 33 6,711 85
2004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 2 5,572 81
2005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 29,318 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
2006          Q2 913,018 36,927 108,975 177,669 10,399 518,757 44,284 408 11,073 2 4,443 83
         Q3 929,597 37,772 106,419 171,841 10,253 539,023 48,236 408 11,119 2 4,443 83
         Q4 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 30,030 408 11,036 2 4,443 80
2007          Q1 923,511 38,622 102,508 166,569 10,276 549,886 39,620 408 11,100 2 4,443 79
         Q2 945,531 38,497 103,219 175,516 10,114 557,055 45,104 408 11,096 2 4,443 79
         Q3 939,321 37,725 102,103 162,292 10,344 568,917 41,833 408 11,177 2 4,443 77
State government
2001 364,559 1,900 87,856 . . . 265,652 5 9,145 . . 1
2002 392,172 588 121,394 . . . 255,072 5 15,113 . . 1
2003 423,737 787 154,189 . . . 244,902 4 23,854 . . 1
2004 448,672 1,282 179,620 . . . 228,644 3 39,122 . . 1
2005 471,375 847 201,146 . . . 221,163 3 48,216 . . 1
2006          Q2 478,661 523 214,954 . . . 211,432 2 51,748 . . 1
         Q3 478,603 123 213,823 . . . 211,564 2 53,091 . . 1
         Q4 481,850 36 216,665 . . . 209,270 2 55,876 . . 1
2007          Q1 483,084 5 221,087 . . . 211,039 2 50,950 . . 1
         Q2 479,658 80 223,011 . . . 201,938 2 54,627 . . 1
         Q3 480,050 1,825 222,879 . . . 202,054 2 53,290 . . 1
Local government 11
2001 99,209 . 153 . . 913 96,051 136 1,955 . . .
2002 100,842 . 153 . . 913 97,624 124 2,027 . . .
2003 107,857 . 77 . . 734 104,469 106 2,471 . . .
2004 112,538 . − . . 812 108,231 86 3,410 . . .
2005 116,033 . − . . 466 111,889 77 3,601 . . .
2006          Q2 118,323 . − . . 260 114,383 75 3,605 . . .
         Q3 117,462 . − . . 260 113,522 75 3,605 . . .
         Q4 118,380 . − . . 256 113,261 70 4,792 . . .
2007          Q1 117,768 . − . . 256 112,646 70 4,795 . . .
         Q2 117,312 . − . . 256 112,191 70 4,795 . . .
Special funds 8,9,10,12
2001 59,084 − 3,748 10,134 . 31,040 13,626 8 529 . . .
2002 59,210 − 3,820 10,185 . 32,828 11,832 8 537 . . .
2003 58,830 − 4,610 10,185 . 34,201 9,315 8 512 . . .
2004 57,250 − 4,538 9,685 . 34,355 8,274 8 389 . . .
2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 4,609 − 238 . . .
2006          Q2 15,011 . − 51 . 10,369 4,353 − 238 . . .
         Q3 14,860 . − 51 . 10,368 4,253 − 188 . . .
         Q4 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 3,950 − 188 . . .
2007          Q1 14,258 . − 51 . 10,271 3,749 − 188 . . .
         Q2 14,183 . − 51 . 10,271 3,674 − 188 . . .
         Q3 100 . − . . 100 . . . . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including 8In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central govern-
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term ment and its special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- ratios. — 9On 1 January 2005 central government assumed joint responsi-
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans bility for the debts of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the afore-
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- mentioned special fund is recorded under central government. — 10On
vestment assistance levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing con- 1 July 2007 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former the ERP Special Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the recorded under central government. — 11Including debt of municipal
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have been esti-
their home country. — 6Excluding offsets against outstanding claims. — mated. — 12ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June 2007), German Unity
7Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2005   2006   2007
  2004   2005   2006   2004   2005   2006   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 104.8 106.0 111.6 4.7 1.2 5.3 1.9 8.4 2.2 5.0 5.6 5.2 5.3
Construction 83.2 79.2 83.5 − 3.8 − 4.8 5.4 − 2.7 3.3 1.9 5.6 10.6 16.3 0.3
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel and
restaurant services, transport
and storage  1 104.1 104.7 108.5 1.6 0.6 3.6 − 0.1 3.8 1.9 3.5 5.3 3.3 2.7
Financing, renting and business
services  2 104.9 107.7 110.1 − 0.4 2.7 2.2 2.6 1.3 1.8 2.6 3.0 3.2 3.2
Public and private services  3 102.6 103.1 103.3 0.4 0.4 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.1 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 0.5
Gross value added 103.1 104.1 107.0 1.4 1.0 2.8 1.1 3.4 1.5 2.9 3.6 3.5 2.9
Gross domestic product  4 102.1 102.9 105.8 1.1 0.8 2.9 1.0 3.4 1.6 2.7 3.7 3.3 2.5
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 101.4 101.3 102.3 0.2 − 0.1 1.0 − 0.7 1.2 0.2 0.4 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2
Government consumption 100.9 101.4 102.2 − 1.5 0.5 0.9 1.3 1.7 0.1 0.9 0.7 2.1 2.1
Machinery and equipment 94.2 99.9 108.2 4.6 6.0 8.3 8.7 11.3 8.4 8.0 6.3 10.6 8.8
Premises 85.1 82.4 85.9 − 3.8 − 3.1 4.3 − 0.5 2.4 1.9 4.7 7.8 14.4 − 0.4
Other investment  6 112.5 117.9 125.8 2.1 4.8 6.7 6.6 5.2 6.1 6.9 8.3 3.9 4.8
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . − 0.1 0.0 − 0.1 0.1 1.3 0.0 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.3
Domestic use 97.8 98.1 100.0 − 0.2 0.3 1.9 0.6 3.6 1.1 2.2 0.7 2.0 0.7
Net exports  8 . . . 1.3 0.5 1.1 0.4 0.0 0.6 0.7 3.1 1.4 1.7
Exports 125.2 134.1 150.9 10.0 7.1 12.5 8.7 14.6 9.0 10.7 15.6 9.9 9.4
Imports 112.7 120.3 133.7 7.2 6.7 11.2 8.6 17.1 8.9 10.3 9.2 7.7 6.1
Gross domestic product  4 102.1 102.9 105.8 1.1 0.8 2.9 1.0 3.4 1.6 2.7 3.7 3.3 2.5
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,307.5 1,326.4 1,357.5 1.8 1.4 2.3 1.1 2.9 1.8 1.5 3.1 1.2 1.6
Government consumption 415.6 421.5 425.9 − 0.3 1.4 1.0 1.8 2.7 0.6 0.4 0.5 2.5 2.5
Machinery and equipment 154.5 162.1 173.7 3.5 4.9 7.1 7.3 9.9 7.5 7.1 4.9 9.7 7.7
Premises 208.0 203.4 217.2 − 2.4 − 2.2 6.8 0.0 3.2 3.5 7.9 11.9 22.3 6.5
Other investment  6 24.8 25.3 26.3 1.8 2.1 3.7 3.2 2.7 4.1 3.6 4.4 2.0 1.4
Changes in inventories  7 − 10.2 − 7.5 − 4.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,100.2 2,131.3 2,195.8 1.1 1.5 3.0 1.8 4.8 2.6 3.3 1.5 3.5 2.4
Net exports 111.0 113.3 126.4 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 847.8 918.0 1,046.5 9.9 8.3 14.0 10.3 16.5 10.9 12.3 16.3 10.4 9.4
Imports 736.8 804.7 920.1 7.5 9.2 14.3 11.3 21.4 13.1 13.2 10.8 7.5 5.7
Gross domestic product  4 2,211.2 2,244.6 2,322.2 2.2 1.5 3.5 1.8 3.9 2.3 3.4 4.3 5.0 4.2
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 106.2 107.8 109.3 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.9 1.7 1.5 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.7
Gross domestic product 105.0 105.8 106.4 1.1 0.7 0.6 0.8 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.5 1.6 1.7
Terms of trade 102.5 101.3 99.8 − 0.4 − 1.3 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 0.6 0.3
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,137.1 1,129.9 1,149.4 0.4 − 0.6 1.7 − 0.6 0.5 1.6 2.3 2.3 3.1 2.9
Entrepreneurial and property
income 530.0 561.3 601.9 13.4 5.9 7.2 8.7 11.1 2.0 6.1 10.1 7.9 3.9
National income 1,667.1 1,691.2 1,751.2 4.2 1.4 3.6 2.0 4.1 1.8 3.7 4.6 4.8 3.3
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,226.3 2,265.0 2,344.4 3.6 1.7 3.5 2.0 3.9 2.3 3.5 4.3 5.2 3.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2007. — 1In- products). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6In-
cluding communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate tangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertain-
activities, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home servi- ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net in-
ces. — 4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on crease in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-
Period total tion  2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
2002 98.3 88.6 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.3 101.8 101.9 99.4 105.4
2003 98.4 84.9 99.8 99.5 99.5 102.0 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.6
2004 100.9 80.6 102.7 102.5 103.3 105.8 87.5 97.9 104.4 103.7 101.3 111.9
2005 103.7 76.1 102.8 106.3 106.5 111.1 87.8 100.9 110.0 104.6 106.2 116.8
2006 109.8 81.0 102.9 113.2 115.1 118.9 94.0 102.6 114.5 111.7 114.8 120.2
 
2006          Jan 98.1 41.6 120.4 100.9 104.6 101.1 85.7 96.3 113.9 104.7 92.3 107.3
         Feb 100.4 45.7 109.1 104.6 105.5 109.7 89.4 96.0 110.4 107.6 99.4 121.8
         Mar 111.8 63.6 112.6 116.2 116.5 124.4 98.3 103.4 118.4 117.0 117.0 131.8
         Apr 107.9 86.1 101.9 110.5 113.2 114.4 92.4 101.4 113.5 110.6 109.0 120.3
         May 107.7 88.8 95.4 110.8 114.1 115.0 89.4 100.7 112.9 112.4 110.1 122.5
         June 112.4 94.0 94.3 116.0 118.8 123.2 92.7 101.4 114.4 117.2 119.4 126.1
         July 112.7 99.4 97.1 115.6 119.0 121.2 90.3 103.2 118.8 111.9 115.1 127.4
         Aug 103.5 90.6 92.7 105.9 113.0 103.8 79.3 100.8 113.6 104.7 105.4 92.4
         Sep 117.3 99.1 93.5 121.5 123.1 129.2 106.6 106.5 113.1 118.7 125.6 132.0
         Oct 117.9 97.7 100.7 121.6 124.9 125.6 104.4 110.4 119.8 120.8 119.9 126.9
         Nov 120.7 96.1 106.5 124.6 124.4 133.9 107.9 110.5 119.0 121.1 128.3 133.3
         Dec 107.1 69.5 110.7 110.2 103.6 124.7 91.3 100.3 105.6 93.9 136.6 100.5
2007          Jan 104.8 56.4 104.9 109.2 115.3 110.3 89.4 98.7 117.9 117.3 102.6 117.6
         Feb 108.0 59.7 99.4 113.4 116.8 119.2 95.7 98.6 116.4 117.8 112.5 127.5
         Mar 7 121.2 7 78.0 105.2 126.9 129.4 136.0 104.2 109.1 125.0 127.9 132.4 143.1
         Apr 7 112.8 7 84.6 96.8 117.2 121.2 122.3 90.6 104.9 121.4 117.9 117.6 129.2
         May 7 113.9 7 86.4 95.4 118.4 123.1 123.5 90.7 104.8 121.9 118.2 120.4 128.7
         June 7 118.5 7 91.0 94.3 123.7 127.8 133.2 95.2 102.9 117.9 121.3 130.6 137.8
         July  + 7 118.0 7 95.4 95.2 122.6 127.2 131.0 89.6 103.7 121.7 117.7 127.7 132.3
         Aug  + 7 108.9 7 87.8 93.3 112.6 119.8 112.8 81.0 104.1 119.9 108.8 114.3 100.2
         Sep  + p 7 124.3 7 96.9 96.5 129.9 131.8 140.0 107.3 111.0 121.9 122.8 137.0 143.5
Annual percentage change  
  
2002 − 1.2 − 4.4 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.7 + 3.8 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 1.3
2003 + 0.1 − 4.2 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 5.2 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.6 + 2.1
2004 + 2.5 − 5.1 + 2.9 + 3.0 + 3.8 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 2.4 + 3.8 + 3.6 + 4.0
2005 + 2.8 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 5.0 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 5.4 + 0.9 + 4.8 + 4.4
2006 + 5.9 + 6.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 + 8.1 + 7.0 + 7.1 + 1.7 + 4.1 + 6.8 + 8.1 + 2.9
 
2006          Jan + 3.9 − 13.2 + 6.9 + 4.2 + 3.7 + 6.1 + 4.9 + 1.9 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 7.0 + 0.7
         Feb + 5.9 + 5.5 + 1.3 + 6.5 + 6.2 + 9.2 + 4.2 + 1.9 + 2.7 + 5.6 + 6.8 + 8.4
         Mar + 4.8 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 5.3 + 7.1 + 5.5 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 2.6 + 4.3
         Apr + 5.3 + 7.5 + 0.7 + 5.5 + 6.8 + 4.9 + 6.3 + 4.1 + 4.8 + 4.3 + 8.0 − 1.7
         May + 7.1 + 6.5 − 2.5 + 8.1 + 8.5 + 9.8 + 12.2 + 3.0 + 3.2 + 9.2 + 11.0 + 9.2
         June + 5.6 + 6.3 + 1.9 + 5.8 + 8.6 + 5.1 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 6.2 + 8.8 + 3.6 + 3.0
         July + 5.7 + 7.0 + 0.7 + 6.2 + 8.2 + 6.4 + 7.9 + 0.7 + 5.9 + 3.4 + 6.8 + 4.4
         Aug + 7.9 + 7.3 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 11.0 + 9.1 + 13.0 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 8.7 + 14.4 + 1.9
         Sep + 6.1 + 7.8 − 0.1 + 6.4 + 8.7 + 6.6 + 9.2 + 0.3 + 2.1 + 8.5 + 10.0 + 1.9
         Oct + 4.4 + 4.6 − 3.1 + 5.1 + 8.2 + 5.1 + 4.2 − 1.8 + 1.7 + 7.2 + 10.8 − 3.2
         Nov + 7.0 + 11.6 − 1.4 + 7.6 + 8.8 + 9.0 + 8.0 + 1.5 + 6.3 + 8.5 + 12.6 + 1.7
         Dec + 7.3 + 13.7 − 4.2 + 8.5 + 11.2 + 7.7 + 12.2 + 3.9 + 6.7 + 11.8 + 5.6 + 5.7
2007          Jan + 6.8 + 35.6 − 12.9 + 8.2 + 10.2 + 9.1 + 4.3 + 2.5 + 3.5 + 12.0 + 11.2 + 9.6
         Feb + 7.6 + 30.6 − 8.9 + 8.4 + 10.7 + 8.7 + 7.0 + 2.7 + 5.4 + 9.5 + 13.2 + 4.7
         Mar 7 + 8.4 7 + 22.6 − 6.6 + 9.2 + 11.1 + 9.3 + 6.0 + 5.5 + 5.6 + 9.3 + 13.2 + 8.6
         Apr 7 + 4.5 7 − 1.7 − 5.0 + 6.1 + 7.1 + 6.9 − 1.9 + 3.5 + 7.0 + 6.6 + 7.9 + 7.4
         May 7 + 5.8 7 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 6.9 + 7.9 + 7.4 + 1.5 + 4.1 + 8.0 + 5.2 + 9.4 + 5.1
         June 7 + 5.4 7 − 3.2 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 7.6 + 8.1 + 2.7 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 3.5 + 9.4 + 9.3
         July  + 7 + 4.7 7 − 4.0 − 2.0 + 6.1 + 6.9 + 8.1 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 2.4 + 5.2 + 10.9 + 3.8
         Aug  + 7 + 5.2 7 − 3.1 + 0.6 + 6.3 + 6.0 + 8.7 + 2.1 + 3.3 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 8.4 + 8.4
         Sep  + p 7 + 6.0 7 − 2.2 + 3.2 + 6.9 + 7.1 + 8.4 + 0.7 + 4.2 + 7.8 + 3.5 + 9.1 + 8.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Annual and supply, and, in particular, mining of coal and lignite, extraction of crude oil
quarterly figures based on firms’ reports of enterprises with at least 20 and natural gas and manufacture of refined petroleum products. — 4In-
employees; monthly breakdown from January 2007 on the basis of data cluding mining and quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor ve-
provided by firms with at least 50 employees, but with a smaller reporting hicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities
group before that date. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version related to printing. — 7Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless assigned to the main grouping Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the annual overall survey in the
energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The figures refer to the economic construction sector (average +4%). — +Provisional; adjusted in advance by
classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results o f the
parts thereof; civil engineering”. — 3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water Quarterly Production Survey for the third quarter 2007. 
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 Durable goods Non-durable goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
total  
  
2002 98.2 − 0.1 96.4 + 0.5 99.5 + 0.1 99.0 − 2.4 95.7 − 4.1 101.0 − 1.4
2003 99.0 + 0.8 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.2 95.6 − 3.4 90.4 − 5.5 98.8 − 2.2
2004 105.1 + 6.2 105.0 + 7.4 107.6 + 6.9 95.1 − 0.5 89.3 − 1.2 98.7 − 0.1
2005 111.8 + 6.4 110.0 + 4.8 116.2 + 8.0 99.7 + 4.8 91.4 + 2.4 104.9 + 6.3
2006 123.8 + 10.7 124.8 + 13.5 127.5 + 9.7 105.7 + 6.0 98.9 + 8.2 109.9 + 4.8
 
2006          Sep 130.2 + 10.8 131.1 + 14.7 133.8 + 8.7 112.4 + 6.7 107.1 + 8.1 115.7 + 6.0
         Oct 129.7 + 9.3 134.5 + 14.8 129.8 + 5.6 113.5 + 6.6 112.3 + 9.2 114.3 + 5.0
         Nov 130.7 + 8.0 134.8 + 14.4 131.6 + 3.3 113.7 + 8.5 110.9 + 7.1 115.5 + 9.4
         Dec 123.5 + 8.5 115.7 + 12.1 136.5 + 6.8 95.6 + 4.9 87.1 + 5.1 100.9 + 4.9
2007          Jan 127.2 + 9.2 132.4 + 13.9 128.1 + 6.2 106.5 + 5.9 99.3 + 4.9 111.0 + 6.4
         Feb 132.6 + 12.1 130.3 + 11.6 138.7 + 13.7 115.2 + 6.3 100.2 + 4.0 124.6 + 7.5
         Mar 146.1 + 14.3 144.3 + 14.3 153.7 + 16.1 120.7 + 6.0 109.1 + 3.0 127.8 + 7.6
         Apr 131.7 + 9.2 133.6 + 8.6 136.2 + 10.2 107.4 + 6.8 98.3 + 0.8 113.1 + 10.3
         May 134.7 + 12.3 135.5 + 9.8 140.6 + 15.2 107.2 + 8.1 101.2 + 4.8 110.9 + 9.9
         June 146.6 + 18.0 141.7 + 9.9 160.1 + 26.1 107.6 + 10.1 102.6 + 7.3 110.7 + 11.8
         July 135.0 + 7.4 136.2 + 6.2 139.9 + 8.9 111.1 + 4.6 98.4 + 5.1 119.0 + 4.5
         Aug 125.1 + 5.2 126.8 + 6.6 127.2 + 4.3 111.2 + 4.7 93.0 + 4.3 122.5 + 5.0
         Sep  p 137.0 + 5.2 137.4 + 4.8 141.4 + 5.7 117.7 + 4.7 109.0 + 1.8 123.2 + 6.5
from the domestic market  
  
2002 94.6 − 3.1 94.6 − 1.9 94.7 − 3.4 94.6 − 5.3 92.0 − 7.5 96.3 − 3.9
2003 94.6 + 0.0 95.0 + 0.4 96.0 + 1.4 89.9 − 5.0 86.3 − 6.2 92.1 − 4.4
2004 98.3 + 3.9 100.4 + 5.7 100.1 + 4.3 87.2 − 3.0 83.0 − 3.8 89.8 − 2.5
2005 101.4 + 3.2 103.6 + 3.2 102.8 + 2.7 91.1 + 4.5 85.2 + 2.7 94.7 + 5.5
2006 110.9 + 9.4 116.9 + 12.8 110.5 + 7.5 95.0 + 4.3 92.2 + 8.2 96.6 + 2.0
 
2006          Sep 119.9 + 13.6 122.7 + 14.8 123.6 + 15.1 101.8 + 5.6 100.5 + 8.9 102.6 + 3.7
         Oct 118.5 + 10.4 126.5 + 14.0 115.9 + 8.6 103.3 + 4.8 105.2 + 9.8 102.1 + 1.7
         Nov 118.9 + 9.8 127.4 + 13.9 115.9 + 6.6 103.1 + 6.6 106.1 + 9.5 101.3 + 4.9
         Dec 106.8 + 9.4 107.5 + 12.9 112.7 + 6.8 87.8 + 6.7 82.0 + 9.2 91.3 + 5.2
2007          Jan 113.7 + 10.7 123.0 + 14.0 111.4 + 9.5 93.8 + 3.4 92.1 + 2.8 94.8 + 3.8
         Feb 115.1 + 11.1 120.9 + 12.4 114.5 + 12.7 100.6 + 2.5 92.9 + 2.2 105.4 + 2.8
         Mar 128.3 + 13.0 132.8 + 14.2 131.3 + 14.4 107.1 + 5.4 102.0 + 3.8 110.2 + 6.4
         Apr 117.3 + 9.8 124.8 + 8.9 117.6 + 12.0 94.8 + 5.6 89.3 + 1.1 98.2 + 8.3
         May 117.9 + 8.9 127.4 + 9.9 117.0 + 8.9 93.1 + 4.5 89.6 + 0.6 95.2 + 6.8
         June 123.5 + 12.0 131.5 + 10.1 126.2 + 15.4 92.8 + 7.0 91.9 + 4.9 93.4 + 8.4
         July 121.4 + 8.0 129.2 + 6.4 122.2 + 10.9 96.7 + 4.1 90.1 + 4.9 100.7 + 3.6
         Aug 113.4 + 4.3 122.0 + 6.1 110.6 + 3.1 96.8 + 2.3 84.9 + 2.2 104.2 + 2.5
         Sep  p 119.9 + 0.0 127.5 + 3.9 117.9 − 4.6 103.8 + 2.0 100.0 − 0.5 106.2 + 3.5
from abroad  
  
2002 102.7 + 3.6 99.1 + 4.2 104.1 + 3.5 108.6 + 3.6 103.9 + 3.5 111.4 + 3.7
2003 104.4 + 1.7 102.3 + 3.2 105.1 + 1.0 108.2 − 0.4 99.3 − 4.4 113.8 + 2.2
2004 113.6 + 8.8 112.2 + 9.7 114.5 + 8.9 112.6 + 4.1 103.1 + 3.8 118.5 + 4.1
2005 124.8 + 9.9 119.9 + 6.9 128.5 + 12.2 119.0 + 5.7 105.0 + 1.8 127.7 + 7.8
2006 140.0 + 12.2 137.3 + 14.5 143.2 + 11.4 129.4 + 8.7 113.6 + 8.2 139.3 + 9.1
 
2006          Sep 143.0 + 7.9 144.3 + 14.6 143.3 + 4.1 136.0 + 8.7 121.6 + 6.7 144.9 + 9.7
         Oct 143.6 + 8.0 147.1 + 15.8 142.7 + 3.6 136.1 + 9.7 127.8 + 8.2 141.3 + 10.6
         Nov 145.4 + 6.3 146.4 + 15.4 146.1 + 1.0 137.2 + 11.9 121.3 + 2.9 147.1 + 17.2
         Dec 144.4 + 7.8 128.5 + 11.0 158.4 + 6.8 113.0 + 2.3 98.3 − 1.7 122.2 + 4.4
2007          Jan 144.0 + 7.7 147.1 + 13.9 143.5 + 4.0 134.7 + 9.9 115.0 + 8.5 147.0 + 10.4
         Feb 154.4 + 12.9 144.9 + 10.5 161.1 + 14.4 147.6 + 12.5 116.1 + 7.5 167.2 + 14.8
         Mar 168.3 + 15.5 162.3 + 14.5 174.4 + 17.3 150.7 + 6.8 124.7 + 1.6 167.0 + 9.4
         Apr 149.7 + 8.6 147.3 + 8.1 153.3 + 9.0 135.4 + 8.8 118.1 + 0.4 146.1 + 13.4
         May 155.6 + 15.9 148.2 + 9.7 162.4 + 19.7 138.5 + 13.8 126.6 + 11.9 145.9 + 14.8
         June 175.5 + 23.9 157.6 + 9.6 191.3 + 33.6 140.3 + 15.1 126.1 + 11.5 149.3 + 17.1
         July 152.0 + 6.8 147.2 + 5.9 156.2 + 7.5 143.1 + 5.6 116.6 + 5.4 159.6 + 5.6
         Aug 139.8 + 6.2 134.4 + 7.3 142.5 + 5.2 143.2 + 8.7 110.9 + 8.0 163.3 + 8.9
         Sep  p 158.4 + 10.8 153.0 + 6.0 163.1 + 13.8 148.6 + 9.3 128.8 + 5.9 161.0 + 11.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic ployees, previously on the basis of the reports by enterprises with at least 20
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture employees. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; cluding manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2In-
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added tax; cluding printing and service activities related to printin g. 
from January 2006 on the basis of reports by enterprises with at least 50 em-
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany  1 Eastern Germany  2 
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per-
 centage centage centage
Period change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2002 88.8 − 6.1 72.8 91.5 95.7 92.1 − 6.9 80.5 94.8 96.4 79.6 − 3.6 51.5 81.9 94.0
2003 79.3 − 10.7 67.5 78.6 87.5 82.0 − 11.0 75.6 79.7 88.7 71.9 − 9.7 45.1 75.4 84.3
2004 74.3 − 6.3 61.3 72.8 84.2 76.9 − 6.2 70.5 74.6 83.8 67.1 − 6.7 35.8 67.7 85.2
2005 73.8 − 0.7 56.9 74.4 83.5 77.8 + 1.2 66.5 78.0 84.8 62.6 − 6.7 30.5 64.2 80.1
2006 77.6 + 5.1 59.4 81.3 84.9 82.1 + 5.5 68.9 84.8 87.3 65.3 + 4.3 33.1 71.1 78.6
   
2006          Aug 84.2 + 2.2 60.1 86.9 96.1 88.3 + 1.7 70.7 89.6 97.9 72.9 + 3.7 30.8 79.1 91.5
         Sep 90.8 + 1.9 66.5 93.9 102.5 94.6 + 0.9 74.0 96.5 105.6 80.3 + 5.2 45.7 86.6 94.5
         Oct 76.5 + 2.7 57.9 84.4 79.2 81.2 + 2.4 68.6 87.2 82.2 63.6 + 3.8 28.4 76.2 71.6
         Nov 70.5 + 4.3 50.7 80.3 71.9 74.5 + 2.9 59.4 86.2 70.5 59.6 + 9.8 26.8 63.4 75.3
         Dec 70.3 − 6.1 56.2 83.9 63.8 72.7 − 7.5 60.4 88.2 62.4 63.9 − 1.1 44.8 71.4 67.4
2007          Jan 59.9 + 19.1 43.4 69.6 59.3 64.6 + 19.2 50.3 74.6 62.0 47.0 + 18.7 24.3 55.1 52.1
         Feb 64.0 + 8.3 45.6 77.3 60.5 67.5 + 4.0 53.4 83.1 58.4 54.5 + 25.9 24.2 60.6 66.1
         Mar 93.1 + 13.3 60.3 101.8 103.7 99.4 + 15.2 71.2 107.1 108.4 75.7 + 6.6 30.1 86.4 91.7
         Apr 87.7 + 8.9 61.8 92.8 98.1 93.3 + 9.9 68.5 98.8 102.5 72.5 + 5.8 43.2 75.5 86.9
         May 89.6 + 4.1 60.9 93.5 103.2 96.3 + 2.6 70.6 100.8 107.5 71.2 + 10.4 34.0 72.5 92.0
         June 96.0 + 2.7 66.5 103.2 106.2 102.2 + 4.4 76.0 109.0 110.9 78.8 − 3.0 40.4 86.3 93.9
         July 93.6 + 7.0 60.0 103.3 103.5 100.7 + 9.8 68.8 112.1 107.8 73.8 − 2.5 35.9 77.8 92.3
         Aug 83.8 − 0.5 58.6 82.2 101.5 89.1 + 0.9 69.1 86.3 105.1 69.5 − 4.7 29.8 70.4 92.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications 0.2.8. — 1Excluding West Berlin. — 2Including West Berlin. — 3Including
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there- the railways and post office. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  2 of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco products leather goods ing materials sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted 2003 = 100
2002 100.5 − 1.6 − 1.3 98.3 + 2.7 97.5 + 3.5 105.8 − 5.0 101.0 − 7.9 99.9 − 0.8 − 0.8 98.1 + 2.9
2003  4 100.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 100.2 + 1.9 100.0 + 2.6 100.1 − 5.2 100.2 − 0.7 100.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 100.5 + 2.4
2004 101.8 + 1.5 + 1.6 103.3 + 2.9 99.8 − 0.3 103.4 + 2.9 103.6 + 3.2 102.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 102.5 + 2.0
2005 103.8 + 2.3 + 1.7 106.4 + 3.3 104.8 + 5.0 105.6 + 2.4 101.9 − 1.5 104.0 + 2.2 + 1.5 104.9 + 2.2
2006  5 111.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 111.9 + 0.3 111.8 + 2.6 114.2 + 2.6 115.1 + 4.1 113.6 + 2.4 + 1.6 121.6 + 6.8
 
2006          Sep  5 106.8 − 0.3 − 0.9 106.0 + 0.1 107.8 − 0.6 108.3 − 1.5 111.7 + 4.6 109.9 + 1.3 + 0.5 119.5 + 6.7
         Oct 114.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 109.8 − 2.1 114.2 + 1.4 131.0 + 1.9 123.8 + 5.0 118.0 + 2.3 + 1.8 128.9 + 9.7
         Nov 116.5 + 0.3 − 0.2 111.2 − 1.9 115.7 + 2.2 121.0 + 0.8 129.1 + 8.6 120.7 + 3.0 + 2.2 136.5 + 12.8
         Dec 138.2 + 2.9 + 2.6 131.8 + 0.2 132.0 + 1.9 146.4 + 4.2 153.3 + 13.2 137.3 + 7.0 + 6.3 135.9 + 25.1
2007          Jan 99.3 − 2.2 − 3.0 102.7 − 0.1 106.3 − 0.7 95.9 − 2.7 99.4 − 1.5 95.8 − 4.2 − 5.3 82.9 − 11.7
         Feb 96.2 − 1.0 − 1.7 100.7 − 2.1 103.9 + 1.7 86.7 + 4.1 98.1 + 1.3 95.9 − 2.1 − 3.1 94.3 − 5.8
         Mar 112.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 114.4 + 0.5 115.7 + 1.6 116.3 + 4.6 119.5 + 3.5 114.9 + 0.0 − 1.2 124.3 − 1.8
         Apr 113.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 115.9 + 2.3 114.5 + 3.6 134.2 + 9.6 114.7 − 1.0 115.0 − 0.4 − 1.8 119.9 − 6.7
         May 107.7 − 2.6 − 3.2 112.6 − 0.9 112.5 + 2.5 110.8 − 5.1 107.7 − 4.3 111.7 − 2.4 − 3.5 123.9 − 1.4
         June 105.7 − 1.9 − 2.5 110.3 − 2.1 111.9 + 2.6 109.2 + 0.3 107.1 + 0.5 110.2 − 1.7 − 2.8 124.4 − 0.8
         July 108.5 − 0.4 − 0.8 111.8 − 3.7 117.3 + 4.3 111.5 + 2.2 108.7 + 3.0 112.4 − 0.7 − 1.6 124.6 − 0.6
         Aug 105.7 − 1.9 − 2.7 107.8 − 1.0 111.2 + 3.9 109.9 − 2.7 107.7 − 2.0 107.6 − 1.6 − 2.8 112.6 + 0.3
         Sep 108.8 + 1.9 + 0.9 107.7 + 1.6 113.4 + 5.2 125.0 + 15.4 110.9 − 0.7 110.7 + 0.7 − 0.7 116.7 − 2.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding parts and accessories. — 4Figures for 2003 do not include Lower Saxony. —
value-added tax; annual percentage changes based on a consistent report- 5Figures from January 2006 onwards based on an expanded sample owing
ing sample. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Ex- to newly registered institutions; provisional, in some cases revised, and par-
cluding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of ticularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for missi ng reports. 
automotive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor vehicle
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployed  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-
manu- ment pro- going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cational
ing Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  3 6,7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2004 38,880 + 0.4 + 153 34,661 + 0.0 6,019 769 151 117 184 4,381 + 93 10.5 286
2005 38,847 − 0.1 − 33 34,490 − 0.5 5,931 719 126 r 61r 114 9 4,861 9 + 479 9 11.7 10 413
2006 39,089 + 0.6 + 242 34,694 + 0.6 11 5,249 710 67 51 124 4,487 − 374 10.8 564
2006          Oct 39,677 + 0.8 + 310 5,252 737 39 56 137 4,084 − 471 9.8 626
         Nov 39,744 + 0.9 + 371 35,270 + 0.9 5,251 734 36 56 141 3,995 − 536 9.6 609
         Dec 39,616 + 1.2 + 453 5,236 718 63 52 134 4,008 − 597 9.6 592
2007          Jan 39,074 + 1.8 + 690 5,247 686 126 44 121 4,284 − 726 10.2 12 594
         Feb 39,100 + 1.9 + 719 34,729 + 2.0 5,246 679 148 43 124 4,247 − 801 10.2 624
         Mar 39,242 + 1.9 + 743 5,255 13 687 144 42 129 4,124 − 853 9.9 640
         Apr 39,463 + 1.9 + 732 5,255 13 696 51 42 133 3,976 − 815 9.5 651
         May 39,664 + 1.7 + 668 35,171 + 1.8 5,266 13 699 48 42 135 3,812 − 727 14 9.1 643
         June 39,778 + 1.6 + 620 5,284 13 704 46 42 133 3,687 − 712 8.8 648
         July 39,760 + 1.6 + 607 5,319 13 706 ... 42 123 3,715 − 671 8.9 650
         Aug 39,856 + 1.6 + 634 35,468 + 1.7 5,351 13 713 ... 15 4315 116 3,705 − 666 8.8 648
         Sep 16 40,179 16 + 1.7 16 + 672 ... ... ... 15 4315 126 3,543 − 694 8.4 629
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 4315 138 3,434 − 650 8.2 609
Western Germany o)  
  
2004 . . . . . 5,380 562 122 24 121 2,783 + 89 8.5 239
2005 . . . . . 5,214 529 101 r 12r 769 3,247 9 + 464 9 9.9 10 325
2006 . . . . . 11 4,650 525 54 10 85 3,007 − 240 9.1 436
2006          Oct . . . . . 4,647 542 32 10 97 2,738 − 360 8.2 473
         Nov . . . . . 4,645 540 30 10 99 2,672 − 409 8.0 464
         Dec . . . . . 4,631 530 50 9 93 2,670 − 450 8.0 458
2007          Jan . . . . . 4,642 509 93 9 83 2,830 − 532 8.5 12 463
         Feb . . . . . 4,640 505 108 9 84 2,798 − 572 8.4 483
         Mar . . . . . 4,647 13 511 104 9 87 2,708 − 609 8.1 493
         Apr . . . . . 4,645 13 517 41 9 90 2,611 − 591 7.8 504
         May . . . . . 4,655 13 519 39 10 93 2,503 − 545 14 7.5 502
         June . . . . . 4,670 13 522 36 10 91 2,427 − 539 7.3 511
         July . . . . . 4,701 13 524 ... 10 85 2,450 − 510 7.3 515
         Aug . . . . . 4,728 13 529 ... 15 1015 80 2,444 − 498 7.3 511
         Sep . . . . . ... ... ... 15 915 87 2,334 − 501 7.0 498
         Oct . . . . . ... ... ... 15 915 95 2,265 − 473 6.8 485
Eastern Germany +  
  
2004 . . . . . 639 207 29 93 63 1,599 + 4 18.4 47
2005 . . . . . 717 189 25 r 49r 389 1,614 9 +1 6 9 18.7 10 88
2006 . . . . . 11 599 185 13 42 39 1,480 − 134 17.3 129
2006          Oct . . . . . 605 195 7 46 40 1,346 − 111 15.7 153
         Nov . . . . . 606 194 6 46 42 1,323 − 127 15.5 145
         Dec . . . . . 604 188 14 43 41 1,337 − 148 15.7 134
2007          Jan . . . . . 604 177 33 35 39 1,454 − 194 17.0 12 130
         Feb . . . . . 606 174 41 34 40 1,448 − 229 16.9 141
         Mar . . . . . 608 13 175 40 33 42 1,416 − 244 16.6 146
         Apr . . . . . 610 13 179 10 33 43 1,365 − 224 16.0 147
         May . . . . . 611 13 180 10 32 42 1,309 − 181 14 15.2 141
         June . . . . . 614 13 181 10 32 42 1,260 − 173 14.7 137
         July . . . . . 618 13 182 ... 33 39 1,265 − 161 14.7 134
         Aug . . . . . 622 13 183 ... 15 3315 36 1,262 − 169 14.7 137
         Sep . . . . . ... ... ... 15 3415 39 1,209 − 193 14.1 131
         Oct . . . . . ... ... ... 15 3415 43 1,169 − 177 13.6 124
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual 2004. — 8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — 9From January 2005,
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- unemployed persons including recipients of social assistance who are ab le to
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- work. — 10From January 2005, including offers of job opportunities. —
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Workplace concept; aver- 11From January 2006, enterprises with more than 50 employees, previously
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — enterprises with at least 20 employees. — 12From January 2007, vacancies
3Up to December 2004, western Germany including West Berlin and east- for seasonal workers are included only if they are based on non-specific em-
ern Germany excluding West Berlin. — 4The figures refer to the economic ployer requirements. — 13Provisional up to adjustment to the figures of
classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or the annual overall survey. — 14From May 2007, calculated on the basis of
parts thereof; civil engineering”. — 5Number within a given month. — 6Em- new labour force figures. — 15Annualised data from the Federal Employ-
ployees involved in job creation schemes and structural adjustment meas- ment Agency based on information received so far. — 16Initial preliminary
ures (SAM). — 7Mid-month level; end of month figures up to December estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Period Total Food Energy  1 rents  2 rents index  2 market  3 Exports Imports Energy  5 products  3 materials  6 energy  1,2 
2000 = 100  
  
2002 7 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 104.9 102.6 100.2 7 102.4 100.0 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.1
2003 8 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 8 104.1 101.3 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.9
2004 9 10 106.2 105.7 102.9 114.8 108.9 104.8 101.4 10 105.8 99.7 101.1 97.2 101.4 96.3
2005 11 108.3 105.8 103.8 126.6 111.1 105.9 102.7 11 110.7 98.8 102.4 101.4 139.5 105.4
2006 12 110.1 107.7 104.4 137.3 112.1 107.0 105.3 12 116.8 107.6 104.8 106.7 163.9 131.5
 
2006          Jan 109.1 106.6 103.7 134.4 110.7 106.5 114.1 101.1 103.3 104.7 163.7 120.1
         Feb 109.5 107.1 104.0 134.7 111.6 106.7 103.7 114.9 103.3 103.7 105.1 160.9 124.5
         Mar 109.5 107.0 104.4 135.0 111.3 106.7 115.5 104.8 104.0 105.6 163.6 123.7
         Apr 109.9 107.4 104.4 139.2 111.2 106.8 116.6 105.9 104.5 107.0 177.8 129.3
         May 110.1 108.4 104.3 139.8 111.3 106.9 104.4 116.7 106.2 104.8 107.2 171.6 134.5
         June 110.3 108.5 104.2 140.7 111.7 107.0 117.1 106.9 104.8 107.0 172.7 130.0
         July 110.7 108.1 103.9 142.1 113.6 107.1 117.7 105.9 105.2 108.3 182.1 135.6
         Aug 110.6 107.7 103.8 141.3 113.3 107.2 105.9 117.9 109.8 105.2 108.5 178.5 134.3
         Sep 110.2 108.0 104.4 136.1 112.3 107.2 117.5 109.6 105.2 107.1 155.4 133.7
         Oct 12 110.3 107.5 105.2 135.4 112.2 107.3 12 117.8 108.4 105.6 106.8 146.8 139.0
         Nov 110.2 107.8 105.4 134.6 111.6 107.4 107.1 117.8 110.9 105.7 106.4 144.9 137.7
         Dec 111.1 108.3 105.3 134.6 114.8 107.4 117.8 111.3 105.6 106.1 148.7 136.3
2007          Jan 13 110.9 109.5 105.6 136.5 112.8 107.7 117.8 111.1 105.8 105.4 133.2 138.8
         Feb 111.3 109.3 105.8 137.6 113.9 107.8 111.7 118.1 113.1 106.0 105.9 142.2 141.8
         Mar 111.6 109.1 106.1 139.8 113.6 107.9 118.4 113.1 106.2 106.5 147.7 145.5
         Apr 14 112.0 110.3 106.1 141.6 114.1 108.0 118.5 112.2 106.5 107.5 154.9 149.1
         May 112.2 110.2 106.2 142.5 114.6 108.1 112.6 118.9 113.0 106.7 107.8 154.7 150.5
         June 112.3 110.3 105.9 143.0 114.9 108.1 119.1 113.6 106.9 108.4 164.3 148.5
         July 112.8 110.1 105.6 144.2 116.7 108.2 119.0 p 117.5 106.9 108.7 172.7 146.2
         Aug 112.7 110.4 105.7 142.4 116.7 108.3 113.3 119.1 p 121.4 106.9 107.9 166.8 141.5
         Sep 112.8 110.9 106.3 144.2 115.6 108.4 119.3 p 126.0 106.9 108.5 177.4 142.9
         Oct 14 113.0 112.8 106.6 143.8 115.5 108.5 ... ... ... ... 186.5 143.9
Annual percentage change  
  
2002 7 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 7 − 0.6 − 6.6 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.9
2003 8 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 8 + 1.7 + 1.3 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.6
2004 9 10 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.5 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 10 + 1.6 − 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 22.3 + 10.8
2005 11 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 10.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.3 11 + 4.6 − 0.9 + 1.3 + 4.3 + 37.6 + 9.4
2006 12 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 0.6 + 8.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 2.5 12 + 5.5 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 5.2 + 17.5 + 24.8
 
2006          Jan + 2.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 15.5 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 1.8 + 6.8 + 52.3 + 25.5
         Feb + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 14.6 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 5.9 + 4.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 44.4 + 25.5
         Mar + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 4.8 + 1.9 + 5.5 + 30.6 + 20.0
         Apr + 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 12.9 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 6.1 + 7.6 + 2.4 + 6.9 + 38.7 + 25.4
         May + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 13.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 6.2 + 7.9 + 2.7 + 7.5 + 38.1 + 31.5
         June + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 6.1 + 8.5 + 2.5 + 5.6 + 19.4 + 22.0
         July + 1.9 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 6.0 + 8.6 + 2.7 + 6.3 + 20.0 + 26.7
         Aug + 1.7 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 7.9 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 5.9 + 11.2 + 2.7 + 5.5 + 10.9 + 26.8
         Sep + 1.0 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 11.4 + 2.3 + 3.7 − 3.2 + 26.4
         Oct 12 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.1 12 + 4.6 + 9.7 + 2.5 + 3.0 − 4.7 + 28.7
         Nov + 1.5 + 3.1 + 1.0 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 4.0 + 4.7 + 10.5 + 2.6 + 2.8 − 2.4 + 22.9
         Dec + 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 4.4 + 9.8 + 2.4 + 2.2 − 2.2 + 17.7
2007          Jan 13 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 3.2 + 9.9 + 2.4 + 0.7 − 18.6 + 15.6
         Feb + 1.6 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 7.7 + 2.8 + 9.5 + 2.2 + 0.8 − 11.6 + 13.9
         Mar + 1.9 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 7.9 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 9.7 + 17.6
         Apr 14 + 1.9 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 5.9 + 1.9 + 0.5 − 12.9 + 15.3
         May + 1.9 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 7.9 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 1.8 + 0.6 − 9.8 + 11.9
         June + 1.8 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 6.3 + 2.0 + 1.3 − 4.9 + 14.2
         July + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 1.1 p + 11.0 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 5.2 + 7.8
         Aug + 1.9 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 0.8 + 3.0 + 1.0 + 7.0 + 1.0 p + 10.6 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 6.6 + 5.4
         Sep + 2.4 + 2.7 + 1.8 + 6.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.5 p + 15.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 14.2 + 6.9
         Oct 14 + 2.4 + 4.9 + 1.3 + 6.2 + 2.9 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... + 27.0 + 3.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — January 2003, increase in tax on energy consumption, increase in tobacco
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data tax. — 9From January 2004, increase in healthcare prices. — 10From March
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Excluding value-added tax. — as well as December 2004, increase in tobacco tax. — 11From September
4For the euro area, in euro. — 5Coal and crude oil. — 6Food, beverages 2005, increase in tobacco tax. — 12From October 2006, increase in the
and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 7From January 2002, prices of tobacco products. — 13From January 2007, increase in the stand-
increase in tax on energy consumption, increase in tobacco tax; additionally ard rate of VAT and in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. — 14Introduction
in the case of the consumer price index: increase in insurance tax. — 8From of university tuition fees in some federal states. 
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2000 883.4 3.4 569.6 4.0 339.9 2.8 909.5 3.6 1,337.4 3.1 123.2 0.4 9.2
2001 902.0 2.1 590.0 3.6 353.8 4.1 943.9 3.8 1,389.5 3.9 130.9 6.2 9.4
2002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.9
2003 908.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 378.3 2.9 967.2 0.8 1,431.8 2.1 147.2 5.6 10.3
2004 914.3 0.7 603.5 2.5 378.7 0.1 982.3 1.6 1,459.3 1.9 151.8 3.2 10.4
2005 911.9 − 0.3 602.8 − 0.1 378.9 0.0 981.7 − 0.1 1,482.6 1.6 156.2 2.9 10.5
2006 926.0 1.5 605.4 0.4 379.2 0.1 984.6 0.3 1,515.9 2.3 158.4 1.5 10.5
2005          Q4 252.2 − 0.2 164.7 − 0.5 94.4 0.0 259.2 − 0.3 379.9 1.3 34.6 3.4 9.1
2006          Q1 214.4 0.3 140.6 − 0.7 96.0 0.7 236.6 − 0.2 377.9 2.7 52.5 1.3 13.9
         Q2 223.5 1.7 143.5 0.3 95.3 0.5 238.8 0.4 372.6 1.8 37.2 1.9 10.0
         Q3 230.8 2.0 154.9 1.0 94.3 0.1 249.2 0.6 374.4 1.5 33.7 1.6 9.0
         Q4 257.3 2.0 166.5 1.1 93.5 − 1.0 260.0 0.3 391.1 2.9 35.0 1.1 9.0
2007          Q1 222.1 3.6 145.2 3.3 94.8 − 1.3 240.0 1.4 385.0 1.9 55.8 6.3 14.5
         Q2 231.1 3.4 147.1 2.5 93.5 − 2.0 240.6 0.7 380.0 2.0 39.4 5.9 10.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2007. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2000 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.1 100.0 2.1 100.0 1.5
2001 102.0 2.0 101.9 1.9 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 101.8 1.8
2002 104.7 2.7 104.6 2.7 104.6 2.3 104.6 2.3 103.2 1.3
2003 106.8 2.0 106.8 2.1 106.9 2.2 107.1 2.4 104.5 1.3
2004 108.1 1.2 108.2 1.3 108.3 1.3 108.9 1.6 105.1 0.6
2005 109.1 0.9 109.4 1.1 109.3 0.9 110.0 1.0 105.4 0.3
2006 110.3 1.1 110.8 1.3 110.3 0.9 111.0 0.9 106.3 0.9
2005          Q4 121.7 0.7 122.1 0.8 121.9 0.7 110.3 0.8 115.0 0.0
2006          Q1 102.0 0.9 102.5 1.1 102.0 0.7 110.4 0.7 100.1 0.4
         Q2 102.8 1.6 103.3 1.8 102.5 0.9 110.8 0.8 103.1 1.0
         Q3 112.6 0.3 113.2 0.5 112.9 0.4 111.3 1.1 105.6 1.1
         Q4 123.6 1.5 124.3 1.8 123.7 1.5 111.5 1.1 116.3 1.1
2007          Q1 102.6 0.6 103.3 0.8 103.2 1.2 111.7 1.2 101.6 1.5
         Q2 104.6 1.7 105.2 1.9 103.8 1.3 112.2 1.3 104.6 1.5
         Q3 114.4 1.6 115.1 1.7 114.7 1.6 113.1 1.7 . .
2007          Mar 102.4 0.3 103.1 0.4 103.3 1.3 111.8 1.3 . .
         Apr 103.9 0.1 104.5 0.3 103.4 1.2 111.9 1.2 . .
         May 106.2 3.5 106.8 3.7 103.7 1.2 111.9 1.2 . .
         June 103.7 1.5 104.4 1.7 104.2 1.5 112.8 1.5 . .
         July 134.7 1.3 135.6 1.4 135.0 1.5 113.0 1.6 . .
         Aug 103.9 1.4 104.5 1.6 104.6 1.7 113.2 1.7 . .
         Sep 104.5 2.1 105.2 2.2 104.6 1.6 113.2 1.7 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13 thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2007. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2006 2007
Item 2004 2005 2006 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug
Current account + 60,748 − 1,878 − 9,728 + 17,650 − 187 − 1,412 + 13,833 + 4,839 + 732A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,129,339 1,224,238 1,389,047 373,194 361,341 373,240 130,418 129,712 120,180
Imports (fob) 1,028,883 1,178,862 1,360,441 355,372 352,779 352,980 119,089 120,306 116,321
Balance + 100,453 + 45,377 + 28,603 + 17,822 + 8,562 + 20,259 + 11,329 + 9,406 + 3,859
2 Services
Receipts 366,385 401,750 429,334 110,172 105,261 116,719 41,584 42,776 42,222
Expenditure 333,777 366,986 393,567 101,682 97,495 102,317 34,644 38,146 39,157
Balance + 32,611 + 34,765 + 35,765 + 8,490 + 7,765 + 14,402 + 6,940 + 4,629 + 3,065
3 Income − 13,736 − 11,556 + 1,409 + 6,744 + 4,704 − 19,516 − 622 − 1,795 + 1,419
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 82,110 85,390 86,578 27,738 26,747 18,452 6,512 5,383 6,514
Transfers to non-residents 140,694 155,856 162,087 43,144 47,965 35,009 10,326 12,785 14,125
Balance − 58,582 − 70,465 − 75,506 − 15,405 − 21,219 − 16,557 − 3,814 − 7,402 − 7,610
Capital account + 16,554 + 12,148 + 10,151 + 4,820 + 4,995 + 2,562 + 78 + 854 + 214B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 18,739 + 25,499 + 117,058 − 45,765 + 4,692 + 23,248 − 19,505 + 47,137 + 52,757C)
1 Direct investment − 68,646 − 209,989 − 158,803 − 59,446 − 14,603 − 69,087 − 37,443 + 76 − 8,537
By resident units abroad − 161,011 − 301,628 − 322,571 − 80,237 − 92,012 − 109,392 − 42,770 − 12,889 − 25,681
By non-resident units in the euro area + 92,364 + 91,640 + 163,767 + 20,792 + 77,408 + 40,304 + 5,326 + 12,965 + 17,143
2 Portfolio investment + 72,892 + 146,090 + 263,475 + 120,394 + 129,810 + 69,518 + 70,614 + 30,175 + 13,314
By resident units abroad − 343,938 − 411,305 − 494,657 − 140,350 − 147,395 − 149,740 − 39,394 − 35,114 + 16,707
Equity − 106,544 − 134,268 − 135,275 − 28,012 − 17,622 − 10,235 + 3,981 − 2,140 + 7,126
Bonds and notes − 179,379 − 262,476 − 294,288 − 88,106 − 93,765 − 116,856 − 32,076 − 35,331 − 10,996
Money market instruments − 58,016 − 14,560 − 65,097 − 24,233 − 36,010 − 22,648 − 11,299 + 2,357 + 20,577
By non-resident units in the euro area + 416,832 + 557,394 + 758,128 + 260,743 + 277,206 + 219,258 + 110,008 + 65,289 − 3,392
Equity + 126,798 + 263,207 + 289,697 + 83,002 + 113,513 + 71,508 + 71,004 + 49,805 − 27,442
Bonds and notes + 273,518 + 248,605 + 464,355 + 185,191 + 141,834 + 110,892 + 39,350 + 14,593 + 21,946
Money market instruments + 16,517 + 45,584 + 4,079 − 7,448 + 21,858 + 36,857 − 346 + 891 + 2,104
3 Financial derivatives − 8,286 − 13,871 − 1,871 − 93 − 16,410 − 14,061 − 9,697 − 10,770 − 12,495
4 Other investment − 27,150 + 85,270 + 15,529 − 104,178 − 92,487 + 41,038 − 41,068 + 30,848 + 59,154
Eurosystem + 8,198 + 5,755 + 15,682 + 3,602 + 147 + 7,397 + 7,225 − 6,216 + 1,715
General government − 5,435 + 2,943 + 4,543 − 8,713 + 8,794 − 17,659 − 12,550 + 16,130 + 4,542
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 14,447 + 87,965 − 31,401 − 112,016 − 23,724 + 47,007 − 41,039 + 10,420 + 46,885
Long-term − 10,840 − 41,659 − 50,063 − 45,396 − 46,856 + 6,768 − 14,403 − 1,580 − 22,697
Short-term − 3,604 + 129,628 + 18,660 − 66,620 + 23,130 + 40,239 − 26,636 + 12,000 + 69,581
Other sectors − 15,467 − 11,398 + 26,705 + 12,947 − 77,702 + 4,293 + 5,296 + 10,514 + 6,012
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 12,453 + 18,002 − 1,275 − 2,443 − 1,618 − 4,160 − 1,911 − 3,191 + 1,321
Errors and omissions − 58,562 − 35,772 − 117,482 + 23,295 − 9,501 − 24,399 + 5,593 − 52,831 − 53,703D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errors
on current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 Omissions
DM million
1993 − 31,450 + 60,304 − 3,217 − 52,549 + 19,095 − 55,083 − 1,915 + 43,448 + 22,795 − 10,082
1994 − 49,418 + 71,762 − 1,318 − 62,803 + 2,393 − 59,451 − 2,637 + 60,708 + 2,846 − 8,653
1995 − 42,363 + 85,303 − 4,294 − 63,985 − 3,975 − 55,413 − 3,845 + 50,117 − 10,355 − 3,909
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 79
1997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,613
1998 − 28,695 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,294
2001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,775
2001 + 425 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,757
2002 + 42,976 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,514 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,316
2003 + 40,931 + 129,921 − 11,142 − 34,497 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,770 + 445 + 20,528
2004 + 94,899 + 156,096 − 16,990 − 29,419 + 13,091 − 27,879 + 430 − 117,968 + 1,470 + 22,639
2005 + 103,053 + 158,179 − 18,501 − 28,880 + 20,778 − 28,524 − 1,270 − 119,385 + 2,182 + 17,601
2006  r + 114,071 + 159,048 − 18,725 − 22,430 + 22,973 − 26,795 − 192 − 140,732 + 2,934 + 26,853
2004          Q4 + 22,848 + 34,998 − 4,595 − 6,003 + 5,182 − 6,733 − 218 − 29,756 + 37 + 7,126
2005          Q1 + 31,658 + 43,196 − 4,056 − 5,773 + 5,541 − 7,250 − 1,492 − 27,301 − 181 − 2,866
         Q2 + 25,632 + 40,670 − 4,392 − 6,013 + 1,617 − 6,249 + 107 − 40,227 + 1,230 + 14,488
         Q3 + 21,848 + 40,695 − 4,730 − 12,329 + 5,775 − 7,563 + 59 − 12,025 − 783 − 9,883
         Q4 + 23,915 + 33,619 − 5,323 − 4,765 + 7,845 − 7,461 + 56 − 39,833 + 1,916 + 15,861
2006          Q1  r + 25,602 + 39,564 − 5,069 − 6,203 + 7,492 − 10,183 + 151 − 36,804 + 1,082 + 11,051
         Q2  r + 23,672 + 34,873 − 4,165 − 3,628 + 1,597 − 5,005 + 9 − 56,066 + 367 + 32,385
         Q3  r + 21,651 + 38,718 − 4,678 − 11,175 + 6,887 − 8,101 − 253 − 12,802 + 844 − 8,595
         Q4  r + 43,147 + 45,892 − 4,813 − 1,424 + 6,996 − 3,505 − 100 − 35,060 + 642 − 7,987
2007          Q1 + 37,220 + 48,826 − 3,497 − 4,704 + 7,353 − 10,758 + 182 − 75,447 + 100 + 38,045
         Q2 + 35,627 + 48,814 − 2,922 − 3,347 − 2,107 − 4,812 + 835 − 88,989 − 1,359 + 52,528
         Q3  p + 37,684 + 50,088 − 2,723 − 10,185 + 9,086 − 8,581 + 359 − 20,386 − 347 − 17,657
2005          Apr + 7,505 + 12,407 − 1,331 − 1,582 − 617 − 1,373 − 199 − 22,266 + 404 + 14,960
         May + 6,091 + 11,966 − 1,327 − 2,527 + 69 − 2,091 + 272 − 4,304 − 141 − 2,059
         June + 12,036 + 16,296 − 1,734 − 1,904 + 2,164 − 2,786 + 34 − 13,656 + 967 + 1,587
         July + 7,748 + 13,545 − 1,511 − 3,634 + 1,735 − 2,388 + 103 − 5,657 + 324 − 2,194
         Aug + 4,848 + 12,235 − 1,564 − 5,192 + 1,707 − 2,337 − 86 − 501 + 932 − 4,261
         Sep + 9,252 + 14,915 − 1,655 − 3,503 + 2,334 − 2,839 + 42 − 5,866 − 2,039 − 3,428
         Oct + 7,610 + 11,788 − 2,185 − 2,300 + 2,646 − 2,338 + 329 − 9,339 + 207 + 1,400
         Nov + 9,805 + 12,951 − 1,678 − 927 + 2,521 − 3,061 − 107 − 15,276 + 1,059 + 5,579
         Dec + 6,500 + 8,880 − 1,460 − 1,537 + 2,679 − 2,062 − 166 − 15,217 + 650 + 8,883
2006          Jan  r + 7,677 + 12,367 − 1,988 − 2,627 + 2,357 − 2,431 + 7 − 14,489 − 26 + 6,805
         Feb  r + 8,219 + 12,825 − 1,088 − 992 + 2,746 − 5,272 + 282 − 10,688 + 1,534 + 2,187
         Mar  r + 9,707 + 14,373 − 1,992 − 2,584 + 2,389 − 2,479 − 138 − 11,627 − 426 + 2,059
         Apr  r + 8,547 + 10,772 − 1,022 − 840 + 1,868 − 2,231 − 145 − 14,735 + 1,475 + 6,332
         May  r + 4,192 + 12,079 − 1,780 − 1,666 − 3,257 − 1,184 − 283 − 17,582 − 1,067 + 13,673
         June  r + 10,933 + 12,022 − 1,363 − 1,122 + 2,986 − 1,590 + 437 − 23,750 − 41 + 12,380
         July  r + 6,847 + 12,527 − 1,922 − 3,067 + 2,245 − 2,936 − 229 + 8,096 − 332 − 14,714
         Aug  r + 5,192 + 10,943 − 1,189 − 4,363 + 2,124 − 2,324 + 146 − 7,491 + 698 + 2,154
         Sep  r + 9,612 + 15,248 − 1,567 − 3,746 + 2,519 − 2,842 − 171 − 13,407 + 478 + 3,965
         Oct  r + 12,885 + 16,962 − 1,666 − 1,675 + 2,554 − 3,291 + 5 + 2,302 + 401 − 15,191
         Nov  r + 14,854 + 18,133 − 1,667 − 1,042 + 2,156 − 2,726 − 75 − 17,760 − 102 + 2,981
         Dec  r + 15,409 + 10,798 − 1,481 + 1,294 + 2,286 + 2,512 − 30 − 19,602 + 342 + 4,223
2007          Jan + 11,169 + 16,175 − 1,326 − 3,571 + 1,700 − 1,809 + 249 − 8,796 − 458 − 2,621
         Feb + 8,468 + 14,153 − 883 − 861 + 2,659 − 6,601 + 29 − 34,723 + 566 + 26,226
         Mar + 17,584 + 18,498 − 1,287 − 272 + 2,994 − 2,349 − 96 − 31,929 − 8 + 14,440
         Apr + 10,300 + 14,992 − 1,081 − 1,143 − 505 − 1,963 + 191 − 18,666 − 1,215 + 8,175
         May + 8,878 + 17,292 − 1,086 − 1,600 − 4,905 − 824 + 698 − 31,130 − 657 + 21,555
         June + 16,449 + 16,531 − 755 − 604 + 3,302 − 2,025 − 54 − 39,193 + 513 + 22,798
         July + 13,509 + 17,944 − 1,281 − 3,134 + 2,915 − 2,935 + 398 − 3,746 + 121 − 10,160
         Aug + 8,764 + 14,078 − 915 − 4,478 + 2,904 − 2,825 − 46 + 2,162 − 21 − 10,880
         Sep  p + 15,411 + 18,066 − 527 − 2,574 + 3,268 − 2,822 + 7 − 18,801 − 447 + 3,383
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2007
Country / group of countries  2004  2005  2006 r Jan / Aug May Jun Jul Aug Sep  p 
All countries  1 Exports 731,544 786,266 893,042 637,393 78,898 81,826 81,349 77,672 81,767
Imports 575,448 628,087 733,994 507,731 61,607 65,295 63,406 63,594 63,701
Balance + 156,096 + 158,179 + 159,048 + 129,662 + 17,292 + 16,531 + 17,944 + 14,078 + 18,066
I Exports 541,395 581,611 657,325 480,651 60,159 62,001 60,694 56,876 ...European countries
Imports 408,698 443,508 512,568 362,524 44,600 47,677 45,831 43,905 ...
Balance + 132,697 + 138,103 + 144,757 + 118,127 + 15,558 + 14,325 + 14,863 + 12,971 ...
Exports 472,288 505,716 564,864 414,170 51,740 53,313 52,043 47,829 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 346,767 371,136 423,731 303,263 37,750 40,238 38,260 36,643 ...
Balance + 125,521 + 134,580 + 141,133 + 110,907 + 13,991 + 13,074 + 13,782 + 11,187 ...
Euro-area (13) Exports 320,388 342,559 376,563 274,376 34,244 35,411 34,432 30,267 ...
countries Imports 233,112 248,629 285,093 202,156 25,053 26,645 25,425 24,132 ...
Balance + 87,276 + 93,931 + 91,470 + 72,221 + 9,191 + 8,766 + 9,007 + 6,135 ...
of which
Austria Exports 40,244 43,305 49,512 34,749 4,296 4,485 4,256 4,293 ...
Imports 24,020 26,048 30,301 21,507 2,675 2,829 2,797 2,452 ...
Balance + 16,224 + 17,256 + 19,211 + 13,243 + 1,621 + 1,656 + 1,459 + 1,841 ...
Belgium and Exports 43,992 47,512 51,141 37,638 4,462 4,564 4,461 4,391 ...
Luxembourg Imports 28,818 31,426 36,263 27,936 3,728 3,645 3,335 3,603 ...
Balance + 15,173 + 16,085 + 14,878 + 9,703 + 734 + 919 + 1,126 + 788 ...
France Exports 74,360 79,039 85,006 61,812 7,771 7,958 7,863 6,541 ...
Imports 51,535 53,700 62,102 43,649 4,910 5,591 5,682 4,718 ...
Balance + 22,825 + 25,339 + 22,904 + 18,163 + 2,861 + 2,367 + 2,181 + 1,822 ...
Italy Exports 51,479 53,855 59,348 43,309 5,634 5,807 5,578 4,064 ...
Imports 35,676 36,348 41,470 29,557 3,732 3,960 3,976 3,203 ...
Balance + 15,803 + 17,507 + 17,878 + 13,752 + 1,903 + 1,846 + 1,602 + 861 ...
Netherlands Exports 46,730 49,033 56,531 40,959 5,100 5,242 5,042 4,966 ...
Imports 46,204 51,823 60,750 41,616 5,247 5,376 5,117 5,500 ...
Balance + 526 − 2,789 − 4,219 − 657 − 148 − 134 − 75 − 533 ...
Spain Exports 36,249 40,018 41,775 31,892 4,053 4,346 4,257 3,294 ...
Imports 17,426 18,070 19,832 14,230 1,851 1,898 1,767 1,498 ...
Balance + 18,823 + 21,948 + 21,943 + 17,662 + 2,202 + 2,448 + 2,491 + 1,797 ...
Other EU member Exports 151,899 163,157 188,301 139,794 17,496 17,902 17,611 17,562 ...
states Imports 113,654 122,507 138,638 101,107 12,696 13,593 12,836 12,511 ...
Balance + 38,245 + 40,650 + 49,663 + 38,686 + 4,800 + 4,308 + 4,775 + 5,052 ...
of which
United Exports 59,986 60,394 64,726 47,767 5,734 5,967 6,341 5,878 ...
Kingdom Imports 34,466 39,069 40,832 28,580 3,438 4,010 3,761 3,569 ...
Balance + 25,520 + 21,325 + 23,895 + 19,187 + 2,297 + 1,956 + 2,580 + 2,309 ...
Exports 69,107 75,895 92,461 66,481 8,418 8,689 8,652 9,047 ... 2 Other European
Imports 61,931 72,372 88,837 59,261 6,851 7,438 7,571 7,262 ... countries
Balance + 7,176 + 3,523 + 3,625 + 7,220 + 1,568 + 1,250 + 1,081 + 1,785 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 27,917 29,629 34,782 23,941 2,984 2,907 2,978 3,110 ...
Imports 21,445 22,620 25,227 19,546 2,128 2,453 2,501 2,264 ...
Balance + 6,472 + 7,009 + 9,556 + 4,396 + 857 + 454 + 477 + 845 ...
II Exports 188,782 203,229 234,139 155,782 18,660 19,624 20,567 20,694 ...Non-European
Imports 166,132 183,940 220,745 144,769 16,955 17,565 17,520 19,632 ... countries
Balance + 22,650 + 19,289 + 13,393 + 11,013 + 1,704 + 2,059 + 3,047 + 1,062 ...
Exports 13,785 14,807 16,617 11,733 1,486 1,475 1,472 1,582 ... 1 Africa
Imports 11,092 13,762 16,734 9,973 1,349 1,280 1,420 1,265 ...
Balance + 2,694 + 1,045 − 117 + 1,759 + 137 + 194 + 51 + 318 ...
Exports 84,694 91,994 104,154 66,426 7,874 8,343 8,904 8,633 ... 2 America
Imports 54,679 58,574 72,163 46,955 5,686 6,029 5,294 6,305 ...
Balance + 30,016 + 33,420 + 31,991 + 19,470 + 2,187 + 2,315 + 3,610 + 2,329 ...
of which
Exports 64,860 69,299 77,991 48,539 5,793 6,054 6,539 6,079 ... United States
Imports 40,709 41,798 49,197 30,679 3,717 3,919 3,391 3,893 ...
Balance + 24,151 + 27,501 + 28,795 + 17,861 + 2,075 + 2,135 + 3,148 + 2,186 ...
Exports 84,789 90,498 106,991 73,011 8,772 9,078 9,561 9,829 ... 3 Asia
Imports 98,177 109,304 128,942 86,085 9,673 10,024 10,574 11,827 ...
Balance − 13,388 − 18,805 − 21,951 − 13,074 − 900 − 945 − 1,013 − 1,999 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 17,357 20,420 22,978 15,487 1,741 1,771 2,060 2,182 ...
Imports 4,398 5,077 6,295 4,123 489 551 557 588 ...
Balance + 12,959 + 15,343 + 16,682 + 11,364 + 1,251 + 1,219 + 1,503 + 1,594 ...
Japan Exports 12,719 13,338 13,886 8,706 984 1,094 1,100 1,111 ...
Imports 21,583 21,772 24,016 15,946 2,110 1,841 1,755 2,056 ...
Balance − 8,865 − 8,434 − 10,130 − 7,239 − 1,126 − 747 − 655 − 945 ...
Exports 20,992 21,235 27,478 19,235 2,485 2,517 2,571 2,699 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 32,791 40,845 49,958 34,588 3,539 3,969 4,412 4,987 ... of China  2 
Balance − 11,800 − 19,610 − 22,479 − 15,353 − 1,054 − 1,452 − 1,841 − 2,288 ...
Exports 26,838 27,538 31,619 21,275 2,597 2,669 2,704 2,759 ... Emerging markets
Imports 30,012 31,520 36,113 22,186 2,466 2,654 2,734 2,863 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 3,174 − 3,982 − 4,494 − 910 + 131 + 15 − 30 − 104 ...
Exports 5,513 5,930 6,377 4,613 528 727 631 649 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,184 2,301 2,906 1,755 247 232 232 235 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,329 + 3,629 + 3,471 + 2,858 + 280 + 495 + 399 + 415 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, region. Excluding repair and maintenance operations from January 200 7 on-
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of wards. — 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indo-
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2002 − 35,728 − 35,554 + 2,789 + 1,424 − 1,549 + 5,237 − 8,075 − 2,073 + 506 − 1,416 − 16,603
2003 − 34,497 − 37,332 + 1,833 + 1,421 − 747 + 5,088 − 4,761 − 1,836 + 1,476 − 1,182 − 13,885
2004 − 29,419 − 35,302 + 3,870 + 1,349 − 275 + 5,349 − 4,410 − 1,362 + 976 − 932 + 14,023
2005 − 28,880 − 36,317 + 6,102 + 1,760 − 458 + 3,627 − 3,594 − 1,693 + 1,128 − 1,569 + 22,347
2006 − 22,430 − 32,804 + 4,740 + 2,373 − 1,563 + 3,542 + 1,281 − 1,844 + 1,010 − 1,330 + 24,303
2006          Q1 − 6,203 − 6,361 + 744 + 521 − 481 + 803 − 1,429 − 443 + 55 + 164 + 7,328
         Q2 − 3,628 − 7,749 + 1,349 + 479 − 226 + 1,026 + 1,492 − 423 + 377 − 345 + 1,942
         Q3 − 11,175 − 13,545 + 1,384 + 431 − 584 + 785 + 355 − 431 + 307 − 798 + 7,686
         Q4 − 1,424 − 5,149 + 1,262 + 942 − 273 + 929 + 864 − 546 + 271 − 350 + 7,346
2007          Q1 − 4,704 − 6,501 + 1,565 + 841 − 763 + 790 − 637 − 366 + 295 + 170 + 7,184
         Q2 − 3,347 − 8,829 + 1,934 + 753 − 171 + 916 + 2,050 − 477 + 660 − 310 − 1,797
         Q3 − 10,185 − 14,425 + 1,958 + 612 − 417 + 848 + 1,239 − 430 + 688 − 741 + 9,827
2006          Nov − 1,042 − 1,268 + 343 + 189 − 44 + 306 − 568 − 174 + 114 − 130 + 2,285
         Dec + 1,294 − 880 + 345 + 491 + 2 + 376 + 960 − 218 + 142 − 76 + 2,363
2007          Jan − 3,571 − 2,106 + 403 + 205 − 557 + 270 − 1,787 − 133 − 39 + 52 + 1,648
         Feb − 861 − 1,857 + 454 + 272 + 38 + 234 − 2 − 102 + 157 + 44 + 2,615
         Mar − 272 − 2,538 + 708 + 364 − 244 + 287 + 1,153 − 130 + 177 + 74 + 2,920
         Apr − 1,143 − 2,476 + 835 + 209 − 295 + 280 + 304 − 130 + 190 − 107 − 398
         May − 1,600 − 2,894 + 499 + 221 + 35 + 306 + 233 − 148 + 217 − 105 − 4,800
         June − 604 − 3,458 + 599 + 322 + 89 + 330 + 1,514 − 198 + 253 − 99 + 3,401
         July − 3,134 − 4,459 + 637 + 203 − 337 + 282 + 540 − 160 + 164 − 239 + 3,154
         Aug − 4,478 − 5,362 + 630 + 205 − 1 + 266 − 215 − 121 + 213 − 252 + 3,156
         Sep − 2,574 − 4,604 + 691 + 205 − 79 + 301 + 913 − 148 + 311 − 250 + 3,517
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2002 − 27,514 − 15,712 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 2,667 − 11,801 − 3,470 − 8,331 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,205
2003 − 28,283 − 18,257 − 15,428 − 13,731 − 2,829 − 10,026 − 3,332 − 6,694 + 311 − 1,238 + 1,549
2004 − 27,879 − 16,754 − 14,307 − 12,730 − 2,447 − 11,125 − 3,180 − 7,945 + 430 − 1,094 + 1,524
2005 − 28,524 − 17,655 − 16,274 − 14,724 − 1,382 − 10,869 − 2,926 − 7,943 − 1,270 − 3,419 + 2,149
2006 − 26,795 − 14,664 − 14,957 − 13,452 + 293 − 12,130 − 2,927 − 9,204 − 192 − 1,927 + 1,735
2006          Q1 − 10,183 − 7,309 − 6,814 − 6,313 − 494 − 2,874 − 732 − 2,143 + 151 − 311 + 462
         Q2 − 5,005 − 1,835 − 3,575 − 3,234 + 1,740 − 3,170 − 732 − 2,439 + 9 − 665 + 675
         Q3 − 8,101 − 5,086 − 4,708 − 4,519 − 379 − 3,015 − 732 − 2,283 − 253 − 423 + 170
         Q4 − 3,505 − 434 + 140 + 613 − 574 − 3,071 − 732 − 2,339 − 100 − 528 + 428
2007          Q1 − 10,758 − 7,886 − 7,186 − 6,571 − 701 − 2,872 − 751 − 2,121 + 182 − 291 + 473
         Q2 − 4,812 − 259 − 3,770 − 3,359 + 3,511 − 4,553 − 751 − 3,802 + 835 − 326 + 1,161
         Q3 − 8,581 − 5,748 − 5,533 − 5,198 − 215 − 2,834 − 751 − 2,082 + 359 − 325 + 683
2006          Nov − 2,726 − 1,691 − 1,411 − 1,274 − 280 − 1,035 − 244 − 791 − 75 − 170 + 95
         Dec + 2,512 + 3,647 + 3,655 + 3,779 − 8 − 1,136 − 244 − 892 − 30 − 213 + 183
2007          Jan − 1,809 − 980 − 896 − 682 − 85 − 828 − 250 − 578 + 249 − 91 + 340
         Feb − 6,601 − 5,484 − 5,027 − 4,715 − 458 − 1,116 − 250 − 866 + 29 − 87 + 116
         Mar − 2,349 − 1,422 − 1,264 − 1,174 − 158 − 927 − 250 − 677 − 96 − 113 + 17
         Apr − 1,963 − 747 − 1,643 − 1,603 + 896 − 1,216 − 250 − 966 + 191 − 98 + 289
         May − 824 + 1,429 − 1,034 − 936 + 2,462 − 2,253 − 250 − 2,002 + 698 − 105 + 803
         June − 2,025 − 941 − 1,093 − 821 + 153 − 1,084 − 250 − 834 − 54 − 123 + 69
         July − 2,935 − 1,897 − 1,758 − 1,606 − 139 − 1,038 − 250 − 788 + 398 − 109 + 506
         Aug − 2,825 − 1,879 − 1,818 − 1,661 − 61 − 946 − 250 − 695 − 46 − 120 + 74
         Sep − 2,822 − 1,972 − 1,958 − 1,931 − 14 − 850 − 250 − 599 + 7 − 97 + 103
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2006 2007
Item 2004 2005 2006 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 263,926 − 377,791 − 429,862 − 94,420 − 172,364 − 210,383 − 149,266 − 6,477 − 54,912 − 87,878
1 Direct investment  1 − 11,942 − 44,640 − 63,311 − 9,480 − 13,831 − 24,139 − 34,061 − 10,844 − 9,130 − 14,087
Equity capital + 15,095 − 18,812 − 52,053 − 9,934 − 864 − 11,208 − 5,506 − 4,296 − 3,625 + 2,416
Reinvested earnings  2 − 13,447 − 14,511 − 18,161 − 5,273 − 5,922 − 4,485 − 7,356 − 2,249 − 2,474 − 2,633
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 13,590 − 11,316 + 6,903 + 5,726 − 7,045 − 8,446 − 21,200 − 4,299 − 3,031 − 13,870
2 Portfolio investment − 102,327 − 202,810 − 159,427 − 52,837 − 72,119 − 62,455 + 1,388 − 583 + 3,628 − 1,658
Shares 3 + 8,974 − 17,054 + 6,285 − 3,258 + 12,139 − 2,831 + 5,348 + 3,210 + 4,323 − 2,185
Mutual fund shares  4 − 12,149 − 43,525 − 24,426 − 7,291 − 12,673 − 16,883 − 2,057 − 4,904 + 4,104 − 1,257
Bonds and notes  5 − 87,216 − 137,208 − 134,511 − 44,238 − 65,840 − 39,605 + 3,614 − 65 − 2,008 + 5,687
Money market instruments − 11,935 − 5,023 − 6,775 + 1,949 − 5,744 − 3,136 − 5,517 + 1,177 − 2,791 − 3,903
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 7,173 − 7,235 − 6,257 − 3,037 − 10,002 − 12,010 − 32,169 − 9,452 − 14,929 − 7,788
4 Other investment − 143,955 − 125,288 − 203,802 − 29,708 − 76,512 − 110,420 − 84,077 + 14,281 − 34,460 − 63,899
MFIs  7,8 − 121,830 − 85,768 − 207,620 − 44,600 − 49,053 − 86,937 − 78,383 − 1,531 − 14,477 − 62,376
Long-term + 5,858 − 69,964 − 71,579 − 24,968 − 13,431 − 24,039 − 34,434 − 4,033 − 15,373 − 15,027
Short-term − 127,687 − 15,804 − 136,041 − 19,632 − 35,623 − 62,899 − 43,949 + 2,502 + 897 − 47,348
Enterprises and households − 21,417 − 20,601 − 21,649 − 656 − 22,797 − 1,682 − 2,454 + 144 − 2,400 − 197
Long-term − 7,286 − 12,278 − 23,813 − 9,074 − 7,657 − 10,220 − 9,309 − 1,160 − 4,146 − 4,003
Short-term  7 − 14,131 − 8,323 + 2,164 + 8,418 − 15,140 + 8,538 + 6,855 + 1,304 + 1,745 + 3,806
General government + 2,143 + 3,154 + 979 + 5,637 + 10,953 − 25,143 + 26,625 + 18,659 + 5,959 + 2,007
Long-term + 49 + 7,693 + 7,408 + 343 − 220 − 196 + 12 + 16 − 27 + 24
Short-term  7 + 2,094 − 4,539 − 6,428 + 5,295 + 11,173 − 24,946 + 26,613 + 18,643 + 5,986 + 1,983
Bundesbank − 2,851 − 22,073 + 24,488 + 9,911 − 15,615 + 3,343 − 29,865 − 2,990 − 23,542 − 3,333
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) + 1,470 + 2,182 + 2,934 + 642 + 100 − 1,359 − 347 + 121 − 21 − 447
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 145,958 + 258,406 + 289,131 + 59,361 + 96,917 + 121,394 + 128,881 + 2,731 + 57,073 + 69,077
1 Direct investment  1 − 7,406 + 28,841 + 34,168 + 19,094 + 7,581 + 1,848 + 14,686 + 4,344 + 3,783 + 6,559
Equity capital + 32,595 + 17,928 + 17,323 + 11,876 + 4,727 + 3,752 + 8,940 + 1,816 + 549 + 6,574
Reinvested earnings  2 − 296 + 5,560 + 5,751 + 384 + 2,936 − 2,364 + 4,236 + 1,513 + 1,587 + 1,135
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors − 39,704 + 5,352 + 11,095 + 6,834 − 83 + 459 + 1,510 + 1,014 + 1,646 − 1,151
2 Portfolio investment + 116,773 + 178,869 + 160,626 + 58,656 + 36,333 + 75,339 + 48,265 + 10,599 + 26,404 + 11,261
Shares  3 − 13,727 + 21,308 + 27,500 + 17,251 − 3,178 + 8,638 − 3,471 − 7,976 + 10,385 − 5,881
Mutual fund shares + 4,587 + 1,100 + 9,347 + 1,371 + 746 + 1,624 + 787 + 397 + 257 + 134
Bonds and notes  5 + 140,285 + 159,499 + 125,051 + 48,284 + 28,990 + 60,609 + 31,843 + 12,063 + 10,240 + 9,540
Money market instruments − 14,371 − 3,038 − 1,272 − 8,250 + 9,775 + 4,469 + 19,106 + 6,115 + 5,522 + 7,468
3 Other investment + 36,591 + 50,696 + 94,337 − 18,389 + 53,004 + 44,207 + 65,930 − 12,213 + 26,886 + 51,256
MFIs  7,8 + 32,339 + 22,456 + 60,499 − 11,485 + 38,500 + 26,099 + 53,662 − 9,988 + 23,005 + 40,646
Long-term − 10,083 − 9,830 − 11,898 − 8,132 − 6,004 + 3,557 − 601 + 2,902 − 1,725 − 1,778
Short-term + 42,422 + 32,286 + 72,397 − 3,353 + 44,505 + 22,542 + 54,263 − 12,890 + 24,730 + 42,424
Enterprises and households + 9,936 + 26,818 + 35,280 − 4,753 + 11,534 + 15,348 + 8,366 − 1,173 − 2,105 + 11,644
Long-term + 6,743 + 14,125 + 17,517 + 2,697 + 424 + 597 + 5,191 + 3,740 + 988 + 463
Short-term  7 + 3,193 + 12,693 + 17,763 − 7,450 + 11,110 + 14,752 + 3,175 − 4,913 − 3,093 + 11,181
General government − 3,233 + 3,526 − 154 − 2,037 + 2,614 + 1,780 + 1,942 − 1,273 + 6,055 − 2,840
Long-term − 2,000 + 2,597 + 886 + 312 − 851 − 19 − 563 − 130 − 162 − 271
Short-term  7 − 1,233 + 929 − 1,040 − 2,348 + 3,465 + 1,799 + 2,505 − 1,143 + 6,217 − 2,570
Bundesbank − 2,451 − 2,105 − 1,287 − 114 + 355 + 979 + 1,960 + 221 − 68 + 1,806
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 117,968 − 119,385 − 140,732 − 35,060 − 75,447 − 88,989 − 20,386 − 3,746 + 2,162 − 18,801
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
in the
Inter- Liabilities
national arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from external
Fund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
 
 
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-
national claims on
Monetary Other residents
Fund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 less
or month Total Total rights reserves (net)  2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2006          May 120,684 89,520 55,979 3,356 30,184 350 29,950 865 6,070 114,614
         June 88,241 85,905 51,983 3,639 30,284 350 1,121 866 5,839 82,402
         July 102,264 89,167 54,918 3,465 30,784 350 11,852 894 6,183 96,081
         Aug 124,938 86,736 53,253 3,501 29,982 350 36,940 912 5,374 119,564
         Sep 115,371 85,854 52,302 3,440 30,111 350 28,254 913 4,980 110,391
         Oct 110,016 85,341 52,080 3,097 30,164 350 23,414 912 5,043 104,973
         Nov 114,116 85,307 53,218 3,048 29,040 350 27,546 914 5,273 108,843
         Dec 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007          Jan 114,714 87,385 54,853 2,998 29,534 350 26,011 969 5,415 109,299
         Feb 121,019 87,962 56,389 2,734 28,839 350 31,715 993 4,892 116,127
         Mar 121,457 86,120 54,820 2,624 28,675 350 33,958 1,029 5,158 116,299
         Apr 110,112 86,731 54,837 2,578 29,316 350 22,102 930 6,300 103,811
         May 125,859 86,364 53,675 2,671 30,018 350 38,242 903 7,005 118,854
         June 116,754 84,846 52,809 2,666 29,370 350 30,616 942 6,137 110,617
         July 120,334 85,125 53,446 2,594 29,085 350 33,606 1,253 6,325 114,009
         Aug 144,630 85,469 53,554 2,594 29,321 350 57,148 1,664 6,257 138,373
         Sep 151,300 88,592 57,168 2,530 28,894 350 60,480 1,879 8,013 143,288
         Oct 171,237 90,168 59,549 2,475 28,144 350 78,473 2,246 10,159 161,077
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2003 362,099 86,627 275,472 159,653 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2004 377,540 98,632 278,908 159,764 119,144 112,342 6,802 506,434 50,211 456,223 361,111 95,112 63,762 31,350
2005 409,493 97,333 312,160 179,738 132,422 125,497 6,925 548,107 65,557 482,550 375,114 107,436 73,270 34,166
2006 449,306 117,723 331,583 189,378 142,205 134,057 8,148 624,790 95,019 529,771 408,907 120,864 79,900 40,964
2007          Apr  r 480,778 143,412 337,366 190,783 146,583 137,514 9,069 643,012 104,518 538,494 415,987 122,507 76,207 46,300
         May  r 484,134 141,705 342,429 195,131 147,298 137,838 9,460 646,620 111,124 535,496 413,675 121,821 75,276 46,545
         June  r 491,921 148,145 343,776 192,535 151,241 141,684 9,557 662,071 104,394 557,677 430,678 126,999 79,183 47,816
         July  r 494,492 149,168 345,324 197,360 147,964 138,096 9,868 656,805 105,752 551,053 425,511 125,542 75,862 49,680
         Aug  r 493,664 151,513 342,151 196,955 145,196 135,112 10,084 655,877 106,278 549,599 424,744 124,855 73,322 51,533
         Sep 503,206 149,956 353,250 202,008 151,242 141,181 10,061 666,742 110,971 555,771 424,615 131,156 80,153 51,003
Industrial countries 1
 
2003 310,454 85,390 225,064 144,980 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,220
2004 335,809 97,485 238,324 148,649 89,675 84,903 4,772 468,592 48,304 420,288 349,293 70,995 53,480 17,515
2005 362,704 95,847 266,857 167,314 99,543 94,278 5,265 508,106 63,924 444,182 364,680 79,502 60,907 18,595
2006 395,727 115,269 280,458 173,862 106,596 100,541 6,055 570,675 93,560 477,115 389,770 87,345 66,210 21,135
2007          Apr  r 428,209 140,990 287,219 176,697 110,522 103,722 6,800 585,753 103,154 482,599 394,704 87,895 63,641 24,254
         May  r 430,625 138,871 291,754 180,722 111,032 103,911 7,121 590,998 109,876 481,122 393,684 87,438 62,891 24,547
         June  r 437,165 145,370 291,795 177,676 114,119 106,912 7,207 604,530 103,144 501,386 410,040 91,346 66,339 25,007
         July  r 439,686 146,503 293,183 183,096 110,087 102,674 7,413 599,093 104,454 494,639 405,014 89,625 63,443 26,182
         Aug  r 437,935 148,725 289,210 181,933 107,277 99,716 7,561 595,775 104,825 490,950 403,583 87,367 60,493 26,874
         Sep 446,802 147,099 299,703 187,438 112,265 104,679 7,586 606,355 109,577 496,778 403,523 93,255 66,891 26,364
EU member states 1
 
2003 230,673 81,430 149,243 94,092 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,642
2004 259,480 92,867 166,613 101,254 65,359 61,563 3,796 376,461 43,838 332,623 284,173 48,450 36,494 11,956
2005 270,808 91,882 178,926 108,523 70,403 66,156 4,247 414,377 60,186 354,191 300,022 54,169 41,305 12,864
2006 308,720 108,982 199,738 121,929 77,809 72,902 4,907 479,025 86,343 392,682 332,871 59,811 45,202 14,609
2007          Apr  r 348,064 135,300 212,764 130,383 82,381 76,978 5,403 496,168 94,987 401,181 339,977 61,204 44,275 16,929
         May  r 349,358 132,704 216,654 133,945 82,709 77,010 5,699 497,869 97,807 400,062 339,411 60,651 43,537 17,114
         June  r 356,293 139,345 216,948 132,358 84,590 78,898 5,692 499,848 98,224 401,624 338,950 62,674 45,354 17,320
         July  r 357,245 140,996 216,249 135,088 81,161 75,260 5,901 500,137 99,395 400,742 338,798 61,944 43,691 18,253
         Aug  r 358,946 143,072 215,874 137,322 78,552 72,578 5,974 494,143 100,176 393,967 334,120 59,847 41,098 18,749
         Sep 364,110 141,965 222,145 139,799 82,346 76,299 6,047 506,800 105,154 401,646 337,232 64,414 45,944 18,470
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,404
2004 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 305,864 28,295 277,569 244,860 32,709 24,258 8,451
2005 175,532 59,160 116,372 69,048 47,324 44,369 2,955 332,261 29,443 302,818 268,483 34,335 25,225 9,110
2006 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 369,648 38,878 330,770 292,178 38,592 28,340 10,252
2007          Apr  r 231,989 92,291 139,698 85,745 53,953 50,235 3,718 383,721 47,946 335,775 297,065 38,710 27,325 11,385
         May  r 235,832 93,349 142,483 88,416 54,067 50,143 3,924 381,848 48,884 332,964 294,442 38,522 27,124 11,398
         June  r 243,741 100,561 143,180 87,680 55,500 51,604 3,896 387,391 50,294 337,097 296,687 40,410 28,729 11,681
         July  r 243,378 101,548 141,830 88,386 53,444 49,377 4,067 387,885 51,044 336,841 297,022 39,819 27,543 12,276
         Aug  r 241,128 102,901 138,227 87,140 51,087 46,955 4,132 384,440 51,476 332,964 294,504 38,460 25,945 12,515
         Sep 243,638 102,346 141,292 87,735 53,557 49,356 4,201 386,358 56,312 330,046 289,253 40,793 28,379 12,414
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,249
2004 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,835
2005 46,789 1,486 45,303 12,424 32,879 31,219 1,660 40,001 1,633 38,368 10,434 27,934 12,363 15,571
2006 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 54,115 1,459 52,656 19,137 33,519 13,690 19,829
2007          Apr  r 52,569 2,422 50,147 14,086 36,061 33,792 2,269 57,259 1,364 55,895 21,283 34,612 12,566 22,046
         May  r 53,509 2,834 50,675 14,409 36,266 33,927 2,339 55,622 1,248 54,374 19,991 34,383 12,385 21,998
         June  r 54,756 2,775 51,981 14,859 37,122 34,772 2,350 57,541 1,250 56,291 20,638 35,653 12,844 22,809
         July  r 54,806 2,665 52,141 14,264 37,877 35,422 2,455 57,712 1,298 56,414 20,497 35,917 12,419 23,498
         Aug  r 55,729 2,788 52,941 15,022 37,919 35,396 2,523 60,102 1,453 58,649 21,161 37,488 12,829 24,659
         Sep 56,404 2,857 53,547 14,570 38,977 36,502 2,475 60,387 1,394 58,993 21,092 37,901 13,262 24,639
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in May 2004, including Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, L atvia,
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia; from Jan uary
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases 2007, including Bulgaria and Romania. — 2From January 2007, including
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- Slovenia. — 3 All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. 
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. — 1From
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2005          Apr 1.6738 1.5991 10.7080 7.4499 138.84 8.1763 9.1670 1.5475 0.68293 1.2938
         May 1.6571 1.5942 10.5062 7.4443 135.37 8.0814 9.1931 1.5449 0.68399 1.2694
         June 1.5875 1.5111 10.0683 7.4448 132.22 7.8932 9.2628 1.5391 0.66895 1.2165
         July 1.6002 1.4730 9.8954 7.4584 134.75 7.9200 9.4276 1.5578 0.68756 1.2037
         Aug 1.6144 1.4819 9.9589 7.4596 135.98 7.9165 9.3398 1.5528 0.68527 1.2292
         Sep 1.6009 1.4452 9.9177 7.4584 136.06 7.8087 9.3342 1.5496 0.67760 1.2256
         Oct 1.5937 1.4149 9.7189 7.4620 138.05 7.8347 9.4223 1.5490 0.68137 1.2015
         Nov 1.6030 1.3944 9.5273 7.4596 139.59 7.8295 9.5614 1.5449 0.67933 1.1786
         Dec 1.5979 1.3778 9.5746 7.4541 140.58 7.9737 9.4316 1.5479 0.67922 1.1856
2006          Jan 1.6152 1.4025 9.7630 7.4613 139.82 8.0366 9.3111 1.5494 0.68598 1.2103
         Feb 1.6102 1.3723 9.6117 7.4641 140.77 8.0593 9.3414 1.5580 0.68297 1.1938
         Mar 1.6540 1.3919 9.6581 7.4612 140.96 7.9775 9.4017 1.5691 0.68935 1.2020
         Apr 1.6662 1.4052 9.8361 7.4618 143.59 7.8413 9.3346 1.5748 0.69463 1.2271
         May 1.6715 1.4173 10.2353 7.4565 142.70 7.7988 9.3310 1.5564 0.68330 1.2770
         June 1.7104 1.4089 10.1285 7.4566 145.11 7.8559 9.2349 1.5601 0.68666 1.2650
         July 1.6869 1.4303 10.1347 7.4602 146.70 7.9386 9.2170 1.5687 0.68782 1.2684
         Aug 1.6788 1.4338 10.2141 7.4609 148.53 7.9920 9.2098 1.5775 0.67669 1.2811
         Sep 1.6839 1.4203 10.0971 7.4601 148.99 8.2572 9.2665 1.5841 0.67511 1.2727
         Oct 1.6733 1.4235 9.9651 7.4555 149.65 8.3960 9.2533 1.5898 0.67254 1.2611
         Nov 1.6684 1.4635 10.1286 7.4564 151.11 8.2446 9.1008 1.5922 0.67397 1.2881
         Dec 1.6814 1.5212 10.3356 7.4549 154.82 8.1575 9.0377 1.5969 0.67286 1.3213
2007          Jan 1.6602 1.5285 10.1238 7.4539 156.56 8.2780 9.0795 1.6155 0.66341 1.2999
         Feb 1.6708 1.5309 10.1326 7.4541 157.60 8.0876 9.1896 1.6212 0.66800 1.3074
         Mar 1.6704 1.5472 10.2467 7.4494 155.24 8.1340 9.2992 1.6124 0.68021 1.3242
         Apr 1.6336 1.5334 10.4400 7.4530 160.68 8.1194 9.2372 1.6375 0.67934 1.3516
         May 1.6378 1.4796 10.3689 7.4519 163.22 8.1394 9.2061 1.6506 0.68136 1.3511
         June 1.5930 1.4293 10.2415 7.4452 164.55 8.0590 9.3290 1.6543 0.67562 1.3419
         July 1.5809 1.4417 10.3899 7.4410 166.76 7.9380 9.1842 1.6567 0.67440 1.3716
         Aug 1.6442 1.4420 10.3162 7.4429 159.05 7.9735 9.3231 1.6383 0.67766 1.3622
         Sep 1.6445 1.4273 10.4533 7.4506 159.82 7.8306 9.2835 1.6475 0.68887 1.3896
         Oct 1.5837 1.3891 10.6741 7.4534 164.95 7.6963 9.1735 1.6706 0.69614 1.4227
*Calculated from daily values; for additional euro reference exchange statistics. — 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from
rates, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in Stage III of Economic and Monetary Union
Since Country Currency ISO currency code Euro 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Tolar SIT 239.640
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2007
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-24  1 EER-44  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
20 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
20 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Zeit Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 95.8 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.6 95.6 97.7 98.2 98.0 97.6
2000 87.0 86.4 85.7 85.4 87.9 85.8 91.6 97.0 85.1 91.1 92.8 91.8 90.8
2001 87.7 87.2 86.6 85.0 90.4 87.1 91.3 95.9 85.8 90.5 93.0 91.3 90.8
2002 90.1 90.4 89.7 88.3 94.9 91.0 92.0 94.9 88.4 90.9 93.7 92.0 91.9
2003 100.6 101.4 100.4 99.3 106.8 101.9 95.5 94.0 97.5 94.7 97.4 96.6 96.9
2004 104.3 105.1 103.5 103.7 111.2 105.6 96.0 92.9 100.1 95.1 98.9 98.2 98.6
2005 103.3 104.2 102.3 102.1 109.7 103.7 94.9 91.5 99.3 93.4 98.9 97.4 97.3
2006 103.6 104.5 102.3 101.7 110.0 103.4 p 94.1 p 90.1 99.5 p 92.5 99.1 97.2 96.8
2003          Sep 100.4 101.4 106.1 101.3 97.1 96.4 96.5
         Oct 102.0 102.9 108.2 103.2 97.7 97.2 97.4
         Nov 102.0 102.8 102.7 102.3 108.2 103.1 96.0 93.6 99.1 95.3 97.7 97.2 97.5
         Dec 104.9 105.5 111.4 106.0 98.8 98.5 99.0
2004          Jan 106.0 106.7 112.7 107.1 99.4 99.1 99.6
         Feb 105.8 106.5 104.8 104.8 112.5 107.0 96.7 93.4 101.1 96.1 99.1 99.0 99.5
         Mar 104.0 104.8 110.4 105.0 98.7 98.3 98.5
         Apr 102.3 103.1 108.5 103.2 98.1 97.5 97.6
         May 103.0 103.8 102.1 102.2 109.8 104.4 95.4 93.0 98.5 94.7 98.3 97.6 98.1
         June 102.9 103.6 109.8 104.3 98.0 97.4 97.8
         July 103.4 104.1 110.3 104.8 98.4 97.6 98.1
         Aug 103.2 104.2 102.3 102.5 110.1 104.8 95.6 92.8 99.3 94.6 98.5 97.7 98.1
         Sep 103.5 104.4 110.5 104.9 98.7 97.8 98.2
         Oct 104.7 105.5 111.8 106.0 99.1 98.2 98.7
         Nov 106.0 106.6 104.7 105.1 113.3 107.3 96.3 92.3 101.6 95.1 99.6 98.7 99.3
         Dec 107.3 108.0 114.7 108.6 100.4 99.5 100.1
2005          Jan 106.1 106.8 113.2 107.0 99.9 98.7 99.1
         Feb 105.4 106.0 104.8 104.8 112.2 106.0 96.4 92.0 102.1 94.9 99.6 98.3 98.5
         Mar 106.1 107.0 113.1 107.1 100.0 98.7 98.9
         Apr 105.3 106.1 112.1 106.0 99.3 98.1 98.2
         May 104.3 105.2 102.7 102.8 110.8 104.8 95.1 91.7 99.6 93.7 99.1 97.8 97.8
         June 101.6 102.6 107.8 102.1 98.1 96.6 96.3
         July 102.2 103.1 108.2 102.3 98.4 96.8 96.4
         Aug 102.6 103.7 101.2 100.9 108.9 103.0 94.4 91.3 98.4 92.9 98.7 97.0 96.8
         Sep 102.1 103.1 108.4 102.4 98.8 97.1 96.8
         Oct 101.8 102.7 107.9 101.8 98.6 96.9 96.5
         Nov 101.1 102.0 100.5 99.9 107.0 100.8 93.6 90.8 97.2 92.1 98.3 96.5 95.9
         Dec 101.2 102.0 107.0 100.9 98.4 96.5 95.9
2006          Jan 101.8 102.7 107.7 101.4 98.5 96.5 95.8
         Feb 101.2 102.0 100.4 100.4 106.8 100.5 93.5 90.3 97.8 91.9 98.3 96.2 95.4
         Mar 101.9 103.0 107.6 101.4 98.5 96.5 95.7
         Apr 103.0 104.0 108.8 102.5 98.9 96.9 96.3
         May 104.0 104.9 102.6 102.6 110.5 103.9 94.4 90.3 99.7 92.8 99.1 97.2 96.9
         June 104.2 105.0 111.1 104.4 99.1 97.4 97.3
         July 104.5 105.5 111.3 104.6 99.4 97.7 97.4
         Aug 104.6 105.5 103.0 102.7 111.3 104.6 p 94.2 p 89.9 99.9 p 92.7 99.1 97.4 97.1
         Sep 104.4 105.2 111.1 104.2 99.3 97.4 97.1
         Oct 103.9 104.7 110.4 103.6 99.4 97.4 97.0
         Nov 104.5 105.3 103.2 101.0 111.1 104.2 p 94.3 p 89.7 100.5 p 92.4 99.9 97.7 97.4
         Dec 105.5 106.1 112.3 105.0 100.3 98.0 97.7
2007          Jan 104.9 105.6 111.5 104.3 100.4 98.0 97.6
         Feb 105.4 106.1 104.0 102.2 111.9 104.6 p 94.8 p 89.6 101.8 p 92.9 100.6 98.3 97.8
         Mar 106.1 106.7 112.7 105.4 100.8 98.4 98.0
         Apr 107.1 107.8 113.7 106.3 101.4 98.9 98.5
         May 107.3 107.9 105.4 103.2 113.6 106.1 p 95.4 p 89.5 p 103.4 p 93.3 101.5 98.9 98.3
         June 106.9 107.4 113.1 105.6 101.3 98.7 98.0
         July 107.6 108.2 113.9 106.3 101.9 99.2 98.5
         Aug 107.1 107.7 ... ... 113.7 106.1 p 95.4 p 89.2 p 103.7 p 93.1 101.6 98.9 98.4
         Sep 108.2 108.8 114.7 107.0 102.1 99.4 98.8
         Oct 109.4 110.0 115.7 107.8 102.8 99.9 99.2
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of shown are based on the trade in manufactured goods between
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the 1999 and 2001 and reflect third-market effects. Where price and wage
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure indices were not available, estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations. This
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see group includes not only the countries belonging to the EER-24 group (see
Monthly Report , November 2001, pp  51-65 and May 2007, pp  32-37). For footnote 1) but also Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India,
details of the methodology see ECB, Monthly Bulletin , September 2004, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines,
pp  69-72 as well as the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2, which can be down- Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and
loaded from the ECB’s website (www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures Venezuela. — 3Annual and quarterly averages. — 4Euro-area countries
implies an increase in competitiveness. — 1ECB calculations are based on (before 2007, excluding Slovenia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan,
the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. —
euro against the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Ca- 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-24 group. —
nada, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kong, 6Owing to missing data for the deflators of total sales, China and
Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore are not included in this calculation. — 7Euro-area countries and
Singapore, Slovakia, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom countries belonging to the EER-44 group (see footnote 2). 
and United States. The weights used in these calculations during the period
76*XI  External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic and
statistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are available
in both English and German, in printed
form and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a
file which is updated monthly and
contains approximately 40,000 time
series published by the Bundesbank
can be obtained on magnetic tape cas-
sette or CD-ROM from the Division
Statistical data processing, math-
ematical methods. Orders should be
sent, in writing, to one of the ad-
dresses listed on the reverse of the title
page. Selected time series can also be
downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2006 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2007 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007

Monthly Report articles
December 2006
– Germany in the globalisation process
– The economic situation of small and medium-
sized enterprises in Germany since 1997
– Transporting the new Basel capital rules into
German law
– Recent developments in payment cards and
innovative electronic payment procedures
January 2007
– Investment activity in Germany under the influ-
ence of technological change and competition
among production locations
– The labour market in Germany: general devel-
opments seen in an international context
February 2007
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2006-07
March 2007
– German balance of payments in 2006
– German intra-euro-area trade: cyclical effects
and structural determinants
April 2007
– Leveraged buyouts: the role of financial inter-
mediaries and aspects of financial stability
– Financial development and outlook of the pub-
lic long-term care insurance scheme
May 2007
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2007June 2007
– Investment and financing in 2006
– Current account balances and price compe-
titiveness in the euro area
July 2007
– The relationship between monetary develop-
ments and the real estate market
– Trends in local government finances since 2000
– Primary and secondary markets for German
public sector debt instruments: institutional
framework, trading systems and their rele-
vance for Germany as a financial centre
August 2007
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2007
September 2007
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2006
– Private consumption in Germany since reunifi-
cation
October 2007
– Globalisation and monetary policy
– Advances in strengthening the economy’s
growth potential
– Reform of German budgetary rules
– TARGET2 – the new payment system for
Europe
November 2007
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2007
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)
5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19962
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 19972
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19992
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20032
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-
rungsunion, April 20052
European economic and monetary union,
September 2005
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20062
Special Statistical Publications*o
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200332 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, September 20072, 4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20002, 5
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2006,
July 20075
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
20065
6 Ratios from financial statements of German
enterprises 2003 to 2004, January 20075
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, February 20052
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics
April 20071, 5
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2007
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20062
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2007
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available in German only.
3Solely available on the website, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Stat-
istics”, “External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
4Available on the website only (updated on a quarterly
basis).
5Available on the website only.*Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail-
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng-
lish.
oNot available on the website.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2007
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
22/2007
Volatile multinationals? Evidence from the labor
demand of German firms
23/2007
International investment positions and exchange
rate dynamics: a dynamic panel analysis
24/2007
Testing for contemporary fiscal policy discretion
with real time data
25/2007
Quantifying risk and uncertainty in macroeco-
nomic forecasts
26/2007
Taxing deficits to restrain government spending
and foster capital accumulation
27/2007
Spill-over effects of monetary policy – a progress
report on interest rate convergence in Europe
28/2007
The timing and magnitude of exchange rate over-
shooting
29/2007
The timeless perspective vs. discretion: theory and
monetary policy implications for an open economy
30/2007
International cooperation on innovation: empirical
evidence for German and Portuguese firms
31/2007
Simple interest rate rules with a role for moneySeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
09/2007
Banking consolidation and small business finance –
empirical evidence for Germany
10/2007
The quality of banking and regional growth
11/2007
Welfare effects of financial integration
12/2007
The marketability of bank assets and managerial
rents: implications for financial stability
13/2007
Asset correlations and credit portfolio risk – an
empirical analysis
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20012
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20012
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19992
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Mark
or more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the website.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

