MONTHLY REPORT
AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER
2007
Vol 59
No 8

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1Fax +49 69 9566 3077Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 11 am on 17 August 2007.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on thewebsite.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in summer 2007 5
Overview 6Global and European setting 12
Diverging trends in French andGerman foreign trade 20
Monetary policy and banking business 24
Money market management andliquidity needs 26
Financial markets 33
Euro real term structures andbreak-even inflation rates 36
Economic conditions in Germany 43
Extension of the reporting categoriesin the Deutsche Bundesbank’snegotiated pay rate statistics 50
Public finances 57
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Financial accounts 52*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
4Public finances in Germany 54*
Economic conditions in Germany 61*External sector 68*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
5The economic scene
in Germany
in summer 2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
6OverviewCyclical upswing still intact
The robust momentum of the global econ-
omy persisted in the second quarter of 2007.Emerging market economies, in particular,expanded dynamically. The upswing in the in-dustrial countries also continued at a consid-erable pace. Despite the spillover of tensionsoriginating in the US mortgage loan marketinto the global financial markets over the pastfew weeks, the further global economicgrowth prospects may still be rated as favour-able. Even so, risks for the world economyhave increased with the ongoing adjustmentprocess on the US real estate market. Further-more, the oil markets’ highly vulnerable stateposes certain risks to the global economy andto the overall price environment. Continuingenergy and food price increases were passedthrough to a large extent to the consumerprice level in the second quarter. Prices in theindustrial countries in the second quarterwere consequently up 0.9% on the first quar-ter after seasonal adjustment. This amountsto an annualised inflation rate of more than3
1/C252%.
Underpinned by the robust state of the global
economy and market players’ high level ofconfidence, stock prices and bond yields rosestrongly at first in the second quarter. Whilepredominantly positive company news andbuoyant merger and acquisition activitypushed up stock price indices to multi-yearhighs, interest rates in the ten-year segmentof the capital market rose by around
1/C252per-
centage point to 51/C252% in the USA and 41/C252%
in the euro bond market by mid-July, partly inanticipation of higher central bank rates inInternational
setting
Financial
markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
7several large economies. However, after prob-
lems in the US mortgage loan market and theconsequences for institutions investing bothdirectly and indirectly in this market becameincreasingly apparent, investors’ risk percep-tions fundamentally changed. Stock pricesconsequently dropped considerably and inter-est rate spreads on riskier investmentswidened noticeably. Conversely, the “flight toquality” lowered the bond yields of top-ratedborrowers. The continuing positive expect-ations for corporate earnings and robustgrowth tended to have a stabilising effect onthe stock market. This is especially true ofGerman equities, which have performedcomparatively well to date, not least owingto the currently buoyant cyclical momentum.The euro remained very strong into Julyagainst the backdrop of the ongoing favour-able growth prospects for the euro area. Itwas only recently that the euro started toweaken a little amid increasing uncertainty inthe financial markets. Since the beginning ofthe year, the euro has gained slightly on aver-age against a basket of 24 major currencies.
Although the euro’s strength in the foreign
exchange markets in the first half of this yearsupported European monetary policy to a cer-tain degree, upward price pressure in theeuro area resulting, in particular, from higherprices for crude oil and other commodities aswell as for food nonetheless intensified. Over-all prices rose by 0.8% from the first to thesecond quarter compared with 0.5% in theprevious three months. In terms of monetarypolicy, future prospects are more importantthan current and past price developments. Inspite of the interest rate adjustments thathave been made to date, the further outlook
again appears less favourable. Strong monet-ary expansion, driven by the buoyant demandfor credit, causes concern that the average in-crease in consumer prices in the euro areawill clearly exceed the 2% mark over the nextfew years. The persistently high oil prices, up-ward pressure on prices for industrial rawmaterials and in the agricultural sector as wellas increasing overall production capacity util-isation, together with the growing pressureon costs from wages, likewise indicate risksto macroeconomic stability that need to betaken seriously. The ECB Governing Counciltherefore further tightened the interest ratepolicy stance at the beginning of June, raisingthe main refinancing rate by
1/C254percentage
point to 4%. At the same time, the ECB Gov-erning Council indicated that it intends tomonitor ongoing developments with greatvigilance so that it can take further measuresif necessary. Correspondingly, interest rate ex-pectations in the money market remained onthe upside until this report went to press.During the past few weeks developments inthe money market have been additionallyoverlaid by tensions connected with the prob-lems in the US subprime mortgage market,particularly in the somewhat longer maturitysegments. The Eurosystem successfully coun-tered what was at times substantial pressureon bank liquidity by offering the banks gener-ous refinancing.
The cyclical upturn in the German economy
continued into the second quarter of 2007.According to initial figures from the FederalStatistical Office, aggregate output went upin the second quarter by 0.3%, after adjust-
Monetary
policy
German
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
8ment for seasonal and calendar effects, com-
pared with 0.5% in the first quarter. How-ever, the statistically recorded slowdown ofthe pace of growth may in fact understatethe underlying economic dynamics, particu-larly bearing in mind the impact of the fiscalwithdrawal of purchasing power due to theVAT increase since the beginning of the yearas well as the advanced purchases in 2006not just of consumer durables but also of resi-dential construction. The fact that growthhas not come to a standstill in these circum-stances may therefore be seen as a clear indi-cation of the stronger endogenous base ofthe current upswing. This is supported by thefurther upward revision of GDP growth in2006 by another
1/C2510percentage point to
3.1% (in calendar-adjusted terms), which wasannounced with the publication of the latestGDP figures.
The slower momentum of economic growth
in the second quarter is also to be seen in thecontext of the dynamic construction activityin the early part of this year due to the mildwinter. A “technical rebound” was thereforeexpected in this sector. By contrast, expend-iture on machinery and equipment increasedfurther in the second quarter. It was a main-stay of growth throughout the first half ofthe current year. Furthermore, private con-sumption is likely to have made a positivecontribution to growth in the second quarter.Retail turnover through traditional sales out-lets and purchases of cars, at any rate, de-veloped more favourably following the dentin demand accompanying the rise in VAT.Lastly, foreign trade made another markedpositive contribution to macroeconomic
growth in the second quarter.
Labour market trends continued to be prom-
ising in the second quarter. Although employ-ment did not increase by as much as in thefirst quarter, comparisons with past economicupswings show that labour input is playing agreater role in the current upturn, measuredby the increase in the total number of hoursworked in the overall economy and the factthat employment intensity is higher. Theseare the first visible rewards of the wage re-straint and labour market reforms of the pastyears. The number of unemployed fell in thesecond quarter by 97,000 to 3.84 million.This was 754,000 persons fewer than a yearbefore. In July seasonally adjusted unemploy-ment decreased by a further 45,000 persons.The unemployment rate decreased to 9.0%,compared with 10.6% a year earlier.
The improved labour market situation has
altered the existing wage bargaining condi-tions. Thus the labour agreements concludedso far this year vary distinctly according to in-dustry, reflecting the different economic situ-ation of individual sectors and the relativestrength of sectoral bargaining positions. Forexample, the large pay rise agreed in themetal-working industry mirrors the excep-tionally buoyant state of that industry, whilethe agreement in the printing industry is tobe seen in the context of the more moderateeconomic growth that has been recorded inthat sector. The protracted negotiations inthe construction industry as well as at theprincipal railways operator, Deutsche Bahn,illustrate difficulties experienced in reaching a
Labour market
Wages

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
9consensus on both the employer and employ-
ee side. However, the settlement concludedat the major telecoms company, DeutscheTelekom, shows that even during an upswingemployees are willing to make concessionswith regard to the pay level and standardworking hours if their jobs are threatened. Asa whole, negotiated rates of pay in thesecond quarter of 2007 were up by 1.8%year-on-year.
Price movements in Germany were again sig-
nificantly shaped by developments on themarkets for energy and other commodities.However, the resultant pressure on prices wasslightly eased by the appreciation of the euro.Owing to higher crude oil prices, German im-ports were nevertheless considerably moreexpensive in the second quarter. Import pricesincreased by 1.6% compared with the firstquarter.
Consumer prices rose slightly faster in the
second quarter of 2007 than in the first quar-ter. This was due not only to the continuingrise of energy prices but also to the impact ofa jump in prices for a number of agriculturalcommodities and dairy products on inter-national markets. Food prices were 2.0%more expensive year-on-year. Prices of indus-trial goods (excluding energy) increased by1.7%. Services were 2.8% dearer over 12months, mainly owing to the VAT increaseand the introduction of student tuition fees.Taking the average increase of 1.8% inenergy prices and 1.1% higher housing rentsinto account, the year-on-year rate of pricerises for the second quarter of 2007 as awhole amounts to 1.9% as measured by thenational consumer price index (CPI). The cor-
responding measure of the Harmonised Indexof Consumer Prices (HICP) is 2.0%. In July,too, the inflation rate amounted to 1.9% and2.0%, respectively. In the coming months,significantly higher year-on-year rates of con-sumer price inflation are expected, not leastowing to the baseline effects due to the com-paratively low energy prices in the secondhalf of 2006.
The outlook for a continuation of economic
growth remains favourable. This is suggested,at all events, by the orders on hand and therelevant sentiment indicators. New orders in-creased further in the second quarter from ahigh level and the stock of orders on hand formany firms grew again. The relationship be-tween the order volume in the order-basedmanufacturing industries and productioncapacity available indicates a further increase.
Overall the available indicators point to a con-
tinuation of the positive underlying trend.Fixed investment is likely to benefit more dur-ing the course of the year from the high cap-acity utilisation in the industrial sector andthe positive order situation, after the normal-isation in the construction industry had tem-porarily dampened demand in the secondquarter. The prospects of continuing strongexport growth are also good given an in-crease in incoming orders from abroad and inview of German firms’ high level of competi-tiveness and attractive range of goods. Todate, the euro’s higher external value hasdone little to curb exports. This is also due tothe fact that today the German economy hasa product range whose sales profile responds
Prices Outlook

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
10far less sensitively and fairly slowly to shifts in
exchange rate patterns. Moreover, worldtrade is continuing to grow most favourably.
Judging from the present perspective, the re-
cent developments in the international finan-cial markets give no cause to essentially revisethis assessment of favourable fundamentals.The fluctuations associated with the problemsin the US subprime mortgage market derivefrom the repricing of risks in market segmentswhich were previously characterised byabove-average growth. In principle, this ad-justment to a changed risk landscape is a wel-come return to the norm, although it didoccur very abruptly. Moreover, some marketsegments experienced extreme nervousnessand overreactions. It is therefore necessary tomonitor the corresponding developmentscarefully, not least so as to help ensure an or-derly risk repricing in liquid markets.
The dampening effects of the VAT increase
could have a lingering impact on private con-sumption. The higher oil prices are likewisesqueezing the purchasing power of dispos-able income. However, households’ spendingbehaviour, which was temporarily constrictedby their response to the VAT rise, should bebolstered more and more in the next fewmonths by the improved situation on thelabour market. The GfK index of consumerconfidence has been developing positivelysince March, and income expectations in thesecond quarter were significantly higher thanin the first quarter. Households’ economicexpectations show that the upswing is in-creasingly present in the perception of con-sumers.The development in public finances is current-
ly very positive. After the general governmentdeficit ratio had already halved to 1.6% lastyear, a further marked decline is expected for2007. Significant progress has thus beenmade in the consolidation of public financesand a balanced government budget is alreadypossible this year.
The fiscal balance could be somewhat more
favourable in the coming year if the positivemacroeconomic dynamics persist. Accordingto the budgetary plans, however, no furtherimprovement in the structural balance is like-ly. The reform of business taxation, which willcome into force next year, will lead to exten-sive revenue losses. In addition, a certain ac-celeration of the rise in expenditure, whichhas been subdued over the past few years, ison the horizon. There is a danger that, as dur-ing previous cyclical upswings, the favourablecourse of budgetary development may beseized as a chance to make additional ex-penditure hikes or cuts in taxes and socialsecurity contributions without taking dueaccount of the partially temporary nature ofthe improvement.
The positive overall fiscal picture should not
obscure the fact that extensive consolidationmeasures are required not only for centralgovernment but also for some state and localgovernments. If the surpluses generated bysome government entities (eg the FederalEmployment Agency or individual federalstates) were used for significant cuts in contri-bution rates or increases in expenditure, thepartially unresolved budgetary problems
Public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
11would resurface, also at the general govern-
ment level.
The current favourable circumstances provide
the opportunity to rapidly eliminate the con-tinuing budgetary imbalances and to attainand lastingly maintain a balanced budgetposition in the medium term, in line with thegoals of the European fiscal framework. Afterthe excessive deficit procedure that had beenimposed on Germany in January 2003 wasdropped in June owing to the country’s
favourable budgetary development, the non-binding preventative agreements of the Euro-pean fiscal framework must now be rigorous-ly implemented. In this way, Germany can setan example within the European Union andsimultaneously strengthen the credibility ofthe Stability and Growth Pact, which wasreformed not least owing to pressure fromGermany.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
12Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
The strong upward trend in world economic
activity persisted in the second quarter of2007. Particularly those emerging marketeconomies in the middle of a convergenceprocess grew at a highly dynamic pace; thisgroup has now come to represent an increas-ingly self-sustaining weight in the globalgrowth pattern. The upturn in the industrialnations continued at a considerable pace.Overall economic output among those coun-tries rose in the second quarter once again byan estimated
1/C252% on the quarter after adjust-
ment for seasonal and calendar variations,after having gone up by
3/C254% in the fourth
quarter of 2006. Real gross domestic product(GDP) was up by 2
1/C254% on the year. After
starting the year on a very lacklustre note, theUS economy distinctly regained momentum,despite residential construction continuing tobe a drag on growth. By contrast, the Japan-ese economy decelerated after having ex-panded sharply in the 2006-07 winter half-year. GDP growth in the euro area likewiseslowed down, albeit not as sharply as inJapan. One reason was that industrial produc-tion got off to a weak start in the secondquarter owing to special factors. Another wasthat seasonally adjusted construction outputfell markedly, especially because the custom-ary second-quarter revival was weaker owingto the mild winter weather at the beginningof 2007.
Among the large emerging market econ-
omies, China, with year-on-year growth of+12%, once again showed the strongestsecond-quarter growth. It even improved onGlobal
economic
indicators still
clearly pointing
upwards;
industrial
countries on
stable growth
path
Emerging
market
economies ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
13its first-quarter performance (+11%). This,
however, was associated with a distinct in-crease in inflation to 5.6% in July. In order tocontain inflation expectations, the Chinesecentral bank once again raised its key lendingrates. The other east Asian countries (exclud-ing Japan) likewise remained on a steep ex-pansion path; their export growth has barelyflagged thus far, even though demand fromthe USA was no longer as dynamic as it hadbeen earlier.
The majority of Latin American countries con-
tinued to benefit from high prices for crudeoil and other raw materials. The Brazilianeconomy once again grew noticeably in thefirst quarter of 2007. The sharp cyclical up-turn is likely to have persisted in the secondquarter, as is indicated by the further im-provement in the business climate. Consumerprice inflation, however, went up from 3.0%in April to 3.7% in July. GDP growth in Mex-ico, by contrast, at a seasonally adjusted
1/C254%,
was relatively sluggish in the first quarter,owing particularly to dampening stimuli fromthe USA. In the second quarter, however, thecountry is likely to have once again received apositive economic boost from the revival ofUS economic activity.
The Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) is still in the midst of an economic boomwhich is being driven mainly by the highrevenues from the export of energy commod-ities. In addition, however, Russia’s economicgrowth has become more sustainable as in-vestment has now also picked up, although,at 8.8% in July, inflation remained very high.Seasonally adjusted,
quarter-on-quarter change
%
%
%
%
%
Euro area
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 2007United KingdomJapanUnited StatesIndustrial countriesGrowth trends in
industrial countries *
*The United States, Japan, the United
Kingdom and the euro area.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
02.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−2.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
... and CIS still
on a steep
growth path

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
14The continued outlook for the world econ-
omy is still being assessed favourably. At themid-year juncture the OECD’s compositeleading indicators for both the industrialnations and the major emerging marketcountries pointed to a continuation of stronggrowth. This is also being signalled by theglobal Purchasing Managers’ Index.
1In add-
ition, at the end of July the IMF revised itsspring forecast for global GDP growth in2007 and 2008 by
1/C254percentage point to
51/C254% for each of the two years. This means
that the expected deceleration comparedwith 2006 (+5
1/C252%) is likely to remain within
narrow bounds. A much more favourable as-sessment of the pace of expansion in thesouth and east Asian emerging market econ-omies (especially China) and the CIS was themain reason for this. While, according to theIMF forecast, the considerable rise in oil pricesin the past few months will have little impacton the cyclical growth forces worldwide, itwill lead to additional price pressure in theoil-importing countries.
All the same, the risks to global economic
momentum have increased in the past fewmonths. The correction process taking placeon the US subprime mortgage market hasamplified distinctly and has also spread toother segments of the financial markets bothinside and outside the USA. In addition to theadjustment of what were previously, in somecases, very lax borrowing terms in the USmortgage market, there has been, in particu-lar, a widening of the rather low risk pre-miums on corporate bonds and loans intend-ed to finance mergers and acquisitions. In themajor international equity markets, especiallythe shares of enterprises from the financial
and real estate sectors sagged significantly. Inaddition, external imbalances still persist, al-though they have probably not intensified inthe meantime. Moreover, the oil markets’high vulnerability to disruptions still poses acertain threat to the global economy and thegeneral price climate.
Crude oil prices continued to rise in the
second quarter. On a quarterly average,prices for Brent crude oil, denominated in USdollars, were 17% higher than in the firstthree months of this year. The upward trendinitially persisted after mid-year. In the firsthalf of August, however, the oil price eased;at US$70 per barrel when this report went topress, it stood at 5% below its level a yearearlier. In euro terms, a barrel cost 9% lessowing to currency appreciation. The strongincrease in the price of crude oil in the pastfew months was linked, for one thing, to thereduction in production in the Middle East inthe 2006-07 winter half-year, the at timesconsiderable reductions in production inNigeria and delivery shortfalls in the NorthSea. For another, global demand for oil hascontinued to grow. Output shortfalls amongUS refineries also contributed in notablemeasure to the increase in the price of refinedpetroleum products in the second quarter.This also resulted in higher prices in Europe,particularly for petrol, because of increasedpurchases abroad by US mineral oil enter-prises. Although a slight easing is expectedon the crude oil futures markets over a timehorizon of six to 18 months, oil prices will
1This index is calculated from indices for the USA, Japan,
Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Russia and China.Global
economic
indicators and
new IMF
forecast
Increased
global risksPrices in
commodity
markets at
record highs

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
15continue to trend upwards over the coming
five years, according to the July 2007 forecastby the International Energy Agency. Thisreflects the expectation that the increase inoil supply, especially from the non-OPECcountries, will fail to keep pace with thegrowth of global demand.
On the whole, industrial raw materials were
being quoted – in US dollars – slightly lower,after having once again risen sharply in April.In early August, however, they were still11
1/C254% higher than a year earlier. World mar-
ket prices for food, beverages and tobaccocontinued to rise throughout the reportingperiod, reaching new peaks. Sharp rises inthe prices of oilseeds and oils, which are in-creasingly in demand for the production ofbiofuels, were the main reason. The overallindex of commodity prices excluding energyin early August was up by 15% on the year inUS dollar terms and up by 7
1/C254%i ne u r o
terms.
The continuing rise in the cost of energy and
higher food prices had a clear impact on con-sumer prices in the second quarter. In the in-dustrial countries, prices in the second quar-ter were up by a seasonally adjusted 0.9%from the first quarter, in which they had risenby 0.7%. The year-on-year rate remained un-changed at 2.1%, but this was solely becausethe corresponding price increase betweenApril and June 2006 had been even greater.At 1.9%, core inflation (excluding energy andfood) was only slightly lower than on averageduring the first three months of this year.In the industrial countries excluding Japan,where core inflation is still negative, it stood
at 2.1%.
The US economy grew by a seasonally and
calendar-adjusted
3/C254% in the second quarter,
according to the initial estimate, after havingseen only a marginal increase in output in thefirst quarter. If both periods are taken to-gether, US GDP expanded in the first half ofthe current year at an annualised rate of 2%.Log scale
US$
or €World market prices for
crude oil *
Sources: Thomson Financial Datastream and
Global Insight. — * Price for a barrel of
Brent crude oil.
Deutsche BundesbankUS$ Futures prices
15 August 2007
15 May 2007
Spot 3 M 6 M 9 M 12 M 15 M 18 M80
75
70
65
60Spot prices
in US dollars
in euro70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Price
movements
in industrial
countries
influenced
by rising prices
for oil and food
USA

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
16Commercial investment lent an important
boost to growth in the second quarter, in-creasing by 2% after seasonal adjustment.Business construction grew particularly sharp-ly and more than offset the renewed 2
1/C252%
decline in residential construction. Privateconsumption continued to rise, albeit, at+
1/C254%, at a slower pace. It was chiefly under-
pinned by the continued sharp rise in employ-ment. Domestic demand contributed a totalof
1/C252percentage point to growth, and foreign
trade1/C254percentage point. Real exports grew
by a seasonally and calendar-adjusted 11/C252%,
whereas price-adjusted imports fell by3/C254%.
This reflects – alongside the exceptionallystrong first-quarter growth – particularly themoderate growth of private consumptionand the dampening impact of the US dollar’sdepreciation.
2
According to the US Federal Reserve’s latestforecast, the US economy will continue togrow moderately in the second half of 2007,which means that GDP could grow between2
1/C254% and 21/C252% over the course of the year.
In 2008, however, the pace of growth is ex-pected to pick up slightly, lying in a corridorbetween 2
1/C252% and 23/C254% between the fourth
quarter of 2007 and the end of 2008. TheFed had given a somewhat more favourableassessment of the outlook in February. TheIMF recently likewise recently revised its fore-cast for annual average growth in the UnitedStates in 2007 downwards to 2%; for 2008,however, it expects growth to rebound to2
3/C254%.
Consumer price inflation in the United States
accelerated distinctly in the second quarter toa seasonally adjusted 1.5% vis-/C224-vis the first
quarter, in which it had stood at 0.9%. Year-on-year inflation rose from 2.4% to 2.7%,despite a dampening baseline effect. Higherprices for energy and food were the main fac-tors fuelling the strong price pressure. Exclud-ing these two items, year-on-year inflationfell by 0.3 percentage point to 2.3%. In Julythe headline rate declined to 2.4%, whereasthe core rate excluding the volatile compon-ents held steady at 2.2%. The core deflatorof private consumption fell back below the2% mark in June. In 2008 the Fed expectsthis deflator to continue to rise at a ratebetween 1
3/C254% and 2%.
According to initial estimates, seasonally ad-
justed real GDP in Japan remained virtuallyunchanged in the second quarter after havinggone up by
3/C254% in the first three months. It
grew by 21/C254% on the year. One reason for
the sideways movement of economic activitybetween April and June was the smaller in-crease in private consumption, which halvedto just under
1/C252% on the quarter. A second
reason is that real housing investment fellsharply (-3
1/C252%). Commercial investment, by
contrast, grew more sharply, at a seasonallyadjusted 1
1/C254%. Real exports rose by just
under 1% after having gone up in the firstthree months of 2007 by 3
1/C252%. Since imports
2Along with the announcement of the second-quarter
results, revisions to the national accounts data for the
three preceding years were also published, as usual.
According to these figures, average GDP growth for the
years 2004 to 2006 has been revised downwards by
1/C254percentage point to 31/C254%. At the same time, the
household saving ratio in 2005 and 2006, which had pre-
viously been reported to be negative, was revised up-
wards sharply by 1 to 11/C252percentage points to1/C252% for
each of the two years. In the second quarter of 2007 the
rate likewise stood at +1/C252%.Japan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
17grew only slightly more slowly than exports,
real net exports stayed at their level for thefirst quarter, in which – relative to GDP – theyhad risen by nearly
1/C252percentage point. Con-
sumer prices in the April to June period wereslightly below their previous year’s level.Excluding energy and food, they fell by afurther 0.3%. This was due in large part tothe continued sharp reduction in the price ofconsumer durables in the areas of consumerelectronics and household goods.
In the United Kingdom, second-quarter over-
all economic output was up by
3/C254% on the
first quarter in seasonal and calendar-adjustedterms, thereby continuing the steep path ofexpansion onto which it had embarked at thebeginning of 2006. On the year, real valueadded rose by 3%. Growth was broadlybased insofar as manufacturing productionexcluding construction, following a slight de-cline in the 2006-07 winter half-year, wentup by just over
1/C252%. Construction output
grew by a seasonally adjusted 1% following+
3/C254% between January and March. By con-
trast, the services sector grew a bit moreslowly, at
3/C254%. On the demand side – as far
as can be inferred from the available data –private consumption is likely to have onceagain been the mainstay. Real retail sales rosein the second quarter by a seasonally adjusted1
1/C254% following a perceptibly slower expan-
sion in the first three months. Consumerprice inflation fell from 2.9% in the first quar-ter to 2.6% in the second, although this ispartly connected with the aforementionedbaseline effect with regard to energy prices.In July, the rate, at 1.9%, had returned toslightly below the official inflation target of2%. Excluding energy and unprocessed food,
inflation stood at 1.8% as this report went topress. While the upward trend with regard toreal estate prices slowed down in the secondquarter, the year-on-year rate was still10.7%.
In the new EU member states (excluding Slo-
venia) from the last two enlargement rounds,the cyclical upswing continued in the secondquarter. While seasonally adjusted industrialoutput did not exceed its first-quarter level,this was largely attributable to the sharpdecline in April which was, at least in part,due to exceptional factors. In May and June,industrial output rebounded noticeably, regis-tering a year-on-year increase in the secondquarter of 8%. The strongest growth rateswere recorded in Slovakia (+14
1/C252%) and Bul-
garia (101/C252%). The buoyant output growth,
however, was accompanied by persistentlystrong price pressures. In the second quarter,consumer prices increased by a further 1.1%on the quarter after seasonal adjustment. Theyear-on-year increase accelerated from 3.3%in January to 4.0% in July, with the range ofnational inflation rates, as this report went topress, stretching from -0.2% in Malta to+9.5% in Latvia.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
The euro-area economies grew by a seasonal-
ly and calendar-adjusted
1/C254% in the second
quarter. This meant that the rate of expansionwas nearly
1/C252percentage point below that in
the first three months. Real GDP went up by2
1/C252% on the year. The seasonally adjustedUnited
KingdomNew EU
member states
More moderate
GDP growth in
the euro area
owing to
special factors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
18average rate reflected a rather strong increase
in aggregate output in Spain, Belgium andAustria. Output growth was somewhatmuted in the three large member states ofFrance, Germany and Italy, as well as in theNetherlands. In some euro-area countries,macroeconomic growth was handicappednot only by the sluggish pace of industrial ac-tivity at the start of the second quarter butalso notably by the seasonally adjusteddecline in construction output, representinga technical counterswing to the weather-related high level of activity in the first quar-ter. During the current quarter, these specialfactors will no longer play a role, whichmeans that, per se , the manufacturing sector
is likely to once again make a greater contri-bution to growth.
At a seasonally adjusted
1/C254% in the second
quarter, industrial output (excluding construc-tion) grew much more slowly than in the firstquarter (+
3/C254%). This was due partly to the
weak April outturn, which was marked par-ticularly by output shortfalls owing to the“bridge holiday” at the end of the monthand the strikes in some segments of the Ger-man car industry. As the chart on this pageshows, since the beginning of 2004 industrialactivity in Germany has been considerablymore buoyant than in other major memberstates. This is consistent with the clearly moredynamic pace of German export growth,which is subjected to an in-depth comparisonwith France in the box on pages 20 and 21.The fact that capacity utilisation in the manu-facturing sector in July was markedly lowerthan in April is consistent with the overallmuted growth of industrial production; how-2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 2007SpainItalyFranceof which
GermanyEuro areaThree-month moving average
MonthlyIndustrial output *
in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and national statistics. —
*Excluding construction.
Deutsche Bundesbank112
109
106
103
100
97103
100
97
94106
103
100
97118
115
112
109
106
103
100
97106112
109
106
103
100
97
Industrial
activity still
rising despite
weak output
growth

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
19ever, capacity utilisation remained well above
its multi-year average.
If the negative exceptional influences are fac-
tored out, the underlying cyclical trend in theeuro-area industrial sector continued to beclearly pointed upwards in the second quar-ter. Orders received by industry in April-Maywere up by a seasonally adjusted 2% fromthe first quarter and by 10
1/C254% on the year.
Excluding the manufacture of other transportequipment, in which large orders often playan important role, 1% more orders werebooked than on average over the first threemonths. In addition, manufacturing enter-prises, according to the results of the EU in-vestment survey of March-April, are planningto increase their real expenditure on newplant and equipment as well as buildings thisyear by 6% after having increased theirinvestment budgets to the same extent in2006. Another indicator of a continuedfavourable outlook for the upswing in themanufacturing sector is that industrial confi-dence – despite the slight decline in July –remained at an exceptionally high levelthroughout the reporting period.
There are no detailed national accounts data
on the demand side just yet. However, thesideways movement of exports to non-euro-area countries in April-May is consistent withthe picture of slightly weaker overall GDPgrowth. In this two-month period, importsrose marginally in terms of value. However,this was caused mainly by higher energyprices rather than by an expansion in the vol-ume of imports. On the whole, no notablecontribution by foreign trade to GDP growthcan be expected for the second quarter.
Moreover, construction investment is unlikelyto have boosted expansion much in view ofthe weak second-quarter revival in the con-struction sector. In addition, householdsshowed restraint on the consumption front.Retail purchases (excluding vehicles) rose onlyslightly after seasonal adjustment (
1/C254%) from
the first quarter, and new car registrationsremained at the previous quarter’s depressedlevel. However, the continuing improvementin the labour market is heralding a greaterpropensity for consumers to spend in thesecond half of the year.
The upturn on the labour market continued
in the second quarter of 2007. According toprovisional Eurostat data, a seasonally adjust-ed 10.42 million people were without em-ployment on average between April andJune, or 0.37 million fewer than in the firstthree months of 2007 and 1.51 million fewerthan in the same period a year earlier. The(standardised) unemployment rate fell from7.2% in the first quarter to 7.0% in thesecond. Unemployment rates fell in nearly allmember states; only in Ireland did the raterise somewhat (no information for the secondquarter is available for Italy and Greece). Thedecline in euro-area unemployment has beendriven by a sharp expansion in employment.The number of persons in employment roseby a seasonally adjusted 0.4% in the firstquarter of 2007 – more recent information isnot available. The year-on-year rate ofgrowth was 1.4%. In the case of wages, theyear-on-year increase slipped slightly in thefirst three months to 2.3%. However, this ag-gregate figure masks a broad spectrum of
Aggregate
demand
sluggish in Q2Labour market
still vibrant

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
20Deuts che Bun desbankDiver ging tren ds in Fren ch an d German forei gn tra de 
Durin g the 1990s, Fran ce’s tra de with its euro-area partners 
and non-euro-area countries grew, at times, more dynami-
cally than the German e conomy’s cross- border tra de in 
goo ds an d servi ces. Since 2001, however, the pen dulum has 
swun g back clearly in Germany’s favour.
Durin g the 1991 to 1997 perio d, Fran ce’s nominal net 
exports – the balan ce of exports an d imports as deﬁ ne d in 
the national a ccounts – rose from –1 % to +3 % of GDP.1 It 
subsequently went back down to 1 % in 2000. Germany’s 
net exports-to- GDP ratio improve d from 1991 to 1998 by 2 
per centa ge points to 1½ %, an d thus not nearly as mu ch as 
that of Fran ce. In the two followin g years, Germany’s cor-
respon ding ratio likewise fell, by 1 per centa ge point to 
+½ %. In 2001, Germany’s surplus ex ceeded that of Fran ce 
for the ﬁ  rst time in a lon g time. As the chart below shows, 
the divide grew in su bsequent years, due both to the stron g 
growth of the German surplus an d also because Fran ce’s bal-ance diminishe d consi dera bly in 2003-04 before then turn-
ing ne gative. In 200 6, Germany’s nominal net exports stoo d 
at +5½ % of GDP, whereas the compara ble ﬁ gure for Fran ce 
was –1½ %.2
The countervailin g patterns of the two countries‘ external 
positions in the perio d from 2001 to 200 6, whi ch is the fo cal 
point of this analysis, were due mainly to sharp real export 
growth in Germany, whi ch avera ged 7% a year, couple d 
with the relatively slow growth in Fran ce (+2½ %).3 Not least 
because of the hi gh import content of German exports, real 
imports in Germany likewise grew more sharply; however, 
at 5 % a year, this rate was only 1 per centa ge point hi gher 
than that of Fran ce. The buoyant growth of Fren ch imports 
relative to exports is attri buta ble parti cularly to the rather 
robust domesti c deman d durin g this perio d, whi ch rose by 
2% per year, whereas this ﬁ  gure shrank in Germany in 2001-
02 an d only rose by just un der ½ % on avera ge over the fol-
lowin g three years. In Germany, it was only in 200 6 that it 
returne d to its 2000 value, risin g quite sharply by 1¾ %.
The reasons behin d the different export dynami cs sin ce the 
beginnin g of this decade are analyse d below. The ﬁ  rst o bvi-
ous approa ch is to look at the growth of the two e cono-
mies‘ sales markets. Contrary to assertions by some, German 
exporters turn out to have only a sli ght a dvanta ge in this 
respe ct. Whereas their sales markets grew by 6% a year 
in terms of volume, Fran ce’s grew by 5½ %. This is surpris-
ing insofar as Germany’s e conomy has a stron ger foothol d 
in dynami cally growin g markets, parti cularly in China an d 
eastern Europe. Ultimately, the diver ging growth of sales 
markets explains only a very small part – less than one-
tenth of the cumulative growth differen ce in real exports 
of 34½ per centa ge points in the 2001-200 6 perio d. If, how-
ever, this ﬁ  nding is compare d with the growth of the two 
countries’ exports, the German e conomy turns out to have 
slightly improve d its export performan ce durin g this perio d, 
whereas that of Fran ce deteriorate d. In terms of overall 
worl d tra de, Germany hel d its real share – despite the stron g 
sur ge of the emer ging market e conomies – at aroun d 9%. 
In Fran ce, by contrast, the ratio fell by 1 per centa ge point to 
3¾ %, with the loss of inﬂ  uen ce on non-euro-area markets 
more stron gly pronoun ced than in the euro area.
1 Owin g to the chan geover of real national a ccounts data to chain-
linke d in dices, the net exports-to- GDP ratio can be expresse d only at 
current pri ces. — 2 In bilateral forei gn tra de between Fran ce an d Ger-
many, whi ch is not the main fo cus of this analysis, Fran ce has tra dition-
ally run a deﬁ cit (an d Germany, correspon dingly, a surplus). The Fren ch 
deﬁ cit wi dene d distin ctly in the se con d half of the 1990s an d, sin ce 
2000, has ﬂ  uctuate d between –1 % an d –1½ % of Fren ch GDP. — 3 It 
shoul d be note d here that in Fran ce exports an d imports are deﬂ ate d only on the basis of avera ge values whereas in Germany they are 
deﬂ ate d on the basis of real pri ce in dices. When comparin g real vari-
ables, this can lea d to distortions whi ch, however, are impossi ble to 
pin down pre cisely. — 4 See B Pluyau d, Mo dellin g imports an d exports 
of goo ds in Fran ce, Distin guishin g between intra an d extra euro area 
tra de, in O De Ban dt, H Herrmann an d G Pari gi (e ds), Conver gence or 
diver gence in Europe, Growth an d business cycles in Fran ce, Germany 
and Italy, Berlin, Hei delberg, 200 6, pp 345–34 6, as well as C Allar d et %
Real imports
Fran ce
Germany2000 = 100, lo g scale
Real exports
Germany
Fran ceNominal net exports as a per centa ge of GDP
Germany
Fran ceForei gn tra de in Germany an d Fran ce
140
120
100
90160
140
120
1006+
4+
2+
0
2–
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 200 6

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
21Since, unlike market growth, export performan ce makes a 
clear contri bution to explainin g the diver gence in exports 
between Germany an d Fran ce, this raises the question of 
what role pri ce competitiveness may have playe d in this 
regard. The relatively broa dly deﬁ ne d in dicator chosen 
here ( calculate d vis-à-vis 19 in dustrial countries base d on 
the deﬂ ators of total sales) shows an improvement for both 
countries between the beginnin g of monetary union an d 
autumn 2000; at a total of 10¼ %, Germany’s in dicator grew 
more stron gly than that of Fran ce (+7¾ %). Since the en d of 
2000, however, the euro has appre ciate d marke dly, causin g 
the pri ce competitiveness of the German an d Fren ch e cono-
mies vis-à-vis non-euro-area countries to fall by 1 6¼% an d 
21¼ % respe ctively. Within the euro area, espe cially because 
of the less-than-avera ge rise in wa ge costs, it continue d to 
rise, however, by 7¾ % an d 1½ % respe ctively. On the whole, 
ie compare d with 19 in dustrial countries, the competitive-
ness of Germany an d Fran ce fell between 2001 an d 200 6 by 
2¼ % an d 6¼% respe ctively.
The diminishe d pri ce competitiveness is likely to have slowe d 
the in crease in German exports by ¼ per centa ge point an d 
that of Fren ch exports by 4¾ per centa ge points sin ce 2001. 
The resultin g 4½ per centa ge point differen ce represents 
one-ei ghth of the cumulative growth differential for exports. 
This means that a lar ge per centa ge of the diver gence of 
Germany’s an d Fran ce’s export growth can be attri bute d 
neither to nominal ex chan ge rate chan ges nor to national 
inﬂ ation differentials. Similar con clusions are rea ched by 
various stu dies whi ch assert that tra ditional determinants, 
such as domesti c deman d in the buyin g countries an d pri ce 
competitiveness, are a ble to explain only a fairly small part 
of the export development of the major euro-area countries 
in the current decade. The e conometri c estimations a ccord-
ingly all show relatively lar ge unexplaine d resi duals.4
Referen ce is often ma de in this conne ction to the two 
countries’ different ran ge of exports. It is hel d that the 
global e conomi c upswin g beneﬁ te d Germany’s export se c-
tor more than Fran ce’s by bein g more stron gly fo cuse d on 
capital goo ds. In deed, the share of capital goo ds (in cluding 
cars) in Germany’s exports in 200 6, at 47¾ %, was, in fa ct, 
nearly 10 per centa ge points hi gher than in Fran ce. In the case of interme diate goo ds, whi ch last year a ccounte d for 
32½ % of Germany’s exports, Germany’s e dge over Fran ce 
was only 1¾ per centa ge points. Conversely, consumer goo ds 
and ener gy supplies, at 23½ % an d 5¼ % respe ctively, were, 
respe ctively, 7 per centa ge points an d 2½ per centa ge points 
higher in Fran ce’s basket of exports than in that of Ger-
many. Upon closer inspe ction, however, these differen ces in 
the ran ge of goo ds did not make a meanin gful contri bu-
tion to explainin g the differen ces in export growth.5 This is 
partly because both the German an d the Fren ch e conomies 
saw their exports of consumer goo ds, on an annual aver-
age over the 2001-200 6 perio d, in crease somewhat more 
stron gly than deliveries of capital goo ds to other countries. 
Another remarka ble thin g to note is that, in all four cate go-
ries of goo ds, the German e conomy a chieve d higher rates of 
export growth; the growth differentials – with the ex cep-
tion of ener gy – remaine d within a rather narrow band of 
between 3 per centa ge points (interme diate goo ds) an d 4¼ 
per centa ge points ( capital goo ds).
On the whole, it can be con cluded that the diver ging tren ds 
in German an d Fren ch forei gn tra de can be explaine d only 
in part by differen ces in the development of sales markets 
and pri ce competitiveness as well as pro duct ran ge effe cts. A 
more important fa ctor coul d be that small an d me dium-size d 
enterprises ( SMEs) in Germany have a stron ger presen ce on 
overseas markets an d have su ccessfully tappe d additional 
sales markets by usin g new business mo dels an d ﬂ exi ble 
offers. Thus, the per centa ge of German SMEs that export 
at all, at just over one-tenth, is well a bove that of Fren ch 
SMEs (4 %).6 This also in dicates that mi croe conomi c reasons, 
such as differen ces in pro ducts, te chnolo gy or marketin g, 
play a si gniﬁ cant role. However, it is nearly impossi ble to 
determine the exa ct wei ght of these fa ctors owin g to a la ck 
of suita ble data. Moreover, there is reason to assume that 
owin g, amon g other thin gs, to slu ggish domesti c deman d in 
the ﬁ  rst half of this decade, German in dustry ha d a parti cu-
lar interest in in creasin g its export a ctivity, whereas Fren ch 
companies beneﬁ te d from mu ch more ro bust domesti c 
deman d. A ccordingly, with the conver gence of domesti c 
dynami cs in both countries alrea dy un der way, the discrep-
ancies in forei gn tra de will, in future, ten d to re cede.
al, Explainin g differen ces in external se ctor performan ce amon g lar ge 
euro area countries, in: Spain Sele cted Issues, IMF Country Report No 
05/401, O ctober 2005, p 13. — 5 On this, see H Boulhol an d L Maillar d, 
Analyse descriptive du décrochage ré cent des exportations françaises, 
in P Artus an d L Fanta gné, Évolution ré cente du commer ce extérieur 
français. Rapport pour le Conseil d’Analyse É conomi que, 200 6. A ccord-
ing to this report, only just un der one-tenth of the Fren ch growth la g in exports between 1998 an d 2003 was attri buta ble to differen ces in 
the ran ge of goo ds. — 6 See Deuts che Bun desbank, The export busi-
ness of German enterprises a ccording to size cate gory an d economi c 
sector ( box), Monthly Report, De cem ber 200 6, pp 40-41 an d Les PME 
françaises à l‘export: une fai blesse stru cturelle, http://www.ifrap.or g/0-
ouvrirlesite/Dossier-ai des-exportation.htm.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
22country results, ranging from 0% in Germany
to around 4% in France and Spain to 6% inPortugal.
Euro-area price pressures continued to inten-
sify in the second quarter of 2007, rising by0.8% after seasonal adjustment following0.5% in the first three months. The higherrate of inflation was caused mainly by theenergy component in the wake of higher oilprices. Consumers had to pay much more forunprocessed food, too. Excluding these twocomparatively volatile components, inflation-ary pressure, at a seasonally adjusted 0.5%,was on a par with the figure in the twopreceding quarters. Whereas the prices forservices went up by an average of 2.6% onthe year, processed foods were 2.0% moreexpensive and commercial goods 1.0%. Onbalance, the year-on-year rise in the Harmon-
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) – likecore inflation – remained unchanged at1.9%. In July 2007, euro-area prices (season-ally adjusted) rose further owing to theincreased oil prices. Year-on-year HICP infla-tion, however, fell to 1.8% by virtue of theespecially sharp increases in energy prices inmid-2006.
National inflation differentials – as measured
by the weighted standard deviation – hadfallen once again as this report went to press.The ranking of countries, however, has re-mained relatively stable. Finland and theNetherlands have recorded inflation rates ofunder 2% for 20 and 15 quarters respectively.In Greece, inflation has receded to 2.6%, fall-ing below the 3% mark for the first time inSeasonally adjusted
%
2006 Q2
2007 Q2
FR GR 1 BE DE FI ES PT IT 1 LU AT NL IE SLEuro-area averageUnemployment *in the euro area
*Standardised unemployment rates as defined by the ILO. Changes in statistical methods could potentially
have impaired comparability over time for individual countries  −  especially Germany. — 1Figures available
only for 2007 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
21
0
Price pressure
driven by the
volatile com-
ponents
Inflation
differentials
in euro area
relatively low
but persistent

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
2312 quarters – yet it was still higher than in the
other member states, Slovenia and Irelandexcepted. The (cumulative) inflation dividevis-/C224-vis Germany has expanded slightly in
nearly all euro-area countries.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
24Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy
and the money market
The monetary policy reins have been tight-
ened again. At the start of June, the Govern-ing Council of the ECB again raised centralbank rates by
1/C254percentage point, thus coun-
tering the longer-term price risks in the euroarea, which are indicated not only by thesharp monetary expansion, but also by theoutcome of the economic analysis. Since13 June, the main refinancing operationshave been conducted with a minimum bidrate of 4%, while interest rates on the mar-ginal lending facility and the deposit facilityhave been 5% and 3% respectively. Giventhe favourable development in the economyas a whole, the monetary policy stance istending to remain on an expansionary trendfollowing this interest rate move.
As with the earlier interest rate rises, the
interest rate move in June was implementedsmoothly in the money market. During theperiod under review, the EONIA overnightrate, in which banks trade overnight liquidity,was, in most cases, initially only slightly abovethe marginal allotment rate, while the othermoney market rates increased slowly andsteadily throughout. Owing to liquidity im-passes caused by uncertainty associated withthe problems in the US subprime mortgageloan market, however, there were severe ten-sions in the European money market on 9 Au-gust, which led to the overnight rate goingup to 4.7% for a short time. To ensure orderlyconditions in the money market, the ECB,with the aid of quick tenders, provided thebanks with – in some cases, extensive – li-Interest rate rise
in June
Money market
rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
25quidity on this date and the following three
trading days. In doing so, the functional effi-ciency of the market was restored, with theresult that EONIA stood between 4.1% and4.2% (see the explanatory notes on page 26).The longer-term interest rates in the moneymarket remained well above this level. For12-month funds, 4.6% was paid at the endof the period under review.
Monetary developments in the euro area
After the very sharp rise in M3 in the euro
area in the first quarter, monetary growthslowed somewhat in the second quarter, butremained high, at a seasonally adjusted annu-alised rate of 9%. In particular, there was alarge-scale build-up of the M3 componentsremunerated close to market rates, mainlyshort-term time deposits and money marketfund shares. These forms of investment werestill evidently benefiting to a particular extentfrom the interest rate differential betweenthe money market and the capital market,which, despite increasing in the period underreview, is still fairly flat. In some cases, thereare likely to be shifts away from short-termsavings deposits and overnight deposits,which tend to earn little interest. As there hasonly been a comparatively small increase inthe amount of cash in circulation recently,M1, consisting of the very liquid money com-ponents of cash and overnight deposits, wentup at a seasonally adjusted annualised rate ofjust 4% in the reporting quarter. This meantthat its contribution to the 12-month rate ofM3 has shown a further decline and, at 3 per-centage points at the end of the period underreview, was roughly as high as in mid-2000,
when short-term interest rates were at muchthe same level as now.
The low short-term and long-term interest
rates are continuing to make a key contribu-tion to the very high borrowing by the privatesector from banks in the euro area. Borrow-ing went up by a seasonally adjusted and an-nualised rate of 13
1/C252% in the second quarter,
compared with 111/C252% in the previous quar-
ter. Lending to the private sector therefore re-mains the key driving force behind the mon-etary expansion in the euro area. In particular,non-financial corporations significantly in-creased their unsecuritised borrowing fromdomestic banks, in some cases to acquire ormerge with other enterprises. At the sametime, loans to financial enterprises continuedMonthly averages
%
1999 2007Money market interest rates
in the euro area
-  = Average of the period from 1 to 16
August 2007.
Deutsche Bundesbank6.0
5.55.04.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0- - - Minimum bid rate for
main refinancing operations
(end-of-month levels)
EONIA
Three-month Euribor
Forward rate agreement for
three-month funds with a maturity
of nine to twelve months
00 01 02 03 04 05 06Continued
strong
monetary
growth
Persistent heavy
lending to
private sector, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
26Money market management and liquidity needs
During the four reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 18 April and 7 August 2007, the liquidityneeds arising from the autonomous factors deter-mining bank liquidity increased by 515.3 billion net.
As usual at this time of year, the main reason forthis development was the strong growth in the vol-ume of banknotes in circulation (up by 524.9 bil-
lion). General government deposits likewise grewowing to seasonal factors; the increase was strong-est in the June-July reserve period. This was attrib-utable primarily to the half year end effect. How-ever, liquidity needs were curbed by developmentsin the remaining autonomous factors throughoutthe period under review. If the changes in net for-eign reserves and in other factors are taken to-gether – a move which eliminates valuation effects –513.7 billion net flowed into the market via such
transactions. This essentially occurred as a result ofEurosystem purchases of euro-denominated finan-cial assets unrelated to monetary policy.
In the April-May period, there was an increase of
54.3 billion in the provision of liquidity through
longer-term refinancing operations after the trans-action of 29 March 2007 had completed thetopping-up process from 5120.0 billion to 5150.0
billion started at the end of January. The volume ofthe main refinancing operations (MRO) was ex-panded by 520.0 billion to 5295.4 billion in the
period under review. This served above all to bal-ance out the greater liquidity requirement arisingfrom the increase in general government depositsat central banks in the June-July reserve period. Onbalance, credit institutions’ central bank balancesrose in parallel to the perceptible increase of 59.4
billion in the minimum reserve requirement to5191.3 billion.
In the period under review, the EONIA stood mostly
at 3.83% until the key interest rate rise took effecton 13 June 2007. With the new minimum bid rateof 4.00%, the EONIA stood mostly at between4.06% and 4.08%.
In order to offset a liquidity deficit at the end of the
June-July period, the ECB conducted a liquidity-providing fine-tuning operation totalling 52.5 bil-
lion.
As liquidity conditions were virtually balanced at
the end of the July-August period, the ECB did notconduct a fine-tuning operation on the last day ofthe reserve maintenance period for the first timesince January 2007. However, market participantshad expected a liquidity-providing quick tenderand thus the EONIA rose to 4.23%; it fell again to4.09% on the following day.
The temporary increase in the EONIA rates in the
course of the period under review were initiallylimited to days at the end of the month and halfyear when market participants displayed a greaterliquidity preference. In the current August-September reserve period, however, the overnightrates rose as high as 4.70% on 9 August triggeredby liquidity shortages in the US money market. In
order to calm the markets, the ECB carried out liqui-dity-providing fine-tuning operations on that day aswell as on the next three business days. In the firstquick tender, a fixed rate tender with a minimumbid rate of 4.00%, the ECB allocated the completevolume of bids totalling 594.8 billion. In the next
three operations, which were conducted as variablerate tenders, the ECB progressively reduced the vol-ume from 561.1 billion to 547.7 billion and finally
57.7 billion. This intervention ensured that the
money market continued to function and that theEONIA rates could be maintained within a range of4.10% to 4.20%.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
2007
Item18 Apr
to14 May15 May
to12 June13 June
to10 July11 July
to7 Aug
I Provision (+) or absorp-
tion (–) of central bankbalances due to changesin autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circula-
tion (increase: –) – 5.2 – 5.2 – 6.1 – 8.4
2 General government
deposits with the Euro-system (increase: –) – 3.1 + 2.2 – 4.8 + 1.6
3 Net foreign reserves
2+ 2.5 + 0.3 – 3.4 – 6.3
4 Other factors2+ 2.0 + 2.2 + 7.0 + 9.4
Total – 3.8 – 0.5 – 7.3 – 3.7
II Monetary policy oper-
ations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market oper-
ations
(a)Main refinancing
operations – 0.1 + 3.3 + 10.5 + 6.3
(b)Longer-term
refinancingoperations + 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
(c) Other operations + 0.8 – 0.1 + 0.3 – 0.1
2 Standing facilities
(a)Marginal lending
facility – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1
(b)Deposit facility
(increase: –) – 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1
Total + 4.6 + 3.5 + 10.6 + 6.0
III Change in credit
institutions’ currentaccounts (I + II) + 0.6 + 3.0 + 3.4 + 2.4
IV Change in the minimum
reserve requirement(increase: –) – 0.4 – 3.1 – 3.0 – 2.9
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s
contribution, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Sec-tion of this Monthly Report. — 2Including end-of-quarter
valuation adjustments with no impact on liquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
27to show a sharp increase. Housing loans of
private households likewise rose sharply inthe quarter under review. However, theirgrowth slowed again, probably as a result ofa rise in financing costs, as well as a certaincooling of the property boom in some euro-area countries. There was only a moderate in-crease in other bank loans to private house-holds in the euro area; not only consumers inGermany, but also those in France and theNetherlands increased their consumer loansonly to a marginal extent.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the banks also
purchased securities issued by domestic en-terprises to a much larger extent in thesecond quarter than in the previous quarters.In particular, they expanded their portfolios offixed-interest euro-denominated corporatedebt securities. Their increase in yield in theperiod under review probably made themeven more interesting to banks. In addition,the credit institutions also built up their port-folios of domestic shares and other equityagain, having sold net amounts of such paper– like government bonds – on a fairly largescale in the preceding quarter.
In some cases, the banks purchased these se-
curities from non-residents, which is likely tohave contributed to a marked decline in thebanks’ net external asset position in thesecond quarter, as compared with a verysharp rise in the two previous quarters. Here,there was strong demand from non-residentsfor fixed-rate securities issued by residents,which was probably a result, in particular, ofthe interest rate hike in the euro area and theprevailing expectations that the euro wouldSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
€b n%
+ 1,200
+ 1,000
+    800
+    600+    400
+    200
0
−    200
−    400
−    600
−    800of which
Net external asset position 1, 3
Net external asset
position
External
assets
External
liabilities4
1999 2007... counterparts 1
Loans to the
private sectorNet external
asset position
Monetary capital2 Remaining balance
sheet items2
M3Growth rate of M3 and
the contributions to growth in ...
... components of the money stock 1
M1 M2 − M1
M3 − M2 M3Components and counterparts
of the money stockin the euro area
1 Calculated from the changes cumulated
over 12 months. — 2Taken in isolation, an
increase curbs M3 growth. — 3Not sea-
sonally adjusted. — 4Increase: −.
Deutsche Bundesbank24+
20+
16+
12+
8+
4+
0
4−
8−
12−16+
12+
8+
4+
0
4−
00 01 02 03 04 05 06... in particular,
strong
securities
purchases by
the banks
Fall in banks’
net external
asset position

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
28appreciate, especially against the US dollar.
Banks’ issues also benefited from this strongdemand.
As part of the consolidated balance sheet of
the euro-area banking sector, the sharp over-all rise of 3262 billion in the net external asset
position during the last 12 months is also like-ly to be reflected mainly in a change in theother counterparts and not to have led to anequally large rise in M3. For example, thebanks sold government bonds in net terms tothe value of 376 billion between July 2006
and June 2007. And sales of long-term bankdebt securities, which have increased signifi-cantly since the fourth quarter of 2006, arealso likely to have satisfied mainly the highforeign demand for such paper. By contrast,the current interest rate and exchange ratesituation is also likely to have led to domesticinvestors withdrawing from foreign currency-denominated balances with banks abroadand investing in M3-relevant euro assets inthe euro area. In addition, domestic non-banks which have sold domestic securities tonon-residents may have invested their profitschiefly in the M3 components remuneratedclose to market rates. This is likely to havecontributed to the acceleration in annual M3growth since the fourth quarter of last year.
Domestic investors were very willing to invest
funds with domestic banks in the long termin the second quarter, too, which, taken inisolation, curbed monetary growth. By theend of the period under review, it was chieflylong-term time deposits which had shown asharp seasonally adjusted rise, going up at anannualised rate of 13
1/C252% between April andJune. However, this was due solely to other fi-
nancial institutions, which had been formingsuch deposits on a large scale for somemonths. This is likely to be associated withtheir involvement in the very buoyant securi-tisation activities of the banks, which usesuch financial institutions to securitise theirloans and place them with investors. In re-turn, the financing institutions provide thebanks with the sales proceeds as a long-termtime deposit. In addition, savings depositswith a notice period of more than threemonths were also built up further, albeit to amuch smaller extent than in the previousquarter. There was a further sharp increase inthe circulation of long-term bank debt secur-ities outside the domestic banking sector,going up at a seasonally adjusted annualisedrate of 10
1/C252% in the second quarter. Its
somewhat weaker momentum than in thetwo preceding quarters and the decline in thebanks’ net external asset position suggestthat the contribution of non-residents to theincrease in bank debt securities has beensomewhat smaller of late.
All in all, the monetary data therefore con-
tinue to signal inflation risks in the euro areain the medium to long term. On the basis ofprevious experience, the mainly credit-drivenhigh monetary growth, which has persistedfor a long time now, suggests that the infla-tion rate will be noticeably higher than 2%on an average of the next three years. Owingto the renewed sharp M3 increase in theperiod under review, the deviation from theGoverning Council of the ECB’s stabilitybenchmark has actually increased of late,even if the average inflation rate forecast
Very large
long-term
investment of
funds with
banks
continuesClear sign of
longer-term
inflation risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
29with the aid of monetary data has been sub-
ject to major uncertainty for some years.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
The deposit business of German banks with
domestic customers again expanded moreslowly in Germany than in the euro area as awhole. With a seasonally adjusted annualisedgrowth increase of just over 7%, it picked upnoticeably in the second quarter, however.Domestic investors preferred mainly short-term deposits. Much as in the euro area as awhole, they funded predominantly short-term time deposits remunerated at marketrates, the interest rates of which, followingthe ECB interest rate hikes, went up byaround
1/C254percentage point on average in the
period under review. In some cases, there arelikely to be shifts again away from short-termsavings deposits in Germany, too. These wererecently reduced at a seasonally adjusted an-nualised rate of 7
1/C252%, which comes as no
great surprise, given the fact that their remu-neration was almost stagnating in the periodunder review. Overnight deposits, for whichthe banks do not pay any interest in somecases, showed only a moderate increase.
At the same time, longer-term bank deposits
were also built up further in the second quar-ter. Above all, time deposits with an agreedmaturity of more than two years benefitedfrom this. In particular, domestic insurancecorporations, which traditionally constitutethe strongest group of depositors, formedlarge amounts of such deposits. But other fi-nancial institutions, too, provided German
banks with funds for the longer term in thisway. By contrast, there has been little de-mand of late for savings deposits with anagreed notice period of more than threemonths. This is striking, especially in compari-son with the preceding quarters, in whichsuch deposits were increased at annualisedgrowth rates of almost 25% in some cases.As the decline in short-term savings depositswas much less sharp at the end of the periodunder review, there are some indications thatdistinctly fewer shifts into longer-term savingsdeposits were made in the reporting period.
The lending business of German banks with
domestic non-banks fell by a seasonally ad-justed and annualised 2% in the secondquarter. The sale of domestic securities by do-Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2007 2006
ItemApril to
JuneApril to
June
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 13.7 + 14.5
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years + 36.1 + 18.9of over 2 years + 5.6 + 7.7
Redeemable at agreed notice
of up to 3 months – 12.4 – 7.9of over 3 months + 0.6 + 2.7
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised + 1.2 + 7.9Securitised – 16.9 – 3.0
to domestic government
Unsecuritised – 6.8 – 10.3Securitised – 4.2 + 2.3
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .—1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche BundesbankSharp increase
in shorter-term
bank deposits
Longer-term
bank deposits
also up
Credit declining

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
30mestic banks had a particular impact in this
respect. As well as government securities,they sold mainly shares issued by domesticenterprises. Furthermore, general govern-ment continued to reduce its loans withbanks. By contrast, there was a marginal risein loans to enterprises and private house-holds, which had also risen somewhat in theprevious quarter. In particular, non-financialenterprises again borrowed from domesticbanks, whereas financial enterprises reducedtheir borrowing. Households, too, reducedtheir debt to German banks. As in the previ-ous quarter, housing loans were redeemed onbalance. Other lending to households, whichcovers mainly loans to self-employed persons,likewise continued to fall. By contrast, con-sumer loans rose slightly.In line with the data from the Bank Lending
Survey, the bifurcated growth of credit in theprivate sector evidently reflects the differentborrowing demands of households and non-financial enterprises. On the one hand, thebanks reported a further fall in demand forlending to households for house purchase.On the other, they recorded a slight rise in de-mand for loans to enterprises. In addition,they also witnessed increased demand forconsumer credit, but qualified this by point-ing out that this was likely to be less anational German trend than the consequenceof the attempt to gain market share withspecial campaigns.
The fairly weak overall growth in domestic
credit contrasts to a certain extent with themore expansionary credit supply policy of theGerman banks. Thus, credit standards in bothretail and corporate business were once againeased moderately in the second quarter ac-cording to Bank Lending Survey data. Addedto this was a further broad narrowing of themargins on average-risk exposures. Further-more, according to information from the sur-veyed institutions, the margins on riskierloans were also lowered slightly for the firsttime since the survey was introduced, where-as the margins on riskier loans to householdsremained almost unchanged. The changes inthe credit supply conditions were therefore al-together somewhat more expansionary inGermany than in the euro area as a whole.
German banks’ lending rates were clearly in-
fluenced by the continued monetary policytightening and the rise in capital market inter-est rates in the second quarter. Lending to en-
Seasonally adjusted
€b n
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change2,330
2,300
2,270
2,240
2,210
2,180Log scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank5
4
3
2
1
0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Low demand
for credit
Moderate
easing of credit
supply
conditions
Nearly all
lending rates
up

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
31Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year and up
to 5 years. — 3 With an initial rate fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years. — 4 According to Bank Lending
Survey; percentage difference between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and
“tightened somewhat” and the numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased
considerably”. — 5 Expectations for 2007 Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank% pa 
%
%Loans to non-financial corporations
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Changes in loan margins4
Loans to enterprises
Average loansRiskier loansChanges in credit standards4
Loans to enterprises
5Bank interest rates (new business) 1
Loans to enterprises ...
... up to € 1 million with an initial rate fixation
    of up to 1 year
... over € 1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of over 5 years
... over € 1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
120+
90+
60+
30+
0
30−
60−
90−60+
30+
0
30−
60−6.5
6.0
5.5
5.04.54.03.5
3.0% pa 
%%Loans to households
Consumer credit
Average loansRiskier loans
02 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Housing loans
Average loansRiskier loansConsumer credit
5Housing loans
5Consumer credit2
Housing loans3
60+
30+
0
30−
60−60+
30+
0
30−
60−30+
0
30−30+
0
30−7.0
6.5
6.0
5.55.04.54.0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
32terprises, in particular, increased by an aver-
age of 28 basis points in the second quarter,which meant that the institutions were de-manding between 5.1% and 6.1% for short-term loans to enterprises, depending on thesize of the loan. For long-term loans, therates in question amounted to 5.2% and5.3% respectively. Interest rates on loans forhouse purchase also went up noticeably inthe second quarter, by 18 to 27 basis points.The conditions for loans with an interest ratefixation of over ten years stood at 5.0% at
the end of the quarter. Only in the case ofconsumer credit was there a countervailingeffect in parts. In particular, there was a fall ininterest rates for longer-term loans. Thisshould probably be seen in connection withthe special campaigns to increase the marketshare of some institutions in this market sec-tor, which were also mentioned in the BankLending Survey.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
33Financial marketsFinancial market trends
Developments in the international financial
markets fluctuated considerably in thesecond and at the beginning of the thirdquarter. The robust state of the global econ-omy and a high level of confidence on thepart of market players initially resulted world-wide in rising bond yields and higher stockprices. In many regions, stock prices rose tomulti-year highs, with some of the corres-ponding indices reaching record levels. Frommid-July, however, increasingly apparentproblems in the US mortgage market trig-gered a fundamental shift in investors’ riskperceptions. As a result, stock prices droppedsignificantly and the spreads on higher-riskfinancial instruments widened noticeably.Conversely, the “flight to quality” loweredthe bond yields of top-rated borrowers. In theforeign exchange markets, the euro held veryfirm against various currencies for much ofthe time since business cycle expectations forthe euro area were on the upside and mostmarket players were expecting monetary pol-icy to be tightened further. It was only recent-ly that the euro started to weaken a littleamid increasing uncertainty in the financialmarkets.
Exchange rates
After temporarily reaching a new high of over
US$1.36 at the end of April 2007, the euro-US dollar exchange rate depreciated toUS$1.33 by mid-June. The US dollar benefit-ed from the fact that speculation about pos-sible interest rate cuts in the USA was damp-Financial
market setting
The euro’s
exchange rate
against the
US dollar, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
34ened by warnings from the Federal Reserve
concerning existing inflation risks as well asby favourable US labour market data. Lessheed was apparently taken during this timeof the possible repercussions for the US econ-omy of the crisis in the US real estate market,which had contributed significantly to the up-ward surge in the euro-US dollar exchangerate in the first few months of the year.The euro-US dollar parity showed renewed
appreciation in July, when the markets in-creasingly expected a further rise in euro-areainterest rates in the fourth quarter followingthe publication of positive sentiment indica-tors and in view of continuing risks to pricestability in the euro area. Moreover, followingthe announcement that two hedge funds ac-tive in the US mortgage market had run intodifficulties, the crisis in the US real estate mar-ket was seen with growing concern by invest-ors, so that the dollar came under additionalpressure vis-/C224-vis the other major currencies.On 24 July, the euro achieved a new historicalhigh of just over US$1.38. However, the eurosubsequently lost a little ground again. Profit-taking, the publication of the surprisinglyhigh growth rate of US GDP for the secondquarter and an increased demand for dollarliquidity probably played a role in this. As thisreport went to press, the euro was trading atUS$1.34, 2% up since the beginning of theyear.
Owing to the large yield spread between Jap-
anese and European investments, the euroinitially appreciated against the yen in the re-porting period and repeatedly reached newhighs in the second quarter. Although thepublication of the Tankan survey and state-ments from the Bank of Japan triggeredspeculation of an interest rate rise in Japan atthe beginning of July, the upward movementof the euro-yen exchange rate still continuedfor the time being. In mid-July, the euroreached its highest level to date since thelaunch of EMU, trading at ¥169. The eurowas thus about 7
1/C252% above its level since the
start of the year and over one-quarter higherLog scale
US$
££¥
¥
1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 06Nominal effective exchange rate 1
1999 Q1 = 100... pound sterling... yenagainst the ...
... US dollar
*Monthly averages; from 2007, daily data.
—1As calculated by the ECB against the
currencies of 24 countries. 
Deutsche BundesbankExchange rate of the euro *
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.57110
100
931.45
1.35
1.25
1.15
1.05
0.95
0.850.85
2007JF M A M JJA120
110
100
90
800,70
0,650,75
0,70170
160
150
140
130
120
110
... the yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
35than since its introduction. The surge in the
euro-yen exchange rate came to an end inthe last week of July, when the worldwide fallin stock market prices exerted downwardpressure on the euro vis-/C224-vis the yen. Theyen continued to strengthen in mid-August.Many market players attribute this to theheightened uncertainty in the financial mar-kets, which has dampened risk propensityand led to a liquidation of carry trades. Theeuro-yen exchange rate stood at ¥153 as thisreport went to press. The euro was thus2
1/C252% below its level at the beginning of the
year.
Vis-/C224-vis the pound sterling, the euro moved
within a narrow range between £0.67 and£0.68 in the reporting period. The raising ofkey interest rates by the Bank of England inJuly had been generally expected by the mar-kets and therefore had no discernible impacton the further development of the euro-pound parity. Given the robust growth of theBritish economy and the existing inflationrisks, however, many market players expectedthe Bank of England, too, to continue tight-ening its stance. As this report went to press,the euro was trading at £0.68, which is
1/C252%
above its value recorded at the beginning ofthe year.
The euro’s average value vis-/C224-vis the 24
major currencies in the exchange rate indexhas hardly changed on balance since the endof March. Most recently, the euro’s effectiveexchange rate was
1/C252% higher than at the
beginning of the year, and 3% up on its levelat the start of monetary union. In real terms,ie taking into account the simultaneous de-velopment of the inflation differentials be-
tween the euro area and its major tradingpartners, the euro’s effective exchange ratewas almost 3
1/C252% above its level at the start
of monetary union.
Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
The yields of long-term debt securities issued
by first-class borrowers markedly increasedon a worldwide scale in the second quarteragainst the backdrop of a benign macroeco-nomic environment and in the expectation ofrising central bank interest rates in variouseconomies. The European bond markets re-corded a rise of just over
1/C252percentage point
up to mid-July, both in nominal and realterms;
1the corresponding rise in the USA
was somewhat smaller. Since then, however,the yields of European government bondshave dropped by just over
1/C254percentage
point; most recently, ten-year bonds in theeuro area were remunerated at almost 4
1/C252%.
US yields, by contrast, declined more stronglyto 4
3/C254% of late. An increased demand for
safe investment opportunities in the wake ofthe crisis in the US mortgage markets is likelyto have affected interest rate movementsacross the maturity spectrum. Moreover,some unfavourable economic indicatorsweighed on the capital market at times. Thisresulted in a renewed flattening of the Ger-man yield curve.
1Market players’ inflation expectations – as measured by
the break-even inflation rate derived from inflation-
indexed bonds – remained virtually unchanged in the
euro area throughout the reporting period. See also the
box on p 36-37.... and the
pound sterling
Effective euro
exchange rateRising capital
market rates up
to mid-July

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
36Deuts che Bun desbankEuro real term stru ctures an d break-even inﬂ  ation rates
The market for inﬂ  ation-in dexe d euro-area government 
bon ds is constantly growin g. Thus bon ds from Fran ce, Italy 
and Gree ce linke d to the European Harmonise d In dex of 
Consumer Pri ces (ex cluding to bacco) have been circulatin g 
sin ce 2001 an d 2003, respe ctively, an d the ﬁ  rst German inﬂ  a-
tion-in dexe d Fe deral bon d was issue d last year. With a total 
of 1 6 inﬂ ation-prote cted debt se curities havin g meanwhile 
been issue d by euro-area mem ber states with a total vol-
ume of bon ds outstan ding of just un der €150 billion, it is 
now possi ble to estimate a real zero- coupon term stru cture 
for the euro area, mo delle d on the European an d national 
nominal yiel d curves.
Such a real term stru cture makes it possi ble to derive real 
yiel ds with a constant maturity. Thus comparisons ma de 
over time, for example of the ten-year real interest rate, 
are not distorte d by the decreasin g resi dual maturity of 
an in dividual bon d. Furthermore, the break-even inﬂ  ation 
rate curve (BEIR curve) derive d from the differen ce between 
the real zero- coupon term stru cture an d a correspon ding 
nominal term stru cture is base d on yiel ds for ea ch point in 
time that have not only i denti cal maturities but also i den-tical durations. Furthermore, implie d forwar d rates can be 
derive d from the term stru cture. In other wor ds, the future 
interest rates expe cted by market parti cipants at a given 
moment in time (on avera ge) can be calculate d. An implie d 
forwar d BEIR curve can also be compute d. While the break-
even inﬂ  ation rate shows market parti cipants‘ expe ctations 
regarding the avera ge inﬂ  ation level up to a future date, 
implie d forwar d BEIRs reﬂ  ect the market‘s inﬂ  ation expe ct-
ations for a perio d of time in the future. However, both con-
tain a dditional inﬂ  ation risk premiums.1
Term stru ctures reﬂ  ect market parti cipants‘ expe ctations 
con cernin g the development of future real interest rates or 
future inﬂ  ation parti cularly well if they are not “ distorte d“ 
by a time-varyin g risk premium, liqui dity premium or other 
types of term premiums an d if they show a goo d ﬁ t to the 
market pri ces of tra ded bon ds. Both of these requirements 
are best satisﬁ  ed by usin g a data set that is as homo gene-
ous an d broa dly base d as possi ble. However, the num ber of 
inﬂ ation-in dexe d bon ds issue d by euro-area mem ber states 
that are currently in circulation limits the data set. On the 
one han d, the resi dual maturity of the still relatively new 
issues lies in the me dium to lon g-term ran ge an d thus no 
real yiel ds an d BEIRs can be calculate d for shorter perio ds of 
time.2 On the other han d, the creditworthiness of the issues 
varies consi dera bly, ran ging from AAA to A. Furthermore, 
some countries offer a ran ge of bon ds with different matu-
rities, while other countries only offer in dividual issues.3 
Estimates of zero- coupon term stru ctures usin g the para-
metri c pro cedure of Nelson an d Siegel (1987)4 have shown 
that they ﬁ  t the ori ginal data better if only bon ds with the 
best creditworthiness (with an AAA ratin g from Stan dard & 
Poor’s) are use d than if bon ds with a lower creditworthiness 
(A ratin g) are a dded.5 
If the development of the lon g-run real interest rate, calcu-
late d usin g the estimate d zero- coupon yiel d for a perio d of 
1 The differen ce between the yiel ds of nominal bon ds an d inﬂ ation-
indexe d bon ds in cludes, in a ddition to the expe ctations of the level 
of inﬂ  ation in the perio d un der review, a premium to compensate for 
possi ble chan ges in inﬂ  ation durin g this perio d. Thus, in general, the 
BEIR is a bove the “pure“ inﬂ  ation expe ctation. This un certainty does 
not apply in the case of inﬂ  ation-prote cted investments an d therefore 
does not nee d to be compensate d for. While in the case of inﬂ  ation-
indexe d bon ds, too, there is also a short perio d of time in whi ch there 
is no prote ction a gainst inﬂ  ation chan ges owin g to the belate d pay-
ment to offset inﬂ  ation, whi ch is calculate d with a time la g, it can 
be disre garded here as it is consi dera bly shorter (three months) than is the case with multi-year nominal bon ds. A further distortion may 
emanate from liqui dity premiums. However, in general, these are rela-
tively constant over time, as there are no inﬂ  uen ces from the futures 
market, unlike in the case of nominal government bon ds (cheapest-to-
deliver). — 2 The estimation of the parameters for the curves is only 
desi gned to ﬁ t the yiel ds of availa ble bon ds. Therefore, values calcu-
late d usin g the estimate d parameters whi ch are outsi de the maturity 
ran ge show no extrapolate d market expe ctations. Rather, parti cularly 
in the short maturity se gment, e conomi cally implausi ble curves, an d 
sometimes even curves with ne gative values, may be pro duced. — 
3 Since inﬂ  ation-prote cted bon ds are bou ght, for example, to ﬁ  nan ce As at 13 Au gust 2007
%
Resi dual maturity in yearsEstimate d real
term stru ctureIndividual yiel ds
FR
FRFR
DE
FRFR
24 68 1 01 21 41 618 20 22 24 2 628 30Real term stru cture derive d
from AAA-rate d inflation-in dexe d
euro-area government bon ds
2.6
2.5
2.4
2.32.2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
37ten years, is examine d, it can be seen that, followin g a sli ght 
rise at the beginnin g of this year, it fell a gain for a time in 
the wake of the turmoil in the ﬁ  nan cial markets tri ggere d 
by the Chinese sto ck market an d the U S su bprime mort gage 
market. The correspon ding lon g-run inﬂ  ation expe ctations, 
measure d by the ten-year BEIRs, remaine d constant at just 
over 2%. A remarka ble development o ccurre d in the se c-
on d quarter, when the lon g-run real interest rate sur ged by 
just over 60 basis points, whereas the BEIR in crease d only 
slightly. On the one han d, this reﬂ  ects the buoyant upturn 
in the euro area. On the other han d, the interest rate move-
ment is also likely to have been inﬂ  uen ced by international 
co-movements between interest rates. In the Unite d States, 
whose e conomy develope d more ro bustly than was expe cted 
at the beginnin g of the year, the real interest rate an d the 
BEIR followe d a similar pattern to the euro area.6 Latterly, 
however, real yiel ds then fell a gain. While, compare d with 
the start of the year, the real interest rate was thus just over 
½ per centa ge point hi gher, the ten-year inﬂ  ation expe ct-
ations were sli ghtly below the level at whi ch they ha d been 
at the beginnin g of the year an d at the start of the se con d 
quarter.
Today’s expe ctations re garding future real interest rate 
developments can be described usin g the forwar d rates 
derive d from the term stru cture, for example, by means of 
a ﬁ ve-year interest rate in ﬁ  ve years‘ time. So far this year, 
the ﬁ  ve-year spot real interest rate an d the forwar d real 
interest rate between years ﬁ  ve an d ten have shown a hi gh 
level of co-movement. Moreover, over virtually the entire 
perio d, the implie d forwar d interest rate is a bove the cur-
rent spot interest rate, whi ch correspon ds to a “normal”, 
ie upwar d, slope of the real yiel d curve. This relationship 
between the two interest rates only reverse d in July. This 
reﬂ ects an inverse slope of the real yiel d curve an d points to 
expe ctations of fallin g real interest rates. In the case of the BEIR, by contrast, the ﬁ  ve-year forwar d 
rate in ﬁ  ve years‘ time has ﬂ  uctuate d more stron gly aroun d 
the ﬁ  ve-year spot rate durin g the course of the year. Latterly 
the forwar d rate was somewhat a bove the spot rate.  On 
the one han d, this may reﬂ  ect mar ginally hi gher lon g-run 
inﬂ ation expe ctations. On the other han d, it may reﬂ  ect a 
“normalisation” of the BEIR term stru cture, whi ch, driven 
by the inﬂ  ation risk premium, may show an upwar d slope 
even in the case of sta ble inﬂ  ation expe ctations. However, 
consi dere d as a whole, the chan ges in the BEIR so far this 
year have remaine d within close boun ds, in dicatin g lar gely 
sta ble lon g-run inﬂ  ation expe ctations.
lon g-date d real lia bilities, investors prefer to have a ccess to a  ran ge of 
bon ds with differin g maturities. This is reﬂ  ected in the differin g yiel ds 
of bon ds with the same creditworthiness an d similar liqui dity. — 4 See 
C Nelson un d A Siegel (1987), Parsimonious mo dellin g of yiel d curves 
for U. S. Treasury yiel ds, Journal of Business, Vol 60, pp 473-489. Here 
the parameters of a fun ctional form are deﬁ ne d so as to minimise 
the deviations of the theoreti cal (estimate d) zero- coupon yiel ds from 
the o bserve d yiel ds of inﬂ  ation-in dexe d bon ds. A term stru cture that 
is estimate d in this way cannot take on all forms, whi ch is why the 
estimation of the term stru cture for nominal bon ds is mostly calcu-
late d usin g the Svensson extension (L Svensson (1994), Estimatin g an d interpretin g forwar d interest rates: Swe den 1992-1994, IMF Workin g 
Paper No 114, Washin gton D C) or via the even more ﬂ  exi ble non-para-
metri c estimation usin g cubic splines deﬁ ne d pie cewise. However, all 
three approa ches provi de a comparatively goo d ﬁ t to the data, so that 
given a small num ber of availa ble bon ds, estimatin g a small num ber 
of parameters is prefera ble. — 5 Usin g all bon ds, the mean-square d 
yiel d error was a bout three times as hi gh as when only German an d 
Fren ch AAA-rate d bon ds were use d. — 6 Measure d by in dividual inﬂ  a-
tion-in dexe d an d mat chin g nominal bon ds. — 7 Five-year rate in ﬁ  ve 
years‘ time. — 8 Horizon of ﬁ  ve years.Daily data
%
%
Break-even inflation rate8Implie d forwar d break-even inflation rate7Estimate d zero- coupon real yiel d8Implie d forwar d
real yiel d7Estimate d zero- coupon real yiel ds
and break-even inflation rates
in the euro area
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.82.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
J FMAM JJ A
2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
38The heightened nervousness of the market
participants in the wake of the US mortgagecrisis can also be seen in the implied volatilityof options on bond futures. It mirrors themarket’s uncertainty concerning the futuredevelopment of capital market yields. Thelevel of uncertainty thus measured has in-creased perceptibly in all major financialcentres. For the Bund future, it was most re-cently almost twice as high as at the end ofMarch and also well above the average valuesince 1999.
The financial market movements in the past
few weeks ultimately reflect a general re-appraisal of risk. For example, the yieldspread of BBB-rated corporate bonds overeuro-area government bonds increased byone-quarter to 138 basis points, after theyhad fallen in June to their lowest level for two
years. This development is consistent with inpart substantial rises in premiums in the creditrisk transfer market (see chart on p 39). Fric-tions in connection with syndicating largeloans were also evident. Particular attentionwas aroused by two corporate take-overs inconnection with which the underwriters wereunable to pass the loans on to financial in-vestors as planned. The problems in the se-curitisation market have also placed strainson merger and acquisition (M&A) transac-tions, which are frequently highly leveraged.A proper assessment of risks, which in thepast the markets did not appear to haveundertaken always and everywhere, is neces-sary from a monetary policy perspective andalso with regard to sustainable financial sta-bility. To this extent, the corrections of thespreads should be seen as a normalisation.However, the fact that the adjustments oc-curred abruptly and – in an environmentof increased uncertainty – were accompaniedby a drying-up of liquidity in various marketsegments caused problems for the marketplayers.
Issuing activity in the German bond market in
the second quarter of 2007 was not affectedby the aforementioned turbulences, whichdid not start until July. Total gross sales of do-mestic debt securities amounted to 3290
1/C252
billion. This was significantly less than in the
previous three months ( 3324 billion); how-
ever, after deducting redemptions andchanges in issuers’ holdings of their own se-curities, German issuers raised only a slightlysmaller inflow of funds ( 345
1/C252billion net)
than in the previous quarter ( 3501/C252billion).Weekly average
%
Per-
centage
pointsSpread of BBB-rated
corporate bonds over
government bonds
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Yield on seven to ten-yearbonds outstanding
Government
bondsBBB-rated corporate bondsCorporate and government
bond yields in the euro area
Source: Merrill Lynch, Thomson Financial
Datastream.
Deutsche Bundesbank2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
06.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
Heightened un-
certainty
Widening of
corporate bond
spreadsWeaker issuing
activity in the
bond market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
39At343 billion net, a similar amount of foreign
debt securities were sold in the German mar-ket, about four-fifths of which were denom-inated in euro. The total amount of resourcesraised from sales of domestic and foreigndebt securities in the second quarter was thusjust over 388 billion, compared with 3122
1/C252
billion in the preceding three months.
In contrast to the weaker issuing activity over-
all, the public sector had greater recourse tothe capital market in the reporting period(325 billion) than in the preceding quarter
(35
1/C252billion). At 324 billion (net), central gov-
ernment accounted as usual for by far thelargest share of new borrowing. In the long-er-term maturity range it issued, in particular,311 billion worth of five-year Federal notes
(Bobls) and 311 billion worth of ten-year Fed-
eral bonds (Bunds). In addition, it issued two-year Federal Treasury notes (Sch/C228tze) in theamount of 32 billion. State government in-
creased its capital market debt by just under31 billion in the second quarter, which was
less than in the preceding three months ( 33
billion).
German credit institutions drew 315
1/C252billion
in the bond market in the second quarter, fol-lowing 339 billion in the first quarter. As in
the first three months of this year, their issu-ing activity focused on other bank debt secur-ities, which can be structured flexibly ( 321
1/C252
billion). Debt securities of specialised credit in-
stitutions were issued to the net amount of310
1/C252billion, compared with net sales of 325
billion in the preceding quarter. As in the pre-vious three months, domestic banks, by con-trast, reduced their debt from public andmortgage Pfandbriefe ( 315
1/C252billion and 31
billion, respectively).
German enterprises tapped the domestic
bond market for 341/C252billion in the second
quarter, compared with 36 billion in the first
quarter. On balance, they issued short-datedinstruments in the amount of 35
1/C252billion,
simultaneously reducing their debt in longer-dated bonds by 31 billion.
As in the first quarter, foreign investors were
the principal purchasers of debt securities inthe period from April to June. In net terms,they acquired securities of German privateand public issuers for 339
1/C252billion and 3231/C252
billion, respectively. German credit institutions
also greatly enlarged their bond market port-folios ( 325 billion). In doing so, they almostDaily data
Percent-
age
points
Percent-
age
points
Enlarged scale
iTraxx Europe 125 2
2004 2005 2006 2007iTraxx Europe Crossover 1Credit risk premiums
in Europe *
Source: Bloomberg. — * The indices relate
to a maturity of ten years in each case. —
1 The index shows the credit default risk
premiums for 50 European enterprises thatare not considered investment grade. —
2 The index shows the credit default risk
premiums for 125 European enterprises
that are categorised as investment grade.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.0
0.80.60.45.0
4.03.0
2.0
Higher
borrowing by
the public
sector
Less borrowing
by credit
institutions ...... and by
enterprises
Purchases of
debt securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
40exclusively bought foreign bonds on balance.
German non-banks reweighted their bondportfolios from domestic to foreign securities;they sold debt securities for 3
1/C252billion (net)
from their stocks in the reporting period.
An optimistic mood continued to prevail in
the international stock markets right into thethird quarter. Strong global economicgrowth, predominantly positive corporatedata and buoyant M&A activity drove the
world’s major stock price indices to multi-yearhighs. However, the increasingly apparent cri-sis in the US mortgage markets, which hadled to an interim trough already in March,triggered a heavy slide in stock prices frommid-July in the wake of generally heightenedrisk sensitivity. In particular, equity prices ofthe financial sector, which was directly affect-ed by the problems, underperformed thestock market. Some economic indicators withworse-than-expected numbers as well as thetensions in the money market also weighedon the markets. In this context, uncertaintyregarding future share price developmentsrose to a heightened level.
2Despite this, cor-
porate earnings as a whole are still growingrobustly and are likely to have a stabilisingeffect on the stock markets.
This is especially true of German equities,
which have performed comparatively well,not least owing to the ongoing favourablecyclical conjuncture in Germany. For example,the broad CDAX index has increased by justunder 1% since the start of the second quar-ter – in spite of the recent slide in stock prices– while the US S&P 500 index has been fallingslightly short of its end-March level, and theEuropean Dow Jones EuroStoxx has droppedby 5% on balance. Domestic shares haveconsequently recorded an average price riseof 7% since the beginning of the year.
In spite of rising share prices overall, issuing
activity in the German share market weak-ened somewhat in the second quarter. Do-Monthly data
Lin scale
Price-earnings ratio3
in relation to the ...
... DAX
... Dow Jones
    EuroStoxxLog scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx 1, 2
DAX 1, 2Share price movements and
earnings estimates for
European and German
public limited companies
1January 2002 = 100. — 2Source: Deutsche
Börse A G. — 3Based on year-on-year
I / B / E / S analyst estimates (earnings before
goodwill). Source: Thomson Financial Data-
stream.
Deutsche Bundesbank20
18
1614
12
10140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
45
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
2Measured by implied volatility indices, such as the VIX
or the VDAX.Share prices
down following
bull runSlightly reduced
issuing activity
in the stock
market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
41mestic enterprises issued new shares worth
321/C252billion, as against almost 331/C252billion in
the first quarter. Half of this involved sharesof listed companies. In addition, foreignshares were sold in the German market for38
1/C252billion net.
In the second quarter of 2007, domestic non-
banks were the main group of buyers in theequity market. They added domestic and for-eign equities worth 313
1/C252billion to their port-
folios. Foreign investors acquired domesticshares in the amount of 312
1/C252billion, on bal-
ance, mainly in the form of portfolio invest-ment ( 38
1/C252billion).3By contrast, domestic
credit institutions sold equities for 3121/C252bil-
lion.
Domestic investment companies recorded in-
flows of 31/C252billion in the second quarter,
which was well down on the previous threemonths ( 312
1/C252billion). This drop was attribut-
able almost entirely to the specialised fundsreserved for institutional investors, whichraised only 31 billion of fresh funds compared
with 312
1/C252billion in the preceding three
months. The outstanding volume of mutualfund shares of German funds open to thegeneral public, which had been static in thefirst quarter, declined by 3
1/C252billion. Of the in-
vestment funds open to the general public,bond-based funds ( 34 billion less) and share-
based funds ( 33 billion less) again sustained
the greatest outflows. Units of hedge fundsand funds of funds were also redeemed onbalance on a small scale. By contrast, open-end real estate funds and mixed security-based funds sold shares for 32
1/C252billion each.
Money market funds offloaded shares worth311/C252billion net. Once again, sales of shares
by foreign funds in Germany showed amarked rise of 317 billion.
As in the previous quarter, mutual fund
shares were purchased mainly by domesticnon-banks ( 311 billion), which on balance
solely added mutual fund shares issued byforeign investment companies to their port-folios ( 312
1/C252billion). The investment of do-
mestic credit institutions ( 35 billion) was like-
wise concentrated almost exclusively onshares of foreign mutual funds. Non-residentinvestors bought mutual fund shares to theamount of 31
1/C252billion in the German market.Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2006 2007
Item Q2 Q1 Q2Debt securities
Residents 57.7 83.6 24.8
Credit institutions 23.6 46.0 25.2of which
Foreign debt securities 25.5 49.4 32.4
Non-banks 34.1 37.6 – 0.4of which
Domestic debt securities 18.3 15.5 – 11.0
Non-residents 10.9 38.8 63.4
Shares
Residents – 9.7 – 10.9 1.0
Credit institutions – 8.2 5.0 – 12.3of which
Domestic shares – 5.1 1.3 – 17.8
Non-banks – 1.5 – 15.9 13.3of which
Domestic shares 3.1 4.0 10.0
Non-residents 4.0 – 2.0 12.3
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 9.7 12.3 1.0
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public – 2.1 0.0 – 0.7of which: Share-based funds – 3.0 – 2.6 – 2.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
3See page 42 for the evolution of direct investment in
the second quarter.Share
purchases
Sales of mutual
fund shares
Purchases of
mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
42Direct investment
Unlike the situation of portfolio investment,
which recorded net capital imports of 313 bil-
lion, the balance of direct investment showedcapital outflows of 322 billion in the second
quarter, compared with net capital exports of36
1/C252billion between January and March.
The main reason for this was the increased
cross-border investment of German firms,which made 324 billion worth of capital avail-
able to their subsidiaries and branchesabroad. 311 billion of this total was allocated
to raising existing equity stakes while 38
1/C252bil-
lion was earmarked for intra-group loans.Key target countries for the equity invest-ments were Italy and the United Kingdom.
Foreign firms, by contrast, invested only a
very small amount in Germany during theperiod under review ( 32 billion). The main
component of the capital imports was thetransfer of equity capital ( 34 billion). This ori-
ginated chiefly from France, Spain and Italy.Major items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2006 2007
Item Q2 Q1 Q2
I Current account 1,2 + 25.7 + 37.2 + 35.8
Foreign trade 1,3 + 36.9 + 48.8 + 48.8
Services 1 – 3.6 – 4.7 – 3.4
Income 1 + 1.6 + 7.4 – 2.0
Current transfers 1 – 5.0 – 10.8 – 4.7
II Capital transfers 1,4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 56.1 – 75.4 – 88.9
1 Direct investment – 5.4 – 6.3 – 22.0
German investment
abroad – 11.1 – 13.8 – 23.9
Foreign investment in
Germany + 5.7 + 7.6 + 1.9
2 Portfolio investment – 9.9 – 35.8 + 13.0
German investment
abroad – 25.5 – 72.1 – 60.7
Shares + 12.7 + 12.1 – 2.8
Mutual fund shares + 3.0 – 12.7 – 16.9
Debt securities – 41.2 – 71.6 – 41.0
Bonds and notes 5 – 33.5 – 65.8 – 38.0
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes – 28.7 – 53.7 – 32.4
Money market
instruments – 7.7 – 5.7 – 3.0
Foreign investment
in Germany + 15.6 + 36.3 + 73.7
Shares + 3.3 – 3.2 + 8.6
Mutual fund shares + 1.4 + 0.7 + 1.7
Debt securities + 10.9 + 38.8 + 63.4
Bonds and notes 5 + 8.6 + 29.0 + 57.7
of which
Public bonds and
notes + 1.4 – 7.3 + 25.7
Money market
instruments + 2.3 + 9.8 + 5.7
3 Financial derivatives 6 + 2.4 – 10.0 – 12.0
4 Other investment 7 – 43.6 – 23.5 – 66.5
Monetary financial
institutions 8 – 55.8 – 10.6 – 60.9
of which: short-term – 38.9 + 8.9 – 40.4
Enterprises and
households + 13.4 – 11.3 + 13.5
of which: short-term + 7.2 – 4.0 + 23.3
General government – 15.2 + 13.6 – 23.4
of which: short-term – 15.1 + 14.6 – 23.1
Bundesbank + 14.0 – 15.3 + 4.3
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 1.4
IV Errors and omissions + 30.4 + 38.0 + 52.2
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). From January 2007 excluding supplies
of goods for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December
2006, were deducted via the supplementary foreign trade
items. — 4Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced
non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of more than one
year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options as well as finan-
cial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and trade credits,
bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the Bundesbank. —
9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due to
value adjustments. — oExports positively influenced by late
reports. — Discrepancies due to rounding.
Deutsche BundesbankHigh net capital
exports in direct
investment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
43Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The cyclical upturn in the German economy
continued in the second quarter of 2007. Ac-cording to initial figures from the FederalStatistical Office, overall output in the secondquarter went up by 0.3%, after adjustmentfor seasonal and calendar effects, comparedwith 0.5% in the first quarter. There was a2.5 % rise on the year after adjustment forworking-day variations. This means that inthe first half of 2007, the annualised grossdomestic product was 2.3% greater than inthe previous six-month period compared with3.8% in the second half of 2006. However,the slowdown in the pace of growth may infact understate the underlying economic dy-namics. This is particularly true if account istaken of the impact of the fiscal withdrawaldue to the VAT increase since the beginningof the year and the advance purchases in2006 associated not just with consumer dur-ables but also with residential construction.The fact that growth has not ground to acomplete standstill in these circumstancesand that the cyclical blip predicted by manydid not arise may therefore be seen as a clearindication of the stronger endogenous baseof the current upswing.
No detailed figures on the national accounts
are yet available. However, the indicatorsavailable point to a positive growth contribu-tion by private consumption in the secondquarter. In the first quarter the negative ef-fects of the VAT increase had resulted in aclear dampener from which the spending pat-terns of private households are only graduallyrecovering. The propensity to purchase whichEconomic
upturn
continues
Recovery in
private con-
sumption

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
44had been – at times severely – impaired by
the VAT increase, is now showing a counter-swing, which indicates that the negative im-pact of the VAT increase on the consumer cli-mate has probably weakened significantly onthe whole. The turnover pattern in traditionalretail outlets and the increased number ofpurchases of private cars likewise signal a re-vival in private consumption in the secondquarter.
Investment in fixed assets in the second quar-
ter is also to be seen in the context of the factthat construction activity benefited from mildweather at the beginning of the year. A cer-tain “technical counter-reaction” was there-fore expected in this sector. At the same time,expenditure on machinery and equipment inthe second quarter exceeded the level of thefirst quarter. Over the course of the first six
months, this expenditure was important insupporting the growth process and the strongrecovery of the labour market. In view of thehigh level of capacity utilisation and thehealthy order book situation, the incentive toexpand has become more pronounced. Thevarious sentiment indicators have not risenany further of late. However, in view of thehighs reached and given the very favourabledevelopments in 2006, this is not an indica-tion of a turning-point. The underlying senti-ment in the German economy is still betterthan average, and the increasing willingnessto recruit new staff shown by many small andmedium-sized enterprises as well as large en-terprises is proof of the generally optimisticassessment of the future prospects.
Real exports of goods and services increased
in the second quarter. At the same time, im-ports decreased markedly compared with thefirst quarter, during which they had increaseddiscernibly. As a result, foreign trade made asignificantly positive contribution to overalleconomic growth in the second quarter. If,however, account is taken of the deterior-ation in the terms of trade, which means aloss in real income from non-residents, exter-nal influences may have been generally lesssignificant in the period under review.
Output and sales
Industrial output was in full swing when this
report went to press. The momentum ingrowth, however, slowed in the second quar-ter. After seasonal and calendar adjustment,
Seasonally adjusted
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 2007Log scale
Real GDP
2000 = 100Economic growth
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−108
106
104
102
100
98
Growth process
supported by
expenditure on
machinery and
equipmentExternal sector
adds to positive
growth
Industrial
activity in full
swing

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
45second quarter production increased by1/C254%,
compared with an increase of 21/C254% in the
previous three-month period. A bridge-dayeffect in April subdued the quarterly result.
1
April saw warning strikes, particularly at carmanufacturers, which resulted in productionlosses. Furthermore, capacity shortages mayhave played a role. The year-on-year increasewent down to 6
1/C252%. In June capacity utilisa-
tion in industry declined from the very highlevel reached in March, a development whichis due primarily to the production of durables.However, capacity utilisation exceeded theprevious year’s level by
1/C252percentage point
and therefore remained above the level of2000, which was a buoyant year. The in-creased use of factors of production is also re-flected in the growing shortage of specialisedlabour in many sectors of industry.
Construction output after seasonal and calen-
dar adjustment in the second quarter fell by8
3/C254% against the first quarter. This, however,
is not to be seen as an economic downturn.Instead, as already mentioned it was attribut-able to the fact that the second-quarter up-turn was less pronounced owing to increasedproduction in the unusually mild wintermonths. General construction was particular-ly affected by the decline whereas the situ-ation for civil engineering was more favour-able. Residential construction showed a gen-eral decline in turnover of 16
1/C254% after adjust-
ment for seasonal factors in the second quar-ter compared with -7
1/C254% in the first quarter.
For finishing trades, which are less weather-dependent, data are currently available forthe first quarter of 2007 only. According tothese data, the number of hours worked was7
3/C254% above the previous-year level. Even if
account is taken of the fact that the finishingtrades have continued to profit from main-tenance work, residential construction overallwas weak in the second quarter.2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 2007Log scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−15+20+25+30+105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70707010+
5+
0
5−120
115
110
105
100
95
1Experience has shown that working days before and
after public holidays are often used by employees to take
a long weekend or a short holiday break. Such special
features cannot be captured fully by the statistical adjust-
ment procedures.Construction
output back to
normal

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
46Recent indicators of cyclical growth in the ser-
vice sector show a favourable picture. The in-dicator of the business situation produced bythe Ifo institute was markedly higher in thesecond quarter than in the first quarter. Thisis largely a result of the strong increase inApril. Since then the indicator has been fall-ing slightly. According to the business survey“Service Providers of the Information Soci-ety“, the ZEW subindicator for the assess-ment of the business situation, survey re-spondents reported that the situation wasbetter than at the beginning of the year.
Employment and unemployment
The favourable development in the labour
market continued in the second quarter. Thenumber of persons in work increased in the
period from April to June by a seasonally ad-justed 109,000 to 39.70 million. This isequivalent to a year-on-year increase of676,000 persons or 1.7%. However, employ-ment did not increase as fast in the secondquarter of 2007 as it had done in the firstquarter. Nonetheless, seasonal adjustment,which is based on the multi-year average,also overstates here the improvement duringthe mild winter months. During the first sixmonths of 2007 annualised employmentgains stood at 1.8%, significantly higher thanthe employment gains in the first and secondhalves of 2006 (0.9% and 1.4% respectively).
The current cyclical pattern in the labour mar-
ket is very similar to previous recoveries. Ifwork volume is taken as the most compre-hensive indicator, a more advantageous trendthan in earlier cycles can be observed, andthis despite relatively moderate rates of in-crease in total economic output. The mainreason for the increased number of personsin work in the current upswing is probablythe wage restraint of previous years. How-ever, the positive effects of the labour marketreforms have certainly also played a roll.
Estimations by the Federal Employment
Agency suggest that there is stronger growthin employment subject to social security con-tributions than in employment as a whole.In May – more recent data are not yet avail-able – the number of persons in employmentsubject to social security contributions was560,000, or 2.1%, higher than in the samemonth of the previous year. Almost half ofthe increase was attributable to the sector
Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
t=2003 Q2
t=1993 Q1t=1982 Q3t=1975 Q2
t+20 t+16 t+12 t+8 t+4 t t−4 t−8Number of hours worked
in cyclical comparison *
*Total amount worked (in million hours),
normalised to 100 in each respective cyclical
low (measured against GDP development).
Deutsche Bundesbank108
106104102100
98
96
Positive
assessment of
situation for
service
providersEmployment-
intensive
upturn
Rise in employ-
ment subject to
social security
contributions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
47“financing, renting and business services“,
which also includes labour leasing. This wasmarkedly lower than in the previous year. In-creases were also observed in the cases ofself-employed persons, “mini-jobs” and“midi-jobs” and government-assisted jobs.
Various indicators are now showing partial
shortages in the labour market. The delay infilling an advertised vacancy according to theemployment offices markedly exceeded themulti-year average for the third quarter insuccession. In the Ifo business survey, an in-creasing – though still limited – number of en-terprises are responding that a shortage ofworkers is the reason for the lack of outputgrowth. The BA-X index of non-government-assisted jobs, which has data on jobs – pro-vided they are known to the Federal Employ-ment Agency – from 2004 to the present,currently stands at a record high. The Ifo em-ployment barometer, which aims to measurethe willingness of trade and industry to re-cruit new staff, has likewise been recordingrecord highs since measurements began in1998 from the beginning of the year.
It is becoming increasingly difficult to find
those workers amid the strong demand forlabour, that are well-educated, experiencedand perfectly suited to a given vacancy. Forthis reason, people are increasingly being em-ployed who have similar or lower qualifica-tions or generally have difficulty finding em-ployment. Accordingly long-term unemploy-ment is now falling perceptibly just as short-term unemployment has been falling forsome time. The number of people in receiptof unemployment benefit II is now falling al-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
Thou-
sand
Million
Thou-
sand
%
0
12Unemployment
rate
JulyJulyLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed
- 
JulyLin scale
Employed
Year-on-year changeof which
Employees subject to social
security contributions
- 
Apr-
MayLog scale
EmployedLabour market
1From January 2004, unemployed ex-
cluding participants in aptitude testing and
training measures. — 2From January 2005,
unemployed including persons formerly
receiving social assistance but able to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9
8600+
300+
0
300−
600−
900−5.0
4.4
4.1
3.84.7500+
0
500−28.0
27.5
27.0
26.5
26.039.5
39.0
38.5
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Signs of
shortages
Sharp reduction
in long-term
unemployment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
48most as quickly as those in receipt of un-
employment benefit I. In a year-on-year com-parison there were 313,000 fewer recipientsof unemployment benefit II registered as un-employed compared to a decrease of358,000 in the case of unemployment bene-fit I. It must be remembered that, as a resultof the reduction in the period of entitlementto unemployment benefit which came intoforce at the beginning of 2006, there hasbeen a much quicker rate of change from un-employment benefit I to unemployment ben-efit II since February 2007.
2Without this ef-
fect the decrease in the number of un-employed recipients of unemployment bene-fit II would presumably have been even great-er. Furthermore, a significant number ofthese people are participating in employmentthrough mini-jobs. As a result, the long-termunemployed are also benefiting from thestrong demand for labour. This is clearly sup-ported by the fact that low wages can be“topped up” with unemployment benefit II.According to calculations by the Federal Em-ployment Agency, this form of support hasbecome more significant. Consequently,there is now a chance that the hard core ofunemployment will be reduced in size.
Once the favourable special factors caused by
the weather had come to an end, the season-ally adjusted decline in registered unemploy-ment slowed slightly in the second quarter.Unemployment figures decreased in the pastquarter by 97,000 to 3.84 million, 754,000fewer than one year earlier. The fall in un-employment was, therefore, somewhatstronger than the rise in employment, a de-velopment which was connected to thedemographically related reduction in the size
of the labour supply. The seasonally adjustedunemployment rate fell from 9.4% in the firstquarter of 2007 to 9.2 % in the second quar-ter.
3It was therefore 1.9 percentage points
lower than at the same time last year. In Julythe seasonally adjusted decline in unemploy-ment continued. The unemployment rate isnow 9.0%.
Wages and prices
The 2007 pay round continued in the second
quarter with important agreements in themetal-working industry, the printing industry,at Deutsche Telekom AG as well as in thewholesale and foreign trade sectors. In theconstruction industry it is still unclear whetherthe arbitrator’s suggestion put forward inMay will be finally accepted. The process hadbecome necessary because the initial agree-ment failed after being vetoed by some re-
2Nevertheless, the number of recipients of unemploy-
ment benefit II has also declined owing to demographic
reasons. In addition, the efforts of the employment agen-
cies and joint social entities comprising employment
agencies and municipalities to encourage recipients of
benefits back to work probably resulted in a fall beyond
the extent of the pure employment effect.
3The unemployment rate calculated according to the cri-
teria of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) used
for international comparisons has been estimated since
May 2007 using the change in the number of registered
unemployed. Since the beginning of 2004, the ILO ratio
has been calculated using the results of a telephone sur-
vey. This survey was supposed to bridge the gap until the
transition to a continual labour force survey as part of the
microcensus, however this was postponed in April 2007.
As the new continual survey is still not able to deliver suf-
ficiently reliable results, a further bridging solution had to
be found which is based on the traditional estimation
procedure used before 2004. According to an EU Regula-
tion, this procedure should have been replaced by a con-
tinual labour force survey in 2002 (for Germany however,
a transition period applied until the end of 2004). This is
now planned for the reporting month of September
2007.Unemployment
falls further2007 pay round
continues

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
49gional employers associations. The rejection
of the arbitrator’s suggestion by two northGerman employers associations led to strikeslasting several weeks in the correspondingwage-bargaining areas. The arbitrator’s sug-gestion provided for an agreement runningfor 24 months and starting with two “zeromonths” followed by a permanent increase inwages of 3.1% and further increases of 1.5%and 1.6% in 2008. Additional elements in-cluded lump-sum payments. A final agree-ment has also still to be reached in the caseof Deutsche Bahn AG. In this case, the tradeunions Transnet and GDBA have alreadyagreed on a sustained uniform increase in ne-gotiated wages of 4.5% and a one-off pay-ment of 3600 over a period of 19 months.
The GDL engine drivers’ union is still pursuinga much larger wage increase for train drivers.
The agreement reached in the printing indus-
try came into force in mid-May.
4In this case it
was agreed that wages would be increasedby 3.0% after three “zero-months”. With atotal running time of 24 months, it is plannedthat after 12 months there will be a furtherpermanent increase in the weekly wage of2.1%. In the wholesale and foreign trade in-dustry regional representatives of employersand employees agreed on an increase inwages over 24 months of 2.4% from July orAugust 2007 with a further 2.0% increasefrom mid-2008. In addition, graduatedmonthly lump-sum payments were agreedwhich would not affect scheduled rates ofpay. In the case of Deutsche Telekom AG, itwas agreed that around 50,000 employeeswould be outsourced to subsidiaries with dif-ferent pay conditions. These would include,above all, a gradual reduction in remuner-
ation by a total of 6.5% and an increase inworking hours from 34 to 38 hours without acorresponding pay increase. The new wageagreement also contains various measures tomake working conditions more flexible aswell as a reduction in starting wages of ap-proximately 30%. A “zero-round” until theend of 2008 was agreed for the 100,000Deutsche Telekom AG employees who werenot to be outsourced.
Agreements this year vary distinctly from sec-
tor to sector and reflect the different eco-nomic situations of these and the relativestrength of their bargaining positions. For ex-ample, the large settlement in the metal-working industry bears testimony to the ex-ceptionally positive conditions in this industrywhile the agreement in the printing industryis to be seen in the context of the moderateeconomic growth that has been recorded inthis sector. The tough negotiations in the con-struction industry as well as in the case ofDeutsche Bahn AG illustrate the difficulties inreaching a consensus, both for employersand employees. The agreement in the case ofDeutsche Telekom AG shows that even ineconomically positive times employees arewilling to accept pay cuts and longer workinghours if jobs are threatened. Overall, thetrend appears to be towards more differenti-ation and towards the agreement of one-offpayments, which are less of a burden in thefuture than increases in scheduled rates ofpay (see box on page 50).
4The agreement in the metal-working industry was al-
ready reported in the Monthly Report of May 2007.Sectoral
differences in
negotiating
positions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
50Deuts che Bun desbankExtension of the reportin g cate gories in the Deuts che Bun desbank’s
negotiate d pay rate statisti cs
Colle ctively ne gotiate d la bour a greements between 
employers asso ciations an d tra de unions have become 
more complex in re cent years in several respe cts. For 
example, (ﬂ  at-rate) one-off payments, pai d in a ddition 
to the normal remuneration, are playin g a greater role. 
One reason for su ch one-off payments, whi ch do not 
affe ct schedule d rates of pay, is to ensure that, parti cu-
larly in times of growin g competitive pressure, a com-
pany‘s future earnin gs are not burdene d by too hi gh a 
cost base. Thus one-off payments are often ma de durin g 
the ﬁ  rst months of a pay a greement or even throu gh-
out the lifetime of the a greement, instea d of a perma-
nent per centa ge in crease in the re gular wa ge. One-off 
payments may also be awar ded as ﬁ  nan cial compen-
sation for in creases in re gular weekly workin g hours. 
In the context of an improvin g ma croe conomi c situa-
tion – parti cularly in export-relate d industries – one-off 
payments are also a way of allowin g the employees to 
parti cipate in the company‘s commer cial su ccess (whi ch 
was fa cilitate d by their pre ceding wa ge restraint) with-
out pushin g up mar ginal pro duction costs. The ﬂ  at rate 
means that those in lower wa ge brackets beneﬁ t more 
from su ch a dditional payments, an d thus su ch a gree-
ments also contain a “so cial” component.
Within the Deuts che Bun desbank’s ne gotiate d pay rate 
statisti cs, a gree d pay rates, in cluding all one-off pay-
ments an d frin ge beneﬁ ts (nota bly holi day pay, the 
Christmas bonus an d savin g su bsidies) are re corded in 
the months in whi ch they are paya ble a ccording to the 
colle ctive la bour a greement. This is desi gned to ensure 
consisten cy between the monthly ne gotiate d wa ge 
index an d the quarterly ﬁ  gures on a ctual earnin gs 
(in cluding beneﬁ ts that are not covere d by the colle c-
tive a greement) in the national a ccounts, in whi ch one-
off payments are, as a general rule, likewise re corded 
at the time that the payment is a ctually ma de. The 
overall in dex of ne gotiate d pay rates, on whi ch the 
Bun desbank’s reportin g of employee remuneration has 
been base d up to now, has become mu ch more vola-
tile in re cent years owin g to the in crease d fre quen cy of one-off payments. Lar ge one-off a dditional payments 
push up the in dex an d its year-on-year in crease durin g 
the month that payments are ma de. One year later, the 
annualise d rate is then, as a general rule, pushe d down 
(baseline effe ct). This makes it far har der to interpret 
the true development of ne gotiate d wa ges. Durin g 
the ﬁ  rst six months of the current year, for example, 
the year-on-year avera ge in crease in the ne gotiate d 
pay rate in dex varie d between 0.2 % an d 3. 6%. If, by 
contrast, temporary a dditional payments are fa ctore d 
out of the calculation, the development is mu ch more 
even. An d if basi c pay rates alone are consi dere d (ie 
also disre garding frin ge beneﬁ ts) the development is 
smoother still. From a me dium-term perspe ctive, these 
three statisti cal series nevertheless show a similar evo-
lution of ne gotiate d wa ges.
Startin g now, ta ble X.9 in the Statisti cal Section of the 
Monthly Report will in clude, alon gside overall ne goti-
ate d pay rates, the growth rate of ne gotiate d wa ges 
excluding one-off payments an d also of basi c pay rates, 
in ea ch case for the e conomy as a whole. Information 
on the pro duction se ctor (in cluding constru ction) can 
be foun d at http://www. bun desbank. de/statistik/statis-
tik_zeitreihen.en.php
1 Ne gotiate d pay rates ex cluding one-off payments an d 
excluding re gular frin ge beneﬁ ts (holi day pay, Christmas 
bonus, savin g su bsidies et c).Year-on-year chan ge
%
Total
Excluding one-off payments
Basi c pay 1
J FMAM JNe gotiate d rates of pay
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
2007
Negotiated rates of pay
Year-on-year change (%)
Item 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006Average
2001 to
2006
Total 1.9 2.7 2.1 1.4 1.1 1.3 1.7
Excluding one-off payments 2.2 2.3 2.2 1.3 0.9 0.9 1.7Basic pay
1 2.2 2.3 2.4 1.7 1.0 1.0 1.8

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
51According to the Bundesbank’s pay rate stat-
istics, the negotiated rates of pay in thesecond quarter of 2007 were 1.8% up on theyear. A one-off lump-sum payment in themetal-working industry is included in this. Inthe first quarter, base effects from one-offpayments from 2006 dampened the annualrate of increase to 0.8%. If one-off paymentsand collective additional payments are ex-cluded, the increase in basic remunerationwas 1.2%. The new increased scheduledrates of pay as a result of wage agreementswill first be reflected in the negotiated wageindex in the third quarter.
Price developments in Germany were again
significantly determined by developments inthe markets for energy and other commod-ities. The resultant increase in prices waseased by the appreciation of the euro. Over-all, the price of German imports increasedstrongly in the second quarter of 2007. Incomparison with the first quarter, importershad to spend 1.6% more after seasonal ad-justment. As a result, the reduction in pricesin the two preceding quarters was reversed.Even if energy is excluded, however, therewas once again a notable increase in season-ally adjusted terms. Strong price increases inintermediate goods overcompensated for de-creases in the price of capital goods. The rela-tively unfavourable development in the caseof consumer goods continued. Year-on-yearinflation stood at 0.7%, or 1.8% if energy isexcluded.
The price of German manufactured goods in-
tended for domestic sale also increased not-ably, by 0.6% after seasonal adjustment. Ex-2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
%
JulyLin scale
Year-on-year change 1Consumer prices2Construction prices 1Producer prices
of agricultural productsProducer prices
of industrial productsLog scale
Import pricesImport, producer and
consumer prices
1  Not seasonally adjusted, quarterly. —
2 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
2+
1+
0112
109
106
103
100112
109
106
103
100112
109
106
103
100
97121
118
115
112
109
106
103
100109
106
103
100
97
94
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Negotiated
wages and
salaries in the
economy as a
whole
Very strong rise
in import
prices...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
52cluding energy, the increase was similarly
strong, particularly because the increasedprice of imported intermediate goods waspassed on. The overall unfavourable trend inagricultural producer prices was reflected inindustrial producer prices for consumergoods. The main contributor to this was theincrease in farm gate prices of dairies. Theprice of industrial products, excluding energy,increased by 2.7% on the year, or 1.7% if en-ergy is included. As export prices increaseddiscernibly, albeit significantly less than im-port prices, there was a deterioration in theterms of trade. Even so, there was still a plusof 1.1% on the year. In July the price increaseof German industrial goods declined to 1.1%,or 2.5% if energy is excluded.The increase in construction prices slowed
markedly in comparison with the first quarter.However, at 0.8%, the rise was still strongerthan in mid-2006. The year-on-year increasewent up to +7.9%. As in the quarter before,the increase in prices stretched across all sub-sectors of construction. The substantial in-crease in construction costs may also havemedium-term effects on housing rents,whose weight in the German CPI is 21.2%(HICP 10.8%). In the past, rents have fol-lowed construction prices, although, general-ly with a certain time lag. At present the in-crease in rents is being subdued by broadlystable land prices.
At a seasonally adjusted 0.7%, consumer
prices rose slightly faster in the second quar-ter of 2007 than in the first quarter. Accord-ing to calculations by the Federal StatisticalOffice, around 0.2 percentage point was theresult of the introduction of tuition fees inseveral federal states. In addition, just under0.3 percentage point was due to the ongoingincrease in energy prices. This aside, price in-creases overall were fairly subdued. Foodprices were 2.0% more expensive year onyear. The influence of the hike in prices in theinternational markets for a number of agricul-tural commodities gradually became notice-able to consumers. In the case of industrialgoods (excluding energy) the annual inflationrate was only 1.7% despite the increase inVAT. Price-dampening influences were the re-sult of the appreciation of the euro. The priceof services went up by 2.8% on the yearmainly as a result of the VAT increase and theintroduction of tuition fees. If the average in-crease of 1.8% in energy prices and the 1.1%
Year-on-year change
%
1st hfConstruction prices
Rents1
1970 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 2007Construction prices
and rents in Germany
1 According to consumer price index, until
1994 West Germany.
Deutsche Bundesbank16
14
12
10
8
6
42
0- 
- 
... and clear
increase in
price of
manufactured
goodsFurther sharp
rise in construc-
tion prices
Consumer price
increases due
mainly to
tuition fees and
crude oil prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
53rise in housing rents are taken into account,
the annual rate of increase for the secondquarter of 2007 amounts to +1.9%, accord-ing to the national consumer price index. Ac-cording to the harmonised index of consumerprices, the figure was +2.0%.
In July consumer prices increased by 0.3%
after seasonal adjustment. This was mainlyattributable to significantly higher prices forpackage holidays. The cost of energy in-creased further, especially that of fuels andheating oil as a result of sharp increases incrude oil prices. The lifting of the requirementthat domestic electricity prices had to be ap-proved, led on average to no more than amoderate increase in prices. The cost of foodwent up sharply. A contributory factor wasthat more retailers passed on to customersthe increases in farm gate prices for dairyproducts which had taken place in June. Theyear-on-year increase in the CPI increasedfrom 1.8% to 1.9% in June. The year-on-yearincrease according to the harmonised indexof consumer prices was unchanged at 2.0%.Owing to the comparatively low energy pricesin the second half of 2006, significantly high-er annual rates are to be expected in thecoming months, if only as a result of thebaseline effect. A risk of further increases isposed by the fact that oil prices have in-creased strongly of late and there are short-ages in agricultural markets.
Orders received and outlook
The prospects for a continuation of economic
growth remain favourable. This is suggestedat all events by the orders situation and the
relevant sentiment indicators. New orders re-ceived by enterprises increased strongly againin the second quarter of 2007, rising by a sea-sonally and calendar-adjusted 4% from theiralready high level in the first quarter whenthey had already increased by 3
1/C252%. The
year-on-year increase went up to 111/C252% after
calendar adjustment. Unusually large ordersin June, especially from abroad, played a rolehere. This applies to the aircraft and aero-space industry as well as to shipbuilding.Large orders included in the statistics andwith a value of more than 31 million are by
no means as rare as one might imagine. Forthis reason it would not be appropriate to ex-clude them completely from the currentorders situation in order to measure the basictrend in orders received. Admittedly, largeorders generally take longer to have an effecton output than “normal” orders, which arerelatively quickly converted into output. Thestrong growth in orders in the second quartertherefore overstates the response usually tobe expected of output in the third quarter. Ifthose large orders which may be consideredunusual are excluded, the order volume inthe second quarter is still 2% greater thanthe average of the first quarter.
Not least as a result of the large orders re-
ceived, export orders increased by 6
1/C252%.
New orders received from domestic custom-ers also increased by a further 2%. All majorsectors of industry, the capital goods industryin particular, were able to profit from the fa-vourable growth in orders received.Increasing
consumer
prices in July
due to package
holidays and
energyDemand for
manufactured
goods rises
further

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
54In view of the continued buoyant growth in
orders received and the cyclical “breather” inthe industrial sector, the level of orders ofmany enterprises has grown further. Thismeans that the ratio of the order volume inthe order-based manufacturing industries tothe production capacity available is increasingfurther. The order capacity index which isregularly calculated and now continuouslypublished provides information on this. It cur-rently stands well above its long-term aver-age.
5The index stands not only at the highest
level in this cycle but also has reached a levelwhich has not been measured since reunifica-tion. The situation regarding the length oforder books is similar. In June, the value ofthis indicator at 3 months, was only slightlybelow the very high level reached in March.Also when seen against this backdrop, theeconomic outlook remains favourable.
The sentiment indicators for the near future
are at a high level. However, they have not in-creased further of late. Although the Ifo busi-ness expectations in the second quarter wereabove those of the first quarter, they havebeen decreasing slightly since June. The ZEWexpectations also reached a high in May. Fol-lowing a generally more volatile course, theVolume, 2000 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Apr-
May
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 2007Total construction orders
Apr-MayDomesticLog scale
ForeignLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Total industrial ordersDemand for industrial goods
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−10+105
90100
8595
8090
75
70
65110
105
100
95
90115110125
105120
100115
95110
9013013514014515015515+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
- 
5For information on the design and interpretation of the
order capacity index see Deutsche Bundesbank, Industrial
orders and production: how informative is the order cap-
acity index?, Monthly Report, February 2007, p 52. Out-
put and the orders received in the order-based manufac-
turing industry are measured by aggregating the individ-
ual results and the weighted value added. Furthermore,
capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector excluding
food and refined petroleum products, which is estab-
lished by the Ifo institute is included in the calculation.
The order capacity index is calculated on a quarterly basis
and is available on the website of the Deutsche Bundes-
bank under Business Statistics (http://www.bundes-
bank.de/statistik/statistik_konjunktur.en.php) in the
“time series” section.Large number
of orders on
hand
No further
improvement in
business
prospects of
late

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
55indicator fell relatively sharply in the following
months. It must be remembered, however,that for the ZEW financial market test it is notenterprises but instead financial experts thatare questioned. Furthermore, the ZEW indica-tor is based only on expectations. It alsocovers trade and industry and the financialsector. The indicator, therefore, tends to reactmore sensitively to changes in and estima-tions of the capital and foreign exchangemarkets than the Ifo business expectations. Itmay also be more profit-oriented. It is signifi-cant that the greater caution in the July resultis due to expectations for the financial sectorand the other services (excluding trade). TheIfo business expectations for commercial,non-financial service providers have not beenas high since May. The Reuters PurchasingManagers’ Index for the services sector hadan upward trend in the second quarter; how-ever, in July it dropped slightly.
In the construction industry, the business ex-
pectations for the coming six months becameslightly more cautious in the second quarterafter extremely positive developments at thebeginning of the year. The balance of positiveand negative reports, however, still lies farabove the level of the final six months of2006. The demand for construction workwas 1% less than the average of the firstquarter in April-May (more recent figures arenot yet available). This is linked to the volatilenature of public sector orders. The demandfor housing construction, which has again in-creased, is to be valued positively as this hadfallen dramatically during the winter owing tothe dampening effects of the VAT increase.Industrial construction will probably increaseonce again due to the positive effects of the
generally favourable investment environmenteven if no additional demand stimuli have re-cently come from this area.
Overall, the available indicators point to a
continuation of the positive underlying trend.During the rest of the year fixed investment islikely to benefit more from the high capacityutilisation in the industrial sector and thepositive order situation following the normal-isation in the construction industry, whichhad temporarily curbed growth in the secondquarter. The prospects of continuing strongexport growth are also good given the in-creasing inflow of export orders and Germanfirms’ high, and still sustainable, level of com-petitiveness and attractive range of goods. Todate, the euro’s higher rate of exchange has
02.32.62.93.2Memo item
Stock of orders
in production months
1
1993 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 2007Order-Capacity-Index *
Sources: Federal Statistical Office, Ifo insti-
tute and Bundesbank calculations. —
*Manufacturing sectors excluding food
products and refined pertoleum products,
seasonally adjusted. — 1Average of the
period between 1994 and 2002.
Deutsche Bundesbank15+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−
Normalisation
of construction
demand
Underlying
trend still
favourable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
56hardly altered the picture. This is also due to
the fact that today the German economy hasa product range whose sales profile respondsfar less sensitively and fairly slowly to shifts inexchange rate patterns. Moreover, worldtrade is continuing to grow most favourably,as has recently been confirmed by the IMF.
The dampening effects of the VAT increase
could have a lingering impact on private con-sumption. The higher oil prices are likewisesqueezing the purchasing power of dispos-able income. However, households’ spendingbehaviour, which was temporarily constricted
by their response to the VAT rise, should bebolstered more and more in the next fewmonths by the improved situation in the la-bour market and the wage agreementsreached this year. The GfK gauge of con-sumer confidence has improved since March,and income expectations in the second quar-ter were significantly higher than in the firstquarter. Households’ economic expectationsshow that the upswing is now also loomingever large in the perception of consumers.
Labour market
stimuli
increasingly
important for
private
consumption

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
57Public financesGeneral government budget
The evolution of public finances is currently
very positive. After the general governmentdeficit ratio already halved to 1.6% last year,a further marked decline seems likely for2007. Significant progress has thus beenmade in the consolidation of public financesand a balanced budget is already possible thisyear. The favourable macroeconomic trend,which is easing pressure considerably on boththe revenue and expenditure side, is contrib-uting to the current improvement. Further-more, the (very volatile) revenue from profit-related taxes is likely to increase steeplyagain, although it may now have exceededthe medium-term normal level. This is beingreinforced by extensive measures on the rev-enue side (in particular, the rise in the stand-ard rate of turnover tax) and a still moderategrowth in structural expenditure, meaningthat the structural fiscal balance, ie adjustedfor cyclical effects, will likewise improve sig-nificantly. The debt ratio will fall this year forthe first time since 2001 and, following thehigh of 67.9% reached in the two precedingyears, approach the 60% ceiling stipulated inthe EC Treaty.
The general government revenue ratio is like-
ly to remain almost unchanged in 2007. Onthe one hand, the tax ratio will increase, pri-marily as a result of the raising of turnover taxand insurance tax rates but also owing to afurther sharp increase in revenue from profit-related taxes. On the other, social contribu-tion receipts will decrease in the wake of thecut in the contribution rate to the FederalEmployment Agency from 6.5% to 4.2% andBalanced
general govern-
ment budget
possible in
2007
Largely
constant
revenue ratio
strongly
influenced by
countervailing
movements

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
58the lower social contributions from central
government for recipients of unemploymentbenefit II.
1On balance, this will only be partly
offset by higher contribution rates to thestatutory pension and health insuranceschemes. In addition, the growth of the mainmacroeconomic benchmarks for taxes andsocial security contributions (gross wages andsalaries, pre-tax private consumption) is lag-ging behind the marked rise in nominal GDP– due in part to the price effect of the higherexcise duties.
There will be a further marked fall in the ex-
penditure ratio this year. Firstly, the positivemacroeconomic trend is leading to reducedspending since unemployment figures arelower and – as is customarily the case duringan economic upswing – on account of strongnominal GDP growth to a decline in the ex-penditure ratio. Secondly, the moderatewage trend of the past few years is currentlystill having a dampening effect on expend-iture (as on revenue). For one thing, muchgovernment expenditure such as pensionsand unemployment benefits is directly affect-ed by wage levels; for another, the currentwage moderation in the public sector was it-self facilitated by the past development in theprivate sector. Additional factors are the lownumber of new pension recipients, the sus-tained reduction in staff levels and othermeasures such as the shortening of the max-imum period of entitlement to unemploy-ment benefit l, lower social security contribu-tion payments for recipients of unemploy-ment benefit II and lower payments for grantsto homebuyers, which are being phased out.By contrast, there could be acceleratedgrowth in nominal expenditure on govern-
ment investment, which had already seen asharp rise in 2006.
The fiscal balance could be somewhat more
favourable in the coming year if the positivemacroeconomic dynamics persist. Accordingto the budget plans, however, no further im-provement in the structural balance is likely.The reform of business taxation, which willcome into force next year, will lead to exten-sive revenue losses. In addition, a certain ac-celeration of the rise in expenditure, whichhas been subdued over the past few years, ison the horizon. There is a danger that, as dur-ing previous cyclical upswings, the favourablecourse of budgetary development may beseized as a chance to make additional ex-penditure hikes or tax and social security cutswithout taking due account of the partiallytemporary nature of the improvement. In thatcase, the structural budgetary position wouldworsen. Although, as things currently stand,the debt ratio will decline again noticeably, itwill remain above the 60% ceiling. The ad-vantages of consolidation are evident notleast in the associated considerable savingson interest expenditure. Thus the declines inthe deficit in 2006 and 2007 alone will cutthe spending bill by around 34 billion in 2008
compared with the scenario of an unchangeddeficit ratio of 3.2% since 2005.
The positive overall fiscal picture should not
obscure the fact that extensive consolidationmeasures are still required not only for central
1However, with social security spending initially
unchanged, the latter places increased strains on other
contribution payers.Expenditure
growth still
subduedFurther cyclical
improvement
possible in
2008
Different
budgetary
positions for
the different
tiers of
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
59but also for some state and local govern-
ments. This is masked when the budgetaryposition is viewed from a general governmentperspective. If the surpluses generated bysome government entities (eg the FederalEmployment Agency or individual federalstates) were used for tax and social securitycuts or increases in expenditure, the partiallyunresolved budgetary problems would resur-face, also at the general government level.
The current favourable circumstances provide
the opportunity to rapidly eliminate the con-tinuing budgetary imbalances and to attainand lastingly maintain a balanced budgetposition in the medium term, in line with thegoals of the European fiscal framework. Afterthe excessive deficit procedure that had beeninstigated against Germany in January 2003was dropped in June owing to the country’sfavourable budgetary development, the non-binding preventative agreements of the Euro-pean fiscal framework must now be rigorous-ly implemented. In this way, Germany can setan example within the European Union andsimultaneously strengthen the credibility ofthe Stability and Growth Pact, which was re-formed not least owing to pressure from Ger-many. It will now be seen whether countrieswhose public finances have not yet beenstructurally balanced will actually achieve theaim of greater consolidation in good times,which is one of the central reform elements.In Germany, expanding revenue or contract-ing expenditure should be used for the pur-pose of deficit and debt reduction. A surplusduring an economic upturn means not leastthat in a later downturn it will still be possibleto meet the national and European fiscal re-quirements without resorting to pro-cyclical
policies. It should also be noted that consider-able uncertainties exist regarding the assess-ment of the current budgetary position and,in particular, the further development ofprofit-related taxes.
Budgetary development of central,
state and local government
2
Tax revenue
In the second quarter, tax revenue3was
121/C252% up on the same period last year (see
also the table on page 61). This reflects boththe rise in the standard rate of turnover taxand the growth in revenue from income taxesagainst the backdrop of the favourablemacroeconomic trend. Owing to the growthin gross wages and salaries, the restriction oftax rebates claimable by commuters and thecomparatively moderate growth in paymentsdeducted from cash receipts (child benefitand subsidies for supplementary private pen-sion plans), wage tax receipts rose by justunder 8
1/C252%. Revenue from the highly volatile
profit-related taxes increased by 28%. Thisrise reflects the favourable corporate earningssituation and the comparatively low increasein payments deducted from cash receipts(grants paid to home owners and investors,employee rebates, refunds of investment in-
2The following analysis is based on the budgetary figures
as defined in the government’s financial statistics. The
most recently published data on local government
finances are commented on in the short articles in the
Bundesbank Monthly Report of July 2007.
3Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the last quarter recorded.Surpluses
should be
aimed at during
upturnsFurther strong
rise in tax
revenue
in Q2 ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
60come tax) which comfortably offset the
dampening impact of legislative changes ongross revenue (above all the two-year exten-sion of the declining-balance depreciationmethod). Revenue from turnover tax grew by16
1/C252%, which was largely related to the rise
in the standard rate of VAT from 16% to19%.
The 14% increase in total tax revenue in the
first half of the year is noticeably larger thanthe growth of 10% expected in the last offi-cial tax revenue estimate of May for the yearas a whole (excluding local government taxesin each case). At the moment, there are anumber of signs that the annual outturn willalso be significantly higher than the May fore-cast. However, there are uncertainties in thisregard, not least owing to the generally veryvolatile nature of revenue from profit-related
taxes.
4It regularly fluctuates distinctly more
than can be explained by entrepreneurial andproperty income, which is used as an indica-tor for the tax assessment base, and centralgovernment estimates of the effect of legisla-tive changes. Following the recent stronggrowth, the medium-term normal level maynow have been exceeded. Given past experi-ence, a prudent approach is to be recom-mended, particularly as a basis for budgetaryplanning.
Central government budgetCentral government recorded a surplus of
35
1/C252billion in the second quarter of 2007
compared with just over 311/C252billion in the
same period of 2006. The main reason forthis favourable development was an increasein revenue of 10
1/C252% caused by the particular-
ly strong growth in tax receipts. Non-tax rev-enue decreased, by contrast, as there was areduction in the compensatory amount paidby the Federal Employment Agency and cap-ital proceeds also declined. Total expenditurealso increased markedly in the second quarterof 2007 (+4
1/C252%). The biggest absolute rise
was recorded by the new grant to the FederalEmployment Agency, which is being financedthrough the increase in turnover tax. How-ever, increases were also registered not leastin the case of operating expenditure andinterest payments. The latter was doubtlessdue chiefly to higher interest rate charges onshort-term borrowing, in which central gov-ernment is engaged with Federal TreasuryYear-on-year change, quarterly
%Tax revenue *
*Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes which are not yet known
for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank16+
14+
12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
2005 2006 2007
4See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report,
November 2006, p 55.... and favour-
able outlook for
the year as a
wholeHigher surplus
in Q2 owing to
growth in tax
receipts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
61notes (Sch/C228tze) and Treasury discount paper
(Bubills) totalling around 3150 billion as well
as extensive cash advances.
The budget approved at the end of 2006 en-
visaged a deficit of 320 billion for 2007. With
the additional revenue of 310 billion forecast
in the May tax estimate, this could be halved.It should be possible to offset burdens result-ing from the distinctly lower-than-anticipatedproceeds from the compensatory amountthrough savings elsewhere and potentiallyeven stronger tax revenue growth. However,the Federal Ministry of Finance has now an-nounced that it will set up a special fund con-nected with the planned increase in the num-ber of day care places for infants. It intends topay tax revenue into this fund with a view topartly pre-financing the committed assump-tion of costs of 34 billion by 2013.
5Further-
more, planned proceeds from asset realisa-tions might be held in abeyance for subse-quent “difficult times”. Of the associatedproceeds envisaged in the budget ( 311 bil-
lion), only 32 billion has been realised to date.
It cannot be ruled out that the existing scopeto reduce net borrowing by more than thebudgeted amount may not be exploited tothe full in order to be able to record a con-tinuous decline in the next few years.
The draft budget for 2008 approved by the
Federal Cabinet at the beginning of July en-visages net borrowing of 313 billion in the
context of further sizeable asset realisations.Tax revenue
H1 Q2Estimate
for2007
1,2
2006 2007 2006 2007
Year-on-year
changeYear-on-year
changeYear-on-
year
Type of tax 5billionin5
billion as % 5billionin5
billion as %change
as %
Tax revenue, total 2 207.1 235.8 + 28.8 + 13.9 111.2 125.2 + 14.0 + 12.6 + 10.1
of which
Wage tax 57.9 62.7 + 4.8 + 8.4 29.8 32.2 + 2.5 + 8.3 + 7.1Assessed income tax 3.8 9.0 + 5.3 + 140.4 5.9 8.2 + 2.3 + 39.9 + 26.1Investment income taxes
3 12.5 15.7 + 3.2 + 25.7 7.0 8.7 + 1.7 + 23.4 + 11.7
Corporation tax 10.4 11.7 + 1.3 + 12.6 5.2 6.2 + 1.1 + 20.3 + 3.1Turnover taxes
4 71.1 83.0 + 11.9 + 16.8 35.2 41.0 + 5.8 + 16.4 + 17.7
Energy tax 14.2 13.8 – 0.4 – 3.1 9.7 9.2 – 0.5 – 5.1 + 0.2Tobacco tax 6.4 6.4 – 0.0 – 0.2 3.6 3.5 – 0.1 – 3.9 + 0.8
1According to May 2007 official tax estimate. — 2Includ-
ing EU shares in German tax revenue, but excludingreceipts from local government taxes which are not yetknown for the last quarter recorded. — 3Non-assessed
taxes on earnings and withholding tax on interestincome. — 4Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Trends in local govern-
ment finances since 2000, Monthly Report, July 2007, p
40.Net borrowing
could fall
well below
budgeted
figure
Hardly any
fiscal consoli-
dation in 2008
budget

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
62Progress towards fiscal consolidation com-
pared with 2007 thus remains very limitedoverall and has been postponed until subse-quent years, despite the favourable currenteconomic setting. Expenditure is set to in-crease by just over 4
1/C252% compared with the
budget for 2007. This is primarily due to high-er payments to offset the Post Office pensionfund deficit and also to one-off effects result-ing from the overlapping of child-raisingbenefit, which is being phased out, and par-ental benefit, which is already being paid infull, as well as the forwarding of a largeramount of turnover tax resources to the Fed-eral Employment Agency. If these effects aredisregarded, the increase in expenditureamounts to just under 2%, attributable toadditional spending, in particular, on develop-ment aid and external and internal security.
6This falls a long way short of the FinancialPlanning Council’s target of last year to re-strict expenditure growth to 1%. Further-more, not all expenditure authorisations areincluded in the recorded total. Thus, extra ex-penditure appropriations have been ear-marked subject to the proviso that as not yetquantified revenue is to be generatedthrough the sale of CO
2certificates and sales
by the Federal armed forces.
On the revenue side, next year’s budget envis-
ages 3% more tax receipts compared withthe official May estimate for 2007. The resultof the tax estimate for 2008 has been adjust-ed upwards across the board by 32 billion
and various additional legislative changes – inparticular, the business tax reform – havebeen taken into account. In addition, it isplanned to replace the compensatory amountas of 2008 by a reintegration payment bywhich the Federal Employment Agency is tobear half of the administration and labourmarket integration costs for recipients of un-employment benefit II. This should generate35 billion in receipts. Compared with a con-
tinuation of the compensatory amount, thisshould ultimately yield around 32 billion in
additional revenue. As a general principle, in-€b n
€b n Cumulative
200520062007
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
2005
2006
2007Central government fiscal
deficit / surplus since 2005
Deutsche Bundesbank10−
15−
20−
25−
30−
35−
40−15+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
30−
6In general, the task of adjusting expenditure growth for
extraordinary factors is not unproblematic and runs the
risk of being arbitrary. For example, an increase in the
central government grant to the Federal Employment
Agency is ultimately a benefit that must be financed. In
addition, alongside exceptional burdens, exceptional re-
lief such as on payments for retired rail staff, war victims’
welfare benefits and the all-day school programme,
which is coming to an end, should also be factored out.
In particular, the exceptional savings made through the
temporary reduction in transfers to the Post Office pen-
sion fund – owing to the associated securitisation trans-
actions – should have been explicitly highlighted in the
past.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
63surance benefits to be funded through contri-
butions should be clearly demarcated fromsocial policy tasks to be financed out of taxrevenue. Otherwise there is a danger that thefinancial relations with the social securityfunds could be engineered so as to achievecurrent central government budget targets.
The medium-term financial plan up to 2011
envisages running central government netborrowing down to zero by the end of theplanning period. To this end, expendituregrowth after 2008 is to be restricted to anannual average rate of
3/C254%. This target will
require far more stringent expenditure discip-line in future budgetary negotiations than isthe case in the current and coming year. Onthe other hand, the assumed positive devel-opment of tax revenue could encourage add-itional spending wishes, as has been experi-enced in 2007. Moreover, even in 2011, itwill evidently only be possible to achieve abalanced budget thanks to privatisation pro-ceeds of 36 billion.
A tightening of the debt incurrence rules is
being discussed as part of the second phaseof the reform of Germany’s federal structure.This was also urged by the Federal Constitu-tional Court in its judgement of the centralgovernment budgets for 2004. A majority ofthe judges ruled that the budgetary acts didnot breach the borrowing limits specified inArticle 115 of the Basic Law. They thus con-cluded that – despite growth expectations atthe time – the Federal Government was justi-fied in assuming that a serious disruption tooverall economic equilibrium existed, thuswarranting a breach of the statutory borrow-ing ceiling, and that the advancement of the
tax cut and the subsequent adherence to thefiscal stance were suitable measures to avertthis disruption. The German Council of Eco-nomic Experts, whose opinion carries particu-lar weight following the ruling of the FederalConstitutional Court in 1989, was highlycritical of this assessment in its report. Ac-cording to the judges, the ineffectiveness ofArticle 115 of the Basic Law has been demon-strated in practice over the past few years.However, they stressed that the responsibilityfor amending it lies with the legislature andnot with the judiciary. They did not specifyany reform requirements in their ruling. How-ever, the opinion was expressed in minorityvotes that there should at least be a muchnarrower definition of investment and henceof the associated scope for borrowing. In theFederal Government’s medium-term
financial planning
5billion
Financial planActual
2006Target
2007 1Draft2008
22009 2010 2011
Expenditure 261.0 270.5 283.2 285.5 288.5 289.7
of which
Investment 22.7 24.0 24.3 24.1 24.1 23.7
Revenue 233.1 250.9 270.3 275.0 282.5 289.7
of which
Taxes 203.9 220.5 237.1 247.9 252.6 260.3
Net borrowing 27.9 19.6 12.9 10.5 6.0 –Memo item
Percentageincrease inexpenditure + 0.5 + 3.6 + 4.7
3 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.4
1This contains asset disposals of around 515 billion including relief
arising from sales of claims on the Post Office pension fund. — 2In-
cluding asset realisations of around 512 billion. — 3Adjusted for spe-
cial and one-off effects (expiry of relief arising from sales of claims onthe Post Office pension fund, changeover to parental benefit, higherVAT-financed subsidies to the Federal Employment Agency), the in-crease amounts to 1.9%.
Deutsche BundesbankBalanced
budget aimed
at in 2011 with
the aid of one-
off receipts
Federal Consti-
tutional Court
criticises
current
borrowing limit

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
64second stage of the reform of the federal
structure, it is now especially important to ef-fectively restrict net borrowing in the consti-tutions. Inserting the requirement of a struc-turally virtually balanced budget, as enshrinedin the Stability and Growth Pact, would be asuitable element towards eliminating the dis-cretionary leeway currently associated withinvestment-related borrowing limits andavoiding inconsistencies with European fiscalcommitments.
State government budgetsThe state government budgets recorded a
clear surplus of 35
1/C252billion in the second
quarter compared with a balanced budget inthe same period of 2006. Revenue increasedoverall by 10
1/C252% owing, in particular, to the
favourable trend in tax revenue. Expendituregrew by the far smaller margin of 2%. Trans-fers to local government are likely to havebeen considerably larger owing to increasedtax receipts, but the key item of personnel ex-penditure decreased slightly.
Given the strong growth in tax revenue and
the much smaller increase in expenditure, itcan be expected that the state governmentbudgets for 2007 will be close to balance onthe whole. Bavaria, Mecklenburg-WesternPomerania, Saxony and Thuringia are expect-ing at least balanced budgets as early as thisyear. Baden-W/C252rttemberg, Berlin and Sax-ony-Anhalt plan to manage without any newborrowing from 2008 at the latest. By con-trast, a number of Federal states are still drag-ging their feet about aiming to rapidlyachieve a balanced budget. This is particularlytrue of Saarland and Bremen, which are still
suing central government to obtain restruc-turing aid, and of North Rhine-Westphaliaand Schleswig-Holstein. Although Rhineland-Palatinate anticipates a longer transitionalperiod until a balanced budget is achieved, itis taking account of growing future burdensfor civil servant pensions by setting up rela-tively large reserves.
Further efforts would – as in the case of cen-
tral government – facilitate the rapid imple-mentation of tighter borrowing limits. How-ever, the Federal states are still reluctant toset more ambitious legally-binding limits.Hitherto, only Bavaria has had a legal ban onborrowing not warranted by the economicclimate or exceptional circumstances. Now,Baden-W/C252rttemberg is planning a similarregulation in its state budgetary rules as of2008. In order to strengthen the binding ef-fect, however, it would be fundamentallypreferable to enshrine this in the state gov-ernment constitutions. In this respect, thesecond phase of the reform of the federalstructure has a particularly important role toplay.
Social security schemes
7
Statutory pension insurance scheme
In the statutory pension insurance scheme,
revenue exceeded expenditure by 31/C252billion
7The financial development of the statutory health and
long-term care insurance schemes was analysed in great-
er detail in the short articles of the Monthly Report of
June 2007.Further favour-
able develop-
ment in state
government
budgets in Q2
State govern-
ment budgets
close to balance
in 2007, but
continuing
need for con-
solidation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
65in the second quarter. At just over 32 billion,
the surplus recorded in the same quarter of2006 was larger, although this was mainly at-tributable to a one-off revenue windfallcaused by the transitional regulation lastinguntil July 2006, which brought forward thetransfer deadlines for social contributions. At32
1/C252billion, the customary seasonal improve-
ment in the financial situation from the firstto the second quarter was well above the me-dium-term average. This is particularly note-worthy given the mild winter and the conse-quently already relatively strong financial out-turn in the first quarter. Overall, the rise incontribution rates from 19.5% to 19.9% atthe beginning of the year, along with thefavourable trend in employment and im-proved pay levels, had a positive effect on thestatutory pension insurance scheme in thefirst half of the year. The increase in expend-iture was only slight. While pension paymentshardly increased, pension insurance spendingon health insurance contributions for pen-sioners, at 5
1/C252%, grew much faster owing to
the sharp rise in contribution rates at the be-ginning of the year.
8
On the one hand, a further significant in-crease in pay subject to compulsory contri-butions is to be expected in the second halfof the year. On the other, the adjustment ofpensions by 0.54% on 1 July 2007 will amp-lify the increase in expenditure. In this con-nection last year’s favourable employmenttrend is boosting pension levels via the sus-tainability factor. Overall, the statutory pen-sion insurance scheme will probably record alargely balanced budget at the end of theyear. Given the sharper rise in average payand the positive employment trend this year,
there could be a higher pension increase in2008. The cyclically induced positive revenuetrend would then soon be followed by higherexpenditure.
Federal Employment AgencyThe Federal Employment Agency recorded a
surplus of 31
1/C252billion in the second quarter.
Owing to the baseline effect caused by bring-ing forward the transfer deadlines for socialcontributions as of January 2006, no directcomparison is possible with the second quar-Quarterly
€b n
€b nLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
ExpenditureRevenueFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−62
60
58
56
54
2005 2006 2007
8Changes in statutory health insurance institutions’ con-
tribution rates come into effect for pensioners from the
third month following the relevant change (section 247
of the Fifth Book of the Social Security Code). The contri-
bution rate increases in January (an average year-on-year
rise from 14.2% to 14.8%) thus affected expenditure as
of April 2007.Improvement in
the financial
situation owing
to higher con-
tribution rate
and favourable
economic
setting
Largely
balanced result
expected for
2007 as wholeSurplus in Q2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
66ter of 2006 (+ 32 billion). In addition, the Fed-
eral Employment Agency’s contribution ratewas reduced from 6.5% to 4.2% on 1 Janu-ary 2007. Moreover, the Federal grantbrought in at the same time, which amount-ed to 31
1/C252billion in the second quarter, must
also be taken into account. Despite this, totalrevenue was down 21
1/C252% on the year. How-
ever, this was almost matched by the fall inexpenditure (-20%).The main contributory factor to the ongoing
marked decline in expenditure was thereduced costs of unemployment benefit I,which fell by 28
1/C252%. The decisive factor for
this was the decrease of 27% in the numberof recipients. This reflects not only the favour-able labour market situation which, in particu-lar, makes it easier for the short-term unem-ployed to find new jobs, but also the shorten-ing of the maximum entitlement period to un-employment benefit I to 12 months (or18 months for persons aged 55 or over),which has had a financial impact as of 1 Febru-ary 2007. In addition, the compensatoryamount was significantly lower in the secondquarter than in the same period of 2006.Furthermore, almost 8% less was spent on ac-tive labour market policy measures.
The Federal Employment Agency will record a
clear surplus for 2007 as a whole and willtherefore be able to further replenish its re-serves. On 1 January 2008, the compensatoryamount is to be replaced, mainly by means ofa reintegration payment (estimated as 32 bill-
lion higher). In this way the Federal Employ-ment Agency is to meet half of the centralgovernment costs of administration and la-bour market integration measures for recipi-ents of unemployment benefit II. In addition,it is planned to reduce the contribution rateby a further 0.3 percentage point to 3.9%.Overall, extra costs of around 34
1/C252billion will
arise. That would appear viable as long as thelong-term average number of recipients ofunemployment benefit I does not exceed thecurrent annual average level of around1.1 million. Between 1999 and 2006, how-ever, the average number of recipients wasQuarterly
€b n
€b n€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment
   benefit and short-time
   working benefits
...vocational training2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding central government liquidity
assistance. — 2Sharp decline in 2005 caused
by shifting responsibility for training for
recipients of unemployment benefit II to
central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−8.8
8.0
7.2
6.4
5.6
4.8
4.0
3.2
2.4
2.016.0
14.0
12.0
10.0
2005 2006 2007Lower spending
on wage substi-
tutes owing to
buoyant
economic
activity and
shortening of
maximum
period of en-
titlement
Surplus also
expected for
year as whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
67considerably higher, at an average of just
under 1.8 million per year. Although thelabour market reforms may have contributedto the marked average reduction of the num-ber of recipients of unemployment benefit I –in some cases, at the expense of higher num-bers of recipients of unemployment benefit II– this is based on estimates that are subjectto major uncertainty.
The current discussion on the use of the Fed-
eral Employment Agency’s surpluses showsthat a clear and transparent demarcation of
contribution-funded insurance benefits fromtax-funded transfers should be an importantaim for future fiscal reforms. This couldenhance public satisfaction with the socialsecurity systems, support a coherent andmore selective income redistribution policyand thus improve the quality of publicfinances. In particular, this would help toavoid a situation in which contribution payersalone finance certain general societal tasks.
Demarcation of
insurance
benefits from
income redistri-
bution transfers

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
68

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors of
economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*
5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financialsectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
individual taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*
6 Labour market 65*
7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in
Stage III of Economic and MonetaryUnion 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2005          Oct 11.3 8.7 8.0 8.0 7.8 9.4 9.1 2.07 2.20 3.3
         Nov 10.5 8.3 7.6 7.6 8.2 9.5 8.9 2.09 2.36 3.5         Dec 11.3 8.5 7.3 7.5 8.3 9.5 8.9 2.28 2.47 3.4
2006          Jan 10.0 8.3 7.5 7.6 8.5 10.0 8.7 2.33 2.51 3.4
         Feb 9.8 8.6 7.9 8.0 8.8 10.8 8.9 2.35 2.60 3.5         Mar 10.0 9.0 8.5 8.4 9.6 11.6 8.8 2.52 2.72 3.7
         Apr 10.1 9.5 8.8 8.7 9.7 11.9 8.9 2.63 2.79 4.0
         May 10.3 9.2 8.9 8.7 9.5 11.9 8.8 2.58 2.89 4.1         June 9.1 9.0 8.4 8.4 9.2 11.5 8.0 2.70 2.99 4.1
         July 7.5 8.2 7.8 8.1 9.3 11.9 8.6 2.81 3.10 4.1
         Aug 7.3 8.4 8.2 8.1 9.2 12.0 8.4 2.97 3.23 4.0         Sep 7.2 8.4 8.5 8.4 9.4 12.2 8.3 3.04 3.34 3.8
         Oct 6.3 8.2 8.5 8.8 9.1 12.0 8.4 3.28 3.50 3.9
         Nov 6.7 8.9 9.4 9.3 8.7 11.9 8.5 3.33 3.60 3.8         Dec 7.5 9.3 9.9 9.8 8.2 11.5 8.5 3.50 3.68 3.9
2007          Jan 6.9 9.1 10.1 10.0 8.1 11.3 8.6 3.56 3.75 4.1
         Feb 6.7 8.9 10.1 10.4 7.8 10.8 8.4 3.57 3.82 4.1         Mar 7.0 9.5 11.0 10.5 7.8 10.9 8.9 3.69 3.89 4.0
         Apr 6.0 8.8 10.3 10.6 7.6 10.8 8.9 3.82 3.98 4.2
         May 5.9 9.3 10.6 10.6 8.4 11.1 8.5 3.79 4.07 4.3         June 6.1 9.5 10.9 ... 8.7 11.5 9.2 3.96 4.15 4.6
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.06 4.22 4.6
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2005          Oct − 4,608 + 1,012 − 16,752 − 14,871 − 7,041 + 5,102 + 59 1.2015 101.8 102.7
         Nov − 746 + 262 + 7,929 − 6,475 − 41,641 + 55,018 + 1,027 1.1786 101.1 102.0
         Dec − 1,163 + 1,234 − 29,013 − 16,501 − 5,369 − 14,392 + 7,250 1.1856 101.2 102.0
2006          Jan − 9,696 − 6,532 + 3,484 − 1,844 − 41,795 + 49,578 − 2,454 1.2103 101.8 102.6
         Feb − 3,690 + 390 + 22,514 − 31,999 + 23,321 + 29,221 + 1,971 1.1938 101.2 102.0         Mar − 1,146 + 2,630 + 46,776 − 1,532 + 33,976 + 7,956 + 6,375 1.2020 101.9 102.9
         Apr − 5,729 + 1,144 + 12,114 + 1,974 − 15,304 + 26,650 − 1,207 1.2271 103.0 104.0
         May − 10,571 + 365 + 25,600 − 6,217 + 40,405 − 6,851 − 1,738 1.2770 104.0 104.9         June + 9,116 + 5,310 + 1,381 − 15,794 + 70,440 − 54,670 + 1,405 1.2650 104.2 105.0
         July − 1,220 + 4,095 + 8,218 − 10,783 + 7,981 + 12,330 − 1,311 1.2684 104.5 105.4
         Aug − 5,883 − 2,203 + 3,667 − 5,490 − 25,009 + 34,984 − 818 1.2811 104.6 105.4         Sep + 1,441 + 5,582 + 39,069 − 27,672 + 47,288 + 20,509 − 1,055 1.2727 104.4 105.2
         Oct − 826 + 5,601 + 5,109 − 10,003 + 37,159 − 22,107 + 60 1.2611 103.9 104.7
         Nov + 4,791 + 7,213 − 11,001 − 12,909 + 56,896 − 54,375 − 614 1.2881 104.5 105.2         Dec + 13,685 + 5,008 − 39,873 − 36,534 + 26,246 − 27,696 − 1,889 1.3213 105.5 106.0
2007          Jan − 6,081 − 4,355 + 43,067 − 7,412 + 28,950 + 24,533 − 3,004 1.2999 104.9 105.5
         Feb − 5,749 + 2,318 − 11,006 − 10,951 + 14,686 − 14,221 − 519 1.3074 105.4 105.9         Mar + 9,425 + 9,592 − 44,024 − 5,851 + 61,391 − 101,722 + 2,158 1.3242 106.1 106.4
         Apr − 4,298 + 4,319 + 17,699 − 24,514 + 11,519 + 32,462 − 1,769 1.3516 107.1 107.4
         May − 14,569 + 3,596 + 668 − 11,277 + 5,072 + 7,586 − 713 1.3511 107.3 107.4         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3419 106.9 106.9
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3716 107.6 107.6
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-24 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Slovenia Spain area
Real gross domestic product 1 
2004 3.0 1.1 3.7 2.5 4.7 4.3 1.2 3.6 1.9 2.4 1.3 4.4 3.2 2.0
2005 1.1 0.8 2.9 1.7 3.7 5.5 0.1 4.0 1.5 2.0 0.5 4.0 3.5 1.5
2006 3.2 2.9 5.0 2.0 ... 6.0 1.9 6.2 2.9 3.1 1.3 5.2 3.9 2.7
2006          Q1 3.6 3.4 4.6 2.2 4.1 6.4 2.1 7.2 3.5 3.2 1.1 5.0 3.5 2.4
         Q2 2.8 1.6 4.8 1.7 4.1 4.0 1.4 5.5 3.1 3.2 0.9 4.7 4.0 2.9         Q3 2.5 2.7 3.2 2.0 ... 8.1 1.3 6.2 2.8 3.2 1.6 5.6 3.6 2.8         Q4 3.7 3.7 7.4 2.1 ... 4.6 2.7 5.9 2.7 2.8 1.6 5.5 4.2 3.4
2007          Q1 3.1 3.3 5.5 1.8 ... 7.5 2.3 7.3 2.5 3.5 2.0 7.2 4.3 3.1
         Q2 2.3 2.5 ... 1.2 ... ... ... ... 2.4 ... ... ... ... 2.5
Industrial production 1,2 
2004 3.2 3.1 4.9 2.0 1.2 0.3 − 0.3 4.0 4.1 6.3 − 2.7 4.6 1.6 2.2
2005 − 0.4 3.3 0.3 0.2 − 0.9 3.0 − 0.8 0.7 − 1.1 4.2 0.3 3.9 0.6 1.3
2006 5.1 5.9 8.1 0.9 0.5 5.1 2.6 2.3 1.2 8.2 2.7 6.5 3.9 4.0
2006          Q1 6.2 5.1 4.2 0.8 0.9 2.9 3.4 5.4 3.1 5.9 1.4 6.0 2.6 3.5
         Q2 5.5 5.9 14.4 1.8 0.4 9.8 1.6 1.9 0.9 7.7 1.7 5.2 4.0 4.3         Q3 4.0 6.4 10.2 0.7 0.0 6.3 1.3 − 0.7 0.2 10.1 3.5 7.9 4.2 4.2         Q4 4.8 6.0 4.0 0.4 0.6 1.5 3.9 2.3 0.3 9.0 4.3 7.2 4.6 4.0
2007          Q1 3.9
r 6.8 0.9 0.8 2.9 14.4 0.9 1.3 − 3.3 7.2 4.2 9.8 4.2 3.8
         Q2 2.8 7p 5.6 − 0.4 0.0 p 0.7 p − 1.1 0.6 p 2.1 − 0.5 ... 1.9 8.1 2.6 e 2.6
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2004 80.4 83.2 84.5 84.1 75.6 75.6 76.4 85.6 82.7 81.3 80.4 81.6 79.0 81.4
2005 79.4 82.9 84.9 83.2 72.1 74.2 76.4 82.3 82.0 81.7 80.0 82.2 80.2 81.2
2006 82.7 85.5 86.0 85.0 75.7 75.7 77.6 85.2 82.0 83.4 78.4 83.9 80.5 83.0
2006          Q2 82.8 84.4 85.1 84.5 74.6 76.1 77.3 84.0 81.9 83.2 78.0 83.8 81.1 82.4
         Q3 83.9 86.4 88.1 85.7 77.2 76.3 78.0 86.7 81.4 84.0 79.4 84.7 79.4 83.6         Q4 83.5 86.8 85.4 86.3 76.7 76.5 78.1 87.2 83.0 84.3 77.4 84.1 80.6 83.9
2007          Q1 83.4 87.6 89.3 86.0 76.9 76.8 78.2 87.4 83.4 85.1 79.7 85.6 81.2 84.4
         Q2 83.2 88.2 86.9 86.2 76.9 77.1 78.9 88.8 83.3 85.5 81.7 86.2 81.3 84.8         Q3 82.8 87.1 86.7 86.0 76.7 75.9 78.2 ... 83.8 85.2 84.3 85.9 81.4 84.2
Unemployment rate 4 
2004 8.4 9.5 8.8 9.6 10.5 4.5 8.0 5.1 4.6 4.8 6.7 6.3 10.6 8.8
2005 8.4 9.4 8.4 9.7 9.8 4.3 7.7 4.5 4.7 5.2 7.6 6.5 9.2 8.6
2006 8.2 8.4 7.7 9.5 8.9 4.4 6.8 4.7 3.9 4.7 7.7 6.0 8.5 7.9
2007          Jan 7.9 7.6 7.1 9.0 8.6 4.3 6.1 4.9 3.5 4.4 8.1 5.3 8.2 7.3
         Feb 7.8 7.0 7.0 8.9 8.6 4.4 6.1 4.9 3.5 4.4 8.1 5.2 8.2 7.2         Mar 7.6 6.9 6.9 8.8 8.6 4.3 6.1 4.9 3.4 4.3 8.1 5.1 8.1 7.1
         Apr 7.6 6.6 6.8 8.8 ... 4.3 ... 4.9 3.3 4.4 8.0 5.2 8.1 7.0
         May 7.5 6.5 6.8 8.7 ... 4.4 ... 4.9 3.3 4.3 7.9 5.1 8.1 6.9         June 7.4 6.4 6.7 8.6 ... 4.4 ... 4.9 3.3 4.3 7.9 5.1 8.1 6.9
         July 7.5 ... ... ... ... 4.7 ... ... ... 4.3 ... ... 8.0 ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2004 1.9 1.8 0.1 2.3 3.0 2.3 2.3 3.2 1.4 2.0 2.5 3.7 3.1 2.1
2005 2.5 1.9 0.8 1.9 3.5 2.2 2.2 3.8 1.5 2.1 2.1 2.5 3.4 2.2
2006 2.3 1.8 1.3 1.9 3.3 2.7 2.2 3.0 1.7 1.7 3.0 2.5 3.6 2.2
2007          Jan 1.7 1.8 1.3 1.4 3.0 2.9 1.9 2.3 1.2 1.7 2.6 2.8 2.4 5 1.8
         Feb 1.8 1.9 1.2 1.2 3.0 2.6 2.1 1.8 1.4 1.7 2.3 2.3 2.5 1.8
         Mar 1.8 2.0 1.6 1.2 2.8 2.9 2.1 2.4 1.9 1.9 2.4 2.6 2.5 1.9
         Apr 1.8 2.0 1.5 1.3 2.6 2.9 1.8 2.5 1.9 1.8 2.8 2.9 2.5 1.9
         May 1.3 2.0 1.3 1.2 2.6 2.7 1.9 2.3 2.0 1.9 2.4 3.1 2.4 1.9         June 1.3 2.0 1.4 1.3 2.6 2.8 1.9 2.3 1.8 1.9 2.4 3.8 2.5 1.9
         July 1.3 2.0 1.6 1.2 2.7 2.7 1.7 2.0
p 1.4 p 2.0 2.3 4.0 2.3 p 1.8
General government financial balance 6 
2004 0.0 − 3.7 2.3 − 3.6 − 7.9 1.4 − 3.5 − 1.2 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.8
2005 − 2.3 − 3.2 2.7 − 3.0 − 5.5 1.0 − 4.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.6 − 6.1 − 1.5 1.1 − 2.5
2006 0.2 − 1.6 3.9 − 2.5 − 2.6 2.9 − 4.4 0.1 0.6 − 1.1 − 3.9 − 1.4 1.8 − 1.6
General government debt 6 
2004 94.3 65.7 44.1 64.3 108.5 29.7 103.8 6.6 52.6 63.9 58.2 28.9 46.2 69.7
2005 93.2 67.9 41.4 66.2 107.5 27.4 106.2 6.1 52.7 63.5 63.6 28.4 43.2 70.5
2006 89.1 67.9 39.1 63.9 104.6 24.9 106.8 6.8 48.7 62.2 64.7 27.8 39.9 68.9
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central sonally adjusted. — 5  Including Slovenia from January 2007 onwards. —
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — 6  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition; Euro-area
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece, Portugal and the Euro−area aggregate: European Central Bank, member states: European
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and Commission. — 7  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
energy; adjusted for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Produc-
seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and tion Survey for the second quarter 2007. 
October. — 4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; sea-
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2005          Nov 141.0 102.7 20.3 38.2 44.0 − 42.7 27.9 70.6 22.7 10.1 0.2 6.3 6.1
         Dec 44.7 78.0 3.8 − 33.3 − 56.4 18.5 − 71.3 − 89.8 44.4 27.9 0.8 − 7.5 23.1
2006          Jan 127.9 106.0 20.7 21.9 27.0 − 12.3 112.3 124.6 8.4 6.2 0.7 0.7 0.8
         Feb 92.8 109.6 28.3 − 16.8 − 7.2 − 26.1 18.6 44.7 57.9 12.4 0.3 25.0 20.2         Mar 141.9 129.1 44.7 12.8 8.7 0.4 71.6 71.2 48.1 17.6 0.8 21.8 7.9
         Apr 162.3 161.5 64.1 0.7 0.1 − 16.4 79.5 95.9 25.7 14.9 0.4 17.9 − 7.4
         May 43.2 71.4 3.9 − 28.2 − 17.7 6.4 49.8 43.4 28.1 10.4 1.3 21.8 − 5.4         June 52.2 47.8 − 30.1 4.4 1.8 70.3 − 49.7 − 119.9 48.0 10.9 1.2 21.8 14.1
         July 69.4 89.8 13.5 − 20.4 − 16.6 3.9 83.6 79.7 47.6 9.2 1.2 16.3 20.9
         Aug − 14.1 12.7 − 5.3 − 26.8 − 21.2 − 19.0 1.6 20.6 5.3 2.4 1.5 5.5 − 4.1         Sep 126.9 134.5 21.8 − 7.6 − 13.7 17.2 120.5 103.3 28.2 4.3 1.4 14.4 8.2
         Oct 81.4 84.5 30.5 − 3.1 − 5.8 25.8 118.1 92.2 51.3 15.8 2.1 29.0 4.4
         Nov 110.7 105.9 11.6 4.8 6.5 69.2 144.7 75.5 28.3 10.6 2.6 23.0 − 7.9         Dec − 8.2 44.6 2.3 − 52.8 − 58.6 81.1 51.4 − 29.7 50.3 24.1 2.1 18.7 5.5
2007          Jan 120.3 103.1 14.6 17.2 21.2 − 22.9 143.9 166.8 14.3 4.0 1.9 7.8 0.6
         Feb 70.8 69.4 3.2 1.4 4.3 40.6 124.9 84.3 52.9 2.8 1.9 39.9 8.3         Mar 146.5 154.3 46.7 − 7.9 − 6.5 84.5 125.6 41.1 76.3 17.6 0.9 28.1 29.7
         Apr 154.6 170.8 78.7 − 16.2 − 16.7 − 39.4 151.7 191.1 29.0 13.4 0.3 17.5 − 2.2
         May 135.9 104.8 29.9 31.1 36.7 − 14.3 77.4 91.7 9.1 16.8 − 0.2 20.7 − 28.2         June 94.8 100.5 − 19.2 − 5.7 − 5.2 35.6 − 23.0 − 58.6 89.6 20.2 0.7 31.9 36.8
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2005          Nov 4.2 1.9 5.4 2.3 10.0 − 7.0 2.3 9.3 2.5 2.0 0.2 − 2.4 2.8
         Dec − 7.7 − 3.4 11.2 − 4.3 − 6.6 16.8 − 38.3 − 55.1 − 5.0 4.0 0.7 − 10.7 0.9
2006          Jan 38.3 30.0 13.0 8.3 6.2 9.1 36.9 27.8 6.7 0.9 0.7 4.7 0.4
         Feb 0.2 12.8 4.7 − 12.6 − 3.2 − 7.1 6.9 14.0 17.0 5.3 0.3 6.2 5.2         Mar 19.0 16.8 9.3 2.1 2.0 3.0 17.9 14.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.8 − 4.1 3.2
         Apr 44.8 45.1 30.1 − 0.4 − 1.6 9.7 10.3 0.6 2.4 4.2 0.2 − 3.3 1.2
         May − 3.7 − 9.6 − 6.9 5.9 13.4 − 4.6 6.2 10.8 3.1 1.7 1.1 4.9 − 4.6         June − 31.3 − 16.3 − 18.3 − 15.0 − 11.3 58.4 39.5 − 18.9 7.5 1.5 1.3 0.2 4.5
         July − 6.9 − 5.4 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 2.5 2.7 − 11.0 − 13.7 14.6 2.2 1.1 2.4 8.9
         Aug − 4.3 3.9 0.6 − 8.2 − 4.2 − 4.9 1.1 6.1 − 3.1 2.9 1.5 − 4.9 − 2.6         Sep 23.7 32.8 9.5 − 9.1 − 7.9 14.9 32.8 17.8 − 5.8 0.4 1.2 − 4.2 − 3.3
         Oct 4.2 − 0.7 5.1 4.9 1.2 − 4.6 − 5.1 − 0.5 5.1 − 0.1 2.1 − 0.9 4.0
         Nov 12.6 5.5 7.3 7.2 6.6 42.0 42.1 0.1 − 0.8 1.3 2.6 − 0.3 − 4.3         Dec − 40.7 − 22.9 4.2 − 17.8 − 14.9 43.0 25.4 − 17.6 5.2 3.9 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.7
2007          Jan 36.3 25.6 12.0 10.7 12.2 − 11.2 17.8 29.0 18.7 − 0.2 1.8 5.8 11.3
         Feb − 7.0 0.8 − 7.1 − 7.8 − 3.4 5.7 26.9 21.2 5.7 0.8 2.0 − 0.6 3.5         Mar 10.4 14.4 6.4 − 4.0 2.2 14.9 20.6 5.7 − 5.3 − 0.8 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.4
         Apr 32.6 33.4 35.6 − 0.9 − 2.8 − 12.4 25.2 37.6 8.8 2.8 0.2 3.6 2.2
         May − 13.9 − 16.0 − 15.2 2.1 5.0 − 2.5 10.9 13.4 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 6.6 − 8.6         June − 27.3 − 11.7 − 24.6 − 15.6 − 10.1 58.7 24.0 − 34.7 9.5 2.1 0.6 − 3.8 10.5
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
5.7 53.1 − 16.8 23.6 28.2 4.0 24.2 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 2.1 − 9.3 4.6 2005          Nov 
− 11.5 − 83.3 − 113.6 149.4 91.9 18.3 73.6 38.0 19.5 − 18.2 − 14.2 − 3.4          Dec 
18.0 83.0 − 6.1 − 26.6 − 35.2 − 12.0 − 23.2 − 7.9 16.4 15.2 6.6 10.9 2006          Jan 
8.0 − 29.5 − 30.2 20.3 − 2.5 4.0 − 6.5 19.4 3.4 − 2.1 3.2 8.8          Feb 
− 6.5 31.2 − 69.4 59.0 27.9 7.4 20.5 29.3 1.8 1.0 − 0.8 10.3          Mar 
− 10.5 0.2 − 130.5 106.1 65.9 8.1 57.8 41.7 − 1.5 13.9 10.1 0.4          Apr 
− 15.4 − 1.2 − 38.0 7.4 18.9 3.3 15.6 − 10.7 − 0.8 7.8 9.9 12.9          May
41.1 − 3.9 − 37.2 63.9 47.6 10.1 37.5 19.0 − 2.8 − 11.6 − 5.2 − 9.8          June
− 13.1 25.2 − 13.6 − 4.3 − 25.6 9.0 − 34.6 24.4 − 3.1 5.3 12.0 0.6          July− 9.5 − 43.2 − 14.3 − 21.2 − 56.6 − 3.7 − 52.9 35.4 0.1 14.5 2.7 18.3          Aug 
18.0 5.2 − 92.5 96.8 64.7 4.2 60.5 36.0 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 4.9 1.8          Sep 
− 9.8 38.4 − 27.3 12.1 − 17.9 3.9 − 21.8 37.0 − 7.1 − 2.5 2.2 15.5          Oct 
0.8 69.2 − 81.7 68.8 47.9 4.4 43.5 29.0 − 8.2 − 0.4 13.2 0.1          Nov 
− 36.5 − 107.9 − 167.0 201.5 139.9 20.7 119.2 47.7 13.9 − 12.8 − 22.1 0.4          Dec 
11.2 66.4 − 5.5 − 59.8 − 83.3 − 17.0 − 66.4 23.1 0.4 14.2 28.9 22.3 2007          Jan 
19.0 3.2 − 36.2 7.3 − 6.5 3.1 − 9.6 25.1 − 11.3 6.6 11.5 10.8          Feb 
− 5.4 − 1.5 − 161.6 125.3 62.1 9.7 52.4 65.4 − 2.2 13.2 14.1 9.0          Mar 
− 10.2 25.2 − 71.2 52.0 18.5 6.3 12.2 41.0 − 7.5 − 0.1 18.0 1.4          Apr 
26.2 10.9 − 75.5 45.1 22.9 2.8 20.1 26.1 − 3.8 3.4 15.6 11.3          May
20.6 − 54.9 − 75.0 94.8 66.9 7.3 59.5 34.0 − 6.1 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 13.6          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 0.3 − 17.9 − 0.1 2.1 12.8 15.5 0.8 − 1.4 0.9 − 1.0 − 1.9 2005          Nov 
0.9 18.5 − 1.2 4.2 − 5.3 − 8.6 10.2 6.6 − 13.6 − 0.0 0.1          Dec 
2.0 30.8 0.7 − 2.9 7.9 2.7 0.3 − 1.3 7.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 2006          Jan 
− 6.2 − 15.9 2.0 0.5 − 1.8 − 2.8 0.7 − 0.4 2.2 0.6 − 2.1          Feb 
1.8 3.8 0.5 2.4 16.4 8.1 1.3 − 2.0 7.4 − 0.1 1.7          Mar 
− 0.2 34.1 0.4 2.0 18.1 9.3 12.7 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.7          Apr 
1.7 − 17.8 0.8 1.2 4.8 4.5 0.5 − 3.5 0.6 0.4 2.2          May
1.9 14.5 1.1 2.7 3.3 3.4 4.9 − 2.6 − 1.4 0.9 − 1.9          June
1.0 − 3.3 0.6 2.6 − 16.5 − 9.8 4.6 − 4.0 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 1.0          July
3.0 − 16.6 2.7 − 1.0 7.5 − 6.8 9.8 − 4.5 4.8 − 0.2 4.4          Aug 2.3 29.5 2.0 0.4 12.7 0.7 10.5 − 3.8 3.2 − 0.6 2.7          Sep 
− 2.8 6.1 0.6 1.3 − 8.8 − 6.8 8.6 − 4.8 − 6.0 0.0 0.1          Oct 
2.1 29.2 − 0.1 1.8 24.1 28.0 7.3 − 6.2 − 4.5 − 0.2 − 0.3          Nov 
− 2.9 − 11.7 − 2.0 5.4 11.8 4.3 15.7 3.1 − 10.5 − 0.2 − 0.6          Dec 
− 1.9 0.1 1.1 − 4.3 8.3 − 1.1 2.7 − 6.2 8.0 0.2 4.7 2007          Jan 
0.2 − 12.3 1.1 0.7 5.1 − 0.6 4.2 − 3.9 4.7 − 0.7 1.5          Feb 
− 0.3 15.9 1.0 2.5 15.0 3.8 8.1 − 3.3 0.1 1.2 5.0          Mar 
0.3 1.3 0.0 2.2 9.8 − 2.6 17.4 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.5          Apr 
5.2 − 29.5 2.9 − 0.0 10.2 8.3 6.4 − 4.2 − 1.5 0.3 0.9          May0.9 − 0.8 1.2 2.6 21.8 9.8 12.3 − 4.1 2.9 1.5 − 0.6          June
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2005          May 16,735.8 11,385.6 9,030.0 7,785.7 501.1 743.3 2,355.6 830.0 1,525.6 3,638.0 1,712.2
         June 17,013.5 11,519.7 9,146.7 7,924.1 508.0 714.5 2,373.0 830.4 1,542.7 3,695.3 1,798.5
         July 17,103.2 11,572.0 9,202.8 7,982.2 507.2 713.4 2,369.1 830.8 1,538.3 3,728.3 1,802.9
         Aug 17,069.9 11,566.3 9,205.2 7,984.8 506.0 714.4 2,361.1 827.2 1,533.9 3,717.9 1,785.7         Sep 17,308.3 11,669.2 9,310.1 8,073.4 507.0 729.7 2,359.1 832.9 1,526.2 3,830.8 1,808.3
         Oct 17,442.4 11,766.5 9,370.1 8,140.3 523.6 706.2 2,396.5 830.1 1,566.4 3,885.5 1,790.4
         Nov 17,887.3 11,956.0 9,480.0 8,223.5 544.6 711.8 2,476.0 824.4 1,651.6 4,056.4 1,875.0         Dec 17,870.7 11,992.3 9,549.8 8,285.7 553.6 710.5 2,442.5 847.5 1,595.0 3,989.7 1,888.7
2006          Jan 18,162.0 12,129.8 9,670.4 8,384.4 558.0 728.0 2,459.4 842.3 1,617.2 4,088.8 1,943.4
         Feb 18,295.2 12,227.2 9,784.4 8,467.1 569.6 747.7 2,442.8 832.8 1,610.0 4,137.4 1,930.5         Mar 18,450.2 12,355.4 9,910.3 8,550.1 575.8 784.4 2,445.2 836.7 1,608.5 4,174.1 1,920.8
         Apr 18,671.1 12,506.1 10,065.7 8,642.7 587.0 836.0 2,440.4 837.2 1,603.2 4,217.4 1,947.6
         May 18,748.8 12,533.3 10,127.7 8,706.5 595.3 825.9 2,405.5 826.7 1,578.9 4,247.6 1,967.9         June 18,712.1 12,574.4 10,172.0 8,783.0 602.4 786.6 2,402.4 829.3 1,573.1 4,192.7 1,945.1
         July 18,838.8 12,649.5 10,264.5 8,857.7 614.5 792.3 2,385.0 826.3 1,558.7 4,284.2 1,905.1
         Aug 18,860.3 12,647.3 10,287.3 8,874.1 613.9 799.3 2,360.0 820.7 1,539.4 4,280.2 1,932.9         Sep 19,232.3 12,768.7 10,413.4 8,983.9 620.2 809.3 2,355.2 824.0 1,531.3 4,418.2 2,045.3
         Oct 19,416.4 12,850.0 10,500.2 9,036.7 634.9 828.6 2,349.7 825.9 1,523.8 4,540.9 2,025.5
         Nov 19,715.5 12,945.4 10,592.9 9,118.2 638.2 836.5 2,352.5 824.1 1,528.4 4,620.9 2,149.2         Dec 19,743.5 12,933.3 10,639.1 9,161.0 648.3 829.9 2,294.2 830.2 1,464.0 4,681.5 2,128.7
2007          Jan 20,097.3 13,086.0 10,769.5 9,276.4 646.8 846.3 2,316.4 826.0 1,490.5 4,851.0 2,160.4
         Feb 20,284.1 13,153.6 10,834.7 9,337.6 660.6 836.5 2,318.9 822.9 1,496.0 4,941.4 2,189.1         Mar 20,649.3 13,295.9 10,987.2 9,441.6 687.9 857.6 2,308.7 821.0 1,487.7 5,044.2 2,309.1
         Apr 20,918.5 13,442.3 11,151.9 9,526.6 708.5 916.8 2,290.4 821.4 1,469.0 5,157.9 2,318.3
         May 21,217.6 13,585.8 11,264.7 9,600.8 736.0 928.0 2,321.0 815.9 1,505.1 5,255.2 2,376.7         June 21,395.9 13,673.1 11,359.4 9,717.9 760.6 881.0 2,313.7 815.8 1,497.9 5,224.4 2,498.4
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2005          May 4,682.9 3,426.6 2,656.1 2,286.6 76.1 293.4 770.5 457.3 313.2 1,078.6 177.8
         June 4,650.4 3,397.3 2,644.9 2,291.2 80.8 272.9 752.4 451.9 300.5 1,080.5 172.5
         July 4,665.0 3,400.1 2,646.8 2,288.6 80.4 277.9 753.2 455.8 297.4 1,091.8 173.1
         Aug 4,654.8 3,402.2 2,648.8 2,288.2 80.1 280.4 753.4 452.6 300.8 1,079.7 172.9         Sep 4,684.5 3,407.5 2,666.3 2,303.8 80.2 282.3 741.2 447.7 293.5 1,103.6 173.4
         Oct 4,699.9 3,417.0 2,676.6 2,311.6 82.1 282.9 740.4 449.3 291.1 1,106.4 176.5
         Nov 4,722.5 3,421.6 2,678.8 2,308.0 83.5 287.3 742.8 441.6 301.2 1,117.8 183.1         Dec 4,667.4 3,412.0 2,673.6 2,291.3 87.7 294.6 738.4 443.8 294.6 1,080.6 174.8
2006          Jan 4,754.2 3,463.2 2,717.0 2,321.5 88.4 307.1 746.2 445.9 300.3 1,120.2 170.8
         Feb 4,765.6 3,463.1 2,729.4 2,329.2 91.1 309.1 733.7 436.5 297.2 1,134.2 168.3         Mar 4,791.8 3,478.9 2,743.5 2,334.6 93.4 315.5 735.4 436.5 298.9 1,145.0 167.9
         Apr 4,843.7 3,522.5 2,787.6 2,348.9 94.5 344.2 734.8 437.6 297.2 1,146.9 174.3
         May 4,843.9 3,518.0 2,777.3 2,346.0 95.5 335.8 740.7 430.1 310.6 1,145.4 180.5
         June 4,844.8 3,486.3 2,760.6 2,347.5 103.3 309.8 725.7 426.5 299.2 1,183.7 174.8
         July 4,829.6 3,481.0 2,755.7 2,342.0 103.9 309.7 725.3 428.3 297.0 1,174.3 174.3
         Aug 4,821.6 3,477.1 2,759.4 2,344.8 103.6 310.9 717.7 424.2 293.5 1,172.0 172.5         Sep 4,884.7 3,497.1 2,788.4 2,367.7 108.4 312.3 708.7 420.2 288.5 1,209.8 177.8
         Oct 4,886.3 3,500.9 2,787.3 2,361.5 112.9 313.0 713.6 423.2 290.4 1,204.4 181.0
         Nov 4,933.0 3,510.9 2,790.3 2,357.2 117.9 315.2 720.6 423.7 296.9 1,234.4 187.7         Dec 4,922.2 3,466.6 2,764.1 2,327.2 120.7 316.2 702.4 420.8 281.6 1,258.1 197.5
2007          Jan 4,972.0 3,501.3 2,788.2 2,343.3 118.1 326.9 713.1 419.4 293.6 1,279.4 191.3
         Feb 4,987.2 3,491.8 2,786.6 2,349.6 120.5 316.5 705.2 415.0 290.2 1,300.8 194.5         Mar 5,010.4 3,500.9 2,800.3 2,357.3 123.5 319.5 700.6 408.3 292.4 1,316.2 193.3
         Apr 5,064.5 3,530.4 2,830.8 2,353.3 130.1 347.4 699.6 410.1 289.5 1,333.0 201.1
         May 5,076.7 3,516.3 2,814.6 2,352.1 131.6 330.9 701.7 407.3 294.5 1,346.5 213.9
         June 5,069.8 3,488.8 2,801.3 2,364.9 133.7 302.6 687.6 402.2 285.3 1,368.3 212.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
485.8 6,760.1 6,372.6 6,428.4 2,419.0 920.3 72.2 1,377.1 1,549.5 90.3 2005          May
496.6 6,917.7 6,492.1 6,543.2 2,643.8 904.5 78.2 1,436.0 1,390.2 90.5          June
506.4 6,942.6 6,510.2 6,577.6 2,654.9 922.2 77.7 1,438.9 1,394.4 89.5          July
500.9 6,866.4 6,473.6 6,543.2 2,605.8 933.7 78.0 1,440.7 1,396.6 88.4          Aug 507.1 6,956.1 6,545.1 6,614.2 2,653.1 950.0 83.3 1,443.5 1,397.4 86.9          Sep 
510.5 6,994.2 6,582.5 6,649.0 2,667.4 962.3 83.5 1,453.2 1,396.3 86.2          Oct 
514.5 7,025.7 6,602.2 6,669.7 2,683.8 955.2 86.9 1,463.5 1,393.8 86.4          Nov 532.8 7,178.0 6,776.7 6,833.5 2,761.4 985.8 90.2 1,498.4 1,410.4 87.3          Dec 
520.8 7,190.8 6,760.8 6,827.5 2,745.9 974.5 91.0 1,504.2 1,424.0 87.9 2006          Jan 
524.8 7,224.4 6,773.0 6,850.7 2,734.7 990.4 94.7 1,517.3 1,425.4 88.2          Feb 
532.2 7,291.9 6,848.9 6,928.7 2,761.3 1,009.8 97.9 1,544.3 1,426.3 89.0          Mar 
540.3 7,378.4 6,941.9 7,018.3 2,802.8 1,044.5 99.7 1,558.1 1,423.9 89.4          Apr 
543.6 7,381.3 6,957.9 7,027.1 2,819.0 1,025.0 102.1 1,567.8 1,422.5 90.7          May553.7 7,494.2 7,031.0 7,094.4 2,860.6 1,038.9 104.5 1,579.1 1,419.3 91.9          June
562.7 7,478.0 7,025.7 7,091.9 2,827.7 1,059.6 107.6 1,588.3 1,415.6 93.1          July
559.0 7,454.2 7,008.1 7,080.5 2,780.8 1,090.6 109.5 1,590.7 1,414.2 94.6          Aug 563.2 7,568.4 7,090.5 7,173.0 2,837.7 1,122.2 113.4 1,593.4 1,410.4 95.9          Sep 
567.1 7,582.0 7,115.3 7,192.2 2,809.6 1,152.3 119.4 1,609.2 1,403.7 98.0          Oct 
571.5 7,646.2 7,176.6 7,241.4 2,838.1 1,165.4 124.6 1,617.3 1,395.3 100.7          Nov 592.2 7,816.5 7,375.3 7,445.8 2,961.1 1,209.5 123.7 1,640.9 1,407.8 102.7          Dec 
575.6 7,815.2 7,354.2 7,435.6 2,909.5 1,235.7 129.6 1,647.5 1,408.0 105.4 2007          Jan 
578.7 7,839.6 7,363.6 7,440.8 2,900.3 1,250.8 136.5 1,649.5 1,396.5 107.3          Feb 
588.4 7,966.4 7,483.0 7,576.0 2,956.5 1,304.2 146.2 1,666.9 1,394.0 108.2          Mar 
594.7 8,009.7 7,535.2 7,624.6 2,962.0 1,339.0 148.9 1,679.4 1,386.7 108.5          Apr 
597.6 8,100.2 7,588.9 7,677.7 2,979.7 1,357.1 152.4 1,696.7 1,383.5 108.3          May604.9 8,226.4 7,696.7 7,781.1 3,037.6 1,383.5 156.6 1,716.9 1,377.6 109.0          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
130.7 2,285.8 2,217.2 2,182.7 677.7 193.6 15.7 691.4 516.7 87.7 2005          May
134.1 2,288.9 2,220.6 2,182.8 686.7 186.4 16.1 691.0 515.4 87.1          June
136.3 2,289.1 2,221.5 2,185.0 688.3 189.1 16.0 690.0 515.3 86.4          July
135.2 2,290.5 2,224.1 2,185.3 689.5 189.8 15.7 690.5 514.4 85.4          Aug 136.2 2,296.5 2,229.3 2,191.8 697.8 189.7 15.9 690.1 514.4 83.9          Sep 
137.2 2,298.5 2,231.2 2,195.7 699.1 194.3 16.3 689.4 513.4 83.2          Oct 
139.3 2,315.7 2,249.4 2,211.4 714.1 193.8 16.6 691.3 512.2 83.5          Nov 143.5 2,329.5 2,260.2 2,222.9 706.0 201.4 17.0 695.1 519.2 84.2          Dec 
140.6 2,334.4 2,263.0 2,225.0 709.0 199.9 17.3 695.9 518.0 84.9 2006          Jan 
141.1 2,331.8 2,266.9 2,225.6 704.7 199.3 17.6 701.3 517.5 85.2          Feb 
143.5 2,341.2 2,273.7 2,232.7 714.4 197.9 17.8 701.1 515.5 86.0          Mar 
145.5 2,365.1 2,296.3 2,255.8 723.6 209.2 18.1 705.1 513.7 86.2          Apr 
146.8 2,370.8 2,302.7 2,252.2 725.2 204.7 18.5 706.4 510.2 87.3          May
149.5 2,381.2 2,310.1 2,255.7 727.5 205.4 18.9 707.8 507.5 88.6          June
152.1 2,376.3 2,306.2 2,251.2 718.5 209.9 19.4 710.2 503.6 89.7          July
151.1 2,382.7 2,308.9 2,254.5 712.8 218.4 19.9 713.1 499.1 91.2          Aug 151.5 2,392.8 2,315.6 2,261.1 714.0 227.0 20.5 711.9 495.3 92.4          Sep 
152.9 2,389.1 2,314.9 2,264.0 709.2 236.2 21.8 711.7 490.5 94.5          Oct 
154.7 2,423.5 2,346.4 2,286.5 733.7 235.9 22.6 712.8 484.4 97.1          Nov 160.1 2,449.6 2,375.2 2,311.5 735.3 249.6 23.1 716.6 487.7 99.1          Dec 
155.7 2,445.2 2,372.5 2,313.6 737.8 252.4 24.2 716.6 481.6 100.9 2007          Jan 
156.4 2,447.5 2,373.6 2,314.3 735.9 255.1 25.4 717.3 477.6 102.9          Feb 
158.9 2,456.2 2,381.8 2,323.9 740.7 261.0 26.6 716.7 474.4 104.4          Mar 
161.1 2,470.3 2,398.3 2,336.5 737.5 276.8 27.7 719.5 470.3 104.6          Apr 
161.1 2,485.8 2,408.2 2,340.0 744.1 277.2 28.7 719.4 466.2 104.4          May
163.7 2,507.3 2,427.9 2,359.1 755.6 284.5 30.2 721.6 462.2 105.0          June
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2005          May 173.5 158.2 90.6 41.3 1.5 20.4 4.0 0.5 239.2 235.2 634.8 2,203.7 1,721.3
         June 211.5 163.0 93.8 42.9 1.5 20.4 3.9 0.4 238.9 234.5 621.3 2,243.3 1,742.9
         July 210.8 154.3 87.2 40.8 1.6 20.3 3.9 0.5 238.6 235.3 635.1 2,249.8 1,742.0
         Aug 166.8 156.4 89.4 40.8 1.5 20.0 4.2 0.4 249.2 245.4 639.7 2,263.5 1,745.9         Sep 182.4 159.4 90.8 42.5 1.5 19.9 4.2 0.4 234.4 230.8 631.5 2,284.1 1,755.1
         Oct 179.4 165.8 100.0 40.0 1.3 19.9 4.2 0.4 241.4 237.7 628.9 2,316.0 1,776.2
         Nov 185.1 170.9 104.4 40.5 1.3 20.2 4.0 0.4 239.3 235.9 629.6 2,334.1 1,774.6         Dec 173.6 171.0 100.5 44.4 1.1 20.9 3.7 0.4 221.9 219.1 615.8 2,322.6 1,760.6
2006          Jan 191.6 171.7 101.4 44.3 1.1 20.9 3.6 0.4 237.0 233.7 608.4 2,337.1 1,772.6
         Feb 199.6 174.1 103.1 45.1 1.1 20.8 3.6 0.4 235.0 231.4 610.2 2,380.6 1,799.4         Mar 193.1 170.1 94.8 49.3 1.2 20.9 3.6 0.4 235.9 231.6 603.1 2,402.7 1,827.1
         Apr 182.6 177.5 99.6 51.8 1.2 21.0 3.4 0.4 249.7 246.0 613.1 2,411.4 1,836.6
         May 167.2 187.0 104.2 56.1 1.3 21.4 3.5 0.4 258.2 253.7 621.6 2,437.0 1,852.7         June 207.4 192.4 106.7 59.0 1.3 21.5 3.4 0.4 245.1 241.4 616.5 2,455.3 1,864.0
         July 194.3 191.8 106.2 59.3 1.2 21.4 3.2 0.4 250.5 246.7 627.4 2,469.7 1,872.3
         Aug 184.8 188.8 101.6 60.9 1.3 21.4 3.2 0.4 264.9 260.7 639.7 2,489.8 1,887.7         Sep 202.9 192.6 104.0 61.8 1.6 21.6 3.2 0.4 263.8 259.7 645.6 2,509.2 1,896.2
         Oct 193.1 196.7 108.8 61.2 1.7 21.6 3.0 0.4 261.3 255.8 644.7 2,554.3 1,930.0
         Nov 193.9 210.9 116.3 67.1 1.7 22.6 2.9 0.4 260.8 256.8 636.9 2,569.7 1,949.2         Dec 157.9 212.8 114.5 70.4 2.1 22.6 2.7 0.4 248.0 244.8 614.1 2,587.9 1,958.5
2007          Jan 170.4 209.2 112.1 68.8 2.4 22.8 2.6 0.4 262.3 258.7 641.5 2,625.3 1,984.6
         Feb 189.5 209.4 111.5 69.6 2.4 22.8 2.6 0.4 268.8 264.1 652.5 2,668.3 2,024.8         Mar 183.8 206.6 107.5 71.2 2.5 22.4 2.5 0.4 282.0 277.3 666.3 2,701.8 2,053.6
         Apr 173.6 211.5 111.6 72.2 2.5 22.3 2.5 0.4 281.8 276.6 682.3 2,711.1 2,058.8
         May 199.8 222.6 117.1 77.8 2.6 22.5 2.3 0.4 285.2 280.4 702.5 2,749.0 2,081.7         June 220.4 224.8 116.3 80.1 3.5 22.3 2.2 0.5 282.9 278.6 699.8 2,766.9 2,083.3
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2005          May 40.5 62.5 18.4 22.8 0.7 18.1 2.1 0.5 28.3 28.3 32.1 880.9 676.1         June 41.3 64.9 19.6 23.9 0.7 18.1 2.2 0.4 28.3 28.3 32.4 890.3 681.5
         July 41.7 62.4 18.5 22.4 0.6 18.1 2.3 0.5 26.7 26.7 33.8 892.6 682.4
         Aug 41.6 63.6 19.1 23.1 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 30.6 30.6 34.0 893.4 678.4         Sep 42.1 62.6 18.0 23.2 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 28.0 28.0 33.5 894.6 678.1
         Oct 40.9 61.9 19.6 20.9 0.6 17.7 2.6 0.4 32.3 32.3 31.1 896.4 679.9
         Nov 40.7 63.6 20.3 21.9 0.6 18.0 2.3 0.4 33.2 33.2 30.1 894.0 668.9         Dec 41.6 65.1 19.8 24.1 0.6 18.2 2.0 0.4 19.5 19.5 30.1 883.3 660.2
2006          Jan 43.6 65.8 19.2 25.4 0.7 18.3 1.9 0.4 27.4 27.4 29.4 889.1 664.7
         Feb 37.5 68.7 20.9 26.5 0.7 18.3 1.9 0.4 29.6 29.6 30.0 896.4 665.8         Mar 39.3 69.2 19.1 28.9 0.7 18.4 1.8 0.4 37.0 37.0 29.9 890.1 663.4
         Apr 39.1 70.2 18.9 29.8 0.8 18.5 1.8 0.4 35.6 35.6 29.8 882.1 656.5
         May 40.8 77.8 21.7 34.2 0.8 18.8 1.9 0.4 37.0 37.0 30.3 886.4 657.8         June 42.7 82.9 22.8 38.0 0.9 18.9 1.9 0.4 35.7 35.7 31.2 893.5 663.3
         July 43.7 81.4 22.0 37.7 0.8 18.7 1.8 0.4 30.1 30.1 30.5 895.0 662.6
         Aug 46.7 81.4 21.2 38.3 0.9 18.8 1.9 0.4 34.9 34.9 30.3 893.6 661.1         Sep 49.1 82.6 20.9 39.3 1.1 18.9 1.9 0.4 38.1 38.1 29.7 896.8 663.1
         Oct 46.3 78.8 19.0 37.4 1.2 19.1 1.8 0.4 32.1 32.1 29.7 896.1 657.2
         Nov 48.4 88.6 22.1 44.0 1.2 19.2 1.7 0.4 27.5 27.5 29.5 889.7 654.0         Dec 45.5 92.6 24.8 45.1 1.5 19.1 1.6 0.4 17.1 17.1 29.3 888.7 646.5
2007          Jan 43.7 88.0 21.3 43.7 1.8 19.1 1.6 0.4 25.0 25.0 29.5 903.2 655.3
         Feb 43.8 89.4 22.4 43.9 1.9 19.2 1.6 0.4 29.7 29.7 28.3 901.1 655.8         Mar 43.4 88.9 21.3 44.8 1.9 18.9 1.6 0.4 29.8 29.8 29.5 899.9 659.5
         Apr 43.6 90.1 22.1 45.3 1.8 18.9 1.5 0.4 29.4 29.4 28.5 898.9 663.0
         May 48.9 97.0 23.9 50.3 1.9 19.0 1.4 0.4 28.0 28.0 28.8 907.9 667.6         June 49.7 98.5 22.1 52.9 2.8 18.9 1.3 0.5 32.4 32.4 30.3 902.7 658.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
84.4 29.9 2,089.4 3,310.2 1,081.1 − 12.1 2,032.9 − 3,064.1 5,778.3 6,765.8 4,658.8 194.1 2005          May
87.2 32.5 2,123.6 3,251.9 1,133.2 − 14.7 2,125.4 − 3,304.4 5,851.9 6,830.7 4,804.1 196.6          June
87.5 32.3 2,130.0 3,288.1 1,136.2 − 15.6 2,121.9 − 3,321.8 5,890.0 6,882.9 4,815.3 200.9          July
87.2 34.8 2,141.5 3,279.6 1,143.0 1.9 2,125.6 − 3,268.6 5,852.9 6,862.8 4,834.0 201.9          Aug 87.5 34.8 2,161.8 3,381.1 1,166.2 − 17.8 2,165.6 − 3,322.5 5,933.0 6,918.7 4,878.8 203.0          Sep 
92.7 30.1 2,193.2 3,446.6 1,163.5 − 11.2 2,152.3 − 3,349.3 5,970.3 6,962.0 4,916.5 204.7          Oct 
99.2 32.0 2,202.9 3,639.0 1,178.6 − 5.0 2,331.6 − 3,378.5 5,995.7 6,994.7 4,952.1 211.3          Nov 94.7 32.1 2,195.9 3,545.6 1,200.6 13.7 2,239.7 − 3,479.6 6,152.9 7,116.8 5,003.5 222.6          Dec 
109.5 33.9 2,193.7 3,646.9 1,225.6 − 4.1 2,399.5 − 3,443.1 6,122.5 7,111.3 5,032.7 215.9 2006          Jan 
120.7 32.0 2,227.9 3,726.5 1,246.8 − 4.3 2,351.1 − 3,442.0 6,146.1 7,143.9 5,101.3 223.1          Feb 129.8 33.3 2,239.6 3,764.0 1,255.2 22.7 2,342.5 − 3,468.2 6,201.2 7,203.3 5,149.4 224.8          Mar 
130.2 33.6 2,247.5 3,818.6 1,250.7 9.1 2,399.8 − 3,532.3 6,303.1 7,329.7 5,167.1 235.9          Apr 
137.8 35.9 2,263.3 3,843.3 1,239.2 4.9 2,419.7 − 3,550.1 6,307.7 7,361.2 5,182.9 230.4          May125.4 36.3 2,293.6 3,732.0 1,243.5 14.1 2,357.7 − 3,598.1 6,372.5 7,395.9 5,230.0 225.0          June
120.8 39.5 2,309.4 3,810.3 1,274.0 15.4 2,350.8 − 3,572.5 6,368.0 7,406.2 5,286.6 224.8          July
138.0 41.0 2,310.7 3,825.8 1,272.8 10.6 2,343.5 − 3,515.9 6,346.3 7,430.0 5,290.6 225.1          Aug 138.1 40.6 2,330.5 3,934.3 1,275.6 4.0 2,468.2 − 3,581.4 6,445.1 7,533.2 5,317.3 227.6          Sep 
152.3 42.0 2,360.0 4,027.8 1,283.8 − 1.5 2,497.0 − 3,563.5 6,457.1 7,557.3 5,373.0 230.3          Oct 
160.6 38.9 2,370.2 4,046.0 1,279.9 38.1 2,666.3 − 3,609.7 6,520.5 7,617.6 5,391.2 237.7          Nov 151.2 47.7 2,389.0 4,026.5 1,276.5 15.7 2,566.1 − 3,756.5 6,728.4 7,789.3 5,432.2 244.4          Dec 
166.3 54.7 2,404.4 4,218.6 1,283.7 18.3 2,656.8 − 3,681.8 6,686.5 7,811.1 5,464.1 242.2 2007          Jan 
173.5 58.4 2,436.4 4,270.2 1,296.0 35.8 2,674.1 − 3,674.0 6,690.6 7,843.8 5,512.3 241.7          Feb 
180.0 60.1 2,461.7 4,295.1 1,341.8 32.5 2,775.0 − 3,735.3 6,814.2 8,002.7 5,601.5 241.2          Mar 
174.8 67.9 2,468.4 4,450.6 1,345.1 5.3 2,837.9 − 3,752.7 6,862.5 8,069.2 5,624.2 242.4          Apr 
180.7 74.3 2,494.0 4,562.3 1,316.4 26.2 2,878.4 − 3,776.3 6,909.3 8,152.0 5,638.3 239.3          May167.3 74.5 2,525.2 4,500.2 1,347.2 16.7 2,950.9 − 3,844.3 7,004.4 8,228.7 5,721.0 242.1          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
25.1 24.4 831.5 745.4 282.5 − 89.5 517.3 71.3 696.1 1,447.7 1,557.5 1,911.5 − 2005          May
27.0 25.0 838.4 693.3 290.0 − 95.1 522.3 72.0 706.3 1,451.0 1,563.7 1,925.0 −          June
25.2 24.8 842.6 702.5 291.6 − 98.3 526.9 72.6 706.8 1,452.5 1,563.0 1,929.1 −          July
27.0 25.7 840.7 694.3 292.3 − 111.5 531.3 74.1 708.5 1,454.8 1,572.1 1,927.1 −          Aug 28.8 25.7 840.1 713.1 294.7 − 120.9 545.1 76.4 715.8 1,462.3 1,578.3 1,926.9 −          Sep 
28.8 26.5 841.0 720.5 298.7 − 131.6 554.0 76.5 718.8 1,466.8 1,585.5 1,930.5 −          Oct 
26.8 27.0 840.2 733.8 304.7 − 154.4 565.6 76.4 734.4 1,481.9 1,598.9 1,938.0 −          Nov 26.2 27.7 829.4 678.1 306.9 − 134.4 554.4 75.1 725.8 1,490.1 1,593.6 1,934.2 −          Dec 
24.5 28.8 835.8 701.4 327.5 − 107.9 552.8 75.8 728.2 1,491.3 1,601.5 1,962.8 − 2006          Jan 
23.5 27.7 845.2 720.2 332.3 − 126.0 551.4 77.8 725.6 1,489.2 1,600.0 1,982.6 −          Feb 
23.8 29.2 837.2 729.6 336.7 − 134.5 561.8 78.2 733.4 1,496.1 1,616.0 1,979.6 −          Mar 
22.8 29.5 829.7 723.3 340.8 − 104.1 571.1 78.7 742.5 1,515.9 1,633.7 1,980.6 −          Apr 
23.0 31.5 831.9 729.4 336.0 − 122.8 576.7 79.5 746.9 1,517.1 1,639.0 1,980.8 −          May20.8 33.4 839.4 712.3 336.5 − 114.0 568.3 80.6 750.3 1,522.8 1,643.8 1,991.6 −          June
18.9 34.3 841.9 698.3 348.5 − 118.1 569.0 81.2 740.4 1,513.6 1,627.3 2,009.4 −          July
20.8 36.8 836.0 703.2 344.1 − 137.3 570.2 83.9 734.1 1,512.5 1,635.3 2,003.5 −          Aug 20.5 38.8 837.5 723.6 336.2 − 121.3 588.9 85.9 735.0 1,520.1 1,647.1 1,997.3 −          Sep 
19.5 40.0 836.7 723.2 340.0 − 118.7 594.8 86.5 728.2 1,517.1 1,638.3 2,002.4 −          Oct 
21.3 37.9 830.6 714.5 337.0 − 95.7 607.0 86.3 755.7 1,545.7 1,661.8 1,997.0 −          Nov 20.3 38.2 830.2 697.1 336.0 − 106.4 610.9 84.3 760.0 1,568.7 1,673.6 2,001.5 −          Dec 
20.6 42.7 839.9 729.6 348.1 − 119.2 610.7 85.5 759.1 1,564.5 1,682.2 2,025.1 − 2007          Jan 
20.2 44.5 836.4 745.5 353.5 − 134.7 616.3 86.5 758.3 1,563.8 1,686.6 2,029.7 −          Feb 
22.2 47.4 830.2 748.7 350.3 − 131.7 627.7 87.5 762.0 1,572.3 1,701.4 2,021.0 −          Mar 
19.6 49.6 829.7 780.5 352.6 − 131.8 636.2 87.5 759.7 1,583.2 1,710.3 2,025.7 −          Apr 
17.2 52.9 837.7 796.4 342.6 − 149.7 636.9 90.4 768.0 1,593.7 1,720.6 2,023.6 −          May14.7 54.7 833.4 761.0 352.2 − 162.8 646.7 91.6 777.7 1,611.6 1,743.7 2,031.5 −          June
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2005          Apr 282.1 278.2 86.9 0.2 − 0.1 − 498.6 67.4 − 62.1 143.3 642.0
         May 287.0 276.5 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 505.5 62.9 − 58.9 144.0 649.7         June 286.8 273.1 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 512.8 53.5 − 62.0 145.5 658.5
         July 293.3 297.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.3 522.6 67.4 − 57.3 147.9 670.6
         Aug 305.5 309.5 90.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.0 532.6 67.4 − 45.0 149.8 682.7         Sep 304.8 303.5 90.0 − 0.3 0.1 − 531.5 63.1 − 46.2 150.2 681.8
         Oct 307.9 288.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 531.6 47.9 − 44.6 151.4 683.1
         Nov 315.1 293.4 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 535.6 50.4 − 37.9 150.2 686.0         Dec 313.2 301.3 90.0 0.0 − 0.1 0.3 539.8 51.0 − 39.6 153.0 692.9
2006          Jan 317.6 316.4 89.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 559.2 44.2 − 33.5 154.1 713.3
         Feb 325.2 310.0 96.2 0.0 0.3 0.1 − 548.4 56.6 − 28.7 155.4 703.9         Mar 324.7 299.3 104.7 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 550.8 53.3 − 34.0 158.3 709.2
         Apr 327.9 290.1 113.7 0.1 0.7 0.3 − 556.4 51.6 − 35.2 159.5 716.2
         May 337.0 291.3 120.0 0.2 − 0.2 0.4 569.1 51.1 − 33.5 161.2 730.5
         June 336.9 287.0 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 572.0 45.5 − 37.0 163.3 735.4
         July 334.3 316.5 120.0 0.2 − 0.6 0.3 578.8 67.0 − 42.1 166.3 745.7
         Aug 327.6 329.7 120.0 0.2 − 0.1 0.6 588.2 73.0 − 51.5 167.1 755.4         Sep 327.3 314.0 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 588.7 61.4 − 55.6 166.4 755.2
         Oct 326.7 308.7 120.0 0.1 0.3 0.2 − 588.5 59.1 − 59.1 167.0 755.7
         Nov 327.4 311.9 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 592.8 60.2 − 60.6 167.0 759.8         Dec 327.0 313.1 120.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 598.6 54.9 − 66.4 173.2 771.8
2007          Jan 325.8 322.3 120.0 0.1 − 0.2 1.0 619.5 45.0 − 72.7 175.3 794.9
         Feb 322.1 300.5 124.6 0.1 0.1 0.1 1.5 604.6 47.9 − 83.1 176.5 781.2         Mar 321.6 288.7 134.6 0.0 − 0.5 0.8 606.2 47.1 − 90.0 180.6 787.2
         Apr 323.6 281.7 145.7 0.5 − 0.3 0.9 614.8 48.2 − 95.2 182.6 797.7
         May 326.1 281.6 150.0 0.3 − 0.5 0.1 620.0 51.3 − 97.2 183.2 803.8         June 326.4 284.9 150.0 0.3 − 0.2 0.2 625.2 49.1 − 99.4 186.2 811.7
         July 323.0 295.4 150.0 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 631.3 53.9 − 106.4 189.6 821.2
         Aug 316.7 301.7 150.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 639.7 52.3 − 115.8 192.0 832.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2005          Apr 68.1 133.3 53.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 136.6 0.0 79.8 38.0 174.7
         May 69.3 140.3 52.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 138.4 0.1 85.9 38.1 176.5         June 69.5 139.3 52.5 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 141.2 0.1 81.5 38.5 179.7
         July 71.1 149.5 53.0 0.1 − 0.0 0.1 142.6 0.1 92.0 38.9 181.6
         Aug 74.1 155.6 53.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 145.2 0.0 98.9 39.4 184.7         Sep 74.0 148.4 52.6 0.0 0.2 0.0 − 145.2 0.0 90.9 39.0 184.3
         Oct 75.1 149.4 55.1 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 145.1 0.1 95.2 39.0 184.2
         Nov 77.2 145.0 54.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 145.4 0.0 92.6 38.8 184.2
         Dec 77.2 140.9 54.4 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 146.9 0.0 86.0 39.3 186.3
2006          Jan 79.1 154.1 55.7 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 151.9 0.0 97.9 39.2 191.2
         Feb 81.6 158.1 61.6 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 149.7 0.1 112.1 39.6 189.3         Mar 81.0 145.8 68.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 150.7 0.1 104.7 39.6 190.4
         Apr 82.5 137.8 74.3 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 151.5 0.0 103.6 39.7 191.3
         May 85.2 152.2 76.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 154.8 0.0 118.5 40.2 195.0         June 84.9 153.9 73.7 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 156.2 0.1 115.5 40.6 197.0
         July 84.0 162.4 71.6 0.1 − 0.4 0.1 157.9 0.1 118.6 41.0 199.3
         Aug 82.3 171.6 72.1 0.1 − 0.0 0.5 160.1 0.1 124.3 41.2 201.3         Sep 82.3 156.8 73.4 0.1 − 0.0 0.2 160.9 0.0 110.2 41.2 202.2
         Oct 82.6 155.6 76.7 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 160.5 0.1 113.7 40.9 201.5
         Nov 82.8 162.6 78.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 161.1 0.1 122.4 40.8 202.0         Dec 82.7 155.3 78.4 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 162.4 0.1 112.6 41.4 203.8
2007          Jan 82.5 165.0 81.0 0.0 − 0.0 − 167.8 0.1 119.4 41.4 209.2
         Feb 82.2 153.7 86.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 164.8 0.1 115.7 41.9 206.7         Mar 82.0 135.0 95.7 0.0 − 0.2 − 165.3 0.1 104.5 42.8 208.2
         Apr 82.7 128.2 103.9 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 167.1 0.1 104.2 43.2 210.4
         May 83.4 130.6 107.1 0.2 − 0.1 0.0 168.3 0.1 109.2 43.5 212.0         June 83.6 124.0 108.7 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 170.6 0.1 101.4 44.1 214.8
         July 82.7 125.1 108.8 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 171.8 0.1 99.7 45.0 216.8
         Aug 81.1 135.4 104.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 173.9 0.1 102.6 44.9 218.8
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem forof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 1.9 + 0.4 + 4.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 − 1.1 − 2.9 + 2.0 + 11.1 2005          Apr 
+ 4.9 − 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 6.9 − 4.5 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 7.7          May
− 0.2 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.3 − 9.4 − 3.1 + 1.5 + 8.8          June
+ 6.5 + 24.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 9.8 + 13.9 + 4.7 + 2.4 + 12.1          July
+ 12.2 + 11.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 12.3 + 1.9 + 12.1          Aug − 0.7 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.9          Sep 
+ 3.1 − 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 15.2 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 1.3          Oct 
+ 7.2 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.0 + 2.5 + 6.7 − 1.2 + 2.9          Nov − 1.9 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.8 + 6.9          Dec 
+ 4.4 + 15.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 19.4 − 6.8 + 6.1 + 1.1 + 20.4 2006          Jan 
+ 7.6 − 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 10.8 + 12.4 + 4.8 + 1.3 − 9.4          Feb 
− 0.5 − 10.7 + 8.5 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.9 + 5.3          Mar 
+ 3.2 − 9.2 + 9.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 1.2 + 7.0          Apr 
+ 9.1 + 1.2 + 6.3 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 12.7 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 14.3          May− 0.1 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 2.9 − 5.6 − 3.5 + 2.1 + 4.9          June
− 2.6 + 29.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 21.5 − 5.1 + 3.0 + 10.3          July
− 6.7 + 13.2
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.5 + 0.3 + 9.4 + 6.0 − 9.4 + 0.8 + 9.7          Aug 
− 0.3 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 11.6 − 4.1 − 0.7 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.6 − 5.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.5          Oct 
+ 0.7 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − + 4.3 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 4.1          Nov 
− 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 5.8 − 5.3 − 5.8 + 6.2 + 12.0          Dec − 1.2 + 9.2
+ 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 20.9 − 9.9 − 6.3 + 2.1 + 23.1 2007          Jan 
− 3.7 − 21.8 + 4.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 14.9 + 2.9 − 10.4 + 1.2 − 13.7          Feb 
− 0.5 − 11.8 + 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.6 − 0.8 − 6.9 + 4.1 + 6.0          Mar 
+ 2.0 − 7.0 + 11.1 + 0.5 − − 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 5.2 + 2.0 + 10.5          Apr 
+ 2.5 − 0.1 + 4.3 − 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.2 + 3.1 − 2.0 + 0.6 + 6.1          May+ 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 5.2 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 3.0 + 7.9          June
− 3.4 + 10.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 6.1 + 4.8 − 7.0 + 3.4 + 9.5          July
− 6.3 + 6.3
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − + 8.4 − 1.6 − 9.4 + 2.4 + 10.9          Aug 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.4 − 12.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 13.7 + 0.5 + 3.2 2005          Apr 
+ 1.3 + 7.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.7 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 0.1 + 1.8          May
+ 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 0.4 + 3.3          June
+ 1.7 + 10.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.4 + 1.8          July
+ 3.0 + 6.1 + 0.9 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.5 + 3.1          Aug − 0.2 − 7.2 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 0.4 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 2.1 − 4.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 + 0.1          Nov 
− 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 6.6 + 0.5 + 2.1          Dec 
+ 1.9 + 13.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 − 0.1 + 4.9 2006          Jan 
+ 2.5 + 4.0 + 5.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 2.3 + 0.0 + 14.2 + 0.3 − 1.9          Feb 
− 0.6 − 12.3 + 6.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 1.1          Mar 
+ 1.5 − 8.0 + 6.0
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9          Apr 
+ 2.7 + 14.4 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 14.9 + 0.5 + 3.7          May
− 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.6 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 0.9 + 8.4 − 2.1 − 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.4          July
− 1.7 + 9.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 2.0          Aug + 0.0 − 14.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 14.1 + 0.1 + 0.8          Sep 
+ 0.3 − 1.2 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.4 − 0.7          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 7.0 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 8.7 − 0.1 + 0.5          Nov 
− 0.1 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.3 − 0.0 − 9.7 + 0.5 + 1.9          Dec 
− 0.2 + 9.8 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − + 5.3 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.0 + 5.3 2007          Jan 
− 0.4 − 11.4 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 2.9 − 0.0 − 3.7 + 0.5 − 2.4          Feb 
− 0.1 − 18.7 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.0 − 11.2 + 0.9 + 1.5          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 6.8 + 8.2 + 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.2          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.6          May+ 0.1 − 6.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 7.8 + 0.6 + 2.8          June
− 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1
+ 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 2.0          July
− 1.6 + 10.3 − 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 2.0          Aug 
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingeuro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2006 Dec                  1 1,126.1 174.5 147.2 10.9 136.3 23.9 10.8 10.8 −
                                8 1,146.3 174.5 144.8 10.9 134.0 24.2 11.3 11.3 −
                              15 1,138.3 174.1 143.6 11.2 132.4 25.2 11.2 11.2 −
                              22 1,142.3 174.0 147.0 11.0 136.0 22.9 11.6 11.6 −
                              29 3 1,151.0 3 176.8 3 142.3 10.7 3 131.6 3 23.4 12.0 12.0 −
2007 Jan                  5 1,154.4 178.8 144.0 10.7 133.3 22.4 12.4 12.4 −
                              12 1,138.3 176.8 143.8 10.7 133.1 23.6 12.7 12.7 −
                              19 1,141.2 176.8 142.4 10.6 131.8 22.8 14.1 14.1 −
                              26 1,148.1 176.7 142.3 10.6 131.8 22.1 13.8 13.8 −
         Feb                  2 1,136.7 176.7 143.8 10.6 133.2 23.1 14.4 14.4 −
                                9 1,127.2 176.6 144.2 10.0 134.1 22.9 13.4 13.4 −
                              16 1,135.1 176.5 144.4 10.0 134.4 22.0 15.6 15.6 −
                              23 1,150.4 176.5 143.3 10.0 133.3 21.4 14.1 14.1 −
         Mar                  2 1,148.2 176.5 142.5 10.0 132.5 22.2 15.6 15.6 −
                                9 1,139.8 176.4 141.6 10.0 131.6 22.1 15.5 15.5 −
                              16 1,130.0 176.2 140.2 9.9 130.4 22.7 15.5 15.5 −
                              23 1,142.7 176.0 141.7 9.9 131.9 22.9 15.9 15.9 −
                              30 3 1,162.6 3 181.4 3 140.7 9.8 3 130.9 23.2 15.7 15.7 −
2007 Apr                  5 1,171.4 181.2 139.2 9.8 129.5 23.7 14.3 14.3 −
                              13 1,161.6 181.2 140.6 9.8 130.8 23.6 14.6 14.6 −
                              20 1,164.2 180.9 140.3 9.8 130.6 24.9 15.4 15.4 −
                              27 1,176.3 180.7 142.1 9.6 132.4 25.0 14.5 14.5 −
         May                 4 1,165.4 180.5 141.4 9.6 131.8 25.3 15.1 15.1 −
                              11 1,164.2 180.5 142.4 9.6 132.9 25.0 15.0 15.0 −
                              18 1,169.0 180.2 142.3 9.7 132.6 24.6 15.1 15.1 −
                              25 1,187.1 180.0 142.5 10.0 132.6 25.0 14.9 14.9 −
         June                 1 1,178.4 180.0 143.3 10.1 133.2 25.4 15.4 15.4 −
                                8 1,176.3 179.9 143.9 10.1 133.8 25.6 15.3 15.3 −
                              15 1,180.3 179.9 144.2 10.1 134.2 24.6 16.1 16.1 −
                              22 1,186.7 179.9 143.4 10.0 133.4 26.0 15.8 15.8 −
                              29 3 1,208.5 3 172.8 3 141.6 9.9 3 131.8 24.4 16.7 16.7 −
         July                 6 1,191.8 172.7 144.4 9.8 134.5 22.8 16.5 16.5 −
                              13 1,185.4 172.6 143.2 9.8 133.4 23.9 15.9 15.9 −
                              20 1,196.4 172.3 143.6 9.8 133.8 23.5 16.3 16.3 −
                              27 1,212.6 172.1 143.2 9.7 133.5 24.3 16.2 16.2 −
         Aug                  3 1,195.1 172.1 146.1 9.7 136.5 22.5 16.5 16.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2005          Sep 3 325.0 3 43.3 39.5 5.0 34.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 324.6 43.3 39.3 5.0 34.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 329.2 43.3 38.2 5.0 33.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 344.1 3 47.9 3 38.3 4.5 3 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
2006          Jan 338.9 47.9 38.3 4.5 33.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 335.1 47.9 36.7 3.8 32.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 340.5 3 53.2 3 36.0 3.8 3 32.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 344.9 53.2 34.5 3.7 30.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 357.5 53.1 35.6 3.4 32.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 359.1 3 52.0 3 33.9 3.6 3 30.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 364.4 52.0 34.3 3.5 30.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 358.2 52.0 33.6 3.5 30.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 362.4 52.3 33.6 3.4 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 366.4 52.3 33.2 3.1 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 359.2 52.3 33.3 3.1 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 373.7 3 53.1 3 31.7 3.0 3 28.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
2007          Jan 357.9 53.1 32.1 3.0 29.1 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 365.5 53.1 31.5 2.7 28.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 371.4 3 54.8 31.3 2.6 28.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 370.9 54.8 32.5 2.6 29.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 377.2 54.8 33.2 2.7 30.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 373.5 3 52.8 3 32.0 2.7 3 29.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 382.1 52.8 31.9 2.6 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other
 claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
428.2 308.0 120.0 − − 0.2 − 9.8 79.0 40.0 212.7 2006 Dec                  1
449.0 329.0 120.0 − − − 0.0 9.5 78.6 40.0 214.3                                 8
440.0 320.0 120.0 − − − − 10.4 78.4 39.9 215.4                               15
441.5 321.5 120.0 − − − − 10.8 78.0 39.9 216.7                               22
450.5 330.5 120.0 − − 0.1 − 11.4 77.6 39.4 3 217.7                               29
450.5 330.5 120.0 − − 0.0 − 12.9 80.7 39.4 215.2 2007 Jan                  5
430.5 310.5 120.0 − − 0.0 − 12.8 81.2 39.4 217.5                               12
432.5 312.5 120.0 − − 0.0 − 12.1 81.9 39.4 219.3                               19
437.5 317.5 120.0 − − 0.0 − 12.5 82.1 39.4 221.8                               26
422.5 292.5 130.0 − − − 0.0 11.6 82.2 39.3 223.2          Feb                  2
409.5 279.5 130.0 − − 0.0 − 12.5 83.4 39.3 225.3                                 9
416.5 286.5 130.0 − − − − 12.6 84.9 39.3 223.3                               16
431.5 301.5 130.0 − − − 0.0 14.0 85.9 39.3 224.4                               23
429.0 289.0 140.0 − − − 0.0 12.8 86.5 39.3 223.9          Mar                  2
420.0 280.0 140.0 − − − − 13.6 86.8 39.3 224.4                                 9
411.5 271.5 140.0 − − 0.0 0.0 13.5 87.7 39.3 223.4                               16
422.0 282.0 140.0 − − − − 14.4 88.1 39.3 222.3                               23
433.6 283.5 150.0 − − 0.1 − 14.8 88.9 39.3 3 225.1                               30
443.5 291.5 150.0 − − 2.0 − 14.8 90.3 39.3 225.0 2007 Apr                  5
430.7 280.0 150.0 − − 0.7 − 14.7 90.6 39.3 226.4                               13
431.5 281.5 150.0 − − 0.0 0.0 14.2 90.5 39.3 227.3                               20
440.0 288.5 150.0 − − 1.5 − 15.8 92.4 39.2 226.7                               27
429.7 279.5 150.0 − − 0.2 − 14.0 93.1 38.7 227.6          May                  4
426.1 276.0 150.0 − − 0.1 − 14.1 93.5 37.7 230.0                               11
431.2 281.0 150.0 − − 0.2 − 13.8 93.4 37.7 230.7                               18
445.7 295.5 150.0 − − 0.2 0.0 14.1 94.5 37.7 232.5                               25
434.5 284.5 150.0 − − 0.0 − 14.4 94.9 37.6 233.0          June                  1
429.2 279.0 150.0 − − 0.2 − 14.1 96.2 37.6 234.6                                 8
432.0 282.0 150.0 − − 0.0 − 14.4 95.8 37.6 235.6                               15
438.1 288.0 150.0 − − 0.1 − 14.4 93.9 37.6 237.4                               22
464.6 313.5 150.0 − − 1.1 0.0 13.8 3 93.7 37.1 3 243.7                               29
448.2 298.0 150.0 − − 0.0 0.2 13.6 93.9 37.1 242.6          July                  6
442.0 292.0 150.0 − − − − 14.2 93.1 37.1 243.4                               13
451.8 301.5 150.0 − − 0.3 − 14.0 93.3 37.1 244.4                               20
465.7 315.5 150.0 − − 0.2 0.0 14.0 94.2 37.1 245.6                               27
448.0 298.0 150.0 − − − 0.0 14.1 93.1 37.1 245.4          Aug                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
211.2 156.0 54.8 − − 0.4 − 0.1 − 4.4 26.1 2005          Sep 
203.0 148.6 54.2 − − 0.2 − 0.1 − 4.4 34.2          Oct 
195.0 140.8 54.2 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 47.8          Nov 
203.9 146.5 56.4 − − 0.9 − 0.1 − 4.4 49.2          Dec 
227.2 162.5 64.7 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.4 20.6 2006          Jan 
218.9 146.4 72.5 − − 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.4 26.6          Feb 
224.5 147.1 77.4 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 21.7          Mar 
233.0 158.0 74.9 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.2          Apr 
227.6 152.6 74.9 − − 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.4 36.2          May248.8 177.3 71.5 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3          June
253.8 177.9 72.8 − − 3.2 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3          July
223.0 147.3 75.7 − − 0.0 − 1.6 − 4.4 43.4          Aug 234.1 155.2 78.5 − − 0.5 − 3.0 − 4.4 34.7          Sep 
243.3 164.0 79.3 − − 0.0 − 3.0 − 4.4 29.9          Oct 
232.0 155.2 76.7 − − 0.0 − 3.0 − 4.4 34.0          Nov 256.3 173.9 82.3 − − 0.1 − 3.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec 
232.5 150.1 82.3 − − 0.0 − 3.1 − 4.4 32.4 2007          Jan 
235.0 143.5 91.5 − − 0.0 − 3.1 − 4.4 38.0          Feb 
237.3 130.8 106.4 − − 0.1 − 3.1 − 4.4 40.1          Mar 
247.4 139.6 107.5 − − 0.4 − 3.1 − 4.4 28.3          Apr 
236.9 126.6 110.3 − − 0.0 − 3.2 − 4.4 44.5          May243.4 136.2 107.0 − − 0.2 − 3.2 − 4.4 37.3          June
248.5 146.0 102.4 − − − − 3.3 − 4.4 41.0          July
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2006 Dec                  1 1,126.1 601.8 184.0 184.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 44.2 35.9 8.4
                                8 1,146.3 610.2 168.2 168.0 0.2 − − 0.0 0.1 − 73.7 64.9 8.7
                              15 1,138.3 613.9 176.3 176.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 53.9 44.3 9.7
                              22 1,142.3 628.0 177.2 177.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 − 40.5 32.2 8.4
                              29 5 1,151.0 628.2 174.1 173.5 0.6 − − 0.0 0.1 − 53.4 45.2 8.2
2007 Jan                  5 1,154.4 619.3 180.9 178.7 0.1 2.1 − − 0.1 0.1 61.3 53.0 8.3
                              12 1,138.3 611.2 169.1 166.9 0.1 2.1 − 0.0 0.1 0.0 61.1 52.6 8.6
                              19 1,141.2 606.1 176.5 174.6 0.0 1.9 − 0.0 0.1 0.0 62.5 53.4 9.1
                              26 1,148.1 602.7 177.9 176.1 0.0 1.7 − − 0.1 0.0 68.7 59.9 8.8
         Feb                  2 1,136.7 605.8 182.1 180.8 0.0 1.2 − 0.0 0.1 − 48.3 39.4 8.9
                                9 1,127.2 606.0 173.8 172.7 0.0 1.1 − 0.0 0.1 − 46.3 37.7 8.6
                              16 1,135.1 605.3 182.9 181.9 0.0 1.0 − 0.0 0.1 − 46.9 38.4 8.5
                              23 1,150.4 603.6 179.1 177.8 0.5 0.8 − − 0.1 − 68.6 60.2 8.5
         Mar                  2 1,148.2 608.5 183.1 182.6 0.0 0.5 − − 0.1 − 57.7 49.2 8.4
                                9 1,139.8 609.8 179.2 178.6 0.1 0.4 − − 0.1 − 52.3 43.8 8.5
                              16 1,130.0 609.2 182.2 181.9 0.0 0.3 − − 0.1 − 45.7 37.2 8.5
                              23 1,142.7 608.3 178.8 178.4 0.0 0.3 − 0.0 0.1 − 62.0 53.4 8.6
                              30 5 1,162.6 613.6 181.0 179.8 1.1 0.2 − 0.0 0.1 − 65.8 57.1 8.7
2007 Apr                  5 1,171.4 626.0 185.9 185.1 0.6 0.2 − 0.0 0.1 − 60.1 51.3 8.8
                              13 1,161.6 619.4 183.7 183.5 0.1 0.1 − − 0.1 − 57.6 48.6 8.9
                              20 1,164.2 615.8 183.8 183.6 0.0 0.1 − 0.0 0.1 − 64.6 55.6 9.0
                              27 1,176.3 619.7 183.7 183.6 0.0 0.1 − 0.0 0.1 − 70.0 60.8 9.1
         May                 4 1,165.4 624.0 182.0 182.0 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 55.8 46.8 9.0
                              11 1,164.2 623.1 186.1 185.9 0.1 − − − 0.1 − 49.3 40.0 9.3
                              18 1,169.0 624.1 189.9 189.6 0.2 − − 0.0 0.1 − 49.9 41.2 8.6
                              25 1,187.1 623.4 187.4 187.2 0.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 68.8 60.2 8.6
         June                 1 1,178.4 626.8 188.2 188.0 0.2 − − − 0.2 − 54.6 46.1 8.5
                                8 1,176.3 629.3 185.7 185.6 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 51.1 42.6 8.5
                              15 1,180.3 628.2 192.1 192.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 50.2 41.6 8.6
                              22 1,186.7 627.9 189.6 189.5 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 58.5 49.9 8.6
                              29 5 1,208.5 633.1 183.2 182.1 1.1 − − − 0.2 − 77.9 69.7 8.2
         July                 6 1,191.8 638.2 191.6 190.5 1.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 56.9 49.4 7.5
                              13 1,185.4 638.8 193.1 193.0 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 50.1 42.5 7.6
                              20 1,196.4 638.2 190.2 190.1 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 63.8 56.1 7.6
                              27 1,212.6 639.0 196.8 195.2 1.6 − − − 0.2 − 71.0 63.6 7.5
         Aug                  3 1,195.1 645.0 189.7 189.6 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 52.9 45.1 7.8
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2005          Sep 5 325.0 145.0 38.8 38.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Oct 324.6 146.2 37.4 37.3 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Nov 329.2 147.3 41.9 41.7 0.2 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Dec 
5 344.1 153.7 46.3 46.3 0.0 − − − 0.2 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2006          Jan 338.9 148.8 45.4 45.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Feb 335.1 149.9 38.5 38.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
         Mar 5 340.5 151.5 39.7 39.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Apr 344.9 154.7 38.8 38.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         May 357.5 155.3 51.4 51.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         June
5 359.1 157.8 39.9 39.4 0.5 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 364.4 160.3 52.4 52.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Aug 358.2 159.3 46.0 45.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Sep 5 362.4 160.3 46.2 45.5 0.7 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 366.4 161.8 48.0 47.8 0.2 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Nov 359.2 162.8 39.2 39.2 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4         Dec 373.7 170.9 48.0 47.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2007          Jan 357.9 163.6 37.8 37.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Feb 365.5 164.1 43.7 43.6 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         Mar 
5 371.4 166.6 47.9 47.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Apr 370.9 169.7 43.3 43.0 0.2 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.3         May 377.2 169.9 45.1 45.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4         June
5 373.5 171.9 39.8 39.6 0.3 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         July 382.1 173.9 46.6 46.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.3
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of thisfinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
16.5 0.1 12.9 12.9 − 5.7 72.5 − 123.7 64.6 2006 Dec                  1
16.0 0.1 10.6 10.6 − 5.7 73.4 − 123.7 64.6                                 8
16.2 0.1 10.2 10.2 − 5.7 73.6 − 123.7 64.6                               15
16.9 0.1 11.9 11.9 − 5.7 73.6 − 123.7 64.6                               22
16.6 0.1 12.6 12.6 − 5.6 73.8 − 5 122.0 64.6                               29
16.1 0.2 11.9 11.9 − 5.6 70.5 − 122.0 66.4 2007 Jan                  5
16.5 0.2 14.4 14.4 − 5.6 71.7 − 122.0 66.4                               12
16.8 0.2 13.4 13.4 − 5.6 71.7 − 122.0 66.4                               19
19.3 0.2 13.3 13.3 − 5.6 71.9 − 122.0 66.4                               26
16.7 0.2 15.8 15.8 − 5.6 73.7 − 122.0 66.4          Feb                  2
17.2 0.2 16.5 16.5 − 5.6 72.6 − 122.0 66.9                                 9
17.6 0.2 15.3 15.3 − 5.6 72.1 − 122.0 67.1                               16
17.9 0.3 13.6 13.6 − 5.6 72.3 − 122.0 67.1                               23
18.1 0.2 13.9 13.9 − 5.6 71.9 − 122.0 67.2          Mar                  2
18.4 0.2 12.9 12.9 − 5.6 72.2 − 122.0 67.2                                 9
18.1 0.2 11.9 11.9 − 5.6 67.7 − 122.0 67.2                               16
18.3 0.2 13.2 13.2 − 5.6 66.9 − 122.0 67.2                               23
18.8 0.2 13.5 13.5 − 5.6 5 71.1 − 5 125.5 67.5                               30
18.4 0.2 12.6 12.6 − 5.6 68.9 − 125.5 68.3 2007 Apr                  5
18.9 0.2 13.2 13.2 − 5.6 69.0 − 125.5 68.4                               13
18.5 0.2 14.1 14.1 − 5.6 67.7 − 125.5 68.3                               20
19.5 0.3 15.9 15.9 − 5.6 67.8 − 125.5 68.3                               27
19.5 0.2 15.6 15.6 − 5.6 68.7 − 125.5 68.3          May                  4
19.5 0.2 16.2 16.2 − 5.6 70.4 − 125.5 68.3                               11
20.1 0.2 14.8 14.8 − 5.6 70.6 − 125.5 68.3                               18
20.1 0.2 15.5 15.5 − 5.6 72.1 − 125.5 68.3                               25
20.3 0.2 16.4 16.4 − 5.6 72.4 − 125.5 68.3          June                  1
20.2 0.2 17.3 17.3 − 5.6 73.0 − 125.5 68.3                                 8
19.9 0.2 16.8 16.8 − 5.6 73.3 − 125.5 68.3                               15
19.5 0.2 17.8 17.8 − 5.6 73.6 − 125.5 68.3                               22
28.1 0.2 16.1 16.1 − 5.5 5 78.9 − 5 117.0 68.3                               29
19.5 0.2 17.2 17.2 − 5.5 77.2 − 117.0 68.3          July                  6
18.9 0.2 16.9 16.9 − 5.5 76.3 − 117.0 68.3                               13
18.8 0.2 17.0 17.0 − 5.5 77.2 − 117.0 68.3                               20
18.7 0.3 17.3 17.3 − 5.5 78.4 − 117.0 68.3                               27
18.9 0.2 18.5 18.5 − 5.5 78.9 − 117.0 68.3          Aug                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
3.5 0.0 4.1 4.1 − 1.5 11.0 76.4 5 39.2 5.0 2005          Sep 
3.4 0.0 4.0 4.0 − 1.5 11.0 76.5 39.2 5.0          Oct 
3.4 0.0 2.9 2.9 − 1.5 11.2 76.4 39.2 5.0          Nov 3.4 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.5 11.3 75.1
5 44.3 5.0          Dec 
3.4 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 11.5 75.8 44.3 5.0 2006          Jan 
3.5 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.5 12.0 77.8 44.3 5.0          Feb 
3.8 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.4 9.4 78.2 5 48.5 5.0          Mar 
3.6 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 1.4 12.7 78.7 48.5 5.0          Apr 
3.8 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.4 9.8 79.5 48.5 5.0          May3.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.4 22.3 80.6
5 45.8 5.0          June
3.6 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.4 11.6 81.2 45.8 5.0          July
3.6 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.4 11.1 83.9 45.8 5.0          Aug 
3.6 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 11.8 85.9 5 46.4 5.0          Sep 
3.7 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 11.9 86.5 46.4 5.0          Oct 
3.9 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 1.4 12.4 86.3 46.4 5.0          Nov 3.7 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 1.4 13.0 84.3 45.9 5.0          Dec 
3.8 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.4 12.9 85.5 45.9 5.0 2007          Jan 
3.7 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 1.4 13.5 86.5 45.9 5.0          Feb 
3.8 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 10.1 87.5
5 47.4 5.0          Mar 
3.8 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.4 10.0 87.5 47.4 5.0          Apr 4.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.4 10.8 90.4 47.4 5.0          May3.8 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.4 12.4 91.6
5 44.9 5.0          June
4.1 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.4 11.6 92.1 44.9 5.0          July
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.5
1999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.22004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2005          Sep 6,873.8 14.0 2,271.5 1,770.2 1,129.9 640.3 501.3 353.7 147.6 3,403.1 3,089.8 2,505.3 2,238.3         Oct 6,888.8 14.1 2,270.7 1,754.8 1,123.5 631.3 515.9 368.7 147.2 3,412.5 3,098.7 2,512.0 2,244.5
         Nov 6,924.1 13.3 2,287.0 1,760.4 1,133.3 627.1 526.6 373.7 152.9 3,417.1 3,093.2 2,510.3 2,240.3
         Dec 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006          Jan 6,940.6 13.3 2,275.4 1,739.2 1,128.2 610.9 536.2 374.0 162.3 3,458.7 3,123.8 2,542.5 2,251.5
         Feb 6,967.7 14.1 2,289.3 1,745.9 1,132.6 613.4 543.4 376.9 166.4 3,458.7 3,117.1 2,546.9 2,255.5         Mar 7,004.8 13.3 2,302.4 1,736.7 1,123.2 613.4 565.7 392.7 172.9 3,474.5 3,127.4 2,556.8 2,258.4
         Apr 7,075.7 14.5 2,320.4 1,768.4 1,156.7 611.7 552.1 379.5 172.6 3,518.0 3,161.1 2,590.8 2,264.9
         May 7,102.2 14.0 2,347.5 1,787.1 1,170.6 616.5 560.4 381.7 178.7 3,513.5 3,160.4 2,584.0 2,264.5         June 7,075.1 13.8 2,316.3 1,738.4 1,130.8 607.6 577.9 391.7 186.2 3,481.8 3,122.7 2,560.2 2,265.4
         July 7,040.0 13.7 2,299.7 1,733.4 1,133.2 600.1 566.3 379.1 187.2 3,476.6 3,119.5 2,555.2 2,261.1
         Aug 7,034.6 13.6 2,300.0 1,732.6 1,136.0 596.7 567.3 376.8 190.5 3,472.6 3,117.7 2,558.7 2,263.2         Sep 7,077.2 14.2 2,278.0 1,705.0 1,111.7 593.3 573.0 374.8 198.2 3,492.6 3,122.1 2,571.2 2,280.7
         Oct 7,080.1 14.4 2,278.7 1,697.5 1,108.1 589.4 581.2 376.3 204.9 3,496.5 3,119.2 2,563.0 2,272.3
         Nov 7,141.2 13.6 2,293.7 1,712.4 1,126.3 586.2 581.3 365.9 215.3 3,506.4 3,123.3 2,560.4 2,268.4         Dec 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007          Jan 7,192.4 13.3 2,308.2 1,711.1 1,138.1 573.0 597.1 378.2 218.9 3,496.9 3,109.2 2,554.6 2,252.7
         Feb 7,230.9 13.4 2,332.2 1,717.7 1,146.7 570.9 614.5 386.6 227.9 3,487.3 3,096.0 2,547.2 2,256.2         Mar 7,288.3 13.5 2,364.4 1,749.8 1,180.5 569.3 614.6 378.3 236.3 3,496.5 3,100.8 2,555.8 2,261.3
         Apr 7,357.2 14.4 2,379.0 1,736.7 1,167.0 569.7 642.3 406.1 236.2 3,525.9 3,128.3 2,580.7 2,256.9
         May 7,389.3 14.7 2,398.4 1,744.1 1,167.2 576.9 654.3 414.7 239.6 3,511.9 3,106.1 2,558.9 2,253.1         June 7,381.2 14.2 2,396.6 1,724.5 1,156.6 567.9 672.1 423.6 248.5 3,484.4 3,071.9 2,538.0 2,261.7
 Changes 1
1999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.4
2003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.42004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2005 197.2 0.1 101.8 13.2 25.7 − 12.5 88.6 50.5 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 349.0 1.1 76.2 − 2.4 25.2 − 27.6 78.6 17.3 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2005          Oct 14.7 0.1 − 0.8 − 15.4 − 6.4 − 9.0 14.6 15.1 − 0.5 10.3 9.6 7.4 6.8
         Nov 29.4 − 0.8 16.6 5.9 9.8 − 3.8 10.7 4.9 5.7 4.2 − 5.7 − 1.8 − 4.0         Dec − 64.0 2.0 − 10.8 2.3 15.2 − 12.9 − 13.1 − 17.4 4.3 − 7.7 − 6.1 − 3.9 − 11.8
2006          Jan 62.7 − 2.1 − 4.5 − 22.4 − 20.2 − 2.3 18.0 14.2 3.8 38.3 25.3 24.7 12.2
         Feb 19.1 0.8 13.8 6.7 4.4 2.4 7.1 2.9 4.1 0.2 − 6.0 5.1 4.7
         Mar 46.6 − 0.8 13.4 − 9.1 − 9.3 0.3 22.4 15.8 6.6 19.0 12.8 12.4 4.8
         Apr 81.7 1.2 18.2 31.8 33.4 − 1.7 − 13.5 − 13.3 − 0.2 44.8 34.4 34.6 6.8
         May 34.1 − 0.5 27.9 19.5 14.6 4.8 8.4 2.3 6.1 − 3.7 − 0.2 − 6.3 − 0.3         June − 29.8 − 0.2 − 31.2 − 49.0 − 40.3 − 8.8 17.9 10.3 7.6 − 31.3 − 37.2 − 23.3 1.3
         July − 34.3 − 0.1 − 16.4 − 5.1 2.4 − 7.5 − 11.4 − 12.6 1.3 − 6.9 − 3.4 − 5.2 − 3.6
         Aug − 2.2 − 0.0 1.4 0.3 3.6 − 3.2 1.0 − 2.3 3.3 − 4.3 − 1.6 3.8 2.7         Sep 76.9 0.6 14.6 9.0 7.3 1.7 5.6 − 2.0 7.6 23.7 8.4 16.4 18.1
         Oct 4.6 0.2 2.4 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 3.9 8.2 1.5 6.7 4.2 − 2.7 − 8.0 − 8.1
         Nov 75.6 − 0.8 15.3 15.1 18.2 − 3.0 0.2 − 10.3 10.5 12.6 6.1 − 0.6 − 1.9         Dec 13.9 2.8 21.3 6.6 12.9 − 6.4 14.7 10.9 3.8 − 40.7 − 34.3 − 21.0 − 23.5
2007          Jan 33.9 − 3.1 − 6.5 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 36.3 26.8 21.3 9.8
         Feb 46.3 0.1 23.7 6.7 8.7 − 1.9 17.0 8.4 8.7 − 7.0 − 11.6 − 5.9 4.8         Mar 61.6 0.1 32.3 32.2 33.8 − 1.6 0.1 − 8.3 8.4 10.4 5.8 9.6 5.8
         Apr 77.8 0.9 13.0 − 14.6 − 14.0 − 0.6 27.6 27.6 − 0.0 32.6 29.9 27.2 − 3.2
         May 28.0 0.3 19.0 7.4 0.2 7.2 11.6 8.2 3.4 − 13.9 − 22.3 − 21.9 − 3.7         June − 6.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 18.5 − 9.5 − 9.0 17.7 8.9 8.8 − 27.3 − 34.3 − 21.1 8.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998
233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006
267.0 584.6 410.7 173.9 313.2 161.0 65.5 152.2 32.6 119.6 1,020.0 829.8 165.2 2005          Sep 
267.5 586.7 413.2 173.6 313.8 164.6 67.0 149.2 31.7 117.5 1,023.2 832.3 168.2          Oct 
270.0 582.9 406.9 176.0 324.0 168.5 67.7 155.4 30.2 125.2 1,031.7 837.8 174.9          Nov 
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7          Dec 
291.0 581.2 409.8 171.4 334.9 174.4 69.9 160.5 31.6 128.9 1,030.5 831.4 162.8 2006          Jan 
291.4 570.2 401.1 169.1 341.5 182.5 73.6 159.1 31.0 128.1 1,045.4 846.5 160.2          Feb 
298.5 570.5 401.3 169.2 347.1 186.7 76.2 160.4 30.8 129.6 1,055.1 856.0 159.6          Mar 
325.9 570.3 402.8 167.4 356.9 196.8 84.1 160.1 30.4 129.8 1,056.7 859.5 166.0          Apr 
319.5 576.4 394.9 181.4 353.2 193.3 81.5 159.9 30.7 129.2 1,055.0 854.9 172.0          May294.9 562.5 391.0 171.5 359.1 200.3 82.2 158.8 31.1 127.7 1,097.0 892.0 166.1          June
294.0 564.3 392.1 172.2 357.1 200.6 80.9 156.6 31.8 124.8 1,084.4 880.4 165.6          July
295.5 559.0 389.0 170.0 354.9 200.6 81.6 154.3 30.8 123.5 1,084.5 880.1 163.8          Aug 290.5 550.9 387.9 163.0 370.5 217.2 87.0 153.3 27.8 125.5 1,123.3 904.0 169.2          Sep 
290.7 556.2 392.6 163.6 377.3 224.3 89.2 153.0 26.1 126.9 1,118.3 893.3 172.2          Oct 
292.0 562.9 393.2 169.8 383.2 229.9 88.8 153.2 26.1 127.2 1,148.4 916.9 179.0          Nov 294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8          Dec 
301.9 554.5 389.0 165.5 387.7 233.6 90.5 154.1 26.0 128.1 1,191.3 947.7 182.6 2007          Jan 
291.0 548.8 384.8 164.0 391.3 239.4 93.4 151.9 25.8 126.1 1,212.1 955.0 185.9          Feb 
294.5 545.0 379.2 165.8 395.7 244.5 96.0 151.2 24.7 126.5 1,229.3 969.4 184.6          Mar 
323.9 547.6 380.6 167.0 397.6 250.0 96.4 147.6 25.0 122.5 1,245.5 980.9 192.3          Apr 
305.8 547.2 378.5 168.7 405.8 255.7 99.0 150.1 24.3 125.8 1,259.2 979.3 205.1          May276.3 533.9 372.3 161.6 412.5 263.3 103.1 149.2 25.5 123.8 1,282.6 996.3 203.4          June
Changes 1
30.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.1 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.7 31.6 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.9 165.7 9.8 2006
0.6 2.2 2.5 − 0.3 0.7 3.6 1.6 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 2.0 3.1 2.3 1.9 2005          Oct 
2.2 − 3.9 − 6.3 2.4 9.9 3.8 0.5 6.1 − 1.5 7.6 3.2 0.7 6.3          Nov 
7.9 − 2.2 1.9 − 4.0 − 1.6 0.6 − 2.7 − 2.1 0.4 − 2.6 − 37.4 − 40.5 − 10.2          Dec 
12.5 0.6 0.9 − 0.3 13.0 5.3 4.8 7.7 1.2 6.5 36.8 34.4 − 5.9 2006          Jan 
0.4 − 11.0 − 8.7 − 2.3 6.1 7.7 3.4 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 8.1 9.1 − 3.8          Feb 
7.6 0.4 0.2 0.2 6.2 4.5 2.8 1.7 − 0.1 1.8 17.5 16.4 − 2.4          Mar 
27.7 − 0.2 1.6 − 1.8 10.4 10.6 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.2 11.8 12.9 5.7          Apr 
− 6.0 6.1 − 7.9 14.0 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 2.3 − 0.2 0.4 − 0.6 5.1 1.6 5.3          May− 24.7 − 13.9 − 4.0 − 9.9 5.9 7.0 0.6 − 1.1 0.4 − 1.4 39.6 34.8 − 6.7          June
− 1.7 1.8 1.1 0.7 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 11.2 − 11.6 0.3          July
1.2 − 5.4 − 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.7 0.1 0.7 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.8 1.8 1.2 − 1.0          Aug 
− 1.6 − 8.1 − 1.0 − 7.1 15.3 16.4 5.3 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 33.3 23.1 4.7          Sep 
0.1 5.3 4.7 0.6 6.9 7.3 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.6 − 4.9 − 9.9 2.7          Oct 
1.3 6.8 0.5 6.2 6.5 6.1 0.1 0.4 0.0 0.4 42.2 34.7 6.2          Nov 2.5 − 13.3 − 2.9 − 10.4 − 6.4 − 1.9 − 3.6 − 4.5 0.0 − 4.5 25.8 19.0 4.8          Dec 
11.5 5.5 − 1.2 6.7 9.4 4.2 3.8 5.2 − 0.3 5.5 17.3 9.9 − 10.2 2007          Jan 
− 10.7 − 5.7 − 4.3 − 1.4 4.6 6.7 3.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 27.4 13.5 2.2          Feb 
3.8 − 3.8 − 5.6 1.8 4.6 4.8 2.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 0.4 20.6 17.4 − 1.8          Mar 
30.4 2.7 1.5 1.2 2.7 6.3 1.0 − 3.5 0.4 − 4.0 23.9 18.5 7.4          Apr 
− 18.2 − 0.4 − 2.1 1.7 8.4 5.9 2.9 2.5 − 0.7 3.3 10.1 − 4.9 12.4          May
− 29.1 − 13.2 − 6.1 − 7.1 7.0 9.3 4.8 − 2.3 0.6 − 3.0 24.5 19.3 − 2.6          June
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 End of year or month
 
1998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.4
1999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.32004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2005          Sep 6,873.8 1,553.7 1,290.8 262.9 2,296.1 2,192.6 703.0 890.7 221.8 598.9 515.0 61.5 12.4         Oct 6,888.8 1,553.0 1,276.7 276.3 2,298.0 2,196.8 706.7 892.9 223.8 597.2 513.9 60.3 11.6
         Nov 6,924.1 1,546.0 1,273.1 272.9 2,315.2 2,213.4 722.5 894.9 224.6 596.0 512.5 61.2 11.5         Dec 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006          Jan 6,940.6 1,589.6 1,306.9 282.7 2,334.0 2,227.0 716.1 908.1 233.7 602.8 517.9 63.4 11.8
         Feb 6,967.7 1,583.4 1,303.2 280.2 2,331.2 2,233.0 714.3 916.1 235.7 602.6 517.4 60.7 10.8         Mar 7,004.8 1,581.0 1,303.4 277.6 2,340.8 2,241.4 720.9 919.1 237.5 601.4 515.4 60.1 12.1
         Apr 7,075.7 1,635.0 1,340.8 294.3 2,364.7 2,257.5 725.7 932.0 246.2 599.8 513.6 68.1 16.3
         May 7,102.2 1,634.7 1,338.6 296.1 2,370.4 2,269.4 734.6 937.4 249.9 597.4 510.1 60.2 11.8         June 7,075.1 1,617.7 1,334.0 283.6 2,380.7 2,276.8 735.1 945.6 256.2 596.1 507.5 61.3 14.8
         July 7,040.0 1,606.6 1,334.3 272.3 2,375.8 2,274.0 728.0 952.7 261.5 593.2 503.5 58.2 11.9
         Aug 7,034.6 1,589.9 1,310.8 279.1 2,382.3 2,278.6 723.0 965.3 271.0 590.3 499.1 57.0 10.7         Sep 7,077.2 1,583.3 1,299.5 283.8 2,392.3 2,284.0 722.6 973.7 280.2 587.7 495.3 59.2 11.9
         Oct 7,080.1 1,586.2 1,303.4 282.8 2,388.6 2,280.6 715.3 980.2 286.7 585.0 490.5 61.8 12.4
         Nov 7,141.2 1,618.6 1,320.5 298.1 2,423.1 2,310.9 742.3 987.1 293.7 581.4 484.3 63.8 13.0         Dec 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007          Jan 7,192.4 1,619.6 1,334.6 285.1 2,444.8 2,341.1 744.5 1,014.4 313.0 582.2 481.3 60.0 14.2
         Feb 7,230.9 1,623.5 1,339.1 284.4 2,447.0 2,345.0 744.5 1,020.2 317.4 580.3 477.4 58.2 13.4
         Mar 7,288.3 1,652.4 1,368.1 284.3 2,455.8 2,350.8 745.9 1,026.3 324.4 578.5 474.2 61.7 15.7
         Apr 7,357.2 1,669.5 1,370.7 298.7 2,469.9 2,366.6 745.8 1,046.2 342.2 574.6 470.0 59.6 13.5
         May 7,389.3 1,664.2 1,356.6 307.6 2,485.4 2,376.3 751.7 1,054.5 349.9 570.1 465.8 60.3 16.0         June 7,381.2 1,653.6 1,357.9 295.7 2,506.9 2,394.5 759.9 1,067.9 360.4 566.7 461.7 62.6 17.4
 Changes 1
1999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.6
2003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 197.2 32.8 26.9 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 349.0 105.5 81.5 24.0 123.0 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.4
2005          Oct 14.7 − 0.9 − 14.2 13.3 1.9 4.2 4.2 1.6 1.5 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.8
         Nov 29.4 − 8.2 − 4.1 − 4.1 16.9 16.4 15.7 1.9 0.7 − 1.2 − 1.4 0.8 − 0.1         Dec − 64.0 23.8 27.8 − 4.0 13.9 12.0 − 6.6 11.3 8.8 7.4 6.6 1.0 − 1.9
2006          Jan 62.7 17.5 2.9 14.6 5.3 1.8 0.5 2.0 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 1.4 2.2
         Feb 19.1 − 7.6 − 4.3 − 3.3 − 3.3 5.7 − 2.0 7.9 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 1.0         Mar 46.6 − 0.5 1.1 − 1.6 10.1 8.8 6.9 3.1 1.9 − 1.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 1.4
         Apr 81.7 55.5 37.7 17.8 24.5 16.4 5.1 12.9 8.8 − 1.6 − 1.9 8.2 4.2
         May 34.1 1.7 − 0.9 2.6 6.1 12.2 9.0 5.6 3.8 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 7.8 − 4.5         June − 29.8 − 17.5 − 4.7 − 12.8 10.2 7.3 0.4 8.1 6.3 − 1.3 − 2.6 1.1 2.9
         July − 34.3 − 10.9 0.3 − 11.2 − 4.9 − 2.8 − 7.0 7.2 5.2 − 2.9 − 4.0 − 3.2 − 2.8
         Aug − 2.2 − 15.5 − 22.5 6.9 6.0 4.1 − 5.5 12.6 9.5 − 2.9 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.3         Sep 76.9 24.4 20.1 4.3 11.2 6.7 − 0.6 9.9 9.2 − 2.6 − 3.8 2.2 1.2
         Oct 4.6 4.7 5.7 − 1.0 − 3.7 − 3.4 − 7.2 6.5 6.5 − 2.7 − 4.8 2.5 0.5
         Nov 75.6 34.6 17.9 16.7 35.2 30.9 27.5 7.0 7.1 − 3.5 − 6.1 2.2 0.6         Dec 13.9 19.1 28.2 − 9.1 26.1 30.7 3.4 22.2 16.5 5.1 3.1 − 1.8 0.9
2007          Jan 33.9 − 19.2 − 14.3 − 4.9 − 5.0 − 0.8 − 1.4 5.0 2.8 − 4.4 − 6.2 − 2.2 0.3
         Feb 46.3 4.9 4.9 0.1 2.6 4.2 0.2 5.9 4.4 − 1.8 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 0.8         Mar 61.6 29.4 29.3 0.1 9.2 5.9 1.5 6.1 7.0 − 1.8 − 3.3 3.6 2.3
         Apr 77.8 18.6 3.2 15.4 14.0 15.6 − 0.4 20.0 17.9 − 3.9 − 4.1 − 1.9 − 2.1
         May 28.0 − 5.8 − 14.3 8.5 15.3 9.5 5.8 8.2 7.7 − 4.5 − 4.2 0.6 2.4
         June − 6.7 − 8.7 2.9 − 11.7 21.6 18.3 8.3 13.5 10.6 − 3.5 − 4.1 2.4 1.5
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 2001
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 200359.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 2006
46.6 7.6 2.4 2.0 42.1 40.8 28.0 35.6 1,637.1 117.9 657.6 344.2 321.5 2005          Sep 
46.3 8.3 2.4 2.0 40.9 39.7 32.3 32.8 1,634.0 116.2 662.6 346.8 329.3          Oct 
47.3 8.4 2.4 2.0 40.7 38.7 33.2 31.8 1,631.2 113.8 679.3 348.6 338.8          Nov 50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5          Dec 
49.3 9.6 2.4 2.0 43.6 40.4 27.4 31.2 1,617.4 112.2 646.3 369.7 325.0 2006          Jan 
47.6 8.5 2.4 2.0 37.4 35.8 29.6 31.7 1,630.9 113.9 662.9 377.3 320.6          Feb 
45.6 7.8 2.4 2.0 39.3 37.0 37.0 31.6 1,632.1 119.8 667.6 384.1 330.7          Mar 
49.5 11.7 2.4 2.0 39.1 37.6 35.6 31.5 1,623.9 121.1 662.7 384.6 337.5          Apr 
46.0 8.3 2.3 1.9 40.8 37.0 37.0 32.1 1,632.9 125.9 667.8 386.5 340.7          May44.2 6.9 2.3 1.9 42.6 39.3 35.7 33.0 1,641.1 126.7 652.0 387.2 327.8          June
43.9 6.3 2.3 1.9 43.7 40.3 30.1 32.4 1,641.7 124.8 640.2 387.9 325.2          July
44.0 6.5 2.3 1.9 46.7 44.1 34.9 32.2 1,638.1 127.2 646.0 387.2 324.1          Aug 45.1 7.8 2.3 1.9 49.1 45.6 38.1 31.5 1,639.6 129.7 665.0 388.0 339.7          Sep 
47.1 9.9 2.3 1.9 46.3 43.4 32.1 32.0 1,644.6 134.3 663.9 389.1 343.6          Oct 
48.6 10.1 2.3 1.8 48.4 43.7 27.5 32.0 1,641.7 137.5 653.0 391.7 353.6          Nov 45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7          Dec 
43.5 9.2 2.3 1.9 43.7 40.6 25.0 31.9 1,653.8 145.9 667.6 393.0 356.6 2007          Jan 
42.5 8.9 2.3 1.8 43.8 41.8 29.7 31.6 1,657.3 149.5 682.1 399.7 359.9          Feb 
43.6 10.0 2.3 1.9 43.4 42.2 29.8 32.7 1,659.7 158.3 681.3 405.5 371.2          Mar 
43.8 9.5 2.3 1.8 43.6 43.2 29.4 33.6 1,657.7 158.0 708.9 410.7 377.5          Apr 
42.0 8.2 2.3 1.8 48.9 46.9 28.0 33.9 1,666.3 158.4 720.2 416.8 374.6          May42.9 10.0 2.3 1.8 49.7 46.6 32.4 35.3 1,670.4 162.2 685.8 417.6 379.0          June
Changes 1
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002
− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.3 − 9.4 22.4 14.4 18.5 2005
− 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.2 0.3 34.3 21.7 32.1 27.9 29.2 2006
− 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.1 4.3 − 2.9 − 3.2 − 1.6 4.7 2.6 8.1 2005          Oct 
0.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 1.0 0.9 − 1.0 − 4.7 − 2.7 13.1 1.5 10.8          Nov 
2.9 1.3 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.0 − 13.6 − 0.1 − 19.1 − 0.1 − 52.6 − 1.7 − 14.8          Dec 
− 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.0 1.7 7.9 − 0.5 4.4 − 1.9 24.3 5.3 − 1.5 2006          Jan 
− 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 6.2 − 4.6 2.2 0.6 10.3 1.8 12.4 7.1 − 2.6          Feb − 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 1.3 7.4 − 0.1 5.5 5.9 9.4 7.5 7.4          Mar 
4.0 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 4.0 1.3 1.3 1.3 4.6          Apr 
− 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.7 − 0.6 0.6 0.6 11.8 4.8 9.2 2.3 1.8          May− 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 2.3 − 1.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 17.5 0.6 − 4.6          June
− 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 1.0 − 5.6 − 0.6 0.7 − 1.9 − 11.4 0.7 − 2.4          July
0.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 3.9 4.8 − 0.2 − 2.5 2.4 6.7 − 0.1 − 1.3          Aug 
1.0 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.3 1.5 3.2 − 0.7 5.3 3.5 16.7 0.5 16.2          Sep 
2.0 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 2.2 − 6.0 0.5 4.8 4.6 − 1.1 1.2 4.2          Oct 
1.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.1 0.3 − 4.5 − 0.0 3.1 3.3 − 3.2 3.5 6.9          Nov 
− 2.7 − 0.8 0.0 0.0 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 10.5 0.0 − 4.6 − 1.2 − 14.8 − 2.0 0.5          Dec 
− 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 1.4 8.0 − 0.0 14.7 9.5 26.0 3.8 5.8 2007          Jan 
− 1.0 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 1.1 4.7 − 0.3 6.5 3.6 19.2 7.2 1.5          Feb 
1.2 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.4 0.1 1.0 4.2 8.9 1.5 6.0 10.2          Mar 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 1.0 − 0.4 0.9 2.1 − 0.3 32.5 6.0 4.0          Apr 
− 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 5.2 3.7 − 1.5 0.3 7.1 0.4 9.0 5.8 − 2.2          May
1.0 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.9 − 0.3 2.9 1.5 4.8 3.7 − 33.8 0.9 4.1          June
footnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than four with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data collected the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published together with money
separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the deposits market fund shares. 
with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt securities
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2007          Jan 2,038 7,226.6 52.9 2,915.2 2,097.3 792.1 3,829.6 485.8 2,594.5 2.3 737.6 151.5 277.4
         Feb 2,037 7,264.6 57.1 2,946.4 2,119.1 799.6 3,829.9 490.8 2,590.3 2.2 736.8 151.8 279.3
         Mar 2,038 7,320.6 62.9 2,985.2 2,148.7 806.8 3,842.7 501.7 2,584.7 2.1 744.5 151.8 278.0
         Apr 2,038 7,389.1 59.3 3,007.7 2,168.9 809.4 3,883.0 515.5 2,577.8 2.1 777.5 152.2 286.9
         May 2,037 7,420.1 60.4 3,022.8 2,171.8 820.8 3,884.6 509.0 2,585.2 2.1 778.2 152.7 299.6         June 2,037 7,410.4 55.5 3,043.9 2,189.8 818.8 3,858.8 510.2 2,592.1 2.2 743.4 153.6 298.5
Commercial banks 5
2007          May 255 2,221.1 23.8 898.4 751.4 140.7 1,098.4 293.1 574.7 1.1 221.6 78.4 122.2
         June 255 2,184.7 18.3 895.8 752.6 135.0 1,069.3 292.3 579.2 1.2 189.7 78.9 122.4
   Big banks 6
2007          May 5 1,403.2 14.9 566.7 478.7 83.9 662.4 201.0 292.3 0.8 162.1 67.7 91.5         June 5 1,376.6 8.6 565.8 478.5 81.4 642.4 200.1 295.4 0.9 141.2 68.1 91.7
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2007          May 157 662.5 7.5 248.1 193.2 52.8 370.8 69.1 250.4 0.3 49.6 10.2 25.8         June 157 664.6 8.9 247.6 194.9 50.5 370.9 68.6 252.3 0.3 47.9 10.4 26.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2007          May 93 155.4 1.3 83.7 79.5 4.1 65.1 23.0 32.0 0.0 9.9 0.4 4.9         June 93 143.5 0.8 82.3 79.2 3.1 56.0 23.7 31.5 0.1 0.7 0.4 4.0
Landesbanken
2007          May 12 1,479.3 1.9 805.1 593.6 194.7 590.1 86.3 389.4 0.2 112.3 25.3 56.9         June 12 1,477.5 4.5 803.6 592.1 192.4 590.1 87.7 390.7 0.2 109.5 25.6 53.8
Savings banks
2007          May 448 1,011.6 19.4 235.9 92.7 141.1 720.9 61.3 550.7 0.5 108.5 16.2 19.3         June 448 1,016.6 18.1 239.5 96.2 141.0 722.9 62.7 550.8 0.5 108.9 16.3 19.8
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2007          May 2 247.2 0.2 165.5 108.5 56.6 59.1 9.9 16.8 0.0 32.3 13.1 9.4
         June 2 252.8 0.2 170.0 111.2 58.1 60.3 10.6 16.6 0.0 32.8 13.1 9.1
Credit cooperatives
2007          May 1,256 609.9 13.2 154.2 64.5 85.7 412.1 35.9 325.2 0.2 50.7 10.4 20.0
         June 1,256 612.5 12.6 156.1 66.2 85.8 413.5 36.6 325.6 0.2 51.0 10.4 19.9
Mortgage banks
2007          May 22 854.2 0.9 254.7 149.0 105.7 575.2 12.4 410.2 − 152.5 2.9 20.5         June 22 860.4 0.9 262.5 154.3 108.2 572.8 12.0 409.7 − 151.1 2.9 21.2
Building and loan associations
2007          May 26 193.0 0.1 55.0 42.4 12.6 121.0 1.7 104.4 . 14.9 0.4 16.5         June 26 193.9 0.0 55.9 43.2 12.3 121.2 1.7 104.8 . 14.7 0.4 16.5
Special purpose banks
2007          May 16 803.8 1.0 454.0 369.7 83.8 307.9 8.4 213.8 − 85.5 6.1 34.9         June 16 812.0 0.9 460.6 374.0 86.0 308.7 6.5 214.7 − 85.7 6.0 35.9
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2007          May 136 855.7 6.7 355.9 285.5 67.8 459.8 78.9 275.4 0.4 104.6 5.6 27.7         June 136 855.2 7.1 366.1 294.9 68.5 449.2 77.6 275.7 0.4 95.2 5.7 27.1
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2007          May 43 700.3 5.3 272.2 206.0 63.8 394.7 55.9 243.4 0.3 94.7 5.2 22.9         June 43 711.7 6.4 283.8 215.7 65.4 393.2 53.9 244.2 0.3 94.5 5.3 23.1
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,038.8 300.9 1,737.8 2,718.6 834.4 404.3 780.0 124.9 590.5 487.7 109.5 1,707.5 337.8 423.9 2007          Jan 
2,048.8 305.8 1,743.0 2,733.8 839.4 413.8 781.1 133.4 588.7 483.8 110.8 1,713.0 342.5 426.4          Feb 
2,090.3 336.2 1,754.1 2,729.3 837.7 414.6 777.7 126.1 586.9 480.5 112.5 1,719.1 344.6 437.3          Mar 
2,123.3 344.1 1,779.2 2,754.6 848.1 428.4 781.5 131.4 583.0 476.4 113.6 1,720.2 346.8 444.2          Apr 
2,114.0 350.2 1,763.8 2,783.9 872.1 434.6 783.2 146.1 578.5 472.1 115.6 1,732.8 348.9 440.5          May2,084.5 348.4 1,736.0 2,794.4 880.3 434.5 787.3 135.6 575.0 467.9 117.3 1,736.7 350.1 444.7          June
Commercial banks 5
818.0 209.3 608.7 881.6 428.5 217.5 121.8 117.9 101.5 86.6 12.3 241.1 106.9 173.4 2007          May
776.1 200.4 575.7 883.7 427.7 218.1 123.9 110.5 101.5 85.9 12.3 243.7 106.9 174.2          June
Big banks 6
519.2 147.3 371.8 521.3 234.2 145.5 74.7 110.8 63.2 60.7 3.7 177.2 64.0 121.6 2007          May
495.3 141.0 354.3 516.9 230.1 144.4 76.0 103.1 62.7 60.2 3.7 178.7 63.9 121.7          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
182.6 36.8 145.8 329.4 177.1 63.0 42.5 7.1 38.3 25.8 8.4 63.9 39.6 47.0 2007          May
177.2 35.8 141.3 334.7 178.9 65.1 43.3 7.4 38.8 25.7 8.5 65.0 39.7 48.0          June
Branches of foreign banks
116.2 25.2 91.0 31.0 17.2 9.0 4.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 3.4 4.8 2007          May
103.6 23.6 80.1 32.1 18.7 8.7 4.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 3.3 4.5          June
Landesbanken
529.0 78.1 450.9 352.7 65.6 65.9 205.4 25.8 14.8 14.3 1.0 461.9 65.2 70.6 2007          May
527.6 82.9 444.8 354.8 71.4 61.8 205.9 21.6 14.7 14.2 1.0 461.2 65.1 68.8          June
Savings banks
202.5 6.5 196.0 659.7 217.3 62.6 13.1 − 290.8 226.4 76.0 48.4 53.1 47.9 2007          May
203.3 6.4 196.9 660.4 219.0 62.4 13.0 − 288.5 224.0 77.5 49.3 53.8 49.7          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
144.7 34.9 109.7 37.1 8.4 9.5 17.7 2.1 − − 1.5 42.7 11.1 11.6 2007          May
147.5 35.6 111.9 38.4 8.1 11.0 17.8 3.3 − − 1.5 43.3 11.1 12.4          June
Credit cooperatives
78.3 2.5 75.7 426.7 144.5 60.6 27.4 − 170.3 143.7 23.9 39.1 36.6 29.2 2007          May
78.9 2.9 76.0 427.7 144.5 62.4 27.6 − 169.1 142.8 24.1 39.4 37.3 29.2          June
Mortgage banks
152.8 3.7 149.1 185.6 4.0 7.4 173.1 0.2 0.7 0.7 0.4 466.2 23.8 25.7 2007          May
159.2 5.7 153.5 188.3 4.5 8.1 174.6 − 0.7 0.7 0.4 462.6 23.8 26.6          June
Building and loan associations
27.0 2.4 24.7 128.7 0.4 1.3 126.3 − 0.3 0.3 0.4 5.2 7.3 24.8 2007          May
26.1 2.1 24.0 128.3 0.4 1.3 126.0 − 0.3 0.3 0.4 6.9 7.3 25.3          June
Special purpose banks
161.8 12.8 149.0 111.8 3.3 9.9 98.4 0.1 − − 0.2 428.0 44.8 57.4 2007          May
165.6 12.5 153.2 112.7 4.7 9.3 98.5 0.3 − − 0.2 430.3 44.8 58.6          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
300.9 62.5 238.4 300.3 151.0 56.3 68.9 12.2 18.9 18.6 5.2 151.5 32.9 70.1 2007          May
298.5 63.7 234.8 301.1 150.7 57.0 69.6 11.7 18.6 18.3 5.3 151.0 33.2 71.4          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
184.7 37.3 147.4 269.3 133.8 47.2 64.3 12.2 18.9 18.6 5.1 151.5 29.5 65.3 2007          May
194.9 40.1 154.8 269.0 132.0 48.4 65.0 11.7 18.5 18.2 5.2 151.0 29.8 66.9          June
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
1997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.3
1998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.8
1999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2006          Jan 13.0 45.5 1,663.1 1,079.4 0.0 8.1 575.6 2.0 3,032.2 2,659.1 2.3 2.7 368.2
         Feb 13.7 42.4 1,672.9 1,086.9 0.0 8.5 577.5 2.0 3,023.3 2,654.5 2.1 1.5 365.1
         Mar 12.9 39.0 1,667.9 1,081.2 0.0 10.0 576.7 1.9 3,030.2 2,657.6 2.1 1.5 369.1
         Apr 14.1 40.3 1,698.4 1,113.6 0.0 10.9 573.9 2.7 3,066.0 2,665.6 2.1 1.9 396.5
         May 13.5 53.7 1,703.5 1,113.6 − 10.5 579.3 2.0 3,065.4 2,657.3 2.1 1.4 404.6         June 13.4 43.3 1,665.7 1,085.0 − 9.7 571.0 1.9 3,028.2 2,654.0 2.1 2.0 370.0
         July 13.3 52.2 1,652.0 1,078.6 − 9.5 563.8 1.9 3,024.4 2,651.1 2.1 2.0 369.2
         Aug 13.2 46.0 1,657.3 1,087.1 − 9.1 561.1 1.9 3,022.5 2,650.1 2.1 1.3 369.0         Sep 13.8 47.3 1,626.3 1,062.0 − 10.4 553.9 1.9 3,035.2 2,666.7 2.0 1.0 365.5
         Oct 14.0 48.6 1,617.7 1,057.0 − 11.0 549.8 1.9 3,033.2 2,662.9 2.0 1.4 366.9
         Nov 13.3 41.2 1,640.2 1,082.3 − 10.4 547.5 1.9 3,037.8 2,659.6 1.9 1.5 374.9         Dec 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007          Jan 13.0 39.5 1,639.9 1,095.8 0.0 10.3 533.8 1.9 3,024.5 2,640.0 1.8 1.6 381.2
         Feb 12.9 43.7 1,643.2 1,101.0 − 11.7 530.4 2.0 3,011.3 2,639.3 1.7 1.7 368.6         Mar 13.1 49.4 1,669.5 1,128.8 0.0 13.2 527.5 1.9 3,016.1 2,638.8 1.6 1.8 373.9
         Apr 13.9 44.9 1,660.0 1,118.8 0.0 12.8 528.4 1.9 3,043.3 2,635.9 1.6 2.4 403.4
         May 14.2 45.6 1,668.3 1,119.7 0.0 13.4 535.1 1.9 3,021.0 2,630.0 1.6 1.3 388.0         June 13.7 41.3 1,651.7 1,112.2 0.0 16.5 523.0 1.9 2,986.2 2,632.4 1.7 1.7 350.5
Changes *
1998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2006          Jan − 2.1 − 2.4 − 21.4 − 17.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 5.4 − 0.1 + 19.6 + 8.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 10.5
         Feb + 0.7 − 3.1 + 9.8 + 7.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 8.9 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 3.1         Mar − 0.7 − 3.4 − 5.0 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 6.9 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.0
         Apr + 1.2 + 1.3 + 30.5 + 32.3 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 35.3 + 7.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 27.4
         May − 0.6 + 13.4 + 5.8 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 5.4 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.1
         June − 0.2 − 10.4 − 38.2 − 29.0 − − 0.8 − 8.4 − 0.1 − 37.2 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 34.6
         July − 0.1 + 8.9 − 13.7 − 6.5 − − 0.2 − 7.1 − 0.0 − 3.8 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8
         Aug − 0.1 − 6.2 + 6.3 + 9.5 − − 0.4 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3         Sep + 0.6 + 1.3 + 9.3 + 6.5 − + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.7 + 16.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5
         Oct + 0.2 + 1.3 − 7.0 − 3.4 − + 0.5 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 2.0 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.4
         Nov − 0.8 − 7.4 + 22.5 + 25.3 − − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 4.7 − 3.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.9         Dec + 2.8 + 8.3 − 2.4 + 4.5 − − 1.1 − 5.8 − − 36.4 − 28.6 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 8.4
2007          Jan − 3.0 − 9.9 + 2.2 + 9.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 8.4 − 0.0 + 24.3 + 6.6 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 18.2
         Feb − 0.1 + 4.1 + 3.3 + 5.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 12.5         Mar + 0.2 + 5.7 + 26.3 + 27.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 4.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 5.3
         Apr + 0.9 − 4.5 − 11.0 − 10.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 28.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 30.6
         May + 0.3 + 0.7 + 8.2 + 0.9 − + 0.6 + 6.7 − 0.0 − 22.4 − 5.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 15.4         June − 0.5 − 4.3 − 15.4 − 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.1 − 12.1 + 0.0 − 35.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 37.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  
8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
76.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 1997
71.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 1998
37.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 56.2 110.8 1,306.0 118.4 1,187.5 0.1 26.2 2,285.7 718.1 872.9 602.8 91.9 38.9 2006          Jan 
− 55.1 113.2 1,302.1 115.2 1,186.8 0.1 25.1 2,287.7 715.3 877.7 602.6 92.1 38.2          Feb 
− 54.0 115.8 1,302.7 110.3 1,192.3 0.1 23.2 2,303.4 722.4 887.1 601.4 92.4 37.8          Mar 
− 53.9 113.7 1,340.4 128.1 1,212.2 0.1 23.5 2,322.4 726.5 903.1 599.8 93.0 38.1          Apr 
− 53.8 113.6 1,338.3 132.3 1,205.9 0.1 22.7 2,333.8 742.5 900.6 597.4 93.3 37.9          May− 53.7 113.2 1,333.2 116.2 1,216.9 0.1 22.5 2,342.7 742.0 911.0 596.1 93.6 37.4          June
− 53.3 113.8 1,333.5 117.5 1,216.0 0.0 22.1 2,336.9 730.6 919.0 593.2 94.1 37.5          July
− 53.4 113.9 1,310.4 114.2 1,196.2 0.0 22.3 2,347.5 725.6 936.9 590.3 94.7 37.5          Aug − 53.7 108.2 1,299.3 120.7 1,178.6 0.0 22.3 2,356.4 724.2 950.0 587.7 94.5 37.9          Sep 
− 53.5 107.2 1,303.3 113.4 1,189.9 0.0 22.5 2,348.2 716.9 950.5 585.0 95.8 38.0          Oct 
− 53.3 107.0 1,320.5 135.1 1,185.4 0.0 22.3 2,375.0 744.4 952.5 581.5 96.7 38.1          Nov − 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8          Dec 
− 53.5 106.9 1,334.2 130.9 1,203.2 0.0 21.9 2,401.4 746.2 973.6 582.2 99.4 38.9 2007          Jan 
− 53.3 107.3 1,338.9 128.1 1,210.8 0.0 21.8 2,409.8 746.2 982.5 580.3 100.8 38.8          Feb 
− 52.9 107.5 1,367.4 135.9 1,231.4 0.0 21.7 2,417.2 747.5 988.7 578.6 102.5 38.5          Mar 
− 54.2 107.9 1,370.2 143.6 1,226.6 0.0 21.3 2,434.0 756.1 999.6 574.6 103.7 38.3          Apr 
− 53.8 108.0 1,356.0 142.1 1,213.9 0.0 21.2 2,445.1 761.0 1,008.9 570.1 105.0 37.6          May− 53.5 108.5 1,357.0 137.8 1,219.2 0.0 21.0 2,464.9 772.5 1,019.0 566.7 106.7 37.5          June
Changes *
− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998
− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 0.4 + 2.3 + 2.2 − 2.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 9.0 + 1.1 + 8.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 3.6 2006          Jan 
− − 1.1 + 2.4 − 3.9 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.0 − 2.8 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 1.1 + 2.7 + 0.8 − 4.9 + 5.7 − 0.0 − 2.0 + 15.7 + 7.1 + 9.5 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.4          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 2.1 + 37.1 + 17.7 + 19.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 19.0 + 4.0 + 16.0 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.3          Apr 
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.4 − 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 10.6 + 16.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.2          May
− − 0.1 − 0.4 − 5.1 − 15.9 + 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 8.9 − 0.5 + 10.4 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4          June
− − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 11.4 + 8.0 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.0          July
− + 0.1 + 0.1 − 22.2 − 2.7 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.0 − 5.6 + 17.9 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.1          Aug − + 0.3 − 5.7 + 20.5 + 7.5 + 13.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 10.4 − 1.4 + 13.1 − 2.6 + 1.2 + 0.4          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 0.9 + 5.7 − 5.6 + 11.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 7.3 + 0.5 − 2.7 + 1.3 + 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.2 − 0.3 + 17.2 + 21.7 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 26.8 + 27.5 + 2.0 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.0          Nov − − 0.3 − 0.6 + 27.6 − 9.7 + 37.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.5 + 3.3 + 10.3 + 5.1 + 0.8 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.4 + 0.6 − 14.0 + 5.6 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.7 − 1.5 + 10.9 − 4.4 + 1.6 − 0.1 2007          Jan 
− − 0.3 + 0.4 + 4.7 − 2.9 + 7.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 − 0.1 + 8.8 − 1.8 + 1.4 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 0.4 + 0.2 + 28.5 + 7.9 + 20.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 1.3 + 6.2 − 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.3          Mar 
− + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 7.7 − 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 16.2 + 8.1 + 10.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.3 + 0.1 − 14.2 − 1.5 − 12.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 11.1 + 4.9 + 9.3 − 4.5 + 1.4 − 0.7          May
− − 0.4 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 4.4 + 6.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 18.3 + 11.5 + 8.6 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 0.1          June
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.3
1998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.0
1999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2006          Jan 0.3 1,079.3 895.3 678.6 216.7 6.0 178.0 1.5 741.6 411.1 154.8 256.2 9.5 320.9
         Feb 0.4 1,111.4 920.5 701.9 218.6 6.7 184.2 1.5 736.8 406.7 144.3 262.5 7.5 322.6         Mar 0.4 1,153.7 952.8 729.0 223.8 7.6 193.3 1.4 732.4 402.7 140.1 262.6 6.9 322.8
         Apr 0.4 1,136.1 933.9 710.2 223.8 8.6 193.6 1.4 747.2 419.3 160.6 258.7 8.0 319.9
         May 0.5 1,144.1 935.5 709.1 226.5 9.3 199.3 1.4 740.0 412.9 155.5 257.4 7.9 319.1         June 0.4 1,201.7 981.5 748.5 232.9 12.0 208.2 1.0 745.9 414.7 151.9 262.8 9.3 321.9
         July 0.4 1,172.9 950.8 715.4 235.5 12.8 209.3 1.0 748.6 420.3 155.9 264.4 10.3 318.0
         Aug 0.4 1,167.5 943.7 706.9 236.8 11.7 212.1 0.9 753.4 425.0 159.6 265.4 11.3 317.1         Sep 0.4 1,202.0 966.8 726.1 240.7 12.2 223.0 0.8 767.0 426.7 160.9 265.8 9.4 331.0
         Oct 0.4 1,194.8 949.5 708.7 240.7 13.5 231.8 0.7 783.1 435.3 166.2 269.1 10.4 337.4
         Nov 0.4 1,217.8 958.7 714.8 243.9 13.5 245.6 0.8 795.4 438.9 169.5 269.4 10.5 346.0         Dec 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007          Jan 0.4 1,275.2 1,001.6 734.0 267.6 15.4 258.3 0.9 805.1 440.8 176.7 264.1 7.9 356.5
         Feb 0.5 1,303.2 1,018.2 750.8 267.4 15.8 269.2 0.8 818.5 442.3 178.4 263.9 8.1 368.2
         Mar 0.4 1,315.7 1,020.2 752.4 267.8 16.2 279.3 0.8 826.5 448.1 181.4 266.7 7.8 370.6
         Apr 0.5 1,347.6 1,050.3 778.5 271.8 16.2 281.1 0.7 839.7 457.9 192.1 265.8 7.7 374.1
         May 0.5 1,354.6 1,052.3 776.9 275.4 16.5 285.7 0.7 863.6 464.6 193.0 271.6 8.8 390.2         June 0.5 1,392.2 1,077.8 799.8 278.0 18.6 295.8 0.8 872.5 470.4 192.3 278.1 9.2 392.9
Changes *
1998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2006          Jan + 0.1 + 35.3 + 29.9 + 32.9 − 3.0 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 0.0 + 32.8 + 25.5 + 23.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 6.8
         Feb + 0.1 + 28.2 + 21.5 + 20.6 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 6.1 + 0.0 − 8.8 − 7.3 − 11.4 + 4.2 − 2.2 + 0.7         Mar − 0.0 + 46.9 + 36.6 + 30.1 + 6.5 + 1.0 + 9.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 − 0.5 + 1.2
         Apr + 0.0 − 11.7 − 13.0 − 14.8 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 20.4 + 20.8 + 21.3 − 0.5 + 1.2 − 1.6
         May + 0.1 + 11.9 + 4.9 + 1.2 + 3.8 + 0.7 + 6.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.0 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.5         June − 0.1 + 56.8 + 45.3 + 38.9 + 6.4 + 2.8 + 8.8 − 0.4 + 4.4 + 0.4 − 3.9 + 4.4 + 1.3 + 2.6
         July − 0.1 − 28.3 − 30.4 − 33.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.3 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 4.6 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 2.7
         Aug + 0.0 − 4.4 − 6.2 − 7.8 + 1.6 − 1.1 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 5.9 + 5.4 + 3.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.6         Sep − 0.0 + 30.8 + 21.1 + 17.8 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 9.2 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 4.5 − 1.9 + 7.9
         Oct − 0.0 − 7.3 − 17.4 − 17.3 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 8.8 − 0.1 + 16.1 + 10.2 + 5.2 + 4.9 + 1.1 + 4.9
         Nov − 0.0 + 31.1 + 16.8 + 11.4 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 14.2 + 0.1 + 18.5 + 8.3 + 4.0 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 9.9         Dec + 0.0 + 49.0 + 44.3 + 29.7 + 14.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 0.0 − 18.6 − 18.1 − 13.5 − 4.6 − 3.4 + 2.9
2007          Jan − 0.0 + 5.1 − 4.7 − 12.5 + 7.9 + 2.1 + 7.7 − + 24.9 + 17.3 + 19.8 − 2.5 + 0.7 + 6.8
         Feb + 0.1 + 31.4 + 20.6 + 19.4 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 10.5 − 0.1 + 18.1 + 4.7 + 2.8 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 13.2         Mar − 0.0 + 14.6 + 3.9 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 10.3 − 0.1 + 10.0 + 7.2 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 3.0
         Apr + 0.0 + 36.2 + 34.1 + 29.1 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 18.2 + 13.5 + 11.8 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 4.8
         May + 0.1 + 4.6 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 0.0 + 22.2 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 15.7         June + 0.0 + 38.1 + 25.9 + 23.2 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 9.7 + 7.7 + 0.9 + 6.8 − 1.0 + 2.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
15.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 1997
22.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 1998
13.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
7.0 38.8 666.4 143.6 522.7 397.4 125.3 0.6 339.5 86.0 253.5 119.6 134.0 1.1 2006          Jan 
7.1 39.5 691.3 136.8 554.5 428.8 125.7 0.6 326.4 79.4 247.0 114.1 133.0 1.7          Feb 
5.9 38.9 699.4 144.6 554.8 426.3 128.5 0.5 321.3 81.2 240.1 110.1 130.0 1.7          Mar 
5.8 39.4 712.0 151.1 560.9 433.7 127.2 0.5 323.9 76.9 247.0 119.0 128.0 1.7          Apr 
5.5 40.7 715.1 164.8 550.4 424.8 125.5 0.5 323.1 87.8 235.3 109.7 125.6 1.7          May5.6 40.9 689.4 165.7 523.7 398.0 125.7 0.6 321.0 89.2 231.9 102.7 129.2 1.7          June
5.6 41.1 659.4 151.7 507.6 381.5 126.2 0.6 323.2 84.1 239.1 109.9 129.2 1.7          July
5.8 41.1 658.4 150.7 507.6 384.4 123.2 0.6 337.0 95.8 241.2 111.8 129.4 1.7          Aug 6.0 47.8 684.1 169.9 514.1 389.1 125.0 0.5 339.0 86.5 252.5 123.3 129.2 1.7          Sep 
5.9 48.4 683.7 155.2 528.5 404.4 124.1 0.5 335.8 82.4 253.4 123.3 130.1 1.6          Oct 
5.9 48.4 691.6 171.7 519.8 394.7 125.1 0.4 335.4 81.6 253.8 124.2 129.6 1.7          Nov 5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5          Dec 
5.8 44.6 704.6 170.0 534.6 408.8 125.8 0.3 317.2 88.2 229.0 114.6 114.4 1.5 2007          Jan 
5.7 44.6 709.9 177.7 532.1 406.6 125.6 0.3 324.0 93.2 230.8 118.1 112.7 1.5          Feb 
5.8 44.3 723.0 200.3 522.6 398.3 124.3 0.3 312.1 90.2 221.9 112.2 109.7 1.4          Mar 
5.7 44.3 753.1 200.5 552.6 429.8 122.8 0.3 320.6 91.9 228.7 118.5 110.2 3.2          Apr 
5.7 44.7 757.9 208.0 549.9 424.0 125.9 0.3 338.8 111.1 227.8 116.9 110.8 3.2          May5.8 45.2 727.5 210.6 516.9 390.7 126.1 0.2 329.5 107.7 221.8 111.5 110.3 3.1          June
Changes *
+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006
− 3.5 + 1.3 + 17.7 + 40.9 − 23.2 − 20.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 24.9 + 24.3 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 2006          Jan 
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 21.9 − 7.6 + 29.5 + 29.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 15.1 − 6.9 − 8.2 − 6.1 − 2.2 + 0.0          Feb 
− 1.2 − 0.2 + 11.8 + 8.6 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 3.8 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 2.1 − 4.9 − 3.3 − 1.7 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 + 0.8 + 17.2 + 7.5 + 9.7 + 10.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 5.1 − 4.0 + 9.1 + 9.7 − 0.6 − 0.1          Apr 
− 0.3 + 1.4 + 6.3 + 14.4 − 8.1 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 11.1 − 10.3 − 8.8 − 1.5 + 0.0          May+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 27.0 + 0.6 − 27.6 − 27.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.3 − 4.0 − 7.2 + 3.3 + 0.1          June
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 29.6 − 13.9 − 15.8 − 16.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 5.0 + 7.3 + 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 3.2 − 2.7 − + 14.0 + 11.8 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.0          Aug + 0.2 + 6.5 + 24.0 + 18.7 + 5.2 + 3.8 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 9.5 + 10.5 + 11.2 − 0.7 − 0.0          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 14.6 + 16.8 + 15.2 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 5.9 − 4.1 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.0 + 0.5 + 13.8 + 17.9 − 4.1 − 6.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.1          Nov − 0.1 + 1.9 − 1.9 − 3.6 + 1.7 + 2.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 25.5 + 0.4 − 25.9 − 12.7 − 13.2 − 0.1          Dec 
− 0.0 − 5.8 + 12.1 + 1.3 + 10.9 + 9.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 5.8 − 0.2 + 2.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 2007          Jan 
− 0.0 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 8.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 8.6 + 5.3 + 3.4 + 4.2 − 0.8 − 0.1          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 14.6 + 23.0 − 8.4 − 7.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 10.8 − 2.9 − 8.0 − 5.5 − 2.4 − 0.1          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 1.2 + 33.0 + 33.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 10.2 + 2.0 + 8.2 + 6.9 + 1.3 + 1.8          Apr 
− 0.0 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 7.1 − 4.1 − 6.9 + 2.8 − + 17.4 + 19.0 − 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.3 − 0.0          May+ 0.0 + 0.5 − 29.8 + 2.8 − 32.6 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 9.2 − 3.3 − 5.9 − 5.4 − 0.6 − 0.1          June
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.4
1998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2006          Jan 3,032.2 2,661.3 325.0 282.8 282.0 0.8 42.2 40.3 1.9 2,707.3 2,168.5
         Feb 3,023.3 2,656.6 316.7 283.3 282.6 0.7 33.4 32.6 0.8 2,706.5 2,170.1         Mar 3,030.2 2,659.7 329.2 292.7 291.7 0.9 36.5 35.9 0.6 2,701.1 2,167.3
         Apr 3,066.0 2,667.7 336.7 297.1 296.0 1.0 39.7 38.8 0.8 2,729.3 2,199.0
         May 3,065.4 2,659.4 326.4 293.2 292.4 0.7 33.2 32.5 0.7 2,739.0 2,196.1         June 3,028.2 2,656.1 326.0 292.7 291.7 1.0 33.3 32.3 1.1 2,702.1 2,173.3
         July 3,024.4 2,653.2 320.7 285.5 284.6 0.9 35.2 34.1 1.1 2,703.7 2,175.1
         Aug 3,022.5 2,652.2 318.1 285.5 284.8 0.7 32.6 32.0 0.6 2,704.4 2,178.5         Sep 3,035.2 2,668.7 333.0 301.3 300.5 0.8 31.8 31.5 0.3 2,702.1 2,183.5
         Oct 3,033.2 2,664.9 334.5 297.2 296.4 0.8 37.4 36.8 0.6 2,698.7 2,180.2
         Nov 3,037.8 2,661.5 325.7 290.2 289.4 0.8 35.5 34.8 0.7 2,712.2 2,185.1         Dec 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007          Jan 3,024.5 2,641.8 313.0 278.9 278.2 0.7 34.1 33.2 0.9 2,711.5 2,191.4
         Feb 3,011.3 2,641.0 316.4 284.1 283.2 1.0 32.2 31.5 0.8 2,695.0 2,178.8         Mar 3,016.1 2,640.4 324.2 291.8 291.1 0.6 32.4 31.3 1.2 2,691.9 2,179.7
         Apr 3,043.3 2,637.5 327.9 291.1 290.1 1.0 36.8 35.4 1.4 2,715.4 2,205.0
         May 3,021.0 2,631.6 319.3 284.2 283.3 0.9 35.1 34.7 0.4 2,701.6 2,189.7         June 2,986.2 2,634.1 321.7 293.5 292.7 0.8 28.2 27.3 0.9 2,664.6 2,159.1
Changes *
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.31999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.02004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2006          Jan + 19.6 + 8.8 + 15.3 + 9.3 + 9.1 + 0.2 + 6.0 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 4.3 + 9.9
         Feb − 8.9 − 4.7 − 8.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 8.8 − 7.6 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 1.5         Mar + 6.9 + 3.0 + 12.4 + 9.3 + 9.2 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.3 − 0.2 − 5.5 − 2.7
         Apr + 35.3 + 7.5 + 7.6 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 27.6 + 31.3
         May − 1.4 − 9.0 − 11.0 − 4.6 − 4.3 − 0.3 − 6.4 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 9.7 − 2.9         June − 37.2 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 36.9 − 22.8
         July − 3.8 − 3.0 − 5.3 − 7.2 − 7.1 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.8
         Aug − 1.9 − 1.0 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 3.4         Sep + 12.7 + 16.5 + 14.9 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 2.2 + 5.0
         Oct − 2.0 − 3.8 + 1.5 − 4.1 − 4.1 + 0.0 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 − 3.5 − 3.2
         Nov + 4.7 − 3.3 − 8.9 − 7.0 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 13.6 + 4.9         Dec − 36.4 − 28.6 − 22.5 − 20.3 − 20.1 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 2.9 + 0.7 − 13.9 − 2.5
2007          Jan + 24.3 + 6.5 + 9.9 + 9.0 + 8.9 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 14.4 + 10.1
         Feb − 13.2 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 5.3 + 5.0 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 16.5 − 12.6         Mar + 4.8 − 0.5 + 7.9 + 7.6 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.9
         Apr + 28.1 − 3.1 + 3.7 − 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 4.4 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 24.4 + 26.1
         May − 22.4 − 5.9 − 8.6 − 6.8 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 13.8 − 15.2         June − 35.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 8.4 + 8.5 − 0.2 − 6.9 − 7.4 + 0.5 − 37.3 − 30.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
2,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 1997
3,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,969.5 193.0 1,776.5 199.0 51.8 538.7 369.6 31.8 337.8 169.2 − 4.4 2006          Jan 
1,972.9 193.5 1,779.4 197.1 50.7 536.5 368.5 32.2 336.3 168.0 − 4.4          Feb 
1,966.6 193.2 1,773.5 200.7 49.6 533.7 365.3 31.9 333.4 168.4 − 4.4          Mar 
1,968.9 192.6 1,776.3 230.2 49.4 530.3 364.0 31.9 332.2 166.3 − 4.5          Apr 
1,972.0 194.3 1,777.8 224.1 49.3 542.9 362.4 30.9 331.6 180.5 − 4.5          May1,973.4 196.3 1,777.2 199.9 49.3 528.8 358.7 30.8 327.9 170.1 − 4.4          June
1,976.5 198.7 1,777.9 198.6 48.9 528.6 358.0 31.4 326.5 170.7 − 4.4          July
1,978.4 197.0 1,781.4 200.0 49.1 525.9 357.0 31.6 325.3 168.9 − 4.4          Aug 1,980.2 198.9 1,781.3 203.3 49.0 518.7 356.4 30.8 325.6 162.2 − 4.7          Sep 
1,975.9 197.7 1,778.1 204.4 48.7 518.4 355.9 30.9 325.0 162.6 − 4.7          Oct 
1,978.9 198.2 1,780.7 206.1 48.6 527.1 358.4 31.4 327.0 168.7 − 4.7          Nov 1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8          Dec 
1,974.6 198.6 1,776.0 216.9 48.8 520.1 355.8 31.6 324.2 164.3 − 4.7 2007          Jan 
1,973.1 197.3 1,775.7 205.8 48.6 516.1 353.3 31.5 321.8 162.8 − 4.7          Feb 
1,970.1 196.5 1,773.6 209.6 48.2 512.2 347.9 31.4 316.5 164.4 − 4.7          Mar 
1,966.8 195.7 1,771.1 238.1 49.5 510.5 345.2 31.6 313.6 165.3 − 4.7          Apr 
1,969.8 199.1 1,770.7 219.9 49.2 511.9 343.8 32.2 311.6 168.1 − 4.7          May1,969.0 198.8 1,770.3 190.1 48.8 505.4 345.0 33.9 311.1 160.4 − 4.6          June
Changes *
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
− 1.2 − 1.7 + 0.4 + 11.1 − 0.3 − 5.6 − 5.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 0.6 − − 0.1 2006          Jan 
+ 3.4 + 0.5 + 2.9 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 2.2 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 6.3 − 0.3 − 6.0 + 3.5 − 1.1 − 2.7 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 2.9 + 0.4 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.8 − 0.6 + 2.4 + 29.5 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.3 − 2.1 − + 0.1          Apr 
+ 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 12.6 − 1.6 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 14.2 − + 0.0          May+ 1.4 + 2.0 − 0.6 − 24.2 − 0.0 − 14.1 − 3.8 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 10.4 − − 0.0          June
+ 3.1 + 2.4 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.5 − − 0.0          July
+ 1.9 − 1.6 + 3.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 2.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.7 − − 0.0          Aug + 1.8 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 6.7 − + 0.4          Sep 
− 4.4 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − + 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.2 + 0.6 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 8.7 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 2.0 + 6.2 − − 0.0          Nov − 5.5 − 3.1 − 2.4 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 11.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 11.4 − + 0.1          Dec 
− 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 11.3 − 0.4 + 4.3 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 6.9 − − 0.0 2007          Jan 
− 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 11.1 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 1.4 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.4 + 3.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 5.4 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 1.5 − − 0.0          Mar 
− 3.5 − 0.8 − 2.7 + 29.6 + 1.3 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − + 0.0          Apr 
+ 3.0 + 3.4 − 0.5 − 18.2 − 0.3 + 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.7 − 2.0 + 2.8 − − 0.0          May− 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 29.9 − 0.4 − 6.4 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 7.7 − − 0.0          June
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2004 2,224.2 1,127.7 1,086.0 869.7 216.3 1,211.6 320.4 136.7 37.1 53.0 141.4 31.9 56.1 60.0
2005 2,226.6 1,154.5 1,093.3 895.9 197.4 1,199.7 311.3 130.6 37.2 49.4 134.1 31.6 57.8 74.0
2006          June 2,265.4 1,173.1 1,109.8 915.7 194.1 1,232.9 319.0 134.2 38.6 49.8 131.2 32.5 60.1 94.1
         Sep 2,281.0 1,180.7 1,114.7 921.4 193.3 1,241.5 318.1 136.3 39.2 49.4 130.1 33.0 61.0 103.3
         Dec 2,242.2 1,177.5 1,114.7 921.2 193.5 1,204.2 316.1 133.0 39.3 47.2 131.4 32.4 60.9 76.0
2007          Mar 2,261.5 1,174.9 1,110.9 918.8 192.0 1,229.1 314.4 138.5 39.6 47.7 128.7 32.5 61.2 102.5
         June 2,262.0 1,172.6 1,106.6 917.4 189.2 1,230.7 311.4 141.2 39.6 48.0 130.6 33.2 62.5 100.6
 Short-term lending
2004 283.4 − 12.5 − 12.5 239.3 7.6 40.9 3.5 11.1 52.9 3.6 5.9 26.4
2005 273.2 − 11.2 − 11.2 230.0 6.7 38.8 3.2 9.7 49.2 3.3 6.1 32.8
2006          June 292.0 − 10.5 − 10.5 250.6 6.4 42.9 3.4 10.4 47.4 3.7 5.9 51.2
         Sep 300.8 − 11.0 − 11.0 258.6 6.5 43.3 3.3 10.2 46.6 3.9 6.3 60.5         Dec 269.6 − 10.5 − 10.5 228.6 6.3 39.6 3.1 8.8 48.6 3.2 5.5 35.0
2007          Mar 291.4 − 10.5 − 10.5 251.6 6.1 42.6 3.5 9.5 46.2 3.4 5.6 58.6
         June 292.9 − 9.6 − 9.6 252.5 5.0 45.3 3.1 9.7 46.9 3.8 6.1 55.2
 Medium-term lending
2004 194.3 − 38.8 − 38.8 119.9 11.8 16.4 2.5 5.6 11.1 3.2 11.3 7.62005 194.6 − 35.7 − 35.7 122.5 10.7 15.6 2.1 5.2 11.4 3.0 10.6 10.8
2006          June 196.3 − 34.8 − 34.8 125.5 10.6 17.0 2.2 5.2 11.5 3.0 10.3 11.7
         Sep 198.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 127.5 10.5 18.8 2.4 5.3 11.5 3.0 10.5 12.3         Dec 194.5 − 34.4 − 34.4 124.6 10.5 18.5 2.2 5.1 11.4 2.9 10.6 11.7
2007          Mar 196.5 − 33.5 − 33.5 128.2 10.5 20.5 2.1 5.1 11.3 2.9 10.5 14.6
         June 198.8 − 33.1 − 33.1 131.2 10.6 20.3 2.1 5.3 12.4 2.9 11.1 15.6
 Long-term lending
2004 1,746.5 1,127.7 1,034.7 869.7 165.0 852.4 301.0 79.4 31.2 36.2 77.3 25.0 38.9 26.0
2005 1,758.8 1,154.5 1,046.3 895.9 150.4 847.2 293.9 76.2 31.8 34.5 73.5 25.2 41.1 30.4
2006          June 1,777.2 1,173.1 1,064.5 915.7 148.7 856.8 302.0 74.4 33.0 34.2 72.3 25.8 43.9 31.3
         Sep 1,781.3 1,180.7 1,069.1 921.4 147.8 855.4 301.2 74.2 33.5 33.8 72.0 26.1 44.2 30.6         Dec 1,778.1 1,177.5 1,069.8 921.2 148.6 850.9 299.3 74.9 34.0 33.3 71.4 26.4 44.7 29.3
2007          Mar 1,773.6 1,174.9 1,066.8 918.8 148.0 849.3 297.9 75.5 34.0 33.1 71.2 26.2 45.1 29.3
         June 1,770.3 1,172.6 1,063.9 917.4 146.5 847.0 295.8 75.5 34.3 33.0 71.3 26.4 45.3 29.9
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2006          Q2 + 5.5 − 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 2.3 − 1.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 4.3
         Q3 + 15.6 + 4.1 + 4.4 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 8.5 − 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 8.5         Q4 − 37.9 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 36.8 − 2.1 − 3.3 + 0.2 − 2.2 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 27.4
2007          Q1 + 16.2 − 1.7 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 21.6 − 1.7 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 22.7
         Q2 − 0.8 − 5.8 − 3.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 3.0
 Short-term lending
2006          Q2 − 0.9 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.4         Q3 + 8.8 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 8.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 9.3         Q4 − 31.2 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 29.9 − 0.2 − 3.7 − 0.2 − 1.4 + 1.8 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 25.4
2007          Q1 + 21.8 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 23.0 − 0.2 + 3.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 23.5
         Q2 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 4.3
 Medium-term lending
2006          Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3         Q3 + 2.6 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.6         Q4 − 3.7 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6
2007          Q1 − 1.2 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Q2 + 2.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.8
 Long-term lending
2006          Q2 + 3.6 − 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.2         Q3 + 4.2 + 4.1 + 4.2 + 4.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.4         Q4 − 3.0 − 3.6 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 4.2 − 1.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.4
2007          Q1 − 4.4 − 1.7 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1
         Q2 − 3.5 − 5.8 − 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
695.5 163.7 42.5 204.2 419.0 61.7 999.4 762.4 237.0 129.2 19.9 13.2 3.2 2004
685.0 160.3 40.6 199.3 407.5 60.6 1,012.9 778.9 234.0 130.1 18.8 14.1 3.1 2005
692.2 166.3 39.8 199.7 404.2 61.0 1,018.5 787.2 231.3 130.4 18.3 14.1 3.7 2006          June
689.3 164.9 40.5 199.5 401.0 61.5 1,025.1 792.8 232.3 131.4 18.4 14.3 3.7          Sep 
684.0 164.2 39.5 197.0 396.6 60.2 1,023.4 795.0 228.4 130.6 17.6 14.7 3.7          Dec 
678.4 163.0 40.3 195.2 392.7 59.7 1,017.9 792.7 225.2 129.8 16.9 14.6 3.7 2007          Mar 
675.1 162.4 41.6 193.4 390.5 59.9 1,017.0 791.6 225.4 129.6 17.6 14.3 3.6          June
Short-term lending
95.0 15.8 11.5 27.6 44.4 11.4 43.0 4.9 38.0 2.3 19.9 1.1 0.0 2004
86.9 14.1 10.3 23.9 40.1 10.6 41.8 4.5 37.3 2.6 18.8 1.4 0.0 2005
85.6 13.1 11.0 22.9 39.1 11.4 40.4 4.2 36.2 2.6 18.3 1.1 0.0 2006          June
84.5 13.4 10.3 22.5 38.2 11.1 41.0 4.5 36.5 2.8 18.4 1.2 0.0          Sep 
84.9 13.9 10.1 22.1 36.7 10.0 39.8 4.2 35.6 2.8 17.6 1.2 0.0          Dec 
82.2 12.6 10.1 22.1 36.2 10.3 38.9 4.5 34.4 2.6 16.9 1.0 0.0 2007          Mar 
82.4 12.5 11.0 22.0 36.2 10.3 39.5 4.6 35.0 2.6 17.6 0.9 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
62.3 6.5 6.5 17.2 29.6 3.9 73.8 26.9 46.9 37.7 − 0.5 0.1 2004
63.7 7.3 6.5 15.9 29.8 3.8 71.5 25.0 46.5 37.2 − 0.7 0.1 2005
64.6 7.8 6.0 16.1 28.8 3.8 70.2 24.1 46.1 37.3 − 0.6 0.1 2006          June
63.8 6.9 6.8 16.1 28.6 3.8 70.8 23.9 46.8 37.9 − 0.6 0.0          Sep 
62.3 6.9 5.9 15.8 27.7 3.8 69.3 23.9 45.4 37.0 − 0.6 0.1          Dec 
61.2 6.5 6.3 15.7 27.5 3.8 67.7 23.0 44.7 36.9 − 0.6 0.0 2007          Mar 
61.5 6.5 6.8 16.0 27.4 3.8 66.9 22.5 44.4 36.8 − 0.7 0.0          June
Long-term lending
538.2 141.5 24.5 159.5 345.0 46.4 882.6 730.6 152.0 89.2 − 11.5 3.1 2004
534.4 138.9 23.8 159.6 337.6 46.2 899.6 749.4 150.2 90.3 − 12.0 3.1 2005
541.9 145.4 22.8 160.7 336.3 45.8 907.9 758.9 149.0 90.6 − 12.4 3.6 2006          June
541.1 144.7 23.4 160.8 334.3 46.6 913.3 764.4 149.0 90.7 − 12.6 3.6          Sep 
536.9 143.4 23.4 159.1 332.1 46.5 914.3 766.8 147.4 90.8 − 12.9 3.6          Dec 
535.0 143.9 24.0 157.5 328.9 45.7 911.3 765.2 146.1 90.3 − 12.9 3.7 2007          Mar 
531.2 143.4 23.8 155.4 326.9 45.8 910.5 764.6 146.0 90.3 − 12.7 3.6          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 2.0 − 0.3 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 2006          Q2
− 2.4 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 6.8 + 5.4 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q3
− 4.4 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 2.6 − 4.3 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 2.1 − 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 5.3 − 1.2 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 2.1 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 2007          Q1
− 3.4 − 0.5 + 1.2 − 2.0 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1          Q2
Short-term lending
+ 0.5 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 2006          Q2
− 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          Q3
+ 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 2.6 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 2007          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2006          Q2
− 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2007          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
− 1.2 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2006          Q2
− 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 5.5 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 0.8 − + 0.2 − 0.0          Q3
− 3.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 2.5 − 1.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.1 2007          Q1
− 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 2.3 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.1          Q2
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. — loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2004 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 235.0 616.2 8.0 608.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 32.2 10.1
2005 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 231.3 633.1 8.2 624.9 603.4 91.9 42.4 31.6 12.62006 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 289.5 673.3 11.7 661.6 586.5 97.5 37.8 30.4 11.2
2006          July 2,336.9 730.6 919.0 263.5 655.5 9.1 646.3 593.2 94.1 37.5 31.2 22.7
         Aug 2,347.5 725.6 936.9 273.7 663.2 10.1 653.1 590.3 94.7 37.5 31.4 24.8         Sep 2,356.4 724.2 950.0 285.9 664.1 10.7 653.5 587.7 94.5 37.9 30.4 26.9
         Oct 2,348.2 716.9 950.5 285.1 665.4 11.1 654.3 585.0 95.8 38.0 30.5 24.4
         Nov 2,375.0 744.4 952.5 286.1 666.3 11.2 655.1 581.5 96.7 38.1 30.4 20.6         Dec 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 289.5 673.3 11.7 661.6 586.5 97.5 37.8 30.4 11.2
2007          Jan 2,401.4 746.2 973.6 296.4 677.3 12.4 664.9 582.2 99.4 38.9 30.3 19.8
         Feb 2,409.8 746.2 982.5 302.4 680.1 12.7 667.4 580.3 100.8 38.8 30.1 23.1         Mar 2,417.2 747.5 988.7 309.0 679.7 13.2 666.4 578.6 102.5 38.5 30.0 24.3
         Apr 2,434.0 756.1 999.6 316.6 683.0 13.5 669.5 574.6 103.7 38.3 30.0 24.2
         May 2,445.1 761.0 1,008.9 324.3 684.6 13.9 670.8 570.1 105.0 37.6 29.8 22.0
         June 2,464.9 772.5 1,019.0 329.6 689.4 15.3 674.1 566.7 106.7 37.5 30.2 23.9
Changes *
2005 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 3.9 + 16.4 + 0.4 + 16.0 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 2.4
2006 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 + 57.5 + 40.2 + 3.5 + 36.6 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 2.2
2006          July − 5.8 − 11.4 + 8.0 + 5.1 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.0
         Aug + 10.0 − 5.6 + 17.9 + 10.2 + 7.8 + 1.0 + 6.8 − 2.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.2         Sep + 10.4 − 1.4 + 13.1 + 12.2 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 2.6 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 2.0
         Oct − 8.2 − 7.3 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 2.7 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.5
         Nov + 26.8 + 27.5 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 3.8         Dec + 19.5 + 3.3 + 10.3 + 3.3 + 7.0 + 0.5 + 6.5 + 5.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.4
2007          Jan + 6.7 − 1.5 + 10.9 + 6.9 + 4.1 + 0.7 + 3.4 − 4.4 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 8.6
         Feb + 8.4 − 0.1 + 8.8 + 6.0 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 − 1.8 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.3         Mar + 7.4 + 1.3 + 6.2 + 6.6 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Apr + 16.2 + 8.1 + 10.9 + 7.6 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 3.0 − 3.9 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 11.1 + 4.9 + 9.3 + 7.7 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 − 4.5 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 2.2         June + 18.3 + 11.5 + 8.6 + 3.8 + 4.8 + 1.4 + 3.4 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5
Domestic government End of year or month *
2004 103.6 16.8 82.5 30.5 52.0 0.9 51.1 2.7 1.5 34.6 1.1 −2005 103.7 21.0 78.7 31.7 47.0 0.5 46.5 2.4 1.5 32.3 1.0 −2006 134.4 26.7 104.0 51.1 52.9 2.1 50.8 2.1 1.6 28.2 0.8 −
2006          July 121.6 24.6 93.2 45.8 47.4 0.7 46.7 2.2 1.6 28.4 0.7 −
         Aug 125.5 23.8 97.8 46.1 51.7 1.4 50.2 2.3 1.6 28.4 0.7 −         Sep 128.1 22.5 101.6 50.0 51.6 1.7 49.8 2.3 1.6 28.7 0.7 −
         Oct 122.2 20.6 97.7 45.6 52.0 1.8 50.3 2.3 1.6 28.3 0.9 −
         Nov 132.3 24.2 104.3 51.9 52.4 1.8 50.6 2.2 1.6 28.4 0.8 −         Dec 134.4 26.7 104.0 51.1 52.9 2.1 50.8 2.1 1.6 28.2 0.8 −
2007          Jan 128.6 23.0 102.0 48.4 53.6 2.5 51.1 2.0 1.6 29.3 0.8 −
         Feb 131.1 24.1 103.4 49.5 53.8 2.5 51.3 2.1 1.6 29.2 0.8 −         Mar 131.0 22.8 104.6 51.3 53.2 2.5 50.7 2.1 1.6 29.0 0.8 −
         Apr 133.3 23.7 106.0 52.6 53.4 2.5 51.0 2.0 1.6 28.9 0.8 −
         May 143.8 25.4 115.0 61.3 53.7 2.5 51.2 1.9 1.6 28.8 0.8 −
         June 145.0 25.4 116.3 61.6 54.6 3.4 51.2 1.8 1.5 28.7 1.3 −
Changes *
2005 − 0.2 + 3.9 − 3.8 + 1.2 − 5.1 − 0.4 − 4.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.1 −
2006 + 30.7 + 5.7 + 25.3 + 19.4 + 5.9 + 1.6 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 −
2006          July − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 −
         Aug + 3.9 − 0.7 + 4.5 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.7 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −         Sep + 2.6 − 1.3 + 3.8 + 3.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − −
         Oct − 5.9 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 −
         Nov + 10.1 + 3.6 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 −         Dec + 2.1 + 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
2007          Jan − 6.0 − 3.7 − 2.2 − 2.7 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 2.5 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −         Mar − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.2 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 −
         Apr + 2.2 + 0.9 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         May + 10.5 + 1.7 + 8.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −         June + 1.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2004 2,096.4 630.1 768.7 204.5 564.2 7.1 557.1 600.8 96.9 9.0 31.1 10.1
2005 2,173.0 696.0 785.7 199.5 586.1 7.7 578.4 601.0 90.3 10.2 30.7 12.62006 2,260.2 721.0 858.8 238.4 620.4 9.6 610.8 584.5 95.9 9.6 29.5 11.2
2006          July 2,215.2 706.0 825.7 217.7 608.0 8.4 599.6 591.0 92.5 9.1 30.5 22.7
         Aug 2,222.0 701.7 839.1 227.5 611.6 8.7 602.9 588.0 93.1 9.2 30.7 24.8         Sep 2,228.3 701.6 848.4 235.8 612.5 8.9 603.6 585.4 92.9 9.2 29.7 26.9
         Oct 2,226.1 696.3 852.8 239.5 613.3 9.3 604.0 582.8 94.2 9.8 29.6 24.4
         Nov 2,242.8 720.2 848.2 234.3 613.9 9.4 604.5 579.3 95.1 9.7 29.6 20.6         Dec 2,260.2 721.0 858.8 238.4 620.4 9.6 610.8 584.5 95.9 9.6 29.5 11.2
2007          Jan 2,272.9 723.2 871.7 247.9 623.7 9.9 613.8 580.2 97.9 9.6 29.4 19.8
         Feb 2,278.7 722.1 879.1 252.9 626.2 10.2 616.0 578.3 99.3 9.6 29.3 23.1         Mar 2,286.1 724.6 884.1 257.6 626.5 10.7 615.7 576.5 100.9 9.6 29.2 24.3
         Apr 2,300.7 732.4 893.6 264.0 629.5 11.0 618.5 572.6 102.1 9.4 29.1 24.2
         May 2,301.3 735.6 893.9 263.0 631.0 11.4 619.6 568.3 103.5 8.8 29.0 22.0
         June 2,319.9 747.1 902.8 268.0 634.8 11.9 622.9 564.9 105.2 8.8 28.9 23.9
Changes *
2005 + 76.8 + 66.8 + 16.3 − 5.2 + 21.4 + 0.8 + 20.6 − 0.9 − 5.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 2.4
2006 + 87.3 + 24.3 + 72.3 + 38.1 + 34.2 + 1.9 + 32.4 − 16.5 + 7.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 2.2
2006          July − 5.3 − 11.2 + 8.2 + 5.5 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 2.6 − 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.0
         Aug + 6.2 − 4.9 + 13.4 + 9.8 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 3.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.2         Sep + 7.8 − 0.1 + 9.3 + 8.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 2.6 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 2.0
         Oct − 2.2 − 5.3 + 4.4 + 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.5
         Nov + 16.7 + 23.9 − 4.7 − 5.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 3.5 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.8         Dec + 17.4 + 0.7 + 10.7 + 4.1 + 6.5 + 0.2 + 6.3 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.4
2007          Jan + 12.7 + 2.3 + 13.1 + 9.5 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 3.2 − 4.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.6
         Feb + 5.8 − 1.1 + 7.4 + 4.9 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.2 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.3         Mar + 7.4 + 2.6 + 5.0 + 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Apr + 14.0 + 7.2 + 9.5 + 6.4 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.8 − 3.9 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
         May + 0.6 + 3.2 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 4.4 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.2         June + 17.2 + 11.5 + 7.3 + 3.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 3.3 − 3.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2004 762.3 202.0 533.4 110.2 423.1 1.7 421.5 5.1 21.8 8.7 18.3 10.12005 809.9 233.2 550.8 108.7 442.0 2.4 439.6 5.0 21.0 9.7 19.4 12.62006 874.9 256.1 594.1 122.8 471.3 3.2 468.1 4.5 20.2 9.1 20.0 11.2
2006          July 846.2 240.7 580.2 117.9 462.3 2.9 459.4 4.7 20.6 8.6 19.3 22.7
         Aug 856.2 241.9 589.1 123.6 465.5 2.9 462.6 4.7 20.5 8.7 19.6 24.8         Sep 864.8 244.3 595.3 129.0 466.2 3.1 463.2 4.7 20.6 8.8 19.9 26.9
         Oct 863.1 240.2 597.8 130.8 467.0 3.2 463.8 4.6 20.5 9.3 19.9 24.4
         Nov 869.2 253.6 590.7 123.2 467.6 3.2 464.4 4.5 20.3 9.2 20.0 20.6         Dec 874.9 256.1 594.1 122.8 471.3 3.2 468.1 4.5 20.2 9.1 20.0 11.2
2007          Jan 891.4 263.5 602.9 128.4 474.5 3.4 471.1 4.6 20.4 9.1 20.0 19.8
         Feb 891.5 257.5 609.1 132.0 477.1 3.5 473.6 4.6 20.4 9.1 19.9 23.1         Mar 893.5 258.8 609.6 132.9 476.7 3.7 473.0 4.6 20.6 9.1 19.9 24.3
         Apr 906.5 263.7 617.7 137.8 479.9 3.8 476.1 4.5 20.5 8.9 19.9 24.2
         May 903.6 263.8 614.9 133.4 481.5 3.9 477.6 4.5 20.4 8.3 19.8 22.0
         June 913.4 268.4 620.2 134.9 485.3 4.1 481.2 4.4 20.4 8.3 19.7 23.9
Changes *
2005 + 46.7 + 31.0 + 16.4 − 1.5 + 18.0 + 0.7 + 17.3 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 2.4
2006 + 63.5 + 22.2 + 42.5 + 13.4 + 29.1 + 0.7 + 28.4 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 2.2
2006          July − 2.3 − 6.8 + 4.8 + 1.8 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.0
         Aug + 9.3 + 0.6 + 8.9 + 5.6 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.2         Sep + 8.7 + 2.4 + 6.2 + 5.5 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.0
         Oct − 1.8 − 4.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.5
         Nov + 6.1 + 13.4 − 7.0 − 7.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.8         Dec + 5.7 + 2.5 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 9.4
2007          Jan + 16.5 + 7.4 + 9.1 + 5.6 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 8.6
         Feb + 0.1 − 6.0 + 6.2 + 3.6 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.3         Mar + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2
         Apr + 12.4 + 4.3 + 8.1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         May − 2.8 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 4.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.2         June + 8.3 + 4.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2004 1,334.2 428.1 414.8 71.7 283.5 59.6 13.2 235.3 216.9 25.7 175.1 16.2
2005 1,363.1 462.8 448.1 79.7 305.1 63.2 14.8 234.9 217.0 23.7 179.0 14.22006 1,385.3 464.9 450.3 81.7 307.4 61.1 14.6 264.7 245.7 30.1 198.6 16.9
2007          Jan 1,381.5 459.7 444.3 81.7 302.2 60.4 15.4 268.8 250.4 30.9 201.9 17.7
         Feb 1,387.3 464.6 448.4 81.1 306.2 61.0 16.2 270.0 251.0 30.7 202.4 17.8         Mar 1,392.6 465.8 449.9 79.9 308.7 61.3 16.0 274.5 254.9 31.2 205.3 18.5
         Apr 1,394.2 468.7 453.0 82.0 309.4 61.6 15.7 275.9 256.1 31.1 206.3 18.7
         May 1,397.7 471.8 455.5 81.8 311.2 62.5 16.3 279.0 258.7 32.0 207.6 19.1         June 1,406.5 478.7 462.5 81.6 317.4 63.6 16.1 282.6 261.7 32.5 209.6 19.6
Changes *
2005 + 30.1 + 35.8 + 34.2 + 8.0 + 21.5 + 4.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 4.1 − 1.82006 + 23.8 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.9 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 29.8 + 28.7 + 5.8 + 19.9 + 3.0
2007          Jan − 3.8 − 5.2 − 6.0 − 0.1 − 5.3 − 0.7 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 4.8 + 0.7 + 3.3 + 0.8
         Feb + 5.7 + 4.9 + 4.1 − 0.5 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1         Mar + 5.3 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 1.2 + 2.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 3.9 + 0.4 + 2.8 + 0.7
         Apr + 1.6 + 2.9 + 3.1 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.2
         May + 3.4 + 3.1 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.4         June + 8.8 + 6.9 + 7.0 − 0.2 + 6.2 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.6 + 3.0 + 0.5 + 2.0 + 0.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2004 103.6 41.4 0.8 5.8 34.8 0.0 12.9 15.1 2.7 2.2 10.2 0.1 21.5
2005 103.7 38.8 1.3 7.9 29.6 0.0 12.9 16.3 3.9 2.5 9.9 0.1 19.12006 134.4 41.9 2.1 6.2 33.6 0.0 9.5 18.0 5.4 2.5 10.0 0.1 18.5
2007          Jan 128.6 40.6 1.8 4.9 33.9 0.0 9.1 19.1 4.9 4.2 9.9 0.1 19.9
         Feb 131.1 41.8 1.8 5.9 34.1 0.0 9.1 18.8 4.8 4.0 9.9 0.1 19.8         Mar 131.0 42.2 1.6 6.7 33.8 0.0 9.1 19.4 4.9 4.6 9.8 0.1 19.6
         Apr 133.3 43.2 1.6 7.5 34.0 0.0 9.1 20.7 5.9 5.0 9.8 0.1 19.5
         May 143.8 46.9 1.6 11.2 34.1 0.0 9.1 20.0 4.8 5.3 9.8 0.1 19.4         June 145.0 46.6 3.4 8.9 34.2 0.0 9.1 22.6 5.1 7.6 9.7 0.1 19.3
Changes *
2005 − 0.2 − 3.0 + 0.1 + 2.1 − 5.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 2.42006 + 30.7 + 3.1 + 0.8 − 1.7 + 4.0 − 0.0 − 3.4 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.6
2007          Jan − 6.0 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.2 − − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 1.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0
         Feb + 2.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1         Mar − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Apr + 2.2 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 10.5 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1         June + 1.2 − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.3 + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
18.4 94.3 141.0 5.5 135.6 595.7 586.3 9.5 75.1 0.3 12.8 − 2004
17.9 90.8 144.1 5.3 138.8 596.0 586.4 9.6 69.3 0.5 11.3 − 200519.1 115.6 149.2 6.4 142.7 580.0 571.1 8.9 75.7 0.5 9.5 − 2006
18.4 119.6 149.2 6.5 142.7 575.6 566.8 8.8 77.4 0.5 9.4 − 2007          Jan 
19.1 120.9 149.2 6.7 142.4 573.7 565.0 8.7 78.9 0.5 9.4 −          Feb 
19.6 124.7 149.8 7.0 142.7 571.9 563.3 8.6 80.4 0.5 9.3 −          Mar 
19.8 126.2 149.6 7.2 142.4 568.1 559.7 8.4 81.5 0.5 9.2 −          Apr 
20.3 129.5 149.5 7.4 142.0 563.8 555.4 8.4 83.1 0.5 9.2 −          May20.9 133.1 149.5 7.8 141.7 560.5 552.2 8.3 84.8 0.5 9.1 −          June
Changes *
− 0.5 − 3.7 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 4.5 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 2005+ 1.1 + 24.7 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 4.0 − 16.0 − 15.3 − 0.7 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2006
− 0.7 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 − 4.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2007          Jan 
+ 0.7 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Feb 
+ 0.5 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Mar 
+ 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 3.8 − 3.6 − 0.2 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Apr 
+ 0.6 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 4.3 − 4.3 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          May+ 0.5 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 3.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 − − 0.1 −          June
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
 
  
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
25.7 10.5 9.6 2.3 3.3 0.3 21.4 2.9 12.9 4.8 0.8 0.0 2004
28.0 11.8 10.4 2.6 3.2 0.3 20.7 4.1 11.0 4.9 0.7 0.0 200530.5 11.5 12.7 3.4 3.0 0.3 44.0 7.8 29.7 6.0 0.6 0.0 2006
27.3 8.9 11.9 3.6 2.9 0.3 41.6 7.5 27.4 6.1 0.6 0.0 2007          Jan 
29.9 10.3 13.1 3.6 2.9 0.3 40.6 7.2 26.6 6.2 0.6 0.0          Feb 
29.5 9.8 13.2 3.6 2.9 0.3 39.9 6.5 26.8 6.1 0.6 0.0          Mar 
29.6 10.1 13.0 3.5 2.9 0.3 39.8 6.0 27.1 6.1 0.6 0.0          Apr 
33.7 11.2 16.1 3.6 2.8 0.3 43.2 7.8 28.7 6.2 0.5 0.0          May32.5 10.7 15.6 3.6 2.8 0.3 43.3 6.2 29.5 7.2 0.4 0.0          June
Changes *
+ 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 2005+ 2.5 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 23.3 + 3.6 + 18.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2006
− 3.2 − 2.5 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 2007          Jan 
+ 2.6 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Feb 
− 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 4.2 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 3.5 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          May− 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.1 −          June
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2004 613.0 603.5 515.5 397.9 88.0 76.7 9.6 7.7 14.2 105.8 98.4 85.2 7.4
2005 611.9 603.4 519.2 404.2 84.2 74.4 8.5 6.8 13.3 99.3 91.9 77.5 7.42006 594.9 586.5 487.4 384.4 99.1 89.8 8.3 6.4 13.2 107.6 97.5 70.5 10.0
2007          Feb 588.7 580.3 477.4 375.5 102.9 94.4 8.3 6.4 0.3 110.8 100.8 68.9 10.0
         Mar 586.9 578.6 474.2 373.3 104.4 96.0 8.4 6.4 0.4 112.5 102.5 68.6 10.0
         Apr 583.0 574.6 470.0 371.6 104.6 96.3 8.4 6.3 0.3 113.6 103.7 67.9 10.0
         May 578.5 570.1 465.8 369.7 104.4 96.1 8.3 6.3 0.3 115.6 105.0 67.2 10.6         June 575.0 566.7 461.7 366.2 105.0 96.8 8.3 6.2 0.3 117.3 106.7 66.8 10.7
Changes *
2005 − 2.2 − 1.2 + 2.9 + 6.5 − 4.0 − 2.6 − 1.1 − 0.8 . − 5.3 − 5.4 − 6.5 + 0.0
2006 − 17.0 − 16.8 − 31.7 − 20.4 + 14.9 + 15.5 − 0.2 − 0.4 . + 7.3 + 7.2 − 5.5 + 0.1
2007          Feb − 1.8 − 1.8 − 3.8 − 3.0 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 . + 1.4 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.0
         Mar − 1.7 − 1.8 − 3.3 − 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 . + 1.6 + 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0
         Apr − 3.9 − 3.9 − 4.1 − 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 1.2 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.0
         May − 4.5 − 4.5 − 4.2 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 . + 2.0 + 1.4 − 0.6 + 0.6         June − 3.5 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 1.7 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
  
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2004 1,550.0 382.6 22.9 214.6 36.5 62.1 94.2 1,393.7 2.4 0.5 0.5 1.5 43.3 3.7
2005 1,608.7 400.7 25.3 274.5 32.0 61.8 94.8 1,452.1 1.5 0.2 0.5 0.8 45.8 2.52006 1,636.2 392.5 41.1 301.5 30.9 68.3 118.3 1,449.5 1.8 0.2 0.8 0.7 51.4 1.2
2007          Feb 1,659.1 391.7 43.8 310.7 34.8 74.7 130.2 1,454.1 1.8 0.2 0.9 0.7 53.9 1.2
         Mar 1,667.0 387.2 47.1 309.9 37.6 80.5 137.0 1,449.5 1.8 0.1 1.0 0.7 52.1 1.2
         Apr 1,668.3 385.8 47.5 307.9 37.6 80.1 140.2 1,448.0 1.8 0.1 1.0 0.7 52.0 1.3
         May 1,680.8 384.0 49.2 315.9 38.6 81.3 143.3 1,456.2 1.7 0.1 1.0 0.6 52.0 1.3         June 1,684.0 380.9 49.6 319.8 39.8 85.3 142.8 1,455.8 1.8 0.1 1.0 0.6 52.7 1.3
Changes *
2005 + 56.1 + 16.2 + 3.4 + 59.8 − 5.6 − 0.3 − 5.8 + 62.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 2.6 + 0.0
2006 + 21.6 − 27.3 + 8.2 + 25.4 − 2.3 + 6.0 + 22.9 − 7.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.2
2007          Feb + 3.4 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 5.2 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.1 − 0.0
         Mar + 7.9 − 4.5 + 3.3 − 0.9 + 2.9 + 5.8 + 6.8 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.0
         Apr + 1.2 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
         May + 12.5 − 1.7 + 1.8 + 8.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 8.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0         June + 3.2 − 3.1 + 0.3 + 3.9 + 1.2 + 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2006 26 193.9 41.5 0.0 14.4 27.4 66.7 11.7 14.2 0.4 28.6 123.8 5.2 3.7 7.4 95.2
2007          Apr 26 193.2 42.2 0.0 12.6 27.2 66.9 12.1 15.3 0.3 27.6 123.8 5.2 4.3 7.3 7.3
         May 26 193.0 42.5 0.0 12.6 27.2 66.9 12.1 14.9 0.3 26.7 123.5 5.2 5.2 7.3 7.3         June 26 193.9 43.2 0.0 12.7 27.2 67.2 12.1 14.7 0.3 25.8 123.2 5.2 6.9 7.3 7.3
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2007          Apr 15 141.2 29.0 0.0 7.4 17.3 50.2 11.1 9.9 0.2 22.3 82.9 5.0 4.3 4.7 4.5         May 15 140.9 29.1 0.0 7.3 17.3 50.3 11.2 9.6 0.2 21.3 82.6 5.0 5.2 4.7 4.5         June 15 141.8 29.8 0.0 7.6 17.3 50.6 11.2 9.3 0.2 20.5 82.5 4.9 6.9 4.7 4.6
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2007          Apr 11 52.0 13.1 0.0 5.3 9.9 16.7 0.9 5.4 0.1 5.2 40.9 0.2 − 2.6 2.8         May 11 52.2 13.3 0.0 5.3 9.9 16.6 0.9 5.3 0.1 5.4 40.8 0.2 − 2.6 2.7         June 11 52.1 13.4 0.0 5.1 9.9 16.6 0.9 5.4 0.1 5.3 40.7 0.2 − 2.6 2.8
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2006 25.1 3.7 6.5 42.4 29.8 38.6 18.5 4.1 6.8 3.4 13.3 10.4 7.5 11.4 9.5 0.5
2007          Apr 2.2 0.1 0.5 4.6 3.4 3.9 2.0 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.1 10.5 7.7 0.9 0.1
         May 1.8 0.1 0.5 3.8 2.7 3.4 1.7 0.4 0.7 0.3 1.0 10.6 7.7 0.8 0.0         June 1.9 0.1 0.5 4.0 2.8 3.5 1.7 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.1 10.7 7.6 0.8 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2007          Apr 1.3 0.1 0.3 3.3 2.3 3.0 1.5 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.9 6.2 3.8 0.6 0.0         May 1.2 0.1 0.3 2.7 1.8 2.5 1.2 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 6.4 3.8 0.5 0.0         June 1.2 0.1 0.3 2.8 1.8 2.6 1.2 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.9 6.4 3.8 0.5 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2007          Apr 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.1 0.9 0.6 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.9 0.3 0.0         May 0.7 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.9 0.3 0.0         June 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.9 0.3 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
with
foreign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to market
foreign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2004 52 203 1,452.7 681.0 595.7 170.2 425.6 85.2 671.0 477.3 17.1 15.8 460.2 193.7 100.7
2005 54 211 1,626.5 713.1 640.8 180.1 460.7 72.3 805.8 587.7 22.0 21.5 565.7 218.1 107.6
2006          Aug 54 212 1,711.4 718.6 651.8 188.2 463.6 66.7 883.7 671.2 19.5 18.7 651.7 212.5 109.2
         Sep 53 211 1,719.6 703.5 635.5 205.3 430.1 68.0 912.0 697.3 19.9 19.1 677.4 214.7 104.1
         Oct 53 212 1,748.1 715.8 645.6 196.6 449.1 70.2 917.5 695.4 21.3 20.6 674.0 222.1 114.8
         Nov 53 213 1,766.3 712.9 641.3 196.1 445.1 71.6 918.4 696.2 19.7 19.0 676.4 222.2 135.1         Dec 53 213 1,743.7 711.6 635.5 194.1 441.4 76.1 897.7 671.8 18.5 17.9 653.3 226.0 134.3
2007          Jan 53 214 1,876.7 758.9 679.9 208.4 471.5 79.0 970.4 749.8 19.2 18.4 730.6 220.6 147.4
         Feb 53 214 1,917.0 757.3 677.1 208.1 469.0 80.2 1,018.4 786.9 22.5 21.7 764.4 231.4 141.4         Mar 53 215 1,910.2 739.8 661.9 225.4 436.5 77.9 1,040.2 814.0 23.0 22.2 791.0 226.2 130.2
         Apr 53 214 1,902.2 736.1 658.6 225.9 432.7 77.5 1,024.4 798.6 25.0 24.3 773.6 225.8 141.6
         May 53 215 1,962.5 763.0 684.6 232.9 451.8 78.3 1,057.5 822.4 26.8 26.0 795.6 235.1 142.1
Changes *
2004 − 3 + 1 +207.5 +100.7 + 90.1 − 15.4 +105.5 + 10.6 + 64.2 + 57.8 − 1.9 − 1.0 + 59.7 + 6.4 + 42.7
2005 + 2 + 8 + 74.0 − 4.9 + 10.6 + 10.0 + 0.6 − 15.5 + 80.1 + 70.1 + 4.9 + 5.7 + 65.2 + 10.0 − 1.1
2006          Aug − − + 9.4 + 2.8 + 4.4 − 11.3 + 15.6 − 1.5 + 4.0 + 7.1 − 1.1 − 1.0 + 8.2 − 3.0 + 2.5
         Sep − 1 − 1 − 2.2 − 19.1 − 20.2 + 17.1 − 37.3 + 1.1 + 22.4 + 21.5 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 21.1 + 0.9 − 5.5
         Oct − + 1 + 28.5 + 12.7 + 10.5 − 8.8 + 19.3 + 2.1 + 5.2 − 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.5 − 3.8 + 7.6 + 10.7
         Nov − + 1 + 49.1 + 7.3 + 5.3 − 0.4 + 5.7 + 2.1 + 20.1 + 15.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 + 17.2 + 4.6 + 21.6         Dec − − − 22.6 − 1.1 − 5.7 − 2.0 − 3.6 + 4.5 − 20.9 − 24.6 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 23.4 + 3.7 − 0.6
2007          Jan − + 1 +119.1 + 42.7 + 40.2 + 14.3 + 25.9 + 2.5 + 64.1 + 71.4 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 70.7 − 7.4 + 12.2
         Feb − − + 57.7 + 4.0 + 2.4 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 58.8 + 45.8 + 3.3 + 3.3 + 42.5 + 13.0 − 5.2         Mar − + 1 + 2.3 − 14.8 − 12.7 + 17.3 − 30.0 − 2.1 + 27.2 + 31.4 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 30.9 − 4.2 − 10.1
         Apr − − 1 + 11.3 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 0.0 − 3.4 − 5.7 + 2.0 + 2.0 − 7.8 + 2.3 + 12.3
         May − + 1 + 51.1 + 23.8 + 23.2 + 7.0 + 16.2 + 0.6 + 27.2 + 19.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 17.3 + 8.1 + 0.1
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2004 45 170 647.7 304.4 236.1 117.1 119.0 68.3 282.1 211.9 38.6 35.0 173.3 70.2 61.2
2005 43 153 713.6 320.9 249.4 119.9 129.6 71.4 324.6 224.0 39.0 35.8 185.0 100.6 68.1
2006          Aug 42 149 748.9 331.4 251.6 118.3 133.3 79.8 349.1 227.4 48.2 46.3 179.2 121.6 68.4
         Sep 42 148 774.3 337.6 258.8 119.2 139.5 78.9 366.8 238.1 46.7 44.3 191.4 128.7 69.8
         Oct 42 147 765.2 337.9 259.8 117.1 142.7 78.1 360.3 229.4 46.5 44.2 182.9 130.9 67.0
         Nov 42 145 757.4 341.0 262.9 118.6 144.4 78.1 347.7 219.1 46.4 44.7 172.7 128.6 68.7         Dec 40 142 761.2 341.9 262.8 124.1 138.7 79.1 347.3 218.7 38.0 36.4 180.7 128.6 72.1
2007          Jan 40 113 603.6 298.9 224.9 122.7 102.2 74.0 248.9 134.1 36.2 34.1 97.9 114.8 55.8
         Feb 40 113 597.2 292.1 218.9 115.6 103.3 73.2 248.0 133.2 35.5 34.1 97.7 114.8 57.1         Mar 40 113 603.5 299.1 224.8 118.9 105.8 74.3 247.9 133.1 34.9 33.6 98.2 114.7 56.6
         Apr 40 112 602.3 295.8 221.3 115.0 106.3 74.5 250.7 136.5 35.1 33.7 101.4 114.3 55.8
         May 40 112 613.6 299.0 222.3 112.2 110.1 76.6 255.0 138.2 36.5 35.1 101.7 116.8 59.6
Changes *
2004 − 1 − 9 + 9.3 + 0.8 − 8.1 − 10.2 + 2.0 + 9.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 2.8 + 4.2 + 7.0 + 0.1
2005 − 2 − 17 + 49.9 + 7.0 + 7.6 + 2.7 + 4.9 − 0.6 + 36.8 + 6.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 6.1 + 30.3 + 6.1
2006          Aug − 1 − 1 − 10.6 − 5.6 − 6.8 − 0.9 − 6.0 + 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 3.8
         Sep − − 1 + 23.9 + 5.0 + 6.6 + 1.0 + 5.7 − 1.6 + 17.5 + 10.4 − 1.5 − 2.0 + 11.9 + 7.1 + 1.4
         Oct − − 1 − 9.0 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 2.1 + 3.1 − 0.7 − 6.5 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 8.4 + 2.1 − 2.8
         Nov − − 2 − 2.5 + 6.8 + 4.9 + 1.4 + 3.5 + 1.9 − 11.1 − 9.0 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 8.9 − 2.1 + 1.7         Dec − 2 − 3 + 4.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 5.7 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 8.4 − 8.3 + 8.1 − 0.1 + 3.4
2007          Jan − − 29 −159.7 − 44.5 − 38.7 − 1.5 − 37.3 − 5.8 − 98.9 − 85.0 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 83.2 − 13.8 − 16.3
         Feb − − − 3.9 − 5.0 − 5.0 − 7.1 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.3         Mar − − + 7.6 + 7.8 + 6.3 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.5
         Apr − − 1 + 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.7 − 3.9 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 3.6 + 4.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.7
         May − − + 9.9 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 2.8 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 2.5 + 3.7
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 2003
1,226.9 798.4 295.2 503.2 428.4 61.8 55.7 52.4 6.1 5.8 366.6 139.9 21.7 64.3 20041,362.8 912.4 373.6 538.9 450.4 63.9 59.0 55.3 4.9 4.6 386.5 171.9 20.9 70.8 2005
1,414.9 943.8 356.0 587.8 471.1 67.4 59.5 56.5 8.0 7.3 403.7 180.2 22.5 93.9 2006          Aug 
1,420.1 948.2 383.9 564.3 471.9 64.4 56.6 53.8 7.8 7.1 407.6 180.2 27.8 91.5          Sep 
1,446.6 966.0 378.8 587.2 480.6 61.3 53.6 50.7 7.7 7.1 419.3 185.5 28.0 88.0          Oct 
1,457.1 968.0 384.2 583.8 489.1 58.5 51.0 48.5 7.5 6.8 430.6 183.8 28.2 97.2          Nov 
1,442.7 984.9 398.5 586.4 457.8 53.8 49.3 46.2 4.6 4.1 403.9 181.5 27.8 91.7          Dec 
1,542.1 1,003.5 399.1 604.4 538.6 61.6 56.8 53.2 4.8 4.2 477.0 191.5 27.9 115.2 2007          Jan 
1,588.9 1,011.3 398.7 612.6 577.6 60.9 56.0 52.5 4.9 4.2 516.7 204.0 27.6 96.6          Feb 
1,592.4 1,014.8 406.6 608.2 577.5 60.6 55.8 52.2 4.8 4.2 517.0 201.0 28.0 88.9          Mar 
1,565.0 996.5 382.1 614.4 568.5 58.0 53.2 50.1 4.8 4.2 510.5 210.0 28.9 98.2          Apr 
1,611.6 1,012.2 386.5 625.7 599.4 59.0 54.1 50.2 4.8 4.2 540.4 217.9 29.8 103.3          May
Changes *
+ 186.4 + 93.2 + 28.1 + 65.1 + 93.3 − 4.4 − 4.8 − 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 97.7 + 0.4 − 8.7 + 29.4 2004
+ 59.5 + 69.4 + 78.4 − 8.9 − 10.0 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 12.0 + 32.1 − 0.8 − 16.7 2005
− 0.6 + 3.4 − 2.5 + 6.0 − 4.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 + 7.0 − 0.0 + 3.1 2006          Aug 
− 2.4 − 0.4 + 27.9 − 28.3 − 1.9 − 3.1 − 2.9 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 5.3 − 5.1          Sep 
+ 26.6 + 18.2 − 5.1 + 23.3 + 8.4 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 11.4 + 5.4 + 0.1 − 3.5          Oct 
+ 33.2 + 15.4 + 5.4 + 9.9 + 17.8 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 20.6 − 1.7 + 0.3 + 17.4          Nov − 14.6 + 16.9 + 14.3 + 2.6 − 31.5 − 4.7 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 2.7 − 26.8 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.4          Dec 
+ 89.0 + 12.2 + 0.6 + 11.6 + 76.8 + 7.7 + 7.5 + 7.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 69.0 + 10.0 + 0.0 + 20.0 2007          Jan 
+ 59.3 + 15.0 − 0.4 + 15.4 + 44.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 45.0 + 12.5 − 0.3 − 13.8          Feb 
+ 10.0 + 7.2 + 8.0 − 0.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 3.0 + 0.5 − 5.1          Mar 
− 12.6 − 9.7 − 24.5 + 14.8 − 2.9 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 9.0 + 0.9 + 14.0          Apr 
+ 39.5 + 11.7 + 4.4 + 7.3 + 27.8 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 26.9 + 7.9 + 0.9 + 2.8          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003
462.3 277.5 83.4 194.1 184.9 31.8 27.3 26.5 4.5 4.3 153.1 73.5 39.1 72.7 2004
525.4 310.6 103.3 207.3 214.8 36.0 29.1 27.1 7.0 6.8 178.8 79.7 41.0 67.5 2005
549.3 330.1 115.5 214.6 219.1 35.2 26.8 24.5 8.4 8.3 183.9 88.2 40.7 70.7 2006          Aug 
573.5 346.8 114.7 232.1 226.7 37.6 29.3 27.4 8.3 8.1 189.1 88.2 40.8 71.7          Sep 
558.6 334.9 116.3 218.6 223.7 37.5 29.2 26.6 8.2 8.1 186.2 91.2 41.0 74.4          Oct 
550.3 328.6 117.5 211.1 221.7 41.0 32.9 31.1 8.1 8.0 180.6 89.0 39.4 78.8          Nov 557.3 329.4 121.5 207.9 227.9 40.8 33.0 31.6 7.8 7.7 187.1 87.9 40.0 76.0          Dec 
446.1 278.8 111.5 167.3 167.3 39.1 31.5 30.6 7.6 7.5 128.2 65.5 28.7 63.3 2007          Jan 
440.7 274.8 109.1 165.8 165.9 40.5 31.8 30.5 8.6 8.5 125.4 66.4 28.3 61.8          Feb 
447.2 277.5 110.2 167.4 169.6 41.4 32.8 31.1 8.6 8.5 128.2 66.8 28.6 60.9          Mar 
446.9 276.6 109.5 167.2 170.3 43.3 34.9 33.0 8.5 8.3 127.0 67.0 28.0 60.3          Apr 
457.7 282.7 106.4 176.2 175.1 43.0 34.4 32.4 8.6 8.4 132.1 66.7 28.2 61.0          May
Changes *
+ 1.4 − 0.7 − 16.4 + 15.7 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 5.4 − 2.2 + 4.7 2004
+ 48.6 + 24.2 + 19.9 + 4.3 + 24.4 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 20.2 + 6.2 + 1.9 − 6.7 2005
− 10.2 − 4.5 − 2.4 − 2.1 − 5.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.5 2006          Aug 
+ 23.0 + 15.9 − 0.8 + 16.7 + 7.1 + 2.3 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8          Sep 
− 14.9 − 11.9 + 1.6 − 13.5 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 3.0 + 0.2 + 2.8          Oct 
− 4.2 − 3.8 + 1.2 − 5.0 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 3.6 + 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 1.6 + 5.5          Nov + 7.0 + 0.9 + 4.0 − 3.1 + 6.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 6.3 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.6          Dec 
− 113.1 − 51.6 − 10.1 − 41.5 − 61.4 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 59.7 − 22.4 − 11.4 − 12.9 2007          Jan 
− 3.4 − 2.9 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 1.0          Feb 
+ 7.4 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 2.1 + 4.2 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6          Mar 
+ 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.1 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 9.8 + 5.4 − 3.0 + 8.5 + 4.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 4.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4          May
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
 
 
 
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2006          Dec  8 8,749.1 175.0 0.5 174.5 175.3 1.0 0.0
2007          Jan 8,812.9 176.3 0.5 175.8 176.5 0.8 0.0
         Feb 9,013.6 180.3 0.5 179.8 180.6 0.8 0.0         Mar 9,117.3 182.3 0.5 181.8 182.6 0.8 0.0
         Apr 9,136.2 182.7 0.5 182.2 183.2 1.0 0.0
         May 9,291.6 185.8 0.5 185.3 186.2 0.9 0.0         June 9,441.8 188.8 0.5 188.3 189.6 1.2 0.0
         July  
p,9 9,588.2 191.8 0.5 191.3 192.0 0.7 ...
         Aug  p ... ... ... 191.9 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2006          Dec 2,063,592 41,272 200 41,072 41,364 292 0
2007          Jan 2,095,140 41,903 199 41,704 41,890 186 0
         Feb 2,137,811 42,756 199 42,557 42,757 200 2         Mar 2,153,768 43,075 199 42,876 43,186 309 0
         Apr 2,163,044 43,261 199 43,062 43,538 476 7
         May 2,196,880 43,938 199 43,739 44,124 385 2         June 2,225,699 44,514 198 44,316 45,009 693 2
         July 2,240,603 44,812 198 44,614 44,879 265 1
         Aug  
p 2,248,867 44,977 197 44,780 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 8From 1 January 2007, including data of credit institutions in
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- Slovenia. — 9The total number of deficiencies was not available when this
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the report went to press. 
reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 2.25 3.25          Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2006 Mar                  8 1.50 2.50 3.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75          June                15 1.75 2.75 3.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          Aug                  9 2.00 3.00 4.00 2002 Jan                  1 2.71 2005 Jan                  1 1.21
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          Oct                11 2.25 3.25 4.25          to          July                  1 1.17
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Dec                13 2.50 3.50 4.50          Apr                  3
 2006 Jan                  1 1.37
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50 2007 Mar                14 2.75 3.75 4.75          July                  1 1.95
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25          June                13 3.00 4.00 5.00
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75 2007 Jan                  1 2.70
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25          July                 1 3.19
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2007 June               20 365,298 288,000 − 4.00 4.06 4.07 7
         June               27 340,137 313,500 − 4.00 4.07 4.08 7
         July                 4 357,489 298,000 − 4.00 4.03 4.05 7
         July               11 382,686 292,000 − 4.00 4.06 4.06 7
         July               18 375,272 301,500 − 4.00 4.06 4.06 7
         July               25 370,371 315,500 − 4.00 4.06 4.07 7
         Aug                  1 373,286 298,000 − 4.00 4.06 4.06 7
         Aug                  8 391,978 292,500 − 4.00 4.06 4.07 7
         Aug                15 426,994 310,000 − 4.00 4.08 4.10 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2007 May               31 72,697 50,000 − − 4.06 4.07 91
         June               28 66,319 50,000 − − 4.11 4.12 91
         July               26 78,703 50,000 − − 4.20 4.20 98
Source: ECB. — *Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2007 to allotted or collected. 
include Slovenia. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2007          Jan 3.56 3.45 − 3.62 3.74 3.69 − 3.78 3.56 3.59 3.62 3.75 3.89 3.99 4.06
         Feb 3.56 3.51 − 3.59 3.80 3.75 − 3.85 3.57 3.59 3.65 3.82 3.94 4.03 4.09         Mar 3.69 2.80 − 3.93 3.87 3.83 − 3.92 3.69 3.78 3.84 3.89 4.00 4.06 4.11
         Apr 3.81 3.63 − 3.89 3.96 3.89 − 4.01 3.82 3.85 3.86 3.98 4.10 4.19 4.25
         May 3.79 3.20 − 3.86 4.05 3.99 − 4.12 3.79 3.85 3.92 4.07 4.20 4.30 4.37         June 3.95 3.60 − 4.19 4.13 4.09 − 4.18 3.96 4.04 4.10 4.15 4.28 4.40 4.51
         July 4.06 3.99 − 4.10 4.20 4.15 − 4.26 4.06 4.08 4.11 4.22 4.36 4.47 4.56
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2006          Nov 2.78 3.05 3.24 3.80 4.98 4.33 4.68 8.34 6.81 5.91 5.14 4.59 4.63
         Dec 2.89 3.05 3.42 3.88 5.01 4.34 4.70 8.43 6.81 5.93 5.23 4.66 4.68
2007          Jan  3 2.99 3.06 3.45 3.91 5.05 4.38 4.72 8.55 6.84 5.95 5.30 4.76 4.77
         Feb 3.07 3.12 3.49 3.92 5.11 4.46 4.79 8.67 6.95 5.96 5.37 4.83 4.83
         Mar 3.16 3.05 3.61 3.93 5.14 4.45 4.79 8.64 6.88 5.95 5.43 4.90 4.84
         Apr 3.23 3.06 3.67 3.93 5.14 4.48 4.80 8.69 6.96 5.97 5.50 4.94 4.87
         May 3.30 3.03 3.72 3.96 5.16 4.48 4.82 8.71 6.95 5.97 5.50 4.99 4.90
         June 3.39 3.04 3.87 3.95 5.21 4.54 4.86 8.69 6.99 6.04 5.58 5.08 4.93
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2006          Nov 0.91 3.10 3.34 2.80 2.30 2.81 1.49 3.26 3.47 3.66
         Dec 0.92 3.27 3.31 2.79 2.38 2.87 1.51 3.47 4.99 3.88
2007          Jan  3 0.98 3.33 3.48 2.92 2.35 2.98 1.61 3.49 3.91 4.07
         Feb 1.00 3.37 3.64 2.72 2.35 3.07 1.64 3.48 3.80 4.15
         Mar 1.02 3.51 3.65 2.68 2.39 3.14 1.71 3.67 3.84 3.72
         Apr 1.04 3.59 3.68 2.78 2.42 3.20 1.75 3.74 4.01 3.87
         May 1.06 3.62 3.51 2.72 2.43 3.25 1.78 3.74 3.80 3.72
         June 1.08 3.78 3.79 2.64 2.42 3.32 1.78 3.94 4.10 4.18
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2006          Nov 10.08 7.83 7.66 6.16 8.15 4.76 4.49 4.50 4.58 4.47 4.97 5.26 4.91
         Dec 10.03 7.72 7.56 6.08 7.97 4.80 4.56 4.58 4.56 4.49 4.93 5.24 4.82
2007          Jan  3 10.15 8.26 7.63 6.71 8.39 4.83 4.68 4.60 4.60 4.50 5.13 5.43 4.92
         Feb 10.33 8.30 7.69 6.86 8.27 4.90 4.71 4.71 4.70 4.61 5.27 5.38 5.14
         Mar 10.23 8.15 7.51 6.71 8.34 4.94 4.79 4.76 4.71 4.62 5.26 5.60 5.20
         Apr 10.30 8.17 7.77 6.72 8.24 5.00 4.85 4.73 4.75 4.67 5.28 5.57 5.21
         May 10.32 8.27 8.10 6.73 8.30 5.02 4.88 4.80 4.81 4.74 5.38 5.65 5.32
         June 10.39 8.25 8.08 6.66 8.23 5.14 4.99 4.91 4.89 4.79 5.49 5.77 5.32
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2006          Nov 5.82 5.00 5.25 4.68 4.31 4.62 4.58
         Dec 5.80 5.08 5.24 4.71 4.50 4.77 4.63
2007          Jan  3 5.94 5.16 5.31 4.69 4.44 4.67 4.71
         Feb 6.03 5.21 5.44 4.86 4.50 4.69 4.71
         Mar 6.04 5.30 5.45 4.88 4.65 4.81 4.87
         Apr 6.12 5.37 5.47 4.88 4.69 4.99 4.90
         May 6.12 5.43 5.57 4.95 4.71 5.10 5.12
         June 6.17 5.54 5.67 4.98 4.86 5.30 5.17
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. —
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, 3 Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2007 to include Slovenia. 
which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          June 2.48 119,134 2.66 194,457 2.71 82,607 3.92 23,866
         July 2.59 123,786 2.65 193,837 2.82 84,840 3.91 23,381
         Aug 2.69 129,030 2.64 193,804 2.96 87,864 3.91 23,319
         Sep 2.74 133,242 2.64 192,264 3.03 89,398 3.92 23,918
         Oct 2.86 137,322 2.63 191,665 3.20 93,649 4.22 22,303
         Nov 2.92 141,570 2.62 191,012 3.28 91,322 4.23 22,310
         Dec 3.07 147,707 2.61 193,277 3.47 90,662 4.25 22,252
2007          Jan 3.16 154,215 2.60 192,300 3.50 93,632 4.26 22,342
         Feb 3.21 157,913 2.59 191,354 3.52 93,871 4.24 21,929         Mar 3.33 163,774 2.58 191,196 3.67 94,996 4.23 22,215
         Apr 3.40 167,316 2.57 190,215 3.71 95,725 4.25 22,243
         May 3.46 172,864 2.56 189,352 3.78 96,130 4.28 22,042         June 3.55 178,760 2.55 188,745 3.90 95,736 4.27 22,277
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2006          June 5.29 6,142 4.32 29,879 5.26 923,622 9.29 74,256 5.55 69,157 6.04 324,024
         July 5.29 6,019 4.32 29,697 5.25 925,008 9.27 73,385 5.55 69,213 6.05 323,342
         Aug 5.34 6,021 4.32 29,598 5.23 927,050 9.31 72,346 5.52 69,592 6.06 323,243
         Sep 5.39 6,431 4.33 29,571 5.22 929,104 9.41 73,812 5.53 69,624 6.07 322,587
         Oct 5.51 5,995 4.35 29,456 5.21 929,886 9.50 72,878 5.52 69,198 6.07 322,399
         Nov 5.57 5,847 4.36 29,155 5.20 931,063 9.43 70,535 5.50 69,528 6.06 322,042
         Dec 5.53 6,043 4.36 29,536 5.19 930,830 9.69 71,510 5.48 67,373 6.06 320,395
2007          Jan 5.58 5,652 4.38 29,312 5.17 928,584 9.79 69,358 5.48 66,954 6.06 319,205
         Feb 5.60 5,804 4.39 29,068 5.17 928,119 9.77 68,726 5.48 66,426 6.06 318,745         Mar 5.64 6,270 4.41 28,581 5.16 927,728 9.84 69,704 5.47 66,593 6.07 317,772
         Apr 5.65 5,893 4.43 28,304 5.14 926,985 9.87 69,322 5.52 65,831 6.07 317,188
         May 5.67 5,944 4.44 28,090 5.13 926,349 9.94 68,725 5.53 66,151 6.07 316,791         June 5.70 6,343 4.45 27,846 5.13 926,983 10.04 70,236 5.53 66,531 6.08 316,290
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          June 5.07 157,956 4.14 90,560 4.88 494,890
         July 5.08 159,419 4.23 93,650 4.90 493,519
         Aug 5.15 156,471 4.28 92,296 4.90 496,535
         Sep 5.21 158,696 4.32 94,768 4.92 495,304
         Oct 5.32 157,742 4.43 94,563 4.93 494,286
         Nov 5.38 158,418 4.47 95,324 4.93 497,001
         Dec 5.53 154,061 4.57 93,621 4.94 497,339
2007          Jan 5.59 154,768 4.65 94,733 4.97 498,816
         Feb 5.66 154,784 4.68 94,268 4.97 500,380         Mar 5.79 156,009 4.76 94,383 4.98 500,891
         Apr 5.81 157,892 4.81 94,834 4.99 501,087
         May 5.80 159,526 4.84 97,867 5.00 502,283         June 5.94 161,937 4.98 97,605 5.02 502,141
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates may always be calculated either as annualised agreed intere st
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other relatedhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- balance sheet statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis purchase, including building and home improvements; including loan s
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well assample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name andsional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are for their own account. — 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. —can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2006          June 1.35 470,361 2.49 31,399 3.23 1,592 2.55 1,922 2.05 507,349 2.54 88,337
         July 1.36 465,849 2.63 33,301 3.25 2,190 2.90 2,150 2.05 503,445 2.59 89,399
         Aug 1.41 460,404 2.75 34,694 3.40 1,347 2.78 3,537 2.09 498,932 2.65 90,923
         Sep 1.43 457,935 2.82 31,948 3.41 1,691 2.54 2,121 2.10 495,091 2.69 92,142
         Oct 1.47 456,615 2.97 35,094 3.52 2,495 2.82 2,531 2.17 490,334 2.75 94,253
         Nov 1.45 467,261 3.05 34,218 3.54 2,240 2.58 1,897 2.15 484,245 2.82 96,851
         Dec 1.49 465,228 3.23 39,250 3.60 2,069 2.67 1,582 2.20 487,476 2.87 98,851
2007          Jan 1.58 460,252 3.34 47,561 3.69 2,974 2.98 1,639 2.22 481,378 2.98 100,630
         Feb 1.61 465,012 3.33 37,779 3.89 3,178 2.84 1,389 2.23 477,454 3.08 102,659         Mar 1.63 466,577 3.48 40,365 3.92 2,715 2.76 1,316 2.27 474,191 3.15 104,158
         Apr 1.67 469,364 3.54 41,888 3.96 2,647 2.85 1,547 2.36 470,120 3.21 104,368
         May 1.70 472,490 3.60 40,887 4.02 1,934 3.00 1,169 2.35 465,973 3.26 104,138         June 1.73 479,161 3.72 44,261 4.19 3,006 2.92 1,582 2.33 461,997 3.32 104,744
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          June 1.57 157,582 2.67 50,441 4.07 321 3.38 1,133
         July 1.61 158,281 2.77 46,614 3.52 554 4.21 1,292
         Aug 1.71 162,279 2.92 54,472 3.57 280 3.98 641
         Sep 1.71 160,811 3.00 51,870 3.79 488 4.04 797
         Oct 1.81 161,921 3.20 61,003 4.09 315 4.71 985
         Nov 1.87 167,499 3.25 56,101 3.82 256 3.88 1,290
         Dec 1.90 175,389 3.44 58,936 3.58 229 4.44 690
2007          Jan 2.01 170,634 3.48 61,502 4.18 700 4.45 1,021
         Feb 2.03 167,001 3.50 56,356 3.99 331 4.66 908         Mar 2.12 167,475 3.67 59,631 4.09 447 4.10 898
         Apr 2.20 174,310 3.72 54,853 4.12 248 4.52 900
         May 2.23 173,628 3.76 54,833 4.18 290 4.33 265         June 2.27 174,943 3.90 54,211 4.26 781 4.53 719
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2006          June 7.26 5.12 1,283 5.35 5,319 8.64 3,105 4.21 10,126 5.24 2,119 4.81 3,148
         July 7.51 5.54 1,271 5.41 5,564 8.98 3,048 4.27 11,070 5.36 1,793 4.94 2,500
         Aug 7.59 5.63 1,007 5.48 4,718 8.85 3,119 4.40 11,083 5.38 1,394 4.98 2,530
         Sep 7.43 5.60 1,046 5.29 5,422 8.90 2,858 4.41 10,978 5.30 1,861 5.08 2,323
         Oct 7.19 5.61 1,662 5.02 7,074 9.01 3,092 4.63 11,899 5.03 1,815 4.76 2,727
         Nov 7.03 5.56 940 4.92 6,222 8.85 3,030 4.63 10,908 5.20 1,407 4.90 2,379
         Dec 6.71 5.31 1,288 4.85 5,931 8.45 2,734 4.68 16,567 5.21 2,326 4.82 3,524
2007          Jan 7.85 5.63 1,472 5.62 4,034 9.29 2,872 4.80 11,776 5.39 1,793 4.95 3,064
         Feb 8.04 5.74 1,072 5.91 3,680 9.13 2,501 4.90 6,720 5.21 1,468 5.09 2,194         Mar 7.88 5.71 1,589 5.81 5,349 9.15 3,973 4.94 13,362 5.60 2,087 5.17 2,622
         Apr 7.81 5.35 1,121 5.89 5,126 9.08 3,213 4.97 15,958 5.58 1,488 5.16 2,556
         May 7.86 5.99 916 5.88 4,881 9.02 3,252 5.01 13,774 5.66 1,743 5.21 2,492         June 7.80 5.97 1,179 5.75 4,703 8.92 3,157 5.18 15,090 5.76 2,009 5.30 2,899
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          June 10.86 47,657 4.75 4.91 2,338 4.61 2,395 4.66 6,108 4.63 4,902
         July 10.92 46,654 4.83 4.92 2,561 4.66 2,415 4.67 6,106 4.80 4,363
         Aug 11.00 45,734 4.87 5.12 2,229 4.80 2,398 4.71 5,777 4.76 4,498         Sep 11.02 46,945 4.84 5.10 2,122 4.80 1,964 4.71 4,855 4.69 4,191
         Oct 11.10 46,782 4.81 5.10 2,781 4.80 2,254 4.65 5,609 4.65 4,527
         Nov 11.02 45,132 4.82 5.27 2,111 4.84 2,295 4.65 5,434 4.61 4,580
         Dec 11.27 46,268 4.80 5.23 2,315 4.86 2,494 4.60 5,664 4.56 4,528
2007          Jan 11.40 44,820 4.85 5.44 2,619 4.87 2,744 4.64 6,651 4.67 5,200
         Feb 11.36 44,645 4.96 5.45 1,824 4.98 2,009 4.78 4,898 4.78 4,032         Mar 11.47 45,010 4.95 5.46 2,506 4.99 2,565 4.78 6,003 4.76 5,329
         Apr 11.52 44,326 4.99 5.54 2,286 4.99 2,315 4.80 6,525 4.81 5,131
         May 11.59 44,228 5.04 5.56 2,012 5.06 2,167 4.87 6,281 4.85 5,236         June 11.66 45,349 5.19 5.64 2,372 5.22 2,128 5.01 6,144 5.03 5,466
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          June 6.26 70,516 5.04 9,035 5.00 1,210 4.80 1,897
         July 6.29 68,078 5.11 8,108 5.14 1,232 4.88 1,895
         Aug 6.36 66,594 5.14 7,170 5.25 1,514 4.96 2,188         Sep 6.37 67,633 5.37 8,144 5.09 1,185 4.91 1,677
         Oct 6.46 65,477 5.45 8,234 5.11 1,720 4.89 1,731
         Nov 6.46 67,111 5.53 7,461 5.16 1,243 4.96 2,014
         Dec 6.54 65,780 5.67 8,528 5.21 1,440 4.96 2,414
2007          Jan 6.59 65,849 5.61 7,463 5.25 1,389 4.87 2,675
         Feb 6.67 66,262 5.72 7,165 5.44 1,055 5.03 2,402         Mar 6.78 68,119 5.73 9,581 5.42 1,375 5.09 1,958
         Apr 6.78 66,910 5.89 7,609 5.46 1,217 5.12 1,981
         May 6.84 65,747 5.93 7,749 5.53 1,065 5.11 2,515         June 6.89 69,428 6.09 8,714 5.67 1,407 5.27 2,293
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2006          June 3.98 52,421 4.35 5,165 4.45 7,267
         July 4.00 46,079 4.59 4,567 4.74 5,697
         Aug 4.19 42,375 4.56 2,537 4.66 4,578         Sep 4.24 46,903 4.62 5,533 4.65 7,369
         Oct 4.38 45,975 4.45 4,751 4.59 7,482
         Nov 4.36 40,795 4.81 3,452 4.62 5,945
         Dec 4.58 55,961 4.89 5,963 4.76 9,312
2007          Jan 4.63 45,112 4.84 6,013 4.86 5,322
         Feb 4.70 35,257 4.69 3,117 4.76 4,820         Mar 4.90 47,651 4.82 5,945 4.95 7,272
         Apr 4.94 37,983 5.05 6,685 5.01 5,430
         May 4.86 41,431 5.13 5,479 5.05 6,565         June 5.08 52,140 5.50 5,966 5.19 9,513
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,9202003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,1222004 232,863 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 99,152 106,949 121,841 − 14,892 − 125,914
2005 252,775 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,233 96,314 61,740 34,574 − 156,461
2006 243,664 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 141,285 119,885 68,893 50,992 − 123,779
2007          Apr 17,872 8,656 4,916 − 934 4,673 9,216 − 6,724 7,314 − 14,038 − 24,596
         May 49,551 30,676 12,803 4,285 13,588 18,875 23,402 11,873 11,529 − 26,149         June 20,785 5,898 − 1,973 1,207 6,664 14,887 8,133 6,059 2,074 − 12,652
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,932
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6781998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,9412003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,0162004 − 1,818 10,157 − 11,974 11,865 5,045 6,820 − 13,684
2005 25,117 13,766 11,350 − 15,282 10,208 − 25,490 40,398
2006 23,997 9,061 14,937 − 8,276 11,323 − 19,599 32,272
2007          Apr − 4,524 1,137 − 5,661 24,652 29,508 − 4,856 − 29,176
         May 15,896 864 15,032 15,332 − 1,389 16,721 564         June − 128 494 − 622 − 39,021 − 40,414 1,393 38,893
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007          Mar 90,043 64,185 617 8,455 19,044 36,069 1,075 24,783 −         Apr 72,677 51,388 2,818 6,560 8,096 33,913 1,602 19,687 −
         May 83,670 60,273 416 4,226 13,854 41,778 1,978 21,418 −         June 79,211 57,041 827 6,261 11,053 38,899 1,372 20,799 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 69
2007          Mar 25,633 16,370 332 4,540 5,246 6,251 328 8,936 −         Apr 19,899 12,343 497 2,315 3,392 6,139 1,302 6,254 −
         May 29,822 14,688 198 2,661 3,251 8,579 1,977 13,157 −         June 23,373 14,446 454 3,414 3,276 7,303 1,296 7,630 −
Net sales  6 
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,208
2007          Mar 9,418 7,524 − 2,510 − 335 6,532 3,837 158 1,736 − 2,534         Apr 16,521 6,478 1,098 − 5,658 1,525 9,513 − 1,648 11,692 − 137
         May 27,651 15,201 − 610 − 5,282 6,778 14,316 1,366 11,084 − 719         June − 11,075 − 11,200 − 1,703 − 5,307 2,161 − 6,352 − 683 808 − 1,063
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007          Apr 3,099,779 1,859,590 139,036 487,516 394,777 838,261 96,125 1,144,065 105,963
         May 3,127,430 1,874,791 138,426 482,233 401,555 852,577 97,491 1,155,148 105,244         June 3,116,355 1,863,591 136,723 476,926 403,716 846,226 96,808 1,155,956 104,181
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-June 2007 
1,144,607 764,162 56,603 213,553 163,230 330,776 22,129 358,316 62,622    less than 2
717,689 467,409 34,073 147,739 94,126 191,470 18,396 231,885 24,847 2 to less than 4
438,739 242,796 32,390 62,593 44,552 103,262 19,739 176,204 4,340 4 to less than 6
262,667 122,518 6,258 23,228 25,589 67,445 17,145 123,004 5,350 6 to less than 8
283,694 155,411 6,932 18,765 23,417 106,298 4,430 123,854 2,969 8 to less than 10
57,302 38,978 414 5,962 22,264 10,338 2,425 15,899 957 10 to less than 15
28,587 14,295 54 1,773 7,360 5,109 1,320 12,971 1,912 15 to less than 20
183,070 58,020 − 3,315 23,177 31,528 11,224 113,825 1,186 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 553,110
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 723,077
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 1,040,769
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007          Apr 163,822 107 245 48 2 8 − 8 − 142 − 46 1,435,794
         May 164,103 281 136 211 1 0 − 49 114 − 132 1,547,655         June 164,484 381 402 317 4 10 − 23 − 79 − 250 1,494,788
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including shares are traded on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listed on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the
on the Official Market, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt (stock Deutsche Börse AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
market segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German German
more than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.39
1999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 3.2 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.0 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007          Apr 4.2 4.2 4.2 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.6 4.5 115.31 95.48 456.44 7,408.87
         May 4.4 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.7 4.6 114.44 94.10 476.83 7,883.04         June 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 4.9 113.61 93.33 482.48 8,007.32
         July 4.6 4.6 4.5 4.5 4.7 4.8 5.5 4.9 114.42 94.45 459.72 7,584.14
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,3181997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 13,601 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,148 9,016 8,446 3,796 570 8,352 4,585
2005 85,243 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,525 84,144 21,290 7,761 62,854 35,764 1,099
2006 43,960 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 24,425 34,611 14,676 5,221 19,935 19,204 9,349
2007          Apr 10,574 4,145 223 − 406 358 361 3,922 6,429 9,668 465 1,259 9,203 5,170 906
         May 4,912 − 3,117 265 275 − 1,306 997 − 3,382 8,029 4,391 2,068 1,245 2,323 6,784 521         June 1,754 − 678 − 1,143 1,389 − 3,454 978 465 2,432 1,504 2,301 2,133 − 797 299 250
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  € billion
2005 2006 2007 
Item 2005 2006 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households 1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 43.9 42.5 9.6 12.2 2.8 19.2 9.4 12.2 1.3 19.6 8.9
Money market paper 0.1 1.0 0.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.1
Bonds 9.1 36.0 14.0 1.7 0.0 − 6.5 22.9 6.2 19.2 − 12.3 8.6
Shares − 4.0 − 5.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0
Other equity 3.0 2.9 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8Mutual funds shares 22.6 − 8.4 5.5 6.5 10.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 8.7 0.5 11.7
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 59.5 55.4 14.9 9.8 10.8 24.0 15.5 12.2 13.6 14.2 15.2
Short-term claims 2.7 3.0 1.7 0.4 1.4 − 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8
Longer-term claims 56.8 52.5 13.3 9.4 9.4 24.8 14.8 11.4 12.8 13.4 14.5
Claims from company
pension commitments 7.3 7.9 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.9 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.1
Other claims  3 − 6.2 − 4.9 − 0.2 0.2 0.9 − 7.2 − 1.2 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.2
Total 135.2 127.5 45.4 31.9 26.8 31.1 48.4 30.2 26.2 22.8 45.0
  II Financing
Loans − 3.4 − 7.2 − 13.5 4.4 3.6 2.2 − 8.3 1.4 6.0 − 6.2 − 10.1
Short-term loans − 5.1 − 5.4 − 2.9 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 2.0
Longer-term loans 1.7 − 1.7 − 10.6 5.1 4.4 2.8 − 5.9 1.6 6.1 − 3.6 − 8.0
Other liabilities − 2.6 0.4 0.3 − 1.4 0.2 − 1.6 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 0.0 0.1
Total − 6.0 − 6.8 − 13.3 2.9 3.8 0.6 − 8.1 1.7 5.9 − 6.2 − 10.0
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 38.8 24.3 4.5 8.1 18.1 8.1 2.2 6.8 4.5 10.9 23.2
Money market paper 2.4 7.6 4.8 5.3 − 1.3 − 6.4 3.3 − 1.4 3.9 1.9 5.7
Bonds − 9.6 − 27.5 − 15.6 12.4 − 9.3 2.9 − 14.8 13.2 − 25.2 − 0.7 − 10.6
Financial derivatives 2.9 1.4 3.4 − 0.7 − 2.2 2.3 1.3 − 1.7 1.3 0.6 6.0
Shares − 8.8 − 17.4 5.8 − 3.6 − 7.4 − 3.6 − 8.9 18.9 11.3 − 38.7 3.1
Other equity − 7.0 31.2 − 1.2 − 1.0 11.0 − 15.8 1.2 8.1 12.9 8.9 2.3
Mutual funds shares 4.9 − 8.1 2.3 1.6 − 0.5 1.4 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 6.0 0.0 − 1.5
Loans 45.2 16.6 4.0 14.7 − 10.5 37.0 − 10.1 7.4 − 8.0 27.3 − 19.6
Short-term loans 38.3 10.9 1.4 10.2 − 9.2 36.0 − 12.3 7.8 − 7.7 23.1 − 16.9
Longer-term loans 6.8 5.7 2.7 4.5 − 1.4 1.1 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 4.2 − 2.8
Claims on insurancecorporations  
2 1.7 1.5 0.9 0.2 0.7 − 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
Short-term claims 1.7 1.5 0.9 0.2 0.7 − 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims − 10.3 44.6 − 14.2 − 14.0 4.6 13.3 29.2 − 0.5 9.9 5.9 30.6
Total 60.0 74.3 − 5.2 23.0 3.3 38.9 2.3 50.7 4.9 16.4 39.6
  II Financing
Money market paper − 6.9 1.8 4.7 − 1.9 − 4.7 − 5.1 6.5 3.2 − 3.8 − 4.1 6.1
Bonds 10.1 15.6 2.5 0.8 3.4 3.4 3.7 6.3 8.0 − 2.4 − 1.8
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 6.0 4.7 1.3 0.6 2.6 1.5 − 0.9 2.5 2.8 0.3 1.9
Other equity − 1.6 18.7 3.5 4.9 4.2 − 14.2 2.9 2.3 9.3 4.3 5.7
Loans − 4.8 39.1 − 8.3 1.3 − 17.9 20.1 − 18.7 23.4 11.5 23.0 − 4.1
Short-term loans 0.4 20.9 − 5.8 5.1 − 10.5 11.6 − 4.1 7.6 8.3 9.1 4.4
Longer-term loans − 5.2 18.2 − 2.5 − 3.8 − 7.4 8.4 − 14.6 15.8 3.1 13.8 − 8.5
Claims from companypension commitments 5.5 5.5 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4
Other liabilities 10.9 − 2.7 3.2 − 1.2 11.5 − 2.6 9.3 − 6.2 − 2.2 − 3.5 9.6
Total 19.1 82.7 8.3 5.9 0.5 4.5 4.1 32.8 26.8 18.9 18.8
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2005 2006 2007 
Item 2005 2006 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households 1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,492.3 1,534.8 1,458.0 1,470.2 1,473.0 1,492.3 1,501.7 1,513.9 1,515.2 1,534.8 1,543.7
Money market paper 1.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0
Bonds 422.1 480.0 427.4 429.8 442.6 422.1 460.1 469.3 471.8 480.0 495.3
Shares 320.1 372.3 283.8 287.8 302.6 320.1 353.7 337.5 346.4 372.3 396.9
Other equity 205.5 211.8 189.6 198.9 202.3 205.5 211.1 209.5 214.4 211.8 205.2Mutual funds shares 518.7 524.7 472.8 489.6 511.4 518.7 524.1 514.3 513.9 524.7 538.6
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 1,053.2 1,107.8 1,009.0 1,018.8 1,029.5 1,053.2 1,068.6 1,080.6 1,094.0 1,107.8 1,122.9
Short-term claims 77.6 80.6 76.6 77.0 78.4 77.6 78.4 79.1 79.9 80.6 81.3
Longer-term claims 975.6 1,027.2 932.5 941.7 951.0 975.6 990.2 1,001.5 1,014.1 1,027.2 1,041.5
Claims from company
pension commitments 240.5 248.4 235.0 236.9 238.7 240.5 242.5 244.4 246.4 248.4 250.5
Other claims  3 51.6 46.7 57.7 57.9 58.8 51.6 50.5 49.2 48.0 46.7 45.5
Total 4,305.1 4,528.6 4,134.3 4,190.8 4,259.8 4,305.1 4,413.4 4,420.1 4,451.8 4,528.6 4,600.6
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,555.9 1,556.1 1,543.9 1,549.6 1,553.7 1,555.9 1,555.8 1,557.6 1,562.8 1,556.1 1,546.7
Short-term loans 85.6 80.2 87.4 86.6 86.2 85.6 83.2 82.9 82.8 80.2 78.5
Longer-term loans 1,470.3 1,475.9 1,456.6 1,463.0 1,467.5 1,470.3 1,472.6 1,474.7 1,480.0 1,475.9 1,468.2
Other liabilities 12.8 9.7 17.3 16.0 16.1 12.8 12.8 11.6 11.2 9.7 11.1
Total 1,568.7 1,565.9 1,561.3 1,565.6 1,569.8 1,568.7 1,568.6 1,569.2 1,574.0 1,565.9 1,557.7
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 396.1 438.7 368.2 371.8 400.2 396.1 420.4 424.6 443.3 438.7 474.4
Money market paper 22.9 28.4 29.7 32.5 28.1 22.9 26.0 23.1 27.5 28.4 34.6
Bonds 39.8 13.0 33.6 46.0 38.1 39.8 26.5 39.8 13.2 13.0 1.8
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 808.5 948.9 721.0 726.0 751.2 808.5 882.0 870.2 913.3 948.9 1,019.1
Other equity 257.6 292.9 245.7 255.7 270.2 257.6 265.0 270.2 288.6 292.9 285.0Mutual funds shares 108.8 99.9 108.3 111.8 112.3 108.8 108.4 104.3 101.6 99.9 97.8
Loans 126.1 146.6 119.7 130.7 119.1 126.1 119.2 127.8 118.5 146.6 129.6
Short-term loans 91.1 107.3 82.9 93.5 84.4 91.1 81.6 90.8 83.1 107.3 96.9
Longer-term loans 35.0 39.3 36.8 37.2 34.8 35.0 37.6 37.0 35.4 39.3 32.7
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 41.4 42.8 40.6 40.8 41.6 41.4 41.7 42.1 42.5 42.8 43.2
Short-term claims 41.4 42.8 40.6 40.8 41.6 41.4 41.7 42.1 42.5 42.8 43.2
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 379.0 426.3 358.3 360.4 369.8 379.0 396.0 404.3 410.1 426.3 449.4
Total 2,180.3 2,437.6 2,025.1 2,075.7 2,130.6 2,180.3 2,285.1 2,306.5 2,358.5 2,437.6 2,535.0
  II Liabilities
Money market paper 17.1 18.9 28.7 26.8 22.1 17.1 23.5 26.8 23.0 18.9 25.0
Bonds 89.6 93.7 80.9 84.2 88.2 89.6 90.9 93.8 94.7 93.7 92.4Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,137.4 1,359.8 1,007.0 1,046.4 1,095.1 1,137.4 1,273.1 1,230.9 1,251.8 1,359.8 1,439.5
Other equity 597.5 616.2 602.6 607.5 611.8 597.5 600.4 602.7 612.0 616.2 621.9
Loans 1,259.2 1,325.1 1,260.2 1,265.9 1,249.4 1,259.2 1,273.8 1,293.8 1,315.1 1,325.1 1,335.5
Short-term loans 334.8 358.7 329.8 334.4 322.8 334.8 330.7 337.4 349.1 358.7 366.4
Longer-term loans 924.3 966.4 930.4 931.5 926.5 924.3 943.2 956.4 966.0 966.4 969.1
Claims from companypension commitments 206.1 211.6 201.9 203.3 204.7 206.1 207.4 208.8 210.2 211.6 213.0
Other liabilities 361.4 388.1 338.2 345.2 356.9 361.4 365.0 368.1 370.9 388.1 397.1
Total 3,668.3 4,013.5 3,519.5 3,579.4 3,628.2 3,668.3 3,834.2 3,824.9 3,877.7 4,013.5 4,124.4
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2001 − 59.6 − 27.5 − 27.3 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 2.8 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.2
2002 − 78.3 − 36.0 − 30.6 − 5.0 − 6.8 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 0.32003 − 86.9 − 39.6 − 32.7 − 6.9 − 7.7 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.42004 − 82.5 − 52.2 − 26.8 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 3.7 − 2.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
2005 − 72.4 − 47.5 − 20.5 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 3.2 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2
2006
pe − 36.7 − 34.3 − 10.3 + 4.0 + 3.8 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2
2005          H1 − 40.5 − 34.6 − 10.7 − 0.1 + 4.9 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.5
         H2 − 32.2 − 13.1 − 9.7 − 0.9 − 8.4 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7
2006          H1  pe − 23.0 − 20.6 − 5.7 + 1.2 + 2.1 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
         H2  pe − 14.0 − 14.0 − 4.5 + 2.8 + 1.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2001 1,241.5 776.7 377.1 102.6 2.3 58.8 36.8 17.8 4.9 0.1
2002 1,293.0 798.1 404.1 104.3 3.0 60.3 37.2 18.9 4.9 0.12003 1,381.0 845.4 435.3 111.4 5.3 63.9 39.1 20.1 5.2 0.22004 1,451.1 887.1 459.7 116.1 4.2 65.7 40.2 20.8 5.3 0.2
2005 1,521.6 933.0 481.9 119.7 2.7 67.9 41.6 21.5 5.3 0.1
2006
pe 1,566.9 968.1 491.6 121.1 1.7 67.9 41.9 21.3 5.2 0.1
2005          Q1 1,479.4 908.4 466.4 116.6 3.9 67.0 41.1 21.1 5.3 0.2
         Q2 1,493.5 917.4 470.0 118.2 3.5 67.3 41.3 21.2 5.3 0.2
         Q3 1,513.8 932.7 474.8 118.4 3.4 67.8 41.8 21.3 5.3 0.2         Q4 1,521.6 933.0 481.9 119.7 2.7 67.9 41.6 21.5 5.3 0.1
2006          Q1 1,540.1 944.5 487.8 121.3 2.3 68.2 41.8 21.6 5.4 0.1
         Q2 1,560.1 963.5 488.3 122.2 1.7 68.8 42.5 21.5 5.4 0.1         Q3 1,575.1 979.5 488.1 121.3 1.7 68.9 42.8 21.3 5.3 0.1         Q4  
pe 1,566.9 968.1 491.6 121.1 1.7 67.9 41.9 21.3 5.2 0.1
2007          Q1  pe 1,570.9 973.0 492.5 119.0 1.4 67.1 41.6 21.0 5.1 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined according to the national accounts. — 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2001 945.5 477.7 383.7 84.1 1,005.1 551.2 166.2 64.5 36.8 186.4 − 59.6 875.1
2002 952.5 477.5 390.7 84.3 1,030.8 579.8 168.7 62.7 36.1 183.6 − 78.3 879.22003 961.2 481.8 396.1 83.4 1,048.2 594.2 169.0 64.1 33.8 187.2 − 87.0 889.12004 957.1 481.2 396.7 79.2 1,039.6 592.8 169.4 62.5 31.4 183.5 − 82.5 888.2
2005 975.9 493.0 397.0 85.8 1,048.5 597.7 167.5 62.0 30.2 191.1 − 72.6 900.9
2006
pe 1,016.5 530.5 401.1 85.0 1,053.5 600.2 167.8 65.1 32.4 188.1 − 37.0 942.8
as a percentage of GDP
2001 44.7 22.6 18.2 4.0 47.6 26.1 7.9 3.1 1.7 8.8 − 2.8 41.4
2002 44.4 22.3 18.2 3.9 48.1 27.1 7.9 2.9 1.7 8.6 − 3.7 41.02003 44.5 22.3 18.3 3.9 48.5 27.5 7.8 3.0 1.6 8.7 − 4.0 41.12004 43.4 21.8 18.0 3.6 47.1 26.9 7.7 2.8 1.4 8.3 − 3.7 40.2
2005 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.8 46.8 26.7 7.5 2.8 1.3 8.5 − 3.2 40.2
2006
pe 44.0 23.0 17.4 3.7 45.6 26.0 7.3 2.8 1.4 8.1 − 1.6 40.8
Percentage growth rates
2001 − 1.3 − 4.3 + 1.4 + 5.0 + 8.0 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 43.0 . − 2.0
2002 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 5.2 + 1.5 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 1.5 . + 0.52003 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 1.1 + 1.7 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 2.3 − 6.3 + 2.0 . + 1.12004 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 5.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 7.0 − 2.0 . − 0.1
2005 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 3.8 + 4.1 . + 1.4
2006
pe + 4.2 + 7.6 + 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 5.0 + 7.1 − 1.6 . + 4.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2000 612.3 467.3 12.6 595.5 169.3 205.7 67.6 40.7 15.7 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001 555.5 446.2 23.5 599.6 169.9 213.9 66.6 40.1 16.7 − 44.2 445.1 449.1 − 4.0 923.3 971.5 − 48.22002
p 554.7 441.7 20.5 610.9 173.3 226.8 66.1 38.7 11.3 − 56.2 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 927.7 992.2 − 64.5
2003 pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.3 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.3 467.7 474.3 − 6.6 925.4 999.3 − 73.9
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.7 173.4 237.0 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.8 470.3 468.8 + 1.5 927.3 990.7 − 63.3
2005 pe 569.3 452.1 31.1 622.6 172.4 245.0 64.1 33.2 14.5 − 53.3 468.8 471.6 − 2.8 948.5 1,004.6 − 56.1
2006 pe 590.5 488.4 18.1 626.1 169.6 252.0 64.4 33.5 12.0 − 35.6 486.7 467.1 + 19.6 987.7 1,003.7 − 16.0
2005          Q1 121.6 99.2 1.4 159.8 41.1 66.3 25.2 4.6 3.1 − 38.2 117.1 117.5 − 0.4 211.2 249.7 − 38.6
         Q2 138.9 112.5 7.7 144.8 41.2 62.8 10.1 6.4 2.4 − 6.0 117.3 118.2 − 0.9 233.5 240.4 − 6.9
         Q3 144.2 110.6 13.7 154.2 41.3 59.3 19.7 8.6 2.5 − 10.0 114.1 117.0 − 2.9 235.9 248.8 − 12.9         Q4
p 162.4 129.5 7.8 161.9 47.1 55.4 8.8 12.5 6.0 + 0.5 118.1 118.3 − 0.2 264.3 264.0 + 0.3
2006          Q1 p 131.3 106.3 3.8 160.3 40.6 65.6 25.1 4.8 2.9 − 29.0 120.5 116.6 + 3.9 228.9 254.0 − 25.1
         Q2 p 144.3 121.8 4.1 139.9 40.7 59.9 9.5 6.4 2.5 + 4.5 122.2 117.1 + 5.0 245.1 235.6 + 9.5
         Q3 p 146.4 121.9 5.9 156.0 40.6 61.2 20.5 8.4 2.6 − 9.5 117.0 115.2 + 1.7 241.4 249.2 − 7.8
         Q4 p 166.0 138.6 4.0 167.8 46.1 64.1 9.0 12.9 3.5 − 1.8 127.2 117.2 + 10.0 271.1 263.0 + 8.1
2007          Q1 p 148.4 122.4 2.8 164.5 42.7 64.9 25.5 5.3 3.4 − 16.1 112.5 115.8 − 3.3 237.6 257.0 − 19.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- are estimated. — 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets but excluding the Post Office here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrep-
pension funds. Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations ancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local govern-
of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include muni- ment. — 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
cipal special purpose associations and various special accounts. — 2The of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Fed-
latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors eral Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Of fice. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2000 4 292.1 265.2 + 26.9 240.4 250.8 − 10.4 148.0 146.1 + 1.9
2001 240.6 261.3 − 20.7 230.9 255.5 − 24.6 144.2 148.3 − 4.1
2002 240.8 273.5 − 32.7 228.8 258.0 − 29.2 147.0 150.4 − 3.5
2003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 150.1 − 8.0
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.4 − 3.4
2005 pe 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 236.8 260.3 − 23.5 152.3 154.6 − 2.3
2006 pe 254.7 282.9 − 28.2 250.7 259.7 − 9.0 160.6 158.2 + 2.4
2005          Q1 46.0 74.9 − 28.9 56.0 64.7 − 8.7 31.3 34.9 − 3.6
         Q2 61.4 66.0 − 4.6 57.8 60.9 − 3.1 36.0 36.3 − 0.3
         Q3 68.8 73.2 − 4.4 55.9 62.1 − 6.3 37.9 37.9 + 0.0         Q4
p 73.8 67.4 + 6.4 65.6 71.5 − 6.0 45.9 44.3 + 1.6
2006          Q1 p 52.7 74.1 − 21.4 57.3 64.9 − 7.6 33.8 36.4 − 2.6
         Q2 p 63.0 61.6 + 1.5 60.6 60.1 + 0.4 37.7 36.8 + 0.9
         Q3 p 64.7 73.8 − 9.1 60.5 62.5 − 2.1 40.3 38.1 + 2.2
         Q4 p 74.2 73.4 + 0.8 70.5 71.2 − 0.7 46.9 44.5 + 2.5
2007          Q1 p 61.1 74.6 − 13.6 63.5 66.5 − 3.0 35.4 37.6 − 2.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based
istical Office. — 1The Bundesbank’s profit is included only up to the max- on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly
imum amount of €3.5 billion that is to be assigned to the core budget. Rev- figures do not include various special accounts and municipal special pur-
enue over and above this amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund pose associations. — 4 Including proceeds from the sale of UMTS licences. 
for Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including the local authority level of the
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total  1 government  2 government European Union  3 government  4 tax shares  5 of energy tax
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 21,833 57,241 − 104 20,244
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 19,732 54,047 + 12 19,5762002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 18,560 52,490 + 51 22,3212003 442,238 390,438 214,002 155,510 20,926 51,673 + 127 22,0672004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2005          Q1 99,997 85,690 42,005 35,976 7,708 10,924 + 3,382 5,418
         Q2 111,634 96,535 52,716 39,438 4,381 14,475 + 624 5,359         Q3 111,103 96,077 52,065 38,840 5,172 14,903 + 122 5,453         Q4 129,346 114,011 64,993 44,568 4,450 19,448 − 4,113 5,405
2006          Q1 106,907 90,827 45,203 38,733 6,892 12,391 + 3,689 5,491
         Q2 121,891 104,964 57,521 43,338 4,105 16,120 + 807 5,433         Q3 121,711 104,015 55,601 42,798 5,616 17,594 + 103 5,448
         Q4 137,935 121,345 67,310 48,505 5,529 21,211 − 4,620 5,370
2007          Q1 122,566 104,537 53,928 43,916 6,693 13,234 + 4,795 5,362
         Q2 ... 118,090 65,298 49,069 3,724 ... ... 5,408
2006          June . 41,097 22,856 17,083 1,158 . . 1,8112007          June . 46,247 26,046 19,394 807 . . 1,803
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- central government tax revenue. — 4Including local government taxes in
bank calculations. — 1Including receipts from the equalisation of burdens the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 5Difference between local
levies. — 2Before deducting supplementary central government grants and government’s share in the income taxes received by the state government
shares in energy tax revenue remitted to state government. — 3Custom cash offices in the period in question (for this total, see Table IX.6) and the
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from amounts passed on to local government during the same period. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,169
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,4092004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2005          Q1 90,403 34,325 27,867 − 3,761 4,416 5,804 34,909 28,031 6,878 222 15,207 5,005 736 4,713
         Q2 102,224 40,747 29,030 3,359 2,715 5,643 33,009 25,180 7,829 1,454 20,556 5,673 786 5,688         Q3 101,803 38,946 28,172 4,150 3,798 2,826 35,278 27,520 7,758 1,575 20,235 4,868 901 5,726         Q4 120,926 47,942 33,850 6,017 5,405 2,670 36,518 27,710 8,808 2,967 27,511 5,034 955 6,915
2006          Q1 95,851 36,593 28,095 − 2,104 5,184 5,418 35,873 27,508 8,364 313 15,897 6,258 916 5,024
         Q2 111,206 47,844 29,772 5,856 5,173 7,042 35,236 26,345 8,891 1,611 20,438 5,130 948 6,242         Q3 110,282 44,951 29,229 6,266 6,079 3,376 37,051 28,063 8,988 1,686 20,448 5,158 989 6,267         Q4 128,800 53,227 35,516 7,549 6,461 3,701 38,529 29,402 9,127 3,403 27,432 5,183 1,026 7,455
2007          Q1 110,577 43,694 30,464 829 5,434 6,966 42,037 32,624 9,413 153 17,377 6,354 962 6,040
         Q2 125,236 55,351 32,244 8,191 6,224 8,693 41,001 30,642 10,359 1,705 20,694 5,493 992 7,145
2006          June 43,874 23,193 10,260 6,391 5,041 1,501 11,371 8,331 3,040 8 7,331 1,652 319 2,7772007          June 49,381 26,504 11,159 7,473 6,035 1,837 13,315 9,897 3,418 18 7,422 1,798 325 3,134
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, income. — 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens levies, local ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in sectio n1
business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central,
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance state and local government in revenue for 2006: 51.4:46.5:2.1 (central
of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective percentage share of central, government plus
€2.3 billion, state government minus this amount). The EU
state and local government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax share is deducted from central government’s share. — 6Respective percent-
42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, age share of central and state government for 2006: 22.9:77.1. — 7For the
withholding tax on interest income 44:44:12. — 3After deducting child bene- breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
fit. — 4Non-assessed taxes on earnings and withholding tax on interest
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax city tax tax Other tax buildings tax Other  2 Total tax taxes
2000 37,826 11,443 11,841 7,243 3,356 2,151 1,643 7,015 5,081 2,982 3,367 36,659 27,025 8,849
2001 40,690 12,072 11,069 7,427 4,322 2,143 1,554 8,376 4,853 3,069 3,330 34,399 24,534 9,076
2002 42,192 13,778 10,403 8,327 5,097 2,149 1,548 7,592 4,763 3,021 3,200 33,447 23,489 9,261
2003 43,188 14,094 10,280 8,870 6,531 2,204 1,442 7,336 4,800 3,373 3,205 34,477 24,139 9,6582004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2005          Q1 4,407 2,499 2,541 3,854 1,200 335 370 2,149 1,197 905 754 9,816 7,367 2,275
         Q2 9,916 3,610 2,508 1,627 2,010 562 324 2,342 1,070 1,413 848 10,864 7,968 2,758         Q3 9,776 3,951 2,387 1,709 1,589 512 311 2,108 1,184 849 727 10,875 7,745 2,984
         Q4 16,003 4,213 2,879 1,561 1,664 733 460 2,075 1,340 929 690 11,387 9,049 2,230
2006          Q1 4,480 2,786 2,628 3,792 1,492 399 320 2,718 1,681 1,049 811 11,370 8,874 2,321
         Q2 9,727 3,604 2,879 1,662 1,720 505 341 2,258 1,350 881 641 12,296 9,365 2,801         Q3 10,045 3,700 2,665 1,705 1,468 536 329 2,020 1,501 904 733 13,115 9,948 3,026         Q4 15,665 4,296 3,105 1,615 1,593 720 438 1,942 1,593 928 719 12,538 10,182 2,250
2007          Q1 4,540 2,916 2,949 4,504 1,647 416 406 2,636 1,828 1,150 740 12,143 9,541 2,408
         Q2 9,230 3,462 3,249 1,912 1,997 493 352 2,206 1,606 1,006 675 ... ... ...
2006          June 3,137 1,286 1,330 517 782 164 115 751 465 252 183 . . .2007          June 3,090 1,174 1,498 590 794 161 115 720 526 324 229 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- betting, lottery and beer tax.   
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2Notably
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total payments  3 insurance  4 surplus Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
2000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,889
2001 8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,8782003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,8622004
9 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,8882006 241,178 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,510 10,047 9,777 115 45 109 4,912
2005          Q1 55,160 36,897 17,996 58,001 50,031 3,390 − 2,841 2,607 2,432 16 41 118 4,828
         Q2 56,913 38,647 17,911 58,286 49,929 3,413 − 1,373 1,195 1,020 16 42 118 4,874         Q3 57,546 38,492 18,807 58,455 50,150 3,337 − 909 362 187 16 43 117 4,885
         Q4 59,408 42,224 16,834 58,412 50,050 3,300 + 996 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006          Q1 60,801 42,622 17,908 57,965 50,110 3,247 + 2,836 4,452 4,293 16 43 101 4,924
         Q2 60,537 42,351 17,877 58,328 50,143 3,257 + 2,209 7,406 7,241 16 45 105 4,956         Q3 57,950 39,741 17,839 58,521 50,297 3,266 − 571 6,845 6,681 16 45 104 4,959         Q4 61,369 43,351 17,755 58,459 50,140 3,274 + 2,910 10,047 9,777 115 45 109 4,912
2007          Q1 56,177 37,771 18,118 58,275 50,369 3,279 − 2,098 7,955 7,585 215 46 108 4,889
         Q2 59,068 40,501 18,180 58,595 50,282 3,432 + 473 8,890 8,573 165 48 103 4,881
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension institutions under section 50 of the fifth book of the Social Security Code
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for have been deducted from pension payments. — 4Including long-term care
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do not insurance for pensioners until 2004 Q1. — 5Largely corresponds to the
tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. In- sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. — 6Including cash. — 7Ex-
cluding financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending cluding loans to other social security funds. — 8Excluding income booked
and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government in connection with the revaluation of equity interests. — 9Revenue includes
cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loansfrom
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 1,330 − 868 867
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 1,660 − 1,931 1,9312002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 2,215 − 5,623 5,6232003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,2152004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2005          Q1 11,934 11,072 40 14,775 7,983 5,805 2,178 3,332 2,083 1,249 410 − 2,842 5,532
         Q2 13,283 11,449 324 13,697 7,394 5,376 2,018 3,062 1,956 1,105 440 − 414 223
         Q3 12,924 11,618 420 12,662 6,357 4,720 1,637 2,576 1,670 906 372 + 262 − 458
         Q4 14,551 12,850 652 11,954 5,920 4,431 1,489 2,620 1,712 908 228 + 2,597 − 4,900
2006          Q1 14,041 13,057 42 12,320 7,155 5,260 1,894 2,306 1,526 780 388 + 1,721 538
         Q2 13,827 12,848 275 11,742 6,362 4,691 1,670 2,266 1,505 761 300 + 2,084 − 538         Q3 12,860 11,950 302 10,142 5,117 3,879 1,239 2,232 1,486 746 183 + 2,718 −         Q4 14,656 13,321 504 9,958 4,616 3,518 1,098 2,455 1,669 787 218 + 4,698 −
2007          Q1 9,932 7,738 78 10,044 5,321 3,971 1,350 2,032 1,370 662 408 − 113 −
         Q2 10,837 7,910 303 9,383 4,598 3,440 1,157 2,089 1,423 666 259 + 1,454 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government health, pension and long-term care insurance schemes. 6Vocational
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a compen- measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agencies, compensation
satory amount to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit and top-up payments and business start-up grants. — 7Promotion of winter con-
short-time working benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory struction and insolvency compensation for employees. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Medical Thera- Other Adminis-
and peutical expend- trative
Contri- Federal Hospital dental Pharma- treatment Sickness iture on expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 grant Total treatment treatment  3 ceuticals and aids benefits benefits iture  4 surplus  5 
2000 133,808 130,053 . 133,823 44,540 32,734 20,121 9,431 7,058 2,524 7,296 − 15
2001 135,790 131,886 . 138,811 44,980 33,495 22,331 9,760 7,717 2,779 7,642 − 3,0212002 139,707 136,208 . 143,026 46,308 34,899 23,449 9,304 7,561 2,998 8,019 − 3,3202003 141,654 138,383 . 145,095 46,800 36,120 24,218 9,409 6,973 2,984 8,206 − 3,4412004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,178 47,594 34,218 21,811 8,281 6,367 3,731 8,114 + 4,102
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 143,809 48,959 33,024 25,358 8,284 5,868 3,847 8,155 + 1,933
2006 149,929 142,184 4,200 147,973 50,327 34,260 25,835 8,303 5,708 4,526 8,110 + 1,956
2005          Q1 34,630 33,989 − 34,452 12,171 8,280 5,795 1,827 1,539 347 1,765 + 178
         Q2 36,832 34,869 1,250 35,978 12,276 8,183 6,418 2,093 1,522 477 1,989 + 854
         Q3 35,380 34,674 − 35,530 12,102 8,133 6,425 2,087 1,400 391 1,904 − 150
         Q4 38,693 36,719 1,250 37,649 12,457 8,502 6,752 2,263 1,398 591 2,391 + 1,044
2006          Q1 34,744 34,034 − 35,968 12,834 8,483 6,384 1,881 1,477 283 1,836 − 1,224
         Q2 38,004 35,279 2,100 36,830 12,658 8,588 6,450 2,071 1,439 574 1,910 + 1,174         Q3 36,001 35,156 − 36,226 12,551 8,254 6,301 2,048 1,363 515 1,931 − 225         Q4 40,770 37,745 2,100 38,553 12,348 8,888 6,739 2,290 1,412 881 2,384 + 2,217
2007          Q1 36,437 35,693 − 37,147 12,948 8,793 6,687 1,918 1,525 347 1,879 − 710
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The annual figures do not tally with penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. —
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — 2In- 5Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen-
cluding contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. — sation scheme. 
3Including dentures. — 4Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2000 16,523 16,280 16,718 2,252 7,476 4,201 1,068 800 − 195
2001 16,843 16,581 16,890 2,301 7,744 4,134 980 816 − 472002 16,917 16,714 17,346 2,363 8,014 4,151 963 837 − 4282003 16,844 16,665 17,468 2,361 8,183 4,090 952 853 − 6242004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 940 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006
p 18,485 18,357 18,034 2,421 8,672 4,015 857 891 + 451
2005          Q1 4,159 4,130 4,418 586 2,103 996 226 245 − 259         Q2 4,315 4,288 4,439 596 2,120 1,011 220 215 − 123         Q3 4,389 4,358 4,492 606 2,140 1,008 221 213 − 103         Q4 4,629 4,600 4,509 607 2,154 1,037 227 198 + 121
2006          Q1 4,660 4,631 4,511 611 2,152 998 213 246 + 150
         Q2 4,655 4,629 4,447 582 2,158 994 214 222 + 208         Q3 4,471 4,441 4,551 617 2,171 1,014 213 222 − 80         Q4 4,699 4,657 4,526 611 2,191 1,009 218 200 + 173
2007          Q1 4,301 4,265 4,591 624 2,191 1,014 212 238 − 290
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The annual figures do not tally with 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — 2Since subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  1 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2000 + 122,725 + 1,755 − 5,563 − 940 2000 1,211,455 4,440 565,638 211 200,883 440,283
2001 + 135,018 − 14,719 + 3,595 − 1,495 2001 1,223,966 4,440 534,262 174 230,890 454,2002002 + 178,203 + 24,327 + 2,221 + 22 2002 1,277,667 4,440 537,000 137 238,390 497,7002003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 1,236 + 7,218 2003 1,358,137 4,440 530,800 341 298,356 524,2002004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,200 430 296,012 585,500
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 298,701 666,900
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,682 4,440 496,900 480 315,162 716,700
2005          Q1 + 65,235 + 19,631 + 11,093 − 4,966 2005          Q1 1,457,430 4,440 552,700 474 290,316 609,500
         Q2 + 54,315 + 3,646 − 2,371 + 1,492          Q2 1,465,639 4,440 530,900 501 292,598 637,200
         Q3 + 59,325 + 11,140 + 788 + 7,444          Q3 1,480,384 4,440 535,600 501 291,343 648,500         Q4 + 46,048 + 1,062 − 4,999 + 2,071          Q4 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 298,701 666,900
2006          Q1 + 75,788 + 12,526 + 8,174 − 7,296 2006          Q1 1,508,932 4,440 522,400 486 294,206 687,400
         Q2 + 56,445 + 14,238 + 8,228 + 14,649          Q2 1,525,012 4,440 528,500 485 305,787 685,800
         Q3 + 66,689 + 16,579 + 4,181 + 8,913          Q3 1,540,523 4,440 519,300 485 317,498 698,800         Q4 + 22,952 − 10,686 − 17,326 − 9,958          Q4 1,533,682 4,440 496,900 480 315,162 716,700
2007          Q1 + 68,285 + 4,600 + 12,649 − 11,200 2007          Q1
p 1,538,606 4,440 513,900 480 324,386 695,400
         Q2 + 54,415 + 22,020 + 5,792 + 27,209
Source: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 After deducting repurchases. Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
as a residual. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security reunifica- isation
or quarter Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5,6 claims  6 Other  7 
Central, state and local government
2001 1,223,966 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 123 8,986 108
2002 1,277,667 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 66 7,845 972003 1,358,137 36,022 246,414 153,611 12,810 471,115 396,832 341 34,163 33 6,711 862004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 379,984 430 53,672 2 5,572 82
2005          Q4 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 366,978 488 62,765 2 4,443 86
2006          Q1 1,508,932 36,882 320,546 167,403 10,883 530,724 372,680 486 64,799 2 4,443 85
         Q2 1,525,012 37,450 323,930 177,720 10,399 529,386 374,452 485 66,664 2 4,443 83         Q3 1,540,523 37,895 320,241 171,892 10,253 549,652 377,575 485 68,002 2 4,443 83         Q4 1,533,682 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 356,496 480 71,892 2 4,443 81
2007          Q1
p 1,538,606 38,627 323,595 166,620 10,276 560,413 367,039 480 67,032 2 4,443 80
Central government 8,9
2001 701,115 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 123 8,986 107
2002 725,443 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 66 7,845 972003 767,713 35,235 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 38,146 223 7,326 33 6,711 852004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 2 5,572 81
2005          Q4 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 29,318 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
2006          Q1 898,780 36,130 111,773 167,352 10,883 519,889 36,917 408 10,899 2 4,443 84
         Q2 913,018 36,927 108,975 177,669 10,399 518,757 44,284 408 11,073 2 4,443 83         Q3 929,597 37,772 106,419 171,841 10,253 539,023 48,236 408 11,119 2 4,443 83         Q4 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 30,030 408 11,036 2 4,443 80
2007          Q1 923,511 38,622 102,508 166,569 10,276 549,886 39,620 408 11,100 2 4,443 79
         Q2 945,531 38,497 103,219 175,516 10,114 557,055 45,104 408 11,096 2 4,443 79
State government
2001 364,559 1,900 87,856 . . . 265,652 5 9,145 . . 1
2002 392,172 588 121,394 . . . 255,072 5 15,113 . . 12003 423,737 787 154,189 . . . 244,902 4 23,854 . . 12004 448,672 1,282 179,620 . . . 228,644 3 39,122 . . 1
2005          Q4 471,375 847 201,146 . . . 221,163 3 48,216 . . 1
2006          Q1 477,718 752 208,773 . . . 218,132 3 50,057 . . 1
         Q2 478,661 523 214,954 . . . 211,432 2 51,748 . . 1         Q3 478,603 123 213,823 . . . 211,564 2 53,091 . . 1         Q4 481,850 36 216,665 . . . 209,270 2 55,876 . . 1
2007          Q1
p 483,084 5 221,087 . . . 211,039 2 50,950 . . 1
Local government 10
2001 99,209 . 153 . . 913 96,051 136 1,955 . . .
2002 100,842 . 153 . . 913 97,624 124 2,027 . . .2003 107,857 . 77 . . 734 104,469 106 2,471 . . .2004 112,538 . − . . 812 108,231 86 3,410 . . .
2005          Q4 116,033 . − . . 466 111,889 77 3,601 . . .
2006          Q1 117,424 . − . . 466 113,278 75 3,605 . . .
         Q2 118,323 . − . . 260 114,383 75 3,605 . . .         Q3 117,462 . − . . 260 113,522 75 3,605 . . .         Q4 118,365 . − . . 256 113,246 70 4,792 . . .
2007          Q1
p 117,753 . − . . 256 112,631 70 4,795 . . .
Special funds 8,9,11
2001 59,084 − 3,748 10,134 . 31,040 13,626 8 529 . . .
2002 59,210 − 3,820 10,185 . 32,828 11,832 8 537 . . .2003 58,830 − 4,610 10,185 . 34,201 9,315 8 512 . . .2004 57,250 − 4,538 9,685 . 34,355 8,274 8 389 . . .
2005          Q4 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 4,609 − 238 . . .
2006          Q1 15,011 . − 51 . 10,369 4,353 − 238 . . .
         Q2 15,011 . − 51 . 10,369 4,353 − 238 . . .         Q3 14,860 . − 51 . 10,368 4,253 − 188 . . .         Q4 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 3,950 − 188 . . .
2007          Q1 14,258 . − 51 . 10,271 3,749 − 188 . . .
         Q2 14,183 . − 51 . 10,271 3,674 − 188 . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 7Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- 8In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central govern-
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- ment and its special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans ratios. — 9On 1 January 2005 central government assumed joint responsi-
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- bility for the debts of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the afore -
vestment assistance levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing con- mentioned special fund is recorded under central government. — 10In-
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former cluding debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the year-end figures have been estimated. — 11ERP Special Fund, German
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. their home country. — 6Excluding offsets against outstanding claims. —
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2005   2006   2007
  2004   2005   2006   2004   2005   2006   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 103.7 106.8 112.4 3.4 2.9 5.3 3.2 3.9 8.2 2.2 5.3 5.5 5.2
Construction 83.0 80.1 84.0 − 4.5 − 3.4 4.8 − 0.8 − 1.4 2.0 1.6 5.6 9.6 18.3
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 105.1 106.5 110.1 3.5 1.3 3.3 1.9 0.8 3.6 1.8 3.5 4.5 3.1
Financing, renting and business
services  2 106.1 107.3 109.2 0.5 1.1 1.7 0.8 0.8 1.0 1.4 2.2 2.3 2.5
Public and private services  3 102.5 102.5 102.9 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 0.2 − 0.1 0.6 0.3 0.6 0.3 0.6
Gross value added 103.4 104.5 107.3 1.6 1.1 2.7 1.3 1.2 3.2 1.4 2.9 3.3 3.4
Gross domestic product  4 102.3 103.2 106.1 1.2 0.9 2.8 1.4 1.1 3.2 1.5 2.7 3.7 3.3
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 101.1 101.1 101.9 0.1 0.1 0.8 1.0 − 0.9 1.2 − 0.2 0.5 1.5 − 0.2
Government consumption 101.2 101.8 103.3 − 1.3 0.6 1.5 0.9 1.1 2.2 0.7 1.5 1.6 2.3
Machinery and equipment 92.8 98.5 105.6 4.2 6.1 7.3 4.1 5.4 10.8 6.1 6.8 6.0 8.6
Premises 85.0 82.0 85.6 − 3.8 − 3.6 4.3 − 1.3 − 1.6 2.5 2.0 4.8 7.8 15.3
Other investment  6 111.6 116.8 123.7 1.2 4.7 5.9 6.4 5.5 6.3 5.5 4.9 6.8 6.9
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . 0.3 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 0.4 1.0 0.1 0.4 − 1.8 0.0
Domestic use 98.1 98.6 100.3 0.0 0.5 1.7 0.5 0.5 3.3 0.8 2.1 0.7 2.2Net exports  
8 . . . 1.2 0.4 1.2 0.9 0.6 0.1 0.7 0.8 3.1 1.2
Exports 124.6 133.2 150.5 9.6 6.9 13.0 9.4 8.0 15.2 9.5 11.0 16.3 9.6
Imports 112.4 119.8 133.6 6.9 6.5 11.6 7.7 7.3 17.6 9.0 10.4 10.1 8.0
Gross domestic product  4 102.3 103.2 106.1 1.2 0.9 2.8 1.4 1.1 3.2 1.5 2.7 3.7 3.3
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,302.9 1,321.1 1,348.7 1.7 1.4 2.1 2.3 0.8 2.9 1.3 1.6 2.6 1.2
Government consumption 415.1 419.6 424.9 − 0.5 1.1 1.2 1.5 1.1 2.8 0.8 0.4 1.0 2.5Machinery and equipment 151.9 159.4 169.6 3.1 5.0 6.4 3.2 4.1 9.7 5.4 6.1 5.0 7.1
Premises 207.9 202.3 216.2 − 2.5 − 2.7 6.9 − 0.9 − 1.0 3.4 3.6 8.0 12.0 23.1
Other investment  
6 24.7 25.2 25.9 1.5 2.1 3.0 2.4 2.9 2.7 3.2 3.0 3.0 2.5
Changes in inventories  7 − 6.1 − 2.6 − 1.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,096.3 2,125.0 2,184.0 1.0 1.4 2.8 1.4 1.4 4.6 2.3 3.0 1.3 3.6Net exports 110.9 116.0 125.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 844.1 912.3 1,040.3 9.5 8.1 14.0 10.3 9.4 16.0 10.7 12.5 16.9 11.6Imports 733.2 796.3 915.2 7.0 8.6 14.9 9.8 9.8 21.9 13.6 13.4 11.8 7.5
Gross domestic product  
4 2,207.2 2,241.0 2,309.1 2.1 1.5 3.0 1.9 1.7 3.4 1.8 3.1 3.9 5.6
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 106.2 107.6 109.0 1.6 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.1 1.1 1.4Gross domestic product 104.6 105.2 105.5 0.9 0.6 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.2 2.3Terms of trade 102.8 101.9 99.9 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 2.9 − 2.9 − 1.4 − 1.0 2.3
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,136.8 1,129.3 1,145.7 0.5 − 0.7 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.7 0.3 1.3 2.1 2.0 2.8Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 513.8 545.9 601.2 10.4 6.2 10.1 6.5 7.1 14.3 4.8 8.2 13.8 6.7
National income 1,650.6 1,675.1 1,746.9 3.4 1.5 4.3 1.6 1.5 5.0 2.5 4.2 5.4 4.2
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,209.4 2,248.2 2,335.0 3.0 1.8 3.9 2.1 1.6 4.2 2.6 3.8 4.8 5.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2007. — 1Includ- ucts). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangi-
ing communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- ble fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment,
ties, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home services. — literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net increase
4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on prod- in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-
Period total tion  2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
2002 98.3 88.6 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.3 101.8 101.9 99.4 105.4
2003 98.4 84.9 99.8 99.5 99.5 102.0 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.62004 100.9 80.6 102.7 102.5 103.3 105.8 87.5 97.9 104.4 103.7 101.3 112.0
2005 103.7 76.1 102.8 106.3 106.5 111.1 87.8 100.9 110.0 104.6 106.2 116.8
2006 109.8 81.0 102.9 113.2 115.1 118.9 94.0 102.6 114.5 111.7 114.9 120.2
 
2005          Oct 112.9 93.4 103.9 115.7 115.4 119.5 100.2 112.4 117.8 112.7 108.2 131.2
         Nov 112.8 86.1 108.0 115.8 114.3 122.9 99.9 108.9 111.9 111.6 113.9 131.1         Dec 99.8 61.1 115.5 101.6 93.2 115.8 81.4 96.5 99.0 84.0 129.4 95.1
2006          Jan 98.1 41.6 120.4 100.9 104.6 101.1 85.7 96.3 113.9 104.7 92.3 107.3
         Feb 100.4 45.7 109.1 104.6 105.5 109.7 89.4 96.0 110.4 107.6 99.4 121.8
         Mar 111.8 63.6 112.6 116.2 116.5 124.4 98.3 103.4 118.4 117.0 117.1 131.7
         Apr 107.9 86.1 101.9 110.5 113.2 114.4 92.4 101.4 113.5 110.6 109.0 120.4
         May 107.7 88.8 95.4 110.8 114.1 115.0 89.4 100.7 112.9 112.4 110.1 122.5
         June 112.4 94.0 94.3 116.0 118.8 123.2 92.7 101.4 114.4 117.2 119.4 126.1
         July 112.7 99.4 97.1 115.6 119.0 121.2 90.3 103.2 118.8 111.9 115.1 127.4
         Aug 103.5 90.6 92.7 105.9 113.0 103.8 79.3 100.8 113.6 104.7 105.4 92.4         Sep 117.3 99.1 93.5 121.5 123.1 129.2 106.6 106.5 113.1 118.7 125.6 132.0
         Oct 117.9 97.7 100.7 121.6 124.9 125.6 104.4 110.4 119.8 120.8 119.9 126.9
         Nov 120.7 96.1 106.5 124.6 124.4 133.9 107.9 110.5 119.0 121.1 128.3 133.3         Dec 107.1 69.5 110.7 110.2 103.6 124.7 91.3 100.3 105.6 93.9 136.6 100.5
2007          Jan  
r 104.8 56.4 104.9 109.2 115.3 110.3 89.4 98.7 117.9 117.3 102.7 117.6
         Feb  r 108.0 59.7 99.4 113.4 116.8 119.2 95.7 98.6 116.4 117.8 112.5 127.5
         Mar  r 7 121.2 7 78.0 105.2 126.9 129.4 136.0 104.2 109.1 125.0 127.9 132.4 143.1
         Apr  + r 7 112.8 7 84.6 96.7 117.1 120.9 122.2 90.4 105.0 121.3 117.8 117.9 129.3
         May  + r 7 113.8 7 86.4 95.3 118.3 122.8 123.4 90.6 105.0 121.9 118.1 120.7 128.8
         June  + p 7 118.1 7 90.9 93.4 123.3 127.7 132.2 94.6 103.2 118.6 121.8 130.6 137.1
Annual percentage change  
  
2002 − 1.2 − 4.4 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.7 + 3.8 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 1.3
2003 + 0.1 − 4.2 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 5.2 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.6 + 2.12004 + 2.5 − 5.1 + 2.9 + 3.0 + 3.8 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 2.4 + 3.8 + 3.6 + 4.1
2005 + 2.8 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 5.0 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 5.4 + 0.9 + 4.8 + 4.3
2006 + 5.9 + 6.4 + 0.1 + 6.5 + 8.1 + 7.0 + 7.1 + 1.7 + 4.1 + 6.8 + 8.2 + 2.9
 
2005          Oct + 4.4 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 5.4 + 5.1 + 5.1 + 3.8 + 6.7 + 9.2 + 5.5 + 4.1 + 3.5
         Nov + 5.1 − 1.3 − 2.1 + 6.3 + 5.4 + 8.9 + 4.9 + 3.2 + 2.8 + 5.5 + 8.8 + 8.0         Dec + 4.5 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 5.4 + 5.3 + 7.0 + 3.4 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 8.6 + 2.9
2006          Jan + 3.9 − 13.2 + 6.9 + 4.2 + 3.7 + 6.1 + 4.9 + 1.9 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 7.0 + 0.7
         Feb + 5.9 + 5.5 + 1.3 + 6.5 + 6.2 + 9.2 + 4.2 + 1.9 + 2.7 + 5.6 + 6.8 + 8.4
         Mar + 4.8 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 5.3 + 7.1 + 5.5 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.9 + 7.0 + 2.7 + 4.2
         Apr + 5.3 + 7.5 + 0.7 + 5.5 + 6.8 + 4.9 + 6.3 + 4.1 + 4.8 + 4.3 + 8.0 − 1.6
         May + 7.1 + 6.5 − 2.5 + 8.1 + 8.5 + 9.8 + 12.2 + 3.0 + 3.2 + 9.2 + 11.1 + 9.2
         June + 5.6 + 6.3 + 1.9 + 5.8 + 8.6 + 5.1 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 6.2 + 8.8 + 3.6 + 3.1
         July + 5.7 + 7.0 + 0.7 + 6.2 + 8.2 + 6.4 + 7.9 + 0.7 + 5.9 + 3.4 + 6.8 + 4.4
         Aug + 7.9 + 7.3 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 11.0 + 9.1 + 13.0 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 8.7 + 14.4 + 1.9         Sep + 6.1 + 7.8 − 0.1 + 6.4 + 8.7 + 6.6 + 9.2 + 0.3 + 2.1 + 8.5 + 10.0 + 1.9
         Oct + 4.4 + 4.6 − 3.1 + 5.1 + 8.2 + 5.1 + 4.2 − 1.8 + 1.7 + 7.2 + 10.8 − 3.3
         Nov + 7.0 + 11.6 − 1.4 + 7.6 + 8.8 + 9.0 + 8.0 + 1.5 + 6.3 + 8.5 + 12.6 + 1.7         Dec + 7.3 + 13.7 − 4.2 + 8.5 + 11.2 + 7.7 + 12.2 + 3.9 + 6.7 + 11.8 + 5.6 + 5.7
2007          Jan  
r + 6.8 + 35.6 − 12.9 + 8.2 + 10.2 + 9.1 + 4.3 + 2.5 + 3.5 + 12.0 + 11.3 + 9.6
         Feb  r + 7.6 + 30.6 − 8.9 + 8.4 + 10.7 + 8.7 + 7.0 + 2.7 + 5.4 + 9.5 + 13.2 + 4.7
         Mar  r 7 + 8.4 7 + 22.6 − 6.6 + 9.2 + 11.1 + 9.3 + 6.0 + 5.5 + 5.6 + 9.3 + 13.1 + 8.7
         Apr  + r 7 + 4.5 7 − 1.7 − 5.1 + 6.0 + 6.8 + 6.8 − 2.2 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 6.5 + 8.2 + 7.4
         May  + r 7 + 5.7 7 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 6.8 + 7.6 + 7.3 + 1.3 + 4.3 + 8.0 + 5.1 + 9.6 + 5.1
         June  + p 7 + 5.1 7 − 3.3 − 1.0 + 6.3 + 7.5 + 7.3 + 2.0 + 1.8 + 3.7 + 3.9 + 9.4 + 8.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Annual and supply, and, in particular, mining of coal and lignite, extraction of crude
quarterly averages based on firms’ reports of enterprises with at least 20 petroleum and natural gas and manufacture of refined petroleum prod-
employees; monthly breakdown from January 2007 on the basis of data ucts. — 4Including mining and quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of
provided by firms with at least 50 employees, but with a smaller reporting motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service
group before that date. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version activities related to printing. — 7Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statis-
0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless assigned to the main grouping tical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the annual overall survey
energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The figures refer to the economic in the construction sector (average +4%). — +Provisional; adjusted in ad-
classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or vance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the r esults of
parts thereof; civil engineering”. — 3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water the Quarterly Production Survey for the second quarter 2007. 
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 Durable goods Non-durable goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
total  
  
2002 98.2 − 0.1 96.4 + 0.5 99.5 + 0.1 99.0 − 2.4 95.7 − 4.1 101.0 − 1.4
2003 99.0 + 0.8 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.2 95.6 − 3.4 90.4 − 5.5 98.8 − 2.22004 105.1 + 6.2 105.0 + 7.4 107.6 + 6.9 95.1 − 0.5 89.3 − 1.2 98.7 − 0.1
2005 111.8 + 6.4 110.0 + 4.8 116.2 + 8.0 99.7 + 4.8 91.4 + 2.4 104.9 + 6.3
2006 123.8 + 10.7 124.8 + 13.5 127.5 + 9.7 105.7 + 6.0 98.9 + 8.2 109.9 + 4.8
 
2006          June 124.2 + 9.5 128.9 + 16.1 127.0 + 6.1 97.7 + 2.6 95.6 + 4.1 99.0 + 1.7
         July 125.7 + 9.9 128.3 + 13.0 128.5 + 8.7 106.1 + 4.8 93.6 + 5.6 113.9 + 4.6
         Aug 118.9 + 16.6 119.0 + 16.2 121.9 + 19.0 106.2 + 7.6 89.2 + 12.6 116.6 + 5.4
         Sep 130.2 + 10.8 131.1 + 14.7 133.8 + 8.7 112.4 + 6.7 107.1 + 8.1 115.8 + 6.0
         Oct 129.7 + 9.3 134.5 + 14.8 129.8 + 5.6 113.5 + 6.6 112.3 + 9.2 114.3 + 5.0
         Nov 130.7 + 8.0 134.8 + 14.4 131.6 + 3.3 113.7 + 8.5 110.9 + 7.1 115.5 + 9.4         Dec 123.5 + 8.5 115.7 + 12.0 136.5 + 6.8 95.7 + 5.2 87.1 + 5.1 100.9 + 5.0
2007          Jan 127.2 + 9.2 132.4 + 13.9 128.1 + 6.2 106.5 + 5.8 99.3 + 4.9 111.0 + 6.4
         Feb 132.6 + 12.1 130.3 + 11.6 138.7 + 13.7 115.2 + 6.3 100.1 + 3.9 124.6 + 7.5         Mar 146.1 + 14.3 144.3 + 14.3 153.7 + 16.1 120.7 + 6.0 109.1 + 3.0 127.8 + 7.6
         Apr 131.7 + 9.2 133.5 + 8.5 136.2 + 10.2 107.4 + 6.8 98.3 + 0.9 113.1 + 10.2
         May 134.7 + 12.3 135.5 + 9.8 140.6 + 15.2 107.2 + 8.1 101.2 + 4.8 110.9 + 9.9         June  
p 146.3 + 17.8 141.1 + 9.5 159.9 + 25.9 107.7 + 10.2 102.5 + 7.2 111.0 + 12.1
from the domestic market  
  
2002 94.6 − 3.1 94.6 − 1.9 94.7 − 3.4 94.6 − 5.3 92.0 − 7.5 96.3 − 3.9
2003 94.6 + 0.0 95.0 + 0.4 96.0 + 1.4 89.9 − 5.0 86.3 − 6.2 92.1 − 4.4
2004 98.3 + 3.9 100.4 + 5.7 100.1 + 4.3 87.2 − 3.0 83.0 − 3.8 89.8 − 2.5
2005 101.4 + 3.2 103.6 + 3.2 102.8 + 2.7 91.1 + 4.5 85.2 + 2.7 94.6 + 5.3
2006 110.9 + 9.4 116.9 + 12.8 110.5 + 7.5 95.0 + 4.3 92.2 + 8.2 96.6 + 2.1
 
2006          June 110.3 + 6.3 119.4 + 14.7 109.4 − 0.3 86.7 + 0.3 87.6 + 3.5 86.2 − 1.5
         July 112.4 + 8.5 121.4 + 12.9 110.2 + 6.2 92.8 + 1.2 85.9 + 2.9 97.1 + 0.4
         Aug 108.7 + 12.8 115.0 + 16.2 107.3 + 11.9 94.6 + 5.0 83.1 + 11.2 101.7 + 2.2
         Sep 119.9 + 13.6 122.7 + 14.8 123.6 + 15.1 101.8 + 5.6 100.5 + 8.9 102.6 + 3.7
         Oct 118.5 + 10.4 126.5 + 14.0 115.9 + 8.6 103.3 + 4.8 105.2 + 9.8 102.1 + 1.8
         Nov 118.9 + 9.8 127.4 + 13.9 115.9 + 6.6 103.1 + 6.6 106.1 + 9.5 101.3 + 4.9         Dec 106.8 + 9.4 107.5 + 12.9 112.7 + 6.8 87.8 + 6.7 82.0 + 9.2 91.3 + 5.2
2007          Jan 113.7 + 10.7 123.0 + 14.0 111.4 + 9.5 93.8 + 3.4 92.1 + 2.8 94.8 + 3.8
         Feb 115.1 + 11.1 120.9 + 12.4 114.5 + 12.7 100.6 + 2.5 92.9 + 2.2 105.4 + 2.8         Mar 128.3 + 13.0 132.8 + 14.2 131.3 + 14.4 107.1 + 5.4 102.0 + 3.8 110.2 + 6.4
         Apr 117.3 + 9.8 124.8 + 8.9 117.6 + 12.0 94.8 + 5.6 89.3 + 1.1 98.2 + 8.3
         May 117.9 + 8.9 127.4 + 9.9 117.0 + 8.9 93.1 + 4.5 89.6 + 0.6 95.2 + 6.8         June  
p 123.3 + 11.8 131.3 + 10.0 126.3 + 15.4 92.2 + 6.3 91.5 + 4.5 92.7 + 7.5
from abroad  
  
2002 102.7 + 3.6 99.1 + 4.2 104.1 + 3.5 108.6 + 3.6 103.9 + 3.5 111.4 + 3.7
2003 104.4 + 1.7 102.3 + 3.2 105.1 + 1.0 108.2 − 0.4 99.3 − 4.4 113.8 + 2.22004 113.6 + 8.8 112.2 + 9.7 114.5 + 8.9 112.5 + 4.0 103.1 + 3.8 118.4 + 4.0
2005 124.8 + 9.9 120.0 + 7.0 128.5 + 12.2 119.0 + 5.8 105.0 + 1.8 127.7 + 7.9
2006 140.0 + 12.2 137.3 + 14.4 143.2 + 11.4 129.4 + 8.7 113.6 + 8.2 139.3 + 9.1
 
2006          June 141.6 + 13.0 143.8 + 18.0 143.2 + 11.0 121.9 + 6.3 113.1 + 5.1 127.5 + 7.1
         July 142.4 + 11.4 139.0 + 13.1 145.3 + 10.5 135.5 + 10.9 110.6 + 10.8 151.1 + 11.0
         Aug 131.6 + 20.8 125.3 + 16.4 135.4 + 25.0 131.8 + 12.1 102.7 + 15.1 149.8 + 10.7
         Sep 143.0 + 7.9 144.3 + 14.6 143.3 + 4.1 136.0 + 8.7 121.6 + 6.7 145.0 + 9.8
         Oct 143.6 + 8.0 147.0 + 15.7 142.7 + 3.6 136.2 + 9.8 127.8 + 8.2 141.4 + 10.6
         Nov 145.4 + 6.3 146.4 + 15.4 146.1 + 1.0 137.2 + 11.9 121.3 + 2.9 147.0 + 17.1         Dec 144.4 + 7.8 128.5 + 10.9 158.4 + 6.8 113.1 + 2.4 98.3 − 1.8 122.3 + 4.6
2007          Jan 144.0 + 7.7 147.1 + 13.9 143.5 + 4.0 134.7 + 9.8 115.0 + 8.5 147.0 + 10.4
         Feb 154.4 + 12.9 144.9 + 10.5 161.1 + 14.4 147.6 + 12.5 116.0 + 7.4 167.2 + 14.8         Mar 168.3 + 15.5 162.3 + 14.5 174.4 + 17.3 150.8 + 6.9 124.8 + 1.7 167.0 + 9.5
         Apr 149.7 + 8.6 147.2 + 8.2 153.3 + 8.9 135.4 + 8.7 118.1 + 0.5 146.2 + 13.4
         May 155.6 + 15.9 148.2 + 9.7 162.4 + 19.7 138.5 + 13.8 126.6 + 11.9 145.9 + 14.8         June  
p 175.0 + 23.6 156.4 + 8.8 190.9 + 33.3 142.1 + 16.6 126.5 + 11.8 151.8 + 19.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic employees, previously on the basis of the reports by enterprises with more
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture than 20 employees. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; 0.2.8. — 1Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added tax; semi-trailers. — 2Including printing and service activities related to print-
from January 2006 on the basis of reports by enterprises with more than 50 ing. 
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany  1 Eastern Germany  2 
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per-
 centage centage centage
Period change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2002 88.8 − 6.0 72.8 91.5 95.7 92.1 − 6.9 80.5 94.8 96.4 79.6 − 3.6 51.5 81.9 94.0
2003 79.3 − 10.7 67.5 78.6 87.5 82.0 − 11.0 75.6 79.7 88.7 71.9 − 9.7 45.1 75.4 84.32004 74.3 − 6.3 61.3 72.8 84.2 76.9 − 6.2 70.5 74.5 83.8 67.1 − 6.7 35.8 67.7 85.2
2005 73.8 − 0.7 56.9 74.4 83.5 77.8 + 1.2 66.5 78.0 84.8 62.6 − 6.7 30.5 64.2 80.1
2006 77.6 + 5.1 59.4 81.3 84.9 82.1 + 5.5 68.9 84.8 87.3 65.3 + 4.3 33.1 71.1 78.6
   
2006          May 86.1 + 10.5 64.5 89.5 95.6 93.9 + 14.7 76.0 97.2 101.4 64.5 − 3.4 32.7 67.4 80.6
         June 93.5 + 5.6 70.9 87.8 113.9 97.9 + 4.7 82.8 87.2 119.9 81.2 + 8.6 38.2 89.4 98.4
         July 87.5 + 7.4 68.5 84.6 102.5 91.7 + 8.8 79.7 87.1 104.8 75.7 + 2.6 37.6 77.6 96.5
         Aug 84.2 + 2.2 60.1 86.9 96.1 88.3 + 1.7 70.7 89.6 97.9 72.9 + 3.7 30.8 79.1 91.5
         Sep 90.8 + 1.9 66.5 93.9 102.5 94.6 + 0.9 74.0 96.5 105.6 80.3 + 5.2 45.7 86.6 94.5
         Oct 76.5 + 2.7 57.9 84.4 79.2 81.2 + 2.4 68.6 87.2 82.2 63.6 + 3.8 28.4 76.2 71.6
         Nov 70.5 + 4.3 50.7 80.3 71.9 74.5 + 2.9 59.4 86.2 70.5 59.6 + 9.8 26.8 63.4 75.3         Dec 70.3 − 6.1 56.2 83.9 63.8 72.7 − 7.5 60.4 88.2 62.4 63.9 − 1.1 44.8 71.4 67.4
2007          Jan 59.9 + 19.1 43.4 69.6 59.2 64.6 + 19.2 50.3 74.6 62.0 47.0 + 18.7 24.3 55.1 52.1
         Feb 64.0 + 8.3 45.6 77.3 60.5 67.5 + 4.0 53.4 83.1 58.4 54.5 + 25.9 24.2 60.6 66.1         Mar 93.1 + 13.3 60.3 101.8 103.7 99.4 + 15.2 71.2 107.1 108.4 75.7 + 6.6 30.1 86.4 91.7
         Apr 87.7 + 8.9 61.8 92.8 98.1 93.3 + 9.9 68.5 98.8 102.5 72.5 + 5.8 43.2 75.5 86.9
         May 89.6 + 4.1 60.9 93.5 103.2 96.3 + 2.6 70.6 100.8 107.5 71.2 + 10.4 34.0 72.5 92.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications 0.2.8. — 1Excluding West Berlin. — 2Including West Berlin. — 3Including
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there- the railways and post office. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  2 of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco products leather goods ing materials sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted 2003 = 100
2002 100.5 − 1.6 − 1.3 98.3 + 2.7 97.5 + 3.5 105.7 − 5.0 101.0 − 7.9 99.9 − 0.8 − 0.8 98.1 + 2.9
2003  4 100.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 100.2 + 1.9 100.0 + 2.6 100.1 − 5.2 100.2 − 0.7 100.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 100.5 + 2.4
2004 101.8 + 1.5 + 1.6 103.3 + 2.9 99.8 − 0.3 103.4 + 2.9 103.6 + 3.2 102.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 102.5 + 2.0
2005 103.8 + 2.3 + 1.7 106.4 + 3.3 104.8 + 5.0 105.6 + 2.4 101.9 − 1.5 104.0 + 2.2 + 1.5 104.9 + 2.2
2006  5 110.8 + 1.2 + 0.6 111.9 + 0.3 111.9 + 2.6 114.2 + 2.6 115.1 + 4.1 113.4 + 2.4 + 1.6 121.7 + 6.8
 
2006          June  5 107.3 + 2.2 + 1.4 112.7 + 1.6 109.2 + 2.4 108.7 + 5.1 106.6 + 1.9 111.8 + 2.6 + 1.5 125.5 + 3.4
         July 108.7 + 1.3 + 0.4 116.1 + 4.4 112.6 + 0.6 109.2 + 0.9 105.5 − 0.9 113.1 + 1.8 + 0.6 125.5 + 2.5
         Aug 107.3 + 1.4 + 0.9 108.9 + 0.3 107.0 + 2.4 112.9 + 7.2 110.0 + 3.9 109.0 + 3.0 + 2.1 112.4 + 8.9
         Sep 106.4 − 0.3 − 0.9 106.0 + 0.1 107.8 − 0.6 108.2 − 1.5 111.7 + 4.6 109.7 + 1.3 + 0.5 119.6 + 6.7
         Oct 114.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 109.8 − 2.1 114.3 + 1.4 131.1 + 1.9 123.8 + 5.0 117.7 + 2.3 + 1.8 128.9 + 9.7
         Nov 116.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 111.3 − 1.9 115.8 + 2.2 120.9 + 0.8 129.1 + 8.6 120.5 + 3.0 + 2.2 136.6 + 12.8
         Dec 137.8 + 2.9 + 2.6 131.8 + 0.2 132.1 + 1.9 146.4 + 4.2 153.1 + 13.2 137.0 + 7.0 + 6.3 136.0 + 25.1
2007          Jan 99.0 − 2.3 − 3.0 102.7 − 0.1 106.3 − 0.7 95.9 − 2.6 99.4 − 1.5 95.5 − 4.3 − 5.3 82.9 − 11.8
         Feb 95.9 − 1.1 − 1.6 100.7 − 2.1 103.9 + 1.7 86.7 + 4.0 98.2 + 1.4 95.6 − 2.2 − 3.1 94.3 − 5.9         Mar 111.8 + 0.4 − 0.1 114.4 + 0.4 115.7 + 1.5 116.1 + 4.4 119.6 + 3.5 114.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 124.2 − 2.0
         Apr 112.8 + 1.4 + 0.5 115.8 + 2.2 114.4 + 3.4 134.4 + 9.7 114.3 − 1.5 114.7 − 0.6 − 1.9 119.8 − 6.8
         May 107.5 − 2.5 − 3.2 112.6 − 0.9 112.4 + 2.3 110.9 − 5.1 107.6 − 4.4 111.5 − 2.4 − 3.6 123.7 − 1.7
         June 105.2 − 2.0 − 2.6 110.5 − 2.0 111.4 + 2.0 109.1 + 0.4 106.8 + 0.2 109.3 − 2.2 − 3.3 122.1 − 2.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding parts and accessories. — 4Figures for 2003 do not include Lower Saxony. —
value-added tax; annual percentage changes based on a consistent report- 5Figures from January 2006 onwards based on an expanded sample owing
ing sample. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Ex- to newly registered institutions; provisional, in some cases revised, and par-
cluding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of ticularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for missi ng reports. 
automotive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor vehicle
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployed  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-
manu- ment pro- going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cational
ing Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  3 6,7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2004 r 38,880 + 0.4 r + 153 34,656 + 0.0 6,019 769 151 117 184 9 4,381 9 +9 3 9 10.5 286
2005 r 38,847 − 0.1 r − 33 34,466 − 0.5 5,931 719 126 60 114 10 4,861 10 + 479 10 11.7 11 413
2006 r 39,089 r + 0.6 r + 242 34,697 + 0.7 12 5,249 710 67 50 119 4,487 − 374 10.8 564
2006          July r 39,153 r + 0.9 r + 354 5,221 732 54 51 114 4,386 − 451 10.5 627
         Aug r 39,222 r + 0.9 r + 341 34,896 + 1.0 5,253 741 48 51 110 4,372 − 426 10.5 619
         Sep r 39,507 r + 0.8 r + 310 5,267 743 46 51 124 4,237 − 409 10.1 621
         Oct r 39,677 r + 0.8 r + 310 5,252 737 39 54 131 4,084 − 471 9.8 626
         Nov r 39,744 r + 0.9 r + 371 35,251 + 1.0 5,251 734 36 55 135 3,995 − 536 9.6 609
         Dec r 39,616 r + 1.2 r + 453 5,236 718 63 51 128 4,008 − 597 9.6 592
2007          Jan r 39,074 r + 1.8 r + 690 5,247 686 126 42 115 4,284 − 726 10.2 13 594
         Feb r 39,143 r + 2.0 r + 762 34,589 + 1.5 5,246 679 148 41 117 4,247 − 801 10.2 624
         Mar r 39,276 r + 2.0 r + 777 5,255 14 687 144 40 121 4,124 − 853 9.9 640
         Apr r 39,461 r + 1.9 r + 730 5,255 14 696 ... 40 125 3,976 − 815 9.5 651
         May 39,652 + 1.7 + 656 ... ... 5,266 14 699 ... 15 4015 127 3,812 − 727 16 9.1 643
         June 17 39,794 17 + 1.6 17 + 636 5,284 ... ... 15 4015 125 3,687 − 712 8.8 648
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 4115 117 3,715 − 671 8.9 650
Western Germany o)  
  
2004 . . . . . 5,380 562 122 24 121 9 2,783 9 +8 9 9 8.5 239
2005 . . . . . 5,214 529 101 12 76 10 3,247 10 + 464 10 9.9 11 325
2006 . . . . . 12 4,650 525 54 9 81 3,007 − 240 9.1 436
2006          July . . . . . 4,628 539 43 10 78 2,961 − 279 8.9 486
         Aug . . . . . 4,654 545 38 10 76 2,941 − 297 8.8 480
         Sep . . . . . 4,663 546 38 10 87 2,835 − 305 8.5 478
         Oct . . . . . 4,647 542 32 10 93 2,738 − 360 8.2 473
         Nov . . . . . 4,645 540 30 10 95 2,672 − 409 8.0 464         Dec . . . . . 4,631 530 50 9 89 2,670 − 450 8.0 458
2007          Jan . . . . . 4,642 509 93 8 78 2,830 − 532 8.5
13 463
         Feb . . . . . 4,640 505 108 9 79 2,798 − 572 8.4 483
         Mar . . . . . 4,647 14 511 104 9 82 2,708 − 609 8.1 493
         Apr . . . . . 4,645 14 517 ... 9 85 2,611 − 591 7.8 504
         May . . . . . 4,655 14 519 ... 15 1015 87 2,503 − 545 16 7.5 502
         June . . . . . 4,670 ... ... 15 1015 85 2,427 − 539 7.3 511
         July . . . . . ... ... ... 15 1015 81 2,450 − 510 7.3 515
Eastern Germany +  
  
2004 . . . . . 639 207 29 93 63 9 1,599 9 +4 9 18.4 47
2005 . . . . . 717 189 25 48 38 10 1,614 10 +1 6 10 18.7 11 88
2006 . . . . . 12 599 185 13 40 37 1,480 − 134 17.3 129
2006          July . . . . . 593 193 11 41 36 1,426 − 171 16.7 142         Aug . . . . . 599 196 9 41 34 1,430 − 129 16.7 139
         Sep . . . . . 603 196 8 41 36 1,402 − 104 16.4 143
         Oct . . . . . 605 195 7 44 38 1,346 − 111 15.7 153
         Nov . . . . . 606 194 6 44 40 1,323 − 127 15.5 145         Dec . . . . . 604 188 14 41 39 1,337 − 148 15.7 134
2007          Jan . . . . . 604 177 33 34 37 1,454 − 194 17.0
13 130
         Feb . . . . . 606 174 41 33 38 1,448 − 229 16.9 141
         Mar . . . . . 608 14 175 40 32 39 1,416 − 244 16.6 146
         Apr . . . . . 610 14 179 ... 31 40 1,365 − 224 16.0 147
         May . . . . . 611 14 180 ... 15 3115 40 1,309 − 181 16 15.2 141
         June . . . . . 614 ... ... 15 3015 39 1,260 − 173 14.7 137
         July . . . . . ... ... ... 15 3215 36 1,265 − 161 14.7 134
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual unemployed persons excluding all those participating in occupational apti-
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- tude testing and training schemes. — 10From January 2005, unemployed
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- persons including recipients of social assistance who are able to work. —
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Work-place concept; aver- 11From January 2005, including offers of job opportunities. — 12From Janu-
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — ary 2006 enterprises with more than 50 employees, previously enterprises
3Up to December 2004, western Germany including West Berlin and east- with more than 20 employees. — 13From January 2007, vacancies for season-
ern Germany excluding West Berlin. — 4The figures refer to the economic al workers are included only if they are based on non-specific employer re-
classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or quirements. — 14Provisional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual
parts thereof; civil engineering”. — 5Number within a given month. — 6Em- overall survey. — 15Annualised data from the Federal Employment Agency
ployees involved in job creation schemes and structural adjustment meas- based on information received so far. — 16From May 2007, calculated on
ures (SAM). — 7Mid-month level; end of month figures up to December the basis of new labour force figures. — 17Initial preliminary estimate by
2004. — 8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — 9From January 2004, the Federal Statistical Office. 
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Period Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2 market  3 Exports Imports Energy  5 products  3 materials  6 energy  1,2 
2000 = 100  
  
2002 7 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 104.9 102.6 100.2 7 102.4 100.0 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.1
2003 8 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 8 104.1 101.3 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.9
2004 9 10 106.2 105.7 102.9 114.8 108.9 104.8 101.4 10 105.8 99.7 101.1 97.2 101.4 96.3
2005 11 108.3 105.8 103.8 126.6 111.1 105.9 102.7 11 110.7 98.8 102.4 101.4 139.5 105.4
2006 12 110.1 107.7 104.4 137.3 112.1 107.0 105.3 12 116.8 107.6 104.8 106.7 163.9 131.5
 
2005          Oct 11 109.1 104.4 104.3 135.6 111.2 106.1 11 112.6 98.8 103.0 103.7 154.0 108.0
         Nov 108.6 104.6 104.4 130.9 110.4 106.2 103.0 112.5 100.4 103.0 103.5 148.5 112.0
         Dec 109.6 105.5 104.2 131.0 113.7 106.3 112.8 101.4 103.1 103.8 152.0 115.8
2006          Jan 109.1 106.6 103.7 134.4 110.7 106.5 114.1 101.1 103.3 104.7 163.7 120.1
         Feb 109.5 107.1 104.0 134.7 111.6 106.7 103.7 114.9 103.3 103.7 105.1 160.9 124.5         Mar 109.5 107.0 104.4 135.0 111.3 106.7 115.5 104.8 104.0 105.6 163.6 123.7
         Apr 109.9 107.4 104.4 139.2 111.2 106.8 116.6 105.9 104.5 107.0 177.8 129.3
         May 110.1 108.4 104.3 139.8 111.3 106.9 104.4 116.7 106.2 104.8 107.2 171.6 134.5         June 110.3 108.5 104.2 140.7 111.7 107.0 117.1 106.9 104.8 107.0 172.7 130.0
         July 110.7 108.1 103.9 142.1 113.6 107.1 117.7 105.9 105.2 108.3 182.1 135.6
         Aug 110.6 107.7 103.8 141.3 113.3 107.2 105.9 117.9 109.8 105.2 108.5 178.5 134.3         Sep 110.2 108.0 104.4 136.1 112.3 107.2 117.5 109.6 105.2 107.1 155.4 133.7
         Oct 
12 110.3 107.5 105.2 135.4 112.2 107.3 12 117.8 108.4 105.6 106.8 146.8 139.0
         Nov 110.2 107.8 105.4 134.6 111.6 107.4 107.1 117.8 110.9 105.7 106.4 144.9 137.7
         Dec 111.1 108.3 105.3 134.6 114.8 107.4 117.8 111.3 105.6 106.1 148.7 136.3
2007          Jan 13 110.9 109.5 105.6 136.5 112.8 107.7 117.8 111.1 105.8 105.4 133.2 138.8
         Feb 111.3 109.3 105.8 137.6 113.9 107.8 111.7 118.1 113.1 106.0 105.9 142.2 141.8
         Mar 111.6 109.1 106.1 139.8 113.6 107.9 118.4 113.1 106.2 106.5 147.7 145.5
         Apr 14 112.0 110.3 106.1 141.6 114.1 108.0 118.5 112.2 106.5 107.5 154.9 149.1
         May 112.2 110.2 106.2 142.5 114.6 108.1 112.6 118.9 113.0 106.7 107.8 154.7 150.5
         June 112.3 110.3 105.9 143.0 114.9 108.1 119.1 p 112.9 106.9 108.4 164.3 148.5
         July 112.8 110.1 105.6 144.2 116.7 108.2 ... ... ... ... 172.7 146.2
Annual percentage change  
  
2002 7 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 7 − 0.6 − 6.6 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.9
2003 8 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 8 + 1.7 + 1.3 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.6
2004 9 10 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.5 + 4.2 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 1.1 10 + 1.6 − 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 22.3 + 10.8
2005 11 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 10.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.3 11 + 4.6 − 0.9 + 1.3 + 4.3 + 37.6 + 9.4
2006 12 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 0.6 + 8.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 2.5 12 + 5.5 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 5.2 + 17.5 + 24.8
 
2005          Oct 11 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 12.6 + 2.1 + 1.0 11 + 4.6 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 4.3 + 25.2 + 17.4
         Nov + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 11.7 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.4 + 5.5 + 37.4 + 22.5         Dec + 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 14.4 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 5.2 + 2.7 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 57.0 + 29.8
2006          Jan + 2.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 15.5 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 1.8 + 6.8 + 52.3 + 25.5
         Feb + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 14.6 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 5.9 + 4.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 44.4 + 25.5         Mar + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 4.8 + 1.9 + 5.5 + 30.6 + 20.0
         Apr + 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 12.9 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 6.1 + 7.6 + 2.4 + 6.9 + 38.7 + 25.4
         May + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 13.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 6.2 + 7.9 + 2.7 + 7.5 + 38.1 + 31.5         June + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 6.1 + 8.5 + 2.5 + 5.6 + 19.4 + 22.0
         July + 1.9 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 10.2 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 6.0 + 8.6 + 2.7 + 6.3 + 20.0 + 26.7
         Aug + 1.7 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 7.9 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 5.9 + 11.2 + 2.7 + 5.5 + 10.9 + 26.8         Sep + 1.0 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 11.4 + 2.3 + 3.7 − 3.2 + 26.4
         Oct 
12 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.1 12 + 4.6 + 9.7 + 2.5 + 3.0 − 4.7 + 28.7
         Nov + 1.5 + 3.1 + 1.0 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 4.0 + 4.7 + 10.5 + 2.6 + 2.8 − 2.4 + 22.9
         Dec + 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 4.4 + 9.8 + 2.4 + 2.2 − 2.2 + 17.7
2007          Jan 13 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 3.2 + 9.9 + 2.4 + 0.7 − 18.6 + 15.6
         Feb + 1.6 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 7.7 + 2.8 + 9.5 + 2.2 + 0.8 − 11.6 + 13.9
         Mar + 1.9 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 7.9 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 9.7 + 17.6
         Apr 14 + 1.9 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.6 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 5.9 + 1.9 + 0.5 − 12.9 + 15.3
         May + 1.9 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 7.9 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 1.8 + 0.6 − 9.8 + 11.9
         June + 1.8 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 1.7 p + 5.6 + 2.0 + 1.3 − 4.9 + 14.2
         July + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.7 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... − 5.2 + 7.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — January 2003, increase in tax on energy consumption, increase in tobacco
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data tax. — 9From January 2004, increase in healthcare prices. — 10From March
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Excluding value-added tax. — as well as December 2004, increase in tobacco tax. — 11From September
4For the euro area, in euro. — 5Coal and crude oil. — 6Food, beverages 2005, increase in tobacco tax. — 12From October 2006, increase in the
and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 7From January 2002, prices of tobacco products. — 13From January 2007, increase in the stand-
increase in tax on energy consumption, increase in tobacco tax; additionally ard rate of VAT and in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. — 14From April
in the case of the consumer price index: increase in insurance tax. — 8From 2007, introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2000 883.4 3.4 569.6 4.0 339.9 2.8 909.5 3.6 1,337.4 3.1 123.2 0.4 9.2
2001 902.0 2.1 590.0 3.6 353.8 4.1 943.9 3.8 1,389.5 3.9 130.9 6.2 9.42002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.9
2003 908.1 − 0.0 588.6 − 0.6 377.7 2.7 966.3 0.7 1,429.1 1.9 147.4 5.8 10.32004 914.3 0.7 603.1 2.5 377.9 0.0 981.0 1.5 1,454.8 1.8 151.9 3.1 10.4
2005 911.4 − 0.3 601.4 − 0.3 377.4 − 0.1 978.8 − 0.2 1,477.9 1.6 156.9 3.3 10.6
2006 925.3 1.5 603.8 0.4 377.2 − 0.1 980.9 0.2 1,508.2 2.0 159.5 1.7 10.6
2005          Q4 251.9 − 0.3 164.4 − 0.6 94.1 − 0.0 258.5 − 0.4 377.8 1.0 34.8 2.9 9.2
2006          Q1 214.3 0.3 140.3 − 0.8 95.6 0.6 235.8 − 0.2 378.2 2.9 53.7 3.0 14.2
         Q2 223.0 1.5 142.8 − 0.0 94.9 0.4 237.6 0.1 370.1 1.4 37.4 1.9 10.1
         Q3 230.9 2.1 154.6 1.2 93.8 − 0.0 248.4 0.7 373.1 1.6 33.6 0.8 9.0         Q4 257.1 2.0 166.1 1.0 92.9 − 1.2 259.1 0.2 386.8 2.4 35.0 0.5 9.0
2007          Q1 221.1 3.1 144.3 2.9 94.2 − 1.4 238.5 1.2 385.9 2.0 57.4 6.9 14.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2007. — *House- plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
holds including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Residence surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — 3Social cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state and fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 6In-
local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), private cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2000 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.0 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.2 100.0 1.5
2001 102.0 2.0 101.9 1.9 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 101.8 1.8
2002 104.7 2.7 104.6 2.7 104.6 2.3 104.6 2.3 103.2 1.32003 106.8 2.0 106.8 2.1 107.0 2.2 107.1 2.4 104.5 1.22004 108.1 1.2 108.3 1.4 108.4 1.3 108.9 1.7 105.1 0.6
2005 109.2 1.0 109.5 1.1 109.4 0.9 110.0 1.0 105.4 0.2
2006 110.4 1.1 110.9 1.3 110.4 0.9 111.1 1.0 106.3 0.8
2005          Q4 121.8 0.7 122.2 0.8 122.0 0.8 110.4 0.8 115.0 0.0
2006          Q1 102.1 1.0 102.6 1.1 102.1 0.7 110.5 0.7 100.1 0.4
         Q2 102.9 1.6 103.4 1.8 102.6 0.9 110.9 0.8 102.9 0.8         Q3 112.8 0.3 113.4 0.6 113.1 0.5 111.4 1.1 105.6 1.0         Q4 123.7 1.5 124.4 1.8 123.8 1.5 111.6 1.1 116.3 1.1
2007          Q1 102.7 0.6 103.4 0.8 103.3 1.2 111.8 1.2 101.7 1.6
         Q2 104.6 1.6 105.3 1.8 103.8 1.2 112.2 1.2 . .
2006          Dec 104.6 2.7 105.2 3.0 103.5 1.3 111.7 1.2 . .
2007          Jan 103.1 1.4 103.8 1.6 103.3 1.1 111.7 1.1 . .
         Feb 102.5 0.0 103.2 0.3 103.3 1.2 111.8 1.2 . .         Mar 102.5 0.3 103.2 0.4 103.4 1.3 111.9 1.3 . .
         Apr 103.9 0.1 104.6 0.3 103.4 1.2 112.0 1.2 . .
         May 106.2 3.5 106.9 3.6 103.7 1.2 112.0 1.2 . .         June 103.6 1.4 104.3 1.5 104.2 1.3 112.8 1.3 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2007. 
2Excluding one-off payments and ancillary benefits. — 3Source: Federal
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2006 2007
Item 2004 2005 2006 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May
Current account + 60,748 − 1,878 − 9,728 − 5,662 + 17,650 − 2,405 + 9,425 − 4,298 − 14,569A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,129,339 1,224,238 1,389,047 342,117 373,194 359,476 130,272 119,153 123,366
Imports (fob) 1,028,883 1,178,862 1,360,441 334,642 355,372 351,921 120,680 114,834 119,770
Balance + 100,453 + 45,377 + 28,603 + 7,474 + 17,822 + 7,555 + 9,592 + 4,319 + 3,596
2 Services
Receipts 366,385 401,750 429,334 114,147 110,172 103,593 36,514 35,399 37,950
Expenditure 333,777 366,986 393,567 104,343 101,682 97,962 33,410 32,392 34,553
Balance + 32,611 + 34,765 + 35,765 + 9,804 + 8,490 + 5,631 + 3,104 + 3,007 + 3,398
3 Income − 13,736 − 11,556 + 1,409 + 919 + 6,744 + 5,408 + 4,159 − 4,312 − 16,468
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 82,110 85,390 86,578 15,522 27,738 26,752 5,508 4,966 6,767
Transfers to non-residents 140,694 155,856 162,087 39,379 43,144 47,751 12,938 12,277 11,861
Balance − 58,582 − 70,465 − 75,506 − 23,857 − 15,405 − 20,999 − 7,430 − 7,311 − 5,094
Capital account + 16,554 + 12,148 + 10,151 + 2,066 + 4,820 + 5,190 + 1,628 + 641 + 1,950B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 18,739 + 25,499 + 117,058 + 50,954 − 45,765 − 11,963 − 44,024 + 17,699 + 668C)
1 Direct investment − 68,646 − 209,989 − 158,803 − 43,945 − 59,446 − 24,214 − 5,851 − 24,514 − 11,277
By resident units abroad − 161,011 − 301,628 − 322,571 − 73,512 − 80,237 − 76,924 − 23,405 − 30,146 − 31,045
By non-resident units in the euro area + 92,364 + 91,640 + 163,767 + 29,566 + 20,792 + 52,710 + 17,554 + 5,632 + 19,767
2 Portfolio investment + 72,892 + 146,090 + 263,475 + 22,319 + 120,394 + 122,211 + 65,630 + 15,582 + 7,271
By resident units abroad − 343,938 − 411,305 − 494,657 − 118,867 − 140,350 − 145,192 − 19,413 − 41,191 − 60,253
Equity − 106,544 − 134,268 − 135,275 − 28,456 − 28,012 − 20,308 + 14,803 − 11,910 − 1,919Bonds and notes − 179,379 − 262,476 − 294,288 − 67,989 − 88,106 − 88,923 − 20,711 − 26,231 − 48,281
Money market instruments − 58,016 − 14,560 − 65,097 − 22,422 − 24,233 − 35,961 − 13,504 − 3,051 − 10,052
By non-resident units in the euro area + 416,832 + 557,394 + 758,128 + 141,184 + 260,743 + 267,403 + 85,043 + 56,774 + 67,524
Equity + 126,798 + 263,207 + 289,697 + 53,517 + 83,002 + 107,305 + 24,838 + 1,095 + 12,170
Bonds and notes + 273,518 + 248,605 + 464,355 + 80,899 + 185,191 + 137,384 + 65,390 + 39,500 + 38,575
Money market instruments + 16,517 + 45,584 + 4,079 + 6,768 − 7,448 + 22,715 − 5,186 + 16,179 + 16,779
3 Financial derivatives − 8,286 − 13,871 − 1,871 + 7,941 − 93 − 17,184 − 4,239 − 4,063 − 2,199
4 Other investment − 27,150 + 85,270 + 15,529 + 67,823 − 104,178 − 91,410 − 101,722 + 32,462 + 7,586
Eurosystem + 8,198 + 5,755 + 15,682 + 5,364 + 3,602 + 869 + 2,485 + 2,878 − 3,274
General government − 5,435 + 2,943 + 4,543 + 18,607 − 8,713 + 5,160 + 4,395 + 1,605 − 5,132
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 14,447 + 87,965 − 31,401 + 41,881 − 112,016 − 23,735 − 69,193 + 38,189 + 49,324
Long-term − 10,840 − 41,659 − 50,063 − 11,342 − 45,396 − 46,859 − 25,978 − 7,888 + 13,058Short-term − 3,604 + 129,628 + 18,660 + 53,223 − 66,620 + 23,124 − 43,215 + 46,076 + 36,266
Other sectors − 15,467 − 11,398 + 26,705 + 1,969 + 12,947 − 73,705 − 39,410 − 10,210 − 33,331
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 12,453 + 18,002 − 1,275 − 3,184 − 2,443 − 1,365 + 2,158 − 1,769 − 713
Errors and omissions − 58,562 − 35,772 − 117,482 − 47,359 + 23,295 + 9,177 + 32,970 − 14,042 + 11,951D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  
1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 Omissions
DM million
1993 − 31,450 + 60,304 − 3,217 − 52,549 + 19,095 − 55,083 − 1,915 + 43,448 + 22,795 − 10,082
1994 − 49,418 + 71,762 − 1,318 − 62,803 + 2,393 − 59,451 − 2,637 + 60,708 + 2,846 − 8,653
1995 − 42,363 + 85,303 − 4,294 − 63,985 − 3,975 − 55,413 − 3,845 + 50,117 − 10,355 − 3,909
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 79
1997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,6131998 − 28,695 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,2942001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,775
2001 + 425 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,7572002 + 42,976 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,514 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,3162003 + 40,931 + 129,921 − 11,142 − 34,497 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,770 + 445 + 20,528
2004 + 94,899 + 156,096 − 16,990 − 29,419 + 13,091 − 27,879 + 430 − 117,968 + 1,470 + 22,639
2005 + 103,054 + 158,179 − 18,501 − 28,880 + 20,779 − 28,524 − 1,270 − 119,385 + 2,182 + 17,6012006 + 117,179 + 162,156 − 18,725 − 22,431 + 22,973 − 26,795 − 192 − 146,617 + 2,934 + 29,630
2004          Q3 + 17,038 + 36,436 − 4,759 − 10,866 + 4,630 − 8,403 + 192 − 23,483 + 1,568 + 6,254
         Q4 + 22,848 + 34,998 − 4,595 − 6,003 + 5,182 − 6,733 − 218 − 29,756 + 37 + 7,126
2005          Q1 + 31,658 + 43,196 − 4,056 − 5,773 + 5,541 − 7,250 − 1,492 − 27,301 − 181 − 2,866
         Q2 + 25,632 + 40,670 − 4,392 − 6,013 + 1,617 − 6,249 + 107 − 40,227 + 1,230 + 14,488         Q3 + 21,848 + 40,695 − 4,730 − 12,329 + 5,775 − 7,563 + 59 − 12,025 − 783 − 9,883         Q4 + 23,915 + 33,619 − 5,323 − 4,765 + 7,846 − 7,461 + 56 − 39,833 + 1,916 + 15,861
2006          Q1 + 25,279 + 39,241 − 5,069 − 6,203 + 7,492 − 10,183 + 151 − 39,704 + 1,082 + 14,274
         Q2 + 25,699 + 36,901 − 4,165 − 3,628 + 1,597 − 5,005 + 9 − 56,066 + 367 + 30,357         Q3 + 22,386 + 39,454 − 4,678 − 11,175 + 6,887 − 8,101 − 253 − 12,803 + 844 − 9,330         Q4 + 43,814 + 46,560 − 4,813 − 1,424 + 6,996 − 3,505 − 100 − 38,044 + 642 − 5,670
2007          Q1 + 37,220 + 48,826 − 3,497 − 4,704 + 7,353 − 10,758 + 182 − 75,447 + 100 + 38,045
         Q2  
p + 35,820 + 48,758 − 2,930 − 3,354 − 1,958 − 4,696 + 834 − 88,872 − 1,359 + 52,218
2005          Jan + 9,031 + 13,312 − 1,456 − 1,727 + 1,504 − 2,602 − 1,221 + 13,108 − 353 − 20,918
         Feb + 10,184 + 13,616 − 1,285 − 1,538 + 1,733 − 2,341 − 107 − 12,759 + 494 + 2,682
         Mar + 12,443 + 16,268 − 1,314 − 2,508 + 2,305 − 2,307 − 164 − 27,650 − 322 + 15,370
         Apr + 7,505 + 12,407 − 1,331 − 1,582 − 617 − 1,373 − 199 − 22,266 + 404 + 14,960
         May + 6,091 + 11,966 − 1,327 − 2,527 + 69 − 2,091 + 272 − 4,304 − 141 − 2,059         June + 12,036 + 16,296 − 1,734 − 1,904 + 2,164 − 2,786 + 34 − 13,656 + 967 + 1,587
         July + 7,748 + 13,545 − 1,511 − 3,634 + 1,735 − 2,388 + 103 − 5,657 + 324 − 2,194
         Aug + 4,848 + 12,235 − 1,564 − 5,192 + 1,707 − 2,337 − 86 − 501 + 932 − 4,261         Sep + 9,252 + 14,915 − 1,655 − 3,503 + 2,334 − 2,839 + 42 − 5,866 − 2,039 − 3,428
         Oct + 7,610 + 11,788 − 2,185 − 2,300 + 2,646 − 2,338 + 329 − 9,339 + 207 + 1,400
         Nov + 9,805 + 12,951 − 1,678 − 927 + 2,521 − 3,061 − 107 − 15,276 + 1,059 + 5,579         Dec + 6,500 + 8,880 − 1,460 − 1,537 + 2,680 − 2,062 − 166 − 15,217 + 650 + 8,883
2006          Jan + 7,686 + 12,376 − 1,988 − 2,627 + 2,357 − 2,431 + 7 − 15,456 − 26 + 7,762
         Feb + 8,136 + 12,742 − 1,088 − 992 + 2,746 − 5,272 + 282 − 11,655 + 1,534 + 3,236         Mar + 9,456 + 14,123 − 1,992 − 2,584 + 2,389 − 2,479 − 138 − 12,594 − 426 + 3,276
         Apr + 8,798 + 11,023 − 1,022 − 840 + 1,868 − 2,231 − 145 − 14,735 + 1,475 + 6,081
         May + 4,864 + 12,751 − 1,780 − 1,666 − 3,257 − 1,184 − 283 − 17,582 − 1,067 + 13,001         June + 12,038 + 13,127 − 1,363 − 1,122 + 2,986 − 1,590 + 437 − 23,750 − 41 + 11,275
         July + 7,300 + 12,980 − 1,922 − 3,067 + 2,245 − 2,936 − 229 + 8,096 − 332 − 15,167
         Aug + 5,274 + 11,026 − 1,189 − 4,363 + 2,124 − 2,324 + 146 − 7,492 + 698 + 2,071         Sep + 9,813 + 15,448 − 1,567 − 3,746 + 2,519 − 2,842 − 171 − 13,407 + 478 + 3,765
         Oct + 13,066 + 17,143 − 1,666 − 1,675 + 2,554 − 3,291 + 5 + 1,307 + 401 − 14,378
         Nov + 15,062 + 18,342 − 1,667 − 1,042 + 2,156 − 2,726 − 75 − 18,755 − 102 + 3,767         Dec + 15,686 + 11,075 − 1,481 + 1,294 + 2,286 + 2,512 − 30 − 20,596 + 342 + 4,940
2007          Jan + 11,169 + 16,175 − 1,326 − 3,571 + 1,700 − 1,809 + 249 − 8,796 − 458 − 2,621
         Feb + 8,468 + 14,153 − 883 − 861 + 2,659 − 6,601 + 29 − 34,723 + 566 + 26,226         Mar + 17,584 + 18,498 − 1,287 − 272 + 2,994 − 2,349 − 96 − 31,929 − 8 + 14,440
         Apr + 10,300 + 14,992 − 1,081 − 1,143 − 505 − 1,963 + 191 − 18,666 − 1,215 + 8,175
         May + 8,878 + 17,292 − 1,086 − 1,600 − 4,905 − 824 + 698 − 31,130 − 657 + 21,555         June  
p + 16,642 + 16,475 − 764 − 611 + 3,452 − 1,910 − 54 − 39,075 + 513 + 22,488
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2007 4 
Country / group of countries  2004  2005  2006 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun  p 
All countries  1 Exports 731,544 786,266 893,635 77,395 77,620 83,823 78,810 78,898 81,975
Imports 575,448 628,087 731,479 61,220 63,467 65,325 63,818 61,607 65,500Balance + 156,096 + 158,179 + 162,156 + 16,175 + 14,153 + 18,498 + 14,992 + 17,292 + 16,475
I Exports 541,395 581,611 660,335 58,099 58,753 63,933 60,136 60,159 ...European countries
Imports 408,698 443,508 515,913 42,814 44,367 47,153 46,176 44,600 ...Balance + 132,697 + 138,103 + 144,422 + 15,285 + 14,386 + 16,780 + 13,959 + 15,558 ...
Exports 472,288 505,716 567,909 50,454 51,206 55,606 51,979 51,740 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 346,767 371,136 427,121 35,713 36,939 39,535 38,185 37,750 ...
Balance + 125,521 + 134,580 + 140,788 + 14,741 + 14,267 + 16,071 + 13,794 + 13,991 ...
Euro-area (13) Exports 320,388 342,559 379,988 33,925 34,243 37,208 34,646 34,244 ...
countries Imports 233,112 248,629 287,029 24,064 24,795 26,463 25,579 25,053 ...
Balance + 87,276 + 93,931 + 92,958 + 9,861 + 9,447 + 10,745 + 9,067 + 9,191 ...
of which
Austria Exports 40,244 43,305 48,921 4,096 4,107 4,703 4,512 4,296 ...
Imports 24,020 26,048 29,895 2,505 2,583 2,920 2,746 2,675 ...Balance + 16,224 + 17,256 + 19,026 + 1,592 + 1,525 + 1,783 + 1,765 + 1,621 ...
Belgium and Exports 43,992 47,512 53,571 4,871 5,054 5,139 4,696 4,462 ...Luxembourg Imports 28,818 31,426 38,704 3,359 3,353 3,501 3,412 3,728 ...
Balance + 15,173 + 16,085 + 14,867 + 1,512 + 1,701 + 1,638 + 1,285 + 734 ...
France Exports 74,360 79,039 86,093 7,708 7,789 8,395 7,787 7,771 ...
Imports 51,535 53,700 63,490 5,150 5,665 5,987 5,946 4,910 ...Balance + 22,825 + 25,339 + 22,603 + 2,558 + 2,124 + 2,408 + 1,840 + 2,861 ...
Italy Exports 51,479 53,855 59,971 5,376 5,439 6,012 5,399 5,634 ...
Imports 35,676 36,348 40,326 3,449 3,534 3,904 3,799 3,732 ...Balance + 15,803 + 17,507 + 19,646 + 1,927 + 1,905 + 2,108 + 1,600 + 1,903 ...
Netherlands Exports 46,730 49,033 55,877 4,806 5,098 5,384 5,320 5,100 ...
Imports 46,204 51,823 60,519 4,837 5,103 5,214 5,222 5,247 ...Balance + 526 − 2,789 − 4,642 − 30 − 5 + 170 + 98 − 148 ...
Spain Exports 36,249 40,018 42,159 3,935 3,837 4,268 3,901 4,053 ...
Imports 17,426 18,070 19,520 1,791 1,769 1,890 1,767 1,851 ...
Balance + 18,823 + 21,948 + 22,639 + 2,144 + 2,069 + 2,377 + 2,134 + 2,202 ...
Other EU member Exports 151,899 163,157 187,921 16,529 16,964 18,398 17,332 17,496 ...states Imports 113,654 122,507 140,091 11,650 12,144 13,072 12,606 12,696 ...
Balance + 38,245 + 40,650 + 47,829 + 4,879 + 4,820 + 5,326 + 4,726 + 4,800 ...
of which
United Exports 59,986 60,394 65,341 5,718 6,079 6,266 5,783 5,734 ...Kingdom Imports 34,466 39,069 42,829 3,197 3,436 3,600 3,568 3,438 ...
Balance + 25,520 + 21,325 + 22,512 + 2,520 + 2,643 + 2,666 + 2,216 + 2,297 ...
Exports 69,107 75,895 92,426 7,645 7,546 8,327 8,157 8,418 ... 2 Other European
Imports 61,931 72,372 88,792 7,101 7,428 7,619 7,992 6,851 ... countries
Balance + 7,176 + 3,523 + 3,634 + 544 + 119 + 708 + 166 + 1,568 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 27,917 29,629 34,726 3,014 2,897 3,110 2,942 2,984 ...
Imports 21,445 22,620 25,206 2,260 2,487 2,692 2,761 2,128 ...
Balance + 6,472 + 7,009 + 9,520 + 754 + 410 + 418 + 181 + 857 ...
II Exports 188,782 203,229 234,134 19,169 18,704 19,775 18,589 18,660 ...Non-European
Imports 166,132 183,940 214,886 18,350 19,043 18,117 17,587 16,955 ... countries
Balance + 22,650 + 19,289 + 19,248 + 819 − 338 + 1,658 + 1,002 + 1,704 ...
Exports 13,785 14,807 16,610 1,365 1,374 1,496 1,482 1,486 ... 1 Africa
Imports 11,092 13,762 16,382 1,150 1,390 1,117 1,001 1,349 ...
Balance + 2,694 + 1,045 + 228 + 215 − 16 + 379 + 480 + 137 ...
Exports 84,694 91,994 104,197 8,206 8,112 8,547 7,807 7,874 ... 2 America
Imports 54,679 58,574 70,773 5,728 6,117 5,665 6,132 5,686 ...
Balance + 30,016 + 33,420 + 33,423 + 2,477 + 1,996 + 2,882 + 1,676 + 2,187 ...
of which
Exports 64,860 69,299 78,011 5,972 6,179 6,223 5,700 5,793 ... United States
Imports 40,709 41,798 48,517 3,833 3,918 3,798 4,209 3,717 ...Balance + 24,151 + 27,501 + 29,494 + 2,138 + 2,261 + 2,426 + 1,491 + 2,075 ...
Exports 84,789 90,498 106,946 9,059 8,694 9,221 8,797 8,772 ... 3 Asia
Imports 98,177 109,304 125,170 11,290 11,321 11,135 10,242 9,673 ...
Balance − 13,388 − 18,805 − 18,224 − 2,232 − 2,627 − 1,914 − 1,444 − 900 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 17,357 20,420 22,948 1,920 2,001 2,003 1,810 1,741 ...
Imports 4,398 5,077 6,252 476 468 482 512 489 ...Balance + 12,959 + 15,343 + 16,696 + 1,444 + 1,533 + 1,521 + 1,297 + 1,251 ...
Japan Exports 12,719 13,338 13,861 1,128 1,050 1,153 1,086 984 ...
Imports 21,583 21,772 23,720 1,988 2,078 2,332 1,785 2,110 ...Balance − 8,865 − 8,434 − 9,859 − 860 − 1,028 − 1,178 − 700 − 1,126 ...
Exports 20,992 21,235 27,521 2,145 2,151 2,319 2,347 2,485 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 32,791 40,845 48,751 4,673 4,693 4,261 4,054 3,539 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 11,800 − 19,610 − 21,230 − 2,528 − 2,542 − 1,941 − 1,707 − 1,054 ...
Exports 26,838 27,538 31,584 2,707 2,474 2,734 2,631 2,597 ... Emerging markets
Imports 30,012 31,520 33,956 2,941 2,887 2,934 2,707 2,466 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 3,174 − 3,982 − 2,372 − 234 − 413 − 200 − 76 + 131 ...
Exports 5,513 5,930 6,380 540 524 511 503 528 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,184 2,301 2,559 182 215 200 212 247 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,329 + 3,629 + 3,821 + 358 + 309 + 311 + 291 + 280 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. —
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other 4 Excluding repair and maintenance operations from January 2007 onwards. 
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. —
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2002 − 35,728 − 35,554 + 2,789 + 1,424 − 1,549 + 5,237 − 8,075 − 2,073 + 506 − 1,416 − 16,603
2003 − 34,497 − 37,332 + 1,833 + 1,421 − 747 + 5,088 − 4,761 − 1,836 + 1,476 − 1,182 − 13,885
2004 − 29,419 − 35,302 + 3,870 + 1,349 − 275 + 5,349 − 4,410 − 1,362 + 976 − 932 + 14,023
2005 − 28,880 − 36,317 + 6,102 + 1,760 − 458 + 3,627 − 3,594 − 1,693 + 1,128 − 1,569 + 22,3472006 − 22,431 − 32,804 + 4,740 + 2,373 − 1,563 + 3,542 + 1,281 − 1,844 + 1,010 − 1,330 + 24,303
2005          Q4 − 4,765 − 6,366 + 1,902 + 520 − 951 + 924 − 793 − 552 + 644 − 326 + 8,172
2006          Q1 − 6,203 − 6,361 + 744 + 521 − 481 + 803 − 1,429 − 443 + 55 + 164 + 7,328
         Q2 − 3,628 − 7,749 + 1,349 + 479 − 226 + 1,026 + 1,492 − 423 + 377 − 345 + 1,942         Q3 − 11,175 − 13,545 + 1,384 + 431 − 584 + 785 + 355 − 431 + 307 − 798 + 7,686         Q4 − 1,424 − 5,149 + 1,262 + 942 − 273 + 929 + 864 − 546 + 271 − 350 + 7,346
2007          Q1 − 4,704 − 6,501 + 1,565 + 841 − 763 + 790 − 637 − 366 + 295 + 170 + 7,184
         Q2 − 3,354 − 8,829 + 1,926 + 717 − 161 + 917 + 2,075 − 488 + 601 − 310 − 1,647
2006          Aug − 4,363 − 4,505 + 494 + 120 − 115 + 257 − 613 − 144 + 112 − 268 + 2,392
         Sep − 3,746 − 4,933 + 263 + 205 − 76 + 289 + 507 − 164 + 82 − 262 + 2,781
         Oct − 1,675 − 3,001 + 575 + 262 − 231 + 247 + 473 − 155 + 15 − 144 + 2,698
         Nov − 1,042 − 1,268 + 343 + 189 − 44 + 306 − 568 − 174 + 114 − 130 + 2,285
         Dec + 1,294 − 880 + 345 + 491 + 2 + 376 + 960 − 218 + 142 − 76 + 2,363
2007          Jan − 3,571 − 2,106 + 403 + 205 − 557 + 270 − 1,787 − 133 − 39 + 52 + 1,648
         Feb − 861 − 1,857 + 454 + 272 + 38 + 234 − 2 − 102 + 157 + 44 + 2,615
         Mar − 272 − 2,538 + 708 + 364 − 244 + 287 + 1,153 − 130 + 177 + 74 + 2,920
         Apr − 1,143 − 2,476 + 835 + 209 − 295 + 280 + 304 − 130 + 190 − 107 − 398
         May − 1,600 − 2,894 + 499 + 221 + 35 + 306 + 233 − 148 + 217 − 105 − 4,800
         June − 611 − 3,458 + 592 + 287 + 99 + 331 + 1,539 − 209 + 194 − 99 + 3,550
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2002 − 27,514 − 15,712 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 2,667 − 11,801 − 3,470 − 8,331 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,205
2003 − 28,283 − 18,257 − 15,428 − 13,731 − 2,829 − 10,026 − 3,332 − 6,694 + 311 − 1,238 + 1,549
2004 − 27,879 − 16,754 − 14,307 − 12,730 − 2,447 − 11,125 − 3,180 − 7,945 + 430 − 1,094 + 1,524
2005 − 28,524 − 17,655 − 16,274 − 14,724 − 1,382 − 10,869 − 2,926 − 7,943 − 1,270 − 3,419 + 2,1492006 − 26,795 − 14,664 − 14,957 − 13,452 + 293 − 12,130 − 2,927 − 9,204 − 192 − 1,927 + 1,735
2005          Q4 − 7,461 − 5,031 − 4,316 − 4,070 − 715 − 2,430 − 732 − 1,698 + 56 − 734 + 790
2006          Q1 − 10,183 − 7,309 − 6,814 − 6,313 − 494 − 2,874 − 732 − 2,143 + 151 − 311 + 462
         Q2 − 5,005 − 1,835 − 3,575 − 3,234 + 1,740 − 3,170 − 732 − 2,439 + 9 − 665 + 675         Q3 − 8,101 − 5,086 − 4,708 − 4,519 − 379 − 3,015 − 732 − 2,283 − 253 − 423 + 170         Q4 − 3,505 − 434 + 140 + 613 − 574 − 3,071 − 732 − 2,339 − 100 − 528 + 428
2007          Q1 − 10,758 − 7,886 − 7,186 − 6,571 − 701 − 2,872 − 751 − 2,121 + 182 − 291 + 473
         Q2 − 4,696 − 178 − 3,685 − 3,360 + 3,507 − 4,519 − 751 − 3,767 + 834 − 327 + 1,161
2006          Aug − 2,324 − 1,415 − 1,258 − 1,204 − 157 − 909 − 244 − 665 + 146 − 107 + 253
         Sep − 2,842 − 1,914 − 1,874 − 1,838 − 40 − 928 − 244 − 684 − 171 − 110 − 60
         Oct − 3,291 − 2,391 − 2,105 − 1,892 − 286 − 900 − 244 − 656 + 5 − 145 + 150
         Nov − 2,726 − 1,691 − 1,411 − 1,274 − 280 − 1,035 − 244 − 791 − 75 − 170 + 95
         Dec + 2,512 + 3,647 + 3,655 + 3,779 − 8 − 1,136 − 244 − 892 − 30 − 213 + 183
2007          Jan − 1,809 − 980 − 896 − 682 − 85 − 828 − 250 − 578 + 249 − 91 + 340
         Feb − 6,601 − 5,484 − 5,027 − 4,715 − 458 − 1,116 − 250 − 866 + 29 − 87 + 116
         Mar − 2,349 − 1,422 − 1,264 − 1,174 − 158 − 927 − 250 − 677 − 96 − 113 + 17
         Apr − 1,963 − 747 − 1,643 − 1,603 + 896 − 1,216 − 250 − 966 + 191 − 98 + 289
         May − 824 + 1,429 − 1,034 − 936 + 2,462 − 2,253 − 250 − 2,002 + 698 − 105 + 803
         June − 1,910 − 860 − 1,009 − 821 + 149 − 1,050 − 250 − 799 − 54 − 124 + 69
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2006 2007
Item 2004 2005 2006 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Apr May June
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 263,926 − 377,791 − 435,748 − 67,076 − 97,405 − 172,364 − 208,585 − 64,759 − 85,201 − 58,625
1 Direct investment  1 − 11,942 − 44,640 − 63,311 − 19,684 − 9,480 − 13,831 − 23,925 − 9,934 − 15,417 + 1,426
Equity capital + 15,095 − 18,812 − 52,053 − 21,192 − 9,934 − 864 − 10,928 − 1,623 − 7,653 − 1,653
Reinvested earnings  2 − 13,447 − 14,511 − 18,161 − 5,406 − 5,273 − 5,922 − 4,500 − 2,314 − 658 − 1,528
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 13,590 − 11,316 + 6,903 + 6,914 + 5,726 − 7,045 − 8,496 − 5,997 − 7,106 + 4,607
2 Portfolio investment − 102,327 − 202,810 − 159,427 − 20,188 − 52,837 − 72,119 − 60,689 − 8,736 − 37,544 − 14,408
Shares 3 + 8,974 − 17,054 + 6,285 − 2,838 − 3,258 + 12,139 − 2,821 + 6,909 − 10,641 + 911
Mutual fund shares  4 − 12,149 − 43,525 − 24,426 − 585 − 7,291 − 12,673 − 16,891 − 6,429 − 8,029 − 2,432
Bonds and notes  5 − 87,216 − 137,208 − 134,511 − 15,135 − 44,238 − 65,840 − 38,012 − 9,070 − 17,873 − 11,069
Money market instruments − 11,935 − 5,023 − 6,775 − 1,631 + 1,949 − 5,744 − 2,966 − 146 − 1,002 − 1,818
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 7,173 − 7,235 − 6,257 − 1,129 − 3,037 − 10,002 − 12,047 − 5,396 − 2,325 − 4,327
4 Other investment − 143,955 − 125,288 − 209,687 − 26,920 − 32,692 − 76,512 − 110,566 − 39,477 − 29,259 − 41,830
MFIs  7,8 − 121,830 − 85,768 − 207,620 + 887 − 44,600 − 49,053 − 87,003 − 47,928 − 5,357 − 33,719
Long-term + 5,858 − 69,964 − 71,579 − 14,280 − 24,968 − 13,431 − 24,104 − 6,812 − 7,688 − 9,605
Short-term − 127,687 − 15,804 − 136,041 + 15,167 − 19,632 − 35,623 − 62,899 − 41,116 + 2,331 − 24,114
Enterprises and households − 21,417 − 20,601 − 27,535 − 1,685 − 3,641 − 22,797 − 1,771 + 1,149 + 5,499 − 8,419
Long-term − 7,286 − 12,278 − 23,813 − 6,668 − 9,074 − 7,657 − 10,309 − 4,193 − 2,507 − 3,608
Short-term  7 − 14,131 − 8,323 − 3,722 + 4,983 + 5,434 − 15,140 + 8,538 + 5,342 + 8,007 − 4,811
General government + 2,143 + 3,154 + 979 + 1,010 + 5,637 + 10,953 − 25,135 − 4,555 − 13,262 − 7,318
Long-term + 49 + 7,693 + 7,408 + 6,513 + 343 − 220 − 188 − 192 − 7 + 11
Short-term  7 + 2,094 − 4,539 − 6,428 − 5,502 + 5,295 + 11,173 − 24,946 − 4,362 − 13,255 − 7,328
Bundesbank − 2,851 − 22,073 + 24,488 − 27,133 + 9,911 − 15,615 + 3,343 + 11,856 − 16,140 + 7,626
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) + 1,470 + 2,182 + 2,934 + 844 + 642 + 100 − 1,359 − 1,215 − 657 + 513
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 145,958 + 258,406 + 289,131 + 54,273 + 59,361 + 96,917 + 119,713 + 46,093 + 54,071 + 19,550
1 Direct investment  1 − 7,406 + 28,841 + 34,168 + 5,041 + 19,094 + 7,581 + 1,890 + 3,912 + 656 − 2,678
Equity capital + 32,595 + 17,928 + 17,323 + 2,833 + 11,876 + 4,727 + 3,791 + 2,651 + 1,649 − 509
Reinvested earnings  2 − 296 + 5,560 + 5,751 + 2,477 + 384 + 2,936 − 2,364 + 469 − 292 − 2,541
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors − 39,704 + 5,352 + 11,095 − 270 + 6,834 − 83 + 463 + 792 − 702 + 373
2 Portfolio investment + 116,773 + 178,869 + 160,626 + 25,976 + 58,656 + 36,333 + 73,722 − 6,374 + 26,217 + 53,880
Shares  3 − 13,727 + 21,308 + 27,500 + 6,287 + 17,251 − 3,178 + 8,648 − 31,877 − 452 + 40,977
Mutual fund shares + 4,587 + 1,100 + 9,347 + 1,230 + 1,371 + 746 + 1,677 + 906 + 521 + 250Bonds and notes  
5 + 140,285 + 159,499 + 125,051 + 22,274 + 48,284 + 28,990 + 57,699 + 20,106 + 21,812 + 15,781
Money market instruments − 14,371 − 3,038 − 1,272 − 3,815 − 8,250 + 9,775 + 5,698 + 4,490 + 4,336 − 3,129
3 Other investment + 36,591 + 50,696 + 94,337 + 23,257 − 18,389 + 53,004 + 44,101 + 48,555 + 27,198 − 31,652
MFIs  7,8 + 32,339 + 22,456 + 60,499 + 12,139 − 11,485 + 38,500 + 26,099 + 44,735 + 20,284 − 38,920
Long-term − 10,083 − 9,830 − 11,898 − 953 − 8,132 − 6,004 + 3,557 + 471 + 3,053 + 33Short-term + 42,422 + 32,286 + 72,397 + 13,092 − 3,353 + 44,505 + 22,542 + 44,264 + 17,231 − 38,953
Enterprises and households + 9,936 + 26,818 + 35,280 + 6,926 − 4,753 + 11,534 + 15,242 + 220 + 5,893 + 9,130
Long-term + 6,743 + 14,125 + 17,517 + 3,197 + 2,697 + 424 + 489 − 185 + 543 + 132Short-term  
7 + 3,193 + 12,693 + 17,763 + 3,729 − 7,450 + 11,110 + 14,753 + 406 + 5,350 + 8,998
General government − 3,233 + 3,526 − 154 + 5,041 − 2,037 + 2,614 + 1,780 + 2,434 + 346 − 1,000
Long-term − 2,000 + 2,597 + 886 + 497 + 312 − 851 − 19 + 251 + 99 − 370Short-term  
7 − 1,233 + 929 − 1,040 + 4,545 − 2,348 + 3,465 + 1,799 + 2,183 + 246 − 630
Bundesbank − 2,451 − 2,105 − 1,287 − 850 − 114 + 355 + 979 + 1,165 + 676 − 862
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 117,968 − 119,385 − 146,617 − 12,803 − 38,044 − 75,447 − 88,872 − 18,666 − 31,130 − 39,075
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
 
 
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2006          Feb 109,677 88,029 51,646 3,829 32,554 350 20,450 847 5,663 104,013
         Mar 105,884 89,157 53,173 3,755 32,229 350 15,543 834 6,286 99,598
         Apr 100,233 89,433 56,106 3,685 29,643 350 9,606 844 4,632 95,601
         May 120,684 89,520 55,979 3,356 30,184 350 29,950 865 6,070 114,614         June 88,241 85,905 51,983 3,639 30,284 350 1,121 866 5,839 82,402
         July 102,264 89,167 54,918 3,465 30,784 350 11,852 894 6,183 96,081
         Aug 124,938 86,736 53,253 3,501 29,982 350 36,940 912 5,374 119,564         Sep 115,371 85,854 52,302 3,440 30,111 350 28,254 913 4,980 110,391
         Oct 110,016 85,341 52,080 3,097 30,164 350 23,414 912 5,043 104,973
         Nov 114,116 85,307 53,218 3,048 29,040 350 27,546 914 5,273 108,843         Dec 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007          Jan 114,714 87,385 54,853 2,998 29,534 350 26,011 969 5,415 109,299
         Feb 121,019 87,962 56,389 2,734 28,839 350 31,715 993 4,892 116,127         Mar 121,457 86,120 54,820 2,624 28,675 350 33,958 1,029 5,158 116,299
         Apr 110,112 86,731 54,837 2,578 29,316 350 22,102 930 6,300 103,811
         May 125,859 86,364 53,675 2,671 30,018 350 38,242 903 7,005 118,854         June 116,754 84,846 52,809 2,666 29,370 350 30,616 942 6,137 110,617
         July 120,334 85,125 53,446 2,594 29,085 350 33,606 1,253 6,325 114,009
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2003 362,099 86,627 275,472 159,653 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2004 377,540 98,632 278,908 159,764 119,144 112,342 6,802 506,434 50,211 456,223 361,111 95,112 63,762 31,3502005 409,493 97,333 312,160 179,738 132,422 125,497 6,925 548,107 65,557 482,550 375,114 107,436 73,270 34,1662006 449,306 117,723 331,583 189,378 142,205 134,057 8,148 619,890 90,669 529,221 408,357 120,864 79,900 40,964
2007          Jan 455,498 128,979 326,519 183,710 142,809 134,311 8,498 626,242 99,361 526,881 408,779 118,102 75,835 42,267
         Feb 467,393 141,480 325,913 180,700 145,213 136,611 8,602 635,180 107,655 527,525 409,211 118,314 74,904 43,410         Mar 480,965 145,830 335,135 185,173 149,962 141,081 8,881 636,405 99,050 537,355 412,909 124,446 79,966 44,480
         Apr 480,641 143,962 336,679 190,083 146,596 137,527 9,069 637,809 99,868 537,941 415,437 122,504 76,213 46,291
         May 483,980 142,255 341,725 194,431 147,294 137,834 9,460 641,512 106,574 534,938 413,125 121,813 75,271 46,542         June 491,752 148,695 343,057 191,835 151,222 141,665 9,557 657,058 99,944 557,114 430,128 126,986 79,174 47,812
Industrial countries 1
 
2003 310,454 85,390 225,064 144,980 80,084 75,236 4,848 499,436 53,087 446,349 383,919 62,430 48,210 14,220
2004 335,809 97,485 238,324 148,649 89,675 84,903 4,772 468,592 48,304 420,288 349,293 70,995 53,480 17,5152005 362,704 95,847 266,857 167,314 99,543 94,278 5,265 508,106 63,924 444,182 364,680 79,502 60,907 18,5952006 395,727 115,269 280,458 173,862 106,596 100,541 6,055 565,775 89,210 476,565 389,220 87,345 66,210 21,135
2007          Jan 405,558 126,806 278,752 169,878 108,874 102,397 6,477 574,093 97,916 476,177 390,750 85,427 62,922 22,505
         Feb 414,940 138,897 276,043 165,950 110,093 103,609 6,484 582,086 106,211 475,875 390,302 85,573 62,702 22,871         Mar 429,123 143,596 285,527 171,445 114,082 107,416 6,666 580,687 97,622 483,065 392,349 90,716 67,573 23,143
         Apr 428,076 141,540 286,536 175,997 110,539 103,739 6,800 580,556 98,504 482,052 394,154 87,898 63,644 24,254
         May 430,479 139,421 291,058 180,022 111,036 103,915 7,121 585,901 105,326 480,575 393,134 87,441 62,894 24,547         June 437,001 145,920 291,081 176,976 114,105 106,898 7,207 599,530 98,694 500,836 409,490 91,346 66,339 25,007
EU member states 1
 
2003 230,673 81,430 149,243 94,092 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,642
2004 259,480 92,867 166,613 101,254 65,359 61,563 3,796 376,461 43,838 332,623 284,173 48,450 36,494 11,9562005 270,808 91,882 178,926 108,523 70,403 66,156 4,247 414,377 60,186 354,191 300,022 54,169 41,305 12,8642006 308,720 108,982 199,738 121,929 77,809 72,902 4,907 474,125 81,993 392,132 332,321 59,811 45,202 14,609
2007          Jan 325,591 119,337 206,254 125,998 80,256 75,041 5,215 482,200 88,877 393,323 334,207 59,116 43,237 15,879
         Feb 336,118 132,111 204,007 122,322 81,685 76,511 5,174 488,160 94,140 394,020 334,238 59,782 43,567 16,215         Mar 347,047 137,139 209,908 125,060 84,848 79,563 5,285 490,310 90,029 400,281 336,806 63,475 47,141 16,334
         Apr 347,925 135,850 212,075 129,683 82,392 76,989 5,403 490,970 90,337 400,633 339,427 61,206 44,277 16,929
         May 349,206 133,254 215,952 133,245 82,707 77,008 5,699 492,771 93,257 399,514 338,861 60,653 43,539 17,114         June 356,129 139,895 216,234 131,658 84,576 78,884 5,692 494,848 93,774 401,074 338,400 62,674 45,354 17,320
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,404
2004 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 305,864 28,295 277,569 244,860 32,709 24,258 8,4512005 175,532 59,160 116,372 69,048 47,324 44,369 2,955 332,261 29,443 302,818 268,483 34,335 25,225 9,1102006 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 369,648 38,878 330,770 292,178 38,592 28,340 10,252
2007          Jan 214,818 79,346 135,472 83,371 52,101 48,635 3,466 380,147 47,751 332,396 294,464 37,932 27,212 10,720
         Feb 220,015 87,630 132,385 79,140 53,245 49,749 3,496 381,815 49,445 332,370 293,992 38,378 27,568 10,810         Mar 230,689 93,610 137,079 81,562 55,517 51,952 3,565 383,049 47,589 335,460 295,128 40,332 29,414 10,918
         Apr 231,848 92,841 139,007 85,045 53,962 50,244 3,718 383,173 47,396 335,777 297,065 38,712 27,327 11,385
         May 235,678 93,899 141,779 87,716 54,063 50,139 3,924 381,300 48,334 332,966 294,442 38,524 27,126 11,398         June 243,576 101,111 142,465 86,980 55,485 51,589 3,896 386,841 49,744 337,097 296,687 40,410 28,729 11,681
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2003 51,645 1,237 50,408 14,673 35,735 33,279 2,456 43,750 1,735 42,015 16,512 25,503 12,254 13,249
2004 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,8352005 46,789 1,486 45,303 12,424 32,879 31,219 1,660 40,001 1,633 38,368 10,434 27,934 12,363 15,5712006 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 54,115 1,459 52,656 19,137 33,519 13,690 19,829
2007          Jan 49,940 2,173 47,767 13,832 33,935 31,914 2,021 52,149 1,445 50,704 18,029 32,675 12,913 19,762
         Feb 52,453 2,583 49,870 14,750 35,120 33,002 2,118 53,094 1,444 51,650 18,909 32,741 12,202 20,539         Mar 51,842 2,234 49,608 13,728 35,880 33,665 2,215 55,718 1,428 54,290 20,560 33,730 12,393 21,337
         Apr 52,565 2,422 50,143 14,086 36,057 33,788 2,269 57,253 1,364 55,889 21,283 34,606 12,569 22,037
         May 53,501 2,834 50,667 14,409 36,258 33,919 2,339 55,611 1,248 54,363 19,991 34,372 12,377 21,995         June 54,751 2,775 51,976 14,859 37,117 34,767 2,350 57,528 1,250 56,278 20,638 35,640 12,835 22,805
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in May 2004, including Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, L atvia,
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia; from Jan uary
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases 2007, including Bulgaria and Romania. — 2From January 2007, including
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- Slovenia. — 3 All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. 
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. — 1From
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2005          Jan 1.7147 1.6060 10.8588 7.4405 135.63 8.2125 9.0476 1.5469 0.69867 1.3119
         Feb 1.6670 1.6128 10.7719 7.4427 136.55 8.3199 9.0852 1.5501 0.68968 1.3014         Mar 1.6806 1.6064 10.9262 7.4466 138.83 8.1880 9.0884 1.5494 0.69233 1.3201
         Apr 1.6738 1.5991 10.7080 7.4499 138.84 8.1763 9.1670 1.5475 0.68293 1.2938
         May 1.6571 1.5942 10.5062 7.4443 135.37 8.0814 9.1931 1.5449 0.68399 1.2694         June 1.5875 1.5111 10.0683 7.4448 132.22 7.8932 9.2628 1.5391 0.66895 1.2165
         July 1.6002 1.4730 9.8954 7.4584 134.75 7.9200 9.4276 1.5578 0.68756 1.2037
         Aug 1.6144 1.4819 9.9589 7.4596 135.98 7.9165 9.3398 1.5528 0.68527 1.2292         Sep 1.6009 1.4452 9.9177 7.4584 136.06 7.8087 9.3342 1.5496 0.67760 1.2256
         Oct 1.5937 1.4149 9.7189 7.4620 138.05 7.8347 9.4223 1.5490 0.68137 1.2015
         Nov 1.6030 1.3944 9.5273 7.4596 139.59 7.8295 9.5614 1.5449 0.67933 1.1786         Dec 1.5979 1.3778 9.5746 7.4541 140.58 7.9737 9.4316 1.5479 0.67922 1.1856
2006          Jan 1.6152 1.4025 9.7630 7.4613 139.82 8.0366 9.3111 1.5494 0.68598 1.2103
         Feb 1.6102 1.3723 9.6117 7.4641 140.77 8.0593 9.3414 1.5580 0.68297 1.1938         Mar 1.6540 1.3919 9.6581 7.4612 140.96 7.9775 9.4017 1.5691 0.68935 1.2020
         Apr 1.6662 1.4052 9.8361 7.4618 143.59 7.8413 9.3346 1.5748 0.69463 1.2271
         May 1.6715 1.4173 10.2353 7.4565 142.70 7.7988 9.3310 1.5564 0.68330 1.2770         June 1.7104 1.4089 10.1285 7.4566 145.11 7.8559 9.2349 1.5601 0.68666 1.2650
         July 1.6869 1.4303 10.1347 7.4602 146.70 7.9386 9.2170 1.5687 0.68782 1.2684
         Aug 1.6788 1.4338 10.2141 7.4609 148.53 7.9920 9.2098 1.5775 0.67669 1.2811         Sep 1.6839 1.4203 10.0971 7.4601 148.99 8.2572 9.2665 1.5841 0.67511 1.2727
         Oct 1.6733 1.4235 9.9651 7.4555 149.65 8.3960 9.2533 1.5898 0.67254 1.2611
         Nov 1.6684 1.4635 10.1286 7.4564 151.11 8.2446 9.1008 1.5922 0.67397 1.2881         Dec 1.6814 1.5212 10.3356 7.4549 154.82 8.1575 9.0377 1.5969 0.67286 1.3213
2007          Jan 1.6602 1.5285 10.1238 7.4539 156.56 8.2780 9.0795 1.6155 0.66341 1.2999
         Feb 1.6708 1.5309 10.1326 7.4541 157.60 8.0876 9.1896 1.6212 0.66800 1.3074         Mar 1.6704 1.5472 10.2467 7.4494 155.24 8.1340 9.2992 1.6124 0.68021 1.3242
         Apr 1.6336 1.5334 10.4400 7.4530 160.68 8.1194 9.2372 1.6375 0.67934 1.3516
         May 1.6378 1.4796 10.3689 7.4519 163.22 8.1394 9.2061 1.6506 0.68136 1.3511         June 1.5930 1.4293 10.2415 7.4452 164.55 8.0590 9.3290 1.6543 0.67562 1.3419
         July 1.5809 1.4417 10.3899 7.4410 166.76 7.9380 9.1842 1.6567 0.67440 1.3716
*Calculated from daily values; for additional euro reference exchange statistics. — 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from
rates, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in Stage III of Economic and Monetary Union
Since Country Currency ISO currency code Euro 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.7502007  January 1 Slovenia Tolar SIT 239.640
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2007
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-24  1 EER-44  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
20 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
20 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Zeit Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 95.7 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.5 97.7 98.2 98.0 97.6
2000 87.0 86.4 85.7 85.4 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.0 85.1 91.0 92.8 91.8 90.8
2001 87.7 87.1 86.5 84.9 90.4 87.1 91.2 95.8 85.8 90.4 93.0 91.3 90.82002 90.1 90.4 89.5 88.2 94.9 91.0 91.9 94.8 88.3 90.8 93.7 92.0 91.92003 100.6 101.3 100.1 98.8 106.8 101.8 95.3 93.8 97.2 94.5 97.4 96.6 96.92004 104.3 105.1 103.1 103.0 111.2 105.6 95.6 92.5 99.6 94.7 98.9 98.2 98.6
2005 103.3 104.1 100.9 101.3 109.7 103.7 94.3 90.9 98.7 92.8 98.9 97.4 97.3
2006 103.6 104.4 100.7 100.1 110.0 103.4
p 93.4 p 89.5 98.7 p 91.8 99.1 97.2 96.8
2003         June 102.9 103.7 109.0 104.0 98.5 97.8 98.1
         July 101.7 102.5 107.5 102.5 97.8 97.2 97.2
         Aug 100.6 101.5 100.6 99.8 106.2 101.5 95.3 93.7 97.4 94.6 97.3 96.6 96.6         Sep 100.4 101.4 106.1 101.3 97.1 96.4 96.5
         Oct 102.0 102.9 108.2 103.2 97.7 97.2 97.4
         Nov 102.0 102.8 102.5 101.6 108.2 103.1 95.7 93.4 98.8 95.1 97.7 97.2 97.5         Dec 104.9 105.5 111.4 106.0 98.8 98.5 99.0
2004         Jan 106.0 106.6 112.7 107.1 99.4 99.1 99.6
         Feb 105.8 106.5 104.4 104.3 112.5 107.0 96.3 93.0 100.7 95.8 99.1 99.0 99.5         Mar 104.0 104.7 110.4 105.0 98.7 98.3 98.5
         Apr 102.3 103.1 108.5 103.2 98.1 97.5 97.6
         May 103.0 103.8 101.8 101.7 109.8 104.4 95.0 92.6 98.0 94.2 98.3 97.6 98.1         June 102.9 103.5 109.8 104.3 98.0 97.4 97.9
         July 103.4 104.1 110.3 104.7 98.4 97.6 98.1
         Aug 103.2 104.1 102.0 102.0 110.1 104.7 95.1 92.3 98.7 94.2 98.5 97.7 98.1         Sep 103.5 104.4 110.5 104.9 98.7 97.8 98.2
         Oct 104.7 105.4 111.8 106.0 99.1 98.2 98.7
         Nov 106.0 106.6 104.4 104.2 113.3 107.3 95.9 92.0 101.1 94.8 99.6 98.7 99.3         Dec 107.3 108.0 114.7 108.6 100.4 99.5 100.1
2005         Jan 106.1 106.8 113.2 107.0 99.9 98.7 99.1
         Feb 105.4 105.9 103.2 104.0 112.2 106.0 95.8 91.6 101.5 94.4 99.6 98.3 98.5         Mar 106.1 106.9 113.1 107.0 100.0 98.7 99.0
         Apr 105.3 106.0 112.1 106.0 99.3 98.1 98.3
         May 104.3 105.2 101.3 102.2 110.8 104.9 94.4 91.1 98.8 93.1 99.1 97.8 97.8         June 101.6 102.5 107.8 102.1 98.1 96.6 96.4
         July 102.2 103.0 108.2 102.3 98.4 96.8 96.5
         Aug 102.6 103.6 100.0 100.2 108.9 103.0 93.8 90.7 97.7 92.3 98.7 97.0 96.8         Sep 102.1 103.0 108.4 102.5 98.8 97.1 96.9
         Oct 101.8 102.7 107.9 101.9 98.6 96.9 96.5
         Nov 101.1 102.0 99.1 98.9 107.0 100.9 93.0 90.3 96.7 91.6 98.3 96.5 95.9         Dec 101.2 102.0 107.0 100.9 98.4 96.5 96.0
2006         Jan 101.8 102.6 107.7 101.4 98.5 96.5 95.9
         Feb 101.2 102.0 99.0 98.9 106.8 100.6 92.9 89.7 97.2
p 91.3 98.3 96.2 95.4
         Mar 101.9 102.9 107.6 101.4 98.5 96.5 95.8
         Apr 103.0 104.0 108.8 102.5 98.9 96.9 96.3
         May 104.0 104.9 100.8 100.6 110.5 104.0 93.7 89.7 98.9 p 92.1 99.1 97.3 97.0
         June 104.2 105.0 111.1 104.5 99.1 97.4 97.3
         July 104.5 105.4 111.3 104.7 99.4 97.7 97.5
         Aug 104.6 105.4 101.4 100.8 111.3 104.6 p 93.5 p 89.3 99.2 p 92.0 99.1 97.3 97.1
         Sep 104.4 105.2 111.1 104.3 99.3 97.4 97.1
         Oct 103.9 104.7 110.4 103.6 99.4 97.4 97.0
         Nov 104.5 105.2 101.4 100.2 111.1 104.2 p 93.6 p 89.1 99.7 p 91.7 99.9 97.7 97.4
         Dec 105.5 106.0 112.3 105.0 100.3 98.0 97.7
2007         Jan 104.9 105.5 111.5 104.3 100.4 98.0 97.6
         Feb 105.4 105.9 102.2 100.8 111.9 104.5 p 94.6 p 89.5 p 101.5 p 92.7 100.6 98.3 97.8
         Mar 106.1 106.4 112.7 105.2 100.8 98.4 98.1
         Apr 107.1 107.4 113.7 106.0 101.4 98.9 98.5
         May 107.3 107.4 ... ... 113.6 105.7 p 95.6 p 89.7 p 103.6 p 93.4 101.5 98.9 98.4
         June 106.9 106.9 113.1 105.2 101.3 98.7 98.1
         July 107.6 107.6 113.9 105.8 101.6 99.0 98.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of shown are based on the trade in manufactured goods between
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the 1999 and 2001 and reflect third-market effects. Where price and wageGerman economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure indices were not available, estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations. This
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see group includes not only the countries belonging to the EER-24 group (seeMonthly Report , November 2001, pp  51-65 and May 2007, pp  32-37). For footnote 1) but also Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India,
details of the methodology see ECB, Monthly Bulletin , September 2004, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines,
pp  69-72 as well as the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2, which can be down- Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey andloaded from the ECB’s website (www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures Venezuela. — 3Annual and quarterly averages. — 4Euro-area countries
implies an increase in competitiveness. — 1ECB calculations are based on (before 2007, excluding Slovenia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan,
the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. —euro against the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Ca- 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-24 group. —
nada, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kong, 6Owing to missing data for the deflators of total sales, China and
Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore are not included in this calculation. — 7Euro-area countries and
Singapore, Slovakia, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom countries belonging to the EER-44 group (see footnote 2). and United States. The weights used in these calculations during the period
76*XI  External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printed
form and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, afile which is updated monthly andcontains approximately 40,000 timeseries published by the Bundesbankcan be obtained on magnetic tape cas-sette or CD-ROM from the DivisionStatistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2006 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2007 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007

Monthly Report articles
September 2006
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2005
– German foreign direct investment (FDI) rela-
tionships: recent trends and macroeconomic
effects
– The evolution of labour market-related ex-
penditure
October 2006
– How informative survey data on private sector
inflation expectations are for monetary policy-
makers
– Current trends and structural changes in the
public bond market
November 2006
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2006
December 2006
– Germany in the globalisation process– The economic situation of small and medium-
sized enterprises in Germany since 1997
– Transporting the new Basel capital rules into
German law
– Recent developments in payment cards and
innovative electronic payment procedures
January 2007
– Investment activity in Germany under the influ-
ence of technological change and competition
among production locations
– The labour market in Germany: general devel-
opments seen in an international contextFebruary 2007
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2006-07
March 2007
– German balance of payments in 2006
– German intra-euro-area trade: cyclical effects
and structural determinants
April 2007
– Leveraged buyouts: the role of financial inter-
mediaries and aspects of financial stability
– Financial development and outlook of the pub-
lic long-term care insurance scheme
May 2007
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2007
June 2007
– Investment and financing in 2006– Current account balances and price compe-
titiveness in the euro area
July 2007
– The relationship between monetary develop-
ments and the real estate market
– Trends in local government finances since 2000
– Primary and secondary markets for German
public sector debt instruments: institutional
framework, trading systems and their rele-
vance for Germany as a financial centre
August 2007
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2007
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)
5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19962
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
2
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
2
The market for German Federal securities,May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 2003
2
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-rungsunion, April 2005
2
European economic and monetary union,
September 2005
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20062
Special Statistical Publications*o
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200332 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, June 20072, 4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20002
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2006,
July 20075
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
20065
6 Ratios from financial statements of German
enterprises 2003 to 2004, January 20075
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, February 20052
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics
April 20071, 5
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2007
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20062
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2007
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available in German only.
3Solely available on the website, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Stat-
istics”, “External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
4Available on the website only (updated on a quarterly
basis).5Available on the website only.*Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail-
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng-
lish.
oNot available on the website.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2007
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
11/2007
Exchange rate dynamics in a target zone – a het-
erogeneous expectations approach
12/2007
Money and housing – evidence for the euro area
and the US
13/2007
An affine macro-finance term structure model for
the euro area
14/2007
Does anticipation of government spending matter?Evidence from an expectation augmented VAR
15/2007
On-the-job search and the cyclical dynamics of the
labor market
16/2007
Heterogeneous expectations, learning and Euro-pean inflation dynamics
17/2007
Does intra-firm bargaining matter for business
cycle dynamics?
18/2007
Uncertainty about perceived inflation target andmonetary policy
19/2007
The rationality and reliability of expectations re-
ported by British households: micro evidence fromthe British household panel survey
20/2007
Money in monetary policy design under uncer-
tainty: the Two-Pillar Phillips Curve versus ECB-stylecross-checkingSeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
05/2007
Diversification and the banks’ risk-return-charac-
teristics – evidence from loan portfolios of German
banks
06/2007
How do banks adjust their capital ratios? Evidence
from Germany
07/2007
Modelling dynamic portfolio risk using risk driversof elliptical processes
08/2007
Time-varying contributions by the corporate bondand CDS markets to credit risk price discovery
09/2007
Banking consolidation and small business finance –
empirical evidence for Germany
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20012
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20012
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19992
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the website.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

