MONTHLY REPORT
MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER
2008
Vol 60
No 5

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 11 am on 16 May 2008.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
bank can be downloaded from our website.
The statistical data are also published on the
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,
by virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank
Act. It is available to interested parties free of
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-
tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in spring 2008 5
Overview 6
Global and European setting 12
Growth and prosperity gap between
the USA and the euro area –
new trends 18
Fiscal developments in the euro area 22
Monetary policy and banking business 25
Money market management and
liquidity needs 26
“Traces” of the financial market
turbulence in the financial accounts 34
Financial markets 37
Price competitiveness and economic
growth – a non-linear relationship? 42
Economic conditions in Germany 50
Who stands to gain from the fall
in unemployment? 56
Public finances 65
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 5*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*
Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem 16*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
Banks 20*
Minimum reserves 42*
Interest rates 43*
Capital market 48*
Financial accounts 52*
Public finances in Germany 54*
Economic conditions in Germany 61*
External sector 68*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
5The economic scene
in Germany
in spring 2008

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
6OverviewGerman economy began the year strongly,
but price climate remains troubled
The global economic upturn continued dur-
ing the first quarter, but lost some of its mo-
mentum. From a current perspective there is
a good chance that the US economy will be
able to avoid the slump into recession feared
by some and that the corresponding negative
impact on global economic growth will thus
be more muted. However, it remains to be
seen how rapidly and durably the economic
and financial difficulties in the United States
will be overcome. The pressure to adjust cre-
ated by the distortions in the US real estate
market is still high, and the situation on
the financial markets remains fragile despite
some rays of hope. At the same time, the
global price climate has deteriorated signifi-
cantly. The sustained strong growth in world
market prices for crude oil and food since the
beginning of the year is affecting consumer
price inflation both in industrial countries
and, to an even greater extent, in emerging
market economies and developing countries.
The international financial markets again en-
countered strong turbulence in the first few
months of the year, although this has since
subsided somewhat. Concerns about the
soundness of several financial institutions and
increasing fears about global economic activ-
ity initially caused global stock market prices
worldwide to plummet; at the same time, the
spreads on risky bonds reached new highs in
some cases. A marked rise in risk aversion
among investors prompted sizeable portfolio
shifts into safe-haven vehicles, as had also
been the case in the previous quarter, thusInternational
setting
Financial
markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
7considerably squeezing government bond
yields, which fell below 4% in the euro areacompared with 4
1/C252% at the end of 2007.
However, after the Federal Reserve eased ac-cess to liquidity and lowered its key interestrate again in mid-March, the markets re-bounded and interest rates on the Europeancapital markets rose up to 4
1/C254% by the end
of the reporting period. Against this back-drop, the euro performed comparativelystrongly in the foreign exchange markets. Ittemporarily marked new highs against majorcurrencies before relinquishing part of itsgains towards the end of the period under re-view. On a weighted average, the eurogained 3% against the currencies of the euroarea’s major trading partners between the be-ginning of 2008 and the end of the reportingperiod.
The fall-out from the financial market turmoil
continued to set the mood in the euro moneymarket, especially in the longer maturityranges. Following reports from European andUS banks of further write-downs on theirstructured loan portfolios, the risk spreads onunsecured money market interest rates haveincreased – considerably in some cases –since March 2008 after falling perceptibly atthe start of the year. As in the precedingmonths, the Eurosystem countered these de-velopments with various liquidity policy meas-ures. Thus, it again provided banks with gen-erous additional liquidity at the beginning ofthe reserve maintenance periods and enabledinstitutions to meet their minimum reserve re-quirements early (frontloading). Furthermore,the Eurosystem supported banks’ somewhatlonger-term liquidity arrangements by focus-ing central bank lending to a greater extent
on three-month and recently also six-monthmaturities. The continuation of additionalthree-month tender operations and introduc-tion of the new six-month transactions didnot increase the total refinancing volume,however. This underlines the special roleplayed by liquidity policy operations – whichshould not be equated with a more expan-sionary European monetary policy stance – insupporting the smooth functioning of theeuro money market. In the face of continuingtensions in the money and credit markets andthe marked deterioration in the price climate,the ECB Governing Council has maintainedits steady monetary policy course over thepast few months. The minimum bid rate inthe main refinancing operations (MROs) hasconsequently been kept at 4% since summer2007.
Monetary developments in the first quarter
of 2008 were again characterised by stronggrowth in money holdings in the euro area.At a seasonally adjusted annualised growthrate of 8
1/C252%, the pace of monetary expan-
sion was down somewhat on the two-digitgrowth rates of previous quarters, however.The main driving force behind monetary ex-pansion continued to be lending by euro-areabanks to the private sector. Loans to the pri-vate sector rose by a seasonally adjusted an-nualised rate of 10% in the reporting period,thus matching the growth rate seen in theclosing quarter of 2007. This developmentwas driven not least by the more dynamiccredit growth in Germany. The banking statis-tics data do not indicate any major con-straints on credit availability in the private sec-Monetary
policy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
8tor, which some observers had feared might
ensue from the tensions on the money and
credit markets. This appraisal is also con-
firmed by the German results of the Bank
Lending Survey.
Nevertheless, the sustained strong monetary
growth, driven primarily by copious lending
to non-financial corporations, continues to
gives cause for stability policy concern. Infla-
tionary risks are associated in addition with
the overall robust state of the euro-area econ-
omy, the tightening of the labour market
and, above all, the persistent price pressures
emanating from the international crude oil
and food markets. At all events, the strong
upward thrust of consumer prices continued
in the first quarter of 2008. The Harmonised
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro
area was up by an average of 3.4% on the
year; in April, the HICP measure of inflation
eased only marginally to 3.3%.
In the first quarter of 2008, the euro-area
economies grew by a seasonally adjusted rate
of 0.7% vis-/C224-vis the final quarter of 2007.
This development is attributable not least to
the sharp increase in aggregate output in
Germany. According to initial figures from the
Federal Statistical Office, German gross do-
mestic product (GDP) in the first three
months of 2008 expanded by 1.5% on the
quarter in seasonally and calendar-adjusted
terms. Following a moderate rise of 0.3% at
the end of 2007, the pace of growth picked
up again considerably, and a substantial in-
crease in overall capacity utilisation was re-
corded as well. The expansion in economic
output was broadly based across the individ-ual sectors. Industrial output was very robust
and, given the comparatively mild weather,
the construction sector was able to press
ahead with processing the surge in orders re-
ceived in the final quarter of last year.
Business-related service providers likewise
benefited from these two factors. As far as it
is possible to tell, growth on the expenditure
side continued to be sustained mainly by
brisk investment demand and buoyant ex-
ports. Moreover, following its dip in the
fourth quarter of 2007, private consumption
regained some ground, which also pushed up
imports.
The strong growth momentum seen in the
early part of the year shows what potential
the German economy still essentially has fol-
lowing an upturn extending over more than
four years. The pace of output growth should
be interpreted cautiously, however, as it can-
not be simply projected forward given the
special factors that boosted the good first-
quarter result and the dampening effect on
the German economy that may be expected
from the slackening of global economic
growth. This is consistent with the fact that,
according to the Ifo Institute, sentiment in
the industrial sector deteriorated significantly
in April 2008.
Looking at the empirically quite robust rela-
tionship between the Ifo business climate in-
dicator and the year-on-year change in GDP ,
the latest survey results provide some tenta-
tive evidence that growth in the German
economy may be more subdued in the com-
ing months. This is also suggested by tech-
nical factors, such as the weather-inducedGerman
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
9shifting of production in the construction sec-
tor and the fact that Easter fell early, whichmay have led to higher sales figures beingrecorded by retail trade outlets in March.The – in some cases substantial – negativefactors in the international setting are likelyto be mirrored by more muted export growth.As a result, investment in machinery andequipment, which remained robust through-out the reporting period, may also lose mo-mentum. Given the persistently high energyprices, the mainstays of growth in the Ger-man economy will, nevertheless, continue toprofit both from the continuing stimuli fromoil revenue recycling via the foreign tradechannel and from the above-average growthin global demand for energy-efficient andenvironmentally-friendly technology, a sectorin which the German economy offers com-petitive products. Furthermore, there are pro-spects that the process of recovery in privateconsumption – which was interrupted in thefourth quarter of 2007 – can be resumed.Consumers are likely to abandon theirreluctance to purchase, especially if infla-tion abates. According to figures from theGesellschaft f/C252r Konsumforschung (GfK), theconsumer climate is currently benefiting frommore optimistic income expectations that aresolidly underpinned by the sustained im-provement in the labour market and higheremployee remuneration.
The clear improvement in the labour market
has continued so far this year and the avail-able leading indicators suggest that this willpersist in the near future – albeit not at therobust pace recorded to date. There was afurther perceptible decline in the officialunemployment figure in the first quarter. At a
seasonally adjusted 3.36 million, there were211,000 fewer persons registered as un-employed than in the final quarter of 2007.This is equivalent to an unemployment rate of8.0%, which is thus down by 1.5 percentagepoints on the year. However, there was nomonth-on-month decline in joblessness inApril.
In the context of the much brighter employ-
ment situation, new wage agreements withhigher negotiated rates – which in somecases clearly exceeded the levels negotiatedin previous years – were concluded in a num-ber of sectors in the first few months of2008. According to the Deutsche Bundes-bank’s pay rate statistics, the year-on-year in-crease in wages in the first quarter of theyear, at 2.3%, was double that recorded inthe final three months of 2007. In the pro-duction sector, which benefited from flourish-ing export and investment activity, the overallincrease in negotiated rates of pay (3.4%)was noticeably greater than in the moredomestically-oriented service sectors. Thehigher wage settlements per se virtually ruleout the prospect of any further positive stim-uli for employment, and the 2008 wageround is not without risks to stability policyeither.
Consumer prices (as measured by the nation-
al CPI) rose again sharply in the first quarterof 2008. The annual growth rate fell onlyslightly, from 3.0% to 2.9%, despite thedampening baseline effect due to the VAThike of 1 January 2007. Energy and foodprices again rose faster than the other com-
Labour marketWages
Prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
10ponents (by 9.3% and 8.0%, respectively).
The HICP inflation measure stood at 3.1%, as
in the fourth quarter of 2007. When recalcu-
lated using a methodologically comparable
basis to the CPI, the figure is even somewhat
higher. In April, there was no further month-
on-month increase in seasonally adjusted
consumer prices, partly because the higher
crude oil prices were not passed on in their
entirety. Food price inflation eased. The cost
of industrial goods (excluding energy) and
rents increased only marginally. The year-on-
year rate of price inflation (CPI) fell from
3.1% to 2.4% owing in part to baseline ef-
fects resulting from the introduction of uni-
versity tuition fees in a number of federal
states in April 2007, delayed price effects of
the increase in VAT as of 1 January 2007 and
the fact that Easter fell early. The HICP figure
was 2.6% compared with 3.3% in March.
A further rise in inflation rates is to be expect-
ed in the coming months.
In 2008, the state of public finances is likely
to deteriorate somewhat. After the general
government deficit was reduced markedly in
the past few years and a balanced budget
was achieved in 2007, a slight reversal is ex-
pected in the current year. The cyclical setting
will continue to make a positive impact
owing to the beneficial economic growth
profile from the point of view of general gov-
ernment. The unfavourable budgetary devel-
opment is due more to structural factors such
as, notably, sizeable cuts in taxes and social
security contributions and, in addition, to a
probable weak trend in revenue from profit-
related taxes. The rate of increase in expend-
iture which, although still moderate, is higherthan in previous years, will not provide an ad-
equate counterweight. The overall develop-
ment is fraught with much uncertainty, how-
ever, owing to the financial market turbu-
lence and increased risks to the macroeco-
nomic outlook. The debt ratio, which in 2007
recorded a clear decline for the first time in
years, is likely to decrease further. Neverthe-
less, the 60% ceiling stipulated by the EC
Treaty will continue to be overshot. The public
finance situation is likely to remain more or
less unchanged in the coming year. A small
structural deficit is again likely provided there
are no additional increases in expenditure or
cuts in taxes and social security contributions.
On the one hand, the outlook indicates that
the structural general government deficits in
2008 and 2009 are likely to be low and that
the budgetary situation should therefore be
much better than in recent years. The debt
ratio is also falling closer towards the 60%
ceiling. On the other hand, it is becoming
clear that it will not be easy to achieve the
structural improvements in 2009 announced
by the Federal Government in the latest sta-
bility programme. After adjustment for asset
realisations, central government will probably
again record a sizeable deficit next year. Con-
trary to the impression sometimes created by
current fiscal policy discussions, there is there-
fore no scope for additional deficit-increasing
measures without corresponding counterfi-
nancing. Instead, policymakers should bear
in mind the fact that the recalculation of
the socio-cultural minimum subsistence level
means that the relevant tax allowances (and
possibly child benefit payments, too) as well
as basic allowances will need to be raisedPublic finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
11starting in 2009, and that subsequently a less
favourable budgetary situation is to be ex-pected. A substantial drop in revenue levels isalso likely to result from 2010 onwards fromthe implementation of a ruling by the FederalConstitutional Court referring to the offset-ting of health and long-term care insurance
contributions against tax. These strains onpublic budgets could be borne more easily ifa more favourable situation were to beachieved in 2009.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
12Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
In the first few months of 2008, the global
economy continued to grow, but it has lost
some momentum. At the same time, the
global price climate deteriorated significantly.
The cyclical weakness in the United States
was at the heart of real economic develop-
ments. US gross domestic product (GDP) in-
creased only slightly in the first quarter of
2008 – as already at the end of 2007. One
contributing factor was the continuing sharp
decline in residential investment. The other
was the only slight growth of private con-
sumption, which had been the main driver of
growth for a long time. As things now stand,
it is quite likely that the US economy can
avoid the slump into recession feared by
some since, apart from monetary policy im-
pulses, the economic programme adopted by
the US government will probably already
show first effects in the spring and come to
fruition in the second half of the year. How-
ever, the question remains how soon it will be
possible to completely overcome the eco-
nomic slump. The pressure to adjust created
by the turmoil on the US real estate market is
still high, and the situation on the financial
markets remains vulnerable despite some rays
of hope.
By contrast, the growth of the Japanese
economy in the first quarter was markedly
higher than in the fourth quarter of 2007.
The euro area also showed a high measure of
resilience against the external retarding forces
and also saw noticeably accelerated growth.
In the industrial countries as a group, real
GDP once again grew by an estimated1/C252%Global
economy on
flatter growth
path

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
13(after seasonal and calendar adjustment) in
the first quarter of 2008. The year-on-year in-crease was 2
1/C254%.
In the south and east Asian emerging market
economies, the pace of growth seems tohave slowed down somewhat since the be-ginning of the year, but it remained quitehigh compared with the industrial countries.The main reasons for the loss of momentumwere the more moderate development of ex-ports and the major erosion of consumers’purchasing power by the sharp increase in en-ergy and food prices. At 10
1/C252%, the Chinese
economy’s year-on-year growth in the firstquarter was no longer quite as strong as inthe fourth quarter of 2007, when GDPgrowth was 11
1/C254%. The weaker impulses
from exports were offset by stronger growthin domestic demand. The weather-relatedproduction stoppages in the winter monthsare also likely to have contributed to thedecline in growth. So far, there has been noeasing of consumer prices; in March-April,the inflation rate was 8.4%.
The economies of Latin America have so far
been affected very differently by the weaken-ing of the US economy – depending on thestrength or type of the economic ties. For ex-ample, Mexico and its Central Americanneighbours, including the Caribbean, wereaffected more than other countries, not onlyowing to slower growth of exports to theUnited States (which are mostly relatively sig-nificant) but also owing to a decline, or clear-ly slower rise in, workers’ remittances, al-though from a macroeconomic perspective,the impact on Mexico was offset to a degreeby the high oil prices. Other countries, such
as Brazil, Argentina and Chile, continued tobenefit from the higher prices for industrialraw materials as well as for food, beveragesand tobacco. However, the picture for thewhole economy in this region is oftenclouded by the strong rise in food prices. Thisalso involves politically controversial redistri-bution effects since the poorer sections of thepopulation in the cities lose much of theirpurchasing power owing to the heavy weightof basic foods in the basket of goods. Con-versely, the rising income in the (partly neg-lected) agricultural sector also benefits smallfarmers. A positive aspect is that Latin Ameri-ca’s vulnerability to financial market crises hasclearly decreased, some of the reasons beingthat the dependency on foreign savings hasbeen greatly reduced in recent years and thatit was possible to build up a large volume ofmonetary reserves.
In the oil-exporting countries of the Middle
East, the economic overheating in recentmonths has further increased, if anything. Acrucial factor for this was that, owing to thepegging of their currencies to the US dollar,most member states of the Gulf CooperationCouncil have virtually imported the recentinterest rate cuts by the US Federal Reserve,even though the inflationary pressure hasconsiderably risen there. In the Common-wealth of Independent States, the increase indomestic demand fuelled by the commodityboom together with the considerable in-crease in food prices likewise continued toplace a burden on the price climate. In Russia,the inflation rate rose to 13.3% in March,compared with 7.6% twelve months earlier.
Moderate loss
of momentum
in emerging
market
economies
Signs of
overheating
in the oil-
producing
countries of the
Middle East and
in Russia

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
14In the meantime, the central bank has started
pursuing a more restrictive course; at times,
administrative measures were also taken to
dampen the rise in prices, although with little
success.
The main reasons for the slowdown in the
global economy include the absence of im-
pulses from the United States, the significant
broad-based rise in commodity prices and the
fact that the turbulence on the financial mar-
kets, which has often led to high losses in the
financial sector and a tightening of lending
conditions both within the United States and
beyond its borders, has not yet been over-
come. Against this background, the Inter-
national Monetary Fund (IMF) once again re-
vised its forecast for the global economy
downwards. The Fund now expects globalgrowth to decline from an above-average
result of 5% in 2007 to 33/C254% in this and
next year and thus fall somewhat below the
multi-year average of 4%. Compared with
2007, the aggregate growth rate for indus-
trial countries might be halved to 11/C254% for
both years, and the aggregate growth rate
for the emerging market economies and
developing countries might be reduced by a
similar extent from 8% to well over 61/C252%.
Owing to the continued large gap, the share
of global growth generated by this group of
countries will probably increase by one-tenth
to eight-tenths in the 2007-09 period. In
1990, the emerging market economies and
developing countries generated only one-third
of global growth, rising to almost one-half in
2000. According to the IMF forecast, the ex-
pansion of real global trade will decline from
63/C254% in 2007 to 51/C252% this year and 53/C254%
next year.
So far, the slower pace of the global economy
has not been able to dampen rising prices on
the commodity markets. At the end of the
period under review, crude oil prices reached
a new high at US$1243/C254per barrel of Brent
crude oil, which was more than one-quarter
above the level at the start of 2008 and nine-
tenths above the level one year earlier. In
euro, the year-on-year rise was 68% in mid-
May, due to the euro’s appreciation. One rea-
son for the sharp rise in oil prices since the
start of 2008 was OPEC’s decision not to in-
crease the production quotas. Another reason
was that there were increasing indications
that non-OPEC supply could develop less fa-
vourably than previously expected. Moreover,
the geopolitical tensions in important oil-Percent-
age
points
1990 95 00 05 07 08 2009Emerging market economies and
developing countries
of which: China
Advanced economies 1
22Contributions to global
economic growth
Sources: International Monetary Fund,
World Economic Outlook Database April
2008 and Bundesbank calculations. — 1In-
dustrial countries including Malta, Slovenia,
Cyprus, Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea
and Singapore. — 2April 2008 IMF fore-
cast.
Deutsche Bundesbank6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Further
downward
revision of IMF
forecastSharp rise in
prices for
crude oil ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
15producing countries remained high; some-
times there were also production and deliverydisruptions for technical reasons or becauseof strikes. In addition, the demand for oil,particularly from emerging market econ-omies, is continuing to increase markedly.
The prices (in US dollars) of other raw mater-
ials (excluding energy) remained virtually un-changed in April after a first-quarter increaseof 17% on the period. This was mainly owingto slightly declining world market prices forfood, beverages and tobacco, which, in turn,were fostered by lower prices for oilseeds andoils. While wheat prices clearly decreased re-cently, rice prices increased sharply. This hason various occasions already led to protests inthe major cities of some emerging marketeconomies and developing countries. In thiscontext, it is worrying that a number of gov-ernments have reacted by adopting protec-tionist measures, such as export tariffs onbasic foods or export limits for the improve-ment of domestic supply, or increased stock-piling, thus further adding to inflation on theglobal markets. A more efficient course of ac-tion would be to refrain from distortionaryintervention and to let the higher consumerprices take their effect at the producer levelto create incentives to quickly expand produc-tion. The prices for industrial raw materials,which had increased by 14
1/C252% on the quar-
ter in the first quarter, rose by only 1% on themonth in April.
The continuation of the sharp rise in world
market prices for crude oil and food since thebeginning of the year has also had an impacton consumer price inflation in the industrialcountries. In the first quarter, headline infla-
tion was 3.5% up on the year; this was thehighest rate since the end of 1997. ExcludingJapan, it stood as high as 3.7%. Core infla-tion (excluding the volatile components offood and energy) amounted to 2.5% forthese countries, compared with 2.3% in thefourth quarter of 2007.
According to provisional figures, overall eco-
nomic output in the United States has risenonly slightly in the first quarter after seasonaland calendar adjustment – as already in thefourth quarter of 2007. The year-on-year in-crease stood unchanged at 2
1/C252%. However,
the structure of the growth took a turn forthe worse in the winter months in that thegreatest contribution, at
1/C254percentage point,
came from inventory investment, with do-US dollar basis, 2000 = 100, log scale
Industrial raw materialsCrude oil
(Brent)
Food, beverages
and tobaccoWorld market prices for
crude oil and industrial
raw materials as well as food,
beverages and tobacco
Sources: Thomson Financial Datastream and
HWWI. —  -  = 14 May 2008.
Deutsche Bundesbank450
400
350
300
250
200
150
80- 
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008... and for other
raw materials
since the
beginning of
the year
Inflation up in
the industrial
countriesUSA

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
16mestic final demand sinking. Private con-
sumption increased by merely1/C254% (seasonal-
ly and calendar adjusted), following an in-
crease of1/C252% in the final quarter of 2007.
Housing construction continued its unbroken
tailspin, falling by 71/C252%, and investment in
non-residential structures, which had been a
significant pillar of construction output in
2007, declined for the first time since the
third quarter of 2005 (–11/C252%). Investment in
machinery and equipment likewise tended
slightly downwards. Real exports rose strong-
ly in the first quarter of the year, by a season-
ally and calendar adjusted 11/C254%, but at the
same time – in contrast to the previous quar-
ter – imports picked up again somewhat;
given the existing difference in levels between
the two indicators, foreign trade ultimately
made only a minor net contribution to
growth.
Given that the winter months saw a massive
accumulation of inventories and that the ma-
jority of leading indicators continued to be
pointed downwards, overall output for the
second quarter is expected to remain weak.
However, now that the IRS has already begun
to send tax rebate checks to households,
which is likely to boost their demand already
in May and June, a marked decline in real
GDP is unlikely. All in all, however, private
consumption faces significant strains, mainly
through the considerable erosion of purchas-
ing power, the decline in employment, stricter
lending conditions and negative wealth ef-
fects. At 3.9%, the inflation rate was still at a
very high level in April, despite falling by 0.4
percentage point since January. As before,
the considerable price pressures stemmedmainly from energy and food. Core inflation
(excluding energy and food) as measured by
the Personal Consumption Expenditure defla-
tor increased slightly to 2.1% in March.
In the first quarter, the Japanese economy
grew by3/C254% in seasonally adjusted terms,
following an expansion of just over1/C252%i n
the fourth quarter. Real GDP was up by only
1% on the year, however, owing to a baseline
effect. The accelerated period-on-period
growth is largely due to the more lively
growth of private consumption, which, at
3/C254%, was double its end-2007 result. Another
factor was that the permit backlog in residen-
tial construction, which had led to a signifi-
cant decline in activity in this area in the
second half of 2007, diminished at least in
part after the turn of 2007-08; expenditure
on new residential construction increased by
41/C252%. Government investment was likewise
expanded. By contrast, corporate investment
noticeably declined (–1%). A further import-
ant driver for growth was real exports, which
were up by a seasonally adjusted 41/C252%o n
the quarter. With import growth clearly
weaker (+2%), foreign trade contributed1/C252
percentage point to GDP growth. Consumer
prices, which had declined on the year in the
third quarter of 2007, have shown a notice-
able upward trend since then owing to the
price increases for crude oil and food. Head-
line inflation was 1.2% in March. If energy
and food are excluded, prices remained virtu-
ally unchanged.
According to provisional figures, seasonally
and calendar adjusted real GDP growth in the
UK slowed down further in the first quarterJapan
United
Kingdom

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
17to almost1/C252% on the quarter or 21/C252% on the
year. One factor in this was that, owing to
the ongoing financial market crisis, the value
added in the “business-related services and fi-
nances” sector increased by only just under
1/C252% in seasonally and calendar adjusted
terms on the previous period, when it had in-
creased by just over1/C252%; in the first three
quarters of 2007, growth rates averaged
11/C254%.1The overall economic output of the
services sector increased by1/C252%. Moreover,
the economic output of the production sector
(excluding construction) stagnated at the
level of the fourth quarter of 2007. By con-
trast, construction activity increased by1/C252%,
favoured by the mild winter weather. How-
ever, the housing market is unlikely to have
provided any further stimulus; house prices
fell by 41/C254% in the period from January to
April. Nevertheless, year-on-year consumer
price inflation increased markedly in this time,
namely from 2.2% to 3.0%, owing to higher
energy and food prices. Excluding these two
components, inflation was 2.0% in April.
Industrial activity in the new EU member
states (excluding Slovenia, Cyprus and Malta,
which now belong to the euro area) remained
lively in the winter months. In January-
February, output exceeded the level of the
fourth quarter of 2007, in which growth had
declined somewhat, by no less than 61/C252%i n
seasonally adjusted terms and was thus 93/C254%
up on the year. A major demand-side driver
was the increase in purchasing activity by
households, which – in terms of nominal re-
tail sales – rose by 111/C252% on the year in the
first quarter. Wages and employment con-
tinued their robust growth, thereby fuellingindividuals’ propensity to consume. The aver-
age standardised unemployment rate in these
countries fell to 7.2% in the fourth quarter.
However, the positive production and labour
market developments have been accompan-
ied by a significant across-the-board rise in
inflation. On an average of the first four
months, consumer prices were a seasonally
adjusted 2.3% higher than in the previous
period and 6.7% up on the year. Individual
figures in April ranged from 3.7% in Slovakia
to 17.4% in Latvia.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
The persistently weak economy in the United
States, combined with robust macroeconom-
ic development in the euro area, caused the
euro-area economies to pull ahead of the
USA in terms of growth in the 2007-08 win-
ter half-year. On average over the 2005-07
period, the euro area’s growth lag was al-
ready only just under1/C252percentage point,
compared with one percentage point in the
period from 1996 to 2001 and 11/C254percent-
age points from 2002 to 2004. However, the
closing of the gap was due primarily to a
slowdown in the United States and not
so much to stronger euro-area economic
growth. Moreover, the prosperity gap be-
tween the United States and the euro area –
in terms of per-capita income in purchas-
ing power parities – is still as large as at the
end of the 1990s (see explanatory notes on
pp 18-19).
1The even more narrowly defined financial sector is re-
sponsible for creating around 8% of the total gross value
added in the UK, compared with 4% in Germany.New EU
member statesUS and euro-
area growth
converging ...
... yet
prosperity gap
still wide

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
18Deutsche BundesbankGrowth and prosperity gap between the USA and the euro area – new trends
The growth differentials between the USA and the euro
area, which increased substantially during the slump at the
beginning of the current decade, have declined markedly in
recent years. Following the bottoming out of the business
cycle in both economic areas in the second half of 2001 after
the “New Economy” boom, the US economy initially grew
quite sharply, driven by monetary impulses and a strong
fiscal policy stimulus, while in the euro area the recovery
remained moderate until mid-2003. The sustained slump in
Germany was a significant contributing factor. The average
growth rates in the two economic areas for the period
between 2002 and 2004 were 2.6% in the USA and 1.3% in
the euro area, compared with 3.5% and 2.6% for the period
between 1996 and 2001.1
However, from mid-2003 onwards the pace of growth in the
euro area increased significantly; in 2006, at 2.8%, real GDP
growth returned to almost the same level as overall eco-
nomic output in the USA for the first time since the begin-
ning of the upswing. In 2007, at 2.6%, the growth rate was
even 0.4 percentage point higher. The main reason for this
was that the decline in housing investment, which had
started at the end of 2005 and subsequently accelerated con-
siderably, was by itself enough to cause a 1-percentage-point
drop in US GDP growth. By contrast, despite the strong ap-
preciation of the euro in 2007, the pace of growth in the
euro area declined relatively little. On an average of the
period 2005-07, at 2.3%, euro-area growth was only 0.4 per-
centage point slower than that of the US economy. The pick-
up in growth in Germany, from 0.3% in the period from 2002
to 2004 to 2.0% in the following years, played an important
role.
This is consistent with a recent reduction in the labour pro-
ductivity growth gap between the USA and the euro area
following a significant increase, particularly in the second
half of the 1990s.2Measured as real gross domestic product
(GDP) per employed person, in the three-year period from
2005 to 2007 growth slowed in the USA to 1.2% from 2.6%
in 2002-04, while in the euro area it increased from 0.9% to
1.2% (and in Germany from 1.3% to 1.6%).3Once again,
therefore, the closing of the gap was due more to a slow-
down in the United States than to stronger euro-area eco-
nomic growth.Moreover, it would be premature to infer a stronger co-
movement of the underlying real trends from this finding,
which is based on a relatively short observation period. It
should be borne in mind that, particularly last year, the euro-
area economy was still quite buoyant, while the US economy
had already gone past its peak; to this extent, the closing of
the gap described above was caused by the cyclical shifts.
However, aggregate potential output estimates show that
the convergence of US and euro-area growth rates over the
past few years is not just a cyclical phenomenon. According
to OECD calculations, since the end of the 1990s there has
been a clear convergence of the potential growth path;
actual growth convergence, particularly at the start of the
current decade, was obscured by the aforementioned diver-
gences in the first phase of the cyclical upturn. The main rea-
son for the closing of the potential output growth gap was
the marked slowdown in the United States from 31/C252% in the
second half of the 1990s to 21/C252% in the period from 2002 to
2007, while for the euro area the OECD cites a more or less
constant pace of around 2%. According to ECB staff esti-
mates, euro-area potential output growth is estimated at 2%
to 21/C252at the current end. Thus, as a core area of the Euro-
pean Union, the euro-area countries are still a long way
away from the goal, formulated in Lisbon in 2000, of increas-
ing sustainable growth in the Community to 3% by 2010.4
A Solow decomposition of growth rates to examine the
supply-side background behind economic growth in both
economic areas shows clearly that the lower post-2002 an-
nual average US GDP growth compared with the second half
of the 1990s is due mainly to a noticeably weaker contribu-
tion from capital as a factor of production, with the reduc-
tion being more pronounced in the USA than in the euro
area. Therefore, the disparity vis-/C224-vis the United States was
significantly reduced. The main reason for this could have
been that the capital-linked technological advances, which
benefited the US economy in particular, lost momentum.
During the 2002-04 period, labour’s contribution to growth
also fell in the USA – in relative terms on a similar scale to the
euro area. However, in 2005-065it returned to levels equiva-
lent to those of the second half of the 1990s. Between 2002
and 2004, the empirical residual component, which is con-
ceptually related to total factor productivity, grew consider-
ably more strongly in the United States than in the euro
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, Appendix: Discussing the growth and
prosperity gap between the United States and the euro area, Monthly
Report, May 2002, pp 34-38. — 2See European Commission: The EU
Economy: 2007 review – Moving Europe’s productivity frontier,
2007. — 3The data on productivity developments are based – owing
to a lack of current data on work-load – on staff levels, converted tofull-time equivalents, as published by the European Commission in its
spring forecast at the end of April 2008. — 4For more detail on
potential growth in Germany, see specifically Deutsche Bundesbank,
Advances in strengthening the economy’s growth potential, Monthly
Report, October 2007, pp 35-45. — 5The data needed for a growth
decomposition are only available as complete sets up to 2006. —

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
19area, but thereafter the pace was equally strong in both eco-
nomic areas.
An analysis highlighting prosperity aspects should funda-
mentally be based on net domestic product (NDP), which re-flects distributable income in an economy more closely thanGDP, which also includes the depreciations.
6This is particu-
larly the case in periods in which the weight of capital con-sumption changes, as, for example, in the United States dur-ing the second half of the 1990s. At that time the ratio of de-preciations to GDP tended to increase significantly, not leastdue to increased depreciations in ICT investment, which char-acteristically have a relatively short useful economic life – onaverage the ratio increased by 0.4 percentage point per an-num vis-/C224-vis 0.1 percentage point in the euro area. However,on an average of the period 2005-07 the national deprecia-tion rate did not change in either the USA or the euro area.Therefore real NDP generally increased at the same pace asGDP.
Furthermore, it would seem appropriate to use a per-capita
analysis to determine the prosperity gap between the tworegions over time. A country with a rapidly expanding popu-lation must create stronger real income growth than a coun-try with low population growth in order to maintain or in-crease the material standard of living of its population. Inthe period 2005-07, the US population grew by an averageof 0.9% and thus about twice the euro area’s rate. This ismainly due to higher birth rates in the USA and the longperiod of increased immigration. However, populationgrowth resulting from immigration is likely to have slowedin the meantime as, for cyclical reasons, there is a reducedneed for labour. Since 2005 real per-capita NDP has increasedby an average of 1.8% per annum in both the USA and theeuro area (in Germany it has even increased by 2.1%). Thismeans a recent break in the growth of the prosperity gap be-tween the USA and the euro area. However, the catching-upprocess that could have been expected given the current in-come disparity has not occurred, either.
If, to compare per-capita income levels, the figures are con-
verted from euro to US dollars at market exchange rates,nominal per-capita NDP in the euro area has increased parti-cularly sharply over the last seven years – by 11% per annum,compared with 4
1/C252% in the USA – during which the euro ap-
preciated markedly. At just under US$33,000 in 2007, euro-area per-capita income was accordingly 18% below the USlevel. However, PPP exchange rates are generally preferableto market exchange rates when comparing per-capita in-come, as they take better account of the differences in pricelevels between the respective economic areas and enable dis-ruptive short-term volatility in the exchange rate to beavoided. Calculated using PPP exchange rates, euro-area per-capita NDP in 2007, at US$28,200, was 30% below the US le-vel; the gap is thus still as large as at the end of the 1990s. InGermany the income gap vis-/C224-vis the USA has also not de-creased, holding steady at 27% at last report. Comparedwith the euro area, Germany is thus in a somewhat morefavourable position.
6Strictly speaking, the net national income (NNI) at factor cost
(national income), which differs from NDP in terms of the balance ofprimary income to and from the rest of the world and is recordedwithout including taxes less subsidies on production and imports,should be used. However, national income is officially only publishedas a nominal variable. For simplicity, terms of trade-induced changesin real incomes were also disregarded, in particular as the positive
and negative terms of trade effects of a country largely even out overa longer period of time. — 7Real depreciation as a percentage of
real GDP at previous year’s prices; change in percentage points. Thedeflator of the depreciation for the euro area is estimated using dataon seven euro-area countries. — 8Figure for 2007 estimated.Real per-capita net domestic product (NDP)
in the United States and the euro area
Percentages
Calculated from
ItemReal
per-capitaNDP Real GDPChange in
the depre-ciationrate
7Population
Average change during the period
Euro area
1996-2001 2.1 2.6 0.1 0.4
2002-2004 0.4 1.3 0.3 0.62005-2007 1.8 2.3 0.0
8 0.5
USA
1996-2001 2.0 3.5 0.4 1.12002-2004 1.6 2.6 0.0 1.02005-2007 1.8 2.7 0.0 0.9
Memo item
Germany
1996-2001 1.6 1.9 0.2 0.12002-2004 – 0.1 0.3 0.3 0.12005-2007 2.1 2.0 0.0 – 0.1
Difference in percentage points
Difference between
USA and euro area
1996-2001 – 0.1 0.9 0.3 0.7
2002-2004 1.2 1.3 – 0.3 0.32005-2007 0.0 0.4 – 0.1 0.4

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
20In the first quarter of 2008, GDP growth in
the euro area increased by a seasonally ad-
justed3/C254% on the period. However, this was
partly owing to the mild winter weather
which barely affected construction output. At
21/C254%, year-on-year overall economic growth
was as high as in the fourth quarter of 2007.
In view of the relatively favourable output
level in the construction sector in the first
quarter, a technical reversal is expected in thesecond quarter, which will tend to dampen
the rise in overall output. To a large extent,
the sharp GDP increase in the first quarter is
due to the very dynamic development in Ger-
many and the noticeably faster pace of
growth in France. The corresponding data for
Italy are not yet available, but, in view of in-
dustrial output developments in January-Feb-
ruary, growth is likely to have risen moderate-
ly again – unlike in the fourth quarter of
2007. By contrast, the Spanish economy has
significantly lost momentum, mainly owing to
the marked slowdown in housing construc-
tion.
The robust macroeconomic upturn in the
euro area in the first quarter was mainly sus-
tained by the production sector. Excluding
the special factors in the construction sector,
the main stimuli came from manufacturing.
Here, output increased by a seasonally adjust-
ed 11/C254%, after remaining unchanged in the
fourth quarter. Energy production, by con-
trast, noticeably declined owing to the mild
weather. Within the manufacturing industry,
the producers of capital goods recorded the
strongest growth. Nevertheless, the capacity
utilisation of industrial enterprises further de-
clined from January to April, yet remained
clearly above its multi-year average at last re-
port. While in a generally robust state, the
outlook for industrial activity in the euro area
has dimmed somewhat overall in recent
months. Although the high amount of orders
received in the fourth quarter was still ex-
ceeded by1/C252% in January-February, the Pur-
chasing Managers’ Index and the industrial
confidence indicator are signalling a slow-
down.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
Jan/
FebLog scale
New orders received by
manufacturers working
on orders
2000 = 100
Total
Of which
Excluding
heavy trans-
port
equipment
200801994-2007
averageLin scale
Capacity utilisationLog scale
Industrial output
2000 = 100Selected indicators of
industrial activity
in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
9586
84
82
80
78115
110
105
100
95
- - 
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Faster pace of
growth again in
first quarterNoticeable
expansionary
stimuli from
industry

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
21Data on the development of the major de-
mand components are not yet available. Theslight first-quarter increase in real retail sales –following the sharp decrease in the finalquarter of 2007 – indicates, at most, a slightrise in private consumption. In addition, newcar registrations declined by a seasonally ad-justed 3
1/C254% in the period from January to
March. Moreover, consumer sentiment wassignificantly worse in the first four months ofthis year than in the fourth quarter of 2007.As already mentioned, construction invest-ment probably increased strongly, owing notleast to the mild weather, and enterprises’ de-mand for machinery and equipment seems tohave been buoyant again. The value of ex-ports to non-euro-area countries surged atthe start of the year; on the two-month aver-age of January-February, they surpassed thelevel of the fourth quarter of 2007, in whichthey had remained virtually unchanged, by aseasonally adjusted 4
1/C252%. They were 11% up
on the year. Nominal imports increased at asimilar pace. However, since a greater part ofthis rise was price-related, foreign trade mayhave slightly supported overall growth.
Unemployment in the euro area is still falling,
although at a slowing pace. Compared withthe average of the fourth quarter, it wasdown by 152,000 to 10.97 million, or 7.1%.Developments in the individual countries var-ied widely. While Germany recorded a declineof 220,000, Spain had an increase of130,000. Employment growth also declinednoticeably in the fourth quarter of 2007,namely from 0.4% in the third quarter of2007 to 0.2%. However, there was still a1.7% rise on the year. Hourly labour costs stillincreased moderately in the fourth quarter of
2007 by a seasonally adjusted 0.7% com-pared with the previous period and by 2.7%on the year, but are likely to have acceleratedvisibly at the beginning of 2008.
Consumer price inflation continued to rise
strongly in the first quarter of 2008. As in thefinal quarter of 2007, the prices for goodsand services increased by no less than 1% onaverage in seasonally adjusted terms. Ex-trapolated for a full year, this results in an in-flation rate of around 4%. The actual year-on-year increase grew from 2.9% to 3.4%on an average of the three winter months.The main price drivers were once again en-ergy, the price of which rose by 3.4% on thequarter, and food, at 1.4%. By contrast, theprice trend for goods was flat (+0.2%), andEuro-area consumer prices
Year-on-year percentage change
2007 2008
Item Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1HICP, total 1.9 1.9 2.9 3.4
of which
Energy 0.5 0.7 8.2 10.8Unprocessed food 3.3 2.4 3.1 3.5
HICP excluding energy
and unprocessed food 1.9 2.0 2.3 2.5
of which
Processed food 2.0 2.5 4.5 6.4Industrial goods 1.0 1.0 1.1 0.8Services 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.6
Deutsche BundesbankMore buoyant
demand
Further
improved
labour market
conditionsInflation still
strong

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
22Deutsche BundesbankFiscal developments in the euro area
Fall in the deficit in 2007, particularly owing to favourable
cyclical influences and revenue windfalls
At the end of April, Eurostat, the European Commission’s
statistical office, published the government deficit and debt
figures of the EU member states that had reported these fig-
ures as part of the European excessive deficit procedure.
According to these reports, the general government deficit
ratio in the euro area decreased from 1.3% to 0.6% last year
and thus reached its lowest level since the start of monetary
union.1The debt ratio fell from 68.5% to 66.4%. Govern-
ment revenue grew by 5.3%, primarily owing to exceptional
increases in revenue from direct taxes, causing the general
government revenue ratio to rise slightly by 0.2 percentage
point to 45.6%. Growth in expenditure amounted to 3.7%.2
The expenditure ratio fell by1/C252percentage point to 46.3%,
mainly as a result of favourable economic developments.
According to European Commission calculations, the struc-
tural deficit ratio, ie the deficit ratio after adjustment for
cyclical influences and temporary measures, fell by1/C252percent-
age point to 0.7%. It should, however, be borne in mind
that this includes continued exceptionally high growth in
revenue, particularly in the generally very volatile revenue
from profit-related taxes. Overall, the fall in the structural
deficit ratio thus hardly reflects any active fiscal policy con-
solidation in the member states. Instead, the quite marked
decline in the deficit in 2007 was due mainly to favourable
cyclical developments and unexpected increases in revenue.
Rise in the 2008 deficit ratio owing to discretionary measures
In its spring forecast, the European Commission expects the
deficit ratio to increase to 1.0% in 2008. Cyclical influences
and temporary measures play hardly any role, rather, accord-
ing to the Commission, the rise in the structural deficit ratio
is due mainly to discretionary cuts in taxes and social security
contributions (particularly in Germany, France and Spain).
Furthermore, following the revenue windfalls that many
countries have experienced over the past few years, tax rev-
enue is now expected to see a more normal development.
Overall, revenue growth will therefore fall to 3.2% in 2008.
According to the forecast, expenditure will increase by 4.1%.
The expenditure ratio will thus remain largely unchanged,
despite subdued growth in interest expenditure. Given a
somewhat less favourable cyclical influence, the Commission
forecasts a further slight deterioration in the euro-area
budget balance in 2009. The downward movement in general
government debt in relation to GDP, which began in 2006, is
expected to continue until 2009. However, according to the
forecast, at 64.3%, the euro-area debt ratio will then still be
above the 60% reference value.No euro-area country has a deficit ratio above 3%, but
several countries have persistently high fiscal imbalances
In 2007, no euro-area country recorded a deficit ratio that ex-
ceeded the 3% reference value. However, the fiscal deficits
reported by France, Portugal and Greece were close to this
limit. Furthermore, Eurostat expressed reservations with
regard to Greece’s figures. The Greek deficit figures have
already been revised upwards retroactively in previous years,
sometimes significantly, and it cannot be ruled out that,
ultimately, a figure exceeding the 3% limit will be recorded
once more. A reliable statistical database is indispensable for
credible budgetary rules. In this respect, both national
authorities and the European institutions are required to
provide a timely and sound basis.
While the European Commission expects Greece’s deficit
ratio to improve without the need for additional measures
during the forecast period and Portugal’s 2009 deficit ratio
to be at least unchanged vis-/C224-vis its 2007 level, a further rise
in the deficit ratio is expected for France. The Commission
forecasts that, at 3% of GDP, France will by far have the high-
est deficit ratio of all the euro-area countries in 2009. Italy’s
already relatively high deficit also looks likely to increase
further. Malta and Ireland are expected to record ratios be-
tween 1% and 2% in 2009. The deficits reported by Belgium,
Slovenia, Austria and Germany are likely to be smaller than
this, while balanced budgets or surpluses are expected in
Finland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain and Cyprus.
According to the Commission’s forecast, the debt ratios in
most euro-area countries will decline between 2007 and
2009. However, the reference value for the debt level of 60%
of GDP will still be exceeded by Belgium, Germany, Greece,
France, Italy and Portugal in 2009. The expected increase
in Portugal and France is at odds with the Maastricht
Treaty requirement that the debt ratio is sufficiently dimin-
ishing and approaching the reference value at a satisfactory
pace.
Currently, Italy and Portugal are still in the excessive deficit
procedure. The correction period granted to Portugal ex-
tends up to 2008, while the correction period granted to Italy
expired in 2007. However, as both countries reported a def-
icit ratio below 3% in 2007, the Commission recommends
that the ECOFIN Council should abrogate the procedure.
However, beyond compliance with the reference values, the
Stability and Growth Pact envisages significantly more ambi-
tious medium-term budgetary objectives. These country-
specific objectives are set by the member states themselves.
Viewed from a structural perspective, surpluses or, at most, a
deficit ratio of 1% are to be achieved depending on poten-
1In 2000, a balanced budget was achieved solely as a result of one-off
proceeds from the sale of UMTS mobile telephone licences. After ad-justment for these one-off proceeds, the euro-area deficit amounted
to 1% of GDP. — 2In 2007, expenditure growth was dampened by

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
23tial growth and the debt ratio. This is also intended to ensure
that, in downturns, the 3% level is not exceeded if the auto-
matic stabilisers are operating freely. The Pact also sets dis-
tinct requirements for the adjustment path: if the structural
deficit exceeds the target value, it generally has to be re-
duced annually by 0.5% of GDP, whereby greater progress in
consolidation is to be achieved during good times.
The reform of the Pact not least had the objective of pressing
ahead with consolidation, particularly in good times. How-
ever, many countries have recently fallen short of this object-
ive. Instead, in a favourable macroeconomic environment,
they have often used revenue windfalls to finance cuts in taxes
and social security contributions or additional expenditure.
According to the Commission’s calculations, in 2007, 8 of
the 15 euro-area member states (Belgium, Germany, France,
Greece, Italy, Malta, Austria and Portugal) failed to meet
their medium-term budgetary objective. The forecast also
shows that none of these countries will meet their objective
by 2009. Furthermore, Ireland is also not expected to achieve
its objective from 2008 onwards owing to a considerable
structural deterioration. In both 2008 and 2009, only Malta
will achieve the required regular reduction in the structural
deficit by 0.5% of GDP without the need for additional con-
solidation measures. For Greece, this will be the case only in
one of these two years. According to the forecast, all of the
other countries listed will meet this requirement neither in
2008 nor in 2009.In this context, occasional calls for active fiscal economic sta-
bilisation measures are problematic. An expansionary fiscal
policy in countries that fail to meet their medium-term
budgetary objective would not be in line with the Pact’s
requirements. However, as the steps towards deficit consoli-
dation are related to structural variables, the automatic
stabilisers can work around this mandatory path. Achieving
the medium-term budgetary objective ultimately ensures
that, in normal downturns, the 3% limit is observed without
the automatic cyclically-induced revenue shortfalls and add-
itional expenditure having to be actively counteracted.
As has already been clearly shown in the past, an unsound
basis and unfavourable developments in the macroeconomic
environment can quickly lead to excessive deficits. Possible
additional burdens resulting from the financial market tur-
moil are currently intensifying this risk. It is therefore crucial
for countries with notable structural deficits to make serious
efforts to rapidly draw closer to their medium-term budget-
ary objective. Although sufficient efforts have not been evi-
dent in all cases, the possible options for imposing sanctions
envisaged in the preventive arm of the Stability and Growth
Pact – early warning by the Council, policy recommendations
from the Commission – have not been implemented since
the reform of the Pact in 2005.
0.3 percentage point: in 2006, the Italian government had assumed
part of the debt of the Italian railway company and this one-off ex-penditure-increasing measure was no longer applicable in 2007. —
3Source: Economic Forecast Spring 2008, European Commission.Budget balance (as % of GDP) 3Structural budget balance
(as % of GDP) 3 Debt (as % of GDP) 3
Country 2006 2007 2008 2009 2006 2007 2008 2009 2006 2007 2008 2009
Belgium 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 88.2 84.9 81.9 79.9
Germany – 1.6 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 0.8 – 0.8 67.6 65.0 63.1 61.6Finland 4.1 5.3 4.9 4.6 4.2 4.9 4.8 4.9 39.2 35.4 31.9 29.1France – 2.4 – 2.7 – 2.9 – 3.0 – 2.7 – 2.7 – 2.8 – 2.6 63.6 64.2 64.4 65.1Greece – 2.6 – 2.8 – 2.0 – 2.0 – 3.7 – 3.3 – 2.6 – 2.3 95.3 94.5 92.4 90.2Ireland 3.0 0.3 – 1.4 – 1.7 2.9 0.2 – 0.8 – 0.9 25.1 25.4 26.9 28.8Italy – 3.4 – 1.9 – 2.3 – 2.4 – 2.8 – 1.5 – 1.9 – 1.6 106.5 104.0 103.2 102.6Luxembourg 1.3 2.9 2.4 2.3 1.4 2.8 2.7 2.9 6.6 6.8 7.4 7.6Malta – 2.5 – 1.8 – 1.6 – 1.0 – 2.9 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 1.0 64.2 62.2 60.6 58.8Netherlands 0.5 0.4 1.4 1.8 1.1 0.3 1.0 1.3 47.9 45.4 42.4 39.0Austria – 1.5 – 0.5 – 0.7 – 0.6 – 1.4 – 1.0 – 1.2 – 0.9 61.8 59.1 57.7 56.8Portugal – 3.9 – 2.6 – 2.2 – 2.6 – 3.2 – 2.2 – 1.9 – 2.2 64.7 63.3 64.1 64.3Slovenia – 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 1.3 – 0.7 – 1.1 – 0.7 27.2 24.1 23.4 22.5Spain 1.8 2.2 0.6 0.0 2.0 2.4 1.1 0.9 39.7 36.2 35.3 35.2Cyprus – 1.2 3.3 1.7 1.8 – 0.7 3.5 1.9 2.0 64.8 59.8 47.3 43.2EU 15 – 1.3 – 0.6 – 1.0 – 1.1 – 1.2 – 0.7 – 1.0 – 0.9 68.5 66.4 65.2 64.3

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
24the prices of services (+0.7%) remained com-
paratively moderate. Energy prices increased
by 10.8% on the year, processed food prices
by 6.4% and unprocessed food (vegetables,
fruit, meat and fish) by 3.5%. Among the
euro-area countries, only the Netherlands re-
corded an inflation rate below 2%; in six
countries, it was even above 4% (including
Slovenia with no less than 6.5%). In April, the
annual euro-area inflation rate decreased by
0.3 percentage point on the month to 3.3%;
in this case, however, the early Easter date
and the previously only incomplete transfer ofthe most recent rises in crude oil prices likely
played a role.
Public finances in the euro area developed fa-
vourably last year. However, the noticeable
decline in the deficit ratio was driven mainly
by the good economic activity and windfall
revenues. All countries were below the 3%
reference value. For the future, some coun-
tries may be expected to fall well short of the
requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact
(see explanatory notes on pp 22-23).Favourable de-
velopment of
public finances
in 2007

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
25Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the money
market
Over the past three months, the Governing
Council of the ECB has again followed its
monetary policy strategy and left the central
bank interest rates unchanged. The Eurosys-
tem’s main refinancing operations in the form
of variable rate tenders therefore continue to
be subject to a minimum bid rate of 4%,
while the Eurosystem charges interest of 5%
for accessing the marginal lending facility and
pays 3% on the deposit facility. Given the
continued tensions on money and credit mar-
kets and the marked deterioration in the
price climate, the firm anchoring of longer-
term inflation expectations continues to be
the main challenge facing monetary policy
makers.
The consequences of financial market turbu-
lence continue to determine the mood in the
euro money market, especially when it comes
to longer maturities. Following recent reports
from European and US banks of write-downs
on their exposures in structured loans, the
risk premiums included in unsecured money
market interest rates have increased – consid-
erably in some cases – since March 2008
after dropping significantly at the start of the
year. The spread between the unsecured
three-month EURIBOR and the collateralised
three-month EUREPO rose from around
0.4 percentage point to around 0.8 percent-
age point between the end of February and
the end of April and was therefore only
around 0.1 percentage point below the
record high of December 2007.Eurosystem
interest rates
remain
unchanged
Money market
risk premiums
rise again

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
26Money market management and liquidity needs
In the three reserve maintenance periods between
16 January and 15 April 2008, euro-area credit insti-
tutions’ need for central bank liquidity determined
by autonomous liquidity factors remained almost
unchanged in net terms. The demand for liquidity
from banknotes in circulation declined by 56.5 bil-
lion. This is attributable to the sharp decline of
516.5 billion in demand for banknotes in the
January-February 2008 maintenance period after
the marked increase over the Christmas period. If
the net foreign reserves and the other factors are
taken together, a move which eliminates liquidity-
neutral valuation effects, there is likewise a decline
in the liquidity needs over the three periods ( 517.5
billion in total). This was caused by the continued
purchase of euro-denominated financial assets un-
related to monetary policy and by the disburse-
ments of central bank profits, which have an effect
on liquidity, including the Bundesbank profit of
around 54.3 billion paid on 11 March. By contrast,
liquidity needs arising from general government
deposits with the Eurosystem rose markedly by a
net523.8 billion.
Also during the period under review, the Eurosys-
tem pursued the course set in August 2007 of sup-
plying the credit institutions with generous
amounts of liquidity over almost the entire main-
tenance period to enable them to fulfil their min-
imum reserve requirements early and, therefore, to
hold the EONIA near to the minimum bid rate and
to contribute to a normalisation of the money mar-
ket. Even so, the Eurosystem did not make more li-
quidity available to the banks than they needed to
meet the minimum reserve requirement, which in-
creased during the reporting period. Consequently,
the Eurosystem shifted the emphasis of its open
market transactions more heavily into the longer-
term area once again. Contributory factors to this
in the reporting period were not only the extension
of two supplementary three-month refinancing op-
erations but also the implementation of an add-
itional tender with, for the first time, a maturity of
six months.
In the January-February maintenance period, the
ECB maintained the course which it had set in the
preceding months, allotting liquidity volumes in
main refinancing operations which were substan-
tially above the benchmark. In the first main refi-
nancing operation (MRO) in the maintenance
period which began on the 16 January, the above-
benchmark allotment was 525.0 billion. During the
maintenance period, the ECB reduced the amounts
above the benchmark to 54.0 billion in the last
MRO. On almost all days during this period, with
the exception of the last day in January, the EONIA
was close to the minimum bid rate of 4.00% and
therefore fulfilled the aim of liquidity manage-
ment. After a liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning oper-ation with a volume of 516.0 billion on the last day
of the maintenance period, however, the EONIA in-
creased again to 4.10%.
In the subsequent maintenance period of February-
March, the main refinancing operations were once
again characterised by generous but successively
decreasing amounts above the benchmark. The ECB
reduced the above-benchmark allotments in stages
from 520.0 billion in the first MRO of the period to
54.0 billion in the last. The EONIA spread (differ-
ence between the EONIA and the minimum bid
rate) was, until shortly before the end of the main-
tenance period, 5 basis points at the most, showing
an easing in the short-term market rates. On the
penultimate day of the period, however, the EONIA
increased markedly. The liquidity-providing fine-
tuning operation carried out by the ECB on the last
day of the maintenance period with a volume of
59.0 billion was, however, unable to prevent the
EONIA increasing significantly to 4.23%.
Banks’ supply of liquidity over the Easter holidays
was the most significant issue of the March-April
maintenance period. In comparison with the main
refinancing operations in the preceding periods, in
this period, the ECB deviated from its earlier strat-
egy of a gradual reduction in above-benchmark
amounts. In order to provide a generous supply of
liquidity before Easter, the banks were allotted
525.0 billion more than the calculative liquidity
need (ie the benchmark) in each of the first two
MROs. Additionally, the ECB met the increased de-
mand for central bank money by means of a
liquidity-providing fine-tuning operation with a
volume of 515.0 billion and a maturity which ex-
tended over the Easter holidays. However, these
measures were not enough to bring the EONIA,
which had climbed to 4.19% before Easter, back
down to the level of the minimum bid rate. In the
first MRO after the Easter holidays, the ECB in-
creased the above-benchmark allotment to 550.0
billion in order to ensure sufficient liquidity at the
end of the month (which was also the end of the
quarter). An additional fine-tuning operation on
the last day of March supported this aim. Even so,
these measures were not able to reduce the EONIA
by the desired amount, and, on 31 March, the EONIA
was again at 4.16%. At the beginning of April,
however, the EONIA spread decreased markedly
and generally stood at less than 6 basis points dur-
ing the remainder of the maintenance period. On
the last day of the period, the EONIA dropped
markedly once again to 3.78% after a liquidity-
providing fine-tuning operation with a volume of
521.0 billion had been underbid by 56.1 billion.
At the start of the April-May maintenance period
the EONIA again hovered at rates around the min-
imum bid rate of 4.00%.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
27As in the previous months, the Eurosystem
countered the turbulence on the money mar-
ket with various liquidity policy measures. It
provided banks with generous additional
liquidity at the beginning of the reserve main-
tenance periods and thus enabled banks to
meet their minimum reserve requirements
early (frontloading). The overnight interest
rate (EONIA) was also stabilised close to the
minimum bid rate for main refinancing oper-
ations thanks to additional fine-tuning oper-
ations with different maturities. Furthermore,
the Eurosystem supported banks’ longer-term
liquidity arrangements by focusing central
bank lending to a greater extent on three-
month and recently also six-month matur-
ities.
Continuing additional three-month tender
operations and introducing the new six-
month transaction did not increase the total
refinancing volume at the corresponding
amount, however. This underlines the special
role of liquidity policy operations as a means
of strengthening the smooth functioning of
the euro money market, which should not be
mistaken for more expansionary European
monetary policy.
Monetary developments in the euro area
Monetary development in the first quarter of
2008 was again characterised by strong
growth in money holdings in the euro area.
At a seasonally adjusted annualised growth
rate of 81/C252%, however, it was down some-
what on the two-digit growth rates of the
two previous quarters. Of all the componentsof M3, financial investments remunerated
close to market rates, in particular, have in-
creased considerably, while the highly liquid
monetary components of M1 went up only
moderately in the first quarter and holdings
of overnight deposits actually stagnated.
Private-sector loans granted by banks in the
euro area were again the main source of
money creation in the first quarter, although
they also grew somewhat less strongly than
in previous quarters. The increase in bank
holdings of securities from private issuers in
the euro area, which are included in the total
number of outstanding bank credits, was the
only element to reduce its growth rate, how-
ever. Seasonally adjusted and annualised
growth in securities holdings was just 61/C252%
in the first quarter compared with 391/C252% be-%
Basis
points
Difference between uncollateralised
and collateralised three-month money 1Three-month Euribor
EONIA
Minimum bid rate for main
refinancing operationsMoney market interest rates
in the euro area
1Three-month Euribor less three-month
Eurepo.
Deutsche Bundesbank100
75
50
25
05.00
4.75
4.50
4.25
4.00
3.75
3.50
ASOND J FM AM
2007 2008Liquidity policy
measures ...
... do not signal
a change in
monetary policy
Monetary
growth remains
strongPace of growth
in private-
sector loans
unchanged ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
28tween October and December of last year
when, among other things, one-off effects in
connection with the financing of the acquisi-
tion of a large European bank by an inter-
national banking syndicate had boosted
banks’ securities holdings in the euro area.
By contrast, private-sector loans rose by a
seasonally adjusted, annualised rate of 10%
in the reporting period, the same amount as
in the closing quarter of 2007.
Strong growth was again recorded in unse-
curitised loans to non-financial corporations.
Not least owing to vigorous loan growth in
Germany, the – in some cases – considerable
decline in loans to enterprises, especially in
those euro-area countries confronted with a
substantial deterioration in economic out-
look, did not impact the corresponding ag-
gregate for the entire euro area. But even if
Germany is excluded, there is currently no
evidence of a serious decline in loans to
enterprises in the euro area. Loans to other
financial intermediaries also increased signifi-
cantly, a development which was partly due
to risk-shielding operations in connection
with the turbulence on the international
financial markets. Conversely, loans to house-
holds continued to fall. Fewer housing loans,
in particular, were granted compared with
the corresponding periods in earlier years. As
well as shrinking demand for loans owing to
the changed economic situation and outlook
in some euro-area countries, the slower
growth in housing loans is also attributable to
the stricter credit standards applied by banks
to cover the elevated risks.Factors determining bank liquidity*
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
2008
Item16 Jan
to
12 Feb13 Feb
to
11 March12 March
to
15 April
I Provision (+) or
absorption (–) of
central bank
balances due to
changes in auto-
nomous factors
1 Banknotes in
circulation
(increase: –) + 16.5 – 1.5 – 8.5
2 General govern-
ment deposits
with the
Eurosystem
(increase: –) – 5.3 – 8.0 – 10.5
3 Net foreign
reserves 1 + 9.8 – 10.3 + 5.8
4 Other factors 1 – 5.7 + 14.3 + 3.6
Total + 15.3 – 5.5 – 9.6
II Monetary policy
operations of the
Eurosystem
1 Open market
operations
(a) Main
refinancing
operations – 81.9 + 7.5 + 0.2
(b) Longer-term
refinancing
operations – 0.3 – 0.0 + 10.1
(c) Other
operations + 67.8 + 0.9 + 1.9
2 Standing
facilities
(a) Marginal
lending
facility – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0
(b) Deposit
facility
(increase: –) + 0.7 + 0.1 – 0.3
Total – 13.8 + 8.4 + 11.9
III Change in credit in-
stitutions’ current
accounts (I + II) + 1.5 + 2.9 + 2.2
IV Change in the
minimum reserve
requirement
(increase: –) – 1.8 – 2.9 – 2.3
*For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundes-
bank’s contribution, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-
tical Section of this Monthly Report. — 1Including end-
of-quarter valuation adjustments with no impact on
liquidity.
Deutsche Bundesbank... but varies
from sector
to sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
29After increasing very sharply in the previous
quarter, monetary capital formation in theeuro area was relatively low in the firstquarter, thus boosting monetary growthwithin the context of the consolidated bal-ance sheet. On a seasonally adjusted and an-nualised basis, banks’ longer-term liabilitiesrose by just over 1
1/C252%, the lowest level since
mid-2002. Growth in longer-term time de-posits, in particular, slowed dramatically, pos-sibly in connection with the considerable de-cline in banks’ securitisation activity and theensuing slower increase in credit institutions’liabilities to securitisation vehicles. Further-more, as in the previous quarter, holdings oflonger-term bank debt securities outside theEuropean banking sector increased onlyslightly. The temporary dip in sales in somesub-segments as well as relatively highspreads on bank debt securities may have
played a role here. In the period under review,the weak growth in the monetary capital,which comprises all liabilities not recognisedas M3 in the consolidated balance sheetof the banking system, was also caused bylower allocations of capital and reserves.While this position increased at an annualisedrate of 28% in the fourth quarter of 2007,the growth rate was just 6% in the first quar-ter of 2008 – probably also owing to thefinancial market turbulence.
As in the fourth quarter of 2007, net out-
flows of funds from the non-banking sectorof the euro area to foreign countries had anegative effect on monetary growth in thefirst quarter of 2008, which was reflected inOpen market operations of the Eurosystem*
Value
dateType of
trans-
action 1Maturityin daysActual
allotment
in5billionDeviation
from the
benchmark
in5billionMarginal
rate/fixed
rate
%Allotment
ratio
%Weighted
rate
%Cover
ratio
2Numberof bidders
16.01.08 MRO 7 190.5 25.0 4.16 28.53 4.21 1.27 281
23.01.08 MRO 7 175.5 17.0 4.16 88.19 4.19 1.34 276
30.01.08 MRO 7 167.5 10.0 4.18 79.02 4.20 1.51 264
31.01.08 LTRO 92 50.0 – 4.21 38.94 4.33 1.96 151
06.02.08 MRO 7 161.5 4.0 4.17 45.03 4.20 1.39 226
12.02.08 FTO (–) 1 – 16.0 – 4.00 54.88 – 1.82 22
13.02.08 MRO 7 187.5 20.0 4.10 54.31 4.18 1.19 229
20.02.08 MRO 7 178.0 15.0 4.10 78.17 4.15 1.27 262
21.02.08 S-LTRO 91 60.0 – 4.15 29.71 4.26 1.84 105
27.02.08 MRO 7 183.0 10.0 4.10 15.83 4.15 1.27 260
28.02.08 LTRO 91 50.0 – 4.16 39.21 4.23 2.19 165
05.03.08 MRO 7 176.5 4.0 4.11 96.39 4.14 1.36 264
11.03.08 FTO (+) 1 9.0 – 4.13 15.00 4.14 5.01 32
12.03.08 MRO 7 209.5 25.0 4.12 24.55 4.16 1.24 298
13.03.08 S-LTRO 91 60.0 – 4.25 22.13 4.40 2.21 139
19.03.08 MRO 7 202.0 25.0 4.16 19.38 4.20 1.46 336
20.03.08 FTO (+) 5 15.0 – 4.13 11.96 4.20 4.39 44
26.03.08 MRO 7 216.0 50.0 4.23 19.11 4.28 1.40 301
27.03.08 LTRO 91 50.0 – 4.44 77.88 4.53 2.63 190
31.03.08 FTO (+) 1 15.0 – 4.06 73.65 4.13 2.05 25
02.04.08 MRO 7 150.0 35.0 4.21 2.65 4.25 1.89 306
03.04.08 S-LTRO 189 25.0 – 4.55 27.77 4.61 4.12 177
09.04.08 MRO 7 130.0 5.0 4.23 53.72 4.24 1.90 295
15.04.08 FTO (–) 1 – 14.9 – 4.00 100.00 – 1.00 7
*For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations
from 14 November 2007 to 15 January 2008, see Deutsche
Bundesbank, Monthly Report, February 2008, p 25. —
1MRO: main refinancing operation, LTRO: longer-term
refinancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-term refinancing operation, FTO: fine-tuning operation
(+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing
operation). — 2Ratio of total bids to the allotment
amount.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Little growth
in longer-term
investment at
banks
Another
significant
decline in
banks’ net
external asset
position

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
30statistics as a drop in the net external asset
position of euro-area banks.
Although monetary dynamics in the euro
area slowed somewhat between January and
March, the price risks associated with monet-
ary development remain high. Longer-term
inflation forecasts based on monetary indica-
tors remain well above the limit defined
by the Governing Council as conducive to
price stability. Despite the fact that monetary
growth may have received renewed momen-
tum from the continued financial market tur-
bulence, and therefore overstated the longer-
term monetary growth trend relevant to sta-
bility policy, monetary growth, which remains
strong and is driven mainly by the large vol-
ume of lending to non-financial enterprises,
continues to give cause for concern.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
After continued strong growth in recent quar-
ters, seasonally adjusted, annualised growth
in bank deposits in Germany decreased from
9% in the fourth quarter of 2007 to 4% in
the first quarter of 2008. This decline is attrib-
utable to short-term bank deposits, which
halved from just under 13% in the previous
quarter to 61/C252% in the period under review.
Highly liquid overnight deposits actually stag-
nated after decreasing slightly in the fourth
quarter of 2007. Moreover, short-term sav-
ings deposits were cut again. By contrast,
short-term time deposits (with an agreed
maturity of up to two years) remunerated at
market rates grew exceptionally strongly atSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
€b n%
+ 1,200
+ 1,000
+    800
+    600
+    400
+    200
0
−    200
−    400
−    600
−    800of which
Net external asset position 1, 3
Net external asset
position
External
assets
External
liabilities4
1999 2008... counterparts
Credit to the
private sector 1Net external
asset position1
Monetary capital 1, 2 Remaining balance
sheet items 1, 2
M3Growth rate of M3 and
the contributions to growth in ...
... components of the money stock
M1 1M2 − M1 1
M3 − M2 1M3Components and counterparts
of the money stock
in the euro area
1 Calculated from the changes cumulated
over 12 months. — 2Taken in isolation, an
increase curbs M3 growth. — 3Not sea-
sonally adjusted. — 4Increase: −.
Deutsche Bundesbank24+
20+
16+
12+
8+
4+
0
4−
8−
12−16+
12+
8+
4+
0
4−
00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Monetary
analysis
continues to
show inflation
risks
Less demand
for short-term
bank deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
31an annualised rate of just over 30%, even if
this pace of growth was much less than inthe previous quarters.
The considerable reduction in monetary cap-
ital formation in the euro area, which tendedto stimulate monetary development, is alsoreflected in the development of longer-termbank deposits in Germany, which actually fellin the first quarter of 2008. As with short-term savings deposits, this decline affectedlonger-term savings deposits (with an agreedperiod of notice of over three months), whichwere topped up considerably in the previousyear. By contrast, longer-term time deposits(with an agreed maturity of over two years)increased slightly. While insurance com-panies, which are typically the largest investorgroup in this segment, invested less in thesedeposits than is usual in the first quarter,other financial intermediaries invested morecapital in deposits with longer maturities atdomestic banks.
Although, in the first quarter of 2008, the up-
turn in lending by German banks to domesticcustomers did not continue at the remarkablepace of the last quarter of 2007, newly issuedprivate-sector loans again increased at a sea-sonally adjusted, annualised rate of 3% in theperiod under review after years of near stag-nation. Producing enterprises, in particular,took out new loans from German banks. Thisis another indication of robust investment ac-tivity in Germany. Domestic households, bycontrast, reduced their net debt arising fromhousing and other loans. Loans to generalgovernment also decreased significantly, as inthe previous quarter. They fell at a seasonallyadjusted, annualised rate of just over 8%.
Bank holdings of public securities, on theother hand, rose slightly. German banks alsopurchased securities from private issuers forthe first time in a year.
Contrary to fears, the above-mentioned data
from banking statistics do not indicate majorconstraints in credit availability in the privatesector as a result of the tensions on the inter-national money and credit markets. This isalso confirmed by the German results of theBank Lending Survey.
1The banks surveyed
again applied slightly stricter standards for is-Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2008 2007
ItemJan to
MarJan to
Mar
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 0.4 + 0.3
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years + 14.6 + 14.3of over 2 years + 3.2 + 2.7
Redeemable at agreed notice
of up to 3 months – 8.5 – 13.3of over 3 months – 3.1 + 5.3
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised + 30.9 + 20.4Securitised + 11.2 + 4.6
to domestic government
Unsecuritised – 9.8 – 11.0Securitised + 6.7 + 7.1
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report. — 1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank
1Starting with the April round of surveys, the size of the
German sample of the Bank Lending Survey for the euro
area was increased from 17 to 30 institutions. This bigger
sample makes the information gathered more represen-
tative, not least because it better reflects developments
in the German banking industry in recent years.Reduction in
longer-term
bank deposits
Robust growth
in private-
sector loans
German banks
offer different
lending policies
to borrowers

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
32suing loans to enterprises in the first quarter
of 2008 and, on balance, increased their mar-
gins for both average and riskier loans to en-
terprises. Loans to large firms were affected
more in both cases. However, the adjust-
ments appear to have been much less restrict-
ive than they were in the euro area overall.
Households were less affected by the stricter
lending conditions as a whole. The banks sur-
veyed claim to have increased only their mar-
gins for riskier consumer and housing credit,
while credit standards for these loans were
generally relaxed further and the margins for
average loans were narrowed.
As in the previous quarter, the scope of the
survey was extended to include a number of
additional questions on the isolated effect of
financial market turbulence on lending policy.In conjunction with the standard questions,
the information provided by survey partici-
pants continues to indicate that tension on
the financial markets has primarily affected
commercial banking business and acquisition
financing for large enterprises, in particular,
while private customers have been less affect-
ed. The same effects are likely to prevail in
future. These results are in line with the vari-
ous surveys of enterprises conducted in the
spring of this year and according to which
small and medium-sized enterprises, in par-
ticular, did not complain of a noticeable
deterioration in financial conditions.
Reporting institutions reduced the price of
their loans – with the exception of consumer
credit – in the first quarter of 2008, thereby
following the financial market trend. At the
end of the period under review, institutions
were therefore demanding interest of be-
tween 5.4% and 6.2% for short-term loans
to enterprises and between 5.1% and 5.4%
for long-term loans to enterprises, depending
on the size of the loan. The conditions for pri-
vate housing loans with an interest rate fix-
ation period of over ten years were 4.9% at
the end of the first quarter, compared with
5.0% at the end of 2007. On the banks’
liability side, interest rates also fell in the first
quarter with the exception of overnight
deposits, which were remunerated at a slight-
ly higher rate compared to the preceding
quarter, thus partially mirroring the develop-
ment of overnight conditions on the money
market. Longer-term time deposits, in par-
ticular, were remunerated at tangibly less in
the first quarter. With regard to the future
development of banks’ interest rates, how-Seasonally adjusted
€b n
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
20082,370
2,340
2,310
2,280
2,250
2,220Log scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank3
2
1
0
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Effects of
financial
market
turbulence on
banks’ lending
policyBank interest
rates mainly
down in first
quarter of 2008

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
33Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2  With an initial rate fixation of over 1 year and up
to 5 years. — 3 With an initial rate fixation of over 5 years and up to 10 years. — 4 According to Bank Lending
Survey; percentage difference between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and
“tightened somewhat” and the numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased
considerably”. — 5 Expectations for 2008 Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank% pa
%
%Loans to non-financial corporations
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 08Changes in loan margins4
Loans to enterprises
Average loansRiskier loansChanges in credit standards4
Loans to enterprises
5Bank interest rates (new business) 1
Loans to enterprises ...
... up to €1 million with an initial rate
    fixation of up to 1 year
... over €1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of over 5 years
... over €1 million
     with an initial rate
     fixation of up to 1 year
120+
90+
60+
30+
0
30−
60−
90−60+
30+
0
30−
60−6.5
6.0
5.5
5.04.54.03.5
3.0% pa
%%Loans to households
Consumer credit
Average loansRiskier loans
02 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008Housing loans
Average loansRiskier loansConsumer credit
5Housing loans
5Consumer credit2
Housing loans3
60+
30+
0
30−
60−60+
30+
0
30−
60−30+
0
30−30+
0
30−7.0
6.5
6.0
5.55.04.54.0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
34Deutsche Bundesbank“Traces” of the financial market turbulence in the financial accounts
The persistent turbulence in the global financial markets
since August of last year has, among other things, led to
tensions in the money market, caused share prices to fall
and impacted adversely on bank balance sheets. Data on
the aggregate financial flows for 2007 are now also avail-
able. These show that the individual sectors made sizeable
shifts in their portfolios, especially in the second half of the
year. Overall, the availability of funds is unlikely to have
been affected by this, however.
Borrowing
According to the financial accounts, financial investment
and borrowing moved in opposite directions last year.
There was a sharp rise in financial investment by the non-
financial sectors, while their demand for financing showed
a marked fall. The latter amounted to just under 5100 bil-
lion, compared with more than 5140 billion in 2006. Even
though the year-on-year decline in the demand for finan-
cing was more pronounced in the second half of 2007 than
in the first six months, this development was not due to
supply-side factors in the wake of the financial market tur-
moil. In fact, a sectoral analysis shows that this was primar-
ily attributable to the consolidation measures of general
government. Government borrowing in 2007 amounted to
just59 billion in net terms, which was around 540 billion
less than in 2006.
Households, too, played their part in the decline in the
demand for funds; at 518 billion in 2007, they reduced
their debt by around 510 billion more than in 2006. Net
repayments, which were spread throughout the year, were
made not only on loans for consumption and commercial
purposes – as had been the case in 2006 – but also, and for
the first time, on loans for house purchase. This develop-
ment is ultimately a reflection of the fact that house-
holds’ propensity to consume and invest had been sub-
dued for a long time and is therefore unlikely to be due to
the financial market turbulence. In actual fact, the banks
made it easier to gain access to new loans. According to
the Bank Lending Survey, credit standards for householdswere, on the whole, eased somewhat in the second half of
2007.
Unlike in the case of government and households, non-
financial enterprises’ external financing requirements rose
in 2007 – to just under 5110 billion, compared with roughly
5100 billion in the previous year. Demand for bank loans
was particularly buoyant. Loans amounting to 555 billion
on balance were taken up from domestic and foreign
banks, which was about twice as much as in 2006. Borrow-
ing took place predominantly in the second half of 2007.
In line with the quite dynamic growth in investment in ma-
chinery and equipment, longer-term loans, too, were in
significantly heavier demand.
In contrast to earlier years, other financial credits, which
are granted mainly by foreign firms to group affiliates,
played no more than a subordinate role in 2007, especially
in the second half of the year. This was probably due to the
fact that borrowing through bond issues by foreign finan-
cing subsidiaries, which often underlies such intra-group
and tax-motivated loans, has become more difficult as a re-
sult of the problems in the financial markets. No such de-
velopment was to be noted in the domestic capital market,
however. By selling debt securities and equity, the produ-
cing enterprises procured funds amounting to 540 billion
in 2007, which was roughly as much as in 2006. Further-
more, there were no significant differences in the inflow
of funds between the first and second half of the year.
Financial investment
While the non-financial sectors’ financial investment fell
away markedly following the slump in share prices in 2000,
the financial market turbulence of 2007 scarcely affected
its scale. Nevertheless, as was the case in 2000, there were
considerable structural changes in the investment behav-
iour of individual sectors. The sharp increase in financial in-
vestment by the non-financial sectors in 2007 was due
mainly to the activities of producing enterprises, which
built up their new financial assets by just under 560 billion
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, The economic situation of small and
medium-sized enterprises in Germany since 1997, Monthly Report,
December 2006, pp 35-66.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
35to5157 billion. These consisted essentially of cross-border
investment and – especially in the second half of the year –
bank deposits. By contrast, debt securities were sold on aconsiderable scale in net terms. While the sale of moneymarket paper was probably also prompted by the uncer-
tainty in the wake of the financial market turbulence, the
scaling-back of bond market investment has to be seenmore in connection with the financing of external corpor-ate growth.
Unlike the producing enterprises, households reduced
their financial investment slightly to 5115 billion in 2007.
Nevertheless, at 586 billion, twice as much flowed into
bank deposits than had done in 2006. This very large in-
flow, which was especially pronounced in the second halfof last year, concerned mainly short-term time deposits;given their remuneration at market rates, this form of sav-
ing was evidently quite attractive, particularly towards the
end of 2007 when money market rates for deposits heldbeyond the end of the year were picking up markedly.Households reduced their portfolio investment in the form
of shares and bonds on a broad front, mainly in the second
half of 2007. This development is also likely to haveaffected the certificates issued by banks. These are oftensimilar to derivatives and, for statistical purposes, are
recorded under debt securities. Depending on their charac-
teristics, they have become less attractive as a result of theturbulence in the financial markets. Investment fundshares were purchased on a sizeable scale in net terms in
the first six months of last year, at a figure of more than
520 billion. In the second half of the year, however, house-
holds invested only 54 billion in them on balance. From the
third quarter, it was mainly shares of domestic mutual
funds that were sold. This particularly affected money mar-
ket funds, which, in turn, also invested some resources inpaper whose rating has now been downgraded owing tothe problems in the financial markets.
Institutional financial investors, too, increased their bank
deposits comparatively strongly in 2007. Insurers and pen-sion funds topped up their bank deposits by almost 540 bil-lion, for example. As usual, they showed a preference for
longer-term time deposits. Mutual fund shares, which –
after bank deposits – are the second-largest item in theportfolio of the insurance sector, were acquired only on arelatively minor scale ( 515 billion). Insurers reduced their
net equity investments by 58 billion. Other financial insti-
tutions, which include mainly the investment funds, alsotopped up their liquidity buffer in the form of bank de-posits by 534 billion in 2007, which was more than usual.
While sight deposits were mainly preferred in the first half
of the year, there was a switch to short-term time depositscarrying a higher rate of interest towards the end of theyear. Financial institutions sold shares on a considerable
scale ( 541 billion). By contrast, as in 2006, they acquired
debt securities and mutual fund shares worth around 530
billion, the majority of which were bought in the first sixmonths of 2007.
Summary
Ultimately, the financial accounts reflect extensive port-
folio shifts within the various sectors. Borrowing does not
seem to be impaired however. This is shown, in particular,by the sharp rise in bank loans to producing enterprises inthe last few months of 2007. To that extent, there were no
identifiable retarding effects on the level of procurement
of machinery and equipment. This is, not least, a reflectionof the sound condition of German enterprises, which haveclearly improved their balance sheet structures and possess
a large amount of internal financial resources. This applies
also, and especially, to small and medium-sized enter-prises.
1Moreover, there are other positive structural fac-
tors which have strengthened the resilience of the German
economy. For example, the household debt ratio has also
shown a marked fall in the past few years, there are noexaggerations in house prices, and a good deal of progresshas been made in making the labour market more flexible.
All this is likely to have played a part in the economic situ-
ation proving to be comparatively robust against the back-ground of the tensions in the money and capital markets.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
36ever, the recent tension on the European
money market and interest rate hikes on thecapital market may have exerted some up-
ward pressure on interest rates.Loans 1to enterprises
by firm size
small and medium-sized enterprises
large enterprises
by purpose
fixed investments
inventories and working capital
mergers/acquisitions and
corporate restructuring
Loans to households
housing loans
consumer credit and other lending2
2007 Q4
2008 Q12008 Q2 expected
significant ... minor ... no ... minor ... significant ...
... contribution to easing ... contribution to tighteningEffects of financial market turbulence on credit standards *
*Selected results of the quarterly survey on German banks’ lending business. Full survey results can be
viewed at www.bundesbank.de/volkswirtschaft/vo_veroeffentlichungen.php. — 1Including credit lines. —
2- = mean;             = the range shown includes one standard deviation. 
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
37Financial marketsFinancial market trends
The international financial markets again ex-
perienced heavy turmoil at the beginning of
the first quarter of 2008, although this sub-
sided somewhat towards the end of the
quarter and in subsequent weeks. Concerns
about the financial soundness of several fi-
nancial institutions, particularly in the USA,
and about the extent of the required write-
downs as well as worries about the global
economy initially resulted in substantial stock
market losses worldwide; at the same time,
the spreads on some risky bonds soared to
new record highs. A significant increase in
risk aversion meant that investors – as in the
previous quarter – carried out numerous port-
folio changes in favour of safe securities, thus
putting government bond yields under con-
siderable pressure. However, after the Federal
Reserve had facilitated access to liquidity in
mid-March and again lowered its key interest
rate, the markets experienced a counter-
movement, which was also partly based on
market players’ hope that any US recession
would be a mild one. Against this backdrop,
the euro put in a comparatively strong per-
formance on the foreign-exchange markets;
it briefly attained new highs against import-
ant currencies, but relinquished some of its
gains towards the end of the reporting
period.
Exchange rates
Despite the two Fed rate cuts totalling
125 basis points in January, the euro initially
remained largely range-bound against theFinancial
market setting
Euro exchange
rate develop-
ment against
the US dollar ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
38US dollar in a band around US$1.47 in the
first two months of 2008. Concerns that the
imminent economic slowdown in the USA
could spill over to the euro area may have
played a role. However, as inflation risks in
the euro area became increasingly apparent,
leading many market players to believe that
an ECB rate cut was less likely, and growth
forecasts for the US economy were simultan-
eously lowered in response to weak economicdata, the euro moved into an upward trend
against the US dollar at the end of February.
In mid-April, the single currency reached a
new historic high at just under US$1.60 after
Eurostat had revised the euro-area inflation
rate for March upwards and general interest-
rate expectations had risen. However, this
was followed by slight losses in the euro-
dollar exchange rate after publication of a
weaker-than-expected Ifo business climate
index; given historically relatively high short-
term exchange-rate volatility, the euro was
trading at around US$1.55 when this report
went to press, still 5% higher than at the
beginning of the year.
Ultimately, the euro was virtually unchanged
against the yen in the first few months of the
year – despite some strong exchange-rate
fluctuations. The yen’s role as financing cur-
rency for carry trades is frequently cited as
the reason for the, by historical standards,
high euro-yen volatility. These transactions
mean that changes in risk perception and tol-
erance on the international stock and bond
markets – triggered for example by the prob-
lems on the US mortgage market and their
knock-on effects in other areas – can have an
immediate impact on demand for the Japan-
ese currency. The positive correlation be-
tween stock market developments in the
euro area and the euro-yen exchange rate
that has been observed for some time is an
indication that this is indeed the case. In add-
ition, the Bank of Japan’s Tankan report at the
beginning of April indicated that the eco-
nomic outlook was clouding over, a develop-
ment which could have contributed to the
view that interest rates in Japan would re-Log scale
US$
££¥
¥
1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Nominal effective exchange rate 1
1999 Q1 = 100... pound sterling... yenagainst the ...
... US dollar
*Monthly averages; from 2008, daily
data. — 1As calculated by the ECB against
the currencies of 22 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankExchange rate of the euro *
0.70
0.65
0.60120
110
100
931.60
1.50
1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.90
0.85
2008JF M A M110
100
90
801200.70
0.650.80
0.75
0.70140
130
120150160170
... the yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
39main low, the basis for carry trades. When
this report was concluded, the euro was onlyslightly below its level at the beginning of theyear, at just under ¥163.
A further cooling of the housing market as
well as continued problems on the UK creditmarkets hurt the pound sterling in the firstquarter of 2008. However, the ongoing infla-tion risks prevented the Bank of England fromcarrying out more significant rate cuts thanthose made in February and April. Againstthis backdrop, the euro-pound exchange rateinitially range traded before moving into anupward trend at the beginning of March.More negative news about the UK economysent the euro up to an historic high of morethan £0.80 in mid-April, some 10% higherthan at the start of monetary union. Towardsthe end of the reporting period, the euro washardly any lower at just under £0.80. Thisequates to a gain of almost 9% comparedwith its level at the beginning of the year.
The euro’s performance against some other
major currencies has been very heteroge-neous in the year to date. For example, thesingle currency posted considerable gainsagainst the Korean won (17
1/C252%) and the
Canadian dollar (7%) but slipped furtheragainst the Czech krona (-5%) and the Polishzloty (-5
1/C252%). On average, however, the euro
appreciated against the 22 major currenciescontained in the exchange rate index andreached a new historic high in mid-April2008. As this article went to press, the effect-ive exchange rate was 3% above its level atthe beginning of the year and around 12%higher than at the start of monetary union. Inreal terms, ie taking account of the inflation
differentials between the euro area and itsmajor trading partners, the euro’s effectiveexchange rate also rose slightly, a fact whichpoints to losses in price competitiveness.However, the comparatively moderate priceand cost developments seen in Germany foryears mean the country’s price competitive-ness can currently still be regarded as favour-able.
12 January 2008 to 15 May 2008
%Won (Republic
of Korea)
Pound sterling
Canadian dollar
US dollar
EER-22 1
Renminbi yuan
(China)
Yen
Swedish krona
Swiss franc
Forint (Hungary)
Czech kronaZloty (Poland)Appreciation / depreciation
of the euro against
selected currencies
1 Euro’s nominal effective exchange rate
against the currencies of 22 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank16+12+8+4+0 4−8−12−
1The accession of Malta and Cyprus to the euro area
meant the trade weights for the indicators of the German
economy’s price competitiveness were adjusted. In add-
ition, Greece has been included in the narrow group of
countries since it introduced the euro in 2001 and Slo-
venia since 2007. The current weightings of important
trade partners’ currencies are listed in the table on
page 40.... and the
pound sterling
Effective euro
exchange rate

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
40Weighting scheme of the indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
following the introduction of the euro in Malta und Cyprus*
In thousandths
Price competitiveness of the German economy against a ...
... narrow group of countries... medium-sized
group of countries... broad group of
countries
18 trading partners19 trading
partners20 trading
partners22 trading
partners 36 trading partners 56 trading partners
Country/group of
countriesup to
1998 11999 to
2001 22001 to
2006 2,3 2007 2,4from
2008 2,5up to
1998 1from
1999 2up to
1998 1from
1999 2
Narrow group of coun-
tries 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 859.1 836.1 772.8 756.8
Belgium 71.3 62.9 62.6 62.2 62.1 60.4 51.9 54.3 47.0
Finland 14.0 14.7 14.7 14.6 14.6 11.9 12.2 10.7 11.0
France 150.5 142.2 141.4 140.5 140.3 127.5 117.3 114.7 106.2
Greece . . 5.8 5.7 5.7 5.1 4.8 4.6 4.3
Ireland 13.0 24.5 24.3 24.2 24.1 11.0 20.2 9.9 18.3
Italy 113.7 104.0 103.4 102.7 102.6 96.3 85.8 86.6 77.7
Luxembourg 4.7 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.2 4.0 3.5 3.6 3.2
Malta . . . . 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5
Netherlands 84.1 85.0 84.5 84.0 83.9 71.2 70.2 64.1 63.5
Austria 57.1 55.7 55.4 55.1 55.0 48.4 46.0 43.6 41.7
Portugal 13.9 13.6 13.5 13.4 13.4 11.8 11.2 10.6 10.2
Slovenia . . . 6.2 6.2 5.7 5.2 5.1 4.7
Spain 46.2 48.3 48.0 47.7 47.7 39.1 39.9 35.2 36.1
Cyprus . . . . 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3
Denmark 20.1 18.3 18.1 18.0 18.0 17.1 15.1 15.4 13.6
Sweden 29.6 26.8 26.7 26.5 26.5 25.0 22.1 22.5 20.0
United Kingdom 107.8 108.0 107.3 106.7 106.6 91.4 89.1 82.2 80.7
Norway 9.3 7.9 7.9 7.9 7.9 7.9 6.6 7.1 5.9
Switzerland 54.5 48.8 48.5 48.2 48.1 46.2 40.2 41.5 36.4
Japan 79.0 71.8 71.4 70.9 70.9 66.9 59.2 60.2 53.6
Canada 10.7 12.6 12.5 12.4 12.4 9.1 10.4 8.2 9.4
USA 120.5 150.6 149.8 148.9 148.7 102.1 124.3 91.9 112.5
Additional countries be-
longing to the medium-
sized group of countries . .... 140.9 163.9 126.8 148.4
Bulgaria . .... 1 . 4 1 . 5 1 . 3 1 . 3
Estonia . .... 0 . 6 0 . 8 0 . 5 0 . 7
Latvia . .... 0 . 6 0 . 8 0 . 5 0 . 7
Lithuania . .... 1 . 1 1 . 3 1 . 0 1 . 1
Poland . .... 20.4 24.6 18.4 22.3
Romania . .... 4 . 3 4 . 8 3 . 9 4 . 4
Slovakia . .... 6 . 2 7 . 6 5 . 6 6 . 9
Czech Republic . .... 18.9 23.9 17.0 21.7
Hungary . .... 12.3 19.2 11.0 17.4
China . .... 28.5 37.6 25.6 34.1
Hong Kong, SAR . .... 13.5 12.1 12.1 11.0
Republic of Korea . .... 18.0 15.9 16.2 14.4
Singapore . .... 10.5 9.8 9.5 8.8
Australia . .... 4 . 6 4 . 0 4 . 2 3 . 6
Additional countries
belonging to the broad
group of countries . . . . . . . 100.4 94.8
Iceland . . . . . . . 0.3 0.4
Israel . . . . . . . 4.5 4.9
Croatia . . . . . . . 2.5 1.9
Russia . . . . . . . 12.0 10.1
Turkey . . . . . . . 13.2 12.1
Algeria . . . . . . . 0.4 0.4
Morocco . . . . . . . 1.4 1.3
South Africa . . . . . . . 5.8 5.8
Argentina . . . . . . . 1.9 1.6
Brazil . . . . . . . 8.3 6.9
Chile . . . . . . . 1.3 1.2
Mexico . . . . . . . 4.7 7.7
Venezuela . . . . . . . 0.8 0.6
India . . . . . . . 7.3 6.0
Indonesia . . . . . . . 5.3 3.9
Malaysia . . . . . . . 7.3 6.8
Philippines . . . . . . . 2.6 3.4
Taiwan . . . . . . . 13.5 13.8
Thailand . . . . . . . 6.6 5.4
New Zealand . . . . . . . 0.7 0.6
Total 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0
*For a list of the weights used previously, see Deutsche Bundes-
bank, Monthly Report, May 2007, p 34. — 1Base 1995 to 1997. —2Base 1999 to 2001. — 3Euro introduced in Greece. — 4Euro
introduced in Slovenia. — 5Euro introduced in Malta and Cyprus.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
41Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
In the first quarter of 2008, the securities
markets again felt the effects of the turmoil
spreading from the credit markets. The need
for large write-downs in connection with
structured products put financial institutions
under severe pressure and meant rescue
measures had to be taken in individual cases.
In addition, unfavourable economic data, es-
pecially in the USA, and rising commodity
prices worldwide resulted in stock market
prices plummeting. The spreading uncer-
tainty – as indicated, for instance, by the
sharp increase in volatility indices – meant in-
vestors showed a preference for government
bonds, which offer security and liquidity, par-
ticularly in turbulent times. As a result, yields
for such paper dropped significantly at times
during the reporting period, starting in the
USA. Within the euro area, yields for ten-year
bonds temporarily fell by more than 50 basis
points, while yields on very liquid debt secur-
ities such as government bonds slipped by as
much as 70 basis points. Euro-area yields did
not bottom out, at just under 4%, until mid-
March when the Federal Reserve again
lowered key interest rates sharply and simul-
taneously gave primary dealers access to its
discount window. The “flight to quality” sub-
sequently eased, and a countermovement set
in. Capital market rates for European govern-
ment bonds are currently somewhat higher
than 41/C254% and therefore only slightly below
their end-of-2007 level. Since mid-March,
there have been increases in both inflation ex-
pectations – based on the difference between
nominal and real interest rates – and the realcomponent, reflecting the again slightly more
optimistic economic outlook for the euro
area.
As US government bond yields fell even more
sharply than their euro-area counterparts in
the first quarter, the interest-rate advantage
of euro-area bonds temporarily widened to
more than 70 basis points. Fears that the
financial market turmoil could have a signifi-
cant impact on the real economy had a par-
ticularly negative impact. However, the pro-
spect that the crisis would be contained and
the unexpectedly strong GDP data published
at the end of April, which raised hopes that a
potential US recession would be mild, if it oc-
curred at all, saw long-term interest rates pick
up again significantly. As this report went to
press, interest rates on ten-year US govern-Weekly averages
%
Per-
centage
pointsSpread of US bond yields
over the German bond market
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008Yield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
GermanyUSABond yields in Germany
and the USA
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0Capital market
rates fall in
euro area ...
... and even
more so in
dollar area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
42Deutsche BundesbankPrice competitiveness and economic growth – a non-linear relationship?
Although Germany’s price competitiveness is now less
important for determining growth in German exports
than external demand, it still exerts a significant influ-
ence.1In the light of the continuing strength of the
euro, the question arises as to what impact this could
have on the German economy. While German export-
ers have generally coped well with the appreciation
of the euro since 2001, the view is increasingly being
expressed in public debate that the euro-dollar ex-
change rate has now reached a level at which a fur-
ther strengthening of the single currency will signifi-
cantly harm exports and ultimately economic develop-
ment in Germany. This opinion is based on the implicit
assumption that there is a non-linear relationship
between the real exchange rate, on the one hand,
and export performance or economic growth, on the
other.
This question will now be examined using economet-
ric methods which model the non-linearity of ex-
change rate effects by measuring the absolute devi-
ation of price competitiveness from its long-term
average. It has to be remembered when interpreting
the results that the weight of the US dollar in this in-
dicator for Germany is comparatively low at about
15% as a considerable proportion of German foreign
trade is conducted with other euro-area countries.
The relationship between real economic growth in
Germany ( yt) and the relative change in price competi-
tiveness2(wt) can naturally be obscured by other fac-
tors. The following estimation is therefore designed
to take account of the impact of the real long-term
interest rate3(rt) and the effects of external demand4(dt). Furthermore, rigidities in economic activity could
lead to a significant contribution to the lagged real
economic growth. In order to identify any non-linear
effects of changes in price competitiveness on real
economic growth (in addition to the linear effects of
the aforementioned macroeconomic variables), equa-
tion (1) was estimated using a STAR model5based on
quarterly data for the years 1993 to 2006:
(1)yt¼/C120þ/C121yt/C01þ/C122rt/C04þ/C14/C1!t/C1|ﬄ ﬄ{zﬄ ﬄ}wt/C0lagþ/C124dtþ/C15t,
/C123t
where the changing influence of the exchange rate is
represented by the time-varying factor
(2)!t¼2
1þexpð/C13/C1jdev t/C0lagjÞ
and fulfils a logistical function. Furthermore, jdev t/C0lagj
represents the absolute deviation of price competi-
tiveness from its long-term average.6The long-term
average is interpreted as being a “neutral” level of
price competitiveness.7The long-term average is
derived on the basis of data collated between 1975
and 2006. In “equilibrium”, the time-varying factor !t
has the value 1, and the effect of price competitive-
ness on real economic growth is denoted by the con-
stant /C14. As the discrepancy increases, the marginal
effect may double in extreme cases (if yis negative) or
disappear completely (if yis positive).
The (quasi) maximum-likelihood estimation of equa-
tions (1) and (2) produces the coefficients given in the
adjacent table. In addition, tests for autocorrelation
of the residuals and squared residuals as well as for re-
1See the empirical studies by J Clostermann, The impact of the ex-
change rate on Germany’s balance of trade, Economic Research
Group of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Discussion Paper, No 7/1996, and
K Stahn, Has the export pricing behaviour of German enterprises
changed? Empirical evidence from German sectoral export prices,
Deutsche Bundesbank Research Centre, Discussion Paper, Series 1,
No 37/2006. — 2Price competitiveness is defined as the nominal ex-
ternal value for Germany against 19 industrial countries, adjusted totake account of the price developments in total sales in Germany and
the other 19 countries. A rise in the index implies a deterioration in
Germany’s price competitiveness. — 3Calculated on the basis of the
nominal rate of interest on ten-year government bonds and inflation
expectations according to the Consensus Forecast. — 4Real external
demand was calculated as the weighted geometric mean of the
deflated import demand of Germany’s major trading partners. This
was done on the basis of the same group of countries and the same

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
43maining non-linearities show that the model is suffi-
ciently specified.
The first point to emerge from the estimation results
is that all variables with the exception of the lagged
real economic growth have a significant impact on
real economic growth and that the estimated coeffi-cients have the expected sign. This means that theGerman economy benefits from improved external
developments and a real effective depreciation of the
euro. An increase in the real long-term interest rate,by contrast, impedes economic growth even if thistakes about a year to become apparent.
The main question in this section concerns potential
non-linear links with economic growth and can be an-swered using the null hypothesis of a constant coeffi-
cient /C12
3ð/C13¼0Þ. As the results in the table show, this
can be rejected at a significance level of 1%. The plussign of the coefficient /C13implies that !
tdeclines as the
deviation of price competitiveness from its long-term
average increases and converges on zero. Accordingly,
the responsiveness of real economic growth tochanges in price competitiveness declines in Germanyas the deviation increases. This result is inconsistent
with the hypothesis quoted at the beginning, namely
that a prolonged appreciation of the euro wouldhave a disproportionately strong retarding effect onmacroeconomic momentum. Evidently, the internal
stability of the real economy is underestimated by this
pessimistic view.
One explanation for the declining impact of price
competitiveness observed here could be that in theevent of an appreciation of the euro the exports of
enterprises facing strong international competition
are hit first. High price elasticity of foreign demand,which applies primarily to low-tech products, impliesthat the mark-up in the prices set in foreign currency
is comparatively small and will decline relatively
quickly in the event of a rising exchange rate. The pos-sibility of applying a pricing-to-market strategy inthese economic sectors is therefore very limited. If ap-
preciation pressures continue, the enterprises left on
the world market will increasingly have a strong mar-ket position and a correspondingly low price elasticityof demand. Exchange rate developments therefore
also become less important as a macroeconomic de-
terminant, a fact that is reflected in the non-linear re-lationship between economic growth and price com-petitiveness described above. This argument is not im-
plausible given German enterprises’ favourable pos-
ition in the capital goods industry.
8
trade weights as in the calculation of the index for price competi-
tiveness. — 5In a smooth transition autoregressive (STAR) model the
relationship between two variables depends on a transition function.The latter is selected to ensure a “smooth” transition between thepossible extremes of the STAR coefficients /C12
3t. See Granger and
Ter/C228svirta (1993), Modeling Nonlinear Economic Relationships, Ox-ford University Press, Oxford. — 6Specification tests indicate that theabsolute deviation of the real exchange rate from its long-term aver-
age does have a non-linear influence with a lag of 1 along a logisticalfunction. See Ter/C228svirta (1994), Specification, Estimation, and Evalu-ation of Smooth Transition Autoregressive Models, Journal of theAmerican Statistical Association, Vol 89, pp 208-218. — 7See
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report of June 2004. — 8See K Stahn
(2006), op cit.A non-linear model of economic growth
Item yt
/C1200.0087
(3.29)***
/C121– 0.0209
(– 0.18)
/C122– 0.0019
(– 2.31)**
/C14t(lag = 2 )– 0.2761
(– 4.49)***
/C1328.371
(4.43)***
/C1240.0804
(2.53)**
Pseudo t-values in brackets. * (**) [***] denote significance at the
10% (5%) [1%] level.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
44ment bonds were just under 4% and there-
fore just 10 basis points lower than at the
beginning of the year.
Overall, financing conditions for European
corporates on the bond markets have tended
to deteriorate further in the year to date. Des-
pite the drop in government bond rates, the
majority of corporate bond yields increased in
the reporting period. Thus, spreads on cor-
porate bonds in the lowest investment grade
category, BBB, rose 55 basis points against
euro-area government bonds to trade at
250 basis points as this report went to press.
At times, spreads were even more than
300 basis points. Premiums on the market for
credit risk transfer, an indication of investors’
assessment of the credit default risk, also
point to a slight easing of tensions. Followingthe abrupt repricing of risk at the beginning
of the year, market players are again paying
slightly less for insurance against credit
defaults.
In the first quarter of 2008, only some sec-
tions of the German bond market suffered
lower issuance as a result of the heightened
uncertainty and increased risk aversion among
market players. Overall, gross sales of domes-
tic bonds reached a new record high of 3391
billion (previous quarter 33381/C252billion). How-
ever, after deducting redemptions, which
were also higher, and accounting for changes
in issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, Ger-
man issuers’ net inflows were small, at 312
billion. Sales of foreign bonds in the German
market were significantly higher, at 3231/C252bil-
lion. Compared with the previous two quar-
ters, this represents a recovery in sales of
bonds issued by non-residents. However, it is
still well below the placement volume in the
quarters immediately preceding the outbreak
of the financial market turmoil (first half of
2007: 31031/C252billion).2The total amount of
funds raised from sales of domestic and for-
eign debt securities in the first quarter was
3351/C252billion, compared with 3381/C252billion in
the final quarter of 2007.
Given an overall positive cash balance, the
public sector increased its bond market debt
only slightly in the first quarter, by 33 billion,
having raised 3281/C252billion in the capital mar-
ket in the previous three-month period. In theWeekly averages
Per-
centage
points
Per-
centage
points
iTraxx Europe 1252
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008Interest rate spread
of BBB bonds 1Financing conditions on
the European capital market
Sources: Bloomberg, Merrill Lynch and
Thomson Financial Datastream. — 1 Yield
advantage of euro-denominated seven to
ten-year BBB rated corporate bonds versus
matched-maturity euro-area government
bonds. — 2 Credit default risk premiums
for 125 European companies with an in-
vestment grade rating.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5
1.0
0.5
02.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
2Foreign bonds sold in Germany primarily represented
asset backed securities, which were, as in the past two
quarters, denominated mainly in foreign currency and
which German banks have increasingly been taking on to
their balance sheets of late.Worse
financing
conditions for
corporatesLively issuing
activity in the
bond market
Net issuance
of public-
sector bonds ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
45period from January to March, the Federal
Government redeemed bonds worth 361/C252bil-
lion, including Federal savings notes, FederalTreasury notes (Sch/C228tze) and Federal Treasuryfinancing paper ( 3
1/C252billion in total) as well
as, above all, Federal notes (Bobls, 351/C252bil-
lion). Yet at the same time it also issued Fed-eral bonds ( 38
1/C252billion) and topped up
inflation-indexed bonds ( 33 billion), which
are – from the issuer’s point of view – prefer-able to nominal bonds mainly when future in-flation is lower than market players had ex-pected at the time of issuance. As a result,the Federal Government borrowed 35 billion
on the German bond market taking into ac-count redemptions and changes to holdingsof its own bonds, whereas state governmentsreduced their market debt by 32 billion.
As in the previous two quarters when re-
demptions and repurchases had dominated,German credit institutions reduced their cap-ital market debt by 33 billion net between
January and March. In line with the trend ofthe past few years, they also reduced theirpublic Pfandbrief debt ( 314 billion). In add-
ition, they redeemed other bank debt secur-ities with flexible terms and conditions ( 36 bil-
lion), where net issuance has dropped notice-ably since the outbreak of the crisis in thethird quarter of 2007. Previously, the averagevolume issued per quarter since the start ofmonetary union had amounted to 311 billion.
By contrast, special credit institutions steppedup their issuance, selling bonds worth 313
1/C252
billion on the German market. Organisational
restructuring within financial institutions ac-counts for some of this increase. Businessunits responsible for issuance were moved toGermany, meaning that their sales are now
reported in Germany. In addition, domesticcredit institutions brought 34 billion in mort-
gage Pfandbriefe to the market and thus real-ised the highest net issuance in this instru-ment in five years.
Non-financial enterprises tapped the capital
market for a total of 312 billion (compared
with 38 billion in the previous quarter). They
mainly raised the outstanding volume ofshort-dated bonds by 312 billion net; in
addition, longer-term paper with a value of31 billion net was placed on the market.
In the three-month period from January to
March, German bonds were bought almostexclusively by investors based abroad ( 335
1/C252
billion). Non-resident investors were interest-January 2002 = 100, monthly data, log scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx
DAX
2008Share price movements
for European and German
public limited companies
Source: Deutsche Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
45
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
... but decline
in credit
institutions’
market debt
Net issuance
of corporate
bonds
Acquisitions
of bonds

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
46ed only in private issuers’ bonds ( 3411/C252bil-
lion). When interpreting the data, however,
one should note that only a fairly small per-
centage of the securities on record are ultim-
ately held by private investors outside the
banking sector. The high volumes can, in par-
ticular, be attributed to cross-border transac-
tions between financial groups with cross-
holdings, with financial products created in
Germany (mainly certificates and warrants)
being sold to associated companies “en bloc”
and held there until maturity if they cannot
be sold on to private end customers.3By con-
trast, non-resident investors reduced their
holdings of public-sector bonds by 36 billion
in the first quarter of the year. The only
month in which they were net sellers of Ger-
man bonds was February during a short
period of calm following the massive stockmarket losses in January and preceding the
re-emergence of stability concerns in March.
By contrast, German investors bought virtual-
ly no coupon securities ( 31/C252billion). While
German non-banks sold 3191/C252billion worth
of bonds net,4domestic credit institutions in-
creased their bond market exposure by a
similar amount. They invested just under
three-quarters of this sum in foreign bonds
(3141/C252billion), some of which also represent-
ed the asset backed securities issued by their
own securitisation vehicles that had to be
taken on balance.
The above-mentioned credit market turbu-
lence and concerns about the economy re-
sulted in strong stock market losses world-
wide at the beginning of the year. The inter-
national equity markets did not see a certain
degree of recovery until the middle of March
following the takeover of an ailing US secur-
ities house and the lowering of interest rates
and injection of liquidity by the Fed. Numer-
ous capital increases by several US banks and
some unexpectedly strong quarterly results
are also likely to have helped improve senti-
ment. Market players obviously also viewed
massive write-downs by major banks as a
positive move as they increase transparency.
In addition, the euro-area economy proved
relatively robust, there were initial signs of an
easing of tensions on the credit markets, and
it was increasingly hoped that any US reces-
sion would be mild. In this environment,€b n%
Acquisition of German
shares by non-residents
(sales, capital exports: −)
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1CDAX 1CDAX and acquisition
of German shares by
non-residents
1Source: Deutsche Börse AG. As at end of
quarter, change from previous period.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−20+
10+
0
10−
20−
2006 2007 2008
3For more details, see Deutsche Bundesbank, The Ger-
man balance of payments in 2007, Monthly Report,
March 2008, p 26-27.
4Securities acquisitions by German non-banks are deter-
mined as a residual. The data are consequently associated
with greater uncertainty.Strong stock
market losses
until
mid-March ...
... but stocks
recently recover

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
47share prices – particularly for banking stock –
were able to recoup some of their previouslosses. Ultimately, German and Europeanequities have, in the year to date, fallen 13%and 11% respectively as measured by thebroad market indices CDAX and Dow JonesEuroStoxx, while the US S&P 500 has slippedby 5%.
Against the backdrop of the share price
losses, issuance activity in the domestic stockmarket weakened in the first quarter. Ger-man enterprises issued 31 billion worth of
new shares, compared with 33 billion in the
fourth quarter of 2007. These were mostlylisted equities. Moreover, residents sold 37
1/C252
billion worth of foreign shares net.
In the first quarter, domestic non-banks repre-
sented the largest group of equity marketbuyers with 318 billion in purchases. Banks
added equities worth a total of 31 billion to
their portfolios. By contrast, non-resident in-vestors reduced their holdings of Germanshares by 326 billion, which were on balance
exclusively portfolio investments.
5
Domestic investment companies recordedoutflows amounting to 35
1/C252billion in the first
quarter after raising funds of almost 39 billion
in the preceding three months. At 34 billion,
the outflows predominantly hit specialisedfunds reserved for institutional investors,while mutual funds open to the general pub-lic were less badly affected ( 31
1/C252billion). In
the case of mutual funds, equity-based fundsin particular were obliged to repurchase fundunits ( 33
1/C252billion), followed by bond-based
funds ( 32 billion) and money market funds(311/C252billion). By contrast, open-ended real-
estate funds, balanced funds and mixed se-curities funds sold certificates ( 33 billion, 31
1/C252
billion and 31/C252billion respectively). In add-
ition, net sales of foreign mutual fund shareson the German market totalled 317 billion.
In the first quarter, mutual fund shares were
purchased exclusively by domestic non-banks(316
1/C252billion), which on balance added only
mutual fund shares issued by foreign invest-ment companies to their portfolios ( 319 bil-
lion). Foreign investors reduced their exposureto German funds by 31
1/C252billion; credit insti-
tutions sold domestic and foreign mutualfund shares worth 33
1/C252billion.Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2007 2008
Item Q1 Q4 Q1Debt securities
Residents 66.5 – 48.1 0.3
Credit institutions 46.0 25.4 19.7of which
Foreign debt securities 49.4 29.5 14.3
Non-banks 20.5 – 73.5 – 19.3of which
Domestic debt securities 6.0 – 50.5 – 28.6
Non-residents 48.2 86.6 35.5
Shares
Residents – 6.0 9.8 19.5
Credit institutions 5.0 5.3 0.9of which
Domestic shares 1.3 2.7 9.0
Non-banks – 11.0 4.5 18.6of which
Domestic shares 8.5 – 3.0 18.0
Non-residents – 6.5 3.5 – 25.9
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 12.3 9.2 – 4.0
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 0.0 – 0.3 – 1.4of which: Share-based funds – 2.6 – 0.1 – 3.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
5For more details on direct investment, see p 48.Issuance in
stock market
weakens
Share
purchases
Sales of mutual
fund sharesPurchases of
mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
48Direct investment
Against the backdrop of the ongoing finan-
cial market crisis, there has also been a de-
cline in global mergers and acquisitions.
Overall, however, major transactions, which
are probably more difficult to finance in the
current environment, in particular appear to
have declined. The situation in Germany is
similar: the volume of completed cross-border
mergers and acquisitions totalled 314 billion
in the first three months of this year, com-
pared with 3351/C252billion in the previous quar-
ter.6
Over the same period, direct investment,
which is more broadly defined and includes
the building-up of new foreign affiliates,
reinvested earnings and credit transactions
by affiliated companies, recorded net capital
exports of 3451/C252billion. Capital outflows
were therefore higher than in the previous
quarter and significantly exceeded the 2007
average.
German companies which provided their for-
eign branches with additional funds of 348
billion made a large contribution to capital
exports. They primarily increased capital
stakes in foreign companies ( 3221/C252billion). In
addition, however, direct investment loans to
affiliates ( 3161/C252billion) and reinvested earn-
ings ( 39 billion) played a role. The focus was
on transactions carried out by holding com-
panies ( 3101/C252billion), vehicle manufacturers
(371/C252billion) and credit institutions ( 36 bil-
lion). The main host countries for German dir-Major items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2007 2008
Item Q1 Q4 Q1
I Current account 1,2 + 46.5 + 53.3 + 48.0
Foreign trade 1,3 + 49.4 + 49.2 + 50.7
Services 1 – 2.5 – 2.5 – 1.6
Income 1 + 13.0 + 14.5 + 12.7
Current transfers 1 – 10.9 – 5.8 – 11.6
II Capital transfers 1,4 + 0.2 – 0.7 + 0.5
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 55.7 – 66.2 – 70.0
1 Direct investment – 10.6 – 36.0 – 45.3
German investment
abroad – 18.2 – 41.7 – 48.0
Foreign investment in
Germany + 7.6 + 5.7 + 2.7
2 Portfolio investment – 19.8 + 85.1 – 21.2
German investment
abroad – 62.4 – 9.6 – 29.1
Shares + 13.9 + 6.7 + 11.4
Mutual fund shares – 12.4 – 9.8 – 16.9
Debt securities – 63.9 – 6.5 – 23.6
Bonds and notes 5 – 59.4 – 0.4 – 19.7
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes – 47.6 + 4.1 – 5.0
Money market
instruments – 4.5 – 6.1 – 3.9
Foreign investment
in Germany + 42.6 + 94.6 + 7.9
Shares – 6.4 + 7.5 – 26.1
Mutual fund shares + 0.7 + 0.5 – 1.4
Debt securities + 48.2 + 86.6 + 35.5
Bonds and notes 5 + 38.0 + 70.3 + 18.3
of which
Public bonds and
notes – 3.9 + 35.3 – 1.9
Money market
instruments + 10.3 + 16.3 + 17.2
3 Financial derivatives 6 – 8.1 – 27.2 – 18.5
4 Other investment 7 – 17.3 – 88.6 + 16.2
Monetary financial
institutions 8 – 10.6 – 55.5 + 18.0
of which: short-term + 8.9 – 19.5 + 46.4
Enterprises and
households – 5.3 – 10.4 – 1.2
of which: short-term + 3.0 – 1.5 – 5.4
General government + 13.8 – 7.2 + 6.2
of which: short-term + 14.6 – 8.0 + 7.4
Bundesbank – 15.3 – 15.5 – 6.8
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 1.2
IV Errors and omissions + 9.0 + 13.5 + 21.5
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). From January 2007, excluding supplies
of goods for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December
2006, were deducted via the supplementary foreign trade
items. — 4Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced
non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of more than one
year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options as well as finan-
cial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and trade credits,
bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the Bundesbank. —
9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due to
value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank6Source: Zephyr, Bureau van Dijk.Mergers and
acquisitions
Direct
investment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
49ect investment were the 14 old EU countries
(328 billion), including the United Kingdom
(391/C252billion), the Netherlands ( 39 billion) and
France ( 361/C252billion).
Foreign direct investment in Germany
amounted to 321/C252billion in the past quarter.While there were slight inflows of equity cap-
ital and reinvested earnings, outflows wererecorded in credit transactions. This essential-ly represented the repayment by Germanaffiliates of short-term loans to their foreignparent companies.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
50Economic conditions
in GermanyMacroeconomic situation
The German economy grew very sharply in
the first quarter of 2008. According to the
flash estimate of the Federal Statistical Office,
overall economic output increased by 1.5%
in seasonally and calendar-adjusted terms
during the reporting period. Although the ex-
tent of expansion in GDP has to be seen in
connection with subdued growth towards
the end of 2007, when the trend in construc-
tion was weak and there was a temporary
interruption in the upturn in consumption,
this figure also reflects the sound underlying
dynamics of the economy. Overall capacity
utilisation showed a further substantial in-
crease in the final quarter of 2007 and the
first quarter of 2008, for example. After ad-
justment for the different number of working
days, GDP in the first three months of 2008
was 2.6% up on the year, compared with
1.8% in the final quarter of last year.
The expansion in economic output was also
broadly based in sectoral terms. Industrial
output was very buoyant and, given the com-
paratively mild weather, the construction sec-
tor was able to press ahead with processing
the surge in orders received in the final quar-
ter of last year. Business-related services also
benefited from the growth in the production
sector, especially the wholesale trade and the
transport sector. On the expenditure side,
growth contined to be sustained mainly by
buoyant investment demand as well as posi-
tive exports. Moreover, despite persistent
strains with regard to prices, private con-
sumption made up ground again, which also
gave an added boost to imports.Very sharp
GDP growth
in 2008 Q1 ...
... broadly
based

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
51Although there is currently no detailed infor-
mation on the demand components in thefirst quarter of 2008, the available indicatorssuggest that overall economic growth wassustained primarily by domestic demand.Above all, there was a sharp increase in cor-porate investment, which was mainly in ma-chinery and equipment. This is striking insofaras the bringing-forward of such purchasesto 2007, which was advantageous on taxgrounds, evidently had no impact, at least inmacroeconomic terms. One factor in this mayhave been that the cyclically induced long de-livery times had led enterprises to order cap-ital goods well in advance of the cut-off datein order still to benefit from the favourabledepreciation facility. Furthermore, the earn-ings outlook, financing conditions and loca-tional factors – fundamental economic deter-minants which are crucial to the profitabilityof investment projects – were rated positivelyon the whole throughout the period underreview. In addition, there was a jump in con-struction investment. Not only were a largenumber of industrial construction projectsand infrastructure measures realised in thefirst quarter with scarcely any weather-relatedlosses of output, housing construction, too, islikely to have picked up following what was aweak 2007 overall. Finally, households spentperceptibly more in real terms for consump-tion purposes in the first quarter of this year.Against the backdrop of an unexpectedlystrong price shock and increased financial tur-bulence, their sudden reluctance to purchasehad put a brake on consumption in the finalquarter of last year and was reflected to acertain extent in a marked rise in the savingratio. This reluctance is likely to have lessenedsomewhat in the first three months of this
year.
According to the available data, exports
showed a marked growth in the first quarterof 2008. In real terms, seasonally adjusted ex-ports of goods were 1
1/C254% up on the final
quarter of 2007. German exporters were thushardly affected by the declining pace ofgrowth in the world economy. Added to thiswas that the predominantly exchange-rate-related deterioration in the German econo-my’s price competitiveness compared withmajor trading partners – an ongoing trend formore than two years now – was also continu-ing to have no more than a moderate impact.Moreover, the regional structure remained es-sentially unchanged during the reportingperiod. There was very sharp expansion again2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
2008Log scale  
GDP 1Economic growth
1Price-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−112
110
108
106
104
102
100
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Buoyant
domestic
demand
Robust exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
52in exports to the new EU member states, to
China and to the South-East Asian emerging
economies, for example. Exports to Russia
and the OPEC countries continued to benefit
from these countries’ increasing oil and gas
revenues. Exports to other euro-area coun-
tries have also shown a marked increase. The
fact that the German economy has been able
to maintain its competitiveness under difficult
underlying conditions is demonstrated by the
sharp growth in exports to the United States,
for example. In this context, not only the gen-
erally high volatility of foreign trade flows
should be remembered, however, but also
the fact that German enterprises’ US business
was increasingly showing signs of slowing
down in the course of last year.
At 41/C254% in real terms, imports of goods in
the first quarter of 2008 grew even more
sharply than exports in seasonally adjusted
terms. Energy imports recorded the highest
rate of growth in terms of value, but two-
thirds of the rise was price-related. Owing to
buoyant domestic investment, it was mainly
imports of capital goods that increased in real
terms. However, the improvement in the pro-
pensity to consume in Germany is also likely
to have prompted firms to import more con-
sumer products, especially as foreign prod-
ucts were becoming relatively cheaper owing
to the appreciation of the euro. Added to this
was a marked expansion in imports of inter-
mediate goods – not only in connection with
the marked increase in German industrial out-
put but also due in part no doubt to inventor-
ies being stocked up. Price expectations may
also have played a role, however.Foreign trade by region and category
of goods
Percentage change
Average of Jan-Feb 2008
compared with
2007 Q4
seasonally
adjustedJan-Feb 2007
unadjusted
figures
ItemEx-
portsIm-
portsEx-
portsIm-
ports
Total 2.6 6.3 8.8 8.4
Countries or group of
countries
Euro-area countries 2.8 7.8 5.8 8.8
Other EU countries 0.5 3.6 9.5 10.2
of which
New member
states 2 4.0 2.1 17.0 14.9
United States of
America 5.2 – 3.8 4.9 – 6.3
Russian Federation 15.8 – 4.3 31.0 31.4
Japan 8.3 – 3.4 7.4 – 4.6
South-East Asian
emerging
economies 1 5.0 6.6 11.3 – 5.5
China 9.0 3.5 23.4 5.2
OPEC countries 4.4 36.1 12.0 35.9
Categories of goods
Main categories
Intermediate goods 6.9 5.4 9.2 2.6
Capital goods 1.6 5.3 6.4 4.8
Consumer goods 5.0 3.5 16.1 7.1
Energy . 11.2 . 36.9
Selected categories
Chemicals 8.3 4.7 16.7 8.2
Machinery 5.5 6.4 10.9 12.6
Motor vehicles and
motor vehicle parts 2.0 4.1 7.1 7.7
IT products – 1.1 – 1.0 1.1 – 3.1
Metals and metal
products 6.9 5.5 6.8 – 0.3
1Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Brunei
Daressalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thai-
land. — 2Excluding Slovenia, Cyprus and Malta, which
now belong to the euro area.
Deutsche BundesbankMarked
recovery in
imports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
53Sectoral profile
Industrial output was very buoyant again in
the first quarter after having tailed off for a
time in the final quarter of 2007. The positive
underlying trend is also revealed by the fact
that the high level of output at the start of
the year was almost maintained in March
as well in seasonally adjusted terms, even
though there were more public holidays than
usual in this month owing to the early date of
Easter this year. Seasonally adjusted industrial
output in the first three months of 2008 was
2.2% up on the quarter. The renewed surge
in output was broadly based, with capital
goods producers achieving the largest growth.
Industrial output was 6.0% up on the year in
calendar-adjusted terms.
With an average growth of 11/C252% per quarter,
industry has set a quite notable pace of
growth in the past three years. Cyclical fac-
tors predominated at the start of the upswing
– something that can be recognised, say, by
the sharp increase in industrial utilisation at
that time. For one and a half years, however,
the growth in output has not been accom-
panied by any further increase in capacity util-
isation. According to the Ifo Institute, indus-
trial capacity utilisation in 2007 remained at
the record high of more than 87% of normal
full capacity, while real value added in this
sector increased by more than 61/C252%i n
calendar-adjusted terms. These trends reflect
the fact that industrial enterprises are very
willing to invest in capacity extensions at their
domestic locations. This noticeable supply
effect has been made possible, not least, by
the fact that both sides of industry have exer-cised wage restraint for a lengthy period and
that economic policy has tackled overdue re-
forms in the labour market and in the social
security systems. Germany’s regained attract-
iveness as a location of modern industrial
technology can be secured in the long term
only if wage moderation is preserved and
scope for flexibility at firm level is maintained.2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
2008Log scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−15+20+25+30+95
90
85
80
75
70707010+
5+
0
5−125
120
115
110
105
100
95
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Sharp rise
in industrial
output
Capacity
extensions to
the fore

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
54The positive business conditions in industry
also spread to other sectors of the economy.
Additional factory workshops and storerooms
have to be constructed for new production
facilities, for example, which has been provid-
ing stimulus especially to construction sector
activity for some time. Numerous corporate
sector orders as well as a larger volume of
public sector infrastructure projects from the
final quarter of 2007 are the main reason for
an increase in construction sector output in
the first quarter of no less than 10.4% in sea-
sonally adjusted terms. This rise was, admit-
tedly, positively influenced by the fact that,
owing to the mild weather at the beginning
of the year, there were comparatively few of
the usual winter hold-ups in production. In
March, the Easter holidays and a late spell of
winter weather considerably reduced the
heightened level of activity, however. The
continuing positive outlook in industry and
the upturn in the construction sector also
benefited the craft trades, which recorded
employment growth in 2007 for the first time
in one and a half decades.
Employment and unemployment
The marked rise in employment has been
continuing in 2008 so far. According to esti-
mates by the Federal Statistical Office, there
was a seasonally adjusted quarter-on-quarter
increase – aided by the extremely mild winter
weather – of 220,000, or 0.5%, in the first
three months of this year. Including the up-
ward revision of the data from the third quar-
ter of 2007 onwards, the year-on-year rise is
now 684,000, or 1.7%. This growth in em-ployment consists very largely of jobs which
are subject to social security contributions;
according to Federal Employment Agency
data, these showed an increase of 2.5% on
the year in February. Among these jobs, there
was a disproportionately large growth of
6.6% in business-related services, under
which temporary work is also recorded for
statistical purposes. According to preliminary
estimates by the Federal Employment Agency,
the number of persons solely in marginal em-
ployment showed a rise of 1.7% on the year,
while the corresponding figure for persons
with mini-jobs was as much as +9.8%. The
scale of assisted forms of employment in con-
nection with job creations measures, employ-
ment opportunities (one-euro jobs) as well as
assisted self-employment showed a decline in
both quarter-on-quarter and year-on-year
terms.
The available indicators point to a continu-
ation of the expansion in employment. Never-
theless, there are growing signs of some
slowing-down. The Ifo employment barom-
eter shows further need for recruitment but
has been declining slightly since the first
quarter of 2007. The number of vacancies
reported to the Federal Employment Agency
declined somewhat in seasonally adjusted
terms in the first few months of 2008. In
particular, the inflow of new vacancies,
which was very strong before, has become
slower since the beginning of the year. There
was no further rise in April in the Federal
Employment Agency’s BA-X index for non-
government-assisted jobs, which includes
jobs in the primary labour market advertised
on the internet. The IAB survey on jobs onIndustry as
provider of
stimulus for
construction
sector and
craft trades
Sharply
expanding
employmentFurther need
for recruitment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
55offer in the economy as a whole already
shows a decline for the fourth quarter of2007 in both quarter-on-quarter and year-on-year terms.
There was a further perceptible decline in the
official unemployment figure in the first quar-ter. At a seasonally adjusted 3.36 million,there were 211,000 fewer persons registeredas unemployed than in the final quarter of2007. The mild weather and seasonal short-time working benefits are likely to havestrengthened the cyclical improvement, how-ever. The year-on-year decline amounted to624,000. Of these, somewhat over 60%were job seekers receiving unemploymentbenefits under the Third Book of the SocialSecurity Code (SGB III) (statutory insurancescheme) and just under 40% were job seek-ers subject to the Second Book of the SocialSecurity Code (SGB II) (basic allowance sys-tem).
1At 8.0%, the seasonally adjusted un-
employment rate was 0.5 percentage pointslower than in the preceding quarter and1.5 percentage points down on the year.The internationally comparable, standardisedunemployment rate (calculated according toInternational Labour Organization (ILO) cri-teria) stood at 7.4% in the first quarter, com-pared with 8.7% one year earlier. In season-ally adjusted terms, there was no furtherdecline in unemployment in April comparedSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
Thou-
sand
Million
Thou-
sand
%Unemployment rate
012April
2008AprilLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed
- 
AprilLin scale
Employed
Year-on-year changeof which
Employees subject to social
security contributions
Jan-
FebLog scale
EmployedLabour market
1  From January 2004, unemployed  ex-
cluding participants in aptitude testing and
training measures. — 2From January 2005,
unemployed including persons formerly
receiving social assistance but able to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
1110
9
8
7600+
300+
0
300−
600−
900−5.0
4.4
4.1
3.8
3.54.7
3.33.5
3.31000+
500+
0
500−27.5
27.0
26.5
26.028.040.5
40.0
39.5
39.0
38.5
- 
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
1For the structure of the decline in unemployment since
April 2005, see the explanatory notes on page 56-57.Marked fall in
unemployment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
56Deuts che Bun desbankWho stan ds to gain from the fall in unemployment?
Within the spa ce of three years, the num ber of persons ofﬁ  -
cially re gistere d as unemploye d has gone down by 1. 64 million 
to 3.41 million (April 2008). Several fa ctors are likely to have 
contri bute d to this marke d decline. First, at the beginnin g of 
2005, all persons re ceivin g so cial assistan ce an d able to work, 
but not entitle d to claim unemployment beneﬁ t or unemploy-
ment assistan ce, were in cluded in the la bour market statisti cs 
for the ﬁ  rst time. This initially ha d the effe ct of pushin g up the 
num ber of re gistere d unemploye d by aroun d 470,000. At the 
same time, assistan ce was geare d more stron gly to the prin ciple 
of en coura ging an d helpin g people to take up work, while 
unemployment assistan ce – whi ch was calculate d on the basis 
of past earnin gs – was repla ced by a stan dard basi c allowan ce 
known as unemployment beneﬁ t II. In the course of 2005, this 
alrea dy le d to a si gniﬁ cant drop in re gistere d unemployment in 
spite of what was initially only a mil d pi ck-up in employment.1 
In 200 6 an d 2007, the – cyclically – rapi dly risin g deman d for 
labour brou ght a bout a spee dy re duction in unemployment. A 
major contri butory fa ctor in this was that jo bs su bject to so cial security contri butions ha d become more attra ctive to employers 
again, owin g to the chan ged un derlyin g con ditions (re duced 
promotion of “mini-jo bs” an d the dere gulation of temporary 
employment) to gether with a wa ge mo deration pro cess. Fur-
thermore, the restru cturin g of beneﬁ t payments stren gthene d 
the willin gness of jo b-seekers to compromise. It may also have 
been helpful that demo graphi c fa ctors were ten ding to depress 
the la bour supply. 
The past few years have seen a broa dly-base d decline in unem-
ployment – for instan ce, in contrast to the boom perio d of 
1998-2000, the re duction in unemployment in eastern Germany 
was only sli ghtly behin d that in western Germany. Neverthe-
less, measurement by various criteria reveals clear re gional an d 
group-spe ciﬁ c differen ces in s cale an d spee d. For example, the 
improve d labour market situation beneﬁ te d men to a marke dly 
greater extent than it did women. The export an d industry–ori-
ente d nature of the current perio d of  e conomi c upswin g may 
well have playe d a major role in this conne ction. By contrast, 
durin g the New E conomy boom at the en d of the 1990s, the 
per centa ge decline in unemployment amon g women was some-
what greater than amon g men. Likewise, men appear to be 
beneﬁ tin g to a parti cular extent from the broa d dere gulation 
of temporary employment. At all events, a ccording to Fe deral 
Employment A gency statisti cs, three- quarters of persons hire d 
for temporary employment are men. 
There are also marke d differen ces a ccording to a ge group. The 
num ber of youn g unemploye d persons (ie up to 25 years of a ge) 
almost halve d durin g the perio d un der review. This contrasts 
with the drop in the num ber of ol der unemploye d persons (ie 
above 55 years of a ge) whi ch was at ﬁ  rst less pronoun ced than 
the fall in the num ber of unemploye d persons up to 25 years of 
age or “mi ddle-a ged” persons. However, in the course of 2007 
the decline a ccelerate d discerni bly. This may well also be due 
to the fa ct that the amal gamation of unemployment assistan ce 
and so cial assistan ce to form unemployment beneﬁ t II an d the 
tightenin g of work availa bility re quirements applyin g to former 
recipients of so cial assistan ce ha d alrea dy entere d into for ce 
in 2005, while the shortenin g of the previously relatively lon g 
perio d of entitlement to unemployment beneﬁ t, whi ch was of 
signiﬁ cance parti cularly for ol der claimants, did not take effe ct 
until the beginnin g of 2007.
1 This woul d in dicate that persons who lost their entitlement to 
unemployment assistan ce as a result of the new re gulations did not re-re gister. In a ddition, the employment a gencies reviewe d the 
employa bility of earlier re gistere d re cipients of so cial assistan ce. Changes in unemployment according to
various criteria
Cumulative change compared with April 2005 in thousands
(in brackets: percentage change since April 2005)
Item April 2006 April 2007 April 2008
West– 138
(– 4.1%)– 728
(– 21.8%)– 1,123
(– 33.6%)
East– 124
(– 7.2%)– 348
(– 20.3%)– 515
(– 30.1%)
Women–8 8
(– 3.8%)– 353
(– 15.3%)– 649
(– 28.1%)
Men– 175
(– 6.4%)– 723
(– 26.3%)– 990
(– 36.1%)
Below 25 years of age–8 1
(– 12.7%)– 233
(– 36.6%)– 297
(– 46.7%)
Between 25 and 55 years of age– 178
(– 4.6%)– 761
(– 19.9%)– 1,177
(– 30.8%)
Above 55 years of age–3
(– 0.6%)–8 2
(– 13.7%)– 164
(– 27.5%)
Unemployed persons receiving
unemployment benefits (SGB III)– 395
(– 17.9%)– 849
(– 38.5%)– 1,159
(– 52.5%)
Unemployed persons receiving
social benefits (SGB II)+ 133
(+ 4.7%)– 227
(– 8.0%)– 479
(– 16.9%)
Total– 262
(– 5.2%)– 1,076
(– 21.3%)– 1,639
(– 32.4%)

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
57Since the amal gamation of unemployment assistan ce an d 
social assistan ce an d the re duction of the maximum perio d 
of entitlement to unemployment beneﬁ t it has been possi ble 
to approximate rou ghly the level of cyclical an d fri ctional 
unemployment, base d on the num ber of persons in le gal cat-
egory SGB III (unemploye d persons re ceivin g beneﬁ ts from the 
statutory insuran ce s cheme un der the Thir d Book of the Social 
 Security Code: stan dard unemployment beneﬁ ts) an d the level 
of stru ctural unemployment, base d on the num ber of unem-
ploye d persons containe d in le gal cate gory SGB II (unemploye d 
persons re ceivin g a basi c allowan ce su bject to the Secon d Book 
of the Social Security Code: unemployment beneﬁ t II). There are 
fewer lon g-term unemploye d persons amon g the unemploye d 
in cate gory SGB III than there are in cate gory SGB II (April 2008: 
18.3 % compare d with 47.4 %) an d, on avera ge, they also have 
better s chool qualiﬁ cations. A ccording to Fe deral Employment 
Agency statisti cs, 18.4 % of these in dividuals possess a certiﬁ cate 
of aptitu de for hi gher e ducation, compare d with 9.0 % of re cipi-
ents of unemployment beneﬁ t II. The per centa ge of unemploye d 
persons without any s chool-leavin g qualiﬁ cations or havin g only 
a certiﬁ cate of se con dary e ducation, at 44. 6%, is well below the 
ﬁ gure for unemploye d persons in le gal cate gory SGB II ( 64.0 % 
in April 2008 in ea ch case). 
While the num ber of unemploye d persons in cate gory SGB III 
decrease d at quite a rapi d pa ce, shrinkin g to half by April 2008, 
the decline in cate gory SGB II was slu ggish at ﬁ  rst. However, as 
the la bour market continue d to revive, the decline a ccelerate d 
marke dly, while the fall in cate gory SGB III slowe d down. In 
absolute ﬁ  gures an d in seasonally a djuste d terms, the re duction 
in le gal cate gory SBG II durin g the ﬁ  rst four months of 2008 was 
as sharp as in le gal cate gory SGB III. All in all, the num ber of 
unemploye d persons in cate gory SGB II has decrease d by almost 
half a million over the past three years. As a per centa ge of the 
labour for ce, this correspon ds to a fall in the unemployment rate 
of aroun d 1%. Even thou gh the usual distin ction between cycli-
cal an d stru ctural developments cannot be ma de in a clear- cut 
manner, clear pro gress in the re duction of entren ched la bour 
market pro blems is nonetheless i dentiﬁ  able in the current 
economi c cycle. Hen ce, sin ce April 2005, rou ghly one- quarter 
of the total decline in unemployment of rou ghly 4 per centa ge 
points may have been attri buta ble to a fall in the har d core 
of unemployment, whi ch is to be seen in the context of the 
stru ctural reforms of the past few years. The overall impa ct of these reform measures in the la bour market may be rate d as 
even greater, however, inasmu ch as the reor ganisation of the 
labour ex chan ges an d intensiﬁ  ed jo b pla cement have ma de it 
possi ble to re duce fri ctional unemployment as well. In a ddition, 
the re duction in cyclical unemployment has beneﬁ te d from the 
dere gulation of temporary employment.
However, at below one million, the num ber of unemploye d 
persons covere d by the statutory insuran ce s cheme has now 
move d to a fairly low level, whi ch mainly in cludes the fri ctionally 
chara cterise d se gment. A further marke d re duction in unem-
ployment will pro bably primarily be a chieve d only by ero ding 
its stru ctural core. However, the un derlyin g reform an d pay 
poli cy con ditions do not har bour any further potential relief. In 
view of this, measures su ch as the intro duction of comparatively 
high se ctor-spe ciﬁ c minimum wa ges or the extension of ol der 
claimants’ perio d of entitlement to unemployment beneﬁ t are, 
in fa ct, counterpro ductive. Hen ce, any further su bstantial an d 
sustaina ble re duction in the continuin g hi gh level of unem-
ploye d persons re ceivin g a basi c welfare allowan ce, num berin g 
2.3 million at present, can be a chieve d only by persistin g with 
reform poli cy. Otherwise, there woul d be the risk of the tren d 
growth rate of the German e conomy deceleratin g again follow-
ing the perio d of mo derate re covery in the past few years.
Finally, by the en d of 2005, the num ber of persons employe d in 
newly create d jo b opportunities ha d risen to more than 300,000.Seasonally a djuste d
Thou-
san d
Unemploye d persons
receivin g unemployment benefits
(SGB III)Unemploye d persons
receivin g so cial benefits ( SGB II)3,000
2,500
2,0001,500
1,000
  500
    0Unemploye d persons by le gal cate gory
Sour ce of una djuste d figures: Fe deral Employment A gency2005 200 6 2007 2008

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
58with the level in March.2The unemployment
rate, as defined nationally, stood at 7.9%.
Wages and prices
New pay settlements were concluded in
many sectors in the first few months of 2008.
In some cases, the negotiated rates were well
above those agreed in earlier years. Following
a virtual three-year pay freeze (apart from
one-off payments amounting to 3300 per
year), the parties engaged in public sector
pay bargaining for central and local govern-
ment agreed on a permanent increase in re-
muneration by a base amount of 350 and
3.1% backdated to 1 January 2008.3At the
beginning of 2009, salaries will be raised by a
further 2.8%, in addition to which there will
be a one-off payment of 3225.4In local
government in western Germany, standard
weekly working hours are being extended by
half an hour to 39 hours. The new pay settle-
ment runs till the end of 2009. There were
similar improvements for doctors at local hos-
pitals, who had gone on strike in 2006 to
achieve a separate pay agreement and a
marked increase in salary.
A pay increase of 4.4% was agreed in the
chemicals industry. From the 14th month of
the agreement, which runs for a total of
25 months, there will be a further rise of
3.3%. Added to this will be a one-off pay-
ment of 0.5% of the remuneration for the
first 13 months. Marked gains in income
were also negotiated in the steel industry
(+5.2% with an agreement running 13 months
plus a one-off payment of 3200 for a monthwith no increase in standard pay). By con-
trast, the improvements in the textiles and
fashion industry were more modest, at 3.6%
(plus one-off payments), than they were in
the paper, paperboard and plastics processing
industry (+3.9% from May 2008, +2.9%
from May 2009) as well as in parts of the
motor vehicle maintenance sector (in Baden-
W/C252rttemberg, for example, +2.5% in April
2008, followed by +2.0% in both Decem-
ber 2008 and 2009). Negotiations in the
hotel and catering industry also ended in a
comparatively moderate pay rise (+3.0% ini-
tially, followed by an increase of 2.5% at a
later date with an agreement running for
27 months). Deutsche Post AG and the public
sector trade union ver.di agreed on a linear
4.0% increase in pay to take effect after six
months plus a one-off payment of 3200; a
further increase of 3.0% will follow 12 months
later. In the retail trade, there is still no settle-
ment at the regional level in the pay dispute
that has been under way for one year.
Company-specific solutions have been found
instead in some cases.
On the whole, the higher pay settlements re-
flect the generally improved labour market
situation as well as, in terms of their differen-
tiation, the positive performance of industry.
With regard to the public sector, the particu-
lar situation of the past few years has to be
borne in mind. The salary improvements tend
to have been made less through one-off pay-
2Problems in the data processing of the Federal Employ-
ment Agency may have resulted in the situation having
been depicted too unfavourably, however.
3An increase in pay from April 2008 was agreed for local
government in eastern Germany.
4Different arrangements apply in some cases to hospital
employees and those working in municipal utilities.2008 pay round
with higher
negotiated
rates in the
public sector ...
... and in the
private sectorStabilisation
policy risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
59ments than was the case in 2007. On the
other hand, the agreements are characterisedby the fact that they run for relatively longperiods of time. This increases enterprises’planning certainty but might reduce flexibilitywith regard to pay policy. All things con-sidered, additional positive stimuli for em-ployment are not to be expected, however.From a stabilisation policy perspective, the2008 pay round is not free of risks.
According to the Deutsche Bundesbank’s
pay rate statistics, the year-on-year increasein rates of pay in the first quarter of 2008, at2.3%, was double that of the final quarterof 2007. The contractually agreed basic ratesof pay, in which baseline effects of non-repeated one-off payments are omitted,went up by 2.6%. In the production sector,which benefited from buoyant exports andinvestment, the rise in negotiated rates ofpay, at 3.4%, was noticeably sharper than inthe more domestically-oriented services sec-tors.
As was the case in the last few months of
2007, marked increases in crude oil pricescrucially shaped price developments at thebeginning of 2008. While import prices ex-cluding energy went down in the final quar-ter of last year, they have been rising quitesharply since December 2007 despite thestrong appreciation of the euro. In addition tocontinuing price increases for food and ani-mal feed, there were further rises in the costof inputs. Durable goods likewise cost consid-erably more. Imports were 2% more expen-sive overall in seasonally adjusted terms.Excluding energy, the figure was +0.7%.A baseline effect due to the marked price re-
ductions for crude oil in the first quarter of2007 also played a part in the year-on-yearfigure for import prices going up from +3.2%in the final quarter of 2007 to +5.7%. Owingto the impact of the euro’s appreciation, theincrease in the price of exports was clearlyweaker in seasonally adjusted terms than theincrease in the price of imports. As a result,there was a marked deterioration in theterms of trade, where the year-on-year de-cline – not least owing to the baseline effectin import prices – widened from 1.7% to3.4%.
At the domestic industrial producer level,
the quarter-on-quarter rate of price increasewent up from 1.3% to 1.6% in seasonallyadjusted terms. Although this acceleration is
Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
%
Q1Negotiated rates of pay total
Basic pay 1Negotiated rates of pay
1Excluding additional benefits and lump-
sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank3.0
2.5
2.01.5
1.0
0.5
0
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008Markedly
higher rise in
negotiated
rates of pay
in 2008 Q1
Continuing
energy-related
price increase
for imports ...
... and
continuing high
rate of price
increase at
the domestic
producer levels

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
60due in large part to the sharp increase in the
case of energy, the cost of other industrial
products, too, went up sharply at a seasonally
adjusted 0.9%, with price impulses from im-
ports being passed on rapidly. The rise in pro-
ducer prices for products of the food and
beverages industry has not perceptibly weak-
ened so far, although a certain moderation is
apparent in the case of agricultural producer
prices. The year-on-year increase in industrial
factory gate prices went up further from
2.2% to 3.8%, a factor in this being the
marked fall in the corresponding rate in the
first quarter of 2007. If energy is excluded,
the increase was slightly smaller, ie from
2.3% to 2.6%. Prices for construction accel-
erated somewhat again in the first quarter.
The year-on-year rate fell by half to 3.2%,
however, since the price effects in connection
with the increase in the standard rate of value
added tax (VAT) as of January 2007 dropped
out of the figures.
At a seasonally adjusted 0.6%, consumer
prices in the first quarter of 2008 showed a
further sharp rise on the quarter. Owing to
higher crude oil prices and marked price in-
creases for electricity and gas at the begin-
ning of the year, energy was 2.6% more ex-
pensive in seasonally adjusted terms than in
the fourth quarter of 2007. The unfavourable
price trend for food continued, even though
there was a marked flattening of the increase
to 1%, compared with the previous very
sharp seasonally adjusted rise of 4.2%. Sharp
increases in the prices of dairy products, cer-
eals and confectionary contrasted with
downward adjustments in the case of vege-
tables and edible fats and oils, however. The2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
%
April
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
2008Consumer prices2Construction prices 1Producer prices of
agricultural productsProducer prices
of industrial
productsLog scale
Import pricesImport, producer and
consumer prices
1  Not seasonally adjusted, quarterly. —
2 National consumer price index. Rebased
from the original base 2005 = 100.
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
2+
1+
0115
110
105
100115
110
105
100115135
110130
105125
100120
95115115125
100120
105115
110115
110
105
100
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007Unfavourable
trend in
consumer
prices at the
start of 2008
as well ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
61rate of price increase eased somewhat in the
case of industrial goods (excluding energy).
The somewhat stronger rate of increase in
services was also due to the early date
of Easter. Housing rents (excluding ancillary
costs) accelerated slightly. The marked
quarter-on-quarter rise in consumer prices
meant that the annual CPI rate only went
down from 3.0% to 2.9% despite the base-
line effect due to the VAT increase on 1 Jan-
uary 2007.5Among its components, the in-
creases in energy and food prices, at 9.3%
and 8.0% respectively, were sharper than the
average.6HICP inflation was 3.1%, as in the
fourth quarter of 2007. When calculated on a
basis that is comparable to the national con-
sumer price index (CPI) in terms of method-
ology but using the restricted basket of
goods of the HICP , the figure is even some-
what higher.
There was no further seasonally adjusted in-
crease in consumer prices in April, however.
The higher crude oil prices were not yet being
reflected in energy prices. The rate of food
price inflation weakened. There was no more
than a small increase in the cost of industrial
goods (excluding energy) and rents. The year-
on-year increase in the CPI went down from
3.1% to 2.4%. Contributory factors behind
this were the early date of Easter in March
2008, favourable baseline effects resulting
from the introduction of university tuition
fees in a number of federal states in April
2007, and the delayed price effects of the in-
crease in VAT on 1 January 2007. The HICP
figure was 2.6% compared with 3.3% be-
fore. Despite various price reductions in the
case of food, there is likely to be a markedrise in the annual rate of inflation again in the
coming months, not least on account of high
crude oil prices and given that temporarily
lower prices for services owing to Easter fall-
ing in March will no longer be an alleviating
factor. A marked fall cannot be expected until
late autumn provided new adverse factors do
not emerge.
Orders received and outlook
The decidedly strong growth at the beginning
of the year has revealed the inherent poten-
tial that the German economy, in principle,
still has even after more than four years of
cyclical upturn – although the current level of
growth should not be overstated. The consid-
erable risk factors in the international setting
are obviously put into perspective in terms of
their real economic significance by the fact
that the German economy now displays a
greater degree of resilience owing to the
strengthening of its supply-side growth fun-
damentals. The demand profile which the
available indicators suggest for the reporting
5In rebasing to 2005=100 at the beginning of 2008, the
national consumer price index was back-calculated to the
base year 2005. Before this, the annual rate in the fourth
quarter of 2007 had been 2.8%. For details of the
changes made in connection with the rebasing, see the
explanatory notes, Impact of the 2008 index recalculation
on the national price index and the Harmonised Index
of Consumer Prices, Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly
Report, April 2008, pp 32-33.
6Following the back-calculation, markedly higher rates
are shown for food from the second half of 2007. This is
probably due to the weighting by type of outlet that was
newly introduced with the rebasing. This results in great-
er importance being attached to food discounters. Their
prices showed a very sharp percentage rise in the second
half of the year. On this point, see also Impact of the
2008 index recalculation on the national price index and
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, Deutsche
Bundesbank, Monthly Report, April 2008, pp 32-33.... but
interrupted
in AprilSound business
activity owing
to robust
exports and
domestic
stimuli

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
62quarter confirms the assessment that the
economy can essentially go on developing fa-
vourably, especially owing to a shift of em-
phasis to domestic expansionary forces. Fur-
thermore, despite substantial shifts in the ex-
change rate structure, it seems that German
exporters have enjoyed a good deal of suc-
cess so far in sharing in global growth due to
appropriate adaptation strategies, even in the
context of weaker underlying dynamics and
marked differences from region to region.
The demand for German products is highly
satisfactory at present. The intake of indus-
trial orders in the first three months of this
year was 11/C254% down on the quarter after
seasonal adjustment. It should be remem-
bered, however, that there was an extremely
large number of large orders in November
and December 2007, which led to a very
sharp seasonally adjusted increase of 5% in
the volume of industrial orders. Adjusting for
this special effect gives a growth of roughly
3% for the fourth quarter of 2007. The flow
of orders in the first quarter of 2008, which
was not marked by a concentration of large
orders, would therefore be3/C254% up on the ad-
justed prior-quarter level. In addition to the
ongoing positive underlying trend in current
orders up to the end of the period under re-
view, if such an adjustment is taken into
account, industry is also benefiting from what
is still an extremely large stock of orders on
hand. Although Ifo Institute surveys show
something of a year-on-year deterioration in
the assessment of orders which have not yet
been processed, the surveyed firms estimated
what was still quite a long time span of three
full production months.Volume, 2000 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Jan-
Feb
2008Total construction orders
Jan-
FebDomesticLog scale
ForeignLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Total industrial ordersDemand for industrial goods
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−15+
10+100
9095
8590
80
75
70
65110
105
100
95
90115120110120
105110
100130
9514015016015+
10+
5+
0
5−130
120
110
105
100
95140
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007- Orders situation
in industry
remains
favourable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
63Since last autumn, there has been a percep-
tible improvement in the demand situation inthe construction sector, albeit with markedmonthly fluctuations. Following the very not-able seasonally adjusted 8% increase inorders in the final quarter of 2007, there wasalso growth of 2% for the first two monthsof this year (more recent data are unavailableat present). While industrial orders were stillexpanding strongly during this period, publicsector construction projects showed a cleardecline again at the end of the period underreview following their significant sharp rise inthe previous quarter. The fact that demandfor housing construction rose perceptibly atthe start of the year is a positive factor. Itgives cause to believe that the dip in ordersthat followed the interim peak, which wasdue primarily to the abolition of the grant tohomebuyers and the VAT hike, may have bot-tomed out. Even so, housing construction isstill at a very low level overall.
According to the Ifo Institute, the business cli-
mate showed a marked deterioration in April2008, following temporarily improved ratingsduring the first three months. When assessingthis development, however, due accountshould be taken of the fact that the businessclimate indicator is currently still well abovethe level of the most recent cyclical peak inthe second quarter of 2000 and roughlymatches enterprises’ sentiment at the begin-ning of 2006, which was a boom year. Incomparison with the cyclical upswings of the1990s, the high in sentiment is remarkablenot only with regard to its scale but also interms of its duration. Taking as a basis thecorrelation between the Ifo business climateand year-on-year GDP , which is empirically
quite robust,
7the recent surveys do not per
sepoint to an interruption in the economic
cycle.
The level of overall output achieved in the
first quarter of 2008 sets a high standard inseasonally and calendar-adjusted terms, how-ever, which will scarcely be possible to surpassin the coming months. This is suggested bya number of technical factors. First, theweather-related shifts in output means that acertain countermovement may be expectedin the construction sector. At the beginningof the year, an extremely large amount of%
Year-on-year GDP 1
(left-hand scale)
1996 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 2008AprilIfo
business climate2
(right-hand scale)Ifo business climate and
economic growth
1Calendar-adjusted. — 2Trade and indus-
try; 2000  = 100; quarterly averages; season-
ally adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
5+
4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1−6+
110
106102989490
86114
- 
7See How robust is the empirical relationship between
the Ifo business climate indicator and overall economic
activity?, Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, No-
vember 2006, pp 40-41.Continuation of
the upturn in
construction
Sentiment still
optimistic
Half-year
analysis
indicated

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
64machinery and equipment was delivered and
enterprises stocked up heavily on materials
and supplies. This means that there could
well be a lull in investment in machinery and
equipment as well as in inventories in the
short term. Nevertheless, with regard to the
first half of 2008 – a period which is appropri-
ate in this case from an analytical point of
view – a clearly upward underlying cyclical
trend is apparent.
Enterprises’ marked propensity to invest and
their inventory planning are consistent with
the overall picture of a continuing positive
economic outlook. The – in some cases, sub-
stantial – negative factors in the international
setting are likely to be mirrored mainly by
more muted export growth. As a result, in-
vestment in machinery and equipment,
which remained robust throughout the re-
porting period, may also lose momentum.
Given persistently high energy prices, theexisting mainstays of growth will, neverthe-
less, still be able to benefit not only from the
continuing stimuli due to the recycling of
petrodollars through the foreign trade chan-
nel, but also from the above-trend growth in
global demand for energy-efficient and envir-
onmentally friendly technologies – a sector in
which the German economy can offer com-
petitive products. Furthermore, there is the
prospect of a resumption of the recovery pro-
cess in private consumption, which was inter-
rupted in the final quarter of 2007. In particu-
lar, given falling inflation, consumers should
become less reluctant to purchase. According
to figures from the market research insti-
tution, Gesellschaft f/C252r Konsumforschung
(GfK), the consumer climate is currently bene-
fiting from more optimistic income expect-
ations, which, together with the ongoing
advances in the labour market and higher
employee remuneration, form a sound basis
for this.Retarding
effects
economically
manageable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
65Public finances* General government budget
In 2008, the state of public finances is likely
to deteriorate somewhat. After the general
government deficit was reduced markedly in
the past few years and a balanced budget
was achieved in 2007, a slight reversal is ex-
pected in the current year. The cyclical setting
will continue to make a positive impact,
not least owing to the beneficial economic
growth profile from the point of view of gen-
eral government. The unfavourable budget-
ary development is due more to structural
factors such as sizeable tax and social security
cuts and, in addition, to a probable weak
trend in revenue from profit-related taxes.
The rate of increase in expenditure which, al-
though moderate, is still higher than in previ-
ous years, will not provide an adequate coun-
terweight. The overall development is fraught
with uncertainty, however, owing to the
financial market turbulence and increased
risks to the macroeconomic outlook. The
debt ratio, which in 2007 recorded a clear
decline for the first time in years, is likely to
decrease further. Nevertheless, the 60% ceil-
ing stipulated by the EC Treaty will continue
to be overshot.
The two factors mentioned above, in particu-
lar, will have a marked dampening effect on
revenue. On the one hand, tax and social
security cuts, especially the reform of busi-
ness taxation and a further lowering of the
*The “General government budget” section starts with
an analysis of general government budget developments,
which is predominantly based on figures from the nation-
al accounts. The subsequent reporting on budgets of the
various levels of government and the social security
schemes is based on the budgetary figures as defined in
the government’ s budgetary financial statistics.Public finance
situation will
worsen
somewhat in
2008
Marked fall in
revenue ratio
mainly due to
tax and social
security cuts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
66contribution rate to the Federal Employment
Agency from 4.2% to 3.3%, will result in sig-
nificant revenue shortfalls. Rising contribution
rates to the statutory health and long-term
care insurance schemes will have a lesser im-
pact. On the other hand, revenue from profit-
related taxes, which has surged in recent
years and of late has probably been well
above its trend value, is likely to drop owing
inter alia to the financial market turmoil.
However, the forecast is subject to major
uncertainty, especially as the financial impact
of the business tax reform is also hard to
estimate. Overall, government revenue is
likely to fall distinctly in relation to gross
domestic product (GDP) during 2008 despite
progression-related additional tax receipts.
Growth in government expenditure will in-
crease at a noticeably faster pace and prob-
ably reach its highest level since 2002. How-
ever, the expenditure ratio is likely to fall fur-
ther as spending is likely to grow more slowly
than nominal GDP . Cyclically-related labour
market expenditure, for instance, will again
decrease perceptibly. Furthermore, the mod-
erate macroeconomic growth trend in wages
and salaries up until 2007 will have a linger-
ing effect, as there is a time-lag before major
social benefits, especially for pensioners and
the unemployed, are adjusted to the wage
trend. Personnel expenditure, which made a
major contribution to the decrease in the ex-
penditure ratio in previous years, is not likely
to have a dampening effect in 2008 owing to
the sharp pay rises in parts of the public sec-
tor. Stronger expenditure growth is expected
for government investment and in the health-
care sector.The public finance situation is likely to remain
more or less unchanged in the coming year.
A small structural deficit is again likely pro-
vided any additional increases in expenditure
or cuts in taxes and social security contribu-
tions are fully counterfinanced.
On the one hand, the outlook indicates that
the structural general government deficits in
2008 and 2009 are likely to be rather low
and that the budgetary situation should
therefore be much better than in recent
years. The debt ratio is also falling closer to-
wards the 60% ceiling. On the other hand, it
is becoming clear that it will not be easy to
achieve the structural improvements in 2009
announced by Federal Government in the lat-
est stability programme. According to the
most recent European Commission forecast,
Germany is likely to fall well short of the
objective set down in the Stability and
Growth Pact of achieving a structurally bal-
anced budget.1Contrary to the impression
sometimes created by current fiscal policy dis-
cussions, there is therefore no scope for add-
itional deficit-increasing measures without
corresponding counterfinancing. Instead, pol-
icymakers should bear in mind the fact that
the recalculation of the socio-cultural min-
imum subsistence level means that the rele-
vant tax allowances (and possibly child bene-
fit payments, too) as well as basic allowances
will need to be raised starting in 2009. This
is likely to place a strain on the budget for
which no counterfinancing yet exists.
A substantial drop in revenue levels is also
likely to result from 2010 onwards from the
1For information on the Commission’s forecast, see the
box on page 22-23.Faster spending
growth will
slow drop in
expenditure
ratioSituation
largely
unchanged
in 2009
No scope for
additional
financial strains
on government
budgets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
67implementation of a ruling by the Federal
Constitutional Court referring to the offset-
ting of health and long-term care insurance
contributions against tax. These strains could
be borne more easily if a more favourable
situation were to be achieved in 2009.
Government support measures for fragile
financial institutions will be reflected in the
general government fiscal balance and debt
level in 2008. The public banking sector
presents a particular risk as central, state and
local government could be affected as
owners by profit setbacks and may even be
directly affected by having to provide finan-
cial resources and absorb losses.
Budgetary development of central, state
and local government
Tax revenue
Revenue from the major individual taxes in-
creased sharply in the first quarter of 2008
compared with the same period last year. This
continued in part into April. Total tax rev-
enue2grew by 71/C252% in the first quarter (see
also the adjacent chart and the table on
page 68). Revenue from income taxes3in-
creased by a total of 131/C252%. The increase in
wage tax (+71/C252%) reflects not only the
growth in gross wages and salaries but also
the progression effect and the decline in child
benefit payments deducted from cash re-
ceipts. Revenue from profit-related taxes4also
recorded strong growth (+271/C252%). Assessed
income tax receipts exceeded last year’s cor-
responding level by 33 billion. Along withthe persistently buoyant macroeconomic
momentum – albeit a little weaker than in
2007 – payments deducted from cash re-
ceipts for grants to homeowners (main pay-
ment month: March), which are being phased
out, and refunds to employees decreased
sharply (by a total of 32 billion). Although cor-
poration tax receipts sank markedly (-13%),
the drop could have been larger in the wake
of the business tax reform. The consequences
of the financial market turmoil do not appear
to have had a noticeable negative effectYear-on-year change, quarterly
%Tax revenue *
*Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes which are not yet known
for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2006 2007 2008
2Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the last quarter recorded.
3Wage tax, assessed income tax, corporation tax and in-
vestment income taxes plus the solidarity surcharge.
4These comprise assessed income tax, corporation tax
and investment income taxes. In contrast to the definition
used in the national accounts, the financial statistics def-
inition used here deducts grants to home buyers and in-
vestors from profit-related tax revenue.Risks for
government
budgets from
support
measures for
financial
institutions
Sharp increase
in tax revenue
in Q1
Income tax
growth reflects
upturn and
special factors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
68yet either. Investment income taxes soared
(+211/C252%). Of the consumption-related taxes,
revenue from turnover tax increased by 51/C252%
in the first quarter. This reflects, in particular,
the delayed effect on cash receipts in the first
quarter of last year of the rate rise at the be-
ginning of 2007.
The latest official tax estimate from May pre-
dicts a rise of 3% in receipts for the year as a
whole (including local government taxes) and
a slight decline in the tax ratio (as defined
in the government’s financial statistics) to
22.1%.5The slight decline in the ratio can be
explained by the net revenue-reducing effect
of legislative changes (in particular, from the
business tax reform). Although the additional
revenue due to the effects of tax progression
per se causes the ratio to rise, this will bepartly offset by the weaker development of
consumption-related taxes. The revenue
estimates have been revised downwards by
31 billion compared with the last official tax
estimate from November 2007.
The projection for 2009 envisages that tax
revenue will increase by 3% and that the tax
ratio will again rise slightly. The figures have
been revised upwards by 361/C252billion com-
pared with the forecast from May 2007 to
the extent that adjustments have been made
for legislative changes6(the reform of busi-
ness taxation, in particular). For one thing,
wage tax receipts are now estimated to be
significantly higher owing to the sharper
growth in the underlying assessment bases.
For another, the more favourable outturn for
profit-related taxes last year has been largely
projected forward to the following years. Esti-
mation uncertainties ensue from the risks sur-
rounding the underlying macroeconomic as-
sumptions. Furthermore, it is difficult to fore-
cast the further development of revenue from
profit-related taxes, which is extremely vola-
tile – sometimes even from one quarter to
the next. There is much uncertainty, too, con-Tax revenue
Q1
2007 2008Estimate
for
2008 1, 2
Type of tax 5billionYear-
on-year
percent-
age
changeYear-
on-year
percent-
age
change
Tax revenue,
total 2 110.6 118.8 + 7.5 + 3.8
of which
Wage tax 30.5 32.8 + 7.6 + 7.5
Profit-related
taxes 3 13.2 16.9 + 27.4 + 4.4
Assessed
income tax 0.8 3.7 . + 20.1
Investment
income
taxes 4 7.0 8.5 + 21.5 + 9.2
Corporation
tax 5.4 4.7 – 13.0 – 17.8
Turnover taxes 5 42.0 44.3 + 5.4 + 3.9
Energy tax 4.5 4.7 + 2.8 + 2.4
Tobacco tax 2.9 2.5 – 12.7 – 5.9
1According to official tax estimate of May 2008. — 2Includ-
ing EU shares in German tax revenue, but excluding receipts
from local government taxes, which are not yet known for
the quarter recorded. — 3Employee refunds, grants paid to
home owners and investors deducted from revenue. —
4Non-assessed taxes on earnings and withholding tax on
interest income. — 5Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5The estimate is based on the Federal Government’s lat-
est macroeconomic forecast, according to which real
GDP is expected to grow by 1.7% in 2008 (November
2007: 2%) and nominal GDP by 3.4% (November 2007:
3.5%). In 2009, real growth is expected to be 1.2% and
nominal growth 2.7%.
6Including the adjustment for estimated losses following
the ruling of the European Court of Justice in the Meilicke
case. In May 2007 the shortfalls, which the Federal Minis-
try of Finance put at 35 billion, were expected to arise for
the most part in 2008. Since the November 2007 esti-
mate, it has been assumed that the effect on cash re-
ceipts will be felt one year later. As the estimate is based
on the legislative status quo, the expected increase in
relevant allowances (and probably child benefit pay-
ments, too) following the pending recalculation of the
socio-cultural minimum subsistence level were not taken
into account.Rise in
consumption-
related taxes
still boosted by
VAT hike
Slight shortfalls
expected for
2008Outlook
fraught with
uncertainty

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
69cerning the effects of the business tax reform,
the consequences of the financial market tur-bulence
7and the extent to which profit-
related taxes may return to their trend level,which probably is currently being surpassed.
Tax revenue is expected to rise by 4% on
average from 2010 to 2012 and the tax ratioto 22.8%. The ratio will be boosted inter alia
by the progression effect. However, this doesnot include foreseeable lower revenue in thewake of the rearrangement of the specialincome tax deductibility of expenditure onhealth and long-term care insurance contri-butions from 2010 necessitated by a ruling ofthe Federal Constitutional Court. The as-sumptions regarding economic trend-growthare especially important for medium-termprojections. After such projections were re-vised downwards on several occasions inrecent years, a more favourable developmentof trend-GDP is now assumed. Overall, taxrevenue in 2011 has been revised upwards by313 billion vis-/C224-vis the last medium-term
estimate from May 2007, taking account ofthe effects of legislative changes that havetaken place in the meantime. The contri-butory factors include upward revisions forwage tax and the projection of a continuedhigher basis for profit-related taxes.
Central government budgetCentral government recorded a deficit of
311
1/C252billion in the first quarter of 2008 com-
pared with 3131/C252billion in the first three
months of 2007. Revenue rose by 5% ( 33 bil-
lion). While the rise in tax receipts was signifi-cantly curbed by larger contributions to theEU (+ 31
1/C254billion), at 41/C252%(321/C252billion) it
was still larger than expected for the year as awhole (+3%). There was also an increase innon-tax revenue. Income from the FederalEmployment Agency, in particular, was 3
3/C254
billion up on the corresponding period of
2007 as the reintegration payment was con-siderably higher than the compensatoryamount levied previously. Expenditure wasover 1% ( 31 billion) higher than last year.
Current transfers recorded sharp growth of5% ( 32 billion), 31 billion of which was attri-
butable to payments by the post office pen-sion fund, which are now effectively being€b n
€b nCumulative
200620072008
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
2006
2007
2008Central government fiscal
deficit / surplus since 2006
Deutsche Bundesbank10−
15−
20−
25−
30−15+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
- 
7Irrespective of the direct consequences for the develop-
ment of corporate earnings according to the macroeco-
nomic assumptions upon which the tax estimate is
based, it is to be expected that the extensive balance
sheet write-downs will additionally reduce taxable profits,
at least to a certain degree.Medium-term
development
dependent on
macroeconomic
trend-growth
Deficit down
slightly in Q1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
70completely financed out of the Federal
budget. However, more was also spent on
parental benefits and child-raising benefit
than one year ago ( 31/C252billion). Military pro-
curements caused other operating expend-
iture to climb by a considerable 31/C252billion.
However, transfers to the Federal Railways
Fund recorded lower expenditure of 31 billion
as the Fund financed most of its expenditure
in the early part of the current year itself from
asset realisations. Interest expenditure also
declined significantly (- 31/C252billion), whereas a
sharp increase was budgeted for the year as a
whole.
For 2008 as a whole, the central government
budget envisages only a moderate decrease
in the deficit of 321/C252billion to just over 312
billion. Following the good start to the year,
this target certainly seems achievable even
though unplanned new burdens have arisen
in the meantime. Thus the collective labour
agreement for salaried staff in the public sec-
tor concluded at the end of March, and
which is to be applied also to staff with civil
servant status and – with reductions – to re-
tired civil servants, means that an increase in
negotiated rates of pay of over 5% in 2008
will result in a total burden on the budget of
just over 31 billion (including additional costs
for retired civil servants previously employed
by the post office and the railways), whereas
the extra appropriation in the budget
amounts to only 31/C252billion. Furthermore, an
extraordinary payment of over 31 billion has
been approved to support IKB Bank after the
KfW Group had already largely exhausted its
corresponding financial resources in the wake
of support measures totalling approximately37 billion. However, it should be possible to
make savings in other areas through stringent
budget management. Moreover, additional
revenue of 31/C252billion is expected according
to the latest tax estimate. Given the ongoing
financial market crisis and the uncertainty
concerning the burdens resulting from the
business tax reform, however, this likely out-
turn may not yet be interpreted as signalling
the all-clear.
In addition to the projected budget deficit, it
should be observed that relief from asset real-
isations totalling approximately 313 billion is
planned for 2008. According to the concept
for a new debt rule presented by Federal
Government at the end of February, this im-
plies a fiscal consolidation requirement of ap-
proximately 320 billion. If the objectives of
achieving a consolidated central government
budget and credible debt rules are to be up-
held, this needs to be factored into the forth-
coming budget preparations for 2009, espe-
cially as the tax estimate envisages additional
revenue of only 31 billion compared with the
medium-term financial plan in 2007 – which
is effectively required for the foreseeably
much higher personnel costs. The slowing of
tax revenue growth compared with recent
years and higher expenditure on transfers to
the statutory health insurance and pension
insurance schemes, which is already appar-
ent, considerably limit the discretionary fiscal
scope in other areas. Any burdens that arise
from 2009 due to expected increases in tax
allowances and social benefits will have to be
counterbalanced elsewhere. From 2010, the
increase in special tax allowances for contri-
butions to the health and the long-term carePlanned deficit
cut in 2008
currently seems
feasibleStill extensive
need for
consolidation
of central
government
budget

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
71insurance schemes stipulated by the Federal
Constitutional Court is likely to place an add-itional strain on the central governmentbudget, although the size of the extra burdenwill depend greatly on the precise nature ofthe corresponding legislative measures. Givenat most a marginal rise in tax revenue com-pared with the last medium-term financialplan and no corresponding counterfinancingconcepts, the recent public discussions aboutboosting benefits and cutting taxes stand insharp contrast to the publicised medium-termobjectives for the central government budget.
Central government’s off-budget entities re-
corded a surplus of 31
1/C252billion in the first
quarter of 2008 compared with a deficit of31 billion in the same period last year. In
2007, the ERP Special Fund, prior to its re-organisation under the aegis of the KfWGroup, recorded a deficit of over 31 billion.
The post office pension fund had likewiseincurred a deficit of 3
1/C252billion in the first
three months of 2007, which was financedby resources raised from securitisation trans-actions in 2005 and 2006. From the currentyear, however, all expenditure on pensions forretired post office civil servants has been ef-fectively paid from Federal grants. As the on-going contributions from the successor enter-prises of Deutsche Post are now being usedfor the interest expenditure and set aside forthe subsequent repayments in connectionwith the securitisations, a surplus of 3
1/C252bil-
lion was recorded. As in the first quarter oflast year, the Redemption Fund for InheritedLiabilities received part of the Bundesbank’sprofit, which had risen slightly. At almost34
1/C252billion, this again exceeded the portionof331/C252billion that is reserved for transfer to
the central government budget.
State government budgets8
The state governments’ combined deficit
decreased considerably year on year duringthe first quarter of 2008, from 33 billion to
3
1/C252billion. Revenue increased substantially
(+61/C252%) thanks to the positive development
of tax receipts but also to sizeable non-tax in-come in Berlin (apparently resulting from therepayment of an undisclosed contribution toLandesbank Berlin). The concurrent increasein expenditure was much smaller (+2
1/C252%).
Transfers to local government appear to haveagain expanded perceptibly. In addition tothe increase in receipts included in the tax-revenue-sharing schemes with local govern-ment, this rise in income may be attributableto the implementation of a ruling by the Con-stitutional Court in the Federal State of NorthRhine-Westphalia that the state governmentis ultimately obliged to make backpaymentsto local governments of 3
1/C252billion. By con-
trast, personnel expenditure, which is a keycost item, rose by only 1%. In 2006, an in-crease of 2.9% in remuneration for salariedemployees from the beginning of 2008 wasagreed in principle. However, the federalstates, which since the first stage of the re-form of Germany’s federal structure havebeen free to determine the pay and condi-tions of their employees themselves, have sofar only partly applied the pay adjustment to
8The development of local government finances is ana-
lysed in greater detail in the short articles in the Bundes-
bank Monthly Report of April 2008.Off-budget
entities in
surplus in Q1Marked decline
in deficit in
2008 Q1 ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
72their civil servants and retired civil servants,
who account for the bulk of staff costs.
Despite the positive development in the first
part of the year and the improvement of al-
most 31 billion in the figures of the latest tax
estimate, the outlook for the year as a whole
is more subdued, meaning that a slightly less
favourable outturn is expected than in 2007.9
Expected revenue shortfalls resulting from the
business tax reform and additional costs
in the local government revenue-sharing
scheme will have a particular effect here. In
addition, the progressive application of the
pay agreement to civil servants and retired
civil servants is likely to cause personnel
expenditure to climb more steeply over the
remainder of the year. Furthermore, budget-
ary costs may arise from the tense financial
situation of some Landesbanken if the risk
shields covering a total amount of almost
310 billion are drawn on and supplementary
equity injections are needed.
Although most of the federal states also want
to conclude 2008 without incurring any new
debts, those states with particular budget dif-
ficulties and high per capita debt (Bremen,
Saarland and Schleswig-Holstein) in part ex-
pect a clear increase in their deficits in 2008.
As part of discussions in the Federalism Com-
mission, these states have announced that
they will not manage to achieve a balanced
budget by 2019. However, this should be put
into perspective.10The increase in debt over
the past few decades suggests that it would
be advisable to agree uniform stricter budget
rules as part of the second stage of federal
structure reform.Social security funds11
Statutory pension insurance scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re-
corded a deficit of 311/C252billion in the first
quarter of 2008, which was 31/C252billion lower
than in the first three months of last year.
While expenditure increased by over 1%, in-
come grew at the noticeably faster pace of
21/C252%. The inflow of contributions rose by
31/C252%. Both the favourable employment
trend and higher average remuneration had a
positive effect here. However, contributions
for recipients of unemployment benefit de-
creased again. On the expenditure side, pen-
sion payments increased by almost 1%. This
was due to the pension adjustment of 0.54%
in mid-2007 and a rise in the number of pen-
sioners of almost1/C252%. By contrast, health in-
surance contributions for pensioners attribut-
able to the statutory pension insurance
scheme again increased sharply (6%) as the
marked rise in contribution rates introduced
by the health insurance institutions at the be-
9This is based on monthly figures for the core budgets,
according to which the surplus for the federal states in
2007 amounted to 33 billion. But according to figures
from the Federal Statistical Office, which include, in par-
ticular, Berlin’s proceeds from the sale of its Landesbank
investment ( 341/C252billion) – which was transferred to a re-
serve not included in the state budget – the surplus
amounted to 38 billion. If the surplus is calculated using
the sectoral definitions from the national accounts (ie in-
cluding outsourced universities, state-owned road con-
struction enterprises, transport and statistics as well as
civil servant pension reserves), the surplus amounted to
as much as 391/C252billion.
10See the concluding report by the budgetary analysis
working group under http://www.bundestag.de/parla-
ment/gremien/foerderalismum2/drucksachen/kdrs102.pdf.
html.
11The financial development of the statutory health and
public long-term care insurance schemes in 2007 was
analysed in the short articles of the Monthly Report of
March 2008.... but slightly
less favourable
outturn
expected for
2008 as a
whole
Use second
stage of federal
structure
reform to limit
borrowing
capacityLower deficit
due to strong
inflow of con-
tributions in Q1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
73ginning of 2007 did not come into effect for
pensioners until April 2007.12
A continued sharp rise in contribution re-ceipts is expected in the remainder of theyear. However, on 1 July 2008 pensions willnot be increased by 0.46%, as warranted bythe agreed pension adjustment rules, butrather by 1.1% owing to the suspension ofthe envisaged pension adjustment-curbingfactors. For 2009, too, it was decided towaive the pension adjustment curb of justover 0.6 percentage point accounted for byemployees’ supplementary private provisionsfor old age. This will entail additional expend-iture of 3
3/C254billion in 2008, 32 billion in 2009
and33 billion in 2010. If – and only if – the
postponed adjustment curbs are then actuallymade in 2012 and 2013, this would imposeadditional costs of approximately 312 billion
on contribution and tax payers. If not, there isa danger that the contribution rate will beraised permanently 0.3 percentage pointhigher.
13Overall, the statutory pension insur-
ance scheme is nonetheless likely to record asignificantly larger surplus in 2008 than lastyear (over 31 billion).
Federal Employment AgencyIn the first quarter of 2008, the Federal Em-
ployment Agency recorded a deficit of 32
1/C252
billion, whereas the corresponding outturn
for the same quarter of 2007 was close tobalance. However, this also reflects the factthat expenditure was pushed up by transfersof31.6 billion to date to the newly estab-
lished dedicated pension fund for civil ser-vants employed by the Federal EmploymentAgency. Adjusted for this effect, the (operat-
ing) deficit amounted to almost 31 billion.
However, the lowering of the contributionrate from 4.2% to 3.3% alone curtailed rev-enue by 31
3/C254billion. Overall, therefore, the
ongoing advantageous labour market trend iscontinuing to have a positive effect on theFederal Employment Agency’s finances.
In the first quarter of 2008, contribution re-
ceipts were 23% down on the year. After ad-justment for the reduction in the contributionrate, this still amounted to a decrease of 2%.This was solely attributable to special fac-Quarterly
€b n
€b nLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
ExpenditureRevenueFinances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−62
60
58
56
54
2005 2006 2007 2008
12The time-lag is due to the fact that changes to statu-
tory health insurance schemes’ contribution rates are not
applied for pensioners until the third month following
the change.
13See Deutsche Bundesbank, Outlook for Germany’s
statutory pension insurance scheme, Monthly Report,
April 2008, pp 63-65.Higher surplus
expected in
2008
Deficit in Q1
due to lowering
of contribution
rate and special
factorsContribution
trend distorted
in Q1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
74tors14that will balance out again during the
course of the year and without which an in-
crease of 31/C252% would have been recorded.
At32 billion, the Federal grant to the Agency
was 171/C252% higher and therefore in line with
the assumed (for the first time, full) effect on
revenue of 1 percentage point of the increase
in the standard rate of VAT.Expenditure was up by 121/C252% on the year.
However, after the elimination of transfers to
the civil servants’ pension fund, it actually fell
by 31/C252%. Spending on unemployment bene-
fit I dropped by a further 20% ( 31 billion). On
the other hand, the new reintegration pay-
ment, via which the Federal Employment
Agency refunds central government half of
its expenditure on active labour market policy
measures and administrative expenses for
recipients of unemployment benefit II, was
significantly larger than the compensatory
amount levied previously. Furthermore, for
the first time since the beginning of 2003, an
additional amount (+3%) was spent on active
labour market policy.
The outturn for the first quarter supports the
prediction that the financial situation in 2008
will be a lot better than estimated in the Fed-
eral Employment Agency’s budget plan. The
budgeted deficit of 35 billion (of which 32.5
billion due to transfers to the civil servants’
pension fund) could turn out to be less than
half that amount so that, in operational
terms, the Agency could actually generate a
surplus. However, it must not be forgotten
that the ongoing upturn on the labour mar-
ket currently provides exceptionally favour-
able conditions for the Federal Employment
Agency’s financial situation which cannot be
simply projected into the future.Quarterly
€b n
€b n€b n
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment
   benefit and short-time
   working benefits
...vocational training2Log scale
Expenditure,
totalRevenue 1Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding central government liquidity
assistance. — 2Sharp decline in 2005 caused
by shifting responsibility for training for
recipients of unemployment benefit II to
central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−8.0
7.2
6.4
5.6
4.8
4.0
3.2
2.4
2.016
14
12
10
8
2005 2006 2007 2008
14Firstly, contributions for persons raising children of
3290 million pursuant to section 345a of the Third Book
of the Social Security Code had not yet been received in
the first quarter – in contrast to 2007. Secondly, contribu-
tions due at the end of March were partly not booked
until April.Operating
expenditure
down despite
higher
reintegration
payment
Financial
situation better
than estimated
in budget

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 5*
2 External transactions and positions 5*
3 General economic indicators 6*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors of
economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*
5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financialsectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
individual taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*
6 Labour market 65*
7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in
Stage III of European Economic andMonetary Union 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
 I Key economic data for the euro area  
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2006          July 7.5 8.2 7.8 8.1 9.3 11.9 8.6 2.81 3.10 4.1
         Aug 7.2 8.4 8.2 8.1 9.2 12.0 8.4 2.97 3.23 4.0         Sep 7.2 8.4 8.5 8.4 9.4 12.2 8.3 3.04 3.34 3.8
         Oct 6.2 8.2 8.5 8.8 9.1 12.0 8.4 3.28 3.50 3.9
         Nov 6.6 8.8 9.3 9.3 8.7 11.9 8.5 3.33 3.60 3.8         Dec 7.6 9.4 10.0 9.8 8.2 11.5 8.5 3.50 3.68 3.9
2007          Jan 6.9 9.1 10.1 10.0 8.1 11.3 8.6 3.56 3.75 4.1
         Feb 6.8 8.9 10.1 10.4 7.9 10.8 8.4 3.57 3.82 4.1         Mar 7.0 9.5 11.0 10.4 7.8 10.9 9.2 3.69 3.89 4.0
         Apr 6.2 8.8 10.3 10.6 7.6 10.8 9.1 3.82 3.98 4.2
         May 5.9 9.3 10.6 10.6 8.4 11.1 8.7 3.79 4.07 4.3
         June 6.1 9.5 11.0 11.1 8.6 11.6 9.4 3.96 4.15 4.6
         July 6.9 10.5 11.7 11.4 8.7 11.6 9.2 4.06 4.22 4.6
         Aug 6.6 10.5 11.5 11.5 8.8 11.8 9.2 4.05 4.54 4.4         Sep 6.1 10.2 11.4 11.7 8.7 11.7 8.9 4.03 4.74 4.3
         Oct 6.4 11.2 12.3 12.0 9.4 12.4 9.0 3.94 4.69 4.4
         Nov 6.2 10.9 12.3 12.0 9.2 12.2 8.4 4.02 4.64 4.2         Dec 4.0 10.1 11.5 11.8 10.1 12.7 9.1 3.88 4.85 4.3
2008          Jan 4.4 10.4 11.6 11.5 10.0 12.7 9.1 4.02 4.48 4.2
         Feb 3.7 10.7 11.3 11.1 9.8 12.5 8.0 4.03 4.36 4.1         Mar 2.9 9.8 10.3 ... 9.7 12.1 6.6 4.09 4.60 4.1
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.99 4.78 4.3
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2006          July − 342 + 3,104 + 3,641 − 11,250 + 4,706 + 11,404 − 1,218 1.2684 104.5 105.4
         Aug − 2,921 − 2,276 − 3,090 − 4,824 − 20,642 + 23,248 − 872 1.2811 104.6 105.4
         Sep + 3,026 + 5,580 + 33,340 − 32,504 + 50,394 + 16,503 − 1,053 1.2727 104.4 105.2
         Oct + 1,929 + 5,156 + 4,023 − 16,572 + 41,893 − 21,444 + 145 1.2611 103.9 104.8
         Nov + 3,410 + 7,467 − 10,678 − 13,401 + 55,136 − 51,705 − 708 1.2881 104.5 105.4         Dec + 13,544 + 3,624 − 22,903 − 20,944 + 17,340 − 17,292 − 2,007 1.3213 105.6 106.3
2007          Jan − 2,011 − 4,002 + 47,226 − 11,493 + 38,285 + 23,281 − 2,846 1.2999 104.9 105.7
         Feb − 3,672 + 2,455 + 9,056 − 357 + 16,080 − 6,103 − 563 1.3074 105.4 106.2         Mar + 9,430 + 10,184 − 26,846 − 2,406 + 72,988 − 99,415 + 1,987 1.3242 106.1 106.8
         Apr − 2,508 + 4,887 + 51,755 − 5,085 − 2,975 + 61,400 − 1,585 1.3516 107.2 107.8
         May − 13,176 + 4,000 + 7,030 − 25,856 + 9,387 + 24,317 − 817 1.3511 107.3 107.9         June + 13,734 + 11,235 − 8,972 − 26,929 + 64,248 − 44,335 − 1,956 1.3419 106.9 107.4
         July + 6,299 + 7,770 + 48,035 − 109 + 7,772 + 43,416 − 3,044 1.3716 107.6 108.1
         Aug + 1,094 + 3,633 + 66,467 + 475 − 1,348 + 66,212 + 1,129 1.3622 107.1 107.7         Sep + 6,238 + 5,668 − 16,996 − 41,238 + 31,902 − 5,234 − 2,425 1.3896 108.2 108.9
         Oct + 4,638 + 6,945 − 49,138 + 29,522 − 50,015 − 28,625 − 21 1.4227 109.4 110.1
         Nov + 3,642 + 5,056 − 1,642 + 9,505 − 21,435 + 10,083 + 205 1.4684 111.0 111.7         Dec + 2,685 − 2,273 − 23,218 − 20,795 − 21,038 + 13,882 + 4,733 1.4570 111.2 111.7
2008          Jan − 17,924 − 7,270 + 27,273 − 29,934 + 36,375 + 27,661 − 6,827 1.4718 112.0 112.3
         Feb + 4,973 + 2,926 − 9,923 − 13,836 + 37,243 − 38,002 + 4,672 1.4748 111.8 111.9         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.5527 114.6 115.0
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.5751 116.0 116.6
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-22 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
5* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1
 
2005 1.6 1.7 0.8 2.8 1.7 3.8 6.0 0.6
2006 2.8 2.8 2.9 4.9 2.0 4.2 5.7 1.8
2007 2.6 2.8 2.5 4.4 ... 4.0 ... 1.5
2006          Q4 3.2 3.4 3.7 4.2 2.1 4.3 4.5 2.72007          Q1 3.2 4.0 3.4 5.4 1.8 4.3 8.3 2.4
         Q2 2.5 3.3 2.5 5.1 1.2 4.1 5.4 2.0
         Q3 2.7 2.4 2.4 3.6 2.3 3.8 3.8 1.9
         Q4 2.2 1.7 1.6 3.7 2.4 3.6 3.5 .
2008          Q1 2.2 1.5 1.8 ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,2
 
2005 1.3 − 0.3 3.3 0.3 0.3 − 0.9 3.0 − 0.8
2006 4.0 5.1 5.9 9.8 1.0 0.5 5.1 2.4
2007 3.4 2.5 6.1 4.4 1.5 2.2 7.2 − 0.2
2006          Q4 4.0 4.6 6.1 5.4 0.7 0.6 1.5 3.72007          Q1 3.9 3.8
r 7.0 3.8 0.7 3.5 13.6 1.2
         Q2 2.8 2.6 5.9 3.7 0.1 0.7 − 1.0 0.7
         Q3 3.9 3.1 r 6.2 3.8 2.6 2.4 7.5 1.0
         Q4 3.1 0.7 r 5.6 6.0 2.5 2.2 9.9 − 3.4
2008          Q1 e 2.9 ... 8p 5.6 ... ... ... ... ...
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 
2005 81.2 79.4 82.9 84.9 83.2 72.1 74.2 76.42006 83.0 82.7 85.5 86.0 85.0 75.7 75.7 77.6
2007 84.2 83.2 87.5 87.3 86.6 76.9 76.6 78.2
2007          Q1 84.2 83.4 87.6 89.3 86.0 76.9 76.8 78.2
         Q2 84.6 83.2 88.2 86.9 86.2 76.9 77.1 78.9         Q3 84.1 82.8 87.1 86.7 86.4 76.7 75.9 78.2         Q4 84.0 83.4 87.0 86.3 87.6 77.1 76.4 77.4
2008          Q1 83.9 83.8 87.2 86.3 86.8 76.7 79.4 76.7
         Q2 83.5 83.4 87.6 85.2 85.5 77.3 75.3 76.2
 
Unemployment rate 4
 
2005 8.8 8.4 10.7 8.4 9.2 9.8 4.3 7.7
2006 8.2 8.2 9.8 7.7 9.2 8.9 4.4 6.8
2007 7.4 7.5 8.4 6.9 8.3 8.3 4.6 6.1
2007          Oct 7.3 7.1 8.1 6.7 8.0 7.9 4.7 6.1
         Nov 7.2 7.0 8.0 6.6 7.9 7.9 4.8 6.1         Dec 7.2 7.0 7.8 6.5 7.9 7.9 5.1 6.1
2008          Jan 7.1 7.0 7.6 6.4 7.9 ... 5.2 ...
         Feb 7.1 6.9 7.4 6.3 7.8 ... 5.4 ...         Mar 7.1 6.9 7.3 6.3 7.8 ... 5.6 ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2005 2.2 2.5 p 1.9 0.8 1.9 3.5 2.2 2.2
2006 2.2 2.3 p 1.8 1.3 1.9 3.3 2.7 2.2
2007 5 2.1 1.8 p 2.3 1.6 1.6 3.0 2.9 2.0
2007          Nov 3.1 2.9 p 3.3 2.2 2.6 3.9 3.5 2.6
         Dec 3.1 3.1 p 3.1 1.9 2.8 3.9 3.2 2.8
2008          Jan 6 3.2 3.5 p 2.9 3.5 3.2 3.9 3.1 3.1
         Feb 3.3 3.6 p 3.0 3.3 3.2 4.5 3.5 3.1
         Mar 3.6 4.4 p 3.3 3.6 3.5 4.4 3.7 3.6
         Apr p 3.3 4.1 p 2.6 3.3 3.4 4.4 3.3 3.6
 
General government financial balance 7
 
2005 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 3.4 2.9 − 2.9 − 5.1 1.6 − 4.2
2006 − 1.3 0.3 − 1.6 4.1 − 2.4 − 2.6 3.0 − 3.4
2007 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.0 5.3 − 2.7 − 2.8 0.3 − 1.9
 
General government debt 7
 
2005 70.2 92.1 67.8 41.3 66.4 98.0 27.4 105.8
2006 68.5 88.2 67.6 39.2 63.6 95.3 25.1 106.5
2007 66.4 84.9 65.0 35.4 64.2 94.5 25.4 104.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central energy; adjusted for working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece, Portugal and the euro area October. — 4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force;
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and force; seasonally adjusted. — 5  Including Slovenia from 2007 onwards. — 
6*I. Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
I.  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1
 
5.0 3.4 1.5 2.0 0.9 4.1 3.6 4.0 2005
6.1 3.4 3.0 3.3 1.3 5.7 3.9 4.0 2006
... 3.8 3.5 3.4 1.9 6.1 3.8 ... 2007
5.7 3.4 2.7 3.4 1.6 6.3 4.1 3.9 2006          Q4
6.0 3.9 2.5 3.6 2.0 7.2 4.3 4.5 2007          Q1
5.5 3.5 2.6 3.5 1.9 6.0 3.9 4.1          Q2
5.8 4.0 4.2 3.4 1.7 6.4 3.7 4.6          Q3
... 3.7 4.5 3.1 2.0 4.7 3.3 4.3          Q4
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2008          Q1
 
Industrial production1,2
 
0.8 − − 1.1 4.2 0.3 4.0 0.7 0.9 2005
2.4 − 1.2 7.3 2.8 6.6 3.9 0.7 2006
0.3 − 3.0 4.9 1.8 6.7 1.9 3.2 2007
2.0 − 0.3 7.0 4.4 7.2 4.6 1.9 2006          Q4
2.4 − − 3.5 6.7 4.2 9.5 4.2 1.9 2007          Q1
2.1 − 0.4 5.6 1.5 7.9 2.5 2.3          Q2
− 2.9 − 5.6 4.5 1.3 6.3 1.1 4.0          Q3
− 0.7 − 9.8 3.2 0.0 3.5 − 0.2 4.6          Q4
... − ... ... − 2.7 ... − 0.2 ... 2008          Q1
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 
82.3 72.8 82.0 81.7 80.0 82.2 80.2 72.6 2005
85.2 81.6 82.0 83.4 78.4 83.9 80.5 69.9 2006
87.3 80.8 83.6 85.2 81.8 85.9 81.0 70.0 2007
87.4 80.8 83.4 85.1 79.7 85.6 81.2 69.8 2007          Q1
88.8 87.4 83.3 85.5 81.7 86.2 81.3 69.8          Q2
86.5 78.7 83.8 85.2 84.3 85.9 81.4 69.2          Q386.5 76.3 83.8 84.8 81.3 86.0 80.0 71.3          Q4
86.0 79.5 83.5 83.6 78.1 84.8 81.1 72.5 2008          Q1
84.5 82.4 83.4 84.0 82.3 85.3 80.2 73.2          Q2
 
Unemployment rate 4
 
4.5 7.3 4.7 5.2 7.6 6.5 9.2 5.2 2005
4.7 7.3 3.9 4.7 7.7 6.0 8.5 4.6 2006
4.7 6.4 3.2 4.4 8.0 4.8 8.3 3.9 2007
4.7 6.3 2.9 4.3 7.7 4.6 8.5 3.8 2007          Oct 
4.7 6.1 2.8 4.3 7.6 4.5 8.6 3.8          Nov 
4.6 5.8 2.8 4.2 7.6 4.5 8.7 3.8          Dec 
4.6 5.8 2.7 4.2 7.5 4.5 9.0 3.7 2008          Jan 
4.7 5.7 2.6 4.1 7.5 4.4 9.1 3.7          Feb 
4.5 5.6 2.6 4.1 7.4 4.3 9.3 3.7          Mar 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.8 2.5 1.5 2.1 2.1 2.5 3.4 2.0 2005
3.0 2.6 1.7 1.7 3.0 2.5 3.6 2.2 2006
2.7 0.7 1.6 2.2 2.4 3.8 2.8 2.2 2007
4.0 2.9 1.8 3.2 2.8 5.7 4.1 3.2 2007          Nov 
4.3 3.1 1.6 3.5 2.7 5.7 4.3 3.7          Dec 4.2 3.8 1.8 3.1 2.9 6.4 4.4 4.1 2008          Jan 
4.2 4.0 2.0 3.1 2.9 6.4 4.4 4.7          Feb 
4.4 4.3 1.9 3.5 3.1 6.6 4.6 4.4          Mar 
4.3 4.1
p 1.7 p 3.4 p 2.5 6.2 4.2 4.3          Apr 
 
General government financial balance 7
 
− 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 6.1 − 1.5 1.0 − 2.4 2005
1.3 − 2.5 0.5 − 1.5 − 3.9 − 1.2 1.8 − 1.2 2006
2.9 − 1.8 0.4 − 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.1 2.2 3.3 2007
 
General government debt 7
 
6.1 70.4 52.3 63.5 63.6 27.5 43.0 69.1 2005
6.6 64.2 47.9 61.8 64.7 27.2 39.7 64.8 2006
6.8 62.6 45.4 59.1 63.6 24.1 36.2 59.8 2007
6  Including Malta and Cyprus from January 2008 onwards. — 7  As a definition). — 8  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
percentage of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Produc-
1995), member states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty tion Survey for the first quarter 2008. 
7*I.  Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2006          Aug − 14.1 12.7 − 5.3 − 26.8 − 21.2 − 19.0 1.7 20.6 5.3 2.4 1.5 5.5 − 4.1
         Sep 126.9 134.5 21.8 − 7.6 − 13.7 17.2 120.5 103.3 28.2 4.3 1.4 14.4 8.3
         Oct 81.4 84.5 30.5 − 3.1 − 5.8 26.7 119.0 92.2 52.2 15.8 2.1 29.0 5.4
         Nov 110.7 105.9 11.6 4.8 6.5 68.3 143.8 75.5 27.3 10.6 2.6 23.0 − 8.9         Dec − 8.0 44.8 2.5 − 52.8 − 58.6 81.3 51.6 − 29.7 50.3 24.1 2.1 18.6 5.5
2007          Jan 120.4 103.1 14.8 17.3 21.2 − 23.2 143.7 167.0 14.3 4.0 1.9 7.7 0.7
         Feb 70.8 69.5 3.3 1.3 4.3 40.1 124.8 84.7 53.1 2.8 1.9 40.0 8.4         Mar 146.6 154.5 46.8 − 7.9 − 6.6 84.7 125.5 40.8 90.2 31.3 0.9 28.1 29.8
         Apr 152.2 170.9 78.4 − 18.8 − 19.0 − 38.5 153.5 192.0 25.2 12.6 0.3 17.2 − 4.9
         May 138.0 104.4 30.1 33.6 38.7 − 17.2 73.6 90.8 9.7 16.7 − 0.2 21.2 − 28.1         June 93.2 102.5 − 18.2 − 9.3 − 8.7 46.9 − 5.4 − 52.3 87.7 19.7 0.7 32.0 35.4
         July 87.0 106.3 6.1 − 19.3 − 20.7 5.6 64.1 58.5 42.4 14.6 0.8 7.5 19.5
         Aug − 3.0 33.4 − 6.1 − 36.4 − 29.8 − 51.3 − 10.9 40.3 8.1 − 4.4 0.2 8.6 3.6         Sep 123.4 135.0 22.0 − 11.6 − 11.7 − 23.4 31.9 55.3 14.4 − 3.1 1.3 0.4 15.9
         Oct 172.3 168.8 88.2 3.5 6.7 11.6 150.0 138.4 60.2 16.8 1.1 − 0.9 43.3
         Nov 96.8 96.7 9.6 0.2 − 0.7 28.1 80.4 52.2 − 3.4 2.9 0.8 − 12.0 5.0         Dec 109.5 111.0 56.4 − 1.5 − 12.5 − 47.4 − 139.3 − 91.9 92.3 51.0 0.4 2.2 38.7
2008          Jan 124.4 107.8 16.5 16.6 12.9 − 20.8 239.2 259.9 18.8 − 2.8 1.8 9.4 10.3
         Feb 57.0 63.7 2.9 − 6.7 2.9 − 14.1 83.8 98.0 − 4.8 − 8.5 − 1.1 3.4 1.3         Mar 148.1 132.5 28.1 15.6 8.8 − 35.3 − 58.9 − 23.6 18.7 3.3 − 2.3 2.3 15.4
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2006          Aug − 4.3 3.9 0.6 − 8.2 − 4.2 − 4.9 1.1 6.1 − 3.1 2.9 1.5 − 4.9 − 2.6
         Sep 23.7 32.8 9.5 − 9.1 − 7.9 14.9 32.8 17.8 − 5.8 0.4 1.2 − 4.2 − 3.3
         Oct 4.2 − 0.7 5.1 4.9 1.2 − 4.6 − 5.1 − 0.5 5.1 − 0.1 2.1 − 0.9 4.0
         Nov 12.6 5.5 7.3 7.2 6.6 42.0 42.1 0.1 − 0.8 1.3 2.6 − 0.3 − 4.3         Dec − 40.7 − 22.9 4.2 − 17.8 − 14.9 43.0 25.4 − 17.6 5.2 3.9 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.7
2007          Jan 36.3 25.6 12.0 10.7 12.2 − 11.2 17.8 29.0 18.7 − 0.2 1.8 5.8 11.3
         Feb − 7.0 0.8 − 7.1 − 7.8 − 3.4 5.7 26.9 21.2 5.7 0.8 2.0 − 0.6 3.5         Mar 10.4 14.4 6.4 − 4.0 2.2 14.9 20.6 5.7 − 5.3 − 0.8 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.4
         Apr 32.6 33.4 35.6 − 0.9 − 2.8 − 12.4 25.2 37.5 8.8 2.8 0.2 3.6 2.2
         May − 13.9 − 16.0 − 15.2 2.1 5.0 − 2.5 10.9 13.4 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 6.6 − 8.6         June − 27.5 − 11.9 − 24.8 − 15.6 − 10.1 58.7 24.1 − 34.6 9.6 2.1 0.6 − 3.8 10.7
         July 7.2 7.3 5.8 − 0.1 − 5.4 17.5 13.2 − 4.3 9.8 1.4 0.6 − 0.7 8.5
         Aug − 3.9 13.9 − 3.8 − 17.8 − 11.9 − 10.1 5.6 15.7 − 10.7 − 0.0 0.2 − 9.0 − 1.8         Sep 10.3 19.7 5.7 − 9.4 − 3.2 24.7 48.7 24.0 − 0.3 3.6 0.6 − 3.0 − 1.4
         Oct 5.7 8.9 2.5 − 3.2 − 1.9 12.0 4.1 − 7.9 4.2 − 2.8 1.1 5.9 0.0
         Nov − 1.9 4.5 1.4 − 6.4 − 5.2 17.3 28.1 10.7 − 15.0 − 0.7 1.0 − 12.0 − 3.2         Dec 5.8 11.7 − 0.9 − 5.9 − 4.4 21.0 − 0.9 − 21.9 − 2.1 5.1 1.0 − 10.0 1.8
2008          Jan 35.9 36.4 16.0 − 0.5 3.2 − 41.6 − 12.1 29.6 2.3 1.1 − 0.1 1.0 0.4
         Feb − 7.9 − 13.2 − 18.2 5.3 8.7 7.1 29.0 21.9 − 8.3 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 6.5 − 0.1         Mar 44.0 43.4 26.3 0.6 2.8 − 8.5 22.0 30.4 4.6 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.5 7.7
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 9.5 − 43.2 − 14.3 − 21.2 − 56.6 − 3.7 − 52.9 35.4 0.1 14.5 2.7 18.3 2006          Aug 
18.0 5.2 − 92.5 96.8 64.7 4.2 60.5 36.0 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 4.9 1.8          Sep 
− 9.8 38.4 − 27.3 12.1 − 17.9 3.9 − 21.8 37.0 − 7.1 − 2.5 2.2 15.5          Oct 
0.8 69.2 − 81.7 68.8 47.9 4.4 43.5 29.0 − 8.2 − 0.4 13.2 0.1          Nov 
− 36.5 − 108.0 − 167.5 201.5 139.8 20.7 119.2 47.7 13.9 − 12.8 − 21.6 0.4          Dec 
11.2 66.7 − 5.0 − 59.9 − 83.4 − 17.0 − 66.4 23.1 0.4 14.2 28.6 22.2 2007          Jan 
19.0 3.2 − 35.5 7.3 − 6.5 3.1 − 9.6 25.1 − 11.3 6.6 10.8 10.8          Feb 
− 5.4 − 15.5 − 162.0 125.3 62.1 9.7 52.4 65.4 − 2.2 13.2 14.5 8.9          Mar 
− 9.9 30.6 − 67.8 49.7 21.3 6.3 15.0 36.1 − 7.6 − 0.3 17.6 0.8          Apr 
25.9 5.9 − 79.4 48.0 20.8 2.8 17.9 31.0 − 3.7 3.5 16.0 11.8          May
21.2 − 44.1 − 75.2 95.4 67.1 7.3 59.8 34.6 − 6.3 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 12.6          June
− 41.5 37.4 − 54.4 37.8 − 13.6 8.0 − 21.6 61.6 − 10.2 4.9 14.4 − 2.7          July
− 6.3 − 63.2 − 7.3 − 20.4 − 82.8 − 2.3 − 80.5 70.4 − 8.0 10.5 − 6.9 24.0          Aug 
22.3 − 40.7 − 103.9 105.1 77.1 − 0.1 77.3 34.4 − 6.4 1.1 − 24.5 22.2          Sep 
− 16.5 58.5 − 81.6 56.3 − 31.6 3.1 − 34.7 103.4 − 15.5 − 1.8 12.1 15.0          Oct 
15.5 15.9 − 96.9 61.9 40.9 5.1 35.8 27.2 − 6.3 8.4 11.7 15.0          Nov 
− 48.9 − 90.2 − 108.8 160.7 70.7 19.9 50.8 69.3 20.7 − 18.8 − 36.5 3.4          Dec 
15.3 35.5 − 34.0 − 27.2 − 62.1 − 16.4 − 45.7 34.6 0.2 24.1 43.7 − 6.7 2008          Jan 
20.3 6.3 − 21.1 28.6 − 47.2 5.6 − 52.8 78.5 − 2.7 7.1 11.9 − 26.6          Feb 11.0 − 16.1 − 99.2 80.1 55.1 4.2 51.0 19.5 5.5 − 0.2 3.1 16.1          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
3.0 − 16.6 2.7 − 1.0 7.5 − 6.8 9.8 − 4.5 4.8 − 0.2 4.4 2006          Aug 
2.3 29.5 2.0 0.4 12.7 0.7 10.5 − 3.8 3.2 − 0.6 2.7          Sep 
− 2.8 6.1 0.6 1.3 − 8.8 − 6.8 8.6 − 4.8 − 6.0 0.0 0.1          Oct 
2.1 29.2 − 0.1 1.8 24.1 28.0 7.3 − 6.2 − 4.5 − 0.2 − 0.3          Nov 
− 2.9 − 11.7 − 2.0 5.4 11.8 4.3 15.7 3.1 − 10.5 − 0.2 − 0.6          Dec 
− 1.9 0.1 1.1 − 4.3 8.3 − 1.1 2.7 − 6.2 8.0 0.2 4.7 2007          Jan 
0.2 − 12.3 1.1 0.7 5.1 − 0.6 4.2 − 3.9 4.7 − 0.7 1.5          Feb 
− 0.3 15.9 1.0 2.5 15.0 3.8 8.1 − 3.3 0.1 1.2 5.0          Mar 
0.3 1.3 0.0 2.2 9.8 − 2.6 17.4 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.5          Apr 
5.2 − 29.5 2.9 − 0.0 10.2 8.3 6.4 − 4.2 − 1.5 0.3 0.9          May0.9 − 1.1 1.2 2.6 21.9 9.8 12.3 − 4.1 3.2 1.5 − 0.7          June
− 7.3 18.7 0.5 2.3 3.5 2.7 9.3 − 5.8 − 7.0 − 0.4 4.7          July
− 0.3 − 19.9 2.3 − 0.9 16.9 − 7.5 26.9 − 3.9 2.7 − 3.8 2.6          Aug − 1.3 8.3 1.8 − 0.5 28.2 13.0 16.2 − 3.6 7.9 − 3.7 − 1.6          Sep 
− 0.4 17.8 1.4 1.2 − 4.0 − 11.1 15.6 − 4.8 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.0          Oct 
5.7 − 22.6 1.1 1.5 47.3 30.9 10.7 − 4.1 5.1 − 0.0 4.6          Nov 
− 6.5 10.5 0.9 4.7 24.9 − 15.4 51.1 6.4 − 13.1 − 0.4 − 3.7          Dec − 0.1 − 21.3 0.7 − 4.1 13.4 2.6 − 5.1 − 4.8 15.4 − 0.0 5.2 2008          Jan 
− 1.3 − 7.3 2.1 1.5 16.1 − 4.2 19.7 − 2.1 3.9 0.5 − 1.7          Feb 
2.1 23.1 1.4 1.4 5.8 8.8 0.7 − 1.6 0.8 − 1.5 − 1.3          Mar 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2006          Feb 18,295.2 12,227.2 9,784.4 8,467.1 569.6 747.7 2,442.8 832.8 1,610.0 4,137.4 1,930.5
         Mar 18,450.2 12,355.4 9,910.3 8,550.1 575.8 784.4 2,445.2 836.7 1,608.5 4,174.1 1,920.8
         Apr 18,671.1 12,506.1 10,065.7 8,642.7 587.0 836.0 2,440.4 837.2 1,603.2 4,217.4 1,947.6
         May 18,748.8 12,533.3 10,127.7 8,706.5 595.3 825.9 2,405.5 826.7 1,578.9 4,247.6 1,967.9         June 18,712.2 12,574.4 10,172.0 8,783.0 602.4 786.6 2,402.4 829.3 1,573.1 4,192.7 1,945.1
         July 18,838.8 12,649.5 10,264.5 8,857.7 614.5 792.3 2,385.0 826.3 1,558.7 4,284.2 1,905.1
         Aug 18,860.3 12,647.3 10,287.3 8,874.1 613.9 799.3 2,360.0 820.7 1,539.4 4,280.2 1,932.9
         Sep 19,232.3 12,768.7 10,413.4 8,983.9 620.2 809.3 2,355.2 824.0 1,531.3 4,418.2 2,045.3
         Oct 19,417.3 12,850.0 10,500.2 9,036.7 634.9 828.6 2,349.7 825.9 1,523.8 4,541.8 2,025.5
         Nov 19,715.4 12,945.4 10,592.9 9,118.2 638.2 836.5 2,352.5 824.1 1,528.4 4,620.9 2,149.2         Dec 19,743.9 12,933.4 10,639.2 9,161.0 648.4 829.9 2,294.2 830.2 1,464.0 4,681.8 2,128.7
2007          Jan 20,097.5 13,086.1 10,769.6 9,276.4 646.8 846.3 2,316.5 826.1 1,490.5 4,851.0 2,160.3
         Feb 20,284.2 13,153.7 10,834.7 9,337.6 660.6 836.5 2,319.0 823.0 1,496.0 4,941.4 2,189.0
         Mar 20,649.7 13,296.0 10,987.2 9,441.6 687.9 857.6 2,308.8 821.1 1,487.7 5,044.2 2,309.5
         Apr 20,920.0 13,441.3 11,153.1 9,527.0 709.0 917.1 2,288.3 821.2 1,467.1 5,160.0 2,318.7
         May 21,218.9 13,585.9 11,264.6 9,600.5 736.1 928.0 2,321.3 816.2 1,505.1 5,256.3 2,376.7         June 21,413.8 13,668.1 11,357.2 9,713.2 763.7 880.3 2,310.9 816.0 1,494.9 5,242.5 2,503.2
         July 21,462.6 13,747.8 11,455.8 9,810.4 779.5 865.9 2,292.0 817.4 1,474.6 5,284.8 2,430.0
         Aug 21,453.9 13,744.1 11,487.2 9,849.5 783.5 854.2 2,256.9 810.9 1,446.0 5,277.6 2,432.2         Sep 21,680.8 13,853.9 11,609.4 9,950.5 807.0 851.9 2,244.5 810.8 1,433.7 5,247.5 2,579.4
         Oct 22,230.3 14,213.8 11,818.3 10,029.3 880.1 908.9 2,395.5 961.8 1,433.7 5,365.9 2,650.6
         Nov 22,429.7 14,303.4 11,906.0 10,112.0 894.4 899.6 2,397.4 962.6 1,434.8 5,391.6 2,734.7         Dec 22,352.2 14,406.3 12,013.4 10,158.9 951.8 902.8 2,392.9 973.6 1,419.3 5,247.0 2,698.8
2008          Jan 22,839.6 14,587.7 12,157.4 10,299.9 964.0 893.5 2,430.3 980.4 1,449.9 5,491.2 2,760.6
         Feb 22,981.0 14,637.5 12,214.1 10,355.2 986.6 872.3 2,423.4 970.8 1,452.6 5,529.5 2,813.9         Mar 23,018.8 14,759.1 12,328.8 10,448.1 1,009.0 871.8 2,430.3 977.6 1,452.7 5,354.8 2,904.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2006          Feb 4,765.6 3,463.1 2,729.4 2,329.2 91.1 309.1 733.7 436.5 297.2 1,134.2 168.3
         Mar 4,791.8 3,478.9 2,743.5 2,334.6 93.4 315.5 735.4 436.5 298.9 1,145.0 167.9
         Apr 4,843.7 3,522.5 2,787.6 2,348.9 94.5 344.2 734.8 437.6 297.2 1,146.9 174.3
         May 4,843.9 3,518.0 2,777.3 2,346.0 95.5 335.8 740.7 430.1 310.6 1,145.4 180.5
         June 4,844.8 3,486.3 2,760.6 2,347.5 103.3 309.8 725.7 426.5 299.2 1,183.7 174.8
         July 4,829.6 3,481.0 2,755.7 2,342.0 103.9 309.7 725.3 428.3 297.0 1,174.3 174.3
         Aug 4,821.6 3,477.1 2,759.4 2,344.8 103.6 310.9 717.7 424.2 293.5 1,172.0 172.5         Sep 4,884.7 3,497.1 2,788.4 2,367.7 108.4 312.3 708.7 420.2 288.5 1,209.8 177.8
         Oct 4,886.3 3,500.9 2,787.3 2,361.5 112.9 313.0 713.6 423.2 290.4 1,204.4 181.0
         Nov 4,933.0 3,510.9 2,790.3 2,357.2 117.9 315.2 720.6 423.7 296.9 1,234.4 187.7         Dec 4,922.2 3,466.6 2,764.1 2,327.2 120.7 316.2 702.4 420.8 281.6 1,258.1 197.5
2007          Jan 4,972.0 3,501.3 2,788.2 2,343.3 118.1 326.9 713.1 419.4 293.6 1,279.4 191.3
         Feb 4,987.2 3,491.8 2,786.6 2,349.6 120.5 316.5 705.2 415.0 290.2 1,300.8 194.5
         Mar 5,010.4 3,500.9 2,800.3 2,357.3 123.5 319.5 700.6 408.3 292.4 1,316.2 193.3
         Apr 5,064.5 3,530.4 2,830.8 2,353.3 130.1 347.4 699.6 410.1 289.5 1,333.0 201.1
         May 5,076.7 3,516.3 2,814.6 2,352.1 131.6 330.9 701.7 407.3 294.5 1,346.5 213.9         June 5,070.7 3,488.8 2,801.2 2,364.9 133.7 302.6 687.6 402.2 285.3 1,368.3 213.5
         July 5,084.0 3,494.2 2,806.6 2,365.9 139.8 300.9 687.6 407.6 280.0 1,377.5 212.4
         Aug 5,097.5 3,490.3 2,820.4 2,383.6 141.2 295.6 669.8 401.7 268.1 1,387.0 220.3         Sep 5,152.6 3,497.4 2,837.2 2,394.9 145.2 297.1 660.2 395.5 264.7 1,423.6 231.6
         Oct 5,138.6 3,490.1 2,836.5 2,399.8 150.4 286.2 653.6 394.0 259.7 1,416.2 232.3
         Nov 5,155.4 3,486.8 2,839.6 2,401.8 151.5 286.3 647.1 392.7 254.4 1,434.8 233.8         Dec 5,159.0 3,491.7 2,850.6 2,413.7 148.7 288.2 641.1 391.2 249.9 1,432.7 234.6
2008          Jan 5,167.5 3,535.3 2,894.6 2,438.5 145.8 310.3 640.7 387.4 253.3 1,407.0 225.2
         Feb 5,186.3 3,525.7 2,879.9 2,442.3 144.4 293.3 645.8 383.9 261.9 1,427.6 233.0         Mar 5,222.7 3,565.8 2,919.8 2,456.6 163.7 299.5 646.0 381.6 264.4 1,422.9 234.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
524.8 7,224.4 6,773.0 6,850.7 2,734.7 990.4 94.7 1,517.3 1,425.4 88.2 2006          Feb 
532.2 7,291.9 6,848.9 6,928.7 2,761.3 1,009.8 97.9 1,544.3 1,426.4 89.0          Mar 
540.3 7,378.4 6,941.9 7,018.3 2,802.8 1,044.5 99.7 1,558.1 1,423.9 89.4          Apr 
543.6 7,381.3 6,957.9 7,027.1 2,819.0 1,025.0 102.1 1,567.8 1,422.5 90.7          May553.7 7,494.2 7,031.0 7,094.4 2,860.6 1,038.9 104.5 1,579.1 1,419.3 91.9          June
562.7 7,478.0 7,025.7 7,091.9 2,827.7 1,059.6 107.6 1,588.3 1,415.6 93.1          July
559.0 7,454.2 7,008.1 7,080.5 2,780.8 1,090.6 109.5 1,590.7 1,414.2 94.6          Aug 
563.2 7,568.4 7,090.5 7,173.0 2,837.7 1,122.2 113.4 1,593.4 1,410.4 95.9          Sep 
567.1 7,582.0 7,114.2 7,192.2 2,809.6 1,152.3 119.4 1,609.2 1,403.7 98.0          Oct 
571.5 7,646.2 7,176.6 7,241.4 2,838.1 1,165.4 124.6 1,617.3 1,395.4 100.7          Nov 592.2 7,816.5 7,375.3 7,445.8 2,961.1 1,209.4 123.8 1,640.9 1,407.8 102.7          Dec 
575.6 7,815.2 7,354.2 7,435.6 2,909.5 1,235.6 129.7 1,647.5 1,408.0 105.4 2007          Jan 
578.7 7,839.6 7,363.6 7,440.8 2,900.3 1,250.8 136.5 1,649.5 1,396.5 107.3          Feb 
588.4 7,980.2 7,496.8 7,589.8 2,956.5 1,304.1 146.2 1,680.7 1,394.0 108.2          Mar 
594.7 8,020.8 7,543.6 7,635.5 2,964.9 1,335.1 148.0 1,692.5 1,386.6 108.5          Apr 
597.6 8,113.2 7,601.9 7,690.7 2,979.7 1,357.0 152.6 1,709.6 1,383.5 108.3          May604.9 8,240.4 7,710.4 7,794.6 3,038.2 1,384.2 156.7 1,729.2 1,377.4 109.0          June
612.9 8,239.2 7,735.2 7,827.7 3,006.6 1,437.5 162.8 1,743.3 1,367.8 109.8          July
610.5 8,212.8 7,719.5 7,808.8 2,933.5 1,498.3 168.2 1,739.2 1,359.7 110.0          Aug 610.4 8,329.8 7,802.4 7,895.0 3,002.6 1,524.3 169.8 1,733.6 1,353.4 111.2          Sep 
613.5 8,545.9 8,033.3 8,114.1 2,968.2 1,619.6 181.6 1,747.8 1,484.6 112.4          Oct 
618.6 8,615.5 8,092.4 8,158.1 2,998.0 1,625.4 193.5 1,749.2 1,478.6 113.4          Nov 638.5 8,752.9 8,282.2 8,346.1 3,047.9 1,687.4 198.5 1,798.5 1,499.7 114.0          Dec 
623.1 8,813.9 8,311.0 8,393.9 3,024.1 1,745.2 205.3 1,797.9 1,506.1 115.2 2008          Jan 
628.7 8,845.5 8,327.4 8,401.1 2,973.1 1,815.9 206.2 1,787.8 1,503.8 114.4          Feb 
632.9 8,924.8 8,403.1 8,476.5 3,025.4 1,835.7 204.2 1,789.2 1,509.5 112.4          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
141.1 2,331.8 2,266.9 2,225.6 704.7 199.3 17.6 701.3 517.5 85.2 2006          Feb 
143.5 2,341.2 2,273.7 2,232.7 714.4 197.9 17.8 701.1 515.5 86.0          Mar 
145.5 2,365.1 2,296.3 2,255.8 723.6 209.2 18.1 705.1 513.7 86.2          Apr 
146.8 2,370.8 2,302.7 2,252.2 725.2 204.7 18.5 706.4 510.2 87.3          May
149.5 2,381.2 2,310.1 2,255.7 727.5 205.4 18.9 707.8 507.5 88.6          June
152.1 2,376.3 2,306.2 2,251.2 718.5 209.9 19.4 710.2 503.6 89.7          July
151.1 2,382.7 2,308.9 2,254.5 712.8 218.4 19.9 713.1 499.1 91.2          Aug 151.5 2,392.8 2,315.6 2,261.1 714.0 227.0 20.5 711.9 495.3 92.4          Sep 
152.9 2,389.1 2,314.9 2,264.0 709.2 236.2 21.8 711.7 490.5 94.5          Oct 
154.7 2,423.5 2,346.4 2,286.5 733.7 235.9 22.6 712.8 484.4 97.1          Nov 160.1 2,449.6 2,375.2 2,311.5 735.3 249.6 23.1 716.6 487.7 99.1          Dec 
155.7 2,445.2 2,372.5 2,313.6 737.8 252.4 24.2 716.6 481.6 100.9 2007          Jan 
156.4 2,447.5 2,373.6 2,314.3 735.9 255.1 25.4 717.3 477.6 102.9          Feb 
158.9 2,456.2 2,381.8 2,323.9 740.7 261.0 26.6 716.7 474.4 104.4          Mar 
161.1 2,470.3 2,398.3 2,336.5 737.5 276.8 27.7 719.5 470.3 104.6          Apr 
161.1 2,485.8 2,408.2 2,340.0 744.1 277.2 28.7 719.4 466.2 104.4          May163.7 2,507.3 2,427.9 2,359.0 755.7 284.4 30.2 721.5 462.2 105.0          June
166.0 2,508.5 2,434.9 2,365.2 756.8 291.7 31.7 722.9 456.5 105.6          July
165.1 2,524.3 2,451.3 2,377.6 751.4 311.8 32.7 723.2 452.7 105.8          Aug 164.6 2,551.8 2,476.1 2,400.8 761.4 323.9 33.7 726.2 449.1 106.4          Sep 
165.8 2,549.0 2,474.8 2,400.1 748.5 340.1 36.2 723.3 444.4 107.5          Oct 
167.3 2,592.5 2,509.1 2,430.6 779.5 340.4 39.4 722.4 440.4 108.5          Nov 172.0 2,634.0 2,554.6 2,473.5 763.6 384.6 42.7 726.2 446.8 109.5          Dec 
167.9 2,628.9 2,548.6 2,476.2 769.4 383.1 45.0 727.3 442.1 109.4 2008          Jan 
169.4 2,638.9 2,559.5 2,487.6 764.9 402.2 45.8 726.2 440.0 108.5          Feb 
170.8 2,645.3 2,564.1 2,492.0 773.5 402.6 45.5 725.5 438.4 106.5          Mar 
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2006          Feb 199.6 174.1 103.1 45.1 1.1 20.8 3.6 0.4 235.0 231.4 610.2 2,380.6 1,799.4
         Mar 193.1 170.1 94.8 49.3 1.2 20.9 3.6 0.4 235.9 231.6 603.1 2,402.7 1,827.1
         Apr 182.6 177.5 99.6 51.8 1.2 21.0 3.4 0.4 249.7 246.0 613.1 2,411.4 1,836.6
         May 167.2 187.0 104.2 56.1 1.3 21.4 3.5 0.4 258.2 253.7 621.6 2,437.0 1,852.7         June 207.4 192.4 106.7 59.0 1.3 21.5 3.4 0.4 245.1 241.4 616.5 2,455.3 1,864.0
         July 194.3 191.8 106.2 59.3 1.2 21.4 3.2 0.4 250.5 246.7 627.4 2,469.7 1,872.3
         Aug 184.8 188.8 101.6 60.9 1.3 21.4 3.2 0.4 264.9 260.7 639.7 2,489.8 1,887.7
         Sep 202.9 192.6 104.0 61.8 1.6 21.6 3.2 0.4 263.8 259.7 645.6 2,509.2 1,896.2
         Oct 193.1 196.7 108.8 61.2 1.7 21.6 3.0 0.4 261.3 255.8 644.7 2,554.3 1,930.0
         Nov 193.9 210.9 116.3 67.1 1.7 22.6 2.9 0.4 260.8 256.8 636.9 2,569.7 1,949.2         Dec 158.0 212.8 114.5 70.4 2.1 22.6 2.7 0.4 248.0 244.8 614.7 2,587.8 1,958.4
2007          Jan 170.5 209.2 112.1 68.8 2.4 22.8 2.6 0.4 262.3 258.7 641.8 2,625.1 1,984.3
         Feb 189.5 209.4 111.5 69.6 2.4 22.8 2.6 0.4 268.8 264.1 652.0 2,668.2 2,024.7         Mar 183.8 206.6 107.5 71.2 2.5 22.4 2.5 0.4 282.0 277.3 666.3 2,701.6 2,053.4
         Apr 173.9 211.4 111.4 72.2 2.5 22.3 2.5 0.4 281.6 276.6 681.9 2,710.0 2,058.1
         May 199.8 222.6 117.1 77.8 2.6 22.5 2.3 0.4 285.2 280.4 702.5 2,750.4 2,082.5         June 221.0 224.8 116.3 80.1 3.5 22.3 2.2 0.5 282.2 278.0 699.0 2,772.8 2,088.5
         July 180.1 231.4 121.9 81.1 3.6 22.2 2.1 0.5 287.1 282.5 712.6 2,773.7 2,089.4
         Aug 173.7 230.3 116.3 85.6 3.7 22.3 2.0 0.5 297.6 292.9 706.2 2,807.5 2,121.6         Sep 196.0 238.8 121.7 88.3 3.7 22.8 1.9 0.5 295.4 290.5 682.5 2,811.7 2,146.3
         Oct 184.3 247.5 127.2 84.8 3.7 22.7 1.8 7.1 293.5 288.6 684.2 2,867.9 2,207.4
         Nov 199.8 257.6 130.0 92.1 4.0 22.8 1.8 6.9 301.8 297.1 696.9 2,862.9 2,211.8         Dec 151.0 255.9 125.4 93.8 4.4 24.0 1.8 6.7 283.0 278.8 660.6 2,867.0 2,223.8
2008          Jan 168.9 251.2 123.2 89.6 3.9 24.1 1.8 8.7 307.4 303.6 737.3 2,854.3 2,210.1
         Feb 189.2 255.2 122.2 94.1 4.3 24.6 1.7 8.3 314.4 310.0 750.1 2,822.4 2,189.4         Mar 200.2 248.2 118.2 90.8 5.0 24.3 1.7 8.1 314.1 310.0 747.9 2,824.8 2,209.7
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2006          Feb 37.5 68.7 20.9 26.5 0.7 18.3 1.9 0.4 29.6 29.6 30.0 896.4 665.8
         Mar 39.3 69.2 19.1 28.9 0.7 18.4 1.8 0.4 37.0 37.0 29.9 890.1 663.4
         Apr 39.1 70.2 18.9 29.8 0.8 18.5 1.8 0.4 35.6 35.6 29.8 882.1 656.5
         May 40.8 77.8 21.7 34.2 0.8 18.8 1.9 0.4 37.0 37.0 30.3 886.4 657.8
         June 42.7 82.9 22.8 38.0 0.9 18.9 1.9 0.4 35.7 35.7 31.2 893.5 663.3
         July 43.7 81.4 22.0 37.7 0.8 18.7 1.8 0.4 30.1 30.1 30.5 895.0 662.6
         Aug 46.7 81.4 21.2 38.3 0.9 18.8 1.9 0.4 34.9 34.9 30.3 893.6 661.1
         Sep 49.1 82.6 20.9 39.3 1.1 18.9 1.9 0.4 38.1 38.1 29.7 896.8 663.1
         Oct 46.3 78.8 19.0 37.4 1.2 19.1 1.8 0.4 32.1 32.1 29.7 896.1 657.2
         Nov 48.4 88.6 22.1 44.0 1.2 19.2 1.7 0.4 27.5 27.5 29.5 889.7 654.0         Dec 45.5 92.6 24.8 45.1 1.5 19.1 1.6 0.4 17.1 17.1 29.3 888.7 646.5
2007          Jan 43.7 88.0 21.3 43.7 1.8 19.1 1.6 0.4 25.0 25.0 29.5 903.2 655.3
         Feb 43.8 89.4 22.4 43.9 1.9 19.2 1.6 0.4 29.7 29.7 28.3 901.1 655.8
         Mar 43.4 88.9 21.3 44.8 1.9 18.9 1.6 0.4 29.8 29.8 29.5 899.9 659.5
         Apr 43.6 90.1 22.1 45.3 1.8 18.9 1.5 0.4 29.4 29.4 28.5 898.9 663.0
         May 48.9 97.0 23.9 50.3 1.9 19.0 1.4 0.4 28.0 28.0 28.8 907.9 667.6         June 49.7 98.5 22.1 52.9 2.8 18.9 1.3 0.5 32.7 32.7 30.3 902.7 658.2
         July 43.0 100.4 23.6 53.3 2.9 18.9 1.2 0.5 25.7 25.7 29.9 906.0 665.5
         Aug 42.6 104.1 21.6 59.0 2.9 18.9 1.2 0.5 28.4 28.4 26.0 900.4 662.5         Sep 41.3 109.7 24.1 61.8 2.9 19.3 1.1 0.5 36.3 36.3 22.4 889.3 655.7
         Oct 40.9 108.1 25.7 58.7 2.9 19.3 1.1 0.4 34.6 34.6 21.4 891.6 658.3
         Nov 46.7 115.2 25.4 65.9 3.1 19.3 1.0 0.4 39.7 39.7 21.4 881.2 655.5         Dec 40.1 120.3 26.1 69.1 3.5 20.3 1.0 0.4 26.6 26.6 21.1 866.9 646.7
2008          Jan 40.0 112.7 23.4 64.5 3.0 20.4 0.9 0.4 42.1 42.1 21.0 873.7 652.8
         Feb 38.7 112.6 23.5 63.9 3.2 20.6 0.9 0.4 45.9 45.9 21.5 862.3 642.2         Mar 40.8 112.4 23.1 63.2 4.2 20.7 0.9 0.4 46.7 46.7 20.0 854.3 648.3
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
120.7 32.0 2,227.9 3,726.5 1,246.8 − 4.3 2,351.1 − 3,442.0 6,146.1 7,143.9 5,101.3 223.1 2006          Feb 
129.8 33.3 2,239.6 3,764.0 1,255.2 22.7 2,342.5 − 3,468.2 6,201.2 7,203.2 5,149.4 224.8          Mar 
130.2 33.6 2,247.5 3,818.6 1,250.7 9.1 2,399.8 − 3,532.3 6,303.1 7,329.7 5,167.1 235.9          Apr 
137.8 35.9 2,263.3 3,843.3 1,239.2 4.9 2,419.7 − 3,550.1 6,307.7 7,361.2 5,182.9 230.4          May125.4 36.3 2,293.6 3,732.0 1,243.5 14.1 2,357.7 − 3,598.1 6,372.5 7,395.9 5,230.0 225.0          June
120.8 39.5 2,309.4 3,810.3 1,274.0 15.4 2,350.8 − 3,572.5 6,368.0 7,406.2 5,286.6 224.8          July
138.0 41.0 2,310.7 3,825.8 1,272.8 10.6 2,343.5 − 3,515.9 6,346.3 7,430.0 5,290.6 225.1          Aug 
138.1 40.6 2,330.5 3,934.3 1,275.6 4.0 2,468.2 − 3,581.4 6,445.1 7,533.2 5,317.3 227.6          Sep 
152.3 42.0 2,360.0 4,027.8 1,284.7 − 1.5 2,497.0 − 3,563.5 6,457.1 7,557.3 5,373.9 230.3          Oct 
160.6 38.9 2,370.2 4,046.0 1,279.9 38.1 2,666.3 − 3,609.7 6,520.5 7,617.6 5,391.1 237.7          Nov 151.2 47.7 2,389.0 4,026.5 1,276.5 15.6 2,566.2 − 3,756.5 6,728.4 7,789.8 5,432.2 244.4          Dec 
166.1 54.6 2,404.3 4,218.7 1,283.7 18.3 2,656.8 − 3,681.8 6,686.5 7,811.2 5,464.0 242.2 2007          Jan 
173.5 58.4 2,436.4 4,270.8 1,296.1 35.8 2,674.1 − 3,674.0 6,690.6 7,843.3 5,512.4 241.7          Feb 
179.9 60.1 2,461.7 4,295.3 1,341.8 18.7 2,775.4 − 3,735.3 6,814.2 8,002.5 5,615.3 241.2          Mar 
174.7 67.2 2,468.1 4,451.6 1,344.0 − 2.4 2,837.7 − 3,755.4 6,860.3 8,065.6 5,635.9 242.4          Apr 
180.4 74.2 2,495.7 4,562.2 1,316.4 13.1 2,878.4 − 3,776.9 6,910.0 8,152.3 5,653.0 239.9          May167.6 74.9 2,530.3 4,502.8 1,346.8 − 4.0 2,968.8 − 3,845.1 7,005.7 8,229.4 5,738.1 242.4          June
154.8 85.1 2,533.8 4,542.4 1,366.2 7.7 2,920.8 − 3,830.8 7,041.7 8,281.2 5,775.8 245.4          July
174.1 86.5 2,546.9 4,586.1 1,368.3 − 19.4 2,884.3 − 3,748.3 7,021.9 8,286.3 5,787.0 244.2          Aug 193.3 89.0 2,529.4 4,575.7 1,389.3 − 28.1 3,014.0 − 3,822.6 7,119.8 8,380.0 5,786.8 243.7          Sep 
212.2 86.5 2,569.2 4,684.3 1,455.3 − 16.2 3,101.9 − 3,789.6 7,205.6 8,482.2 5,914.5 120.6          Oct 
222.2 91.1 2,549.6 4,696.7 1,452.7 − 7.0 3,191.5 − 3,829.4 7,264.3 8,576.4 5,894.7 122.3          Nov 220.8 96.0 2,550.2 4,596.1 1,487.4 − 38.0 3,104.6 − 3,900.5 7,425.2 8,685.6 5,980.7 127.8          Dec 
201.2 97.7 2,555.4 4,868.6 1,515.7 − 31.4 3,150.7 − 3,850.6 7,441.2 8,784.7 6,017.0 118.9 2008          Jan 
173.3 98.7 2,550.4 4,927.3 1,514.9 − 23.3 3,201.0 − 3,799.9 7,464.1 8,800.5 6,000.4 114.2          Feb 
180.9 106.6 2,537.3 4,825.6 1,508.3 − 10.8 3,251.3 − 3,851.9 7,536.8 8,886.3 5,979.6 113.3          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
23.5 27.7 845.2 720.2 332.3 − 126.0 551.4 77.8 725.6 1,489.2 1,600.0 1,982.6 − 2006          Feb 
23.8 29.2 837.2 729.6 336.7 − 134.5 561.8 78.2 733.4 1,496.1 1,616.0 1,979.6 −          Mar 
22.8 29.5 829.7 723.3 340.8 − 104.1 571.1 78.7 742.5 1,515.9 1,633.7 1,980.6 −          Apr 
23.0 31.5 831.9 729.4 336.0 − 122.8 576.7 79.5 746.9 1,517.1 1,639.0 1,980.8 −          May
20.8 33.4 839.4 712.3 336.5 − 114.0 568.3 80.6 750.3 1,522.8 1,643.8 1,991.6 −          June
18.9 34.3 841.9 698.3 348.5 − 118.1 569.0 81.2 740.4 1,513.6 1,627.3 2,009.4 −          July
20.8 36.8 836.0 703.2 344.1 − 137.3 570.2 83.9 734.1 1,512.5 1,635.3 2,003.5 −          Aug 
20.5 38.8 837.5 723.6 336.2 − 121.3 588.9 85.9 735.0 1,520.1 1,647.1 1,997.3 −          Sep 
19.5 40.0 836.7 723.2 340.0 − 118.7 594.8 86.5 728.2 1,517.1 1,638.3 2,002.4 −          Oct 
21.3 37.9 830.6 714.5 337.0 − 95.7 607.0 86.3 755.7 1,545.7 1,661.8 1,997.0 −          Nov 20.3 38.2 830.2 697.1 336.0 − 106.4 610.9 84.3 760.0 1,568.7 1,673.6 2,001.5 −          Dec 
20.6 42.7 839.9 729.6 348.1 − 119.2 610.7 85.5 759.1 1,564.5 1,682.2 2,025.1 − 2007          Jan 
20.2 44.5 836.4 745.5 353.5 − 134.7 616.3 86.5 758.3 1,563.8 1,686.6 2,029.7 −          Feb 
22.2 47.4 830.2 748.7 350.3 − 131.7 627.7 87.5 762.0 1,572.3 1,701.4 2,021.0 −          Mar 
19.6 49.6 829.7 780.5 352.6 − 131.8 636.2 87.5 759.7 1,583.2 1,710.3 2,025.7 −          Apr 
17.2 52.9 837.7 796.4 342.6 − 149.7 636.9 90.4 768.0 1,593.7 1,720.6 2,023.6 −          May14.7 54.7 833.4 761.0 352.3 − 162.7 647.1 91.6 777.8 1,611.6 1,744.0 2,031.6 −          June
14.4 60.4 831.2 753.5 361.7 − 148.8 647.6 92.1 780.4 1,617.7 1,748.0 2,040.8 −          July
15.5 59.9 824.9 772.0 360.3 − 170.4 656.6 94.4 773.0 1,633.3 1,763.2 2,033.5 −          Aug 16.8 57.0 815.5 785.8 362.4 − 172.4 676.9 96.1 785.5 1,658.1 1,790.7 2,030.3 −          Sep 
22.8 48.0 820.7 772.9 366.1 − 167.7 670.8 97.5 774.2 1,657.5 1,784.4 2,037.4 −          Oct 
27.4 48.4 805.5 777.4 363.0 − 200.2 680.4 98.6 804.9 1,695.2 1,832.1 2,019.1 −          Nov 27.0 45.1 794.8 754.6 368.0 − 194.9 682.8 99.5 789.7 1,737.4 1,857.2 2,019.3 −          Dec 
30.2 46.9 796.6 779.2 374.4 − 220.0 668.2 100.2 792.9 1,731.4 1,871.6 2,028.4 − 2008          Jan 
27.2 48.2 787.0 794.7 377.0 − 228.9 674.8 102.4 788.4 1,744.4 1,887.1 2,019.8 −          Feb 
25.0 48.8 780.6 813.3 379.8 − 212.8 676.2 103.7 796.6 1,751.3 1,891.7 2,013.5 −          Mar 
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2005          Oct 307.9 288.6 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 531.6 47.9 − 44.6 151.4 683.1
         Nov 315.1 293.4 90.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 535.6 50.4 − 37.9 150.2 686.0         Dec 313.2 301.3 90.0 0.0 − 0.1 0.3 539.8 51.0 − 39.6 153.0 692.9
2006          Jan 317.6 316.4 89.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 559.2 44.2 − 33.5 154.1 713.3
         Feb 325.2 310.0 96.2 0.0 0.3 0.1 − 548.4 56.6 − 28.7 155.4 703.9         Mar 324.7 299.3 104.7 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 550.8 53.3 − 34.0 158.3 709.2
         Apr 327.9 290.1 113.7 0.1 0.7 0.3 − 556.4 51.6 − 35.2 159.5 716.2
         May 337.0 291.3 120.0 0.2 − 0.2 0.4 569.1 51.1 − 33.5 161.2 730.5
         June 336.9 287.0 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 572.0 45.5 − 37.0 163.3 735.4
         July 334.3 316.5 120.0 0.2 − 0.6 0.3 578.8 67.0 − 42.1 166.3 745.7
         Aug 327.6 329.7 120.0 0.2 − 0.1 0.6 588.2 73.0 − 51.5 167.1 755.4
         Sep 327.3 314.0 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 0.4 588.7 61.4 − 55.6 166.4 755.2
         Oct 326.7 308.7 120.0 0.1 0.3 0.2 − 588.5 59.1 − 59.1 167.0 755.7
         Nov 327.4 311.9 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 592.8 60.2 − 60.6 167.0 759.8
         Dec 327.0 313.1 120.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 598.6 54.9 − 66.4 173.2 771.8
2007          Jan 325.8 322.3 120.0 0.1 − 0.2 1.0 619.5 45.0 − 72.7 175.3 794.9
         Feb 322.1 300.5 124.6 0.1 0.1 0.1 1.5 604.6 47.9 − 83.1 176.5 781.2         Mar 321.6 288.7 134.6 0.0 − 0.5 0.8 606.2 47.1 − 90.0 180.6 787.2
         Apr 323.6 281.7 145.7 0.5 − 0.3 0.9 614.8 48.2 − 95.2 182.6 797.7
         May 326.1 281.6 150.0 0.3 − 0.5 0.1 620.0 51.3 − 97.2 183.2 803.8         June 326.4 284.9 150.0 0.3 − 0.2 0.2 625.2 49.1 − 99.4 186.2 811.7
         July 323.0 295.4 150.0 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 631.3 53.9 − 106.4 189.6 821.2
         Aug 316.7 301.7 150.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 639.7 52.3 − 115.8 192.0 832.1
         Sep 317.3 268.7 171.7 0.2 10.7 0.4 1.7 639.2 52.3 − 117.8 192.7 832.4
         Oct 321.9 194.3 262.3 0.3 − 1.6 0.9 637.3 63.7 − 118.0 193.4 832.3
         Nov 327.6 180.2 265.0 0.1 − 0.6 5.1 640.1 55.9 − 123.3 194.4 835.1
         Dec 327.5 173.0 278.6 0.3 − 0.4 2.2 644.6 61.9 − 126.6 196.8 841.9
2008          Jan 343.8 255.7 268.8 0.3 − 1.1 68.4 668.2 46.4 − 116.4 200.9 870.2
         Feb 353.6 173.8 268.5 0.2 − 0.4 0.6 651.7 51.7 − 110.7 202.4 854.5         Mar 343.3 181.3 268.5 0.1 0.3 0.3 − 653.2 59.7 − 125.0 205.3 858.7
         Apr 349.1 181.5 278.6 0.1 2.6 0.6 0.4 661.7 70.2 − 128.6 207.5 869.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2005          Oct 75.1 149.4 55.1 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 145.1 0.1 95.2 39.0 184.2
         Nov 77.2 145.0 54.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 145.4 0.0 92.6 38.8 184.2         Dec 77.2 140.9 54.4 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 146.9 0.0 86.0 39.3 186.3
2006          Jan 79.1 154.1 55.7 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 151.9 0.0 97.9 39.2 191.2
         Feb 81.6 158.1 61.6 0.0 0.1 0.0 − 149.7 0.1 112.1 39.6 189.3
         Mar 81.0 145.8 68.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 150.7 0.1 104.7 39.6 190.4
         Apr 82.5 137.8 74.3 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 151.5 0.0 103.6 39.7 191.3
         May 85.2 152.2 76.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 154.8 0.0 118.5 40.2 195.0
         June 84.9 153.9 73.7 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 156.2 0.1 115.5 40.6 197.0
         July 84.0 162.4 71.6 0.1 − 0.4 0.1 157.9 0.1 118.6 41.0 199.3
         Aug 82.3 171.6 72.1 0.1 − 0.0 0.5 160.1 0.1 124.3 41.2 201.3
         Sep 82.3 156.8 73.4 0.1 − 0.0 0.2 160.9 0.0 110.2 41.2 202.2
         Oct 82.6 155.6 76.7 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 160.5 0.1 113.7 40.9 201.5
         Nov 82.8 162.6 78.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 161.1 0.1 122.4 40.8 202.0
         Dec 82.7 155.3 78.4 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 162.4 0.1 112.6 41.4 203.8
2007          Jan 82.5 165.0 81.0 0.0 − 0.0 − 167.8 0.1 119.4 41.4 209.2
         Feb 82.2 153.7 86.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 164.8 0.1 115.7 41.9 206.7         Mar 82.0 135.0 95.7 0.0 − 0.2 − 165.3 0.1 104.5 42.8 208.2
         Apr 82.7 128.2 103.9 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 167.1 0.1 104.2 43.2 210.4
         May 83.4 130.6 107.1 0.2 − 0.1 0.0 168.3 0.1 109.2 43.5 212.0
         June 83.6 124.0 108.7 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 170.6 0.1 101.4 44.1 214.8
         July 82.7 125.1 108.8 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 171.8 0.1 99.7 45.0 216.8
         Aug 81.1 135.4 104.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 173.9 0.1 102.6 44.9 218.8
         Sep 81.1 125.0 114.2 0.2 4.1 0.3 0.6 174.1 0.1 104.4 45.2 219.6
         Oct 82.4 93.2 142.9 0.2 − 0.9 0.2 173.5 0.1 98.8 45.2 219.6
         Nov 84.6 78.3 139.0 0.0 − 0.4 1.5 174.1 0.0 80.0 45.9 220.5         Dec 84.6 73.2 133.6 0.3 − 0.3 0.7 175.2 0.1 68.7 46.7 222.1
2008          Jan 91.5 102.1 134.6 0.1 − 0.6 26.4 180.6 0.1 73.7 46.9 228.1
         Feb 96.0 60.8 130.6 0.0 − 0.2 0.1 176.2 0.0 63.3 47.7 224.1         Mar 90.8 59.8 122.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 − 177.5 0.1 46.9 48.6 226.3
         Apr 92.9 76.7 109.9 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 179.7 0.0 52.4 48.6 228.7
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem forof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 3.1 − 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 15.2 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 1.3 2005          Oct 
+ 7.2 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.0 + 2.5 + 6.7 − 1.2 + 2.9          Nov 
− 1.9 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.8 + 6.9          Dec 
+ 4.4 + 15.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 19.4 − 6.8 + 6.1 + 1.1 + 20.4 2006          Jan 
+ 7.6 − 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 10.8 + 12.4 + 4.8 + 1.3 − 9.4          Feb 
− 0.5 − 10.7 + 8.5 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.9 + 5.3          Mar 
+ 3.2 − 9.2 + 9.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 1.2 + 7.0          Apr 
+ 9.1 + 1.2 + 6.3 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 12.7 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 14.3          May
− 0.1 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 2.9 − 5.6 − 3.5 + 2.1 + 4.9          June
− 2.6 + 29.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 21.5 − 5.1 + 3.0 + 10.3          July
− 6.7 + 13.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.5 + 0.3 + 9.4 + 6.0 − 9.4 + 0.8 + 9.7          Aug 
− 0.3 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 11.6 − 4.1 − 0.7 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.6 − 5.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.5          Oct 
+ 0.7 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − + 4.3 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 4.1          Nov 
− 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 5.8 − 5.3 − 5.8 + 6.2 + 12.0          Dec − 1.2 + 9.2
+ 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 20.9 − 9.9 − 6.3 + 2.1 + 23.1 2007          Jan 
− 3.7 − 21.8 + 4.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 14.9 + 2.9 − 10.4 + 1.2 − 13.7          Feb 
− 0.5 − 11.8 + 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.6 − 0.8 − 6.9 + 4.1 + 6.0          Mar 
+ 2.0 − 7.0 + 11.1 + 0.5 − − 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 5.2 + 2.0 + 10.5          Apr 
+ 2.5 − 0.1 + 4.3 − 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.2 + 3.1 − 2.0 + 0.6 + 6.1          May+ 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 5.2 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 3.0 + 7.9          June
− 3.4 + 10.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 6.1 + 4.8 − 7.0 + 3.4 + 9.5          July
− 6.3 + 6.3
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − + 8.4 − 1.6 − 9.4 + 2.4 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 0.6 − 33.0 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.3          Sep 
+ 4.6 − 74.4 + 90.6 + 0.1 − 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 11.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 5.7 − 14.1 + 2.7 − 0.2 − − 1.0 + 4.2 + 2.8 − 7.8 − 5.3 + 1.0 + 2.8          Nov 
− 0.1 − 7.2 + 13.6 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − 2.9 + 4.5 + 6.0 − 3.3 + 2.4 + 6.8          Dec 
+ 16.3 + 82.7 − 9.8 − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 66.2 + 23.6 − 15.5 + 10.2 + 4.1 + 28.3 2008          Jan 
+ 9.8 − 81.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − − 0.7 − 67.8 − 16.5 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 1.5 − 15.7          Feb 
− 10.3 + 7.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 1.5 + 8.0 − 14.3 + 2.9 + 4.2          Mar 
+ 5.8 + 0.2 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 8.5 + 10.5 − 3.6 + 2.2 + 11.2          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 2005          Oct 
+ 2.1 − 4.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.2 + 0.1          Nov 
− 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 6.6 + 0.5 + 2.1          Dec 
+ 1.9 + 13.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 − 0.1 + 4.9 2006          Jan 
+ 2.5 + 4.0 + 5.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 2.3 + 0.0 + 14.2 + 0.3 − 1.9          Feb 
− 0.6 − 12.3 + 6.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 1.1          Mar 
+ 1.5 − 8.0 + 6.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9          Apr 
+ 2.7 + 14.4 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 14.9 + 0.5 + 3.7          May
− 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.6 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 0.9 + 8.4 − 2.1 − 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.4          July
− 1.7 + 9.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − − 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 2.0          Aug + 0.0 − 14.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 14.1 + 0.1 + 0.8          Sep 
+ 0.3 − 1.2 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.4 − 0.7          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 7.0 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 8.7 − 0.1 + 0.5          Nov 
− 0.1 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.3 − 0.0 − 9.7 + 0.5 + 1.9          Dec 
− 0.2 + 9.8 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − + 5.3 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.0 + 5.3 2007          Jan 
− 0.4 − 11.4 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 2.9 − 0.0 − 3.7 + 0.5 − 2.4          Feb 
− 0.1 − 18.7 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.0 − 11.2 + 0.9 + 1.5          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 6.8 + 8.2 + 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.2          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.6          May
+ 0.1 − 6.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 7.8 + 0.6 + 2.8          June
− 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1
+ 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 2.0          July
− 1.6 + 10.3 − 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 2.0          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 10.4 + 9.3 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.7          Sep 
+ 1.3 − 31.9 + 28.7 + 0.1 − 4.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 2.2 − 14.9 − 3.8 − 0.2 − − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 18.8 + 0.7 + 0.9          Nov − 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.5 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 11.3 + 0.8 + 1.6          Dec 
+ 6.9 + 28.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.4 + 25.6 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.2 + 6.0 2008          Jan 
+ 4.5 − 41.3 − 4.0 − 0.1 − − 0.4 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.8 − 4.0          Feb 
− 5.2 − 1.0 − 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 0.9 + 2.2          Mar 
+ 2.1 + 16.9 − 12.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 2.4          Apr 
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing
euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2007 Aug                31 1,157.5 172.0 144.2 9.7 134.5 26.4 17.5 17.5 −
         Sep                  7 1,207.4 171.9 144.7 9.7 135.1 25.2 15.9 15.9 −
                              14 1,299.3 171.9 145.4 9.7 135.7 23.9 16.3 16.3 −
                              21 1,189.6 171.9 147.0 9.6 137.4 23.2 14.8 14.8 −
                              28 3 1,250.4 3 186.2 3 142.0 9.4 3 132.6 3 23.9 16.1 16.1 −
         Oct                  5 1,228.4 186.1 141.9 9.4 132.6 25.0 15.4 15.4 −
                              12 1,289.1 186.0 143.4 9.4 134.0 23.4 16.2 16.2 −
                              19 1,249.3 185.8 146.6 9.3 137.3 20.5 17.0 17.0 −
                              26 1,263.5 185.7 142.2 9.3 132.9 23.8 18.1 18.1 −
         Nov                  2 1,256.3 185.5 144.4 9.3 135.1 22.8 18.0 18.0 −
                                9 1,248.5 185.5 143.0 9.3 133.7 23.4 17.7 17.7 −
                              16 1,271.8 185.4 141.5 9.3 132.3 23.2 15.7 15.7 −
                              23 1,285.5 185.4 141.9 9.2 132.7 24.2 15.8 15.8 −
                              30 1,297.3 185.4 142.2 9.2 132.9 25.2 14.5 14.5 −
         Dec                  7 1,293.0 185.3 144.8 9.2 135.6 22.6 15.0 15.0 −
                              14 1,338.4 185.3 142.7 9.2 133.5 25.1 14.0 14.0 −
                              21 1,473.0 184.5 137.6 9.2 128.3 35.7 13.6 13.6 −
                              28 1,500.8 184.5 138.0 9.3 128.8 43.2 13.6 13.6 −
2008 Jan                  4 3 1,285.8 3 201.7 3 138.0 9.1 3 128.8 3 41.7 14.7 14.7 −
                              11 1,311.1 201.7 140.6 9.1 131.5 38.7 14.5 14.5 −
                              18 1,350.8 201.7 141.0 9.1 131.8 36.9 14.7 14.7 −
                              25 1,337.5 201.6 140.0 9.1 130.9 36.4 16.2 16.2 −
         Feb                  1 1,330.9 201.5 143.0 9.1 133.9 34.5 14.5 14.5 −
                                8 1,328.3 201.4 140.8 9.1 131.7 37.0 15.0 15.0 −
                              15 1,348.1 201.4 140.7 9.1 131.6 30.3 14.6 14.6 −
                              22 1,338.9 201.3 139.3 9.1 130.2 30.7 14.3 14.3 −
                              29 1,338.8 201.3 137.9 9.1 128.8 24.7 14.6 14.6 −
         Mar                  7 1,332.9 201.2 136.4 9.0 127.3 26.7 15.2 15.2 −
                              14 1,367.1 201.2 139.1 9.0 130.2 24.4 14.8 14.8 −
                              20 1,378.7 201.1 139.4 9.0 130.4 25.3 14.8 14.8 −
                              28 1,393.3 201.1 140.9 9.0 131.8 34.6 14.9 14.9 −
         Apr                  4 3 1,371.4 3 209.7 3 136.7 8.7 3 128.0 3 31.7 14.8 14.8 −
                              11 1,361.8 209.7 136.2 8.8 127.4 41.7 14.9 14.9 −
                              18 1,433.2 209.7 138.2 8.8 129.4 40.5 15.8 15.8 −
                              25 1,405.9 209.6 138.7 8.8 129.9 40.1 15.9 15.9 −
         May                 2 1,399.8 209.6 138.0 8.7 129.2 39.6 16.3 16.3 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2006          June 3 359.1 3 52.0 3 33.9 3.6 3 30.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 364.4 52.0 34.3 3.5 30.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 358.2 52.0 33.6 3.5 30.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 362.4 52.3 33.6 3.4 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 366.4 52.3 33.2 3.1 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 359.2 52.3 33.3 3.1 30.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 373.7 3 53.1 3 31.7 3.0 3 28.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
2007          Jan 357.9 53.1 32.1 3.0 29.1 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 365.5 53.1 31.5 2.7 28.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 371.4 3 54.8 31.3 2.6 28.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 370.9 54.8 32.5 2.6 29.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 377.2 54.8 33.2 2.7 30.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 373.5 3 52.8 3 32.0 2.7 3 29.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 382.1 52.8 31.9 2.6 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 369.6 52.8 31.9 2.6 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 394.0 3 57.2 3 31.4 2.5 3 28.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 394.6 57.2 31.1 2.5 28.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 410.3 57.2 30.8 2.5 28.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 483.7 3 62.4 3 30.1 2.4 3 27.7 7.1 0.3 0.3 −
2008          Jan 415.5 62.4 30.4 2.4 28.0 6.9 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 432.2 62.4 30.8 2.4 28.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 453.4 3 65.1 3 30.0 2.3 3 27.6 4.5 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 439.6 65.1 31.1 2.3 28.7 8.1 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other
 claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
400.1 210.0 190.0 − − 0.1 0.0 11.8 93.3 37.1 255.2 2007 Aug                31
446.3 256.0 190.0 − − 0.3 0.0 11.1 94.9 37.1 260.3          Sep                  7
534.0 269.0 265.0 − − 0.0 0.0 11.3 94.7 37.1 264.7                               14
420.6 155.0 265.0 − − 0.6 0.0 12.8 94.5 37.1 267.6                               21
455.2 190.0 265.0 − − 0.2 0.0 13.3 3 95.4 37.1 3 281.2                               28
428.0 163.0 265.0 − − 0.0 0.0 13.9 97.3 37.1 283.7          Oct                  5
483.0 218.0 265.0 − − − 0.0 15.1 96.6 37.1 288.3                               12
436.0 171.0 265.0 − − − 0.0 15.2 95.8 37.1 295.2                               19
447.0 182.0 265.0 − − 0.0 0.0 15.4 95.8 37.1 298.3                               26
435.0 170.0 265.0 − − 0.0 0.0 17.5 95.7 37.1 300.2          Nov                  2
425.0 160.0 265.0 − − 0.0 0.0 17.8 96.5 37.1 302.5                                 9
447.9 182.0 265.0 − − 0.9 0.0 20.1 95.1 37.1 305.8                               16
454.3 169.0 285.0 − − 0.3 0.0 20.2 95.3 37.1 311.3                               23
463.1 178.0 285.0 − − 0.1 0.0 21.0 95.9 37.1 313.1                               30
448.8 163.0 285.0 − − 0.8 0.0 22.5 97.2 37.1 319.6          Dec                  7
488.7 218.5 270.0 − − 0.2 0.0 23.4 98.4 37.1 323.8                               14
617.1 348.6 268.5 − − 0.0 0.0 23.8 97.2 37.1 326.3                               21
637.1 368.6 268.5 − − 0.0 0.0 23.8 96.2 37.1 327.4                               28
397.5 128.5 268.5 − − 0.6 − 26.2 98.2 38.7 3 329.0 2008 Jan                  4
420.2 151.5 268.5 − − 0.2 0.0 27.0 97.3 38.7 332.3                               11
459.0 190.5 268.5 − − 0.0 0.0 30.3 96.7 38.7 331.8                               18
444.5 175.5 268.5 − − 0.5 0.0 28.6 98.1 38.7 333.5                               25
436.0 167.5 268.5 − − 0.0 0.0 30.7 99.3 38.6 332.7          Feb                  1
430.4 161.5 268.5 − − 0.4 0.0 30.6 100.7 38.6 333.7                                 8
456.0 187.5 268.5 − − − 0.0 31.0 102.0 38.6 333.4                               15
446.5 178.0 268.5 − − 0.0 0.0 31.4 104.8 38.6 331.9                               22
451.5 183.0 268.5 − − − 0.0 30.8 106.1 38.6 333.3                               29
447.0 178.5 268.5 − − 0.0 0.0 31.2 107.5 38.6 329.1          Mar                  7
476.5 209.0 267.4 − − 0.0 0.0 33.5 107.3 38.6 331.6                               14
484.6 201.7 267.4 15.0 − 0.5 0.0 34.2 107.3 38.6 333.2                               20
484.5 216.1 268.4 − − − 0.0 34.8 108.3 38.6 335.4                               28
444.6 151.4 293.1 − − 0.0 0.0 34.2 3 109.6 38.6 3 351.6          Apr                  4
425.0 131.6 293.1 − − 0.2 0.0 35.2 109.6 38.6 350.9                               11
499.5 204.5 295.0 − − 0.0 0.0 34.6 109.3 38.6 347.0                               18
468.0 173.0 295.0 − − 0.0 0.0 34.8 109.4 38.6 350.7                               25
465.0 170.0 295.0 − − 0.0 0.0 32.0 110.0 38.0 351.3          May                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
248.8 177.3 71.5 − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3 2006          June
253.8 177.9 72.8 − − 3.2 − 0.3 − 4.4 19.3          July
223.0 147.3 75.7 − − 0.0 − 1.6 − 4.4 43.4          Aug 
234.1 155.2 78.5 − − 0.5 − 3.0 − 4.4 34.7          Sep 
243.3 164.0 79.3 − − 0.0 − 3.0 − 4.4 29.9          Oct 
232.0 155.2 76.7 − − 0.0 − 3.0 − 4.4 34.0          Nov 256.3 173.9 82.3 − − 0.1 − 3.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec 
232.5 150.1 82.3 − − 0.0 − 3.1 − 4.4 32.4 2007          Jan 
235.0 143.5 91.5 − − 0.0 − 3.1 − 4.4 38.0          Feb 
237.3 130.8 106.4 − − 0.1 − 3.1 − 4.4 40.1          Mar 
247.4 139.6 107.5 − − 0.4 − 3.1 − 4.4 28.3          Apr 
236.9 126.6 110.3 − − 0.0 − 3.2 − 4.4 44.5          May
243.4 136.2 107.0 − − 0.2 − 3.2 − 4.4 37.3          June
248.5 146.0 102.4 − − − − 3.3 − 4.4 41.0          July
210.4 89.9 120.5 − − 0.0 − 3.3 − 4.4 66.5          Aug 223.3 83.8 139.3 − − 0.2 − 4.3 − 4.4
3 73.1          Sep 
202.2 62.9 139.3 − − 0.0 − 7.0 − 4.4 92.4          Oct 
207.2 77.3 129.9 − − 0.0 − 10.1 − 4.4 100.3          Nov 
268.0 133.1 134.8 − − 0.1 − 13.1 − 4.4 3 98.4          Dec 
172.7 47.0 125.7 − − 0.0 − 17.3 − 4.4 120.9 2008          Jan 
178.7 59.0 119.7 − − − − 18.5 − 4.4 137.1          Feb 213.1 98.4 103.5 11.2 − 0.0 − 20.6 − 4.4
3 115.4          Mar 
192.5 80.1 112.4 − − 0.0 − 19.9 − 4.4 118.1          Apr 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2007 Aug                31 1,157.5 637.2 132.6 132.3 0.3 − − − 0.2 − 73.2 65.4 7.8
         Sep                  7 1,207.4 639.2 182.6 181.5 1.0 − − − 0.1 − 68.1 60.1 7.9
                              14 1,299.3 637.5 276.3 274.6 1.7 − − 0.0 0.1 − 64.3 56.6 7.7
                              21 1,189.6 635.0 155.1 154.7 0.4 − − 0.0 0.1 − 76.3 68.7 7.6
                              28 5 1,250.4 637.3 192.2 186.7 5.5 − − 0.0 0.2 − 73.6 66.1 7.4
         Oct                  5 1,228.4 641.3 169.9 165.3 4.6 − − 0.0 0.1 − 67.9 60.3 7.5
                              12 1,289.1 640.6 232.0 201.6 0.3 30.0 − 0.0 0.1 − 64.5 57.1 7.4
                              19 1,249.3 638.7 193.5 192.8 0.7 − − 0.0 0.1 − 61.6 54.4 7.3
                              26 1,263.5 637.8 191.9 191.7 0.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 76.6 69.4 7.2
         Nov                  2 1,256.3 643.5 192.2 192.0 0.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 58.3 50.8 7.4
                                9 1,248.5 642.1 191.1 190.8 0.3 − − 0.0 0.2 − 53.4 45.9 7.5
                              16 1,271.8 640.6 215.3 215.1 0.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 53.4 45.4 7.9
                              23 1,285.5 639.3 195.0 194.8 0.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 81.5 73.9 7.7
                              30 1,297.3 645.7 203.8 203.5 0.3 − − 0.0 0.1 − 75.1 67.5 7.6
         Dec                  7 1,293.0 655.4 173.5 164.9 0.6 8.0 − 0.0 0.2 − 83.9 76.2 7.7
                              14 1,338.4 659.6 235.0 234.8 0.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 58.0 48.8 9.3
                              21 1,473.0 675.9 356.0 214.2 0.2 141.6 − 0.0 0.1 − 49.9 42.1 7.7
                              28 1,500.8 678.6 376.5 223.2 1.9 150.0 − 1.5 0.1 − 44.8 36.9 7.8
2008 Jan                  4 5 1,285.8 670.8 144.2 143.7 0.6 − − 0.0 0.3 − 57.6 50.1 7.5
                              11 1,311.1 659.4 181.3 180.6 0.7 − − 0.0 0.3 − 55.0 47.1 7.9
                              18 1,350.8 653.2 231.1 230.8 0.2 − − 0.0 0.3 − 47.1 38.8 8.3
                              25 1,337.5 649.5 193.2 192.7 0.5 − − 0.0 0.3 − 72.0 64.1 7.9
         Feb                  1 1,330.9 652.6 199.2 198.5 0.5 − − 0.3 0.3 − 55.1 47.8 7.2
                                8 1,328.3 653.4 197.2 196.5 0.4 − − 0.4 0.3 − 52.1 45.1 7.0
                              15 1,348.1 653.0 222.9 222.3 0.2 − − 0.4 0.3 − 52.6 45.5 7.1
                              22 1,338.9 650.6 205.8 205.1 0.2 − − 0.4 0.2 − 66.3 58.9 7.4
                              29 1,338.8 654.0 195.6 194.9 0.2 − − 0.6 0.2 − 80.7 73.1 7.6
         Mar                  7 1,332.9 657.3 196.3 195.8 0.2 − − 0.3 0.2 − 69.4 62.0 7.5
                              14 1,367.1 658.7 229.5 229.0 0.2 − − 0.3 0.2 − 71.0 63.5 7.5
                              20 1,378.7 665.7 220.6 219.6 0.7 − − 0.3 0.2 − 80.7 72.9 7.8
                              28 1,393.3 661.0 224.6 223.4 1.0 − − 0.2 0.2 − 84.8 77.1 7.7
         Apr                  4 5 1,371.4 662.6 195.6 194.7 0.6 − − 0.3 0.2 − 76.3 68.8 7.5
                              11 1,361.8 662.3 175.5 174.9 0.3 − − 0.3 0.2 − 75.1 67.6 7.5
                              18 1,433.2 662.8 247.0 246.3 0.3 − − 0.4 0.2 − 72.6 65.0 7.7
                              25 1,405.9 664.3 197.4 196.9 0.1 − − 0.3 0.2 − 90.4 83.1 7.3
         May                 2 1,399.8 671.7 209.3 209.1 0.1 − − 0.2 0.2 − 65.1 57.6 7.6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2006          June 5 359.1 157.8 39.9 39.4 0.5 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 364.4 160.3 52.4 52.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Aug 358.2 159.3 46.0 45.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4         Sep 
5 362.4 160.3 46.2 45.5 0.7 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 366.4 161.8 48.0 47.8 0.2 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Nov 359.2 162.8 39.2 39.2 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4         Dec 373.7 170.9 48.0 47.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2007          Jan 357.9 163.6 37.8 37.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Feb 365.5 164.1 43.7 43.6 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         Mar 
5 371.4 166.6 47.9 47.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Apr 370.9 169.7 43.3 43.0 0.2 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.3         May 377.2 169.9 45.1 45.1 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4         June
5 373.5 171.9 39.8 39.6 0.3 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         July 382.1 173.9 46.6 46.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.3         Aug 369.6 173.1 31.8 31.5 0.2 − − − − − 0.3 0.0 0.3         Sep 
5 394.0 173.1 47.0 42.2 4.8 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Oct 394.6 174.3 43.3 43.1 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.3         Nov 410.3 175.4 52.9 52.7 0.2 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4         Dec 
5 483.7 183.8 109.5 64.0 4.9 40.6 − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2008          Jan 415.5 176.2 42.6 42.4 0.2 − − − − − 0.8 0.0 0.8         Feb 432.2 177.1 54.3 54.2 0.2 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5         Mar 
5 453.4 179.0 70.1 69.3 0.8 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 439.6 181.4 53.4 53.3 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.0 0.7
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of thisfinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
20.9 0.1 19.4 19.4 − 5.5 82.5 − 117.0 68.9 2007 Aug                31
20.9 0.1 18.6 18.6 − 5.5 86.3 − 117.0 68.9          Sep                  7
22.1 0.6 18.1 18.1 − 5.5 88.9 − 117.0 68.9                               14
21.8 0.6 18.5 18.5 − 5.5 90.7 − 117.0 68.9                               21
23.9 0.6 5 18.1 5 18.1 − 5.4 5 99.2 − 5 131.1 68.9                               28
23.9 0.3 19.1 19.1 − 5.4 100.4 − 131.1 68.9          Oct                  5
25.0 0.3 19.1 19.1 − 5.4 102.1 − 131.1 68.9                               12
25.2 0.3 19.7 19.7 − 5.4 104.8 − 131.1 68.9                               19
25.4 0.2 18.6 18.6 − 5.4 107.5 − 131.1 68.9                               26
27.3 0.3 19.7 19.7 − 5.4 109.3 − 131.1 68.9          Nov                  2
26.8 0.2 18.8 18.8 − 5.4 110.5 − 131.1 68.9                                 9
27.3 0.9 16.4 16.4 − 5.4 112.5 − 131.1 68.9                               16
28.3 0.3 18.3 18.3 − 5.4 117.3 − 131.1 68.9                               23
28.7 0.2 19.4 19.4 − 5.4 118.7 − 131.1 68.9                               30
30.9 0.5 19.4 19.4 − 5.4 124.0 − 131.1 68.9          Dec                  7
31.4 0.4 19.9 19.9 − 5.4 128.6 − 131.1 68.9                               14
38.2 0.9 16.8 16.8 − 5.4 129.8 − 131.1 68.9                               21
45.5 2.4 16.2 16.2 − 5.4 131.4 − 131.1 68.9                               28
45.6 1.6 5 17.6 5 17.6 − 5.3 5 123.7 − 5 147.7 71.4 2008 Jan                  4
45.6 1.1 18.8 18.8 − 5.3 126.8 − 147.7 69.7                               11
48.6 1.4 18.5 18.5 − 5.3 127.9 − 147.7 69.7                               18
51.0 1.2 18.0 18.0 − 5.3 129.7 − 147.7 69.7                               25
48.8 1.3 19.3 19.3 − 5.3 131.7 − 147.7 69.7          Feb                  1
48.7 1.0 19.7 19.7 − 5.3 133.3 − 147.7 69.7                                 8
42.0 1.2 19.6 19.6 − 5.3 133.4 − 147.7 70.2                               15
41.4 1.1 18.6 18.6 − 5.3 131.5 − 147.7 70.5                               22
34.4 0.8 18.6 18.6 − 5.3 130.9 − 147.7 70.6                               29
35.4 0.9 18.8 18.8 − 5.3 131.0 − 147.7 70.6          Mar                  7
36.1 0.6 19.4 19.4 − 5.3 128.1 − 147.7 70.6                               14
36.8 1.5 18.8 18.8 − 5.3 130.7 − 147.7 70.6                               20
47.6 1.3 19.6 19.6 − 5.3 130.6 − 147.7 70.6                               28
48.0 1.2 5 18.0 5 18.0 − 5.1 5 136.6 − 5 156.2 71.4          Apr                  4
57.4 0.8 18.5 18.5 − 5.1 139.1 − 156.2 71.4                               11
58.4 0.8 19.1 19.1 − 5.1 139.5 − 156.2 71.4                               18
58.1 0.9 19.3 19.3 − 5.1 142.2 − 156.2 71.8                               25
57.9 1.7 17.5 17.5 − 5.1 143.3 − 156.2 71.8          May                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
3.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.4 22.3 80.6 5 45.8 5.0 2006          June
3.6 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.4 11.6 81.2 45.8 5.0          July
3.6 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.4 11.1 83.9 45.8 5.0          Aug 3.6 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 11.8 85.9
5 46.4 5.0          Sep 
3.7 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 11.9 86.5 46.4 5.0          Oct 3.9 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 1.4 12.4 86.3 46.4 5.0          Nov 3.7 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 1.4 13.0 84.3 45.9 5.0          Dec 
3.8 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.4 12.9 85.5 45.9 5.0 2007          Jan 
3.7 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 1.4 13.5 86.5 45.9 5.0          Feb 
3.8 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 1.4 10.1 87.5
5 47.4 5.0          Mar 
3.8 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.4 10.0 87.5 47.4 5.0          Apr 4.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.4 10.8 90.4 47.4 5.0          May3.8 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.4 12.4 91.6
5 44.9 5.0          June
4.1 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.4 11.6 92.1 44.9 5.0          July4.1 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.4 12.6 94.4 44.9 5.0          Aug 5.4 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.3 13.6 96.1
5 49.5 5.0          Sep 
7.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.3 13.0 97.5 49.5 5.0          Oct 
11.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.3 14.1 98.6 49.5 5.0          Nov 14.0 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.3
5 13.1 99.5 5 55.0 5.0          Dec 
18.4 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.3 13.3 100.2 55.0 5.0 2008          Jan 
19.4 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 14.1 102.4 55.0 5.0          Feb 21.7 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.3 10.7 103.7
5 58.1 5.0          Mar 
21.2 0.0 4.3 4.3 − 1.3 10.2 104.1 58.1 5.0          Apr 
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.22004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.92007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2006          June 7,075.1 13.8 2,316.3 1,738.4 1,130.8 607.6 577.9 391.7 186.2 3,481.8 3,122.7 2,560.2 2,265.4
         July 7,040.0 13.7 2,299.7 1,733.4 1,133.2 600.1 566.3 379.1 187.2 3,476.6 3,119.5 2,555.2 2,261.1
         Aug 7,034.6 13.6 2,300.0 1,732.6 1,136.0 596.7 567.3 376.8 190.5 3,472.6 3,117.7 2,558.7 2,263.2
         Sep 7,077.2 14.2 2,278.0 1,705.0 1,111.7 593.3 573.0 374.8 198.2 3,492.6 3,122.1 2,571.2 2,280.7
         Oct 7,080.1 14.4 2,278.7 1,697.5 1,108.1 589.4 581.2 376.3 204.9 3,496.5 3,119.2 2,563.0 2,272.3
         Nov 7,141.2 13.6 2,293.7 1,712.4 1,126.3 586.2 581.3 365.9 215.3 3,506.4 3,123.3 2,560.4 2,268.4         Dec 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007          Jan 7,192.4 13.3 2,308.2 1,711.1 1,138.1 573.0 597.1 378.2 218.9 3,496.9 3,109.2 2,554.6 2,252.7
         Feb 7,230.9 13.4 2,332.2 1,717.7 1,146.7 570.9 614.5 386.6 227.9 3,487.3 3,096.0 2,547.2 2,256.2         Mar 7,288.3 13.5 2,364.4 1,749.8 1,180.5 569.3 614.6 378.3 236.3 3,496.5 3,100.8 2,555.8 2,261.3
         Apr 7,357.2 14.4 2,379.0 1,736.7 1,167.0 569.7 642.3 406.1 236.2 3,525.9 3,128.3 2,580.7 2,256.9
         May 7,389.3 14.7 2,398.4 1,744.1 1,167.2 576.9 654.3 414.7 239.6 3,511.9 3,106.1 2,558.9 2,253.1         June 7,381.7 14.2 2,396.3 1,724.1 1,156.2 567.9 672.3 423.8 248.5 3,484.4 3,071.9 2,538.0 2,261.7
         July 7,371.2 13.9 2,373.0 1,708.4 1,146.0 562.5 664.6 415.4 249.2 3,489.7 3,080.8 2,541.9 2,265.9
         Aug 7,417.4 14.1 2,405.9 1,735.3 1,178.1 557.2 670.5 419.3 251.2 3,485.8 3,071.6 2,544.4 2,271.6         Sep 7,500.9 14.4 2,438.4 1,756.8 1,201.2 555.6 681.5 429.9 251.7 3,493.0 3,074.0 2,552.6 2,278.5
         Oct 7,500.5 14.5 2,453.6 1,770.9 1,208.5 562.4 682.7 430.2 252.5 3,485.7 3,058.5 2,543.7 2,278.4
         Nov 7,553.6 14.1 2,489.4 1,791.5 1,226.5 565.1 697.9 443.9 253.9 3,482.3 3,057.5 2,544.1 2,279.6         Dec 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008          Jan 7,574.1 14.1 2,506.6 1,798.8 1,240.4 558.5 707.8 454.1 253.7 3,530.9 3,084.8 2,585.0 2,297.3
         Feb 7,596.6 13.6 2,512.7 1,806.7 1,250.0 556.7 706.0 450.6 255.5 3,521.3 3,079.8 2,577.1 2,306.5         Mar 7,641.7 14.2 2,516.2 1,818.8 1,262.4 556.4 697.4 442.9 254.5 3,561.3 3,095.9 2,593.5 2,316.4
 Changes 1
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.12002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.42004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2005 197.2 0.1 101.8 13.2 25.7 − 12.5 88.6 50.5 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 349.0 1.1 76.2 − 2.4 25.2 − 27.6 78.6 17.3 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 509.7 1.5 210.1 132.5 153.3 − 20.8 77.6 41.6 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.1
2006          July − 34.3 − 0.1 − 16.4 − 5.1 2.4 − 7.5 − 11.4 − 12.6 1.3 − 6.9 − 3.4 − 5.2 − 3.6
         Aug − 2.2 − 0.0 1.4 0.3 3.6 − 3.2 1.0 − 2.3 3.3 − 4.3 − 1.6 3.8 2.7         Sep 76.9 0.6 14.6 9.0 7.3 1.7 5.6 − 2.0 7.6 23.7 8.4 16.4 18.1
         Oct 4.6 0.2 2.4 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 3.9 8.2 1.5 6.7 4.2 − 2.7 − 8.0 − 8.1
         Nov 75.6 − 0.8 15.3 15.1 18.2 − 3.0 0.2 − 10.3 10.5 12.6 6.1 − 0.6 − 1.9         Dec 13.9 2.8 21.3 6.6 12.9 − 6.4 14.7 10.9 3.8 − 40.7 − 34.3 − 21.0 − 23.5
2007          Jan 33.9 − 3.1 − 6.5 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 36.3 26.8 21.3 9.8
         Feb 46.3 0.1 23.7 6.7 8.7 − 1.9 17.0 8.4 8.7 − 7.0 − 11.6 − 5.9 4.8         Mar 61.6 0.1 32.3 32.2 33.8 − 1.6 0.1 − 8.3 8.4 10.4 5.8 9.6 5.8
         Apr 77.8 0.9 13.0 − 14.6 − 14.0 − 0.6 27.6 27.6 − 0.0 32.6 29.9 27.2 − 3.2
         May 28.0 0.3 19.0 7.4 0.2 7.2 11.6 8.2 3.4 − 13.9 − 22.3 − 21.9 − 3.7         June − 6.0 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 19.0 − 9.9 − 9.0 18.0 9.0 9.0 − 27.5 − 34.3 − 21.0 8.1
         July − 4.4 − 0.3 − 23.3 − 15.0 − 9.5 − 5.4 − 8.3 − 8.8 0.5 7.2 10.4 5.5 4.4
         Aug 42.1 0.2 32.8 26.9 32.2 − 5.3 5.9 3.9 2.0 − 3.9 − 9.3 2.4 5.8         Sep 101.2 0.3 32.9 21.7 23.1 − 1.4 11.2 10.5 0.7 10.3 4.6 10.3 8.9
         Oct 26.7 0.2 16.8 14.7 7.2 7.5 2.1 0.4 1.8 5.7 − 5.9 − 2.6 1.0
         Nov 63.1 − 0.4 35.9 20.7 18.0 2.7 15.3 13.7 1.6 − 1.9 − 0.2 1.2 1.9         Dec 39.4 3.7 34.3 56.7 64.0 − 7.3 − 22.4 − 22.5 0.2 5.8 4.9 12.5 9.6
2008          Jan − 31.3 − 3.7 − 33.0 − 63.9 − 65.9 2.0 30.9 31.6 − 0.7 35.9 26.2 32.1 10.5
         Feb 33.0 − 0.5 6.4 8.0 9.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 3.5 1.9 − 7.9 − 4.1 − 6.9 10.1         Mar 45.0 0.6 3.6 12.2 12.5 − 0.3 − 8.6 − 7.7 − 0.9 41.1 17.0 17.0 10.4
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007
294.9 562.5 391.0 171.5 359.1 200.3 82.2 158.8 31.1 127.7 1,097.0 892.0 166.1 2006          June
294.0 564.3 392.1 172.2 357.1 200.6 80.9 156.6 31.8 124.8 1,084.4 880.4 165.6          July
295.5 559.0 389.0 170.0 354.9 200.6 81.6 154.3 30.8 123.5 1,084.5 880.1 163.8          Aug 
290.5 550.9 387.9 163.0 370.5 217.2 87.0 153.3 27.8 125.5 1,123.3 904.0 169.2          Sep 
290.7 556.2 392.6 163.6 377.3 224.3 89.2 153.0 26.1 126.9 1,118.3 893.3 172.2          Oct 
292.0 562.9 393.2 169.8 383.2 229.9 88.8 153.2 26.1 127.2 1,148.4 916.9 179.0          Nov 294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8          Dec 
301.9 554.5 389.0 165.5 387.7 233.6 90.5 154.1 26.0 128.1 1,191.3 947.7 182.6 2007          Jan 
291.0 548.8 384.8 164.0 391.3 239.4 93.4 151.9 25.8 126.1 1,212.1 955.0 185.9          Feb 
294.5 545.0 379.2 165.8 395.7 244.5 96.0 151.2 24.7 126.5 1,229.3 969.4 184.6          Mar 
323.9 547.6 380.6 167.0 397.6 250.0 96.4 147.6 25.0 122.5 1,245.5 980.9 192.3          Apr 
305.8 547.2 378.5 168.7 405.8 255.7 99.0 150.1 24.3 125.8 1,259.2 979.3 205.1          May276.3 533.9 372.3 161.6 412.5 263.2 103.1 149.2 25.5 123.8 1,282.6 996.3 204.3          June
276.1 538.9 378.0 160.9 408.9 264.6 100.0 144.3 25.2 119.1 1,291.5 1,004.7 203.1          July
272.8 527.2 371.6 155.6 414.3 276.0 112.0 138.2 25.7 112.5 1,300.5 1,005.8 211.0          Aug 274.0 521.4 366.1 155.3 419.0 284.7 116.4 134.3 24.9 109.5 1,334.3 1,039.6 220.9          Sep 
265.3 514.8 364.6 150.3 427.1 292.8 121.4 134.4 24.9 109.4 1,325.3 1,022.3 221.5          Oct 
264.5 513.4 362.9 150.5 424.8 295.5 122.2 129.3 25.4 103.9 1,344.7 1,031.3 223.1          Nov 267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4          Dec 
287.6 499.9 357.1 142.8 446.1 309.7 141.2 136.4 25.9 110.5 1,307.3 1,006.0 215.2 2008          Jan 
270.6 502.7 353.4 149.3 441.5 302.8 135.7 138.7 26.1 112.7 1,326.0 1,022.5 223.1          Feb 
277.1 502.5 350.9 151.5 465.4 326.3 140.3 139.1 26.2 112.9 1,327.0 1,035.8 223.0          Mar 
Changes 1
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.1 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.7 31.6 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.9 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.9 136.8 21.1 2007
− 1.7 1.8 1.1 0.7 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 11.2 − 11.6 0.3 2006          July
1.2 − 5.4 − 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.7 0.1 0.7 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.8 1.8 1.2 − 1.0          Aug 
− 1.6 − 8.1 − 1.0 − 7.1 15.3 16.4 5.3 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 33.3 23.1 4.7          Sep 
0.1 5.3 4.7 0.6 6.9 7.3 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.6 − 4.9 − 9.9 2.7          Oct 
1.3 6.8 0.5 6.2 6.5 6.1 0.1 0.4 0.0 0.4 42.2 34.7 6.2          Nov 2.5 − 13.3 − 2.9 − 10.4 − 6.4 − 1.9 − 3.6 − 4.5 0.0 − 4.5 25.8 19.0 4.8          Dec 
11.5 5.5 − 1.2 6.7 9.4 4.2 3.8 5.2 − 0.3 5.5 17.3 9.9 − 10.2 2007          Jan 
− 10.7 − 5.7 − 4.3 − 1.4 4.6 6.7 3.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 27.4 13.5 2.2          Feb 
3.8 − 3.8 − 5.6 1.8 4.6 4.8 2.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 0.4 20.6 17.4 − 1.8          Mar 
30.4 2.7 1.5 1.2 2.7 6.3 1.0 − 3.5 0.4 − 4.0 23.9 18.5 7.4          Apr 
− 18.2 − 0.4 − 2.1 1.7 8.4 5.9 2.9 2.5 − 0.7 3.3 10.1 − 4.9 12.4          May− 29.1 − 13.2 − 6.1 − 7.1 6.8 9.2 4.8 − 2.3 0.6 − 3.0 24.6 19.4 − 1.7          June
1.1 4.9 5.6 − 0.7 − 3.2 1.7 − 2.9 − 5.0 − 0.2 − 4.8 13.3 12.4 − 1.3          July
− 3.4 − 11.7 − 6.4 − 5.3 5.4 11.5 12.0 − 6.2 0.5 − 6.6 5.4 − 2.5 7.5          Aug 
1.4 − 5.7 − 5.4 − 0.3 5.7 9.4 5.1 − 3.7 − 0.7 − 2.9 48.4 47.0 9.3          Sep 
− 3.6 − 3.3 − 1.5 − 1.8 11.5 11.5 5.4 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 4.3 − 9.7 − 0.3          Oct − 0.7 − 1.4 − 1.7 0.3 − 1.7 3.3 1.2 − 5.0 0.5 − 5.5 28.3 16.7 1.1          Nov 
2.9 − 7.6 − 2.1 − 5.4 0.9 − 0.8 3.0 1.7 0.6 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 3.7          Dec 
21.6 − 5.8 − 3.6 − 2.2 9.7 4.4 9.9 5.3 − 0.1 5.4 − 12.6 − 10.3 − 17.9 2008          Jan 
− 17.0 2.8 − 3.7 6.5 − 3.8 − 6.2 − 5.0 2.4 0.2 2.2 28.6 24.6 6.4          Feb 
6.6 − 0.0 − 2.4 2.4 24.1 23.8 4.5 0.4 0.1 0.2 3.6 15.0 − 3.9          Mar 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
1999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.32004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.92007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2006          June 7,075.1 1,617.7 1,334.0 283.6 2,380.7 2,276.8 735.1 945.6 256.2 596.1 507.5 61.3 14.8
         July 7,040.0 1,606.6 1,334.3 272.3 2,375.8 2,274.0 728.0 952.7 261.5 593.2 503.5 58.2 11.9
         Aug 7,034.6 1,589.9 1,310.8 279.1 2,382.3 2,278.6 723.0 965.3 271.0 590.3 499.1 57.0 10.7
         Sep 7,077.2 1,583.3 1,299.5 283.8 2,392.3 2,284.0 722.6 973.7 280.2 587.7 495.3 59.2 11.9
         Oct 7,080.1 1,586.2 1,303.4 282.8 2,388.6 2,280.6 715.3 980.2 286.7 585.0 490.5 61.8 12.4
         Nov 7,141.2 1,618.6 1,320.5 298.1 2,423.1 2,310.9 742.3 987.1 293.7 581.4 484.3 63.8 13.0         Dec 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007          Jan 7,192.4 1,619.6 1,334.6 285.1 2,444.8 2,341.1 744.5 1,014.4 313.0 582.2 481.3 60.0 14.2
         Feb 7,230.9 1,623.5 1,339.1 284.4 2,447.0 2,345.0 744.5 1,020.2 317.4 580.3 477.4 58.2 13.4         Mar 7,288.3 1,652.4 1,368.1 284.3 2,455.8 2,350.8 745.9 1,026.3 324.4 578.5 474.2 61.7 15.7
         Apr 7,357.2 1,669.5 1,370.7 298.7 2,469.9 2,366.6 745.8 1,046.2 342.2 574.6 470.0 59.6 13.5
         May 7,389.3 1,664.2 1,356.6 307.6 2,485.4 2,376.3 751.7 1,054.5 349.9 570.1 465.8 60.3 16.0         June 7,381.7 1,653.4 1,357.7 295.7 2,506.8 2,394.5 760.0 1,067.8 360.3 566.7 461.7 62.6 17.4
         July 7,371.2 1,650.1 1,351.7 298.5 2,508.2 2,401.0 764.7 1,074.7 366.9 561.6 456.0 64.2 15.4
         Aug 7,417.4 1,665.0 1,359.9 305.1 2,523.9 2,418.3 759.1 1,101.4 393.4 557.8 452.1 63.0 13.6         Sep 7,500.9 1,698.6 1,380.9 317.7 2,551.3 2,441.3 768.5 1,117.9 405.7 554.8 448.5 68.6 16.6
         Oct 7,500.5 1,714.2 1,377.3 336.9 2,548.5 2,438.7 757.6 1,129.9 420.3 551.2 443.8 68.9 16.1
         Nov 7,553.6 1,719.0 1,393.4 325.7 2,592.0 2,474.9 785.8 1,141.0 430.8 548.1 439.7 70.5 18.6         Dec 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008          Jan 7,574.1 1,734.4 1,393.6 340.7 2,628.1 2,514.1 770.0 1,193.6 476.6 550.5 441.2 74.1 22.1
         Feb 7,596.6 1,736.2 1,395.6 340.6 2,638.4 2,525.9 768.8 1,209.6 491.5 547.6 439.2 73.7 19.1         Mar 7,641.7 1,759.3 1,432.8 326.5 2,644.7 2,524.5 769.7 1,211.0 492.4 543.8 437.5 79.3 26.3
 Changes 1
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.42004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 197.2 32.8 26.9 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 349.0 105.5 81.5 24.0 123.0 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.42007 509.7 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.2 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.7 5.6
2006          July − 34.3 − 10.9 0.3 − 11.2 − 4.9 − 2.8 − 7.0 7.2 5.2 − 2.9 − 4.0 − 3.2 − 2.8
         Aug − 2.2 − 15.5 − 22.5 6.9 6.0 4.1 − 5.5 12.6 9.5 − 2.9 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.3         Sep 76.9 24.4 20.1 4.3 11.2 6.7 − 0.6 9.9 9.2 − 2.6 − 3.8 2.2 1.2
         Oct 4.6 4.7 5.7 − 1.0 − 3.7 − 3.4 − 7.2 6.5 6.5 − 2.7 − 4.8 2.5 0.5
         Nov 75.6 34.6 17.9 16.7 35.2 30.9 27.5 7.0 7.1 − 3.5 − 6.1 2.2 0.6         Dec 13.9 19.1 28.2 − 9.1 26.1 30.7 3.4 22.2 16.5 5.1 3.1 − 1.8 0.9
2007          Jan 33.9 − 19.2 − 14.3 − 4.9 − 5.0 − 0.8 − 1.4 5.0 2.8 − 4.4 − 6.2 − 2.2 0.3
         Feb 46.3 4.9 4.9 0.1 2.6 4.2 0.2 5.9 4.4 − 1.8 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 0.8         Mar 61.6 29.4 29.3 0.1 9.2 5.9 1.5 6.1 7.0 − 1.8 − 3.3 3.6 2.3
         Apr 77.8 18.6 3.2 15.4 14.0 15.6 − 0.4 20.0 17.9 − 3.9 − 4.1 − 1.9 − 2.1
         May 28.0 − 5.8 − 14.3 8.5 15.3 9.5 5.8 8.2 7.7 − 4.5 − 4.2 0.6 2.4         June − 6.0 − 9.0 2.7 − 11.7 21.5 18.3 8.4 13.4 10.5 − 3.5 − 4.1 2.4 1.5
         July − 4.4 − 2.7 − 5.8 3.1 1.0 6.7 4.8 7.0 6.6 − 5.1 − 5.7 1.6 − 2.0
         Aug 42.1 14.7 8.1 6.5 15.3 16.9 − 5.7 26.3 26.4 − 3.7 − 3.9 − 1.3 − 1.8         Sep 101.2 35.8 21.9 13.9 28.3 23.7 9.8 16.9 12.6 − 3.0 − 3.6 5.9 3.1
         Oct 26.7 16.8 − 3.1 20.0 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 10.7 11.9 14.5 − 3.6 − 4.7 0.4 − 0.4
         Nov 63.1 5.9 16.5 − 10.6 43.6 36.3 28.4 11.0 10.2 − 3.1 − 4.1 1.6 2.5         Dec 39.4 58.9 85.7 − 26.8 41.7 43.4 − 16.2 52.3 47.1 7.3 6.3 4.8 0.8
2008          Jan − 31.3 − 61.6 −101.1 39.5 − 6.8 − 4.2 0.4 0.4 − 1.3 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 2.5 1.9
         Feb 33.0 3.0 2.4 0.6 10.8 12.2 − 0.9 16.1 14.9 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 3.0         Mar 45.0 23.1 37.2 − 14.1 6.3 − 1.4 0.9 1.4 1.0 − 3.7 − 1.6 5.6 7.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 200359.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 2007
44.2 6.9 2.3 1.9 42.6 39.3 35.7 33.0 1,641.1 126.7 652.0 387.2 327.8 2006          June
43.9 6.3 2.3 1.9 43.7 40.3 30.1 32.4 1,641.7 124.8 640.2 387.9 325.2          July
44.0 6.5 2.3 1.9 46.7 44.1 34.9 32.2 1,638.1 127.2 646.0 387.2 324.1          Aug 
45.1 7.8 2.3 1.9 49.1 45.6 38.1 31.5 1,639.6 129.7 665.0 388.0 339.7          Sep 
47.1 9.9 2.3 1.9 46.3 43.4 32.1 32.0 1,644.6 134.3 663.9 389.1 343.6          Oct 
48.6 10.1 2.3 1.8 48.4 43.7 27.5 32.0 1,641.7 137.5 653.0 391.7 353.6          Nov 45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7          Dec 
43.5 9.2 2.3 1.9 43.7 40.6 25.0 31.9 1,653.8 145.9 667.6 393.0 356.6 2007          Jan 
42.5 8.9 2.3 1.8 43.8 41.8 29.7 31.6 1,657.3 149.5 682.1 399.7 359.9          Feb 
43.6 10.0 2.3 1.9 43.4 42.2 29.8 32.7 1,659.7 158.3 681.3 405.5 371.2          Mar 
43.8 9.5 2.3 1.8 43.6 43.2 29.4 33.6 1,657.7 158.0 708.9 410.7 377.5          Apr 
42.0 8.2 2.3 1.8 48.9 46.9 28.0 33.9 1,666.3 158.4 720.2 416.8 374.6          May42.9 10.0 2.3 1.8 49.7 46.6 32.7 35.3 1,670.4 162.2 685.8 417.8 379.5          June
46.6 12.6 2.3 1.8 43.0 41.8 25.7 34.9 1,673.2 168.2 675.2 426.0 378.0          July
47.1 13.1 2.3 1.8 42.6 41.1 28.4 32.3 1,665.5 169.2 694.4 423.3 384.6          Aug 49.8 16.5 2.3 1.7 41.3 39.6 36.3 30.3 1,651.5 170.7 703.6 426.5 402.7          Sep 
50.5 17.5 2.3 1.7 40.9 38.2 34.6 29.2 1,664.4 179.3 687.5 427.7 394.5          Oct 
49.6 18.1 2.3 1.7 46.6 41.9 39.7 29.1 1,658.9 188.3 687.0 427.5 400.4          Nov 53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2          Dec 
49.6 18.9 2.3 1.8 40.0 37.4 42.1 28.8 1,644.1 190.6 679.2 430.8 386.7 2008          Jan 
52.3 23.6 2.3 1.8 38.7 37.1 45.9 29.0 1,631.9 189.7 694.5 431.8 389.0          Feb 
50.7 23.0 2.3 1.8 40.8 37.6 46.7 27.2 1,622.3 188.1 703.1 447.5 390.9          Mar 
Changes 1
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.3 − 9.4 22.4 14.4 18.5 2005
− 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.2 0.3 34.3 21.7 32.1 27.9 29.2 2006
8.1 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.4 48.7 49.1 42.9 59.1 2007
− 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 1.0 − 5.6 − 0.6 0.7 − 1.9 − 11.4 0.7 − 2.4 2006          July
0.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 3.9 4.8 − 0.2 − 2.5 2.4 6.7 − 0.1 − 1.3          Aug 1.0 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.3 1.5 3.2 − 0.7 5.3 3.5 16.7 0.5 16.2          Sep 
2.0 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 2.2 − 6.0 0.5 4.8 4.6 − 1.1 1.2 4.2          Oct 
1.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.1 0.3 − 4.5 − 0.0 3.1 3.3 − 3.2 3.5 6.9          Nov 
− 2.7 − 0.8 0.0 0.0 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 10.5 0.0 − 4.6 − 1.2 − 14.8 − 2.0 0.5          Dec 
− 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 1.4 8.0 − 0.0 14.7 9.5 26.0 3.8 5.8 2007          Jan 
− 1.0 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 1.1 4.7 − 0.3 6.5 3.6 19.2 7.2 1.5          Feb 
1.2 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.4 0.1 1.0 4.2 8.9 1.5 6.0 10.2          Mar 
0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 1.0 − 0.4 0.9 2.1 − 0.3 32.5 6.0 4.0          Apr 
− 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 5.2 3.7 − 1.5 0.3 7.1 0.4 9.0 5.8 − 2.2          May
1.0 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.9 − 0.3 3.2 1.5 4.8 3.7 − 33.7 1.1 4.5          June
3.7 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 5.3 − 7.0 − 0.4 3.4 5.2 − 7.7 8.4 0.6          July
0.5 0.4 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 2.7 − 2.7 − 8.6 2.8 16.4 − 2.9 7.1          Aug 2.9 3.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 7.9 − 1.9 − 7.2 1.6 18.1 4.4 15.7          Sep 
0.9 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 1.1 16.0 10.5 − 11.9 1.7 9.2          Oct 
− 1.0 0.5 0.0 − 0.0 5.7 3.7 5.1 − 0.1 − 2.5 8.7 5.0 0.3 5.8          Nov 
3.9 4.0 0.1 0.0 − 6.5 − 3.7 − 13.1 − 0.5 − 20.2 − 5.9 − 25.2 1.0 − 3.2          Dec 
− 4.4 − 3.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.9 15.4 0.2 6.7 8.3 22.8 2.6 − 10.6 2008          Jan 
2.9 4.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.3 3.9 0.2 − 8.9 − 0.7 21.1 1.0 1.8          Feb 
− 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 0.0 2.1 0.5 0.8 − 1.8 − 10.7 − 2.7 8.5 16.8 2.0          Mar 
2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2007          Oct 2,020 7,533.6 58.7 3,133.5 2,274.4 819.6 3,871.0 526.6 2,600.5 1.9 717.4 156.3 314.1
         Nov 2,019 7,585.9 66.1 3,156.9 2,290.6 824.8 3,891.1 537.1 2,606.9 1.9 716.1 156.9 314.9         Dec 2,015 7,625.7 82.8 3,185.3 2,328.1 818.1 3,884.0 525.1 2,615.2 2.0 712.6 157.7 315.8
2008          Jan 2,016 7,628.6 57.8 3,161.5 2,306.8 813.6 3,919.9 553.0 2,612.8 1.9 725.5 161.4 328.0
         Feb 2,018 7,650.4 65.7 3,158.8 2,302.1 811.3 3,927.4 570.0 2,614.6 1.7 713.9 160.7 337.7
         Mar 2,021 7,696.0 84.0 3,162.4 2,306.2 808.2 3,948.5 582.2 2,611.2 1.6 731.6 162.2 338.9
Commercial banks 5
2008          Feb 264 2,294.5 29.4 947.0 799.4 132.1 1,105.7 303.4 604.2 0.9 190.2 78.4 134.1
         Mar 267 2,336.8 37.9 957.1 810.7 131.2 1,126.0 316.2 603.2 0.8 197.8 78.9 137.0
   Big banks 6
2008          Feb 5 1,450.3 18.9 622.6 530.1 81.9 639.3 195.7 295.2 0.7 142.9 67.4 102.0         Mar 5 1,463.3 18.8 621.4 528.9 81.8 652.0 206.1 292.6 0.6 146.7 67.9 103.0
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2008          Feb 162 684.4 9.6 241.9 188.0 49.0 396.1 78.3 269.1 0.1 46.7 10.4 26.5
         Mar 164 704.1 14.6 248.6 195.9 48.2 402.4 82.7 269.8 0.1 48.1 10.4 28.1
   Branches of foreign banks
2008          Feb 97 159.8 0.9 82.5 81.4 1.1 70.2 29.4 40.0 0.1 0.6 0.5 5.6
         Mar 98 169.4 4.5 87.0 85.9 1.1 71.6 27.5 40.8 0.0 3.0 0.5 5.9
Landesbanken
2008          Feb 12 1,572.0 3.4 846.9 638.6 193.8 638.3 119.6 401.5 0.2 98.4 29.0 54.5         Mar 12 1,563.3 10.3 823.7 615.2 191.4 646.3 117.2 403.4 0.2 113.2 30.0 53.0
Savings banks
2008          Feb 444 1,022.3 18.2 246.1 112.5 128.4 717.7 61.4 554.6 0.4 101.2 19.7 20.6         Mar 444 1,022.3 18.9 245.8 112.1 128.3 717.8 62.7 554.1 0.4 100.6 19.7 20.1
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2008          Feb 2 267.4 0.2 170.0 113.0 55.1 72.8 19.4 19.4 0.0 33.4 13.9 10.5         Mar 2 274.9 0.5 174.5 117.8 54.9 74.7 21.4 19.5 0.0 33.3 13.9 11.2
Credit cooperatives
2008          Feb 1,232 625.2 12.6 165.7 77.5 83.0 415.8 35.3 330.6 0.2 49.4 10.8 20.4
         Mar 1,232 626.6 12.9 165.9 77.4 83.9 417.0 36.7 330.5 0.2 49.4 10.7 20.0
Mortgage banks
2008          Feb 22 814.1 1.0 245.9 136.4 107.9 543.1 15.4 385.6 − 141.5 1.7 22.4
         Mar 22 809.3 0.6 247.5 138.9 106.9 537.7 16.0 382.4 − 138.7 1.7 21.8
Building and loan associations
2008          Feb 25 189.8 0.0 55.3 42.4 12.7 118.9 1.5 105.7 . 11.8 0.4 15.2         Mar 25 190.4 0.1 55.7 42.8 12.8 119.1 1.5 105.8 . 11.8 0.4 15.0
Special purpose banks
2008          Feb 17 865.1 0.9 481.9 382.3 98.4 315.2 13.8 213.0 − 87.9 7.0 60.1         Mar 17 872.5 2.7 492.1 391.4 98.8 309.9 10.4 212.2 − 86.8 7.0 60.8
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2008          Feb 140 855.5 10.8 348.0 275.8 64.7 457.4 80.3 292.2 0.2 83.1 5.9 33.4         Mar 143 840.9 17.9 349.0 281.1 60.9 434.4 85.4 272.9 0.2 74.3 6.2 33.4
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2008          Feb 43 695.6 9.9 265.4 194.4 63.6 387.1 50.9 252.2 0.2 82.6 5.4 27.8         Mar 45 671.5 13.4 262.0 195.2 59.7 362.8 57.9 232.1 0.2 71.3 5.7 27.5
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,171.5 340.9 1,830.6 2,813.2 860.9 475.7 791.8 112.1 559.4 449.8 125.4 1,737.2 353.8 457.9 2007          Oct 
2,159.8 348.6 1,811.2 2,877.8 898.2 503.7 790.8 132.2 556.3 445.7 128.9 1,733.7 351.5 463.1          Nov 
2,217.5 286.8 1,930.6 2,882.3 855.9 534.5 797.3 95.4 563.8 452.2 130.7 1,712.7 352.0 461.3          Dec 
2,177.9 342.0 1,835.9 2,905.8 885.2 529.3 799.0 127.6 558.9 447.4 133.3 1,720.7 353.1 471.2 2008          Jan 
2,182.7 339.6 1,843.1 2,932.3 879.0 563.5 798.6 145.8 556.0 445.3 135.1 1,707.1 355.4 472.8          Feb 
2,224.2 372.4 1,851.8 2,929.6 886.8 558.7 796.9 140.8 552.3 443.7 134.9 1,705.3 363.4 473.5          Mar 
Commercial banks 5
791.7 193.7 598.0 968.6 430.1 280.3 137.1 111.8 104.0 82.8 17.0 250.5 111.1 172.7 2008          Feb 
831.0 218.3 612.6 964.2 431.7 274.4 137.4 107.6 103.7 82.8 17.0 256.9 118.6 166.1          Mar 
Big banks 6
519.0 137.8 381.2 562.1 225.9 184.0 85.0 103.2 61.1 57.8 6.1 188.3 65.6 115.3 2008          Feb 
535.0 146.4 388.5 554.9 226.1 177.1 84.7 98.8 61.1 57.9 6.0 194.8 72.1 106.4          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
154.6 32.7 121.9 375.6 186.1 89.1 46.7 8.3 42.9 25.0 10.8 62.2 41.1 50.9 2008          Feb 
170.7 43.8 126.9 376.8 187.1 89.5 46.7 8.5 42.5 24.8 10.9 62.1 41.4 53.1          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
118.1 23.2 94.9 30.8 18.0 7.2 5.4 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 4.5 6.4 2008          Feb 
125.3 28.1 97.2 32.5 18.5 7.8 6.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 5.1 6.6          Mar 
Landesbanken
587.8 74.9 512.9 381.5 65.0 100.3 200.6 30.5 14.2 13.9 1.2 470.4 63.2 69.2 2008          Feb 
583.2 82.2 501.0 382.9 69.4 97.6 200.5 28.6 14.1 13.7 1.3 465.4 63.1 68.7          Mar 
Savings banks
197.4 13.8 183.6 674.9 221.0 75.5 14.0 − 276.8 212.6 87.8 47.8 54.6 47.5 2008          Feb 
198.1 16.0 182.2 673.9 221.1 76.4 13.9 − 274.9 211.9 87.5 47.3 54.7 48.2          Mar 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
153.4 31.1 122.2 41.9 8.9 14.0 17.6 3.3 − − 1.5 47.8 11.1 13.3 2008          Feb 
156.0 28.5 127.5 44.4 10.1 15.2 17.5 4.6 − − 1.5 48.4 11.1 15.0          Mar 
Credit cooperatives
82.8 4.7 78.1 437.1 147.7 73.4 29.3 − 160.0 135.1 26.7 39.0 37.7 28.7 2008          Feb 
84.5 5.2 79.3 436.2 147.4 74.6 29.0 − 158.7 134.4 26.6 38.4 37.8 29.6          Mar 
Mortgage banks
162.0 4.0 158.0 190.9 2.9 11.1 176.0 − 0.6 0.6 0.3 412.5 22.8 25.9 2008          Feb 
164.3 4.3 160.0 191.3 3.3 11.0 176.0 − 0.6 0.6 0.3 405.4 22.6 25.6          Mar 
Building and loan associations
22.8 1.1 21.8 129.0 0.3 1.5 126.5 − 0.3 0.3 0.4 7.1 7.3 23.6 2008          Feb 
23.2 1.9 21.4 129.2 0.3 1.6 126.5 − 0.3 0.3 0.4 7.1 7.3 23.6          Mar 
Special purpose banks
184.9 16.3 168.6 108.4 3.1 7.5 97.6 0.1 − − 0.2 432.1 47.6 92.1 2008          Feb 
183.8 16.0 167.8 107.5 3.6 7.7 96.0 0.1 − − 0.2 436.3 48.2 96.7          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
285.9 66.6 219.2 325.5 150.0 81.0 72.4 11.8 15.7 15.5 6.3 147.1 36.5 60.6 2008          Feb 
301.1 80.1 220.9 331.2 162.4 81.6 65.2 16.0 15.6 15.3 6.5 111.8 40.0 56.8          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
167.8 43.4 124.4 294.7 132.0 73.8 67.0 11.5 15.7 15.4 6.2 147.1 31.9 54.2 2008          Feb 
175.8 52.1 123.7 298.8 143.9 73.8 59.2 15.8 15.5 15.2 6.4 111.8 34.9 50.2          Mar 
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
1998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.8
1999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.52007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2006          Oct 14.0 48.6 1,617.7 1,057.0 − 11.0 549.8 1.9 3,033.2 2,662.9 2.0 1.4 366.9
         Nov 13.3 41.2 1,640.2 1,082.3 − 10.4 547.5 1.9 3,037.8 2,659.6 1.9 1.5 374.9
         Dec 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007          Jan 13.0 39.5 1,639.9 1,095.8 0.0 10.3 533.8 1.9 3,024.5 2,640.0 1.8 1.6 381.2
         Feb 12.9 43.7 1,643.2 1,101.0 − 11.7 530.4 2.0 3,011.3 2,639.3 1.7 1.7 368.6         Mar 13.1 49.4 1,669.5 1,128.8 0.0 13.2 527.5 1.9 3,016.1 2,638.8 1.6 1.8 373.9
         Apr 13.9 44.9 1,660.0 1,118.8 0.0 12.8 528.4 1.9 3,043.3 2,635.9 1.6 2.4 403.4
         May 14.2 45.6 1,668.3 1,119.7 0.0 13.4 535.1 1.9 3,021.0 2,630.0 1.6 1.3 388.0         June 13.7 41.3 1,651.1 1,112.2 0.0 16.7 522.2 1.9 2,986.2 2,632.4 1.7 1.7 350.5
         July 13.4 48.4 1,629.8 1,095.7 0.0 17.2 517.0 1.8 2,993.2 2,642.2 1.6 1.3 348.1
         Aug 13.5 33.2 1,670.8 1,141.6 0.0 17.7 511.5 1.8 2,984.1 2,641.6 1.6 1.3 339.6         Sep 14.0 42.2 1,683.5 1,155.8 0.0 18.8 508.9 1.8 2,986.2 2,643.2 1.4 1.9 339.7
         Oct 14.1 44.1 1,696.3 1,162.1 0.0 23.9 510.3 1.8 2,973.3 2,641.5 1.5 2.2 328.1
         Nov 13.6 52.0 1,708.7 1,171.8 0.0 26.0 511.0 1.7 2,971.5 2,641.0 1.5 2.2 326.9         Dec 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008          Jan 13.8 43.6 1,723.3 1,194.0 0.0 29.2 500.2 1.9 2,998.5 2,652.9 1.5 2.2 341.9
         Feb 13.2 52.1 1,722.2 1,194.4 − 29.3 498.5 1.9 2,993.2 2,658.6 1.3 2.1 331.1         Mar 13.8 69.6 1,716.3 1,189.6 − 29.7 497.0 1.9 3,009.0 2,666.0 1.3 2.5 339.3
Changes *
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.82007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2006          Oct + 0.2 + 1.3 − 7.0 − 3.4 − + 0.5 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 2.0 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.4
         Nov − 0.8 − 7.4 + 22.5 + 25.3 − − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 4.7 − 3.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.9         Dec + 2.8 + 8.3 − 2.4 + 4.5 − − 1.1 − 5.8 − − 36.4 − 28.6 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 8.4
2007          Jan − 3.0 − 9.9 + 2.2 + 9.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 8.4 − 0.0 + 24.3 + 6.6 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 18.2
         Feb − 0.1 + 4.1 + 3.3 + 5.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 13.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 12.5         Mar + 0.2 + 5.7 + 26.3 + 27.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 4.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 5.3
         Apr + 0.9 − 4.5 − 11.0 − 10.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 28.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 30.6
         May + 0.3 + 0.7 + 8.2 + 0.9 − + 0.6 + 6.7 − 0.0 − 22.4 − 5.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 15.4         June − 0.5 − 4.3 − 16.1 − 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 12.9 + 0.0 − 35.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 37.5
         July − 0.3 + 7.1 − 20.6 − 15.9 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 8.1 + 9.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.9
         Aug + 0.1 − 15.2 + 41.0 + 46.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 5.5 − 0.0 − 9.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 8.5         Sep + 0.5 + 9.0 + 12.7 + 14.2 − + 1.0 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 2.2 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1
         Oct + 0.1 + 1.9 + 13.4 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 6.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 4.4 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 3.1
         Nov − 0.5 + 7.9 + 12.4 + 9.7 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2         Dec + 3.8 + 12.7 + 43.1 + 50.7 − − 0.6 − 7.0 + 0.6 + 3.4 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.1
2008          Jan − 3.7 − 21.0 − 44.3 − 44.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 3.8 − 0.8 + 22.7 + 5.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 17.1
         Feb − 0.6 + 8.5 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 5.3 + 5.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 10.8
         Mar + 0.6 + 17.5 − 5.9 − 4.8 − + 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 15.9 + 7.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 8.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  
8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
71.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 1998
37.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007
− 53.5 107.2 1,303.3 113.4 1,189.9 0.0 22.5 2,348.2 716.9 950.5 585.0 95.8 38.0 2006          Oct 
− 53.3 107.0 1,320.5 135.1 1,185.4 0.0 22.3 2,375.0 744.4 952.5 581.5 96.7 38.1          Nov 
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8          Dec 
− 53.5 106.9 1,334.2 130.9 1,203.2 0.0 21.9 2,401.4 746.2 973.6 582.2 99.4 38.9 2007          Jan 
− 53.3 107.3 1,338.9 128.1 1,210.8 0.0 21.8 2,409.8 746.2 982.5 580.3 100.8 38.8          Feb 
− 52.9 107.5 1,367.4 135.9 1,231.4 0.0 21.7 2,417.2 747.5 988.7 578.6 102.5 38.5          Mar 
− 54.2 107.9 1,370.2 143.6 1,226.6 0.0 21.3 2,434.0 756.1 999.6 574.6 103.7 38.3          Apr 
− 53.8 108.0 1,356.0 142.1 1,213.9 0.0 21.2 2,445.1 761.0 1,008.9 570.1 105.0 37.6          May− 53.5 108.5 1,357.0 137.8 1,219.2 0.0 21.0 2,464.9 772.5 1,019.0 566.7 106.6 37.5          June
− 52.2 110.3 1,351.2 131.5 1,219.7 0.0 20.6 2,464.7 775.2 1,019.2 561.6 108.7 36.6          July
− 52.0 110.3 1,359.0 134.5 1,224.5 0.0 20.4 2,483.3 769.5 1,045.6 557.8 110.3 36.4          Aug − 51.7 110.3 1,380.6 135.8 1,244.7 0.0 20.3 2,510.2 782.1 1,061.7 554.8 111.6 36.4          Sep 
− 51.7 108.0 1,376.9 133.1 1,243.8 0.0 19.8 2,506.9 770.4 1,071.5 551.2 113.8 36.5          Oct 
− 51.4 108.9 1,393.0 141.6 1,251.4 0.0 19.7 2,551.3 800.8 1,085.7 548.1 116.7 36.4          Nov − 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4          Dec 
− 51.9 110.5 1,393.3 136.9 1,256.4 0.0 44.0 2,587.3 785.1 1,130.6 550.5 121.1 33.6 2008          Jan 
− 51.4 110.5 1,394.9 139.2 1,255.7 0.0 43.6 2,601.7 784.9 1,147.5 547.6 121.7 33.6          Feb 
− 50.8 111.9 1,432.6 142.9 1,289.7 0.0 42.8 2,601.9 786.3 1,150.0 543.8 121.8 33.2          Mar 
Changes *
− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007
− − 0.3 − 0.9 + 5.7 − 5.6 + 11.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 7.3 + 0.5 − 2.7 + 1.3 + 0.1 2006          Oct 
− − 0.2 − 0.3 + 17.2 + 21.7 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 26.8 + 27.5 + 2.0 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.0          Nov 
− − 0.3 − 0.6 + 27.6 − 9.7 + 37.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.5 + 3.3 + 10.3 + 5.1 + 0.8 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.4 + 0.6 − 14.0 + 5.6 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.7 − 1.5 + 10.9 − 4.4 + 1.6 − 0.1 2007          Jan 
− − 0.3 + 0.4 + 4.7 − 2.9 + 7.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 − 0.1 + 8.8 − 1.8 + 1.4 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 0.4 + 0.2 + 28.5 + 7.9 + 20.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 1.3 + 6.2 − 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.3          Mar 
− + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 7.7 − 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 16.2 + 8.1 + 10.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.3 + 0.1 − 14.2 − 1.5 − 12.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 11.1 + 4.9 + 9.3 − 4.5 + 1.4 − 0.7          May− − 0.4 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 4.4 + 6.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 18.3 + 11.5 + 8.6 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 0.1          June
− − 0.7 + 1.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 2.6 − 0.3 − 5.1 + 2.0 − 0.4          July
− − 0.3 + 0.0 + 7.8 + 3.0 + 4.8 − − 0.3 + 18.2 − 5.7 + 26.2 − 3.7 + 1.4 − 0.1          Aug − − 0.2 + 0.0 + 21.6 + 1.4 + 20.3 − − 0.1 + 26.9 + 12.6 + 16.1 − 3.0 + 1.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.1 − 2.3 − 3.7 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 3.2 − 11.7 + 9.9 − 3.6 + 2.3 + 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.2 + 0.9 + 16.1 + 8.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 44.1 + 30.4 + 14.2 − 3.1 + 2.6 − 0.1          Nov − − 0.3 + 0.6 + 85.6 − 19.5 + 105.1 − + 0.3 + 27.9 − 20.9 + 39.7 + 7.3 + 1.7 + 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.7 + 1.1 − 101.0 + 14.9 − 115.9 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 8.0 + 5.0 + 5.2 − 4.9 + 2.7 − 0.1 2008          Jan 
− − 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 14.5 − 0.1 + 16.9 − 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.0          Feb 
− − 0.5 + 1.4 + 37.7 + 3.7 + 34.0 − − 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 0.4          Mar 
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.0
1999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.92007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2006          Oct 0.4 1,194.8 949.5 708.7 240.7 13.5 231.8 0.7 783.1 435.3 166.2 269.1 10.4 337.4
         Nov 0.4 1,217.8 958.7 714.8 243.9 13.5 245.6 0.8 795.4 438.9 169.5 269.4 10.5 346.0         Dec 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007          Jan 0.4 1,275.2 1,001.6 734.0 267.6 15.4 258.3 0.9 805.1 440.8 176.7 264.1 7.9 356.5
         Feb 0.5 1,303.2 1,018.2 750.8 267.4 15.8 269.2 0.8 818.5 442.3 178.4 263.9 8.1 368.2         Mar 0.4 1,315.7 1,020.2 752.4 267.8 16.2 279.3 0.8 826.5 448.1 181.4 266.7 7.8 370.6
         Apr 0.5 1,347.6 1,050.3 778.5 271.8 16.2 281.1 0.7 839.7 457.9 192.1 265.8 7.7 374.1
         May 0.5 1,354.6 1,052.3 776.9 275.4 16.5 285.7 0.7 863.6 464.6 193.0 271.6 8.8 390.2         June 0.5 1,392.2 1,077.8 799.8 278.0 18.6 295.8 0.8 872.5 470.4 192.3 278.1 9.2 392.9
         July 0.5 1,397.0 1,081.9 802.4 279.4 19.6 295.6 0.7 865.3 463.0 184.7 278.3 6.6 395.7
         Aug 0.6 1,399.5 1,080.7 794.4 286.4 20.4 298.4 0.6 886.0 481.8 195.3 286.5 12.2 391.9         Sep 0.4 1,444.2 1,122.4 829.1 293.3 18.8 303.0 0.6 892.6 488.0 200.0 288.0 14.6 390.0
         Oct 0.4 1,437.2 1,112.6 811.4 301.2 15.4 309.3 0.5 897.8 486.1 196.3 289.8 22.3 389.3
         Nov 0.5 1,448.2 1,119.1 817.3 301.7 15.2 313.9 0.6 919.6 503.4 212.1 291.3 27.0 389.3
         Dec 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008          Jan 0.3 1,438.2 1,113.1 814.1 298.9 11.7 313.4 2.1 921.4 513.3 215.3 298.0 24.4 383.7
         Feb 0.4 1,436.6 1,107.9 803.7 304.3 15.8 312.9 2.0 934.3 526.3 225.5 300.8 25.2 382.8         Mar 0.4 1,446.1 1,116.7 810.0 306.7 18.2 311.2 2.0 939.5 527.6 226.7 300.9 19.6 392.3
Changes *
1999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.3
2002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.52007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2006          Oct − 0.0 − 7.3 − 17.4 − 17.3 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 8.8 − 0.1 + 16.1 + 10.2 + 5.2 + 4.9 + 1.1 + 4.9
         Nov − 0.0 + 31.1 + 16.8 + 11.4 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 14.2 + 0.1 + 18.5 + 8.3 + 4.0 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 9.9         Dec + 0.0 + 49.0 + 44.3 + 29.7 + 14.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 0.0 − 18.6 − 18.1 − 13.5 − 4.6 − 3.4 + 2.9
2007          Jan − 0.0 + 5.1 − 4.7 − 12.5 + 7.9 + 2.1 + 7.7 − + 24.9 + 17.3 + 19.8 − 2.5 + 0.7 + 6.8
         Feb + 0.1 + 31.4 + 20.6 + 19.4 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 10.5 − 0.1 + 18.1 + 4.7 + 2.8 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 13.2         Mar − 0.0 + 14.6 + 3.9 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 10.3 − 0.1 + 10.0 + 7.2 + 3.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 3.0
         Apr + 0.0 + 36.2 + 34.1 + 29.1 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 18.2 + 13.5 + 11.8 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 4.8
         May + 0.1 + 4.6 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 0.0 + 22.2 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 15.7         June + 0.0 + 38.1 + 25.9 + 23.2 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 9.7 + 7.7 + 0.9 + 6.8 − 1.0 + 2.9
         July − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 2.7 + 3.6
         Aug + 0.1 + 2.5 − 1.1 − 8.1 + 7.0 + 0.8 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 17.1 + 15.3 + 7.1 + 8.2 + 5.6 − 3.9         Sep − 0.2 + 52.9 + 49.4 + 40.0 + 9.4 − 1.6 + 5.1 − 0.0 + 15.5 + 12.5 + 7.0 + 5.4 + 2.7 + 0.4
         Oct + 0.0 − 0.5 − 5.7 − 14.8 + 9.1 + 4.0 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 16.5 + 1.4 − 2.5 + 3.9 + 8.2 + 6.9
         Nov + 0.1 + 16.2 + 11.5 + 9.2 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 27.2 + 21.3 + 17.4 + 3.9 + 4.9 + 1.0         Dec − 0.1 − 14.0 − 12.6 − 13.4 + 0.8 − 1.8 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 10.7 − 10.1 − 14.5 + 4.4 + 0.6 − 1.1
2008          Jan − 0.0 + 6.6 + 9.1 + 11.9 − 2.8 − 1.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 15.6 + 21.9 + 18.5 + 3.4 − 2.9 − 3.4
         Feb + 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.2 − 7.2 + 7.0 + 4.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 17.9 + 16.5 + 11.6 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.3         Mar + 0.1 + 19.9 + 18.7 + 12.8 + 5.8 + 2.5 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 15.7 + 8.9 + 3.9 + 5.0 − 5.1 + 11.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills a nd bills
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
22.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 1998
13.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 20065.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
5.9 48.4 683.7 155.2 528.5 404.4 124.1 0.5 335.8 82.4 253.4 123.3 130.1 1.6 2006          Oct 
5.9 48.4 691.6 171.7 519.8 394.7 125.1 0.4 335.4 81.6 253.8 124.2 129.6 1.7          Nov 
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5          Dec 
5.8 44.6 704.6 170.0 534.6 408.8 125.8 0.3 317.2 88.2 229.0 114.6 114.4 1.5 2007          Jan 
5.7 44.6 709.9 177.7 532.1 406.6 125.6 0.3 324.0 93.2 230.8 118.1 112.7 1.5          Feb 
5.8 44.3 723.0 200.3 522.6 398.3 124.3 0.3 312.1 90.2 221.9 112.2 109.7 1.4          Mar 
5.7 44.3 753.1 200.5 552.6 429.8 122.8 0.3 320.6 91.9 228.7 118.5 110.2 3.2          Apr 
5.7 44.7 757.9 208.0 549.9 424.0 125.9 0.3 338.8 111.1 227.8 116.9 110.8 3.2          May5.8 45.2 727.5 210.6 516.9 390.7 126.1 0.2 329.5 107.7 221.8 111.5 110.3 3.1          June
5.7 45.2 729.0 210.0 519.1 394.5 124.6 0.2 314.3 95.3 219.0 105.2 113.9 3.1          July
5.7 45.3 755.8 179.5 576.3 452.1 124.2 0.2 313.7 91.6 222.1 109.5 112.6 3.1          Aug 5.7 45.5 785.5 220.1 565.3 443.0 122.3 0.2 313.5 94.6 218.9 108.5 110.4 3.1          Sep 
5.8 48.3 794.6 207.8 586.8 466.9 119.9 0.2 306.3 90.6 215.7 106.4 109.3 3.4          Oct 
5.7 48.0 766.8 207.0 559.8 445.8 113.9 0.2 326.6 97.5 229.1 123.1 106.0 3.2          Nov 
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1          Dec 
25.0 50.9 784.6 205.1 579.5 465.6 113.9 0.2 318.5 100.2 218.3 115.7 102.6 3.1 2008          Jan 
25.0 50.2 787.8 200.4 587.4 473.8 113.6 0.2 330.5 94.1 236.4 135.7 100.7 3.0          Feb 
24.2 50.3 791.6 229.5 562.1 449.4 112.7 0.3 327.6 100.5 227.2 129.6 97.5 2.8          Mar 
Changes *
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007
− 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 14.6 + 16.8 + 15.2 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 5.9 − 4.1 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 2006          Oct 
+ 0.0 + 0.5 + 13.8 + 17.9 − 4.1 − 6.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.1          Nov 
− 0.1 + 1.9 − 1.9 − 3.6 + 1.7 + 2.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 25.5 + 0.4 − 25.9 − 12.7 − 13.2 − 0.1          Dec 
− 0.0 − 5.8 + 12.1 + 1.3 + 10.9 + 9.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 5.8 − 0.2 + 2.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 2007          Jan 
− 0.0 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 8.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 8.6 + 5.3 + 3.4 + 4.2 − 0.8 − 0.1          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 14.6 + 23.0 − 8.4 − 7.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 10.8 − 2.9 − 8.0 − 5.5 − 2.4 − 0.1          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 1.2 + 33.0 + 33.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 10.2 + 2.0 + 8.2 + 6.9 + 1.3 + 1.8          Apr 
− 0.0 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 7.1 − 4.1 − 6.9 + 2.8 − + 17.4 + 19.0 − 1.6 − 1.8 + 0.3 − 0.0          May+ 0.0 + 0.5 − 29.8 + 2.8 − 32.6 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 9.2 − 3.3 − 5.9 − 5.4 − 0.6 − 0.1          June
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 10.6 − 12.1 + 1.5 − 2.5 + 4.0 + 0.0          July
− + 0.1 + 26.6 − 30.5 + 57.1 + 57.5 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 3.4 − 5.0 + 1.7 + 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.0          Aug 
+ 0.0 + 0.6 + 36.8 + 41.5 − 4.8 − 3.8 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 3.8 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 0.1 + 2.9 + 12.7 − 11.4 + 24.1 + 26.1 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 5.8 − 3.7 − 2.0 − 1.6 − 0.5 + 0.3          Oct 
− 0.1 − − 23.6 + 0.3 − 23.9 − 18.7 − 5.2 − + 22.4 + 7.3 + 15.1 + 17.3 − 2.2 − 0.2          Nov + 0.0 + 0.3 − 28.2 − 42.3 + 14.1 + 14.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 23.0 − 21.7 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.1 + 2.2 + 46.6 + 40.7 + 5.9 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 + 24.3 − 8.3 − 6.5 − 1.8 − 0.0 2008          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 7.4 − 3.4 + 10.7 + 10.7 + 0.0 − + 13.9 − 5.7 + 19.5 + 20.7 − 1.2 − 0.1          Feb 
− 0.7 + 0.6 + 11.5 + 31.0 − 19.6 − 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 7.3 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 1.6 − 0.2          Mar 
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.4
1999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.82007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2006          Oct 3,033.2 2,664.9 334.5 297.2 296.4 0.8 37.4 36.8 0.6 2,698.7 2,180.2
         Nov 3,037.8 2,661.5 325.7 290.2 289.4 0.8 35.5 34.8 0.7 2,712.2 2,185.1         Dec 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007          Jan 3,024.5 2,641.8 313.0 278.9 278.2 0.7 34.1 33.2 0.9 2,711.5 2,191.4
         Feb 3,011.3 2,641.0 316.4 284.1 283.2 1.0 32.2 31.5 0.8 2,695.0 2,178.8         Mar 3,016.1 2,640.4 324.2 291.8 291.1 0.6 32.4 31.3 1.2 2,691.9 2,179.7
         Apr 3,043.3 2,637.5 327.9 291.1 290.1 1.0 36.8 35.4 1.4 2,715.4 2,205.0
         May 3,021.0 2,631.6 319.3 284.2 283.3 0.9 35.1 34.7 0.4 2,701.6 2,189.7         June 2,986.2 2,634.1 321.7 293.5 292.7 0.8 28.2 27.3 0.9 2,664.6 2,159.1
         July 2,993.2 2,643.8 331.2 295.7 294.9 0.8 35.5 35.0 0.5 2,662.0 2,158.9
         Aug 2,984.1 2,643.2 321.9 292.0 291.4 0.7 29.9 29.3 0.6 2,662.2 2,165.0         Sep 2,986.2 2,644.7 328.8 300.2 299.8 0.4 28.5 27.1 1.4 2,657.5 2,164.8
         Oct 2,973.3 2,643.0 334.5 301.9 301.4 0.6 32.5 30.9 1.6 2,638.8 2,156.7
         Nov 2,971.5 2,642.5 329.1 296.7 296.1 0.6 32.4 30.8 1.6 2,642.4 2,161.6
         Dec 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008          Jan 2,998.5 2,654.4 341.7 310.0 309.1 0.9 31.8 30.5 1.3 2,656.7 2,188.9
         Feb 2,993.2 2,659.9 348.3 317.6 316.7 0.9 30.7 29.4 1.2 2,644.9 2,173.1         Mar 3,009.0 2,667.3 359.5 329.7 328.8 0.8 29.8 28.2 1.6 2,649.5 2,177.1
Changes *
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.02004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.62007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2006          Oct − 2.0 − 3.8 + 1.5 − 4.1 − 4.1 + 0.0 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 − 3.5 − 3.2
         Nov + 4.7 − 3.3 − 8.9 − 7.0 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 13.6 + 4.9         Dec − 36.4 − 28.6 − 22.5 − 20.3 − 20.1 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 2.9 + 0.7 − 13.9 − 2.5
2007          Jan + 24.3 + 6.5 + 9.9 + 9.0 + 8.9 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 14.4 + 10.1
         Feb − 13.2 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 5.3 + 5.0 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 16.5 − 12.6         Mar + 4.8 − 0.5 + 7.9 + 7.6 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.9
         Apr + 28.1 − 3.1 + 3.7 − 0.7 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 4.4 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 24.4 + 26.1
         May − 22.4 − 5.9 − 8.6 − 6.8 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 13.8 − 15.2         June − 35.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 8.4 + 8.5 − 0.2 − 6.9 − 7.4 + 0.5 − 37.3 − 30.8
         July + 8.1 + 9.4 + 9.9 + 2.7 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 7.2 + 7.7 − 0.4 − 1.9 + 0.5
         Aug − 9.2 − 0.7 − 9.3 − 3.7 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 5.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.1         Sep + 2.2 + 1.5 + 6.8 + 8.2 + 8.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 2.2 + 0.8 − 4.7 − 0.2
         Oct − 4.4 − 1.7 + 5.7 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 − 10.2 − 2.7
         Nov − 1.7 − 0.5 − 5.4 − 5.3 − 5.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 4.9         Dec + 3.4 + 6.2 + 2.1 + 5.1 + 5.4 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 5.9
2008          Jan + 22.7 + 4.9 + 10.6 + 8.2 + 7.6 + 0.5 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 12.2 + 20.5
         Feb − 5.3 + 5.5 + 6.8 + 7.9 + 7.9 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 12.1 − 16.0         Mar + 15.9 + 7.4 + 11.2 + 12.0 + 12.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.4 + 4.6 + 4.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfoli os
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
3,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 1998
1,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
1,975.9 197.7 1,778.1 204.4 48.7 518.4 355.9 30.9 325.0 162.6 − 4.7 2006          Oct 
1,978.9 198.2 1,780.7 206.1 48.6 527.1 358.4 31.4 327.0 168.7 − 4.7          Nov 
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8          Dec 
1,974.6 198.6 1,776.0 216.9 48.8 520.1 355.8 31.6 324.2 164.3 − 4.7 2007          Jan 
1,973.1 197.3 1,775.7 205.8 48.6 516.1 353.3 31.5 321.8 162.8 − 4.7          Feb 
1,970.1 196.5 1,773.6 209.6 48.2 512.2 347.9 31.4 316.5 164.4 − 4.7          Mar 
1,966.8 195.7 1,771.1 238.1 49.5 510.5 345.2 31.6 313.6 165.3 − 4.7          Apr 
1,969.8 199.1 1,770.7 219.9 49.2 511.9 343.8 32.2 311.6 168.1 − 4.7          May1,969.0 198.8 1,770.3 190.1 48.8 505.4 345.0 33.9 311.1 160.4 − 4.6          June
1,970.9 199.0 1,772.0 188.0 47.6 503.1 343.0 33.3 309.7 160.1 − 4.6          July
1,980.2 202.7 1,777.5 184.8 47.4 497.1 342.3 33.9 308.4 154.8 − 4.6          Aug 1,978.7 203.2 1,775.5 186.1 47.2 492.7 339.1 33.3 305.7 153.6 − 4.6          Sep 
1,977.0 200.5 1,776.5 179.7 47.1 482.1 333.7 32.0 301.6 148.4 − 4.6          Oct 
1,983.5 203.1 1,780.4 178.1 46.9 480.8 332.0 32.0 300.0 148.7 − 4.6          Nov 
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7          Dec 
1,988.3 209.5 1,778.8 200.6 47.4 467.9 326.6 31.5 295.1 141.3 − 4.5 2008          Jan 
1,989.8 210.5 1,779.4 183.3 46.9 471.8 324.0 32.9 291.1 147.8 − 4.5          Feb 
1,987.5 211.5 1,776.1 189.6 46.3 472.4 322.7 33.6 289.1 149.7 − 4.5          Mar 
Changes *
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
− 4.4 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − + 0.0 2006          Oct 
+ 3.2 + 0.6 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 8.7 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 2.0 + 6.2 − − 0.0          Nov 
− 5.5 − 3.1 − 2.4 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 11.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 11.4 − + 0.1          Dec 
− 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 11.3 − 0.4 + 4.3 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 6.9 − − 0.0 2007          Jan 
− 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 11.1 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 1.4 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.4 + 3.8 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 5.4 − 0.1 − 5.3 + 1.5 − − 0.0          Mar 
− 3.5 − 0.8 − 2.7 + 29.6 + 1.3 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 2.8 + 1.0 − + 0.0          Apr 
+ 3.0 + 3.4 − 0.5 − 18.2 − 0.3 + 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.7 − 2.0 + 2.8 − − 0.0          May− 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 29.9 − 0.4 − 6.4 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 7.7 − − 0.0          June
+ 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.3 − − 0.0          July
+ 9.3 + 3.8 + 5.5 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 6.0 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 1.3 − 5.3 − − 0.0          Aug − 1.5 + 0.5 − 2.0 + 1.3 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 3.3 − 0.6 − 2.7 − 1.2 − + 0.0          Sep 
− 1.7 − 2.7 + 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 7.4 − 5.4 − 1.3 − 4.1 − 2.0 − + 0.0          Oct 
+ 6.5 + 3.1 + 3.4 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Nov + 3.0 + 4.5 − 1.5 + 2.9 − 0.4 − 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 5.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.9 + 19.5 − 0.6 − 8.4 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 5.6 − 2.4 − − 0.1 2008          Jan 
+ 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 17.3 − 0.5 + 3.9 − 2.6 + 1.4 − 4.1 + 6.6 − + 0.0          Feb 
− 2.3 + 1.0 − 3.3 + 6.3 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 1.9 + 1.9 − − 0.0          Mar 
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2005 2,226.6 1,154.5 1,093.3 895.9 197.4 1,199.7 311.3 130.6 37.2 49.4 134.1 31.6 57.8 74.0
2006 2,242.2 1,177.5 1,114.7 921.2 193.5 1,204.2 316.1 133.0 39.3 47.2 131.4 32.4 60.9 76.0
2007          Mar 2,261.5 1,174.9 1,110.9 918.8 192.0 1,229.1 314.4 138.5 39.6 47.7 128.7 32.5 61.2 102.5
         June 2,262.0 1,172.6 1,106.6 917.4 189.2 1,230.7 311.4 141.2 39.6 48.0 130.6 33.2 62.5 100.6         Sep 2,278.8 1,172.1 1,105.7 917.6 188.2 1,246.4 309.5 141.5 40.0 47.9 131.9 33.6 63.3 106.9         Dec 2,289.0 1,166.7 1,101.3 914.4 186.8 1,259.7 306.2 145.4 41.3 47.0 135.7 33.2 65.4 101.4
2008          Mar 2,316.5 1,158.3 1,095.0 908.0 187.0 1,293.1 303.5 152.9 41.7 47.9 134.4 33.5 65.8 126.3
 Short-term lending
2005 273.2 − 11.2 − 11.2 230.0 6.7 38.8 3.2 9.7 49.2 3.3 6.1 32.8
2006 269.6 − 10.5 − 10.5 228.6 6.3 39.6 3.1 8.8 48.6 3.2 5.5 35.0
2007          Mar 291.4 − 10.5 − 10.5 251.6 6.1 42.6 3.5 9.5 46.2 3.4 5.6 58.6
         June 292.9 − 9.6 − 9.6 252.5 5.0 45.3 3.1 9.7 46.9 3.8 6.1 55.2         Sep 300.0 − 9.0 − 9.0 260.4 4.9 44.4 3.6 9.3 48.6 3.8 6.3 59.4         Dec 301.7 − 8.6 − 8.6 261.6 4.6 46.2 4.4 8.5 52.0 3.1 7.2 52.1
2008          Mar 329.0 − 8.6 − 8.6 289.8 4.6 51.1 4.4 9.5 50.9 3.3 6.7 75.4
 Medium-term lending
2005 194.6 − 35.7 − 35.7 122.5 10.7 15.6 2.1 5.2 11.4 3.0 10.6 10.8
2006 194.5 − 34.4 − 34.4 124.6 10.5 18.5 2.2 5.1 11.4 2.9 10.6 11.7
2007          Mar 196.5 − 33.5 − 33.5 128.2 10.5 20.5 2.1 5.1 11.3 2.9 10.5 14.6
         June 198.8 − 33.1 − 33.1 131.2 10.6 20.3 2.1 5.3 12.4 2.9 11.1 15.6
         Sep 203.2 − 32.5 − 32.5 135.8 10.3 21.1 2.2 5.5 12.7 3.0 11.8 16.9         Dec 207.7 − 32.2 − 32.2 141.5 10.4 22.3 2.2 5.6 13.1 2.9 12.5 17.4
2008          Mar 211.5 − 31.4 − 31.4 147.0 10.3 24.1 2.0 5.6 13.2 2.9 12.7 18.9
 Long-term lending
2005 1,758.8 1,154.5 1,046.3 895.9 150.4 847.2 293.9 76.2 31.8 34.5 73.5 25.2 41.1 30.4
2006 1,778.1 1,177.5 1,069.8 921.2 148.6 850.9 299.3 74.9 34.0 33.3 71.4 26.4 44.7 29.3
2007          Mar 1,773.6 1,174.9 1,066.8 918.8 148.0 849.3 297.9 75.5 34.0 33.1 71.2 26.2 45.1 29.3
         June 1,770.3 1,172.6 1,063.9 917.4 146.5 847.0 295.8 75.5 34.3 33.0 71.3 26.4 45.3 29.9         Sep 1,775.5 1,172.1 1,064.2 917.6 146.6 850.2 294.3 76.0 34.2 33.0 70.6 26.8 45.2 30.6         Dec 1,779.6 1,166.7 1,060.5 914.4 146.0 856.5 291.2 76.9 34.7 33.0 70.6 27.2 45.7 31.9
2008          Mar 1,776.1 1,158.3 1,055.1 908.0 147.1 856.2 288.6 77.6 35.3 32.8 70.3 27.2 46.4 32.1
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2007          Q1 + 16.2 − 1.7 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 21.6 − 1.7 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 22.7
         Q2 − 0.8 − 5.8 − 3.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 3.0         Q3 + 16.4 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 16.0 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 5.7         Q4 + 9.4 − 4.6 − 2.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 + 12.5 − 1.8 + 3.9 + 1.3 − 1.0 + 3.6 − 0.5 + 2.1 − 5.6
2008          Q1 + 27.6 − 6.6 − 6.2 − 5.2 − 1.1 + 33.3 − 2.6 + 7.5 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 24.7
 Short-term lending
2007          Q1 + 21.8 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 23.0 − 0.2 + 3.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 23.5
         Q2 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 4.3         Q3 + 7.5 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 7.9 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.2         Q4 + 1.6 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 3.4 − 0.6 + 1.0 − 7.3
2008          Q1 + 27.6 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 28.5 + 0.0 + 4.9 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 23.3
 Medium-term lending
2007          Q1 − 1.2 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Q2 + 2.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.8         Q3 + 4.5 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.4         Q4 + 4.9 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5
2008          Q1 + 3.5 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.2
 Long-term lending
2007          Q1 − 4.4 − 1.7 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1
         Q2 − 3.5 − 5.8 − 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6         Q3 + 4.5 − 2.0 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 1.1 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2         Q4 + 2.9 − 4.6 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 5.0 − 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.2
2008          Q1 − 3.6 − 6.6 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.5 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.2
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
685.0 160.3 40.6 199.3 407.5 60.6 1,012.9 778.9 234.0 130.1 18.8 14.1 3.1 2005
684.0 164.2 39.5 197.0 396.6 60.2 1,023.4 795.0 228.4 130.6 17.6 14.7 3.7 2006
678.4 163.0 40.3 195.2 392.7 59.7 1,017.9 792.7 225.2 129.8 16.9 14.6 3.7 2007          Mar 
675.1 162.4 41.6 193.4 390.5 59.9 1,017.0 791.6 225.4 129.6 17.6 14.3 3.6          June
681.4 163.2 45.0 194.1 388.1 59.5 1,018.2 792.6 225.5 130.9 17.2 14.2 3.6          Sep 690.3 165.0 46.2 197.5 386.6 58.2 1,015.2 791.6 223.7 129.3 17.2 14.0 3.5          Dec 
690.5 165.5 47.4 195.9 384.2 58.6 1,009.6 788.1 221.6 128.9 17.0 13.9 3.5 2008          Mar 
Short-term lending
86.9 14.1 10.3 23.9 40.1 10.6 41.8 4.5 37.3 2.6 18.8 1.4 0.0 2005
84.9 13.9 10.1 22.1 36.7 10.0 39.8 4.2 35.6 2.8 17.6 1.2 0.0 2006
82.2 12.6 10.1 22.1 36.2 10.3 38.9 4.5 34.4 2.6 16.9 1.0 0.0 2007          Mar 
82.4 12.5 11.0 22.0 36.2 10.3 39.5 4.6 35.0 2.6 17.6 0.9 0.0          June
85.0 12.7 13.1 21.6 35.3 10.0 38.8 4.1 34.8 2.6 17.2 0.8 0.0          Sep 
88.0 13.0 13.0 23.3 35.7 9.4 39.2 4.0 35.2 2.5 17.2 0.8 0.0          Dec 
88.4 13.1 14.3 22.3 35.5 10.1 38.3 3.9 34.4 2.5 17.0 0.9 0.0 2008          Mar 
Medium-term lending
63.7 7.3 6.5 15.9 29.8 3.8 71.5 25.0 46.5 37.2 − 0.7 0.1 2005
62.3 6.9 5.9 15.8 27.7 3.8 69.3 23.9 45.4 37.0 − 0.6 0.1 2006
61.2 6.5 6.3 15.7 27.5 3.8 67.7 23.0 44.7 36.9 − 0.6 0.0 2007          Mar 
61.5 6.5 6.8 16.0 27.4 3.8 66.9 22.5 44.4 36.8 − 0.7 0.0          June
62.7 7.0 6.8 16.6 27.5 3.8 66.8 22.2 44.6 36.9 − 0.6 0.0          Sep 65.7 7.4 7.5 17.7 27.4 3.7 65.4 21.7 43.6 35.8 − 0.7 0.0          Dec 
67.7 7.9 7.5 18.6 27.0 3.7 63.8 21.0 42.7 34.8 − 0.7 0.0 2008          Mar 
Long-term lending
534.4 138.9 23.8 159.6 337.6 46.2 899.6 749.4 150.2 90.3 − 12.0 3.1 2005
536.9 143.4 23.4 159.1 332.1 46.5 914.3 766.8 147.4 90.8 − 12.9 3.6 2006
535.0 143.9 24.0 157.5 328.9 45.7 911.3 765.2 146.1 90.3 − 12.9 3.7 2007          Mar 
531.2 143.4 23.8 155.4 326.9 45.8 910.5 764.6 146.0 90.3 − 12.7 3.6          June
533.7 143.5 25.1 155.9 325.2 45.7 912.6 766.3 146.2 91.4 − 12.7 3.6          Sep 536.6 144.7 25.7 156.5 323.5 45.1 910.6 765.8 144.8 90.9 − 12.5 3.4          Dec 
534.4 144.5 25.6 155.0 321.8 44.8 907.5 763.1 144.4 91.6 − 12.3 3.4 2008          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 5.3 − 1.2 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 2.1 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 2007          Q1
− 3.4 − 0.5 + 1.2 − 2.0 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1          Q2
+ 6.7 + 0.8 + 3.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 8.7 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 2.0 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1          Q4
+ 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 1.5 − 2.4 + 0.4 − 5.6 − 3.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 2008          Q1
Short-term lending
− 2.6 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 2007          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
+ 2.6 + 0.2 + 2.1 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3+ 3.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2008          Q1
Medium-term lending
− 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2007          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 1.1 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 2.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2008          Q1
Long-term lending
− 1.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.1 2007          Q1
− 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 2.3 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.1          Q2
+ 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 2.2 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 1.6 − 0.5 − − 0.3 − 0.1          Q4
− 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 0.2 + 0.6 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2008          Q1
1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. — loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2005 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 231.3 633.1 8.2 624.9 603.4 91.9 42.4 31.6 12.6
2006 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 289.5 673.3 11.7 661.6 586.5 97.5 37.8 30.4 11.22007 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 418.9 706.5 22.8 683.7 555.4 118.4 36.4 35.0 22.6
2007          Apr 2,434.0 756.1 999.6 316.6 683.0 13.5 669.5 574.6 103.7 38.3 30.0 24.2
         May 2,445.1 761.0 1,008.9 324.3 684.6 13.9 670.8 570.1 105.0 37.6 29.8 22.0         June 2,464.9 772.5 1,019.0 329.6 689.4 15.3 674.1 566.7 106.6 37.5 30.2 23.9
         July 2,464.7 775.2 1,019.2 327.8 691.5 16.0 675.5 561.6 108.7 36.6 33.4 22.0
         Aug 2,483.3 769.5 1,045.6 353.1 692.5 16.4 676.0 557.8 110.3 36.4 33.3 23.9         Sep 2,510.2 782.1 1,061.7 364.6 697.1 17.0 680.0 554.8 111.6 36.4 34.2 29.3
         Oct 2,506.9 770.4 1,071.5 375.7 695.8 17.7 678.1 551.2 113.8 36.5 34.1 30.1
         Nov 2,551.3 800.8 1,085.7 387.0 698.7 19.8 678.8 548.1 116.7 36.4 35.0 34.5         Dec 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 418.9 706.5 22.8 683.7 555.4 118.4 36.4 35.0 22.6
2008          Jan 2,587.3 785.1 1,130.6 420.3 710.3 24.0 686.3 550.5 121.1 33.6 34.9 36.1
         Feb 2,601.7 784.9 1,147.5 434.5 713.0 25.0 688.0 547.6 121.7 33.6 35.0 38.9         Mar 2,601.9 786.3 1,150.0 435.8 714.2 26.1 688.1 543.8 121.8 33.2 35.0 39.9
Changes *
2006 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 + 57.5 + 40.2 + 3.5 + 36.6 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 2.22007 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 + 127.5 + 33.0 + 11.0 + 22.0 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 + 3.3 + 9.9
2007          Apr + 16.2 + 8.1 + 10.9 + 7.6 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 3.0 − 3.9 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 11.1 + 4.9 + 9.3 + 7.7 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 − 4.5 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 2.2         June + 18.3 + 11.5 + 8.6 + 3.8 + 4.8 + 1.4 + 3.4 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5
         July − 0.8 + 2.6 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 5.1 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 2.7 − 2.0
         Aug + 18.2 − 5.7 + 26.2 + 25.3 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 3.7 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.0
         Sep + 26.9 + 12.6 + 16.1 + 11.5 + 4.6 + 0.6 + 4.0 − 3.0 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 5.4
         Oct − 3.2 − 11.7 + 9.9 + 11.1 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 1.9 − 3.6 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.8
         Nov + 44.1 + 30.4 + 14.2 + 11.0 + 3.2 + 2.1 + 1.0 − 3.1 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 4.4         Dec + 27.9 − 20.9 + 39.7 + 31.9 + 7.8 + 2.9 + 4.9 + 7.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 11.9
2008          Jan + 8.0 + 5.0 + 5.2 + 1.4 + 3.8 + 1.3 + 2.5 − 4.9 + 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 13.5
         Feb + 14.5 − 0.1 + 16.9 + 14.2 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 1.8 − 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.9         Mar + 0.4 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.9
Domestic government End of year or month *
2005 103.7 21.0 78.7 31.7 47.0 0.5 46.5 2.4 1.5 32.3 1.0 −2006 134.4 26.7 104.0 51.1 52.9 2.1 50.8 2.1 1.6 28.2 0.8 −2007 158.5 28.0 127.7 71.9 55.8 3.7 52.1 1.4 1.5 27.6 4.5 −
2007          Apr 133.3 23.7 106.0 52.6 53.4 2.5 51.0 2.0 1.6 28.9 0.8 −
         May 143.8 25.4 115.0 61.3 53.7 2.5 51.2 1.9 1.6 28.8 0.8 −         June 145.0 25.4 116.3 61.6 54.6 3.4 51.2 1.8 1.5 28.7 1.3 −
         July 142.1 26.0 112.9 57.6 55.3 3.5 51.8 1.7 1.5 27.8 4.6 −
         Aug 145.1 23.1 118.8 63.5 55.3 3.5 51.8 1.6 1.5 27.7 4.5 −
         Sep 149.3 26.6 119.6 64.4 55.1 3.6 51.6 1.6 1.5 27.6 4.5 −
         Oct 146.1 27.1 116.0 61.2 54.8 3.2 51.6 1.5 1.5 27.6 4.5 −
         Nov 157.0 27.3 126.8 71.8 55.1 3.4 51.7 1.4 1.5 27.5 4.5 −         Dec 158.5 28.0 127.7 71.9 55.8 3.7 52.1 1.4 1.5 27.6 4.5 −
2008          Jan 150.0 24.9 122.2 66.9 55.3 3.2 52.1 1.4 1.5 24.9 4.5 0.2
         Feb 149.6 24.9 121.9 66.2 55.8 3.4 52.4 1.3 1.5 25.0 4.5 0.2         Mar 150.0 24.6 122.7 66.7 56.0 4.4 51.6 1.3 1.4 24.7 4.5 −
Changes *
2006 + 30.7 + 5.7 + 25.3 + 19.4 + 5.9 + 1.6 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 −2007 + 23.5 + 1.2 + 23.0 + 20.8 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 2.6 −
2007          Apr + 2.2 + 0.9 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         May + 10.5 + 1.7 + 8.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −         June + 1.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         July − 3.4 + 0.6 − 3.9 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 2.7 −
         Aug + 3.0 − 2.9 + 6.0 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Sep + 4.2 + 3.5 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Oct − 3.2 + 0.5 − 3.6 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Nov + 10.9 + 0.2 + 10.8 + 10.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − −         Dec + 1.5 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
2008          Jan − 8.6 − 3.0 − 5.4 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Feb − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Mar + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2005 2,173.0 696.0 785.7 199.5 586.1 7.7 578.4 601.0 90.3 10.2 30.7 12.6
2006 2,260.2 721.0 858.8 238.4 620.4 9.6 610.8 584.5 95.9 9.6 29.5 11.22007 2,420.6 752.0 997.7 347.0 650.7 19.0 631.7 554.0 116.9 8.8 30.5 22.6
2007          Apr 2,300.7 732.4 893.6 264.0 629.5 11.0 618.5 572.6 102.1 9.4 29.1 24.2
         May 2,301.3 735.6 893.9 263.0 631.0 11.4 619.6 568.3 103.5 8.8 29.0 22.0         June 2,319.9 747.1 902.8 268.0 634.8 11.9 622.9 564.9 105.2 8.8 28.9 23.9
         July 2,322.6 749.2 906.4 270.2 636.2 12.5 623.7 559.9 107.2 8.8 28.8 22.0
         Aug 2,338.2 746.4 926.8 289.6 637.2 12.9 624.2 556.2 108.8 8.8 28.8 23.9         Sep 2,360.9 755.5 942.1 300.2 641.9 13.5 628.4 553.3 110.1 8.8 29.7 29.3
         Oct 2,360.8 743.2 955.5 314.5 641.0 14.5 626.5 549.7 112.4 8.9 29.6 30.1
         Nov 2,394.2 773.5 958.9 315.3 643.6 16.5 627.2 546.7 115.2 8.8 30.5 34.5         Dec 2,420.6 752.0 997.7 347.0 650.7 19.0 631.7 554.0 116.9 8.8 30.5 22.6
2008          Jan 2,437.3 760.1 1,008.4 353.4 654.9 20.8 634.1 549.1 119.6 8.6 30.4 35.9
         Feb 2,452.2 760.1 1,025.6 368.3 657.3 21.6 635.7 546.2 120.3 8.6 30.5 38.8         Mar 2,452.0 761.8 1,027.3 369.1 658.2 21.7 636.5 542.5 120.4 8.5 30.5 39.9
Changes *
2006 + 87.3 + 24.3 + 72.3 + 38.1 + 34.2 + 1.9 + 32.4 − 16.5 + 7.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 2.22007 + 157.7 + 30.3 + 137.6 + 106.8 + 30.8 + 9.4 + 21.4 − 30.5 + 20.2 − 0.7 + 0.7 + 9.9
2007          Apr + 14.0 + 7.2 + 9.5 + 6.4 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.8 − 3.9 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
         May + 0.6 + 3.2 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 4.4 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.2         June + 17.2 + 11.5 + 7.3 + 3.5 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 3.3 − 3.4 + 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5
         July + 2.7 + 2.1 + 3.6 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 5.0 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Aug + 15.2 − 2.8 + 20.3 + 19.4 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 3.7 + 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.0
         Sep + 22.7 + 9.0 + 15.3 + 10.5 + 4.8 + 0.6 + 4.2 − 2.9 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 5.4
         Oct − 0.1 − 12.2 + 13.4 + 14.3 − 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.0 − 3.6 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.8
         Nov + 33.2 + 30.3 + 3.4 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.9 + 1.0 − 3.0 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 4.4         Dec + 26.4 − 21.5 + 38.8 + 31.8 + 7.1 + 2.6 + 4.5 + 7.3 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 11.9
2008          Jan + 16.6 + 8.0 + 10.7 + 6.4 + 4.3 + 1.8 + 2.5 − 4.8 + 2.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 13.3
         Feb + 14.9 − 0.1 + 17.2 + 14.9 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 2.9 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.9         Mar − 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.9 − 3.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.1
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2005 809.9 233.2 550.8 108.7 442.0 2.4 439.6 5.0 21.0 9.7 19.4 12.62006 874.9 256.1 594.1 122.8 471.3 3.2 468.1 4.5 20.2 9.1 20.0 11.22007 961.9 264.9 672.9 178.6 494.3 5.5 488.8 3.9 20.1 8.3 21.5 22.6
2007          Apr 906.5 263.7 617.7 137.8 479.9 3.8 476.1 4.5 20.5 8.9 19.9 24.2
         May 903.6 263.8 614.9 133.4 481.5 3.9 477.6 4.5 20.4 8.3 19.8 22.0         June 913.4 268.4 620.2 134.9 485.3 4.1 481.2 4.4 20.4 8.3 19.7 23.9
         July 919.2 273.9 620.7 133.8 486.9 4.3 482.7 4.3 20.3 8.3 19.8 22.0
         Aug 926.1 267.8 634.0 146.2 487.8 4.3 483.4 4.1 20.1 8.3 19.8 23.9
         Sep 944.2 277.7 642.5 150.7 491.8 4.5 487.3 4.0 20.0 8.3 20.8 29.3
         Oct 944.7 269.7 651.1 160.8 490.3 4.5 485.8 4.0 19.9 8.4 20.8 30.1
         Nov 962.6 288.7 649.9 158.2 491.7 5.0 486.7 3.9 20.0 8.3 21.4 34.5         Dec 961.9 264.9 672.9 178.6 494.3 5.5 488.8 3.9 20.1 8.3 21.5 22.6
2008          Jan 980.6 281.1 675.6 178.4 497.1 5.6 491.5 3.9 20.1 8.4 21.5 35.9
         Feb 993.1 279.2 690.0 190.7 499.2 5.8 493.4 3.9 20.0 8.4 21.6 38.8         Mar 990.1 278.8 687.5 187.6 500.0 5.7 494.3 3.9 19.9 8.2 21.7 39.9
Changes *
2006 + 63.5 + 22.2 + 42.5 + 13.4 + 29.1 + 0.7 + 28.4 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 2.22007 + 84.8 + 8.1 + 77.6 + 53.9 + 23.7 + 2.3 + 21.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 9.9
2007          Apr + 12.4 + 4.3 + 8.1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         May − 2.8 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 4.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.2         June + 8.3 + 4.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5
         July + 5.8 + 5.5 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.0
         Aug + 6.7 − 6.1 + 13.2 + 12.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.0
         Sep + 18.2 + 9.8 + 8.6 + 4.5 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 3.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 5.4
         Oct + 0.4 − 8.0 + 8.5 + 10.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.8
         Nov + 17.9 + 19.1 − 1.2 − 3.0 + 1.8 + 0.5 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 4.4         Dec − 0.7 − 23.9 + 23.1 + 20.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 11.9
2008          Jan + 18.6 + 16.0 + 2.6 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 13.3
         Feb + 12.5 − 1.9 + 14.4 + 12.3 + 2.1 + 0.2 + 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9         Mar − 3.0 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.1
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2005 1,363.1 462.8 448.1 79.7 305.1 63.2 14.8 234.9 217.0 23.7 179.0 14.2
2006 1,385.3 464.9 450.3 81.7 307.4 61.1 14.6 264.7 245.7 30.1 198.6 16.92007 1,458.7 487.1 472.1 83.9 320.9 67.2 15.0 324.8 300.7 41.7 234.3 24.7
2007          Oct 1,416.2 473.5 458.3 82.9 312.2 63.1 15.3 304.4 282.1 37.4 222.1 22.5
         Nov 1,431.7 484.7 469.4 83.3 319.2 66.9 15.4 309.0 286.5 38.0 225.3 23.2         Dec 1,458.7 487.1 472.1 83.9 320.9 67.2 15.0 324.8 300.7 41.7 234.3 24.7
2008          Jan 1,456.7 479.1 464.1 83.6 314.2 66.3 15.0 332.8 308.6 42.6 239.9 26.1
         Feb 1,459.1 480.9 465.2 82.9 315.7 66.5 15.7 335.6 311.0 42.5 241.8 26.7         Mar 1,461.9 483.0 467.5 80.6 319.6 67.2 15.5 339.8 314.3 42.7 244.3 27.3
Changes *
2006 + 23.8 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.9 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 29.8 + 28.7 + 5.8 + 19.9 + 3.02007 + 72.9 + 22.2 + 21.8 + 2.2 + 16.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 60.0 + 54.9 + 11.6 + 35.6 + 7.8
2007          Oct − 0.5 − 4.3 − 4.4 + 1.4 − 4.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 3.3 + 0.7
         Nov + 15.3 + 11.2 + 11.1 + 0.4 + 9.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 4.6 + 4.4 + 0.6 + 3.2 + 0.6         Dec + 27.1 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 15.8 + 14.1 + 3.6 + 9.0 + 1.5
2008          Jan − 2.0 − 8.0 − 8.0 − 0.4 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 8.0 + 8.0 + 0.9 + 5.7 + 1.4
         Feb + 2.4 + 1.8 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.8 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.5
         Mar + 2.8 + 2.1 + 2.3 − 2.3 + 3.9 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2005 103.7 38.8 1.3 7.9 29.6 0.0 12.9 16.3 3.9 2.5 9.9 0.1 19.1
2006 134.4 41.9 2.1 6.2 33.6 0.0 9.5 18.0 5.4 2.5 10.0 0.1 18.52007 158.5 38.3 1.9 3.1 33.2 0.0 8.2 27.9 6.0 11.2 10.6 0.1 19.1
2007          Oct 146.1 38.2 1.6 2.8 33.8 0.0 8.2 29.1 8.6 10.8 9.6 0.1 19.1
         Nov 157.0 41.9 1.9 6.2 33.8 0.0 8.2 25.0 4.2 11.1 9.7 0.1 19.0         Dec 158.5 38.3 1.9 3.1 33.2 0.0 8.2 27.9 6.0 11.2 10.6 0.1 19.1
2008          Jan 150.0 37.4 1.5 2.7 33.1 0.0 6.9 26.7 5.4 11.0 10.2 0.1 17.7
         Feb 149.6 37.1 1.4 2.6 33.1 0.0 7.0 24.8 4.5 10.0 10.2 0.1 17.7         Mar 150.0 37.6 1.5 3.8 32.2 0.0 6.8 25.7 4.8 9.7 11.2 0.1 17.6
Changes *
2006 + 30.7 + 3.1 + 0.8 − 1.7 + 4.0 − 0.0 − 3.4 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.62007 + 23.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.6 + 8.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8
2007          Oct − 3.2 − 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 1.7 − 2.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov + 10.9 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0         Dec + 1.5 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.1
2008          Jan − 8.6 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0
         Mar + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
17.9 90.8 144.1 5.3 138.8 596.0 586.4 9.6 69.3 0.5 11.3 − 2005
19.1 115.6 149.2 6.4 142.7 580.0 571.1 8.9 75.7 0.5 9.5 − 200624.1 168.4 156.4 13.5 142.8 550.1 542.4 7.7 96.8 0.5 9.0 − 2007
22.3 153.7 150.8 10.1 140.7 545.7 537.8 7.9 92.5 0.5 8.8 − 2007          Oct 
22.5 157.1 151.9 11.5 140.5 542.7 535.1 7.7 95.1 0.5 9.0 −          Nov 
24.1 168.4 156.4 13.5 142.8 550.1 542.4 7.7 96.8 0.5 9.0 −          Dec 
24.2 175.0 157.8 15.2 142.6 545.3 537.6 7.6 99.6 0.3 8.9 − 2008          Jan 
24.6 177.6 158.0 15.8 142.2 542.3 534.7 7.6 100.3 0.3 8.9 −          Feb 
25.5 181.6 158.2 15.9 142.3 538.6 531.0 7.6 100.5 0.3 8.8 −          Mar 
Changes *
+ 1.1 + 24.7 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 4.0 − 16.0 − 15.3 − 0.7 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2006+ 5.0 + 52.9 + 7.1 + 7.1 + 0.0 − 29.9 − 28.7 − 1.2 + 20.6 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 2007
− 0.1 + 4.3 + 0.6 + 1.1 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2007          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 2.7 − 0.3 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Nov 
+ 1.6 + 11.3 + 4.4 + 2.1 + 2.4 + 7.3 + 7.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Dec 
+ 0.0 + 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 4.8 − 4.7 − 0.1 + 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 2008          Jan 
+ 0.4 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.9 − 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Feb 
+ 0.9 + 4.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 3.7 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Mar 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
 
  
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
28.0 11.8 10.4 2.6 3.2 0.3 20.7 4.1 11.0 4.9 0.7 0.0 2005
30.5 11.5 12.7 3.4 3.0 0.3 44.0 7.8 29.7 6.0 0.6 0.0 200637.8 12.3 19.5 3.6 2.5 0.3 54.5 7.7 38.1 8.4 0.3 0.0 2007
33.3 10.0 17.3 3.5 2.5 0.3 45.5 7.0 30.3 7.8 0.3 0.0 2007          Oct 
37.1 11.6 19.4 3.6 2.5 0.3 53.0 9.6 35.1 8.0 0.4 0.0          Nov 
37.8 12.3 19.5 3.6 2.5 0.3 54.5 7.7 38.1 8.4 0.3 0.0          Dec 
33.8 9.6 18.3 3.5 2.4 0.3 52.1 8.4 34.9 8.5 0.3 0.0 2008          Jan 
36.9 11.0 20.0 3.6 2.4 0.3 50.8 8.1 33.6 8.8 0.3 0.0          Feb 
37.0 10.7 20.3 3.6 2.3 0.2 49.6 7.5 32.9 8.9 0.3 0.0          Mar 
Changes *
+ 2.5 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 23.3 + 3.6 + 18.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2006+ 7.4 + 0.9 + 6.8 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 10.5 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 2007
− 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2007          Oct 
+ 3.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 2.6 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 1.9 + 3.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0          Dec 
− 4.0 − 2.7 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.4 + 0.7 − 3.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2008          Jan 
+ 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 1.3 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 −          Feb 
+ 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 −          Mar 
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2005 611.9 603.4 519.2 404.2 84.2 74.4 8.5 6.8 13.3 99.3 91.9 77.5 7.4
2006 594.9 586.5 487.4 384.4 99.1 89.8 8.3 6.4 13.2 107.6 97.5 70.5 10.02007 563.8 555.4 446.0 354.6 109.4 101.4 8.4 6.1 14.2 130.7 118.4 64.5 12.3
2007          Nov 556.3 548.1 439.7 349.6 108.4 100.5 8.2 6.0 0.5 128.9 116.7 64.8 12.2
         Dec 563.8 555.4 446.0 354.6 109.4 101.4 8.4 6.1 9.9 130.7 118.4 64.5 12.3
2008          Jan 558.9 550.5 441.2 351.1 109.3 101.9 8.4 6.1 0.7 133.3 121.1 63.5 12.2
         Feb 556.0 547.6 439.2 350.2 108.4 101.1 8.4 6.1 0.4 135.1 121.7 62.9 13.4         Mar 552.3 543.8 437.6 348.8 106.3 99.0 8.4 6.1 0.4 134.9 121.8 62.3 13.1
Changes *
2006 − 17.0 − 16.8 − 31.7 − 20.4 + 14.9 + 15.5 − 0.2 − 0.4 . + 7.3 + 7.2 − 5.5 + 0.1
2007 − 31.0 − 31.1 − 41.4 − 28.8 + 10.3 + 11.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 . + 22.4 + 20.1 − 6.7 + 2.2
2007          Nov − 3.1 − 3.1 − 4.1 − 3.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 . + 3.2 + 2.6 − 0.3 + 0.6
         Dec + 7.5 + 7.3 + 6.3 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 . + 1.8 + 1.7 − 0.3 + 0.1
2008          Jan − 4.9 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 3.5 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 − . + 2.6 + 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.1
         Feb − 2.9 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 . + 1.9 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 1.2         Mar − 3.7 − 3.7 − 1.6 − 1.0 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
  
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2005 1,608.7 400.7 25.3 274.5 32.0 61.8 94.8 1,452.1 1.5 0.2 0.5 0.8 45.8 2.5
2006 1,636.2 392.5 41.1 301.5 30.9 68.3 118.3 1,449.5 1.8 0.2 0.8 0.7 51.4 1.22007 1,659.1 375.7 54.2 305.1 51.2 109.6 147.5 1,402.0 1.9 0.1 1.1 0.7 53.6 1.4
2007          Nov 1,679.3 378.1 55.6 309.0 51.5 111.3 151.5 1,416.5 1.8 0.1 1.1 0.6 54.4 1.5
         Dec 1,659.1 375.7 54.2 305.1 51.2 109.6 147.5 1,402.0 1.9 0.1 1.1 0.7 53.6 1.4
2008          Jan 1,667.1 372.9 53.9 307.1 56.3 119.2 147.6 1,400.2 1.9 0.2 1.1 0.6 53.6 1.4
         Feb 1,653.6 374.8 54.9 305.0 55.5 116.2 148.5 1,388.9 1.9 0.2 1.1 0.6 53.6 1.4         Mar 1,651.9 372.0 53.5 298.3 62.3 122.8 147.9 1,381.2 1.9 0.2 1.1 0.6 53.4 1.4
Changes *
2006 + 21.6 − 27.3 + 8.2 + 25.4 − 2.3 + 6.0 + 22.9 − 7.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.2
2007 + 21.7 − 17.5 + 12.9 + 3.6 + 20.2 + 40.7 + 32.3 − 51.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.0
2007          Nov − 4.1 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 5.4 + 3.6 + 8.8 + 1.9 − 14.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.0
         Dec − 20.1 − 2.3 − 1.5 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 4.0 − 14.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0
2008          Jan + 8.0 − 3.0 − 0.3 + 2.0 + 5.2 + 9.6 + 0.2 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Feb − 13.5 + 1.9 + 1.0 − 2.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 + 0.8 − 11.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Mar − 2.1 − 2.6 − 1.4 − 6.7 + 6.9 + 6.6 − 0.5 − 8.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2007 25 189.5 41.8 0.0 12.1 27.6 67.9 11.9 12.1 0.3 22.8 123.8 5.2 6.6 7.3 89.3
2008          Jan 25 189.9 42.3 0.0 12.8 27.7 68.0 11.6 11.8 0.3 22.8 123.6 5.5 7.2 7.3 7.0
         Feb 25 189.8 42.4 0.0 12.9 27.7 67.9 11.6 11.8 0.2 22.6 123.3 5.7 7.1 7.3 6.9
         Mar 25 190.4 42.8 0.0 13.0 27.8 68.0 11.6 11.8 0.2 23.0 123.4 5.8 7.1 7.3 7.4
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2008          Jan 15 138.3 28.0 0.0 8.1 17.6 52.0 10.8 7.1 0.2 18.4 82.3 5.3 7.2 4.7 4.3         Feb 15 138.2 27.9 0.0 8.1 17.6 51.9 10.7 7.2 0.2 18.1 82.0 5.5 7.1 4.7 4.3         Mar 15 138.7 28.0 0.0 8.3 17.7 52.1 10.7 7.2 0.2 18.6 82.0 5.6 7.1 4.7 4.6
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2008          Jan 10 51.6 14.3 0.0 4.7 10.1 16.0 0.9 4.7 0.1 4.4 41.3 0.2 − 2.6 2.7         Feb 10 51.6 14.5 0.0 4.8 10.1 15.9 0.9 4.6 0.1 4.5 41.3 0.2 − 2.6 2.6         Mar 10 51.6 14.9 0.0 4.6 10.1 15.8 0.9 4.6 0.1 4.4 41.4 0.2 − 2.6 2.8
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2007 24.3 3.2 6.6 45.9 34.1 42.3 21.0 4.2 8.4 3.8 13.0 10.0 7.6 10.3 8.4 0.5
2008          Jan 2.1 0.0 0.5 3.6 2.8 3.7 1.8 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.2 9.6 7.3 0.8 0.0
         Feb 1.9 0.0 0.5 3.9 3.1 3.3 1.8 0.3 0.7 0.3 0.8 10.1 7.7 0.8 0.0
         Mar 2.5 0.0 0.5 4.0 3.1 3.6 2.0 0.3 0.7 0.3 0.9 10.2 7.7 0.9 . 0.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2008          Jan 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.9 2.9 1.3 0.2 0.5 0.2 1.1 5.8 3.8 0.5 0.0         Feb 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.7 2.0 2.4 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.2 0.7 6.0 3.9 0.5 0.0         Mar 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.9 2.1 2.7 1.4 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.8 6.1 4.0 0.6 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2008          Jan 0.8 − 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 3.8 3.5 0.3 0.0         Feb 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.1 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 4.1 3.8 0.3 0.0         Mar 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.1 1.0 1.0 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.1 4.1 3.8 0.3 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
with
foreign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to market
foreign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2005 54 211 1,626.5 713.1 640.8 180.1 460.7 72.3 805.8 587.7 22.0 21.5 565.7 218.1 107.6
2006 53 213 1,743.7 711.6 635.5 194.1 441.4 76.1 897.7 671.8 18.5 17.9 653.3 226.0 134.32007 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 20.7 789.8 255.3 161.8
2007          May 53 215 1,962.5 763.0 684.6 232.9 451.8 78.3 1,057.5 822.4 26.8 26.0 795.6 235.1 142.1
         June 53 216 2,037.9 801.8 714.6 224.6 490.0 87.2 1,076.4 837.3 26.1 25.3 811.2 239.1 159.7
         July 52 216 2,091.4 806.6 724.4 221.4 503.0 82.2 1,133.0 880.6 24.2 23.2 856.4 252.4 151.7
         Aug 52 216 2,077.6 828.5 748.5 238.5 509.9 80.1 1,095.6 822.5 23.0 22.2 799.5 273.0 153.5         Sep 52 216 2,058.3 804.4 727.5 250.4 477.1 76.9 1,096.6 826.0 25.9 24.9 800.2 270.5 157.4
         Oct 52 218 2,069.8 832.1 754.9 256.7 498.2 77.1 1,080.6 812.1 24.9 24.0 787.2 268.5 157.2
         Nov 52 218 2,067.1 816.2 741.4 247.6 493.9 74.7 1,085.5 827.8 24.9 24.1 802.9 257.8 165.4         Dec 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 20.7 789.8 255.3 161.8
2008          Jan 52 217 2,080.4 837.3 764.6 255.2 509.4 72.7 1,087.8 833.6 22.7 21.6 810.9 254.2 155.3
         Feb 52 219 2,014.6 819.5 748.5 248.1 500.4 71.1 1,049.3 788.5 24.4 23.3 764.1 260.7 145.8
Changes *
2006 − 1 + 2 +204.9 + 29.4 + 23.7 + 13.9 + 9.8 + 5.6 +142.8 +123.1 − 3.5 − 3.7 +126.6 + 19.7 + 32.8
2007 − 1 + 5 +406.5 +132.8 +136.4 + 44.5 + 91.9 − 3.6 +240.6 +196.1 + 3.1 + 2.9 +192.9 + 44.5 + 33.1
2007          May − + 1 + 51.1 + 23.8 + 23.2 + 7.0 + 16.2 + 0.6 + 27.2 + 19.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 17.3 + 8.1 + 0.1
         June − + 1 + 77.9 + 39.7 + 30.8 − 8.2 + 39.0 + 8.9 + 20.5 + 16.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 16.7 + 4.5 + 17.8
         July − 1 − + 63.6 + 5.5 + 10.3 − 3.2 + 13.5 − 4.8 + 65.8 + 51.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 + 53.1 + 14.7 − 7.7
         Aug − − − 15.2 + 21.5 + 23.6 + 17.1 + 6.5 − 2.1 − 38.3 − 58.6 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 57.5 + 20.2 + 1.6
         Sep − − + 14.5 − 13.5 − 10.9 + 11.9 − 22.8 − 2.6 + 22.4 + 19.8 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 17.0 + 2.6 + 5.7
         Oct − + 2 + 27.6 + 32.6 + 32.1 + 6.3 + 25.7 + 0.5 − 5.6 − 6.1 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 5.1 + 0.5 + 0.6
         Nov − − + 18.5 − 9.0 − 7.0 − 9.2 + 2.2 − 2.0 + 18.5 + 26.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 26.2 − 7.8 + 9.0         Dec − − − 21.8 − 2.0 + 2.0 − 8.9 + 10.9 − 4.0 − 16.6 − 14.4 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 11.1 − 2.2 − 3.2
2008          Jan − − 1 + 45.5 + 25.8 + 23.6 + 16.6 + 7.1 + 2.2 + 26.0 + 26.2 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 25.1 − 0.1 − 6.4
         Feb − + 2 − 46.2 − 11.6 − 10.2 − 7.1 − 3.1 − 1.4 − 26.1 − 35.2 + 1.7 + 1.7 − 36.9 + 9.2 − 8.5
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2005 43 153 713.6 320.9 249.4 119.9 129.6 71.4 324.6 224.0 39.0 35.8 185.0 100.6 68.1
2006 40 142 761.2 341.9 262.8 124.1 138.7 79.1 347.3 218.7 38.0 36.4 180.7 128.6 72.12007 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 36.8 138.1 87.9 59.0
2007          May 40 112 613.6 299.0 222.3 112.2 110.1 76.6 255.0 138.2 36.5 35.1 101.7 116.8 59.6
         June 40 112 608.2 286.4 210.5 106.1 104.4 75.9 261.9 141.6 36.3 35.0 105.2 120.3 59.9
         July 40 109 599.3 280.8 208.2 103.7 104.5 72.6 259.7 143.6 36.2 34.8 107.4 116.1 58.7
         Aug 40 109 595.1 274.9 204.2 102.6 101.6 70.7 263.2 145.8 36.6 35.2 109.2 117.4 57.0         Sep 40 110 590.2 274.7 204.8 110.5 94.3 69.9 259.6 147.4 36.2 34.8 111.3 112.2 55.9
         Oct 41 112 588.0 270.5 200.6 109.0 91.6 69.9 260.8 150.9 36.2 34.8 114.8 109.9 56.7
         Nov 41 112 586.7 269.7 199.6 105.4 94.1 70.1 258.8 152.1 36.7 35.3 115.5 106.7 58.2         Dec 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 36.8 138.1 87.9 59.0
2008          Jan 39 121 598.1 273.3 206.9 108.9 98.0 66.4 265.0 177.9 38.4 37.4 139.5 87.1 59.7
         Feb 39 122 598.8 272.0 206.0 108.7 97.2 66.1 264.4 179.2 39.7 38.7 139.5 85.3 62.3
Changes *
2006 − 3 − 11 + 62.6 + 29.7 + 17.9 + 4.3 + 13.6 + 11.8 + 28.3 − 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 29.0 + 4.7
2007 − 1 − 22 −155.7 − 64.1 − 55.8 − 19.3 − 36.5 − 8.3 − 79.1 − 38.8 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 38.6 − 40.4 − 12.5
2007          May − − + 9.9 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 2.8 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 2.5 + 3.7
         June − − − 5.1 − 12.4 − 11.8 − 6.1 − 5.7 − 0.6 + 7.0 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.6 + 3.6 + 0.4
         July − − 3 − 7.3 − 4.5 − 1.8 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 2.6 − 1.7 + 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.5 − 4.1 − 1.1
         Aug − − − 4.2 − 6.0 − 4.0 − 1.1 − 2.9 − 2.0 + 3.5 + 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 1.7
         Sep − + 1 − 0.2 + 3.0 + 2.1 + 7.9 − 5.8 + 1.0 − 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 3.3 − 5.2 − 1.0
         Oct + 1 + 2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 2.1 + 0.8 + 1.9 + 4.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 2.3 + 0.9
         Nov − − + 1.2 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 3.6 + 3.4 + 1.2 − 1.3 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 3.1 + 1.5         Dec − 2 + 8 + 4.5 − 1.6 + 3.0 − 0.6 + 3.6 − 4.5 + 5.2 + 24.0 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 22.8 − 18.8 + 0.9
2008          Jan − + 1 + 7.8 + 5.9 + 4.7 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.7
         Feb − + 1 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 2.7
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report , are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,362.8 912.4 373.6 538.9 450.4 63.9 59.0 55.3 4.9 4.6 386.5 171.9 20.9 70.8 2005
1,442.7 984.9 398.5 586.4 457.8 53.8 49.3 46.2 4.6 4.1 403.9 181.5 27.8 91.7 20061,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 47.5 4.1 3.9 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5 2007
1,611.6 1,012.2 386.5 625.7 599.4 59.0 54.1 50.2 4.8 4.2 540.4 217.9 29.8 103.3 2007          May
1,677.2 1,076.6 442.8 633.8 600.6 59.0 54.6 50.2 4.5 3.8 541.5 214.8 29.7 116.2          June
1,725.9 1,097.9 438.6 659.3 628.0 58.1 53.6 51.3 4.5 4.0 569.9 219.8 29.7 115.9          July
1,715.8 1,139.6 466.2 673.4 576.2 65.6 61.1 56.9 4.6 4.0 510.6 213.5 30.1 118.3          Aug 1,701.9 1,124.0 507.9 616.1 577.9 62.5 57.9 53.9 4.6 4.0 515.4 203.8 30.1 122.6          Sep 
1,711.3 1,159.4 510.7 648.7 551.9 63.7 59.6 56.3 4.1 3.8 488.2 208.5 30.1 120.0          Oct 
1,739.0 1,154.7 523.7 631.0 584.3 64.0 60.0 55.4 4.1 3.8 520.3 189.8 30.1 108.2          Nov 1,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 47.5 4.1 3.9 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5          Dec 
1,767.7 1,195.7 519.4 676.3 572.0 60.6 56.5 53.6 4.1 3.8 511.4 177.2 29.2 106.4 2008          Jan 
1,709.0 1,161.3 504.1 657.2 547.6 57.3 53.2 50.2 4.1 3.8 490.4 166.8 31.6 107.3          Feb 
Changes *
+ 142.5 +110.0 + 24.9 + 85.1 + 32.5 − 10.0 − 9.7 − 9.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 42.5 + 9.5 + 6.9 + 46.0 2006
+ 359.0 +243.9 +149.2 + 94.7 +115.1 + 1.5 + 2.0 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 +113.6 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 41.7 2007
+ 39.5 + 11.7 + 4.4 + 7.3 + 27.8 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 26.9 + 7.9 + 0.9 + 2.8 2007          May
+ 67.8 + 65.9 + 56.3 + 9.6 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 1.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 + 13.4          June
+ 56.3 + 21.1 − 4.3 + 25.4 + 35.2 − 0.9 − 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 36.1 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.2          July
− 11.4 + 39.3 + 27.7 + 11.6 − 50.6 + 7.5 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 58.1 − 6.4 + 0.4 + 2.2          Aug 
+ 10.9 − 1.5 + 41.7 − 43.2 + 12.4 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 15.5 − 9.7 − 0.0 + 13.3          Sep 
+ 20.8 + 41.8 + 2.8 + 39.0 − 21.0 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 22.2 + 4.7 + 0.0 + 2.0          Oct 
+ 42.9 + 3.9 + 13.0 − 9.1 + 39.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 38.6 − 18.7 + 0.0 − 5.7          Nov − 13.6 + 37.0 + 24.0 + 13.0 − 50.6 − 8.7 − 8.8 − 8.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 41.9 − 3.8 − 0.9 − 3.5          Dec 
+ 49.1 + 7.3 − 28.4 + 35.6 + 41.9 + 5.2 + 5.3 + 6.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 36.6 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 5.1 2008          Jan 
− 44.1 − 26.2 − 15.3 − 10.9 − 18.0 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 14.7 − 10.4 + 2.4 + 5.9          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
525.4 310.6 103.3 207.3 214.8 36.0 29.1 27.1 7.0 6.8 178.8 79.7 41.0 67.5 2005
557.3 329.4 121.5 207.9 227.9 40.8 33.0 31.6 7.8 7.7 187.1 87.9 40.0 76.0 2006437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 29.5 6.8 6.7 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4 2007
457.7 282.7 106.4 176.2 175.1 43.0 34.4 32.4 8.6 8.4 132.1 66.7 28.2 61.0 2007          May
453.4 280.8 114.7 166.1 172.5 41.2 32.7 30.6 8.5 8.4 131.3 66.6 28.5 59.7          June
445.9 278.4 111.0 167.4 167.5 37.7 30.7 29.4 7.1 7.0 129.7 66.7 27.9 58.8          July
442.7 278.7 121.5 157.2 164.0 38.3 31.3 30.2 7.0 6.9 125.7 65.6 28.1 58.7          Aug 443.6 280.7 119.1 161.6 162.9 37.4 30.6 30.2 6.8 6.7 125.5 63.0 27.9 55.6          Sep 
440.3 275.8 120.5 155.4 164.5 37.0 30.3 30.1 6.7 6.6 127.5 62.2 28.0 57.6          Oct 
443.2 275.4 121.8 153.6 167.8 37.7 31.0 30.4 6.7 6.6 130.1 59.3 27.4 56.8          Nov 437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 29.5 6.8 6.7 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4          Dec 
445.3 270.6 120.5 150.2 174.7 41.1 34.1 33.8 7.0 6.9 133.6 70.2 29.2 53.3 2008          Jan 
448.6 278.2 128.8 149.5 170.4 38.8 31.6 31.4 7.2 7.0 131.6 69.0 29.1 52.2          Feb 
Changes *
+ 43.8 + 26.3 + 18.2 + 8.0 + 17.6 + 4.8 + 3.9 + 4.5 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 12.7 + 8.2 − 1.0 + 11.6 2006
− 109.3 − 53.9 − 3.4 − 50.5 − 55.4 − 3.7 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 51.7 − 18.3 − 11.4 − 16.7 2007
+ 9.8 + 5.4 − 3.0 + 8.5 + 4.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 4.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 2007          May
− 4.1 − 1.6 + 8.3 − 9.9 − 2.5 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.2          June
− 6.3 − 1.8 − 3.7 + 1.8 − 4.4 − 3.5 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.6          July
− 3.3 + 0.2 + 10.4 − 10.3 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.0          Aug 
+ 4.4 + 3.8 − 2.4 + 6.1 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.5 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 1.8          Sep 
− 1.7 − 4.1 + 1.4 − 5.4 + 2.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.5          Oct 
+ 4.7 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 4.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.6 − 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.1          Nov − 5.6 − 5.2 − 3.6 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 10.2 + 1.2 − 1.3          Dec 
+ 8.4 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 + 7.8 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 3.8 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 2.0 2008          Jan 
+ 4.8 + 8.3 + 8.3 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.7          Feb 
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2007          Sep 9,649.9 193.0 0.5 192.5 193.4 0.9 0.0
         Oct 9,708.0 194.2 0.5 193.7 194.4 0.7 0.0
         Nov 9,818.7 196.4 0.5 195.9 196.8 1.0 0.0
         Dec  8 10,055.2 201.1 0.5 200.6 200.9 1.1 0.0
2008          Jan 10,106.7 202.1 0.5 201.6 202.4 0.8 0.0
         Feb 10,253.8 205.1 0.5 204.6 205.3 0.7 0.0
         Mar 10,370.6 207.4 0.5 206.9 207.5 0.6 0.0
         Apr  p ... ... ... 207.8 ... ... ...
         May ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2007          Sep 2,253,006 45,060 197 44,864 45,217 353 1
         Oct 2,292,287 45,846 196 45,649 45,944 295 0
         Nov 2,327,494 46,550 196 46,353 46,703 350 0
         Dec 2,339,106 46,782 196 46,586 46,887 301 2
2008          Jan 2,382,218 47,644 197 47,448 47,658 210 0
         Feb 2,426,935 48,539 197 48,342 48,569 227 1
         Mar 2,428,235 48,565 197 48,368 48,556 188 0
         Apr  p 2,425,851 48,517 196 48,321 ... ... ...
         May  p 2,453,700 49,074 196 48,878 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 8Required reserves of the euro area up to 31 December 2007
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- amounted to €199,2 billion. From 1 January 2008, including data of credit
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the institutions in Malta and Cyprus. 
reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 2.25 3.25          Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2006 Mar                  8 1.50 2.50 3.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62          July                  1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75          June                15 1.75 2.75 3.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          Aug                  9 2.00 3.00 4.00 2002 Jan                  1 2.71 2005 Jan                  1 1.21
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          Oct                11 2.25 3.25 4.25          to          July                  1 1.17
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Dec                13 2.50 3.50 4.50          Apr                  3
 2006 Jan                  1 1.37
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50 2007 Mar                14 2.75 3.75 4.75          July                  1 1.95
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25          June                13 3.00 4.00 5.00
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75 2007 Jan                  1 2.70
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25          July                 1 3.19
2008 Jan                  1 3.32
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2008 Apr                  2 283,699 150,000 − 4.00 4.21 4.25 7
         Apr                  9 247,590 130,000 − 4.00 4.23 4.24 7
         Apr                16 249,682 204,500 − 4.00 4.21 4.26 7
         Apr                23 218,419 173,000 − 4.00 4.21 4.25 7
         Apr                30 247,451 170,000 − 4.00 4.26 4.29 7
−
         May                 7 229,288 150,000 4.00 4.26 4.29 7
         May               14 208,523 191,500 − 4.00 4.18 4.26 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2008 Feb                28 109,612 50,000 − − 4.16 4.23 91
         Mar                13 132,591 60,000 − − 4.25 4.40 91
         Mar                27 131,334 50,000 − − 4.44 4.53 91
         Apr                  3 103,109 25,000 − − 4.55 4.61 189
         May                 2 101,175 50,000 − − 4.67 4.75 90
Source: ECB. — *Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2008 to funds were allotted or collected. 
include Malta and Cyprus. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2007          Oct 3.95 3.60 − 4.13 4.65 4.54 − 4.80 3.94 4.10 4.24 4.69 4.66 4.65 4.65
         Nov 4.00 3.39 − 4.12 4.60 4.50 − 4.81 4.02 4.12 4.22 4.64 4.63 4.62 4.61         Dec 3.86
4 3.68 − 4.04 4.83 4.60 − 4.98 3.88 4.16 4.71 4.85 4.82 4.80 4.79
2008          Jan 3.99 3.50 − 4.19 4.44 4.23 − 4.70 4.02 4.13 4.20 4.48 4.50 4.50 4.50
         Feb 4.01 3.95 − 4.12 4.33 4.27 − 4.38 4.03 4.12 4.18 4.36 4.36 4.35 4.35
         Mar 4.08 3.98 − 4.26 4.57 4.33 − 4.74 4.09 4.19 4.30 4.60 4.59 4.59 4.59
         Apr 3.98 3.75 − 4.24 4.75 4.68 − 4.86 3.99 4.24 4.37 4.78 4.80 4.81 4.82
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. — 4 At end-December, 3.70% to 3.80%. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2007          Aug 3.58 3.03 4.03 4.07 5.35 4.58 4.90 8.85 6.97 6.08 5.76 5.24 5.05
         Sep 3.68 3.06 4.13 4.09 5.44 4.64 4.94 8.99 7.00 6.13 5.91 5.35 5.14
         Oct 3.79 3.04 4.18 4.11 5.49 4.68 4.98 9.02 7.10 6.16 5.96 5.44 5.22
         Nov 3.85 3.06 4.21 4.18 5.48 4.72 4.99 8.86 7.12 6.21 5.96 5.49 5.22
         Dec 3.95 3.03 4.33 4.17 5.54 4.75 5.00 8.97 7.13 6.22 6.08 5.57 5.28
2008          Jan  3 3.98 3.06 4.27 4.21 5.62 4.75 5.01 8.99 7.15 6.24 6.06 5.55 5.27
         Feb 3.99 3.11 4.23 4.24 5.60 4.82 5.03 9.05 7.21 6.26 5.99 5.52 5.30
         Mar 4.01 3.06 4.28 4.23 5.62 4.80 5.02 9.07 7.17 6.28 6.01 5.51 5.28
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2007          Aug 1.14 3.93 3.93 3.01 2.53 3.46 1.89 4.08 4.33 4.20
         Sep 1.16 4.07 3.98 2.92 2.58 3.50 1.91 4.14 4.34 4.41
         Oct 1.17 4.11 4.16 3.31 2.53 3.57 1.97 4.07 4.37 4.63
         Nov 1.18 4.08 4.22 3.20 2.54 3.64 2.01 4.10 4.41 4.04         Dec 1.18 4.28 4.14 3.18 2.57 3.68 1.95 4.26 4.40 4.03
2008          Jan  
3 1.20 4.19 4.32 3.43 2.57 3.75 2.01 4.13 4.38 4.68
         Feb 1.21 4.10 4.18 3.22 2.65 3.77 2.02 4.07 4.18 4.36
         Mar 1.22 4.14 3.97 3.09 2.69 3.78 2.02 4.19 4.25 4.08
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2007          Aug 10.55 8.48 8.43 6.85 8.31 5.24 5.15 4.98 5.08 4.90 5.36 5.93 5.47
         Sep 10.53 8.54 8.48 6.83 8.39 5.31 5.23 5.04 5.09 5.02 5.46 5.87 5.51
         Oct 10.64 8.38 8.10 6.88 8.40 5.38 5.29 5.07 5.08 5.11 5.63 6.05 5.59
         Nov 10.50 8.47 8.38 6.90 8.36 5.38 5.28 5.03 5.10 5.11 5.60 5.95 5.49
         Dec 10.46 8.26 8.05 6.93 8.17 5.40 5.32 5.03 5.07 5.18 5.67 5.83 5.43
2008          Jan  3 10.46 8.48 8.11 7.00 8.47 5.37 5.32 5.02 5.07 5.14 5.59 5.93 5.49
         Feb 10.45 8.70 8.54 7.24 8.44 5.35 5.26 4.97 5.02 5.11 5.55 5.87 5.55
         Mar 10.52 8.56 8.36 7.05 8.39 5.32 5.19 4.88 4.96 5.08 5.65 5.78 5.43
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2007          Aug 6.35 5.77 5.86 5.17 5.01 5.46 5.29
         Sep 6.49 5.93 5.90 5.23 5.20 5.60 5.41
         Oct 6.53 5.95 6.00 5.26 5.11 5.19 5.31
         Nov 6.50 5.96 5.90 5.29 5.08 5.28 5.36         Dec 6.62 6.08 5.96 5.30 5.35 5.62 5.48
2008          Jan  
3 6.62 5.93 5.92 5.27 5.12 5.35 5.25
         Feb 6.56 5.84 5.86 5.24 5.04 5.43 5.14
         Mar 6.55 5.91 5.75 5.20 5.19 5.37 5.30
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. —
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, 3Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2008 to include Cyprus and
which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis- Malta. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2007          Mar 3.33 163,774 2.58 191,196 3.67 94,996 4.23 22,215
         Apr 3.40 167,316 2.57 190,215 3.71 95,725 4.25 22,243
         May 3.46 172,864 2.56 189,352 3.78 96,130 4.28 22,042
         June 3.55 178,758 2.55 188,711 3.90 95,736 4.27 22,252
         July 3.66 184,931 2.55 187,763 3.98 99,560 4.29 22,518
         Aug 3.77 194,424 2.54 187,298 4.12 106,493 4.29 22,603
         Sep 3.86 202,538 2.54 187,402 4.24 109,580 4.30 22,699
         Oct 3.91 210,844 2.54 186,438 4.22 112,487 4.29 22,705
         Nov 3.95 218,591 2.53 185,967 4.26 110,367 4.30 22,552         Dec 4.06 233,913 2.52 187,966 4.42 114,005 4.31 22,016
2008          Jan 4.04 245,906 2.52 186,950 4.29 112,840 4.30 21,881
         Feb 4.01 250,408 2.51 185,966 4.19 123,009 4.33 22,040         Mar 4.03 255,183 2.50 185,527 4.26 116,191 4.32 21,716
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2007          Mar 5.64 6,270 4.41 28,581 5.16 927,728 9.84 69,704 5.47 66,593 6.07 317,772
         Apr 5.65 5,893 4.43 28,304 5.14 926,985 9.87 69,322 5.52 65,831 6.07 317,188
         May 5.67 5,944 4.44 28,090 5.13 926,349 9.94 68,725 5.53 66,151 6.07 316,791
         June 5.70 6,343 4.45 27,849 5.13 926,985 10.04 70,236 5.53 66,528 6.08 316,288
         July 5.85 5,643 4.48 27,778 5.12 926,457 10.17 69,915 5.55 66,991 6.10 316,380
         Aug 5.89 5,676 4.50 27,649 5.12 927,312 10.19 67,464 5.56 67,238 6.10 316,776
         Sep 5.94 5,759 4.53 27,516 5.12 928,315 10.25 69,308 5.58 66,890 6.12 316,026
         Oct 6.01 5,610 4.56 27,337 5.11 927,803 10.33 68,812 5.63 66,284 6.14 315,858
         Nov 6.00 5,580 4.59 27,097 5.11 928,247 10.21 67,118 5.64 66,285 6.16 315,737         Dec 5.98 5,715 4.61 26,823 5.10 926,998 10.39 69,974 5.64 66,288 6.17 313,792
2008          Jan 6.19 5,548 4.62 26,524 5.09 924,788 10.37 67,113 5.64 66,119 6.17 313,350
         Feb 6.16 5,524 4.65 26,171 5.09 924,251 10.27 66,879 5.69 64,854 6.16 313,645         Mar 6.18 5,644 4.66 25,994 5.08 922,825 10.39 68,852 5.69 64,926 6.16 312,388
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2007          Mar 5.79 156,009 4.76 94,383 4.98 500,891
         Apr 5.81 157,892 4.81 94,834 4.99 501,087
         May 5.80 159,526 4.84 97,867 5.00 502,283
         June 5.94 161,936 4.98 97,605 5.02 502,136
         July 6.00 161,742 4.98 97,599 5.04 503,967
         Aug 6.02 161,502 5.08 99,908 5.06 508,115
         Sep 6.15 167,064 5.17 101,492 5.10 509,124
         Oct 6.11 165,273 5.24 100,697 5.13 511,668
         Nov 6.12 168,960 5.25 102,768 5.13 514,169         Dec 6.22 175,804 5.39 109,222 5.17 517,706
2008          Jan 6.15 176,696 5.35 112,568 5.15 519,188
         Feb 6.04 181,249 5.30 114,577 5.15 523,115         Mar 6.18 185,006 5.34 116,463 5.14 523,232
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates may always be calculated either as annualised agreed intere st
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other relatedhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- balance sheet statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis purchase, including building and home improvements; including loan s
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well assample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name andsional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are for their own account. — 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for
not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. —can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2007          Mar 1.63 466,577 3.48 40,365 3.92 2,715 2.76 1,316 2.27 474,191 3.15 104,158
         Apr 1.67 469,364 3.54 41,888 3.96 2,647 2.85 1,547 2.36 470,120 3.21 104,368
         May 1.70 472,490 3.60 40,887 4.02 1,934 3.00 1,169 2.35 465,973 3.26 104,138
         June 1.73 479,163 3.72 44,261 4.19 3,006 2.92 1,582 2.33 461,997 3.32 104,744
         July 1.77 475,744 3.84 49,733 4.28 2,928 3.25 1,619 2.33 456,327 3.40 105,360
         Aug 1.85 479,145 3.94 53,951 4.29 2,424 3.23 2,175 2.38 452,446 3.47 105,719
         Sep 1.85 478,416 4.01 55,900 4.29 2,811 3.11 1,422 2.44 448,931 3.51 106,318
         Oct 1.86 473,877 4.00 56,757 4.29 4,426 3.26 2,616 2.41 444,222 3.58 107,459
         Nov 1.84 485,275 4.03 46,651 4.33 4,358 3.26 2,594 2.40 440,239 3.64 108,404         Dec 1.83 487,616 4.22 51,117 4.45 4,997 3.20 2,517 2.46 446,616 3.68 109,427
2008          Jan 1.89 479,559 4.08 67,098 4.38 5,178 3.56 2,096 2.44 441,880 3.76 109,322
         Feb 1.89 480,976 3.91 51,891 4.14 2,051 3.22 1,201 2.43 439,835 3.78 108,445         Mar 1.90 483,448 4.01 49,509 4.18 1,308 2.85 1,033 2.44 438,185 3.79 106,376
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2007          Mar 2.12 167,475 3.67 59,631 4.09 447 4.10 898
         Apr 2.20 174,310 3.72 54,853 4.12 248 4.52 900
         May 2.23 173,628 3.76 54,833 4.18 290 4.33 265
         June 2.27 174,943 3.90 54,211 4.26 781 4.53 719
         July 2.33 174,104 4.01 61,305 4.42 742 4.83 1,864
         Aug 2.34 174,373 4.07 67,761 4.51 808 4.36 728
         Sep 2.34 173,245 4.12 66,416 4.57 532 4.22 607
         Oct 2.35 175,018 4.03 66,241 4.43 849 4.94 988
         Nov 2.34 181,448 4.10 56,793 4.54 615 4.30 606         Dec 2.20 182,148 4.25 58,222 4.71 661 4.70 724
2008          Jan 2.38 175,501 4.08 60,058 4.51 437 5.29 696
         Feb 2.41 173,993 4.02 59,230 3.83 202 4.70 550         Mar 2.41 173,775 4.13 66,134 4.51 161 4.57 181
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2007          Mar 7.88 5.71 1,589 5.81 5,349 9.15 3,973 4.94 13,362 5.60 2,087 5.17 2,622
         Apr 7.81 5.35 1,121 5.89 5,126 9.08 3,213 4.97 15,958 5.58 1,488 5.16 2,556
         May 7.86 5.99 916 5.88 4,881 9.02 3,252 5.01 13,774 5.66 1,743 5.21 2,492
         June 7.80 5.97 1,179 5.75 4,703 8.92 3,157 5.18 15,090 5.76 2,009 5.30 2,899
         July 8.03 6.31 1,352 5.93 5,248 9.06 3,332 5.22 18,606 5.77 1,697 5.44 3,442
         Aug 7.90 6.44 1,003 5.96 4,003 8.67 3,376 5.04 23,231 5.89 1,346 5.43 2,895
         Sep 7.88 6.38 832 5.93 4,399 8.70 2,772 5.11 24,079 5.84 1,477 5.48 2,287
         Oct 7.62 6.29 1,359 5.67 3,527 8.73 3,132 5.22 20,162 5.93 1,456 5.48 2,996
         Nov 7.40 6.19 1,229 5.50 3,131 8.65 2,348 5.15 18,337 5.94 1,296 5.39 2,356         Dec 6.96 5.51 1,472 5.46 2,585 8.27 2,039 5.32 19,696 5.75 2,239 5.33 2,926
2008          Jan 7.58 5.99 1,683 5.73 3,199 8.71 2,631 5.22 17,306 5.91 1,745 5.42 2,866
         Feb 7.81 6.36 864 5.84 2,394 8.69 2,143 5.08 10,092 5.78 1,102 5.33 1,752         Mar 7.58 6.17 1,005 5.69 2,523 8.59 2,167 5.24 11,384 5.68 1,041 5.30 1,838
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2007          Mar 11.47 45,010 4.95 5.46 2,506 4.99 2,565 4.78 6,003 4.76 5,329
         Apr 11.52 44,326 4.99 5.54 2,286 4.99 2,315 4.80 6,525 4.81 5,131
         May 11.59 44,228 5.04 5.56 2,012 5.06 2,167 4.87 6,281 4.85 5,236         June 11.66 45,364 5.19 5.64 2,372 5.22 2,128 5.01 6,144 5.03 5,466
         July 11.76 44,782 5.33 5.69 2,745 5.37 2,484 5.14 6,855 5.16 5,229
         Aug 11.85 43,748 5.37 5.93 2,220 5.36 2,207 5.18 5,578 5.16 4,883
         Sep 11.94 44,980 5.31 5.86 2,240 5.34 1,967 5.12 4,717 5.08 4,242
         Oct 11.90 45,952 5.29 5.87 2,458 5.30 2,380 5.08 5,796 5.08 4,619
         Nov 11.76 44,575 5.27 5.91 1,933 5.30 2,248 5.08 4,964 5.02 4,478         Dec 11.88 47,501 5.28 5.97 2,127 5.33 2,094 5.03 4,842 5.01 4,025
2008          Jan 11.87 46,057 5.28 5.99 2,759 5.17 2,776 5.04 5,863 5.06 4,813
         Feb 11.81 44,772 5.15 5.80 1,926 5.11 2,085 4.94 4,520 4.89 3,734         Mar 11.84 46,975 5.09 5.73 1,647 5.01 2,181 4.89 4,701 4.88 3,915
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2007          Mar 6.78 68,119 5.73 9,581 5.42 1,375 5.09 1,958
         Apr 6.78 66,910 5.89 7,609 5.46 1,217 5.12 1,981
         May 6.84 65,747 5.93 7,749 5.53 1,065 5.11 2,515         June 6.89 69,428 6.09 8,714 5.67 1,407 5.27 2,293
         July 6.96 68,935 6.08 8,903 5.75 1,555 5.38 3,056
         Aug 7.05 64,559 6.26 8,510 5.83 1,110 5.41 2,393
         Sep 7.06 69,525 6.42 10,087 5.89 1,130 5.42 1,989
         Oct 7.10 65,820 6.43 9,719 5.79 1,154 5.39 2,254
         Nov 7.06 67,908 6.40 8,483 5.71 1,380 5.35 1,975         Dec 7.15 71,200 6.55 9,614 5.80 1,289 5.38 2,274
2008          Jan 7.13 70,142 6.31 9,604 5.74 1,248 5.33 2,693
         Feb 7.03 75,934 6.27 7,819 5.72 1,138 5.12 1,250         Mar 7.11 81,059 6.24 9,492 5.65 1,079 5.11 1,354
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2007          Mar 4.90 47,651 4.82 5,945 4.95 7,272
         Apr 4.94 37,983 5.05 6,685 5.01 5,430
         May 4.86 41,431 5.13 5,479 5.05 6,565         June 5.08 52,140 5.50 4,054 5.19 9,513
         July 5.12 44,655 5.17 3,937 5.24 7,317
         Aug 5.21 44,384 5.55 3,737 5.27 7,867
         Sep 5.42 49,458 5.71 3,763 5.64 6,111
         Oct 5.24 49,735 5.51 4,437 5.47 6,766
         Nov 5.12 49,167 5.39 3,453 5.44 6,819         Dec 5.47 73,727 5.67 7,580 5.53 9,629
2008          Jan 5.21 59,934 5.39 5,274 5.06 6,876
         Feb 5.09 57,309 5.84 3,873 5.08 4,127         Mar 5.36 67,680 5.58 3,106 5.43 4,907
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,1091997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,9202003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,1222004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 − 13,723 − 125,772
2005 252,003 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 141,461 95,826 61,740 34,086 − 156,177
2006 247,261 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 144,882 125,329 68,893 56,436 − 121,9322007 204,638 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 114,368 − 53,354 96,476 − 149,830 − 257,992
2008          Jan 20,368 17,511 7,600 5,560 4,351 2,857 − 8,117 − 5,990 − 2,127 − 28,485
         Feb − 12,997 − 23,315 − 14,345 1,205 − 10,175 10,318 − 4,509 11,750 − 16,259 − − 8,488
         Mar 28,391 17,961 3,943 5,145 8,873 10,430 12,927 13,891 − 964 − 15,464
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,932
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6781998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,9412003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,0162004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 31,734 13,766 17,969 451 10,208 − 9,757 31,283
2006 25,886 9,061 16,825 133 11,323 − 11,190 25,7522007 − 2,271 10,053 − 12,325 − 15,897 − 6,702 − 9,195 13,626
2008          Jan − 2,216 100 − 2,316 13,215 17,729 − 4,514 − 15,431
         Feb 261 813 − 552 − 2,233 − 18,740 16,507 2,494
         Mar − 4,426 210 − 4,636 8,504 1,946 6,558 − 12,930
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank Corporate Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,370
1997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 692007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2007          Dec 61,434 45,194 1,633 2,941 13,038 27,582 1,056 15,184 −2008          Jan 120,378 88,454 5,371 5,528 33,193 44,363 547 31,377 −
         Feb 90,455 70,565 2,505 7,469 31,206 29,385 3,853 16,037 −         Mar 96,424 67,543 2,718 3,297 39,002 22,526 787 28,094 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,582
1997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −
2007          Dec 11,757 9,265 804 1,264 911 6,286 992 1,500 −2008          Jan 38,899 23,147 2,437 2,397 9,794 8,519 547 15,206 −
         Feb 31,238 18,810 879 5,288 7,636 5,007 2,846 9,581 −         Mar 24,461 12,255 265 681 6,409 4,900 695 11,511 −
Net sales  6 
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,951
1997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,750
2007          Dec − 35,222 − 27,551 − 4,000 − 3,728 − 814 − 19,009 160 − 7,832 − 1,0462008          Jan 12,825 12,506 2,774 − 6,090 10,541 5,281 9 310 − 1,261
         Feb − 21,495 − 14,722 54 − 5,445 − 7,982 − 1,349 2,320 − 9,093 − 3,493         Mar 4,413 4,066 1,339 − 4,248 12,327 − 5,352 − 1,405 1,752 − 2,651
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issued by enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,180
1997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,3732007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008          Jan 3,143,579 1,880,603 136,275 436,774 476,016 831,538 95,872 1,167,104 84,361
         Feb 3,122,053 1,865,850 136,298 431,329 468,035 830,189 98,191 1,158,011 80,868         Mar 3,126,466 1,869,916 137,637 427,080 480,362 824,837 96,787 1,159,763 78,217
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-March 2008 
1,188,705 816,696 52,007 202,046 210,518 352,125 18,495 353,512 47,796    less than 2
695,255 432,343 40,776 123,045 98,818 169,702 20,938 241,975 14,343 2 to less than 4
442,911 241,681 29,768 57,748 54,492 99,673 18,079 183,152 5,426 4 to less than 6
325,162 191,939 8,312 21,164 30,206 132,257 14,195 119,026 4,066 6 to less than 8
191,153 66,509 6,305 14,313 25,363 20,527 3,819 120,824 2,800 8 to less than 10
48,718 40,921 447 4,193 27,207 9,075 2,063 5,734 707 10 to less than 15
53,367 12,949 19 1,812 7,448 3,670 1,318 39,102 1,891 15 to less than 20
181,194 66,879 − 2,762 26,311 37,806 17,879 96,436 1,186 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 723,077
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 1,040,769
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008          Jan 164,512 − 48 84 64 2 − 13 − 88 − 124 1,280,897
         Feb 164,756 244 303 132 0 − − 4 − 133 − 56 1,382,483         Mar 164,995 239 127 46 5 − − 8 90 − 21 1,256,583
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises listed on the Open Market.
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the Herausgebergemein-
Market (the introduction of which marked the end of the division of organ- schaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. — 3Figure
ised trading segments into an official and a regulated market on 1 Novem- revised downwards by DM1,902 million. 
ber 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock market segment was closed down on
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German German
more than 9 more than 9 German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.69
1997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 3.2 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.0 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 4.6 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.32
2008          Jan 4.1 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.2 4.5 5.5 4.4 117.45 96.69 406.94 6,851.75
         Feb 4.0 3.9 3.8 4.0 4.1 4.4 5.5 4.3 118.44 97.06 403.52 6,748.13         Mar 3.9 3.8 3.8 3.8 4.1 4.4 5.5 4.4 118.80 96.19 391.13 6,534.97
         Apr 4.2 4.1 4.1 4.0 4.4 4.6 5.9 4.6 117.52 95.14 411.06 6,948.82
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,256 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,538 79,242 21,290 7,761 57,952 35,777 6,014
2006 42,974 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 23,439 34,593 14,676 5,221 19,917 18,218 8,3812007 55,141 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 41,705 51,456 − 229 4,240 51,685 37,465 3,685
2008          Jan − 5,232 − 7,704 − 1,054 251 − 3,562 1,448 − 6,650 2,472 − 4,145 − 2,643 − 1,988 − 1,502 4,460 − 1,087
         Feb 6,940 1,441 1,036 − 80 − 253 1,247 405 5,499 6,326 − 345 201 6,671 5,298 614         Mar 9,801 910 − 1,373 − 1,424 − 1,100 529 2,283 8,891 10,775 − 464 − 211 11,239 9,102 − 974
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  € billion
2006 2007 
Item 2005 2006 2007 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households 1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 43.9 42.5 85.9 9.4 12.2 1.3 19.6 8.9 22.1 16.5 38.4
Money market paper 0.1 1.0 − 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
Bonds 16.7 37.1 − 42.1 22.5 5.5 19.2 − 10.0 6.8 − 17.6 − 9.5 − 21.7
Shares − 4.0 − 5.0 − 16.5 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 12.0
Other equity 3.0 2.9 2.9 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7Mutual funds shares 17.7 − 7.0 25.5 − 0.3 1.1 − 8.2 0.3 11.4 9.9 − 4.5 8.7
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 59.3 55.0 53.8 15.5 12.1 13.5 14.0 15.2 12.4 13.8 12.4
Short-term claims 2.7 3.0 2.9 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7
Longer-term claims 56.6 52.1 50.9 14.7 11.3 12.7 13.3 14.4 11.7 13.1 11.7
Claims from company
pension commitments 7.3 10.3 10.8 2.5 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.7
Other claims  3 − 6.2 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 1.2 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.1
Total 137.7 132.0 115.2 48.4 31.2 27.2 25.3 43.5 27.9 15.9 27.8
  II Financing
Loans − 3.4 − 7.2 − 19.0 − 8.3 1.4 6.0 − 6.2 − 10.1 − 1.1 − 4.5 − 3.4
Short-term loans − 5.1 − 5.4 − 1.2 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 2.0 0.7 − 0.9 1.0
Longer-term loans 1.7 − 1.7 − 17.8 − 5.9 1.6 6.1 − 3.6 − 8.0 − 1.8 − 3.6 − 4.4
Other liabilities − 2.6 0.4 0.7 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2
Total − 6.0 − 6.8 − 18.3 − 8.1 1.7 5.9 − 6.2 − 10.0 − 0.9 − 4.3 − 3.2
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 41.7 27.8 61.2 − 1.5 6.2 7.4 15.8 16.2 6.8 11.9 26.3
Money market paper 2.6 9.6 − 22.2 4.5 − 0.1 3.3 1.9 3.9 − 1.0 − 12.5 − 12.5
Bonds − 17.9 − 27.1 −131.8 − 12.7 15.8 − 26.9 − 3.3 − 22.8 − 9.6 − 49.0 − 50.5
Financial derivatives 3.8 1.5 37.9 1.2 − 1.7 1.3 0.7 5.1 4.8 13.7 14.3
Shares 10.6 − 7.6 79.0 − 8.7 24.0 13.9 − 36.8 1.6 43.6 19.7 14.1
Other equity − 5.5 34.0 19.7 0.3 8.5 15.1 10.1 5.0 1.1 15.3 − 1.7
Mutual funds shares 4.9 − 8.1 − 3.1 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 6.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 5.3 2.0 1.8
Loans 45.6 18.8 − 13.2 − 10.5 7.8 − 7.4 28.9 − 19.8 12.9 0.6 − 6.9
Short-term loans 38.3 11.0 − 16.2 − 12.3 7.8 − 7.7 23.2 − 19.6 7.6 − 2.8 − 1.4
Longer-term loans 7.2 7.8 3.0 1.8 − 0.0 0.4 5.7 − 0.2 5.3 3.4 − 5.5
Claims on insurancecorporations  
2 1.7 1.5 1.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
Short-term claims 1.7 1.5 1.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims − 9.3 47.2 128.5 29.8 2.0 9.8 5.6 25.2 − 4.4 25.5 82.2
Total 78.0 97.7 157.4 1.1 62.5 10.9 23.3 13.3 49.1 27.6 67.4
  II Financing
Money market paper − 6.9 1.8 18.2 6.5 3.2 − 3.8 − 4.1 6.1 4.1 − 0.5 8.5
Bonds 10.1 15.6 − 3.7 3.7 6.3 8.0 − 2.4 − 1.8 − 1.0 0.8 − 1.7
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 6.0 4.7 6.8 − 0.9 2.5 2.8 0.3 1.9 2.6 0.8 1.5
Other equity 1.2 22.6 18.9 1.8 1.8 8.6 10.4 6.0 1.2 6.9 4.8
Loans 1.0 55.2 48.4 − 19.1 23.6 11.5 39.3 − 4.5 13.3 12.3 27.2
Short-term loans 2.5 26.3 24.3 − 5.4 7.1 8.4 16.3 2.6 11.3 4.1 6.3
Longer-term loans − 1.5 28.9 24.0 − 13.7 16.5 3.1 22.9 − 7.1 2.0 8.2 20.9
Claims from companypension commitments 5.5 8.2 8.2 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.0
Other liabilities 6.0 − 6.8 11.1 9.3 − 5.7 − 3.0 − 7.4 14.5 − 3.6 − 0.9 1.0
Total 22.9 101.3 107.8 3.4 33.7 26.1 38.1 24.4 18.7 21.4 43.4
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2006 2007 
Item 2005 2006 2007 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households 1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,492.3 1,534.8 1,620.8 1,501.7 1,513.9 1,515.2 1,534.8 1,543.7 1,565.8 1,582.4 1,620.8
Money market paper 1.0 2.0 1.7 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0 1.9 1.8 1.7
Bonds 321.1 361.1 330.8 349.1 351.1 354.0 361.1 373.0 343.8 346.7 330.8
Shares 319.6 368.3 393.3 353.0 335.8 344.3 368.3 395.0 411.5 394.5 393.3
Other equity 216.1 225.5 205.4 213.9 212.1 215.7 225.5 211.5 210.4 208.5 205.4Mutual funds shares 513.4 514.4 545.1 516.0 507.0 506.0 514.4 524.3 543.1 538.7 545.1
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 1,053.2 1,107.8 1,164.6 1,068.6 1,080.6 1,094.0 1,107.8 1,122.9 1,135.2 1,149.0 1,164.6
Short-term claims 77.6 80.6 82.6 78.4 79.1 79.9 80.6 81.3 82.1 82.8 82.6
Longer-term claims 975.6 1,027.2 1,082.0 990.2 1,001.5 1,014.1 1,027.2 1,041.5 1,053.2 1,066.2 1,082.0
Claims from company
pension commitments 240.5 250.8 261.6 243.0 245.6 248.1 250.8 253.4 256.1 258.8 261.6
Other claims  3 51.6 46.7 40.3 50.5 49.2 48.0 46.7 45.5 44.3 43.0 40.3
Total 4,208.9 4,411.5 4,563.6 4,297.1 4,296.8 4,327.1 4,411.5 4,471.4 4,512.2 4,523.4 4,563.6
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,555.9 1,556.1 1,537.6 1,555.8 1,557.6 1,562.8 1,556.1 1,546.7 1,545.6 1,541.0 1,537.6
Short-term loans 85.6 80.2 78.9 83.2 82.9 82.8 80.2 78.5 79.2 77.9 78.9
Longer-term loans 1,470.3 1,475.9 1,458.7 1,472.6 1,474.7 1,480.0 1,475.9 1,468.2 1,466.4 1,463.1 1,458.7
Other liabilities 12.8 9.6 9.2 12.6 11.4 11.0 9.6 10.9 10.9 10.8 9.2
Total 1,568.7 1,565.8 1,546.8 1,568.5 1,569.0 1,573.8 1,565.8 1,557.6 1,556.5 1,551.8 1,546.8
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 396.1 438.7 507.9 420.4 424.6 443.3 438.7 474.4 474.8 492.7 507.9
Money market paper 31.1 36.2 32.4 34.5 31.7 35.4 36.2 41.4 44.1 28.9 32.4
Bonds 136.4 109.1 29.3 126.0 140.6 107.2 109.1 87.8 75.5 29.2 29.3
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 825.6 972.4 1,165.0 902.6 893.7 940.4 972.4 1,050.3 1,137.0 1,115.1 1,165.0
Other equity 276.0 319.3 305.9 272.6 277.9 296.8 319.3 303.3 301.8 313.2 305.9Mutual funds shares 110.5 106.5 109.5 112.3 108.5 106.6 106.5 108.2 104.9 107.6 109.5
Loans 126.1 147.5 149.2 119.2 127.8 118.5 147.5 132.9 147.7 147.9 149.2
Short-term loans 91.1 107.3 108.7 81.6 90.8 83.1 107.3 96.9 107.6 104.2 108.7
Longer-term loans 35.0 40.3 40.4 37.6 37.0 35.4 40.3 36.0 40.2 43.7 40.4
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 41.4 42.8 44.2 41.7 42.1 42.5 42.8 43.2 43.6 44.0 44.2
Short-term claims 41.4 42.8 44.2 41.7 42.1 42.5 42.8 43.2 43.6 44.0 44.2
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 399.5 446.4 501.6 413.0 419.1 428.6 446.4 464.0 468.7 488.2 501.6
Total 2,342.8 2,619.0 2,845.0 2,442.5 2,466.0 2,519.2 2,619.0 2,705.6 2,798.1 2,766.9 2,845.0
  II Liabilities
Money market paper 17.1 18.9 37.1 23.5 26.8 23.0 18.9 25.0 29.1 28.6 37.1
Bonds 89.6 93.7 92.5 90.9 93.8 94.7 93.7 92.4 89.5 93.0 92.5Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,137.4 1,359.8 1,620.6 1,273.1 1,230.9 1,251.8 1,359.8 1,439.5 1,597.1 1,600.6 1,620.6
Other equity 600.6 623.2 642.1 602.4 604.2 612.8 623.2 629.2 630.4 637.3 642.1
Loans 1,270.1 1,338.6 1,402.8 1,284.1 1,304.0 1,325.0 1,338.6 1,347.8 1,368.4 1,384.7 1,402.8
Short-term loans 334.5 360.7 391.2 329.7 336.3 347.8 360.7 364.7 380.8 384.7 391.2
Longer-term loans 935.6 977.9 1,011.6 954.4 967.7 977.2 977.9 983.1 987.6 1,000.0 1,011.6
Claims from companypension commitments 206.1 214.2 222.4 208.1 210.2 212.2 214.2 216.3 218.3 220.4 222.4
Other liabilities 356.6 381.2 429.8 360.5 363.9 365.9 381.2 391.9 404.0 418.2 429.8
Total 3,677.4 4,029.6 4,447.4 3,842.5 3,833.6 3,885.4 4,029.6 4,142.1 4,336.8 4,382.8 4,447.4
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2001 − 59.6 − 27.5 − 27.3 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 2.8 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.2
2002 − 78.3 − 36.0 − 30.6 − 5.0 − 6.8 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 0.32003 − 87.2 − 39.6 − 32.7 − 7.1 − 7.7 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.4
2004
p − 83.6 − 52.1 − 27.8 − 2.3 − 1.3 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
2005 p − 75.4 − 47.5 − 23.0 − 0.9 − 4.0 − 3.4 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
2006 p − 37.0 − 34.7 − 10.7 + 4.9 + 3.5 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2
2007 pe + 0.4 − 19.6 + 5.1 + 5.9 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4
2006          H1  p − 23.0 − 20.6 − 5.9 + 1.7 + 1.8 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
         H2  p − 14.3 − 14.4 − 4.9 + 3.3 + 1.7 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1
2007          H1  pe + 3.2 − 11.1 + 4.6 + 4.0 + 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.5
         H2  pe − 3.0 − 8.7 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2001 1,241.5 776.7 377.1 102.6 2.3 58.8 36.8 17.8 4.9 0.1
2002 1,293.0 798.1 404.1 104.3 3.0 60.3 37.2 18.9 4.9 0.12003 1,381.0 845.4 435.3 111.4 5.3 63.8 39.1 20.1 5.1 0.2
2004 1,451.1 887.1 459.7 116.1 4.2 65.6 40.1 20.8 5.3 0.2
2005 1,521.5 933.0 481.9 119.7 2.7 67.8 41.6 21.5 5.3 0.1
2006 1,569.0 968.6 491.8 122.2 1.7 67.6 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.12007
pe 1,576.3 976.1 493.2 120.3 1.6 65.0 40.3 20.3 5.0 0.1
2006          Q1 1,540.7 945.1 487.8 121.3 2.3 68.0 41.7 21.5 5.4 0.1         Q2 1,560.7 964.0 488.5 122.2 1.7 68.5 42.3 21.4 5.4 0.1         Q3 1,575.8 980.0 488.3 121.3 1.7 68.6 42.7 21.3 5.3 0.1
         Q4 1,569.0 968.6 491.8 122.2 1.7 67.6 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.1
2007          Q1  
pe 1,573.7 973.0 492.7 121.4 1.4 67.0 41.4 21.0 5.2 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,592.5 995.7 488.9 121.4 1.5 67.0 41.9 20.6 5.1 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,571.3 975.5 489.2 119.9 1.6 65.4 40.6 20.4 5.0 0.1
         Q4  pe 1,576.3 976.1 493.2 120.3 1.6 65.0 40.3 20.3 5.0 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined according to the national accounts. — 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2001 945.5 477.7 383.7 84.1 1,005.1 551.2 166.2 64.5 36.8 186.4 − 59.6 875.1
2002 952.5 477.5 390.7 84.3 1,030.8 579.8 168.7 62.7 36.1 183.6 − 78.3 879.22003 961.9 481.8 396.3 83.9 1,049.2 594.2 169.2 64.3 33.9 187.6 − 87.3 889.3
2004
p 958.1 481.3 396.9 80.0 1,041.7 592.7 169.5 62.4 31.6 185.5 − 83.6 888.4
2005 p 977.0 493.0 396.9 87.1 1,052.6 598.2 168.5 62.5 30.7 192.8 − 75.6 900.8
2006 p 1,017.2 530.5 401.1 85.7 1,054.5 600.1 167.7 64.9 32.8 189.1 − 37.3 942.8
2007 pe 1,064.0 574.9 400.8 88.4 1,063.8 597.9 168.4 67.1 36.3 194.0 + 0.2 987.6
as a percentage of GDP
2001 44.7 22.6 18.2 4.0 47.6 26.1 7.9 3.1 1.7 8.8 − 2.8 41.4
2002 44.4 22.3 18.2 3.9 48.1 27.1 7.9 2.9 1.7 8.6 − 3.7 41.02003 44.5 22.3 18.3 3.9 48.5 27.5 7.8 3.0 1.6 8.7 − 4.0 41.1
2004
p 43.3 21.8 17.9 3.6 47.1 26.8 7.7 2.8 1.4 8.4 − 3.8 40.2
2005 p 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.9 46.9 26.6 7.5 2.8 1.4 8.6 − 3.4 40.1
2006 p 43.8 22.8 17.3 3.7 45.4 25.8 7.2 2.8 1.4 8.1 − 1.6 40.6
2007 pe 43.9 23.7 16.5 3.6 43.9 24.7 6.9 2.8 1.5 8.0 + 0.0 40.7
Percentage growth rates
2001 − 1.3 − 4.3 + 1.4 + 5.0 + 8.0 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 43.0 . − 2.0
2002 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 5.2 + 1.5 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 1.5 . + 0.52003 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.6 − 6.1 + 2.2 . + 1.1
2004
p − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 4.7 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 6.7 − 1.1 . − 0.1
2005 p + 2.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 8.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 3.0 + 3.9 . + 1.4
2006 p + 4.1 + 7.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 3.7 + 6.9 − 1.9 . + 4.7
2007 pe + 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 10.6 + 2.6 . + 4.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2001 555.5 446.2 23.5 599.6 169.9 213.9 66.6 40.1 16.7 − 44.2 445.1 449.1 − 4.0 923.3 971.5 − 48.2
2002 p 554.7 441.7 20.5 610.9 173.3 226.8 66.1 38.7 11.3 − 56.2 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 927.7 992.2 − 64.5
2003 pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.3 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.3 467.6 474.4 − 6.8 925.2 999.3 − 74.1
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.7 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.8 469.7 468.5 + 1.2 926.8 990.4 − 63.6
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 621.1 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 52.2 467.8 471.0 − 3.2 947.4 1,002.7 − 55.3
2006 pe 589.0 488.4 18.1 625.1 169.4 252.1 64.4 33.5 11.7 − 36.1 486.3 466.3 + 20.0 986.3 1,002.4 − 16.0
2007 pe 644.1 538.2 17.7 643.5 181.4 250.6 66.1 34.1 9.6 + 0.6 475.1 465.7 + 9.4 1,024.8 1,014.7 + 10.1
2005          Q1 121.6 99.2 1.4 159.8 41.1 66.3 25.2 4.6 3.1 − 38.2 117.1 117.5 − 0.4 211.2 249.7 − 38.6
         Q2 138.9 112.5 7.7 144.8 41.2 62.8 10.1 6.4 2.4 − 6.0 117.3 118.2 − 0.9 233.5 240.4 − 6.9
         Q3 144.2 110.6 13.7 154.2 41.3 59.3 19.7 8.6 2.5 − 10.0 114.1 117.0 − 2.9 235.9 248.8 − 12.9         Q4
p 162.4 129.5 7.8 161.9 47.1 55.5 8.8 12.5 6.0 + 0.5 118.1 118.3 − 0.2 264.3 264.0 + 0.3
2006          Q1 p 131.3 106.3 3.8 160.3 40.6 65.6 25.1 4.8 2.9 − 29.0 120.5 116.6 + 3.9 228.9 254.0 − 25.1
         Q2 p 144.3 121.8 4.1 139.9 40.7 59.9 9.5 6.4 2.5 + 4.5 122.2 117.1 + 5.0 245.1 235.6 + 9.5
         Q3 p 146.4 121.8 5.9 156.0 40.6 61.2 20.5 8.4 2.6 − 9.5 117.0 115.2 + 1.7 241.4 249.2 − 7.8
         Q4 p 166.0 138.7 4.0 167.8 46.1 64.1 9.0 12.9 3.5 − 1.8 127.2 117.2 + 10.0 271.1 263.0 + 8.1
2007          Q1 p 149.4 122.3 2.8 164.5 42.7 64.9 25.5 5.3 3.4 − 15.1 112.2 115.6 − 3.4 238.4 256.9 − 18.5
         Q2 p 158.5 136.9 3.0 144.5 43.9 58.4 10.0 6.7 2.5 + 14.0 119.0 116.3 + 2.7 253.8 237.0 + 16.7
         Q3 p 155.4 131.6 3.6 160.5 44.2 59.8 21.3 8.6 1.6 − 5.1 116.2 115.6 + 0.6 248.2 252.8 − 4.6
         Q4 p 180.5 147.6 7.9 172.9 49.2 66.1 9.2 12.5 1.9 + 7.5 126.9 117.8 + 9.1 283.9 267.3 + 16.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- are estimated. — 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets but excluding the Post Office here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrep-
pension funds. Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations ancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local govern-
of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include muni- ment. — 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
cipal special purpose associations and various special accounts. — 2The of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Fed-
latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors eral Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Of fice. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2001 240.6 261.3 − 20.7 230.9 255.5 − 24.6 144.2 148.3 − 4.1
2002 240.8 273.5 − 32.7 228.8 258.0 − 29.2 147.0 150.4 − 3.5
2003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 150.1 − 8.0
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.4 − 3.4
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.5 − 22.1 151.2 153.7 − 2.4
2006 pe 254.7 282.9 − 28.2 249.1 259.5 − 10.4 158.8 156.2 + 2.6
2007 pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 276.1 266.7 + 9.4 169.0 161.2 + 7.8
2005          Q1 46.0 74.9 − 28.9 56.0 64.7 − 8.7 31.3 34.9 − 3.6
         Q2 61.4 66.0 − 4.6 57.8 60.9 − 3.1 36.0 36.3 − 0.3
         Q3 68.8 73.2 − 4.4 55.9 62.1 − 6.3 37.9 37.9 + 0.0         Q4 73.8 67.4 + 6.4 65.6 71.5 − 6.0 45.9 44.3 + 1.6
2006          Q1 52.7 74.1 − 21.4 57.3 64.9 − 7.6 33.8 36.4 − 2.6
         Q2 63.0 61.6 + 1.5 60.6 60.1 + 0.4 37.7 36.8 + 0.9
         Q3 64.6 73.7 − 9.1 60.5 62.5 − 2.1 40.3 38.1 + 2.2         Q4
p 74.3 73.5 + 0.8 70.5 71.2 − 0.7 46.9 44.5 + 2.5
2007          Q1 p 61.1 74.6 − 13.6 63.5 66.5 − 3.0 35.4 37.6 − 2.1
         Q2 p 69.7 64.4 + 5.3 67.6 61.9 + 5.7 40.4 37.3 + 3.1
         Q3 p 68.3 76.8 − 8.5 66.2 64.1 + 2.1 42.5 39.7 + 2.8
         Q4 p 78.3 76.3 + 2.0 77.9 73.4 + 4.5 50.5 46.1 + 4.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based
istical Office. — 1The Bundesbank’s profit is included only up to the max- on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly
imum amount of €3.5 billion that is to be assigned to the core budget. Rev- figures do not include various special accounts and municipal special pur-
enue over and above this amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund pose associations. 
for Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including the local authority level of the
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total government  1 government European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 of energy tax
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 19,732 54,047 + 12 19,576
2002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 18,560 52,490 + 51 22,3212003 442,238 390,438 214,002 155,510 20,926 51,673 + 127 22,067
2004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,7422007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2006          Q1 106,907 90,827 45,203 38,733 6,892 12,391 + 3,689 5,491
         Q2 121,891 104,964 57,521 43,338 4,105 16,120 + 807 5,433         Q3 121,711 104,015 55,601 42,798 5,616 17,594 + 103 5,448         Q4 137,935 121,345 67,310 48,505 5,529 21,211 − 4,620 5,370
2007          Q1 122,550 104,537 53,928 43,916 6,693 13,313 + 4,700 5,362
         Q2 136,963 118,090 65,298 49,069 3,724 18,217 + 655 5,408
         Q3 131,495 113,712 61,592 46,875 5,246 17,882 − 99 5,524         Q4 147,236 129,215 70,929 51,699 6,587 23,138 − 5,117 5,348
2008          Q1 ... 111,845 56,179 47,660 8,006 ... ... 5,272
2007          Mar . 36,538 20,198 15,041 1,299 . . 1,7872008          Mar . 39,362 20,794 16,588 1,980 . . 1,757
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- ment taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 4Difference be-
bank calculations. — 1Before deducting supplementary central government tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received by the state
grants and shares in energy tax revenue remitted to state government. — government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) and the
2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 
the EU from central government tax revenue. — 3Including local govern-
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,169
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,4092004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2006          Q1 95,851 36,593 28,095 − 2,104 5,184 5,418 35,873 27,508 8,364 313 15,897 6,258 916 5,024
         Q2 111,206 47,844 29,772 5,856 5,173 7,042 35,236 26,345 8,891 1,611 20,438 5,130 948 6,242         Q3 110,282 44,951 29,229 6,266 6,079 3,376 37,051 28,063 8,988 1,686 20,448 5,158 989 6,267         Q4 128,800 53,227 35,516 7,549 6,461 3,701 38,529 29,402 9,127 3,403 27,432 5,183 1,026 7,455
2007          Q1 110,577 43,694 30,464 829 5,434 6,966 42,037 32,624 9,413 153 17,377 6,354 962 6,040
         Q2 125,236 55,351 32,244 8,191 6,224 8,693 41,001 30,642 10,359 1,705 20,694 5,493 992 7,145         Q3 120,644 48,742 31,416 7,299 5,571 4,456 42,612 31,724 10,888 1,850 20,750 5,671 1,019 6,932         Q4 137,361 56,912 37,649 8,709 5,700 4,854 43,986 32,532 11,454 3,267 26,868 5,318 1,010 8,146
2008          Q1 118,847 49,649 32,793 3,668 4,727 8,462 44,294 33,488 10,806 297 17,515 6,114 980 7,002
2007          Mar 38,384 16,852 9,493 654 5,403 1,303 12,273 9,033 3,239 16 6,817 2,091 335 1,8462008          Mar 41,682 19,731 10,256 2,871 5,056 1,548 12,655 9,097 3,558 9 7,065 1,884 338 2,320
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. — 1This sion plans. — 4Non-assessed taxes on earnings and withholding tax on inter-
total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equal- est income. — 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
isation of burdens levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in se ction 1
to central and state government), real property taxes and other local govern- of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central,
ment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective state and local government in revenue for 2007: 53.1:44.9:2 (central govern-
percentage share of central, state and local government in revenue: wage ment plus
€2.7 billion, state government minus this amount). The EU share
tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed is deducted from central government’s share. — 6Respective percentage
taxes on earnings 50:50:-, withholding tax on interest income 44:44:12. — share of central and state government for 2007: 23.2:76.8. — 7For the break-
3After deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pen- down, see Table IX. 7. 
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax city tax tax Other tax buildings tax Other  2 Total tax taxes
2001 40,690 12,072 11,069 7,427 4,322 2,143 1,554 8,376 4,853 3,069 3,330 34,399 24,534 9,076
2002 42,192 13,778 10,403 8,327 5,097 2,149 1,548 7,592 4,763 3,021 3,200 33,447 23,489 9,2612003 43,188 14,094 10,280 8,870 6,531 2,204 1,442 7,336 4,800 3,373 3,205 34,477 24,139 9,6582004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,3992007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2006          Q1 4,480 2,786 2,628 3,792 1,492 399 320 2,718 1,681 1,049 811 11,370 8,874 2,321
         Q2 9,727 3,604 2,879 1,662 1,720 505 341 2,258 1,350 881 641 12,296 9,365 2,801
         Q3 10,045 3,700 2,665 1,705 1,468 536 329 2,020 1,501 904 733 13,115 9,948 3,026
         Q4 15,665 4,296 3,105 1,615 1,593 720 438 1,942 1,593 928 719 12,538 10,182 2,250
2007          Q1 4,540 2,916 2,949 4,504 1,647 416 406 2,636 1,828 1,150 740 12,126 9,541 2,408
         Q2 9,230 3,462 3,249 1,912 1,997 493 352 2,206 1,606 1,006 675 13,432 10,457 2,841         Q3 9,904 3,774 2,875 2,049 1,319 509 322 2,098 1,860 1,043 670 12,701 9,404 3,147         Q4 15,281 4,103 3,277 1,866 1,392 541 408 1,958 1,659 1,004 698 13,142 10,714 2,317
2008          Q1 4,668 2,547 3,192 4,540 1,547 626 394 2,590 1,676 1,087 761 ... ... ...
2007          Mar 2,835 1,125 1,355 627 614 166 95 778 670 435 208 . . .2008          Mar 3,041 1,126 1,434 679 519 166 100 748 578 364 194 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- betting, lottery and beer tax.   
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2Notably
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total payments insurance  3 surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2001 7 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004 8 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,8882006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007
p 236,167 162,218 72,549 235,084 201,922 13,656 + 1,083 12,206 11,280 765 45 116 4,856
2006          Q1 60,801 42,622 17,908 57,965 50,110 3,247 + 2,836 4,452 4,293 16 43 101 4,924
         Q2 60,537 42,351 17,877 58,328 50,143 3,257 + 2,209 7,406 7,241 16 45 105 4,956
         Q3 57,950 39,741 17,839 58,521 50,297 3,266 − 571 6,845 6,681 16 45 104 4,959         Q4 61,369 43,351 17,755 58,459 50,140 3,274 + 2,910 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007          Q1 56,177 37,771 18,118 58,275 50,369 3,279 − 2,098 7,955 7,585 215 46 108 4,889
         Q2 59,068 40,501 18,180 58,595 50,282 3,432 + 473 8,890 8,573 165 48 103 4,881         Q3 57,996 39,494 18,115 59,054 50,633 3,470 − 1,058 8,025 7,598 265 45 117 4,868         Q4
p 62,926 44,452 18,136 59,159 50,638 3,475 + 3,767 12,206 11,280 765 45 116 4,856
2008          Q1 p 57,611 39,028 18,241 58,952 50,795 3,473 − 1,341 10,730 9,459 1,095 46 130 4,792
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension cash benefits. — 3Including long-term care insurance for pensioners until
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for 2004 Q1. — 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do not or quarter. — 5Including cash. — 6Excluding loans to other social security
tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. In- funds. — 7Excluding income booked in connection with the revaluation of
cluding financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending equity interests. — 8Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of equity
and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loansfrom
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 1,660 − 1,931 1,931
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 2,215 − 5,623 5,623
2003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,2152004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,747 2,623 949 + 6,643 −
2005          Q1 11,934 11,072 40 14,775 7,983 5,805 2,178 3,332 2,083 1,249 410 − 2,842 5,532
         Q2 13,283 11,449 324 13,697 7,394 5,376 2,018 3,062 1,956 1,105 440 − 414 223         Q3 12,924 11,618 420 12,662 6,357 4,720 1,637 2,576 1,670 906 372 + 262 − 458         Q4 14,551 12,850 652 11,954 5,920 4,431 1,489 2,620 1,712 908 228 + 2,597 − 4,900
2006          Q1 14,041 13,057 42 12,320 7,155 5,260 1,894 2,306 1,526 780 388 + 1,721 538
         Q2 13,827 12,848 275 11,742 6,362 4,691 1,670 2,266 1,505 761 300 + 2,084 − 538         Q3 12,860 11,950 302 10,142 5,117 3,879 1,239 2,232 1,486 746 183 + 2,718 −         Q4 14,656 13,321 504 9,958 4,616 3,518 1,098 2,455 1,669 787 218 + 4,698 −
2007          Q1 9,932 7,738 78 10,044 5,321 3,971 1,350 2,032 1,370 662 408 − 113 −
         Q2 10,837 7,910 303 9,383 4,598 3,440 1,157 2,089 1,423 666 259 + 1,454 −         Q3 10,366 7,765 232 8,357 3,910 2,979 931 1,985 1,363 622 160 + 2,010 −         Q4 11,703 8,851 357 8,412 3,528 2,684 843 2,264 1,591 674 122 + 3,292 −
2008          Q1 8,714 5,955 83 11,295 4,299 3,183 1,116 2,088 1,473 615 327 − 2,581 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government health, pension and long-term care insurance schemes. 6Vocational
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a compen- measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agencies, compensation
satory amount to central government. — 4Unemployment benefit and top-up payments and business start-up grants. — 7Promotion of winter con-
short-time working benefit. — 5Including contributions to the statutory struction and insolvency compensation for employees. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Medical Thera- Other Adminis-
and peutical expend- trative
Contri- Federal Hospital dental Pharma- treatment Sickness iture on expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 grant Total treatment treatment  3 ceuticals and aids benefits benefits iture  4 surplus  5 
2001 135,790 131,886 . 138,811 44,980 33,495 22,331 9,760 7,717 2,779 7,642 − 3,021
2002 139,707 136,208 . 143,026 46,308 34,899 23,449 9,304 7,561 2,998 8,019 − 3,320
2003 141,654 138,383 . 145,095 46,800 36,120 24,218 9,409 6,973 2,984 8,206 − 3,4412004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,178 47,594 34,218 21,811 8,281 6,367 3,731 8,114 + 4,102
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 143,809 48,959 33,024 25,358 8,284 5,868 3,847 8,155 + 1,933
2006 149,929 142,184 4,200 147,973 50,327 34,260 25,835 8,303 5,708 4,526 8,110 + 1,9562007
p 155,678 149,966 2,500 153,616 51,102 35,545 27,759 8,655 6,012 2,274 8,132 + 2,062
2005          Q1 34,630 33,989 − 34,452 12,171 8,280 5,795 1,827 1,539 347 1,765 + 178
         Q2 36,832 34,869 1,250 35,978 12,276 8,183 6,418 2,093 1,522 477 1,989 + 854
         Q3 35,380 34,674 − 35,530 12,102 8,133 6,425 2,087 1,400 391 1,904 − 150         Q4 38,693 36,719 1,250 37,649 12,457 8,502 6,752 2,263 1,398 591 2,391 + 1,044
2006          Q1 34,744 34,034 − 35,968 12,834 8,483 6,384 1,881 1,477 283 1,836 − 1,224
         Q2 38,004 35,279 2,100 36,830 12,658 8,588 6,450 2,071 1,439 574 1,910 + 1,174
         Q3 36,001 35,156 − 36,226 12,551 8,254 6,301 2,048 1,363 515 1,931 − 225         Q4 40,770 37,745 2,100 38,538 12,332 8,888 6,739 2,290 1,412 881 2,384 + 2,232
2007          Q1 36,437 35,693 − 37,147 12,948 8,793 6,687 1,918 1,525 347 1,879 − 710
         Q2 39,316 37,306 1,250 38,299 12,893 8,860 6,862 2,160 1,510 635 1,930 + 1,017         Q3 37,939 37,138 − 38,068 12,750 8,614 6,897 2,199 1,451 474 1,987 − 129         Q4 41,987 39,829 1,250 40,103 12,512 9,278 7,313 2,378 1,527 818 2,337 + 1,883
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The annual figures do not tally with penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. —
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — 2In- 5Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen-
cluding contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. — sation scheme. 
3Including dentures. — 4Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2001 16,843 16,581 16,890 2,301 7,744 4,134 979 816 − 47
2002 16,917 16,714 17,346 2,363 8,014 4,151 962 837 − 428
2003 16,844 16,665 17,468 2,361 8,183 4,090 951 853 − 6242004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 3152007
p 18,023 17,862 18,344 2,469 8,827 4,034 859 892 − 321
2005          Q1 4,159 4,130 4,418 586 2,103 996 226 245 − 259
         Q2 4,315 4,288 4,439 596 2,120 1,011 220 215 − 123
         Q3 4,389 4,358 4,492 606 2,140 1,008 221 213 − 103
         Q4 4,629 4,600 4,509 607 2,154 1,037 227 198 + 121
2006          Q1 4,660 4,631 4,511 611 2,152 998 213 246 + 150
         Q2 4,655 4,629 4,447 582 2,158 994 214 222 + 208         Q3 4,471 4,441 4,551 617 2,171 1,014 213 222 − 80         Q4 4,699 4,657 4,526 611 2,191 1,009 218 200 + 173
2007          Q1 4,301 4,265 4,591 624 2,191 1,014 212 238 − 290
         Q2 4,469 4,432 4,528 595 2,192 993 213 231 − 59         Q3 4,440 4,403 4,617 623 2,226 1,012 216 213 − 177         Q4 4,813 4,761 4,608 626 2,218 1,015 217 209 + 204
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The annual figures do not tally with 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — 2Since subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  1 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2001 + 135,018 − 14,719 + 3,595 − 1,495 2001 1,223,966 4,440 534,262 174 230,890 454,200
2002 + 178,203 + 24,327 + 2,221 + 22 2002 1,277,667 4,440 536,900 137 238,390 497,800
2003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 1,236 + 7,218 2003 1,358,137 4,440 530,700 341 301,956 520,7002004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,200 430 307,212 574,300
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 313,101 652,500
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,900 480 329,577 702,3002007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007
p 1,539,500 4,440 461,800 480 307,380 765,400
2005          Q1 + 65,235 + 19,631 + 11,093 − 4,966 2005          Q1 1,457,430 4,440 552,700 474 302,916 596,900
         Q2 + 54,315 + 3,646 − 2,371 + 1,492          Q2 1,465,639 4,440 530,900 501 305,598 624,200
         Q3 + 59,325 + 11,140 + 788 + 7,444          Q3 1,480,384 4,440 535,600 501 304,143 635,700
         Q4 + 46,048 + 1,062 − 4,999 + 2,071          Q4 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 313,101 652,500
2006          Q1 + 75,788 + 12,526 + 8,174 − 7,296 2006          Q1 1,508,932 4,440 522,400 486 308,606 673,000
         Q2 + 56,445 + 14,238 + 8,228 + 14,649          Q2 1,525,012 4,440 528,500 485 320,187 671,400
         Q3 + 66,689 + 16,579 + 4,181 + 8,913          Q3 1,540,523 4,440 519,300 485 331,898 684,400         Q4 + 22,952 − 10,686 − 17,326 − 9,958          Q4 1,533,697 4,440 496,900 480 329,577 702,300
2007          Q1 + 68,285 + 4,600 + 12,649 − 11,200 2007          Q1 1,538,621 4,440 513,900 480 321,201 698,600
         Q2 + 54,415 + 22,020 + 5,792 + 27,209          Q2 1,556,684 4,440 504,600 480 320,564 726,600
         Q3 + 51,413 − 20,291 − 4,783 − 27,450          Q3 1,535,253 4,440 489,000 480 308,533 732,800         Q4 + 40,882 + 667 − 12,571 + 6,541          Q4
p 1,539,500 4,440 461,800 480 307,380 765,400
2008          Q1 + 69,510 + 10,443 + 12,306 − 705
Source: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 After deducting repurchases. Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
as a residual. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security reunifica- isation
or quarter Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5,6 claims  6 Other  7 
Central, state and local government
2002 1,277,667 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 66 7,845 97
2003 1,358,137 36,022 246,414 153,611 12,810 471,115 396,832 341 34,163 33 6,711 862004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 379,984 430 53,672 2 5,572 82
2005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 366,978 488 62,765 2 4,443 86
2006          Q3 1,540,523 37,895 320,241 171,892 10,253 549,652 377,575 485 68,002 2 4,443 83
         Q4 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 356,511 480 71,892 2 4,443 81
2007          Q1 1,538,621 38,627 323,595 166,620 10,276 560,413 367,054 480 67,032 2 4,443 80
         Q2 1,556,684 38,577 326,230 175,567 10,114 567,582 362,906 480 70,705 2 4,443 79         Q3 1,535,253 39,550 324,981 162,292 10,344 569,273 354,548 480 69,263 2 4,443 77         Q4
p 1,539,500 40,310 327,408 177,394 10,287 574,512 334,378 480 70,213 2 4,443 75
Central government 8,9,10
2002 725,443 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 66 7,845 97
2003 767,713 35,235 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 38,146 223 7,326 33 6,711 852004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 34,835 333 10,751 2 5,572 81
2005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 29,318 408 10,710 2 4,443 85
2006          Q3 929,597 37,772 106,419 171,841 10,253 539,023 48,236 408 11,119 2 4,443 83
         Q4 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 30,030 408 11,036 2 4,443 80
2007          Q1 923,511 38,622 102,508 166,569 10,276 549,886 39,620 408 11,100 2 4,443 79
         Q2 945,531 38,497 103,219 175,516 10,114 557,055 45,104 408 11,096 2 4,443 79         Q3 939,321 37,725 102,103 162,292 10,344 568,917 41,833 408 11,177 2 4,443 77         Q4 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 22,829 408 10,928 2 4,443 74
2008          Q1 950,431 37,774 101,205 173,295 9,885 578,816 33,649 408 10,886 2 4,443 69
State government
2002 392,172 588 121,394 . . . 255,072 5 15,113 . . 1
2003 423,737 787 154,189 . . . 244,902 4 23,854 . . 12004 448,672 1,282 179,620 . . . 228,644 3 39,122 . . 1
2005 471,375 847 201,146 . . . 221,163 3 48,216 . . 1
2006          Q3 478,603 123 213,823 . . . 211,564 2 53,091 . . 1
         Q4 481,850 36 216,665 . . . 209,270 2 55,876 . . 1
2007          Q1 483,084 5 221,087 . . . 211,039 2 50,950 . . 1
         Q2 479,658 80 223,011 . . . 201,938 2 54,627 . . 1
         Q3 480,050 1,825 222,879 . . . 202,054 2 53,290 . . 1
         Q4p 484,117 2,925 225,325 . . . 201,375 2 54,490 . . 1
Local government 11
2002 100,842 . 153 . . 913 97,624 124 2,027 . . .
2003 107,857 . 77 . . 734 104,469 106 2,471 . . .2004 112,538 . − . . 812 108,231 86 3,410 . . .
2005 116,033 . − . . 466 111,889 77 3,601 . . .
2006          Q3 117,462 . − . . 260 113,522 75 3,605 . . .
         Q4 118,380 . − . . 256 113,261 70 4,792 . . .
2007          Q1 117,768 . − . . 256 112,646 70 4,795 . . .
         Q2 117,312 . − . . 256 112,191 70 4,795 . . .
         Q3 115,782 . − . . 256 110,661 70 4,795 . . .
         Q4p 115,295 . − . . 256 110,174 70 4,795 . . .
Special funds 8,9,10,12
2002 59,210 − 3,820 10,185 . 32,828 11,832 8 537 . . .
2003 58,830 − 4,610 10,185 . 34,201 9,315 8 512 . . .2004 57,250 − 4,538 9,685 . 34,355 8,274 8 389 . . .
2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 4,609 − 238 . . .
2006          Q3 14,860 . − 51 . 10,368 4,253 − 188 . . .
         Q4 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 3,950 − 188 . . .
2007          Q1 14,258 . − 51 . 10,271 3,749 − 188 . . .
         Q2 14,183 . − 51 . 10,271 3,674 − 188 . . .
         Q3 100 . − − . 100 − − − . . .
         Q4 100 . − − . 100 − − − . . .
2008          Q1 0 . − − . 0 − − − . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including 8In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central govern-
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term ment and its special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- ratios. — 9On 1 January 2005 central government assumed joint responsi-
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans bility for the debts of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the afore-
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- mentioned special fund is recorded under central government. — 10On
vestment assistance levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing con- 1 July 2007 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former the ERP Special Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund isGDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the recorded under central government. — 11Including debt of municipal
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have been esti-their home country. — 6Excluding offsets against outstanding claims. — mated. — 12ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June 2007), German Unity
7Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2006   2007
  2005   2006   2007   2005   2006   2007   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 106.0 111.6 117.5 1.2 5.3 5.3 2.2 5.0 5.6 5.3 5.5 5.6 4.8
Construction 79.2 83.5 85.2 − 4.8 5.4 2.0 1.9 5.6 10.6 15.6 0.1 − 1.5 − 2.9
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 104.7 108.5 110.7 0.6 3.6 2.1 1.9 3.5 5.3 3.2 2.3 2.3 0.5
Financing, renting and business
services  2 107.7 110.1 113.5 2.7 2.2 3.1 1.8 2.6 3.0 3.3 3.3 2.8 2.9
Public and private services  3 103.1 103.3 103.8 0.4 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.3 − 0.1 0.7 0.6 0.3 0.4
Gross value added 104.1 107.0 110.1 1.0 2.8 2.8 1.5 2.9 3.6 3.6 2.9 2.7 2.2
Gross domestic product  4 102.9 105.8 108.5 0.8 2.9 2.5 1.6 2.7 3.7 3.4 2.5 2.4 1.6
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 101.3 102.3 101.8 − 0.1 1.0 − 0.4 0.2 0.4 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.3
Government consumption 101.4 102.2 104.4 0.5 0.9 2.1 0.1 0.9 0.7 2.1 2.3 2.3 1.7
Machinery and equipment 99.9 108.2 117.1 6.0 8.3 8.2 8.4 8.0 6.3 10.6 7.6 7.1 7.9
Premises 82.4 85.9 87.9 − 3.1 4.3 2.3 1.9 4.7 7.8 14.4 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.2
Other investment  6 117.9 125.8 134.1 4.8 6.7 6.6 6.1 6.9 8.3 4.3 6.2 7.1 8.4
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.4 0.8
Domestic use 98.1 100.0 100.9 0.3 1.9 0.9 1.1 2.2 0.7 2.1 0.3 0.6 0.9Net exports  
8 . . . 0.5 1.1 1.6 0.6 0.7 3.1 1.5 2.2 1.9 0.8
Exports 134.1 150.9 162.6 7.1 12.5 7.8 9.0 10.7 15.6 9.9 9.3 8.4 4.0
Imports 120.3 133.7 140.2 6.7 11.2 4.8 8.9 10.3 9.2 7.6 4.9 4.6 2.6
Gross domestic product  4 102.9 105.8 108.5 0.8 2.9 2.5 1.6 2.7 3.7 3.4 2.5 2.4 1.6
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,326.4 1,357.5 1,374.4 1.4 2.3 1.2 1.8 1.5 3.1 1.0 1.6 1.6 0.8
Government consumption 421.5 425.9 436.1 1.4 1.0 2.4 0.6 0.4 0.5 2.2 2.5 2.7 2.1Machinery and equipment 162.1 173.7 186.5 4.9 7.1 7.4 7.5 7.1 4.9 9.7 6.8 6.4 7.1
Premises 203.4 217.2 235.9 − 2.2 6.8 8.6 3.5 7.9 11.9 22.2 7.5 5.4 3.2
Other investment  
6 25.3 26.3 27.1 2.1 3.7 3.3 4.1 3.6 4.4 2.6 2.8 3.5 4.1
Changes in inventories  7 − 7.5 − 4.7 − 7.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,131.3 2,195.8 2,253.0 1.5 3.0 2.6 2.6 3.3 1.5 3.5 2.1 2.3 2.6Net exports 113.3 126.4 170.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 918.0 1,046.5 1,133.0 8.3 14.0 8.3 10.9 12.3 16.3 10.4 10.0 8.6 4.5Imports 804.7 920.1 962.2 9.2 14.3 4.6 13.1 13.2 10.8 7.4 4.6 3.8 2.7
Gross domestic product  
4 2,244.6 2,322.2 2,423.8 1.5 3.5 4.4 2.3 3.4 4.3 5.0 4.6 4.5 3.5
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 107.8 109.3 111.2 1.5 1.4 1.7 1.5 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.6 1.8 2.1Gross domestic product 105.8 106.4 108.3 0.7 0.6 1.8 0.6 0.6 0.5 1.5 2.0 2.0 1.9Terms of trade 101.3 99.8 100.5 − 1.3 − 1.5 0.7 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 0.6 0.9 1.0 0.5
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,129.9 1,149.4 1,181.0 − 0.6 1.7 2.8 1.6 2.3 2.3 3.0 3.1 2.5 2.4Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 561.3 601.9 643.2 5.9 7.2 6.9 2.0 6.1 10.1 7.9 3.4 9.5 6.4
National income 1,691.2 1,751.2 1,824.2 1.4 3.6 4.2 1.8 3.7 4.6 4.8 3.2 5.0 3.7
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,265.0 2,344.4 2,446.4 1.7 3.5 4.4 2.3 3.5 4.3 5.3 3.7 4.8 3.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2008. — 1In- products). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6In-
cluding communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate tangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertain-
activities, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home servi- ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net in-
ces. — 4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on crease in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-
Period total tion  2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
2003 98.4 84.9 99.8 99.5 99.5 102.0 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.6
2004 100.8 80.6 102.7 102.5 103.3 105.7 87.5 97.9 104.5 103.6 101.2 111.9
2005 103.6 76.1 102.9 106.3 106.5 111.0 87.8 100.9 110.0 104.5 106.1 116.8
2006 109.8 81.0 102.9 113.2 115.1 118.9 94.0 102.6 114.4 111.7 114.9 120.22007  
r 116.3 83.2 100.5 121.1 124.0 128.8 95.3 105.7 120.5 118.0 126.2 129.3
 
2006          July 112.7 99.4 97.1 115.6 119.0 121.3 90.3 103.2 118.8 111.9 115.2 127.4         Aug 103.5 90.6 92.8 105.9 113.0 103.8 79.3 100.9 113.6 104.7 105.4 92.4         Sep 117.4 99.1 93.5 121.6 123.1 129.3 106.6 106.5 113.1 118.6 125.6 132.0
         Oct 117.9 97.7 100.7 121.6 124.9 125.7 104.4 110.4 119.8 120.8 119.9 126.9
         Nov 120.7 96.1 106.5 124.6 124.4 133.8 107.9 110.6 119.0 121.1 128.3 133.3         Dec 107.1 69.5 110.7 110.2 103.6 124.8 91.3 100.3 105.5 94.0 136.8 100.5
2007          Jan  
r 105.1 56.4 105.0 109.5 115.8 110.5 89.4 98.7 118.9 117.9 103.0 117.8
         Feb  r 108.1 59.4 99.2 113.6 117.1 119.4 95.7 98.6 117.4 117.8 113.1 127.8
         Mar  r 121.4 79.8 105.3 127.0 129.3 136.2 104.0 109.4 126.3 128.1 133.0 143.4
         Apr  r 113.1 86.5 97.0 117.3 121.2 122.7 90.1 104.7 121.8 117.7 117.6 129.4
         May  r 114.0 87.9 95.5 118.4 123.1 123.7 90.1 104.7 122.3 118.2 120.4 128.8
         June  r 118.7 92.5 94.3 123.8 127.8 133.5 94.6 102.7 118.3 121.3 130.7 137.9
         July  r 118.4 96.7 95.4 122.9 127.7 131.1 89.7 104.3 123.0 117.3 127.8 132.2
         Aug  r 109.4 88.8 94.0 113.0 120.3 112.9 81.1 104.7 121.3 108.4 114.4 100.2
         Sep  r 124.6 97.6 96.4 130.1 132.4 139.4 108.0 112.1 122.7 122.3 137.2 143.1
         Oct  r 125.2 96.2 104.5 130.1 132.0 139.1 105.4 113.8 123.2 125.3 132.3 140.4
         Nov  r 125.6 90.5 107.9 130.7 130.1 143.8 105.4 111.9 120.5 123.9 136.9 143.0
         Dec  r 112.3 66.2 111.0 116.7 110.6 133.5 89.6 102.9 109.8 97.4 147.5 107.9
2008          Jan  + 111.6 60.4 107.0 116.9 121.6 122.5 90.0 102.3 124.3 120.5 114.2 124.0
         Feb  + 114.3 65.5 99.7 120.4 123.4 130.4 95.0 99.9 118.6 122.9 123.8 137.1
         Mar  + p 7 127.1 7 75.8 110.6 133.7 137.4 145.0 104.3 110.2 131.8 131.8 142.9 146.4
Annual percentage change  
  
2003 + 0.1 − 4.2 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 5.2 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.7 + 2.1
2004 + 2.4 − 5.1 + 2.9 + 3.0 + 3.8 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 2.5 + 3.7 + 3.5 + 4.0
2005 + 2.8 − 5.6 + 0.2 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 5.0 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 4.8 + 4.4
2006 + 6.0 + 6.4 + 0.0 + 6.5 + 8.1 + 7.1 + 7.1 + 1.7 + 4.0 + 6.9 + 8.3 + 2.9
2007  r + 5.9 + 2.7 − 2.3 + 7.0 + 7.7 + 8.3 + 1.4 + 3.0 + 5.3 + 5.6 + 9.8 + 7.6
 
2006          July + 5.7 + 7.0 + 0.7 + 6.2 + 8.2 + 6.5 + 7.9 + 0.7 + 6.0 + 3.5 + 6.8 + 4.4         Aug + 7.9 + 7.3 + 0.3 + 8.7 + 11.0 + 9.3 + 13.0 + 1.9 + 4.4 + 8.7 + 14.4 + 1.9         Sep + 6.2 + 7.8 − 0.1 + 6.6 + 8.7 + 6.8 + 9.2 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 8.4 + 10.0 + 1.9
         Oct + 4.4 + 4.6 − 3.1 + 5.1 + 8.2 + 5.1 + 4.2 − 1.8 + 1.8 + 7.3 + 10.8 − 3.2
         Nov + 7.0 + 11.6 − 1.4 + 7.6 + 8.8 + 9.0 + 8.0 + 1.6 + 6.3 + 8.5 + 12.6 + 1.7         Dec + 7.5 + 13.7 − 4.2 + 8.7 + 11.2 + 8.3 + 12.2 + 3.9 + 6.5 + 12.8 + 6.4 + 5.7
2007          Jan  
r + 7.1 + 35.6 − 12.8 + 8.5 + 10.7 + 9.3 + 4.3 + 2.5 + 4.4 + 12.6 + 11.7 + 9.8
         Feb  r + 7.7 + 30.0 − 8.9 + 8.6 + 11.0 + 8.8 + 7.0 + 2.7 + 6.5 + 9.5 + 13.8 + 4.9
         Mar  r + 8.6 + 25.5 − 6.5 + 9.3 + 11.0 + 9.5 + 5.8 + 5.8 + 6.6 + 9.4 + 13.7 + 8.8
         Apr  r + 4.9 + 0.5 − 4.7 + 6.2 + 7.1 + 7.3 − 2.5 + 3.4 + 7.4 + 6.5 + 7.8 + 7.6
         May  r + 5.8 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 7.9 + 7.6 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 8.2 + 5.2 + 9.5 + 5.1
         June  r + 5.6 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 6.7 + 7.6 + 8.4 + 2.0 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 3.5 + 9.5 + 9.4
         July  r + 5.1 − 2.7 − 1.8 + 6.3 + 7.3 + 8.1 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.5 + 4.8 + 10.9 + 3.8
         Aug  r + 5.7 − 2.0 + 1.3 + 6.7 + 6.5 + 8.8 + 2.3 + 3.8 + 6.8 + 3.5 + 8.5 + 8.4
         Sep  r + 6.1 − 1.5 + 3.1 + 7.0 + 7.6 + 7.8 + 1.3 + 5.3 + 8.5 + 3.1 + 9.2 + 8.4
         Oct  r + 6.2 − 1.5 + 3.8 + 7.0 + 5.7 + 10.7 + 1.0 + 3.1 + 2.8 + 3.7 + 10.3 + 10.6
         Nov  r + 4.1 − 5.8 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 7.5 − 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.3 + 6.7 + 7.3
         Dec  r + 4.9 − 4.7 + 0.3 + 5.9 + 6.8 + 7.0 − 1.9 + 2.6 + 4.1 + 3.6 + 7.8 + 7.4
2008          Jan  + + 6.2 + 7.1 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 5.0 + 10.9 + 0.7 + 3.6 + 4.5 + 2.2 + 10.9 + 5.3
         Feb  + + 5.7 + 10.3 + 0.5 + 6.0 + 5.4 + 9.2 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 4.3 + 9.5 + 7.3
         Mar  + p 7 + 4.7 7 − 5.0 + 5.0 + 5.3 + 6.3 + 6.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 4.4 + 2.9 + 7.4 + 2.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Annual and supply, and, in particular, mining of coal and lignite, extraction of crude oil
quarterly figures based on firms’ reports of enterprises with at least 20 and natural gas and manufacture of refined petroleum products. — 4In-
employees; monthly breakdown from January 2007 on the basis of data cluding mining and quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor ve-
provided by firms with at least 50 employees, but with a smaller reporting hicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 6Including printing and service activities
group before that date. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version related to printing. — 7Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless assigned to the main grouping Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the annual overall survey in the
energy, plus mining and quarrying. — 2The figures refer to the economic construction sector (average +4%). — +Provisional; adjusted in advance by
classifications ”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results o f the
parts thereof; civil engineering”. — 3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water Quarterly Production Survey for the first quarter 2008. 
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 Durable goods Non-durable goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
total  
  
2003 99.0 + 0.8 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.2 95.6 − 3.4 90.4 − 5.5 98.8 − 2.2
2004 105.1 + 6.2 105.0 + 7.4 107.6 + 6.9 95.1 − 0.5 89.3 − 1.2 98.7 − 0.1
2005 111.8 + 6.4 110.0 + 4.8 116.2 + 8.0 99.7 + 4.8 91.4 + 2.4 104.9 + 6.3
2006 123.8 + 10.7 124.8 + 13.5 127.5 + 9.7 105.7 + 6.0 98.9 + 8.2 109.9 + 4.8
2007 137.5 + 11.1 135.9 + 8.9 145.0 + 13.7 111.6 + 5.6 103.0 + 4.1 116.9 + 6.4
 
2007          Mar 145.2 + 13.6 144.9 + 14.8 151.6 + 14.5 120.0 + 5.4 108.5 + 2.5 127.2 + 7.1
         Apr 131.0 + 8.6 133.2 + 8.3 135.7 + 9.8 105.1 + 4.5 97.4 − 0.1 109.8 + 7.1
         May 134.8 + 12.4 135.7 + 10.0 140.9 + 15.4 106.9 + 7.8 100.8 + 4.3 110.7 + 9.7
         June 147.1 + 18.4 141.8 + 10.0 161.3 + 27.0 107.1 + 9.6 101.8 + 6.5 110.3 + 11.4
         July 135.6 + 7.9 136.5 + 6.4 140.8 + 9.6 111.3 + 4.8 98.0 + 4.7 119.4 + 4.8
         Aug 125.1 + 5.2 126.6 + 6.4 127.2 + 4.3 111.4 + 4.9 92.0 + 3.1 123.4 + 5.7         Sep 138.7 + 6.5 138.8 + 5.9 143.5 + 7.2 118.6 + 5.5 110.4 + 3.1 123.6 + 6.8
         Oct 143.8 + 10.9 139.7 + 3.9 152.0 + 17.1 123.3 + 8.6 128.0 + 14.0 120.4 + 5.3
         Nov 148.2 + 13.4 145.3 + 7.8 158.8 + 20.7 114.5 + 0.7 109.3 − 1.4 117.8 + 2.0         Dec 137.9 + 11.7 124.0 + 7.2 158.4 + 16.0 99.3 + 3.9 91.6 + 5.2 104.0 + 3.1
2008          Jan 140.3 + 8.8 140.3 + 5.4 147.4 + 12.6 111.4 + 4.0 104.4 + 5.1 115.6 + 3.3
         Feb 141.2 + 5.9 138.4 + 5.5 149.3 + 7.1 117.2 + 2.2 101.6 + 2.4 126.8 + 2.0         Mar  
p 153.0 + 5.4 152.4 + 5.2 161.8 + 6.7 119.3 − 0.6 111.1 + 2.4 124.3 − 2.3
from the domestic market  
  
2003 94.6 + 0.0 95.0 + 0.4 96.0 + 1.4 89.9 − 5.0 86.3 − 6.2 92.1 − 4.4
2004 98.3 + 3.9 100.4 + 5.7 100.1 + 4.3 87.2 − 3.0 83.0 − 3.8 89.8 − 2.5
2005 101.4 + 3.2 103.6 + 3.2 102.8 + 2.7 91.1 + 4.5 85.2 + 2.7 94.7 + 5.5
2006 110.9 + 9.4 116.9 + 12.8 110.5 + 7.5 95.0 + 4.3 92.2 + 8.2 96.6 + 2.0
2007 120.1 + 8.3 127.2 + 8.8 120.9 + 9.4 97.7 + 2.8 93.2 + 1.1 100.4 + 3.9
 
2007          Mar 127.9 + 12.7 133.0 + 14.4 130.2 + 13.4 106.6 + 4.9 101.6 + 3.4 109.7 + 5.9
         Apr 116.4 + 9.0 124.2 + 8.4 116.8 + 11.2 93.4 + 4.0 88.9 + 0.7 96.1 + 6.0
         May 118.0 + 9.0 127.7 + 10.2 117.2 + 9.1 92.7 + 4.0 89.4 + 0.3 94.7 + 6.3
         June 123.7 + 12.1 131.6 + 10.2 126.9 + 16.0 92.5 + 6.7 91.6 + 4.6 93.0 + 7.9
         July 121.7 + 8.3 129.5 + 6.7 122.7 + 11.3 96.6 + 4.0 89.7 + 4.4 100.8 + 3.7
         Aug 113.2 + 4.1 121.7 + 5.8 110.4 + 2.9 96.9 + 2.4 83.7 + 0.7 105.0 + 3.2         Sep 120.7 + 0.7 127.7 + 4.1 119.1 − 3.6 105.5 + 3.6 101.8 + 1.3 107.7 + 5.0
         Oct 124.2 + 4.8 131.4 + 3.9 124.2 + 7.2 103.9 + 0.6 102.5 − 2.6 104.7 + 2.5
         Nov 128.9 + 8.4 139.7 + 9.7 127.2 + 9.7 102.8 − 0.3 102.4 − 3.5 103.1 + 1.8         Dec 115.9 + 8.5 114.9 + 6.9 126.8 + 12.5 87.6 − 0.2 83.1 + 1.3 90.3 − 1.1
2008          Jan 120.0 + 4.4 129.9 + 4.9 117.8 + 3.8 98.0 + 4.6 97.3 + 6.0 98.4 + 3.7
         Feb 121.7 + 5.3 130.0 + 7.3 120.3 + 4.1 101.9 + 2.1 95.3 + 3.9 106.0 + 1.1         Mar  
p 132.8 + 3.8 142.0 + 6.8 133.0 + 2.2 106.0 − 0.6 103.3 + 1.7 107.6 − 1.9
from abroad  
  
2003 104.4 + 1.7 102.3 + 3.2 105.1 + 1.0 108.2 − 0.4 99.3 − 4.4 113.8 + 2.2
2004 113.6 + 8.8 112.2 + 9.7 114.5 + 8.9 112.6 + 4.1 103.1 + 3.8 118.5 + 4.1
2005 124.8 + 9.9 119.9 + 6.9 128.5 + 12.2 119.0 + 5.7 105.0 + 1.8 127.7 + 7.8
2006 140.0 + 12.2 137.3 + 14.5 143.2 + 11.4 129.4 + 8.7 113.6 + 8.2 139.3 + 9.1
2007 159.2 + 13.7 149.5 + 8.9 167.3 + 16.8 142.5 + 10.1 124.6 + 9.7 153.6 + 10.3
 
2007          Mar 166.9 + 14.6 163.5 + 15.4 171.4 + 15.3 149.7 + 6.1 123.6 + 0.7 166.0 + 8.8
         Apr 149.2 + 8.3 147.2 + 8.1 153.1 + 8.8 130.9 + 5.1 116.0 − 1.4 140.2 + 8.9
         May 155.7 + 15.9 148.1 + 9.6 162.7 + 19.9 138.4 + 13.7 125.7 + 11.1 146.2 + 15.0
         June 176.4 + 24.6 157.8 + 9.7 193.0 + 34.8 139.4 + 14.4 124.3 + 9.9 148.9 + 16.8
         July 152.9 + 7.4 147.5 + 6.1 157.5 + 8.4 143.7 + 6.1 116.1 + 5.0 160.9 + 6.5
         Aug 139.9 + 6.3 134.2 + 7.2 142.7 + 5.4 143.6 + 9.0 110.3 + 7.4 164.4 + 9.7         Sep 161.1 + 12.7 156.1 + 8.2 166.0 + 15.8 147.6 + 8.5 129.2 + 6.3 159.1 + 9.8
         Oct 168.3 + 17.2 152.8 + 3.9 177.7 + 24.5 166.3 + 22.2 184.1 + 44.1 155.2 + 9.8
         Nov 172.3 + 18.5 154.0 + 5.2 187.9 + 28.6 140.5 + 2.4 124.3 + 2.5 150.6 + 2.4         Dec 165.4 + 14.5 138.2 + 7.5 187.5 + 18.4 125.1 + 10.7 110.4 + 12.3 134.3 + 9.9
2008          Jan 165.6 + 13.2 156.5 + 6.0 174.7 + 18.9 140.9 + 3.1 120.0 + 3.8 153.9 + 2.7
         Feb 165.6 + 6.6 151.5 + 3.1 176.1 + 9.1 151.0 + 2.2 115.5 − 0.3 173.2 + 3.2         Mar  
p 178.3 + 6.8 168.7 + 3.2 188.4 + 9.9 148.6 − 0.7 128.2 + 3.7 161.4 − 2.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic ployees, previously on the basis of the reports by enterprises with at least 20
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture employees. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; cluding manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2In-
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added tax; cluding printing and service activities related to printin g. 
from January 2006 on the basis of reports by enterprises with at least 50 em-
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany  1 Eastern Germany  2 
Public Public Housing Public
Housing sector Housing sector con- sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- struc construc- construc-
Total struction tion  3 tion Total struction tion  3 tion Total tion  4 tion 3 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per-
 centage centage centage
Period change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2003 79.3 − 10.7 67.5 78.6 87.5 82.0 − 11.0 75.6 79.7 88.7 71.9 − 9.7 45.1 75.4 84.3
2004 74.3 − 6.3 61.3 72.8 84.2 76.9 − 6.2 70.5 74.6 83.8 67.1 − 6.7 35.8 67.7 85.2
2005 73.8 − 0.7 56.9 74.4 83.5 77.8 + 1.2 66.5 78.0 84.8 62.6 − 6.7 30.5 64.2 80.1
2006 77.6 + 5.1 59.4 81.3 84.9 82.1 + 5.5 68.9 84.8 87.3 65.4 + 4.5 33.1 71.1 78.62007 84.2 + 8.5 56.1 90.0 95.1 89.7 + 9.3 64.5 94.5 100.0 69.0 + 5.5 33.1 76.8 82.2
   
2007          Feb 64.0 + 8.3 45.6 77.3 60.5 67.5 + 4.0 53.4 83.1 58.4 54.4 + 25.6 24.2 60.6 66.0
         Mar 93.1 + 13.3 60.3 101.8 103.7 99.4 + 15.2 71.2 107.1 108.3 75.7 + 6.5 30.1 86.4 91.8
         Apr 87.8 + 9.1 61.9 92.8 98.1 93.3 + 9.9 68.6 98.8 102.5 72.5 + 6.0 43.3 75.5 86.8
         May 89.6 + 4.1 60.9 93.5 103.2 96.3 + 2.6 70.6 100.8 107.5 71.2 + 10.2 34.0 72.5 92.0         June 96.0 + 2.7 66.5 103.2 106.2 102.2 + 4.4 76.0 109.0 110.9 78.8 − 3.0 40.4 86.3 94.0
         July 93.6 + 7.0 60.0 103.3 103.5 100.7 + 9.7 68.8 112.1 107.8 73.8 − 2.4 35.9 77.8 92.3
         Aug 83.8 − 0.5 58.5 82.2 101.5 89.0 + 0.8 69.0 86.3 105.0 69.5 − 4.7 29.7 70.4 92.4         Sep 93.6 + 3.1 62.3 92.8 113.9 97.2 + 2.7 70.1 96.0 115.9 83.5 + 4.0 41.0 83.6 108.7
         Oct 96.4 + 26.0 56.7 96.9 120.4 104.1 + 28.2 65.8 97.1 136.6 75.1 + 18.1 31.6 96.5 78.8
         Nov 77.3 + 9.6 45.6 83.7 89.7 83.0 + 11.4 53.3 84.9 99.7 61.3 + 2.7 24.5 80.2 63.7         Dec 75.0 + 6.7 51.6 82.7 80.8 78.7 + 8.3 56.6 84.7 85.8 64.6 + 1.1 38.0 76.6 68.0
2008          Jan 68.8 + 14.9 41.5 87.3 64.9 75.1 + 16.3 49.1 93.6 70.1 51.4 + 9.4 20.5 68.9 51.5
         Feb 65.5 + 2.3 46.0 74.6 67.3 73.4 + 8.7 54.2 84.3 73.0 43.7 − 19.7 23.3 46.7 52.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- of; civil engineering”. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version
sive of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications 0.2.8. — 1Excluding West Berlin. — 2Including West Berlin. — 3Including
”Site preparation” and ”Building of complete constructions or parts there- the railways and post office. — 4 Not working-day adjusted. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  2 of which
Furniture and
Cosmetic, Textiles, lighting equip- Retail trade plus retail
pharmaceutical clothing, ments, domestic sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and medical footwear and and motorcycles and Retail sales of appliances, build-
Total tobacco products leather goods ing materials sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 2003 = 100 adjusted adjusted 2003 = 100
2002 100.5 − 1.7 − 1.4 98.3 + 2.6 97.6 + 3.5 105.7 − 5.0 100.8 − 7.9 100.0 − 0.8 − 0.8 98.1 + 2.9
2003  4 100.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 100.2 + 1.9 100.0 + 2.5 100.1 − 5.3 100.2 − 0.6 100.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 100.5 + 2.4
2004 101.8 + 1.7 + 1.8 103.3 + 3.1 99.9 − 0.1 103.4 + 3.3 103.8 + 3.6 102.0 + 1.8 + 1.5 102.5 + 2.0
2005 103.7 + 1.9 + 1.4 106.3 + 2.9 104.5 + 4.6 105.6 + 2.1 102.0 − 1.7 103.9 + 1.9 + 1.2 104.8 + 2.2
2006  5 104.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 106.7 + 0.4 107.2 + 2.6 108.1 + 2.4 105.9 + 3.8 106.5 + 2.5 + 1.5 111.9 + 6.8
2007  6 103.6 − 1.2 − 2.3 106.1 − 0.6 109.8 + 2.4 110.1 + 1.9 103.3 − 2.5 104.5 − 1.9 − 3.3 107.1 − 4.3
 
2007          Mar  6 106.2 − 0.1 − 0.7 109.2 + 0.6 110.5 + 1.3 111.5 + 5.8 110.5 + 4.0 108.4 − 0.2 − 1.1 116.1 − 0.5
         Apr 106.6 + 1.7 + 0.8 110.1 + 1.9 109.8 + 3.7 126.4 + 9.2 104.9 − 1.8 107.9 + 0.0 − 1.3 111.3 − 6.2
         May 101.5 − 2.5 − 3.2 107.2 − 0.9 108.4 + 2.7 104.6 − 5.5 99.2 − 4.0 104.8 − 2.1 − 3.3 115.1 − 0.7
         June 99.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 104.1 − 3.2 106.2 + 1.0 102.9 − 0.2 98.4 + 0.2 103.6 − 1.8 − 2.8 115.3 + 0.0
         July 102.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 106.4 − 4.0 113.1 + 5.3 105.1 + 1.7 100.3 + 3.3 105.1 − 0.8 − 1.7 115.2 − 0.2
         Aug 100.5 − 0.9 − 1.9 102.9 − 0.8 107.0 + 3.9 105.5 − 1.5 98.5 − 2.5 101.6 − 0.6 − 1.9 104.7 + 1.0
         Sep 101.7 + 0.6 − 0.4 101.2 + 0.1 107.3 + 4.7 120.7 + 17.6 101.7 − 1.0 103.3 − 0.2 − 1.7 107.3 − 2.6
         Oct 107.4 − 0.8 − 2.4 107.8 + 3.0 113.8 + 3.5 124.8 + 0.6 108.3 − 5.0 109.0 − 1.2 − 3.1 114.5 − 3.2
         Nov 109.0 − 0.7 − 3.0 106.6 + 0.6 114.2 + 2.6 112.9 − 1.5 111.5 − 6.1 110.0 − 2.7 − 5.1 114.3 − 9.1         Dec 123.6 − 5.6 − 7.6 120.5 − 4.4 124.6 − 1.9 135.4 − 2.4 125.1 − 11.0 120.0 − 6.7 − 8.7 106.0 − 15.3
2008          Jan 97.1 + 3.3 + 1.2 99.0 − 0.6 108.4 + 5.9 94.1 + 4.4 93.9 + 2.6 95.7 + 6.2 + 3.9 90.8 + 17.5
         Feb 93.0 + 1.8 − 0.8 96.1 − 1.7 102.9 + 2.9 86.3 + 5.8 89.6 − 0.6 94.0 + 3.8 + 1.0 96.4 + 9.9         Mar  
s 107.8 + 1.5 − 1.1 109.6 + 0.4 116.3 + 5.2 105.7 − 5.2 112.6 + 1.9 111.1 + 2.5 − 0.3 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding Saxony. — 5From January 2006 reporting population expanded annually to
value-added tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version include new entities; statistical break in reporting population eliminated by
0.2.8. — 1Excluding sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding chain-linking. — 6From January 2007 figures are provisional and particular-
the sale of automotive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including motor ly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for missing reports. 
vehicle parts and accessories. — 4Figures for 2003 do not include Lower
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employment  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployment  6 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-
manu- ment pro- going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cational
ing Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector 5,6 Annual Vacan- workers  4 struction  3 training  6 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  6 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 6,7  in % sands
Germany  
  
2005 38,847 − 0.1 − 33 34,490 − 0.5 5,931 719 126 61 114 8 4,861 8 + 480 8 11.7 9 413
2006 39,089 + 0.6 + 242 34,694 + 0.6 10 5,249 710 67 51 124 4,487 − 374 10.8 564
2007 r 39,766 r + 1.7 r + 677 r 35,319 r + 1.8 5,301 714 68 42 131 3,776 − 711 9.0 11 621
2007          Apr 39,463 + 1.9 + 732 5,257 713 51 42 133 3,976 − 814 9.5 651
         May 39,649 + 1.7 + 653 35,155 + 1.7 5,268 716 48 42 135 3,812 − 726 12 9.1 643
         June 39,747 + 1.5 + 589 5,286 720 46 42 133 3,688 − 711 8.8 648
         July r 39,739 r + 1.5 r + 586 5,322 723 39 42 123 3,715 − 671 8.9 650
         Aug r 39,849 r + 1.6 r + 627 r 35,458 r + 1.6 5,353 730 32 43 116 3,706 − 666 8.8 648
         Sep r 40,171 r + 1.7 r + 664 5,365 735 34 43 125 3,544 − 694 8.5 629
         Oct r 40,393 r + 1.8 r + 716 5,364 728 36 44 142 3,434 − 650 8.2 609
         Nov r 40,458 r + 1.8 r + 714 r 35,933 r + 1.9 5,361 723 37 43 147 3,379 − 617 8.1 577
         Dec r 40,304 r + 1.7 r + 688 5,347 708 78 40 148 3,406 − 602 8.1 546
2008          Jan r 39,756 r + 1.7 r + 682 5,366 681 ... 36 139 3,659 − 625 8.7 528
         Feb 39,789 + 1.8 + 689 35,386 + 1.9 5,385 678 ... 13 3613 143 3,617 − 630 8.6 565
         Mar 14 39,925 14 + 1.7 14 + 683 ... ... ... 13 3513 148 3,507 − 617 8.4 588
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 3513 150 3,414 − 563 8.1 592
Western Germany o) 
  
2005 . . . . . 5,214 529 101 12 76 8 3,247 8 + 464 8 9.9 9 325
2006 . . . . . 10 4,650 525 54 10 85 3,007 − 240 9.1 436
2007 . . . . . 4,684 529 52 9 90 2,486 − 521 7.5 11 489
2007          Apr . . . . . 4,647 529 41 9 90 2,611 − 590 7.8 504
         May . . . . . 4,657 531 39 10 93 2,504 − 545 12 7.5 502
         June . . . . . 4,672 533 36 10 91 2,428 − 539 7.3 511
         July . . . . . 4,703 536 31 10 85 2,450 − 510 7.3 515
         Aug . . . . . 4,730 541 25 9 80 2,444 − 497 7.3 511         Sep . . . . . 4,736 545 27 9 86 2,335 − 501 7.0 498
         Oct . . . . . 4,734 540 30 9 98 2,265 − 473 6.8 485
         Nov . . . . . 4,732 536 30 9 100 2,225 − 448 6.7 460         Dec . . . . . 4,719 527 58 8 101 2,231 − 440 6.7 439
2008          Jan . . . . . 4,732 510 ... 8 95 2,383 − 448 7.1 426
         Feb . . . . . 4,749 507 ...
13 813 98 2,347 − 451 7.0 453
         Mar . . . . . ... ... ... 13 813 102 2,271 − 437 6.8 463
         Apr . . . . . ... ... ... 13 713 104 2,216 − 395 6.6 465
Eastern Germany +)  
  
2005 . . . . . 717 189 25 49 38 8 1,614 8 +1 6 8 18.7 9 88
2006 . . . . . 10 599 185 13 42 39 1,480 − 134 17.3 129
2007 . . . . . 617 185 16 33 42 1,291 − 190 15.1 11 133
2007          Apr . . . . . 610 184 10 33 43 1,365 − 224 16.0 147
         May . . . . . 611 185 10 32 42 1,309 − 181 12 15.2 141
         June . . . . . 614 187 10 32 42 1,260 − 173 14.7 137
         July . . . . . 619 188 8 33 39 1,265 − 161 14.7 134
         Aug . . . . . 623 189 7 33 36 1,262 − 169 14.7 137         Sep . . . . . 628 190 6 34 39 1,209 − 193 14.1 131
         Oct . . . . . 630 189 6 34 44 1,169 − 177 13.6 124
         Nov . . . . . 629 187 7 34 47 1,154 − 169 13.4 117
         Dec . . . . . 628 181 20 32 47 1,176 − 162 13.7 106
2008          Jan . . . . . 634 172 ... 28 45 1,276 − 178 14.9 102
         Feb . . . . . 636 171 ...
13 2813 45 1,270 − 179 14.8 112
         Mar . . . . . ... ... ... 13 2713 47 1,236 − 180 14.4 125
         Apr . . . . . ... ... ... 13 2813 47 1,198 − 167 13.9 127
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual unemployed persons including recipients of social assistance who are able to
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- work. — 9From January 2005, including offers of job opportunities. —
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- 10From January 2006, enterprises with at least 50 employees, previously en-
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Workplace concept; aver- terprises with at least 20 employees. — 11From January 2007, vacancies for
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — seasonal workers are included only if they are based on non-specific em-
3The figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and ployer requirements. — 12From May 2007, calculated on the basis of new la-
”Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — bour force figures. — 13Annualised data from the Federal Employment A-
4Number within a given month. — 5Employees involved in job creation gency based on information received so far. — 14Initial preliminary esti-
schemes and structural adjustment measures (SAM). — 6Mid-month mate by the Federal Statistical Office. 
level. — 7Relative to the total civilian labour force. — 8From January 2005,
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  3 rents  3 index  2 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1 2 
Period 2005 = 100 2000 = 100
Index level  
  
2005 8 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 102.7 8 110.7 98.8 102.4 101.4 139.5 105.4
2006 9 101.6 101.9 100.3 108.5 101.0 101.1 105.3 9 116.8 r 107.1 104.8 106.7 163.9 131.5
2007 10 11  103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 112.9 119.1 118.2 106.7 108.0 166.6 143.7
 
2006          July 102.1 101.9 99.6 111.8 102.2 101.1 117.7 105.9 105.2 108.3 182.1 135.6
         Aug 101.9 101.8 99.5 111.3 102.0 101.2 105.9 117.9 109.8 105.2 108.5 178.5 134.3         Sep 101.5 102.4 100.1 107.7 101.0 101.3 117.5 109.1 105.2 107.1 155.4 133.7
         Oct 
9 101.7 101.8 100.8 107.3 100.9 101.4 9 117.8 107.9 105.6 106.8 146.8 139.0
         Nov 101.7 102.2 100.9 106.8 100.7 101.5 107.1 117.8 110.4 105.7 106.4 144.9 137.7
         Dec 102.4 102.7 100.9 106.7 103.1 101.6 117.8 110.8 105.6 106.1 148.7 136.3
2007          Jan 10 102.4 104.1 101.2 108.3 101.8 101.6 117.8 110.6 105.8 105.4 133.2 138.8
         Feb 102.9 103.9 101.4 109.1 102.9 101.7 111.7 118.1 112.6 106.0 105.9 142.2 141.8
         Mar 103.1 103.7 101.7 110.7 102.8 101.8 118.4 112.7 106.2 106.5 147.7 145.5
         Apr 11 103.6 105.3 101.7 111.9 103.5 101.9 118.5 111.9 106.5 107.5 154.9 149.1
         May 103.6 104.7 101.6 112.5 103.5 102.0 112.6 118.9 112.6 106.7 107.8 154.7 150.5
         June 103.6 105.1 101.4 112.8 103.5 102.2 119.1 113.2 106.9 108.4 164.3 148.5
         July 104.2 105.0 101.2 113.8 105.2 102.3 119.0 117.8 106.9 108.7 172.7 146.2
         Aug 104.1 105.1 101.1 112.5 105.2 102.5 113.3 119.1 121.8 106.9 107.9 166.8 141.5
         Sep 104.2 105.8 101.8 114.0 104.3 102.5 119.3 126.7 106.9 108.5 177.4 142.9
         Oct 11 104.5 108.2 102.2 113.8 104.0 102.6 119.8 r 129.2 107.0 109.3 186.5 143.9
         Nov 105.0 109.7 102.4 118.2 103.8 102.7 114.0 120.8 r 130.2 107.0 110.1 202.1 137.5
         Dec 105.6 110.4 102.2 115.8 106.4 102.8 120.7 r 130.9 107.0 110.0 199.6 138.2
2008          Jan 105.3 112.1 101.9 118.4 104.3 103.0 121.7 r 130.9 107.7 110.9 201.2 153.3
         Feb 105.8 112.0 102.3 118.8 105.3 103.1 115.3 122.6 p 131.5 108.3 112.1 210.6 163.1
         Mar 106.3 112.6 102.5 121.5 105.7 103.2 123.4 p 130.8 108.5 112.6 216.5 160.5
         Apr 106.1 113.0 102.6 122.6 104.2 103.3 ... ... ... ... 225.1 157.7
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 8 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.3 8 + 4.6 − 0.9 + 1.3 + 4.3 + 37.6 + 9.4
2006 9 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.5 9 + 5.5 r + 8.4 + 2.3 + 5.2 + 17.5 + 24.8
2007 10 11  + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 7.2 + 2.0 + 10.4 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 9.3
 
2006          July + 1.8 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 9.8 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 6.0 + 8.6 + 2.7 + 6.3 + 20.0 + 26.7
         Aug + 1.5 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 8.0 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 5.9 + 11.2 + 2.7 + 5.5 + 10.9 + 26.8         Sep + 1.0 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 10.9 + 2.3 + 3.7 − 3.2 + 26.4
         Oct 
9 + 1.1 + 3.6 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 9 + 4.6 + 9.2 + 2.5 + 3.0 − 4.7 + 28.7
         Nov + 1.5 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 3.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 4.0 + 4.7 + 10.0 + 2.6 + 2.8 − 2.4 + 22.9
         Dec + 1.4 + 3.1 + 0.7 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 4.4 + 9.3 + 2.4 + 2.2 − 2.2 + 17.7
2007          Jan 10 + 1.7 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 3.2 + 9.4 + 2.4 + 0.7 − 18.6 + 15.6
         Feb + 1.8 + 2.4 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 7.7 + 2.8 + 9.0 + 2.2 + 0.8 − 11.6 + 13.9
         Mar + 2.0 + 2.6 + 1.3 + 3.7 + 2.5 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 7.5 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 9.7 + 17.6
         Apr 11 + 2.1 + 3.5 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 5.8 + 1.9 + 0.5 − 12.9 + 15.3
         May + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.2 + 2.1 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 7.9 + 1.9 + 6.0 + 1.8 + 0.6 − 9.8 + 11.9
         June + 1.9 + 2.6 + 1.3 + 1.8 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 5.9 + 2.0 + 1.3 − 4.9 + 14.2
         July + 2.1 + 3.0 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 11.2 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 5.2 + 7.8
         Aug + 2.2 + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 7.0 + 1.0 + 10.9 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 6.6 + 5.4         Sep + 2.7 + 3.3 + 1.7 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 16.1 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 14.2 + 6.9
         Oct 
11 + 2.8 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 6.1 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 1.7 r + 19.7 + 1.3 + 2.3 + 27.0 + 3.5
         Nov + 3.2 + 7.3 + 1.5 + 10.7 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 6.4 + 2.5 r + 17.9 + 1.2 + 3.5 + 39.5 − 0.1
         Dec + 3.1 + 7.5 + 1.3 + 8.5 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 2.5 r + 18.1 + 1.3 + 3.7 + 34.2 + 1.4
2008          Jan + 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.7 + 9.3 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 3.3 r + 18.4 + 1.8 + 5.2 + 51.1 + 10.4
         Feb + 2.8 + 7.8 + 0.9 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 3.2 + 3.8 p + 16.8 + 2.2 + 5.9 + 48.1 + 15.0
         Mar + 3.1 + 8.6 + 0.8 + 9.8 + 2.8 + 1.4 + 4.2 p + 16.1 + 2.2 + 5.7 + 46.6 + 10.3
         Apr + 2.4 + 7.3 + 0.9 + 9.6 + 0.7 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... + 45.3 + 5.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — September 2005, increase in tobacco tax. — 9From October 2006, increase
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data in the prices of tobacco products. — 10From January 2007, increase in the
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Net rents. — 4Excluding standard rate of VAT and in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. —
value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 11 Introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 
7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 8From
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2000 883.4 3.4 569.6 4.0 339.9 2.8 909.5 3.6 1,337.4 3.1 123.2 0.4 9.2
2001 902.0 2.1 590.0 3.6 353.8 4.1 943.9 3.8 1,389.5 3.9 130.9 6.2 9.42002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.9
2003 908.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 378.3 2.9 967.2 0.8 1,431.8 2.1 147.2 5.6 10.32004 914.3 0.7 603.5 2.5 378.7 0.1 982.3 1.6 1,459.3 1.9 151.8 3.2 10.4
2005 911.9 − 0.3 602.8 − 0.1 378.9 0.0 981.7 − 0.1 1,482.6 1.6 156.2 2.9 10.5
2006 926.0 1.5 605.4 0.4 379.2 0.1 984.6 0.3 1,515.9 2.3 158.4 1.5 10.52007 955.7 3.2 621.7 2.7 374.4 − 1.3 996.1 1.2 1,542.4 1.7 168.0 6.0 10.9
2006          Q2 223.5 1.7 143.5 0.3 95.3 0.5 238.8 0.4 372.6 1.8 37.2 1.9 10.0
         Q3 230.8 2.0 154.9 1.0 94.3 0.1 249.2 0.6 374.4 1.5 33.7 1.6 9.0
         Q4 257.3 2.0 166.5 1.1 93.5 − 1.0 260.0 0.3 391.1 2.9 35.0 1.1 9.0
2007          Q1 221.9 3.5 145.1 3.2 94.6 − 1.5 239.7 1.3 384.0 1.6 55.2 5.1 14.4
         Q2 231.4 3.5 147.5 2.8 93.3 − 2.1 240.8 0.8 379.9 2.0 39.2 5.5 10.3         Q3 237.6 2.9 158.4 2.3 93.3 − 1.1 251.7 1.0 381.2 1.8 35.1 4.3 9.2         Q4 264.9 2.9 170.8 2.6 93.2 − 0.4 264.0 1.5 397.3 1.6 38.4 9.7 9.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2008. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2000 100.0 2.0 100.0 1.9 100.0 2.1 100.0 2.1 100.0 1.5
2001 101.9 1.9 101.9 1.9 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 101.8 1.8
2002 104.7 2.7 104.6 2.7 104.6 2.3 104.6 2.3 103.2 1.32003 106.8 2.0 106.8 2.1 106.9 2.2 107.1 2.4 104.5 1.32004 108.1 1.2 108.2 1.3 108.3 1.3 108.8 1.7 105.1 0.6
2005 109.0 0.9 109.3 1.1 109.3 0.9 110.0 1.0 105.4 0.3
2006 110.1 1.0 110.7 1.2 110.2 0.8 110.9 0.8 106.3 0.92007 111.5 1.2 112.2 1.4 111.8 1.5 112.5 1.5 107.9 1.4
2006          Q3 112.6 0.3 113.1 0.5 112.8 0.3 111.2 1.0 105.6 1.1
         Q4 123.4 1.5 124.1 1.8 123.7 1.5 111.4 1.1 116.3 1.1
2007          Q1 102.4 0.5 103.1 0.7 103.1 1.2 111.6 1.2 101.6 1.5
         Q2 104.5 1.7 105.1 1.9 103.7 1.3 112.1 1.3 104.9 1.7         Q3 114.3 1.5 115.0 1.7 114.7 1.7 113.1 1.7 107.0 1.3         Q4 124.8 1.1 125.6 1.1 125.8 1.7 113.3 1.7 117.7 1.2
2008          Q1 104.8 2.3 105.5 2.3 105.8 2.6 114.5 2.6 . .
2007          Sep 104.3 2.1 105.0 2.3 104.5 1.7 113.2 1.7 . .
         Oct 103.8 1.3 104.5 1.5 104.7 1.8 113.3 1.8 . .
         Nov 164.1 0.6 165.2 0.6 165.6 0.8 113.4 1.7 . .
         Dec 106.4 1.6 107.1 1.6 107.2 3.2 113.4 1.7 . .
2008          Jan 104.7 1.8 105.4 1.9 105.7 2.6 114.5 2.6 . .
         Feb 104.8 2.6 105.5 2.6 105.7 2.5 114.5 2.6 . .         Mar 104.9 2.6 105.6 2.6 105.9 2.6 114.7 2.7 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13
thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2008. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2007 2008
Item 2005 2006 2007 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb
Current account + 18,137 − 1,273 + 26,393 − 1,950 + 13,631 + 10,965 + 2,685 − 17,924 + 4,973A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,220,263 1,391,214 1,503,614 373,611 376,102 392,418 116,757 124,676 131,410
Imports (fob) 1,171,985 1,372,001 1,448,056 353,487 359,031 382,691 119,030 131,946 128,484
Balance + 48,278 + 19,212 + 55,558 + 20,122 + 17,071 + 9,728 − 2,273 − 7,270 + 2,926
2 Services
Receipts 405,887 437,048 494,795 120,217 135,377 127,843 43,731 37,498 37,676Expenditure 368,541 394,759 443,287 106,239 118,182 116,930 40,440 34,861 34,037
Balance + 37,350 + 42,291 + 51,507 + 13,978 + 17,196 + 10,912 + 3,290 + 2,638 + 3,639
3 Income + 5,438 + 15,093 + 2,974 − 19,354 + 5,001 + 10,378 + 5,084 − 3,161 + 3,283
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 85,849 89,178 90,163 19,544 16,429 27,142 16,448 6,960 15,515
Transfers to non-residents 158,776 167,049 173,809 36,240 42,065 47,195 19,865 17,090 20,391
Balance − 72,927 − 77,873 − 83,648 − 16,697 − 25,636 − 20,053 − 3,416 − 10,130 − 4,876
Capital account + 11,408 + 9,208 + 14,148 + 2,093 + 1,582 + 5,839 + 3,454 + 2,378 + 2,332B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 9,235 + 112,369 + 102,757 + 49,813 + 97,506 − 73,998 − 23,218 + 27,273 − 9,923C)
1 Direct investment − 216,419 − 144,733 − 94,766 − 57,870 − 40,872 + 18,232 − 20,795 − 29,934 − 13,836
By resident units abroad − 364,683 − 345,992 − 401,802 − 113,847 − 115,845 − 78,324 − 24,816 − 45,959 − 27,346By non-resident units in the euro area + 148,265 + 201,260 + 307,034 + 55,976 + 74,973 + 96,556 + 4,021 + 16,024 + 13,510
2 Portfolio investment + 131,439 + 266,294 + 253,915 + 90,388 + 65,124 − 44,183 − 10,076 + 49,330 + 34,802
By resident units abroad − 412,574 − 535,861 − 422,472 − 149,428 − 33,853 − 94,596 + 22,105 − 14,879 − 17,063
Equity − 134,235 − 152,984 − 46,735 − 11,393 − 7,513 − 11,420 + 8,047 + 19,208 + 16,300Bonds and notes − 261,266 − 314,461 − 326,566 − 114,487 − 42,299 − 77,180 + 3,748 + 3,399 − 20,096Money market instruments − 17,078 − 68,418 − 49,171 − 23,547 + 15,959 − 5,996 + 10,311 − 37,487 − 13,267
By non-resident units in the euro area + 544,015 + 802,156 + 676,386 + 239,815 + 98,977 + 50,414 − 32,181 + 64,209 + 51,865
Equity + 255,274 + 302,397 + 211,987 + 75,819 + 33,290 − 6,788 − 9,963 + 36,517 + 28,418
Bonds and notes + 235,580 + 498,120 + 407,108 + 123,781 + 50,097 + 78,903 − 3,196 + 24,918 + 19,104Money market instruments + 53,160 + 1,640 + 57,294 + 40,214 + 15,592 − 21,701 − 19,022 + 2,774 + 4,343
3 Financial derivatives − 18,196 + 2,442 − 110,064 − 19,728 − 26,798 − 48,305 − 10,962 − 12,955 + 2,441
4 Other investment + 94,601 − 10,271 + 58,879 + 41,382 + 104,394 − 4,660 + 13,882 + 27,661 − 38,002
Eurosystem + 5,475 + 15,293 + 29,225 + 7,387 − 3,067 + 24,304 + 15,347 + 4,672 − 13,487
General government + 2,545 + 3,931 + 8,784 − 17,405 + 21,996 − 4,039 − 9,483 + 7,612 − 4,768MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 90,504 − 25,355 + 80,149 + 44,285 + 63,250 − 5,012 − 2,532 + 14,078 + 32,923
Long-term − 43,253 − 49,254 − 113,824 + 7,024 − 40,163 − 34,213 − 41,372 − 25,308 − 8,248Short-term + 133,753 + 23,895 + 193,974 + 37,261 + 103,413 + 29,201 + 38,840 + 39,385 + 41,171
Other sectors − 3,919 − 4,137 − 59,282 + 7,114 + 22,217 − 19,916 + 10,549 + 1,297 − 52,670
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 17,810 − 1,364 − 5,203 − 4,358 − 4,340 + 4,917 + 4,733 − 6,827 + 4,672
Errors and omissions − 38,781 − 120,304 − 143,299 − 49,956 − 112,719 + 57,195 + 17,079 − 11,728 + 2,618D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  
1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 Omissions
DM million
1994 − 49,418 + 71,762 − 1,318 − 62,803 + 2,393 − 59,451 − 2,637 + 60,708 + 2,846 − 8,653
1995 − 42,363 + 85,303 − 4,294 − 63,985 − 3,975 − 55,413 − 3,845 + 50,117 − 10,355 − 3,909
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 791997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,6131998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,2942001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,775
2001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,7572002 + 42,976 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,514 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,3162003 + 43,967 + 129,921 − 11,142 − 34,497 − 15,067 − 25,248 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 17,480
2004 + 102,889 + 156,096 − 16,447 − 29,341 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,660
2005 + 116,606 + 158,179 − 13,761 − 24,914 + 25,687 − 28,585 − 1,248 − 130,725 + 2,182 + 15,3672006 + 141,490 + 159,048 − 12,722 − 15,556 + 37,616 − 26,895 − 175 − 151,113 + 2,934 + 9,7982007 + 184,223 + 198,640 − 9,430 − 16,274 + 41,966 − 30,678 + 224 − 220,859 − 953 + 36,411
2005          Q2 + 28,408 + 40,670 − 3,298 − 5,290 + 2,586 − 6,260 + 107 − 50,279 + 1,230 + 21,764
         Q3 + 25,081 + 40,695 − 3,390 − 11,634 + 7,007 − 7,597 + 81 − 12,934 − 783 − 12,228         Q4 + 32,712 + 33,619 − 3,968 − 3,005 + 9,404 − 3,337 + 56 − 36,044 + 1,916 + 3,276
2006          Q1 + 30,284 + 39,564 − 3,709 − 4,921 + 9,538 − 10,188 + 152 − 38,743 + 1,082 + 8,307
         Q2 + 30,345 + 34,873 − 2,508 − 1,752 + 4,645 − 4,913 + 11 − 66,246 + 367 + 35,890         Q3 + 29,418 + 38,718 − 2,974 − 9,386 + 11,201 − 8,141 − 236 − 20,662 + 844 − 8,519         Q4 + 51,443 + 45,892 − 3,530 + 503 + 12,231 − 3,653 − 102 − 25,462 + 642 − 25,879
2007          Q1 + 46,455 + 49,383 − 2,521 − 2,486 + 13,007 − 10,927 + 157 − 55,658 + 100 + 9,046
         Q2 + 41,805 + 49,388 − 2,232 − 1,951 + 1,473 − 4,873 + 419 − 85,087 − 1,359 + 42,863         Q3 + 42,634 + 50,637 − 2,560 − 9,371 + 12,969 − 9,040 + 317 − 13,931 − 347 − 29,020         Q4 + 53,328 + 49,232 − 2,116 − 2,466 + 14,518 − 5,840 − 669 − 66,182 + 653 + 13,523
2008          Q1  
p + 47,964 + 50,683 − 2,229 − 1,559 + 12,658 − 11,588 + 517 − 69,985 − 1,165 + 21,504
2005          Oct + 8,696 + 11,788 − 1,724 − 2,068 + 3,039 − 2,339 + 329 − 9,304 + 207 + 279
         Nov + 11,078 + 12,951 − 1,248 − 683 + 3,126 − 3,067 − 107 − 16,935 + 1,059 + 5,964
         Dec + 12,938 + 8,880 − 997 − 254 + 3,239 + 2,069 − 166 − 9,805 + 650 − 2,968
2006          Jan + 9,372 + 12,367 − 1,476 − 2,080 + 2,991 − 2,430 + 8 − 14,042 − 26 + 4,661
         Feb + 9,723 + 12,825 − 674 − 645 + 3,493 − 5,275 + 282 − 12,260 + 1,534 + 2,254         Mar + 11,188 + 14,373 − 1,559 − 2,196 + 3,053 − 2,483 − 138 − 12,441 − 426 + 1,392
         Apr + 10,522 + 10,772 − 472 − 431 + 2,888 − 2,236 − 144 − 23,608 + 1,475 + 13,230
         May + 6,589 + 12,079 − 1,224 − 936 − 2,238 − 1,091 − 277 − 23,197 − 1,067 + 16,885         June + 13,234 + 12,022 − 812 − 385 + 3,995 − 1,586 + 432 − 19,441 − 41 + 5,775
         July + 9,181 + 12,527 − 1,383 − 2,523 + 3,510 − 2,949 − 215 + 7,068 − 332 − 16,034
         Aug + 7,611 + 10,943 − 607 − 3,862 + 3,483 − 2,347 + 149 − 9,889 + 698 + 2,129         Sep + 12,626 + 15,248 − 984 − 3,001 + 4,208 − 2,845 − 170 − 17,841 + 478 + 5,385
         Oct + 15,484 + 16,962 − 1,159 − 992 + 3,913 − 3,239 + 5 + 437 + 401 − 15,927
         Nov + 17,705 + 18,133 − 1,239 − 539 + 4,075 − 2,725 − 75 − 15,702 − 102 − 1,928         Dec + 18,254 + 10,798 − 1,132 + 2,034 + 4,243 + 2,311 − 32 − 10,197 + 342 − 8,025
2007          Jan + 14,388 + 16,351 − 890 − 2,484 + 3,320 − 1,909 + 244 − 2,802 − 458 − 11,830
         Feb + 11,383 + 14,337 − 694 − 283 + 4,606 − 6,584 + 18 − 26,791 + 566 + 15,390         Mar + 20,685 + 18,695 − 937 + 281 + 5,080 − 2,433 − 106 − 26,066 − 8 + 5,487
         Apr + 13,381 + 15,182 − 557 − 205 + 898 − 1,938 + 190 − 18,970 − 1,215 + 5,399
         May + 10,320 + 17,477 − 1,210 − 1,431 − 3,739 − 777 + 298 − 29,995 − 657 + 19,377         June + 18,104 + 16,729 − 465 − 315 + 4,313 − 2,158 − 69 − 36,122 + 513 + 18,086
         July + 15,201 + 18,131 − 945 − 3,001 + 4,011 − 2,997 + 377 − 3,707 + 121 − 11,871
         Aug + 10,075 + 14,261 − 779 − 4,770 + 4,332 − 2,968 − 50 + 5,434 − 21 − 15,460         Sep + 17,359 + 18,245 − 836 − 1,600 + 4,625 − 3,075 − 10 − 15,659 − 447 − 1,689
         Oct + 15,077 + 19,060 − 761 − 2,774 + 4,617 − 5,066 − 9 − 27,934 + 309 + 12,866
         Nov + 21,416 + 19,512 − 694 − 324 + 4,627 − 1,705 − 220 − 23,043 + 339 + 1,847         Dec + 16,835 + 10,660 − 662 + 632 + 5,274 + 931 − 440 − 15,205 + 5 − 1,190
2008          Jan + 14,686 + 17,118 − 896 − 1,113 + 3,088 − 3,511 + 446 − 4,110 − 311 − 11,022
         Feb + 16,104 + 16,888 − 626 + 274 + 4,595 − 5,027 + 217 − 31,946 − 349 + 15,624         Mar  
p + 17,174 + 16,676 − 707 − 720 + 4,975 − 3,050 − 147 − 33,929 − 504 + 16,902
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2007  2008
Country / group of countries  2005  2006  2007 Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar  p 
All countries  1 Exports 786,266 893,042 969,049 88,836 87,751 73,353 84,239 84,495 83,966
Imports 628,087 733,994 770,410 69,776 68,239 62,693 67,120 67,606 67,290Balance + 158,179 + 159,048 + 198,640 + 19,060 + 19,512 + 10,660 + 17,118 + 16,888 + 16,676
I Exports 581,611 657,325 730,245 67,183 66,402 54,875 63,067 63,668 ...European countries
Imports 443,508 512,568 551,074 49,898 49,427 44,196 47,293 49,049 ...
Balance + 138,103 + 144,757 + 179,171 + 17,285 + 16,975 + 10,680 + 15,774 + 14,619 ...
Exports 505,716 564,864 627,524 57,527 56,555 46,720 54,202 54,541 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 371,136 423,731 459,892 42,214 40,613 36,006 39,118 40,258 ...
Balance + 134,580 + 141,133 + 167,632 + 15,314 + 15,941 + 10,714 + 15,084 + 14,283 ...
Euro-area (15) Exports 343,843 377,640 416,139 37,953 37,323 31,173 36,140 36,285 ...countries Imports 249,043 285,758 306,342 27,930 26,926 23,886 26,153 27,093 ...
Balance + 94,800 + 91,882 + 109,797 + 10,023 + 10,398 + 7,287 + 9,986 + 9,192 ...
of which
Austria Exports 43,305 49,512 52,763 4,849 4,719 3,932 4,321 4,524 ...
Imports 26,048 30,301 32,753 2,984 2,966 2,571 2,620 2,745 ...Balance + 17,256 + 19,211 + 20,009 + 1,865 + 1,753 + 1,361 + 1,701 + 1,778 ...
Belgium and Exports 47,512 51,141 56,013 4,950 4,750 4,168 4,915 4,926 ...
Luxembourg Imports 31,426 36,263 42,079 3,887 3,570 3,212 3,507 3,493 ...
Balance + 16,085 + 14,878 + 13,934 + 1,063 + 1,180 + 956 + 1,408 + 1,433 ...
France Exports 79,039 85,006 93,861 8,616 8,494 7,055 8,341 8,617 ...
Imports 53,700 62,102 64,912 5,994 5,373 4,691 5,658 6,181 ...Balance + 25,339 + 22,904 + 28,949 + 2,622 + 3,121 + 2,364 + 2,682 + 2,436 ...
Italy Exports 53,855 59,348 65,148 5,845 5,933 4,574 5,504 5,482 ...
Imports 36,348 41,470 44,347 4,030 3,810 3,377 3,647 3,682 ...Balance + 17,507 + 17,878 + 20,801 + 1,815 + 2,124 + 1,196 + 1,857 + 1,800 ...
Netherlands Exports 49,033 56,531 62,373 5,972 5,573 4,800 5,623 5,420 ...
Imports 51,823 60,750 64,328 5,785 5,943 5,735 5,785 5,935 ...Balance − 2,789 − 4,219 − 1,954 + 187 − 370 − 935 − 162 − 515 ...
Spain Exports 40,018 41,775 48,158 4,359 4,450 3,499 4,146 4,052 ...
Imports 18,070 19,832 21,143 1,849 1,849 1,528 1,929 1,957 ...Balance + 21,948 + 21,943 + 27,015 + 2,510 + 2,601 + 1,971 + 2,217 + 2,096 ...
Other EU member Exports 161,873 187,224 211,385 19,574 19,231 15,547 18,062 18,256 ...states Imports 122,093 137,973 153,550 14,284 13,688 12,120 12,965 13,165 ...
Balance + 39,780 + 49,251 + 57,835 + 5,291 + 5,544 + 3,426 + 5,097 + 5,090 ...
of which
United Exports 60,394 64,726 70,999 6,198 6,211 4,908 5,918 5,957 ...Kingdom Imports 39,069 40,832 43,410 3,918 3,864 3,559 3,569 3,550 ...
Balance + 21,325 + 23,895 + 27,589 + 2,280 + 2,347 + 1,348 + 2,349 + 2,407 ...
Exports 75,895 92,461 102,721 9,656 9,847 8,156 8,865 9,127 ... 2 Other European
Imports 72,372 88,837 91,181 7,685 8,813 8,190 8,175 8,790 ... countries
Balance + 3,523 + 3,625 + 11,540 + 1,971 + 1,033 − 34 + 691 + 337 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 29,629 34,782 36,355 3,280 3,416 2,746 3,252 3,184 ...
Imports 22,620 25,227 29,785 2,674 2,720 2,186 2,495 2,593 ...
Balance + 7,009 + 9,556 + 6,570 + 606 + 696 + 560 + 757 + 591 ...
II Exports 203,229 234,139 237,224 21,549 21,258 18,229 20,973 20,729 ...Non-European
Imports 183,940 220,745 220,770 20,029 18,954 18,440 19,767 18,499 ... countries
Balance + 19,289 + 13,393 + 16,454 + 1,519 + 2,303 − 211 + 1,206 + 2,230 ...
Exports 14,807 16,617 17,588 1,541 1,452 1,415 1,520 1,630 ... 1 Africa
Imports 13,762 16,734 15,682 1,471 1,362 1,483 1,645 1,712 ...
Balance + 1,045 − 117 + 1,905 + 70 + 91 − 69 − 125 − 82 ...
Exports 91,994 104,154 100,797 9,194 8,882 7,321 8,705 8,744 ... 2 America
Imports 58,574 72,163 70,354 6,026 5,900 5,656 5,841 5,520 ...
Balance + 33,420 + 31,991 + 30,443 + 3,168 + 2,982 + 1,665 + 2,864 + 3,224 ...
of which
Exports 69,299 77,991 73,356 6,689 6,565 5,281 6,308 6,440 ... United States
Imports 41,798 49,197 45,626 3,784 3,856 3,553 3,604 3,659 ...Balance + 27,501 + 28,795 + 27,730 + 2,905 + 2,708 + 1,729 + 2,704 + 2,781 ...
Exports 90,498 106,991 111,851 10,134 10,335 8,991 10,155 9,740 ... 3 Asia
Imports 109,304 128,942 132,108 12,275 11,504 11,082 12,019 11,087 ...
Balance − 18,805 − 21,951 − 20,257 − 2,141 − 1,168 − 2,090 − 1,863 − 1,348 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 20,420 22,978 23,759 2,116 2,130 2,055 2,127 2,222 ...
Imports 5,077 6,295 6,479 592 667 685 640 513 ...Balance + 15,343 + 16,682 + 17,280 + 1,524 + 1,463 + 1,370 + 1,487 + 1,709 ...
Japan Exports 13,338 13,886 13,075 1,294 1,062 940 1,208 1,130 ...
Imports 21,772 24,016 24,082 2,152 1,960 2,030 1,918 1,963 ...Balance − 8,434 − 10,130 − 11,006 − 858 − 898 − 1,090 − 710 − 832 ...
Exports 21,235 27,478 29,923 2,711 2,758 2,505 2,729 2,573 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 40,845 49,958 54,649 5,419 5,038 4,780 5,213 4,635 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 19,610 − 22,479 − 24,726 − 2,708 − 2,280 − 2,274 − 2,484 − 2,062 ...
Exports 27,538 31,619 32,298 2,951 2,935 2,416 3,027 2,738 ... Emerging markets
Imports 31,520 36,113 33,222 2,992 2,743 2,536 2,872 2,635 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 3,982 − 4,494 − 924 − 41 + 192 − 120 + 155 + 102 ...
Exports 5,930 6,377 6,988 680 588 503 593 615 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,301 2,906 2,625 257 188 219 263 179 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,629 + 3,471 + 4,363 + 422 + 399 + 284 + 330 + 436 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, region. Excluding repair and maintenance operations from January 200 7 on-
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of wards. — 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indo-
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2003 − 34,497 − 37,332 + 1,833 + 1,421 − 747 + 5,088 − 4,761 − 1,836 + 1,476 − 1,182 − 13,885
2004 − 29,341 − 35,302 + 3,870 + 1,328 − 260 + 5,349 − 4,325 − 1,363 + 986 − 989 + 21,420
2005 − 24,914 − 36,317 + 6,245 + 1,678 − 474 + 3,688 + 267 − 1,636 + 3,076 − 1,376 + 27,0632006 − 15,556 − 32,771 + 5,015 + 2,229 − 1,446 + 3,680 + 7,737 − 1,807 + 3,715 − 956 + 38,5722007 − 16,274 − 34,178 + 6,265 + 2,987 − 1,709 + 3,211 + 7,151 − 1,994 + 2,365 − 602 + 42,568
2006          Q3 − 9,386 − 13,545 + 1,457 + 435 − 606 + 821 + 2,053 − 417 + 1,085 − 711 + 11,912
         Q4 + 503 − 5,116 + 1,368 + 866 − 214 + 963 + 2,635 − 530 + 1,168 − 257 + 12,488
2007          Q1 − 2,486 − 5,456 + 1,243 + 734 − 756 + 770 + 979 − 350 + 425 + 335 + 12,672
         Q2 − 1,951 − 8,192 + 1,753 + 786 − 189 + 872 + 3,019 − 463 + 694 − 151 + 1,624         Q3 − 9,371 − 14,309 + 1,721 + 664 − 399 + 839 + 2,113 − 453 + 729 − 640 + 13,608         Q4 − 2,466 − 6,221 + 1,548 + 803 − 365 + 730 + 1,040 − 729 + 518 − 147 + 14,665
2008          Q1 − 1,559 − 5,824 + 1,598 + 928 − 433 + 788 + 1,386 − 424 + 301 + 318 + 12,339
2007          May − 1,431 − 2,823 + 457 + 280 + 20 + 287 + 347 − 147 + 214 − 52 − 3,687
         June − 315 − 3,430 + 508 + 344 + 84 + 308 + 1,870 − 192 + 269 − 44 + 4,357
         July − 3,001 − 4,530 + 572 + 253 − 331 + 289 + 747 − 176 + 208 − 204 + 4,216
         Aug − 4,770 − 5,854 + 583 + 204 + 12 + 258 + 26 − 125 + 222 − 221 + 4,553         Sep − 1,600 − 3,924 + 565 + 206 − 80 + 293 + 1,340 − 152 + 298 − 214 + 4,839
         Oct − 2,774 − 3,608 + 622 + 206 − 462 + 264 + 205 − 194 + 267 − 56 + 4,673
         Nov − 324 − 1,557 + 488 + 64 + 193 + 238 + 250 − 251 + 129 − 74 + 4,701         Dec + 632 − 1,057 + 438 + 534 − 95 + 227 + 585 − 284 + 122 − 17 + 5,291
2008          Jan − 1,113 − 1,518 + 403 + 423 − 253 + 241 − 409 − 178 + 56 + 100 + 2,988
         Feb + 274 − 1,578 + 711 + 376 + 56 + 255 + 455 − 125 + 81 + 107 + 4,488         Mar − 720 − 2,728 + 484 + 129 − 237 + 292 + 1,341 − 121 + 164 + 111 + 4,864
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2003 − 25,248 − 15,222 − 12,393 − 10,696 − 2,829 − 10,026 − 3,332 − 6,694 + 311 − 1,238 + 1,549
2004 − 27,849 − 16,694 − 14,249 − 12,672 − 2,444 − 11,156 − 3,180 − 7,976 + 435 − 1,095 + 1,529
2005 − 28,585 − 17,609 − 16,266 − 14,689 − 1,343 − 10,976 − 2,926 − 8,050 − 1,248 − 3,419 + 2,1722006 − 26,895 − 14,443 − 14,912 − 13,384 + 469 − 12,452 − 2,927 − 9,525 − 175 − 1,924 + 1,7492007 − 30,678 − 16,138 − 18,569 − 16,910 + 2,432 − 14,541 − 3,005 − 11,536 + 224 − 2,037 + 2,261
2006          Q3 − 8,141 − 5,084 − 4,707 − 4,512 − 377 − 3,057 − 732 − 2,326 − 236 − 422 + 186
         Q4 − 3,653 − 384 + 159 + 636 − 543 − 3,269 − 732 − 2,537 − 102 − 528 + 426
2007          Q1 − 10,927 − 7,665 − 7,136 − 6,533 − 529 − 3,261 − 751 − 2,510 + 157 − 292 + 448
         Q2 − 4,873 − 88 − 3,768 − 3,353 + 3,680 − 4,785 − 751 − 4,034 + 419 − 328 + 747         Q3 − 9,040 − 5,720 − 5,509 − 5,213 − 211 − 3,320 − 751 − 2,568 + 317 − 323 + 640         Q4 − 5,840 − 2,665 − 2,156 − 1,810 − 508 − 3,175 − 751 − 2,424 − 669 − 1,095 + 426
2008          Q1 − 11,588 − 8,486 − 8,283 − 7,656 − 203 − 3,101 − 756 − 2,345 + 517 − 272 + 788
2007          May − 777 + 1,534 − 1,010 − 934 + 2,544 − 2,311 − 250 − 2,060 + 298 − 105 + 403
         June − 2,158 − 940 − 1,093 − 821 + 153 − 1,218 − 250 − 968 − 69 − 124 + 56
         July − 2,997 − 1,915 − 1,776 − 1,625 − 139 − 1,082 − 250 − 831 + 377 − 109 + 486
         Aug − 2,968 − 1,839 − 1,778 − 1,659 − 60 − 1,130 − 250 − 879 − 50 − 120 + 70         Sep − 3,075 − 1,966 − 1,954 − 1,930 − 12 − 1,108 − 250 − 858 − 10 − 94 + 84
         Oct − 5,066 − 3,862 − 3,588 − 3,463 − 274 − 1,204 − 250 − 953 − 9 − 110 + 101
         Nov − 1,705 − 797 − 503 − 408 − 295 − 908 − 250 − 657 − 220 − 498 + 277         Dec + 931 + 1,995 + 1,934 + 2,061 + 61 − 1,064 − 250 − 813 − 440 − 487 + 47
2008          Jan − 3,511 − 2,468 − 2,502 − 2,282 + 34 − 1,043 − 252 − 791 + 446 − 107 + 553
         Feb − 5,027 − 3,985 − 3,653 − 3,342 − 332 − 1,042 − 252 − 790 + 217 − 84 + 302         Mar − 3,050 − 2,034 − 2,129 − 2,032 + 95 − 1,016 − 252 − 764 − 147 − 81 − 66
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2007 2008
Item 2005 2006 2007 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Jan Feb Mar
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 392,981 − 451,654 − 651,019 − 213,734 − 149,144 − 128,002 − 217,063 − 85,955 − 71,917 − 59,190
1 Direct investment  1 − 55,384 − 75,489 − 122,325 − 26,860 − 35,569 − 41,726 − 47,986 − 10,502 − 19,460 − 18,024
Equity capital − 24,715 − 56,876 − 47,152 − 13,991 − 4,590 − 23,674 − 22,400 − 6,614 − 4,767 − 11,020
Reinvested earnings  2 − 19,039 − 24,252 − 30,193 − 5,179 − 9,102 − 8,725 − 9,012 − 2,699 − 3,969 − 2,343
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors − 11,630 + 5,638 − 44,980 − 7,690 − 21,877 − 9,327 − 16,574 − 1,189 − 10,724 − 4,661
2 Portfolio investment − 204,948 − 161,339 − 133,334 − 59,338 − 1,997 − 9,579 − 29,090 − 1,459 − 14,067 − 13,563
Shares 3 − 19,948 + 6,982 + 22,739 − 2,923 + 5,073 + 6,713 + 11,377 + 3,870 + 1,750 + 5,758
Mutual fund shares  4 − 43,538 − 23,440 − 41,705 − 16,939 − 2,599 − 9,770 − 16,862 − 2,472 − 5,499 − 8,891
Bonds and notes  5 − 136,384 − 137,243 − 95,817 − 37,598 + 1,602 − 391 − 19,728 + 631 − 4,843 − 15,516
Money market instruments − 5,078 − 7,639 − 18,551 − 1,878 − 6,073 − 6,131 − 3,877 − 3,489 − 5,474 + 5,086
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 9,040 − 6,515 − 71,216 − 8,861 − 27,044 − 27,238 − 18,521 − 9,660 − 8,570 − 291
4 Other investment − 125,792 − 211,244 − 323,192 − 117,316 − 84,186 − 50,112 − 120,301 − 64,023 − 29,470 − 26,807
MFIs  7,8 − 85,773 − 207,632 − 224,809 − 86,941 − 78,386 − 10,426 − 79,727 − 31,447 − 17,380 − 30,900
Long-term − 69,969 − 71,591 − 96,773 − 24,043 − 34,437 − 24,860 − 25,452 − 810 − 13,147 − 11,495Short-term − 15,804 − 136,041 − 128,036 − 62,899 − 43,949 + 14,435 − 54,275 − 30,637 − 4,233 − 19,405
Enterprises and households − 21,118 − 29,169 − 41,032 − 8,553 − 2,541 − 12,078 − 23,289 − 16,330 + 1,204 − 8,162
Long-term − 12,093 − 24,395 − 46,867 − 11,685 − 9,735 − 15,790 − 4,953 − 2,609 − 3,967 + 1,624
Short-term  
7 − 9,025 − 4,774 + 5,835 + 3,132 + 7,195 + 3,712 − 18,335 − 13,721 + 5,171 − 9,786
General government + 3,172 + 1,068 + 8,373 − 25,165 + 26,605 − 4,020 − 1,322 + 6,392 + 2,924 − 10,638
Long-term + 7,711 + 7,497 + 257 − 219 − 7 + 703 − 367 − 235 − 119 − 13Short-term  
7 − 4,539 − 6,428 + 8,117 − 24,946 + 26,613 − 4,723 − 955 + 6,627 + 3,043 − 10,626
Bundesbank − 22,073 + 24,488 − 65,724 + 3,343 − 29,865 − 23,588 − 15,963 − 22,638 − 16,218 + 22,893
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) + 2,182 + 2,934 − 953 − 1,359 − 347 + 653 − 1,165 − 311 − 349 − 504
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 262,256 + 300,540 + 430,161 + 128,647 + 135,212 + 61,820 + 147,078 + 81,845 + 39,971 + 25,262
1 Direct investment  1 + 33,747 + 43,977 + 37,206 + 5,172 + 18,704 + 5,717 + 2,714 − 3,902 + 2,092 + 4,524
Equity capital + 26,760 + 25,297 + 23,519 + 7,226 + 11,437 − 273 + 2,281 + 1,473 + 152 + 656
Reinvested earnings  2 + 1,797 + 3,897 + 6,167 − 2,988 + 3,987 + 2,287 + 4,683 + 1,958 + 1,447 + 1,278
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors + 5,190 + 14,783 + 7,520 + 934 + 3,281 + 3,703 − 4,250 − 7,333 + 494 + 2,589
2 Portfolio investment + 174,012 + 151,028 + 267,893 + 80,902 + 49,780 + 94,636 + 7,896 + 11,722 − 5,383 + 1,558
Shares  3 + 11,821 + 20,715 + 6,216 + 8,195 − 3,111 + 7,515 − 26,117 − 15,675 + 2,491 − 12,932
Mutual fund shares + 6,013 + 8,381 + 3,685 + 1,624 + 810 + 519 − 1,448 − 1,087 + 614 − 974Bonds and notes  
5 + 159,293 + 124,745 + 207,841 + 66,823 + 32,731 + 70,317 + 18,260 + 19,440 − 8,318 + 7,138
Money market instruments − 3,115 − 2,813 + 50,151 + 4,260 + 19,350 + 16,285 + 17,201 + 9,045 − 170 + 8,326
3 Other investment + 54,497 + 105,536 + 125,062 + 42,573 + 66,728 − 38,533 + 136,468 + 74,026 + 43,262 + 19,180
MFIs  7,8 + 22,456 + 60,515 + 73,217 + 26,099 + 53,662 − 45,045 + 97,752 + 63,066 + 21,258 + 13,428
Long-term − 9,830 − 11,881 − 14,197 + 3,557 − 601 − 11,148 − 2,883 − 554 − 905 − 1,425Short-term + 32,286 + 72,397 + 87,413 + 22,542 + 54,263 − 33,897 + 100,636 + 63,620 + 22,163 + 14,853
Enterprises and households + 30,568 + 46,486 + 37,514 + 14,099 + 9,164 + 1,656 + 22,091 + 4,616 + 13,991 + 3,484
Long-term + 17,953 + 27,526 + 17,260 + 2,040 + 7,016 + 6,838 + 9,191 + 595 + 6,656 + 1,940
Short-term  
7 + 12,615 + 18,961 + 20,254 + 12,059 + 2,148 − 5,181 + 12,900 + 4,021 + 7,335 + 1,544
General government + 3,578 − 179 + 2,983 + 1,395 + 1,942 − 3,198 + 7,491 + 1,288 + 6,596 − 393
Long-term + 2,648 + 862 − 1,551 − 413 − 563 + 46 − 878 − 371 − 226 − 282Short-term  
7 + 929 − 1,040 + 4,534 + 1,808 + 2,505 − 3,245 + 8,369 + 1,658 + 6,822 − 111
Bundesbank − 2,105 − 1,287 + 11,349 + 979 + 1,960 + 8,054 + 9,133 + 5,055 + 1,417 + 2,661
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 130,725 − 151,113 − 220,859 − 85,087 − 13,931 − 66,182 − 69,985 − 4,110 − 31,946 − 33,929
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
 
 
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2006          Nov 114,116 85,307 53,218 3,048 29,040 350 27,546 914 5,273 108,843
         Dec 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007          Jan 114,714 87,385 54,853 2,998 29,534 350 26,011 969 5,415 109,299
         Feb 121,019 87,962 56,389 2,734 28,839 350 31,715 993 4,892 116,127         Mar 121,457 86,120 54,820 2,624 28,675 350 33,958 1,029 5,158 116,299
         Apr 110,112 86,731 54,837 2,578 29,316 350 22,102 930 6,300 103,811
         May 125,859 86,364 53,675 2,671 30,018 350 38,242 903 7,005 118,854         June 116,754 84,846 52,809 2,666 29,370 350 30,616 942 6,137 110,617
         July 120,334 85,125 53,446 2,594 29,085 350 33,606 1,253 6,325 114,009
         Aug 144,630 85,469 53,554 2,594 29,321 350 57,148 1,664 6,257 138,373         Sep 151,300 88,592 57,168 2,530 28,894 350 60,480 1,879 8,013 143,288
         Oct 171,237 90,168 59,549 2,475 28,144 350 78,473 2,246 10,159 161,077
         Nov 177,674 89,233 59,157 2,426 27,651 350 85,625 2,466 13,068 164,606         Dec 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008          Jan 208,663 99,028 68,255 2,398 28,376 350 106,706 2,580 21,032 187,632
         Feb 226,761 100,879 70,196 2,378 28,306 350 122,924 2,608 22,382 204,379         Mar 198,070 95,103 65,126 2,335 27,642 350 100,029 2,588 24,919 173,151
         Apr 198,225 92,633 61,352 2,345 28,935 350 102,683 2,559 25,586 172,639
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2004 377,540 98,632 278,908 159,764 119,144 112,342 6,802 506,434 50,211 456,223 361,111 95,112 63,762 31,350
2005 409,493 97,333 312,160 179,738 132,422 125,497 6,925 548,107 65,557 482,550 375,114 107,436 73,270 34,1662006 450,228 117,723 332,505 190,300 142,205 134,057 8,148 624,790 95,019 529,771 408,907 120,864 79,900 40,9642007 512,575 162,654 349,921 199,580 150,341 139,837 10,504 650,666 111,893 538,773 404,255 134,518 82,978 51,540
2007          Oct 526,599 169,870 356,729 203,550 153,179 143,174 10,005 663,262 108,201 555,061 421,843 133,218 80,845 52,373
         Nov 530,286 176,427 353,859 196,819 157,040 146,534 10,506 660,261 110,553 549,708 415,102 134,606 81,850 52,756
         Dec 512,575 162,654 349,921 199,580 150,341 139,837 10,504 650,666 111,893 538,773 404,255 134,518 82,978 51,540
2008          Jan 527,761 181,763 345,998 196,546 149,452 138,550 10,902 649,522 126,859 522,663 389,976 132,687 79,879 52,808
         Feb  
r 533,864 177,226 356,638 202,604 154,034 142,861 11,173 661,402 136,845 524,557 388,600 135,957 81,727 54,230
         Mar 544,361 183,093 361,268 203,635 157,633 146,499 11,134 669,913 130,332 539,581 401,095 138,486 83,242 55,244
Industrial countries 1
 
2004 335,809 97,485 238,324 148,649 89,675 84,903 4,772 468,592 48,304 420,288 349,293 70,995 53,480 17,515
2005 362,704 95,847 266,857 167,314 99,543 94,278 5,265 508,106 63,924 444,182 364,680 79,502 60,907 18,5952006 396,649 115,269 281,380 174,784 106,596 100,541 6,055 570,675 93,560 477,115 389,770 87,345 66,210 21,1352007 455,751 160,666 295,085 183,966 111,119 103,099 8,020 589,945 110,641 479,304 383,375 95,929 69,346 26,583
2007          Oct 470,266 167,031 303,235 189,140 114,095 106,354 7,741 602,846 106,868 495,978 400,862 95,116 68,256 26,860
         Nov 472,349 172,951 299,398 182,156 117,242 109,108 8,134 598,709 109,239 489,470 393,550 95,920 69,048 26,872
         Dec 455,751 160,666 295,085 183,966 111,119 103,099 8,020 589,945 110,641 479,304 383,375 95,929 69,346 26,583
2008          Jan 472,180 179,796 292,384 181,312 111,072 102,776 8,296 589,715 125,609 464,106 369,933 94,173 67,110 27,063
         Feb  
r 477,315 175,242 302,073 186,937 115,136 106,610 8,526 600,810 135,578 465,232 367,673 97,559 69,661 27,898
         Mar 486,440 181,076 305,364 187,720 117,644 109,224 8,420 607,588 129,089 478,499 379,481 99,018 70,532 28,486
EU member states 1
 
2004 259,480 92,867 166,613 101,254 65,359 61,563 3,796 376,461 43,838 332,623 284,173 48,450 36,494 11,956
2005 270,808 91,882 178,926 108,523 70,403 66,156 4,247 414,377 60,186 354,191 300,022 54,169 41,305 12,8642006 308,720 108,982 199,738 121,929 77,809 72,902 4,907 479,025 86,343 392,682 332,871 59,811 45,202 14,6092007 364,102 154,644 209,458 127,082 82,376 75,937 6,439 488,934 105,372 383,562 318,119 65,443 46,262 19,181
2007          Oct 383,899 161,514 222,385 138,051 84,334 78,151 6,183 499,363 102,185 397,178 331,152 66,026 46,978 19,048
         Nov 386,626 167,419 219,207 132,162 87,045 80,531 6,514 493,970 104,935 389,035 322,700 66,335 47,263 19,072
         Dec 364,102 154,644 209,458 127,082 82,376 75,937 6,439 488,934 105,372 383,562 318,119 65,443 46,262 19,181
2008          Jan 388,198 173,132 215,066 131,845 83,221 76,622 6,599 494,974 120,823 374,151 308,600 65,551 45,775 19,776
         Feb 393,110 169,305 223,805 137,350 86,455 79,699 6,756 500,151 128,508 371,643 303,946 67,697 47,298 20,399         Mar 404,372 175,052 229,320 140,730 88,590 82,018 6,572 507,705 121,940 385,765 317,004 68,761 48,023 20,738
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2004 164,160 55,995 108,165 63,310 44,855 42,231 2,624 305,864 28,295 277,569 244,860 32,709 24,258 8,451
2005 175,532 59,160 116,372 69,048 47,324 44,369 2,955 332,261 29,443 302,818 268,483 34,335 25,225 9,1102006 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 369,648 38,878 330,770 292,178 38,592 28,340 10,2522007 251,717 118,112 133,605 79,747 53,858 49,534 4,324 367,018 56,982 310,036 268,445 41,591 28,964 12,627
2007          Oct 254,508 113,189 141,319 86,609 54,710 50,396 4,314 382,509 49,964 332,545 290,435 42,110 29,565 12,545
         Nov 264,789 124,803 139,986 82,892 57,094 52,673 4,421 380,638 54,576 326,062 283,706 42,356 29,739 12,617
         Dec 251,717 118,112 133,605 79,747 53,858 49,534 4,324 367,018 56,982 310,036 268,445 41,591 28,964 12,627
2008          Jan 263,007 125,218 137,789 82,771 55,018 50,533 4,485 376,799 63,904 312,895 270,639 42,256 29,180 13,076
         Feb 269,766 126,442 143,324 86,350 56,974 52,329 4,645 383,707 72,031 311,676 268,315 43,361 29,845 13,516         Mar 281,125 132,707 148,418 90,279 58,139 53,646 4,493 384,769 68,714 316,055 271,854 44,201 30,445 13,756
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2004 41,731 1,147 40,584 11,115 29,469 27,439 2,030 37,842 1,907 35,935 11,818 24,117 10,282 13,835
2005 46,789 1,486 45,303 12,424 32,879 31,219 1,660 40,001 1,633 38,368 10,434 27,934 12,363 15,5712006 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 54,115 1,459 52,656 19,137 33,519 13,690 19,8292007 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,957
2007          Oct 56,333 2,839 53,494 14,410 39,084 36,820 2,264 60,416 1,333 59,083 20,981 38,102 12,589 25,513
         Nov 57,937 3,476 54,461 14,663 39,798 37,426 2,372 61,552 1,314 60,238 21,552 38,686 12,802 25,884
         Dec 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,957
2008          Jan 55,581 1,967 53,614 15,234 38,380 35,774 2,606 59,807 1,250 58,557 20,043 38,514 12,769 25,745
         Feb 56,549 1,984 54,565 15,667 38,898 36,251 2,647 60,592 1,267 59,325 20,927 38,398 12,066 26,332         Mar 57,921 2,017 55,904 15,915 39,989 37,275 2,714 62,325 1,243 61,082 21,614 39,468 12,710 26,758
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in May 2004, including Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, L atvia,
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia; from Jan uary
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases 2007, including Bulgaria and Romania. — 2From January 2007, including
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- Slovenia; from January 2008, including Cyprus and Malta. — 3All countries
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. — 1From that are not regarded as industrial countries. 
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2006          Mar 1.6540 1.3919 9.6581 7.4612 140.96 7.9775 9.4017 1.5691 0.68935 1.2020         Apr 1.6662 1.4052 9.8361 7.4618 143.59 7.8413 9.3346 1.5748 0.69463 1.2271
         May 1.6715 1.4173 10.2353 7.4565 142.70 7.7988 9.3310 1.5564 0.68330 1.2770         June 1.7104 1.4089 10.1285 7.4566 145.11 7.8559 9.2349 1.5601 0.68666 1.2650
         July 1.6869 1.4303 10.1347 7.4602 146.70 7.9386 9.2170 1.5687 0.68782 1.2684
         Aug 1.6788 1.4338 10.2141 7.4609 148.53 7.9920 9.2098 1.5775 0.67669 1.2811         Sep 1.6839 1.4203 10.0971 7.4601 148.99 8.2572 9.2665 1.5841 0.67511 1.2727
         Oct 1.6733 1.4235 9.9651 7.4555 149.65 8.3960 9.2533 1.5898 0.67254 1.2611
         Nov 1.6684 1.4635 10.1286 7.4564 151.11 8.2446 9.1008 1.5922 0.67397 1.2881         Dec 1.6814 1.5212 10.3356 7.4549 154.82 8.1575 9.0377 1.5969 0.67286 1.3213
2007          Jan 1.6602 1.5285 10.1238 7.4539 156.56 8.2780 9.0795 1.6155 0.66341 1.2999
         Feb 1.6708 1.5309 10.1326 7.4541 157.60 8.0876 9.1896 1.6212 0.66800 1.3074         Mar 1.6704 1.5472 10.2467 7.4494 155.24 8.1340 9.2992 1.6124 0.68021 1.3242
         Apr 1.6336 1.5334 10.4400 7.4530 160.68 8.1194 9.2372 1.6375 0.67934 1.3516
         May 1.6378 1.4796 10.3689 7.4519 163.22 8.1394 9.2061 1.6506 0.68136 1.3511         June 1.5930 1.4293 10.2415 7.4452 164.55 8.0590 9.3290 1.6543 0.67562 1.3419
         July 1.5809 1.4417 10.3899 7.4410 166.76 7.9380 9.1842 1.6567 0.67440 1.3716
         Aug 1.6442 1.4420 10.3162 7.4429 159.05 7.9735 9.3231 1.6383 0.67766 1.3622         Sep 1.6445 1.4273 10.4533 7.4506 159.82 7.8306 9.2835 1.6475 0.68887 1.3896
         Oct 1.5837 1.3891 10.6741 7.4534 164.95 7.6963 9.1735 1.6706 0.69614 1.4227
         Nov 1.6373 1.4163 10.8957 7.4543 162.89 7.9519 9.2889 1.6485 0.70896 1.4684         Dec 1.6703 1.4620 10.7404 7.4599 163.55 8.0117 9.4319 1.6592 0.72064 1.4570
2008          Jan 1.6694 1.4862 10.6568 7.4505 158.68 7.9566 9.4314 1.6203 0.74725 1.4718
         Feb 1.6156 1.4740 10.5682 7.4540 157.97 7.9480 9.3642 1.6080 0.75094 1.4748         Mar 1.6763 1.5519 10.9833 7.4561 156.59 7.9717 9.4020 1.5720 0.77494 1.5527
         Apr 1.6933 1.5965 11.0237 7.4603 161.56 7.9629 9.3699 1.5964 0.79487 1.5751
*Calculated from daily values; for additional euro reference exchange March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from 13 January to
rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. — 1Up to 29 December 2000. 
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in Stage III of European Economic and Monetary Union
Since Country Currency ISO currency code Euro 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2008
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-22  1 EER-42  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
22 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
22 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Zeit Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 95.8 96.4 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.6 97.7 98.1 98.0 97.6
2000 87.0 86.4 85.7 85.3 87.9 85.8 91.4 96.8 85.1 91.0 92.8 91.8 90.8
2001 87.7 87.1 86.5 84.9 90.4 87.1 91.1 95.6 85.8 90.3 92.9 91.3 90.8
2002 90.1 90.4 89.6 88.2 94.9 91.0 91.8 94.7 88.4 90.8 93.6 92.0 91.92003 100.6 101.4 100.4 99.3 106.8 101.9 95.3 93.7 97.4 94.5 97.3 96.6 96.92004 104.4 105.1 103.4 103.5 111.2 105.6 95.8 92.6 100.1 95.0 98.8 98.2 98.6
2005 103.3 104.2 102.2 101.8 109.7 103.7 94.7 91.2 99.3 93.2 98.9 97.4 97.3
2006 103.6 104.6 102.2 101.3 110.0 103.4 93.9 89.8 99.4 92.2 99.1 97.2 96.82007 107.7 108.3 105.7 104.5 114.2 106.6
p 95.3 p 89.0 103.9 p 93.2 101.7 99.2 98.6
2004          July 103.4 104.1 110.3 104.8 98.4 97.7 98.1
         Aug 103.2 104.1 102.2 102.3 110.2 104.7 95.4 92.5 99.2 94.5 98.5 97.7 98.2
         Sep 103.6 104.4 110.5 104.9 98.6 97.7 98.2
         Oct 104.7 105.5 111.8 106.1 99.0 98.1 98.6
         Nov 106.0 106.7 104.6 104.8 113.3 107.4 96.1 92.1 101.6 95.0 99.5 98.6 99.2         Dec 107.3 108.3 114.7 108.8 100.3 99.4 100.0
2005          Jan 106.2 106.9 113.2 107.1 99.8 98.7 99.0
         Feb 105.4 106.2 104.8 104.5 112.2 106.2 96.1 91.7 102.1 94.7 99.5 98.2 98.5         Mar 106.2 107.0 113.1 107.0 99.9 98.7 98.9
         Apr 105.3 106.0 112.2 105.9 99.3 98.1 98.3
         May 104.3 105.2 102.7 102.5 110.9 104.8 94.9 91.4 99.6 93.6 99.1 97.9 97.8         June 101.6 102.6 107.9 102.1 98.1 96.6 96.4
         July 102.2 103.1 108.2 102.3 98.3 96.8 96.5
         Aug 102.7 103.6 101.1 100.5 108.9 103.0 94.2 91.1 98.3 92.7 98.7 97.1 96.8         Sep 102.1 103.1 108.4 102.5 98.7 97.0 96.8
         Oct 101.8 102.8 107.9 102.0 98.4 96.7 96.4
         Nov 101.1 102.1 100.3 99.6 107.0 101.0 93.4 90.6 97.2 91.9 98.2 96.4 95.8         Dec 101.2 102.2 107.1 101.0 98.4 96.5 95.9
2006          Jan 101.8 102.7 107.7 101.4 98.4 96.4 95.8
         Feb 101.2 102.1 100.3 100.0 106.8 100.6 93.3 90.0 97.7 91.7 98.2 96.2 95.4         Mar 101.9 103.0 107.6 101.4 98.4 96.5 95.7
         Apr 103.0 104.1 108.8 102.5 98.9 97.0 96.3
         May 104.0 104.9 102.5 102.3 110.5 103.9 94.1 90.0 99.7 92.5 99.1 97.3 97.0         June 104.2 105.1 111.1 104.4 99.1 97.5 97.4
         July 104.5 105.4 111.3 104.6 99.3 97.7 97.5
         Aug 104.6 105.4 102.9 102.3 111.3 104.5 94.0 89.6 99.8 92.4 99.2 97.5 97.2         Sep 104.4 105.2 111.1 104.3 99.1 97.3 97.0
         Oct 103.9 104.8 110.4 103.7 99.2 97.2 96.8
         Nov 104.5 105.4 102.9 100.7 111.2 104.3 94.1 89.4 100.5 92.3 99.8 97.6 97.3         Dec 105.6 106.3 112.3 105.2 100.2 98.0 97.7
2007          Jan 104.9 105.7 111.5 104.4 100.3 98.1 97.6
         Feb 105.4 106.2 103.7 102.2 111.9 104.8 94.6 89.3 101.7 92.7 100.5 98.3 97.8         Mar 106.1 106.8 112.8 105.4 100.8 98.5 98.0
         Apr 107.2 107.8 113.7 106.3 101.4 99.0 98.5
         May 107.3 107.9 105.2 104.3 113.6 106.1 95.5 89.5 103.7 93.5 101.5 99.0 98.4         June 106.9 107.4 113.2 105.6 101.3 98.7 98.1
         July 107.6 108.1 113.9 106.2 101.8 99.1 98.5
         Aug 107.1 107.7 105.6 104.4 113.7 106.0
p 95.2 p 88.9 103.8 p 93.1 101.4 98.8 98.2
         Sep 108.2 108.9 114.8 107.0 102.1 99.5 98.9
         Oct 109.4 110.1 115.8 107.9 102.6 99.8 99.1
         Nov 111.0 111.7 108.2 107.0 117.6 109.6 p 95.9 p 88.4 106.4 p 93.6 103.6 100.8 100.3
         Dec 111.2 111.7 117.6 109.4 103.5 100.5 99.9
2008          Jan 112.0 112.3 118.3 109.9 103.6 100.5 99.9
         Feb 111.8 111.9 ... ... 118.2 109.5 p 96.4 p 88.0 p 108.3 p 94.1 103.6 100.3 99.7
         Mar 114.6 115.0 121.5 112.9 104.6 101.5 101.1
         Apr 116.0 116.6 123.1 114.4 105.4 102.0 101.7
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the trade in manufactured goods between 1999 and 2001 and reflect
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the third-market effects. Where price and wage indices were not available,
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations. This group includes not only the
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see countries belonging to the EER-22 group (see footnote 1) but also Algeria,Monthly Report, November 2001, pp  51-65 and May 2007, pp  32-37). For Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Mala ysia,
details of the methodology see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, September 2004, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, Southpp  69-72 as well as the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2, which can be down- Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. — 3Annual and quarterly
loaded from the ECB’s website (www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures averages. — 4Euro-area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007
implies an increase in competitiveness. — 1ECB calculations are based on including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta) as well as the
the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the non-euro-area countries (Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,euro against the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Ca- Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States). — 5Euro-area countries
nada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kong, Hungary, and countries belonging to the EER-22 group. — 6Owing to missing data
Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, Slovakia, for the deflators of total sales, China and Singapore are not included in th is
South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. The calculation. — 7Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-42
weights used in these calculations during the period shown are based on group (see footnote 2). 
76*XI  External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic and
statistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are available
in both English and German, in printed
form and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a
file which is updated monthly and
contains approximately 40,000 time
series published by the Bundesbank
can be obtained on magnetic tape cas-
sette or CD-ROM from the Division
Statistical data processing, math-
ematical methods. Orders should be
sent, in writing, to one of the ad-
dresses listed on the reverse of the title
page. Selected time series can also be
downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2007 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2008 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008

Monthly Report articles
June 2007
– Investment and financing in 2006
– Current account balances and price com-
petitiveness in the euro area
July 2007
– The relationship between monetary develop-
ments and the real estate market
– Trends in local government finances since 2000
– Primary and secondary markets for German
public sector debt instruments: institutional
framework, trading systems and their rele-
vance for Germany as a financial centre
August 2007
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2007
September 2007
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2006
– Private consumption in Germany since reunifi-
cation
October 2007
– Globalisation and monetary policy
– Advances in strengthening the economy’s
growth potential
– Reform of German budgetary rules
– TARGET2 – the new payment system for
Europe
November 2007
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2007December 2007
– Outlook for the German economy: macroeco-
nomic projections for 2008 and 2009
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2006
– The current status of banks’ internal risk man-
agement and the assessment of capital ad-
equacy under the Supervisory Review Process
January 2008
– The microstructure approach to exchange rate
theory
– Integrated sectoral and overall balance sheets
for Germany
February 2008
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2007-08
March 2008
– German balance of payments in 2007
– Macroeconomic effects of changes in real ex-
change rates
April 2008
– Ten years of monetary policy cooperation in
the Eurosystem
– Price and volume effects of VAT increase on
1 January 2007
– Outlook for Germany’s statutory pension insur-
ance scheme
May 2008
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2008
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)
5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19962
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 19972
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19992
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20032
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-
rungsunion, April 20052
European economic and monetary union,
September 2005
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20062
Special Statistical Publications*o
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200332 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, December 20072, 4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20002, 5
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2006,
July 20075
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
20065
6 Ratios from financial statements of German
enterprises 2004 to 2005, February 20085
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, February 20052
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics,
April 20081, 5
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2007
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20062
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2008
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available in German only.
3Solely available on the website, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Stat-
istics”, “External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
4Available on the website only (updated on a quarterly
basis).
5Available on the website only.*Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail-
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng-
lish.
oNot available on the website.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2008
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
34/2007
Factor-MIDAS for now- and forecasting with
ragged-edge data: a model comparison for Ger-
man GDP
35/2007
Monetary policy and core inflation
01/2008
Can capacity constraints explain asymmetries of
the business cycle?
02/2008
Communication, decision-making and the optimal
degree of transparency of monetary policy com-
mittees
03/2008
The impact of thin-capitalization rules on multi-
nationals’ financing and investment decisions
04/2008
Comparing the DSGE model with the factor
model: an out-of-sample forecasting experiment
05/2008
Financial markets and the current account – emer-
ging Europe versus emerging Asia
06/2008
The German sub-national government bond
market: evolution, yields and liquidity
07/2008
Integration of financial markets and national price
levels: the role of exchange rate volatility
08/2008
Business cycle evidence on firm entrySeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
03/2008
Monetary policy and bank distress: an integrated
micro-macro approach
04/2008
Estimating asset correlations from stock prices or
default rates – which method is superior?
05/2008
Rollover risk in commercial paper markets and
firms’ debt maturity choice
06/2008
The success of bank mergers revisited – an assess-
ment based on a matching strategy
07/2008
Which interest rate scenario is the worst one for a
bank? Evidence from a tracking bank approach for
German savings and cooperative banks
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, January 20082
2a Solvabilit/C228ts- und Liquidit/C228tsverordnung, Feb-
ruary 20082
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Mark
or more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the website.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

