MONTHLY REPORT
AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER
2009
Vol 61
No 8

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 -0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 4:30 pm on 18 August 2009.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
bank can be downloaded from our website.
The statistical data are also published on the
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,
by virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank
Act. It is available to interested parties free of
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-
tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
ContentsThe current economic situation
in Germany 5
Overview 6
Global and European setting 12
Foreign trade in the four major
euro-area countries in the wake
of the global recession 20
Monetary policy and banking business 24
Money market management and
liquidity needs 26
Financial markets 37
Eurosystem purchases of covered
bonds – implications for the German
Pfandbrief market 44
Economic conditions in Germany 47
Publication of a comprehensive
real-time database for the
German economy 50
Marked fluctuations in milk prices:
causes and future developments 60
Public finances 66
Annex: Statistical recording of financial
market stabilisation measures in
connection with the Maastricht deficit
and debt levels 77
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 5*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem 16*
Banks 20*
Minimum reserves 42*
Interest rates 43*
Capital market 48*
Financial accounts 52*
Public finances in Germany 54*
Economic conditions in Germany 61*
External sector 68*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*
Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
5The current economic
situation in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
6OverviewCyclical downswing comes to a halt
The world economy appears to have bot-
tomed out in the second quarter of 2009.
One sign is that a number of emerging mar-
ket economies, in particular China, grew at
a markedly accelerated pace or returned to
growth. Another is that the contractionary in-
fluences in the industrialised countries weak-
ened substantially. This was mainly because
manufacturing output, which has been espe-
cially hard hit by the recession, picked up
somewhat in the course of the second quar-
ter, after dragging down gross domestic
product (GDP) in the latter part of 2008 and
first part of 2009.
The tendency towards a worldwide economic
recovery may be even more pronounced in
the second half of 2009. This view is support-
ed by the distinct global improvement, in par-
ticular, of expectation components in surveys
among firms and households alike. Among
other things, the brighter sentiment is a re-
flection of the burgeoning effects of the fiscal
stimulus programmes, the highly expansion-
ary monetary policy stance and the extensive
financial market stabilisation measures. How-
ever, the fact that the worldwide shock to
confidence has eased somewhat, but has by
no means been overcome, argues against a
strong recovery in the second half of 2009.
What is more, banks in the industrial coun-
tries, whose capital base has already been
eroded – in some cases substantially – by the
financial crisis, could encounter further strains
in the event of a cyclically induced deterior-
ation of credit quality.Global
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
7The international financial markets began
to regain confidence during the reportingperiod. Increasingly up-beat economic indica-tors, government aid for the financial sectorand supportive measures by central banks ig-nited a recovery. Against the backdrop of asomewhat stronger risk appetite, market par-ticipants apparently reversed their previousportfolio shifts into safe assets and becamemore active in the stock markets, thus signifi-cantly boosting share prices worldwide.
At the same time, financing conditions for
European enterprises improved appreciably intandem with the resurgent financial marketsand diminishing uncertainty. Corporate bondswith the lowest investment grade rating,BBB, saw their spreads narrow substantiallyafter reaching record values towards the endof the first quarter, and there was a markeddecline in absolute yields, too. This easing offinancing conditions reflects receding creditrisk spreads, while lower liquidity premiumsare likely to have been a further contributoryfactor. Compared with their long-term aver-age, corporate bond spreads nevertheless re-main at a relatively high level.
In the foreign exchange markets the euro lost
a little value against 21 major currencies onbalance vis-/C224-vis the end of the first quarter.Gains against the US dollar, the Chineserenminbi and the Japanese yen were morethan offset by losses against the pound ster-ling and some commodity currencies as wellas central and east European currencies.
In the second quarter of 2009, a favourable
price climate combined with firmly anchoredinflation expectations gave the Governing
Council of the ECB scope to lower its keyinterest rate in April and May by a further0.25 percentage point in each case to cur-rently 1%.
The cut in the main refinancing rate was ac-
companied by the Governing Council’s deci-sion to launch a programme to purchaseeuro-denominated covered bank bonds foran amount of 360 billion in order to stabilise
liquidity conditions in the European bankingsystem over the long term as well. Moreover,the Governing Council decided to offer threeadditional refinancing transactions with a ma-turity of 12 months and at a fixed interestrate up to December 2009. With the firstlong-term refinancing transaction of thiskind, the Eurosystem on 25 June 2009 pro-vided 1,121 credit institutions with a total of3442.2 billion at a rate of 1%.
The European credit institutions’ very com-
fortable liquidity situation following the allot-ment of this twelve-month tender led to arenewed distinct decline in money marketrates. Longer-term money market rates,too, again fell noticeably on the back ofthe twelve-month tender. The measure wastherefore exceptionally successful.
Monetary expansion in the euro area con-
tinued to weaken in the second quarter of2009, albeit at a slower pace. As in the previ-ous two quarters, the weak underlying mon-etary momentum must be seen in connec-tion, above all, with continued muted creditgrowth. In particular, lending to non-financialcorporations again experienced an acceler-
Financial
market setting
Monetary
policy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
8ated decrease. This was due to the steep de-
cline in unsecuritised loans with a maturity of
up to one year, whereas medium to long-
term loans still rose slightly. According to the
Bank Lending Survey, the decline in loan dy-
namics reflects both the fall in demand from
corporate borrowers and the tightening of
banks’ supply standards.
In line with the improved global economic
setting, the cyclical downward movement of
German economic activity came to a halt in
the second quarter of 2009. According to a
flash estimate by the Federal Statistical Office,
real GDP in the second three months of 2009
rose slightly by 0.3% quarter on quarter
in seasonally and calendar-adjusted terms.
Calendar-adjusted output was down 5.9%
year-on-year in the reporting period. Plant
capacity utilisation at firms remained excep-
tionally low and was accompanied by high
underutilisation of the workforce. According
to leading indicators, a further marked pick-
up in overall economic output is possible in
the third quarter from a low level.
However, a high degree of uncertainty con-
tinues to prevail. Both in Germany and inter-
nationally, expansionary monetary and fiscal
policies in particular are currently having a
bearing. Yet given the German economy’s
specialisation profile, an endogenously sus-
tained recovery process depends primarily on
continued and broadly based stimuli from ex-
ports. This is reinforced by the fact that enter-
prises’ propensity to invest is likely to remain
weak and consumption could turn out to be
less resilient during the remainder of 2009.
As foreign demand has perked up, however,one of the key conditions is in place for fur-
ther boosting corporate confidence. If this
picture is confirmed and enterprises gear
their investment and staff management plan-
ning to this brighter outlook, the monetary
and fiscal policy stimuli might have had a sta-
bilising effect at just the right time, and the
extension of short-time working would have
fulfilled a bridging function towards sustain-
ing a high employment level.
In the second quarter, Germany’s exporting
enterprises initially saw their external business
shrink further following the weak result post-
ed in the first quarter of 2009. However, the
drop in exports was much more muted than
in the previous two quarters. Moreover, first
demand stimuli came from east Asia in recent
months.
With capacity utilisation at exceptionally low
levels, enterprises again invested less in ma-
chinery and equipment in seasonally adjusted
terms in the second quarter than in the first.
However, the downward movement slowed
down noticeably after the sharpest decline
since German reunification had been record-
ed in the preceding three months. Construc-
tion investment is likely to have posted a
marked increase in the second quarter. On
the one hand, this was fuelled by a natural
counterswing to weather-related losses in
January and February. On the other hand,
construction activity also received impetus
from a spate of public-sector orders, even
though the financial resources earmarked for
infrastructure projects in the fiscal stimulus
packages have had only a minor impact on
demand so far.German
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
9The cyclical restraint in investing in machinery
and equipment is largely due to the signifi-cant capacity underutilisation at present. This,in turn, lowers demand for external finan-cing. Consequently, bank lending to non-financial enterprises fell sharply again in thesecond quarter. The Bank Lending Survey in-dicates that credit standards, too, were tight-ened further in Germany in the reportingperiod, albeit to a lesser extent than in thetwo previous quarters. The most importantdeterminant of the, on the whole, slackeninglending dynamics is probably still the weakcyclical momentum, which is leading in par-ticular to a drop in demand for short-termcredit financing for current operational ex-penditure. The available data still show nosign of a broad-based credit crunch in Ger-many.
What is more, since the late 1990s, German
firms have significantly bolstered their finan-cial robustness and built up considerablereserves. Between 1998 and 2007, for ex-ample, they raised their equity capital and re-turn on sales ratios perceptibly and lightenedtheir interest burden. Another key factor inbuilding up resilience to crisis situations hasbeen that, in the past years of buoyant eco-nomic activity, undercapitalised firms not onlypositioned themselves more strongly in abso-lute terms, but also narrowed the gap be-tween themselves and enterprises with asounder equity base. In the present context itis important, moreover, that construction andthe retail trade – sectors in which a largenumber of firms typically face a high risk ofinsolvency during a recession – are benefitingmost from the fiscal policy stimuli.As in the first quarter, household spending in
the second quarter of 2009 is likely to haveposted an increase in seasonally adjustedterms. Thus, consumption in Germany is re-markable in continuing to defy the negativeeffects of the global economic and financialcrisis. The raft of stabilisation measures suc-cessfully averted the undermining of confi-dence in the functional viability of the finan-cial sector. Moreover, the fiscal programmesfocused, inter alia , on strengthening house-
holds’ disposable income. Numerous tax reliefmeasures and additional transfer paymentswere adopted which appreciably boosted thedisposable income of households in the firsthalf of 2009. Finally, arrangements extendingshort-time working offered firms strong in-centives to resort less to laying off employees.As a result, the risk of unemployment has sofar not been uppermost in households’ mindswhen assessing their economic prospects.
While firms responded to the sharp, crisis-
induced fall in output levels with further staff-ing cut-backs in the second quarter of 2009,job losses have largely been concentrated inthree sectors so far. In manufacturing, whichhas been especially hard hit by the global de-mand shock, the number of employees sub-ject to social security contributions fell sharplymeasured over twelve months. The declinewas even more pronounced in the sector“other business services”, which also coversall subcontracted workers irrespective of thesector in which they work. In the logistics sec-tor, too, which also has very close links withmanufacturing, employment was cut backperceptibly.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
10However, much of the impact that the mas-
sive economic slump was expected to have
on the labour market has so far largely been
cushioned by reducing the number of hours
worked per employee. Whereas in the first
quarter of 2009, firms focused on trimming
overtime, running down working time ac-
counts and reducing the working week,
short-time working has again gained in im-
portance in the meantime. Conversely, regis-
tered unemployment has grown relatively
moderately to date, rising quarter-on-quarter
by a seasonally adjusted 130,000 to 3.47 mil-
lion persons in the second quarter of 2009
after an increase by 139,000 in the first three
months.
Turning to price developments in Germany,
the decline in factory gate prices continued at
a slower pace in the second quarter of 2009.
By contrast, consumer prices rose slightly in
seasonally adjusted terms, after falling in the
previous two quarters. The year-on-year rate
eased further in the second quarter. Con-
sumer prices were down again in July, also in
seasonally adjusted terms, and the year-on-
year rate was negative for the first time in
22 years. This was due mainly to the fact that
the sharp energy and food price hikes in the
second half of 2007 and the first half of
2008, which drove the annual rise in the con-
sumer price index to 3.3% towards the mid-
dle of 2008, have been partly reversed since
then. In the months ahead, against the back-
drop of favourable overall price develop-
ments, the negative year-on-year rate may
first be expected to decline, followed by a re-
turn to slightly positive annual rates later in
the year.The state of public finances is deteriorating
dramatically in the current year. Whereas a
virtually balanced general government budget
was recorded for 2008, this year’s deficit is
likely to rise above 3% of GDP and thus ex-
ceed the ceiling stipulated by the EC Treaty.
This is due, first, to the direct impact of
the cyclical downturn on public finances. It
should be borne in mind, however, that ac-
tual earnings and private consumption, both
of which are particularly important to public
finances, are currently experiencing a far
more favourable development than GDP it-
self, and that growth in unemployment is
likely to remain limited on an annual average.
Nevertheless, there are indications of an ex-
ceptionally sharp decline in revenue from
profit-related taxes that is far more severe
than the regular macroeconomic reference
variable would suggest and should be regard-
ed as a counterswing to the unusually high
growth seen in the past few years. Second,
extensive deficit-increasing measures, espe-
cially the fiscal stimulus packages, which will
represent a total of around 11/C254% of GDP in
2009, are having an impact. General govern-
ment debt will shoot up to 313/C254trillion and
could reach almost 75% of GDP . In addition
to the substantial budget deficit itself, the
drop in nominal GDP and the measures sup-
porting financial institutions – which are not
reflected in the deficit – are driving factors in
this context.
The public finance situation will take a further
sharp turn for the worse in the year ahead.
Thus the debt ratio could rise to a new high
of around 80%, while the deficit ratio could
reach approximately 6%. This primarily re-Public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
11flects the extensive automatic stabilisers and
the discretionary fiscal stabilisation measureswhich – given the exceptional dimensions ofthe economic downturn – are of a justifiablemagnitude. At the same time, however, astrong need for consolidation is building up.The deficit forecast for 2010 is due only to alesser extent to temporary measures and ef-fects or to cyclical factors. Instead, the struc-tural deficits which already existed in 2008,when the overall economic situation was stillfavourable for public finances, will be drivenup by permanent cuts in taxes and social con-tributions and an appreciable increase in the
structural expenditure ratio. Without fiscalconsolidation, the general government debtratio would continue to expand rapidly, lead-ing to a swift rise in the interest burden andfurther limiting scope for fiscal policy action.Moreover, both the European fiscal rules andthe new national budgetary rules now en-shrined in the constitution stringently requirethat the deficits be resolutely scaled back.Thus, fiscal policymakers will find themselvesconfronted with a major consolidation task inthe coming legislative period.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
12Global and
European settingWorld economic activity
The world economy is likely to have bot-
tomed out in the second quarter of 2009.
One sign of this is that some emerging mar-
ket economies, particularly China, have either
visibly stepped up their growth rate or have
returned to growth. In addition, contraction-
ary pressure has diminished considerably in
the industrial world. In the second quarter,
gross domestic product (GDP), according to
initial estimates based on data for most major
economies and the euro area, was down only
minimally on the quarter after seasonal ad-
justment, compared with a slide of 13/C254% and
21/C254% in the two preceding quarters. Total
output was down by 43/C254% on the year. The
main reason for the slower pace of decline in
economic activity was that manufacturing
output, which was at the heart of the reces-
sion, rebounded somewhat in the advanced
economies over the course of the second
quarter after having represented a major
drag on overall economic growth in 2008
Q4-2009 Q1. A key role was played by both
the revival of export orders and the growing
demand-side impact of the government eco-
nomic stabilisation programmes. In addition,
the calm price environment had a stabilising
effect.
The trend toward a cyclical recovery could
grow even stronger in the second half of the
year, as is indicated by the perceptible world-
wide improvement in, above all, the expect-
ations component in surveys of firms and
households. As a case in point, the ifo climate
indicator for the world economy rose in the
second quarter of 2009 for the first timeWorld economy
at cyclical
trough
Signs of
moderate
second-half
upturn

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
13since the fourth quarter of 2007. However,
the more favourable six-month-ahead expect-ations contrasted once again with a poorerassessment of the current situation. TheGlobal Purchasing Manager’s Index has like-wise trended upwards in the past fewmonths, with the manufacturing industry in-dicator, in particular, seeing an improvement.The increasingly noticeable positive effects ofthe economic stimulus packages, the very ex-pansionary monetary policy and the extensivefinancial market stabilisation measures areall factors contributing to the brighter mood.However, one reason why the second half of2009 might not see an exceptionally strongrecovery is that, although the global shock toconfidence has lost some of its sting, it has byno means been overcome altogether. In add-ition, the banks in the industrial nations,which already sustained, in some cases, se-vere capital losses on account of the financialcrisis, could come under increasing straincaused by the recession-induced deterior-ation of credit quality; this would tend todampen their enthusiasm to engage in com-mercial lending.
Given recent mounting positive signals from
business indicators, in early July the Inter-national Monetary Fund (IMF) revised its April2009 forecast for world GDP . It was owing to
the very poor first-quarter result that the2009 forecast was still revised slightly down-ward to -1.4%. The trend rate for the periodfrom the fourth quarter of 2008 to the end of2009, however, has been raised visibly from
-0.6% to 0.0%, implying a perceptible end-2009 growth overhang. In addition, the trendrate for 2010 was increased from +2.6%Overall economic output
in industrial countries *
* The United States, Japan, the United King-
dom and the euro area.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009–2.5–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5
00.51.01.52.0
++++
–1.5–1.0–0.50
00.51.01.5
+++
–3.5–3.0–2.5–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50
00.51.01.5
+++
–2.5–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50
2.52.01.51.00.500.51.01.5
–––––+++Seasonally adjusted,
quarter-on-quarter change
Industrial countries
United States
Japan
United Kingdom
Euro area%%%%
%%%%
IMF forecasts
favourable
trends for 2009
and 2010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
14to +2.9%, resulting in an annual average
growth rate of 2.5%, compared with +1.9%
in the April forecast. The 2009 projections for
the industrial economies and for the emer-
ging market economies were, at -3.8% and
+1.5% respectively, virtually confirmed, and
the 2010 projections were increased roughly
in sync to +0.6% and +4.7% respectively.
Among the industrial countries, Japan and
the USA, in particular, are seen by the IMF to
have a better outlook for growth in 2010
than estimated early in the second quarter.
For the emerging market economies, the up-
ward corrections were focused on the south
and east Asian countries, Russia, and a few
isolated Latin American nations, including
Mexico. In the wake of the strong first-
quarter contraction, the forecast for global
trade growth in 2009 was revised down-wards once again, by 1.2 percentage points,
to -12.2%; however, for 2010 it was revised
upward by 0.4 percentage point to +1.0%.
The IMF still sees risks as being tilted towards
the downside, although the tail risks have di-
minished. For the July update, the assumed
price for key oil blends was revised upwards
perceptibly to US$601/C252(2009) and US$741/C252
(2010).
Spot prices for crude oil, which had already
rebounded noticeably from their last low
point (US$40 for a barrel of Brent) in the
period from the second half of February to
the end of March, continued their sharp rise
in the second quarter, fluctuating around the
US$70 mark in mid-June. On an average of
the second quarter, the price was 30% higher
than in the first quarter, yet it was still down
by about one-half on the year. One key rea-
son was that the OPEC production cutbacks
were being implemented more rigorously
than in earlier periods of weak business activ-
ity. Another was that signs of a speedy Chi-
nese recovery and positive business activity
signals from the United States fuelled expect-
ations that global demand for oil would soon
rebound strongly. Following a July setback,
Brent quotations returned to somewhat over
the US$70 mark in the first two weeks of
August. The yield curve remained sharply
pointed upwards, indicating a visible rise in oil
prices over the medium and longer term.
Industrial raw materials prices, denominated
in US dollars, likewise rose considerably in the
second quarter. Their average over the April
to June period was up by 101/C252% on the
quarter but still down 391/C252% on the year.World market prices for 
crude oil and industrial raw 
materials as well as food, 
beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  — 
= 14 August 2009.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 200980100125150175200250300400500US dollar basis, 2000 = 100, log scale
Crude oil 
(Brent)
Industrial raw materialsFood, beverages 
and tobaccoCrude oil prices
tending
towards
stabilisation
after rising
sharply
Prices for other
commodities
diverging since
mid-year

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
15Sharply increasing prices for non-ferrous
metals, caused for their part by the spike indemand from China, were the main reason.The relatively low prices at the beginning ofthe second quarter had apparently been usedfor a considerable replenishment of inventor-ies in China. After mid-year, industrial rawmaterials prices continued their climb at amore moderate pace. Over the course of theApril-May period, prices for food, beveragesand tobacco rose by 16
1/C254%. In mid-June a
correction set in, amounting to -103/C254%b y
the end of the period. This was mainly caused
by falling prices of grain and oilseeds due,
above all, to forecasts of improved harvests.
For the coming ten years, the OECD and theFAO expect the agricultural commodity prices
to tend to level off below the peak reached in2008.
The increases in the price of crude oil and
other commodities impacted distinctly onconsumer price inflation in June in theindustrial countries, with headline consumerprice inflation, having remained virtually un-changed in April and May, rising in June by aseasonally adjusted 0.5%, owing mainly tohigher fuel prices. Average inflation for thequarter was up by 0.2% on the precedingperiod, which had still seen prices fall by0.5%. Year-on-year inflation, however, fellfrom +0.7% in the first quarter to -0.2% inthe second. This figure contains base effectscaused by energy and food prices, which rosesharply up until the beginning of the thirdquarter of 2008. For this reason, as well asbecause of the dropping off of fuel prices,year-on-year inflation is likely to have beennegative in July, too. On average for 2009,consumer prices in the industrial world areforecast by the IMF in its July update to re-
main virtually stable (+0.1%) and to pick upby 0.9% in 2010.
Economic activity in the major emerging mar-
ket economies was once again highly uneven
in the second quarter. Recessionary pressureremained strong in Russia where, accordingto official information, second-quarter real
GDP was down by 11% on the period afterhaving already fallen by 9
3/C254% in the first
quarter. This even outdid the sharp declinerecorded during the Russian crisis of 1998.
The protracted slump in total output is likely
to be due mainly to the considerable contrac-tion in investment, including inventories. Pri-
vate consumption likewise tended to slump,with a continued high inflation rate of 12.6%in the past quarter having played its part.Moderate cyclical relief is in sight for thesecond half of the year, not least owing to ex-
pectations of higher revenue from energyand commodity exports. For 2009 the IMF ex-pects a 6
1/C252% decline in real GDP followed by
growth of 11/C252% in 2010.
In Brazil, by contrast, the upswing in the
manufacturing sector that had already beenemerging at the beginning of the year con-
tinued. In the second quarter, output was upby 3
1/C252% on the quarter but down by 121/C254%
on the year. Government financial incentives
to purchase new cars were one of the fac-
tors contributing to the revival. By contrast,
Mexico’s economy is likely to have continuedto shrink in the second quarter. One reason is
Mexico’s tight economic links with the USmanufacturing sector, especially car makers.Negative
inflation in
industrial
countriesStrongcontraction
in Russia, ...
... mixed
picture in the
large Latin
American
countries, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
16Another is that the outbreak of influenza
A (H1N1) temporarily paralysed economic ac-
tivity. Argentina is likewise in a period of
weak economic activity, though the slump
does not appear to be very pronounced. Con-
sumer price inflation in all three countries,
however, has receded only slightly from its
peak in the fourth quarter of 2008, to 5.4%
in Mexico, 5.5% in Argentina and 4.7% in
Brazil.Cyclical recovery has made the strongest pro-
gress in China and some other Asian emer-
ging market economies. After having already
expanded perceptibly in the first quarter after
seasonal adjustment (according to official
Chinese figures), China’s economy picked up
the pace of growth in the second quarter.
Year-on-year GDP growth therefore acceler-
ated from 6% in the first quarter to 8% in
the second. A strong increase in public infra-
structure and housing investment made a key
contribution, whereas exports have not yet
regained their footing. Private consumption
was supported not only by government in-
centives but also by a steady decline in con-
sumer prices, which in July were down by
1.8% on the year. Since economic growth is
currently being fuelled mainly by fiscal policy
measures and by a strongly expansionary
monetary and lending policy, the sustainabil-
ity of the upswing is by no means assured.
The slide of the US economy diminished dis-
tinctly in the second quarter, with real GDP
falling in the second quarter, according to
preliminary calculations, by only1/C254% (after
seasonal adjustment) on the first quarter, in
which it had dropped by 11/C252%. Following a
slight rise in the first quarter, real private
consumption in the second quarter was
down by1/C254% quarter-on-quarter. This is at-
tributable to diverging influences. Although
the recession-induced decline in labour in-
come has been slightly overcompensated by
increased transfer payments and a reduction
in the direct tax burden, households’ saving
ratio was up by 11/C254percentage points in the
second quarter to 51/C254%, a rate last seen in2008 200930369
–+++Year-on-year change
%
%
%%%
RussiaBrazilIndiaChinaConsumer prices
in selected emerging
market economies
0+3+6+9+12
036
++
03691215
+++++0+3+6Mexico
Sources: national statistics and OECD.
Deutsche Bundesbank... but
significant
recovery in
China
United States

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
17the third quarter of 1998.1An additional fac-
tor that adversely affected consumer demand
was the perceptible rise in energy prices in
the second quarter, which contributed in key
measure to the seasonally adjusted 0.3% in-crease in the consumer price index from its
level in the first quarter, in which it had fallenby 0.6%. However, owing to the aforemen-tioned base effect, annual inflation slid clearlyinto the negative zone (-1.2%). It is note-worthy that the considerable deterioration in
the labour market situation has led neither togreat uncertainty among consumers nor tomajor income losses. Non-farm payroll em-ployment in the United States continued itsrapid descent, and from March to July theunemployment rate rose by one percentagepoint to 9.4%.
The growth-dampening effects projected by
investment diminished perceptibly in thesecond quarter, with the decline in commer-cial investment decelerating significantly from11
3/C254%t o21/C254%. The decline in residential
construction investment did not decelerate
quite as sharply, with only a three-percentage-
point change to -81/C254%. Inventory destocking
subtracted1/C254percentage point from overall
economic output, as against just over1/C252per-
centage point in the first quarter. Govern-
ment expenditure and external trade project-
ed expansionary stimuli. Real exports, at a
seasonally adjusted 13/C254%, once again shrank
more moderately than imports (-4%); there-
fore, foreign trade – looking only at the num-
bers – added1/C254percentage point to growth,
following a contribution of +3/C254a period earl-
ier.The current leading indicators are pointing to
a stabilisation of private final demand in thethird quarter and a slight uptick at year’s end.Against this background, in June the FederalReserve revised its forecasts, particularly for2009, upward. It now expects real GDP toshrink by 1
1/C252% to 1% from the fourth quar-
ter of 2008 to the end of 2009 but then to
rise by 2% to 31/C254% in 2010 and by 33/C254%t o
41/C252% in 2011. The longer-term outlook for
growth is still estimated to be in the range of2
1/C252%t o23/C254%. The Federal Reserve percep-
tibly raised its personal consumption expend-iture (PCE) projection for 2009 to a range of
1.0% to 1.4%. The revisions are not signifi-
cant for the two following periods, and thelonger-run projection remains unchanged at
a range of 1.7% to 2.0%.
The Japanese economy seemed to regain its
footing as the second quarter progressed.
Real GDP in the second quarter rebounded,going up by just under 1% after having de-clined by a total of 8
1/C254% since its cyclical
peak at the beginning of 2008. It still grew
negatively on the year, by -61/C252%. Foreign
trade was one of the pillars supporting macro-economic recovery. Real exports accelerated
nearly in sync with manufacturing output. At
the same time, the drag from imports dimin-ished significantly. The extensive economic
1In the revised national accounts, which were published
at the beginning of August along with preliminary results
for the second quarter of 2009, households’ disposable
income was revised upwards much more sharply for the
past few years than private consumption expenditure. As
a consequence, the saving ratio rose significantly – for in-
stance, by one to two percentage points between 2006
and 2008 – and no longer posts any negative values for
either this year or the years previously. Real GDP growth
was reduced noticeably, especially for 2008, when it was
lowered from 1% to just under1/C252%.Japan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
18stimulus packages boosted domestic de-
mand, thus serving as another pillar of the re-
covery. Government incentives encouraged
households to increase their consumption
perceptibly, and public investment was ex-
panded sharply. By contrast, private invest-
ment activity continued its decline. Over the
course of the second quarter, the standard-
ised unemployment rate rose by 1.6 percent-
age points to 5.4% in June. In the second
quarter, consumer prices were down by a
seasonally adjusted 0.4% on the quarter. The
year-on-year decline was 1%. Both the en-
ergy price-related base effect and the pro-
tracted slide in the prices of consumer dur-
ables contributed to this development.
In the second quarter, overall economic activ-
ity in the United Kingdom, according to pre-
liminary information, was down by a season-
ally adjusted3/C254% from its level a quarter earl-
ier, in which it had decreased by 21/C252%. The
year-on-year output loss amounted to 51/C252%
The contraction in real gross output deceler-
ated significantly in all major sectors com-
pared with the first quarter, with the excep-
tion of agriculture, forestry and fishing. In
construction, negative GDP growth deceler-
ated from -7% to -21/C254% and in manufactur-
ing from -51/C252%t o-1/C254%. Value added in the
services sector declined in the second quarter
by3/C254% after falling by 11/C252% a period earlier.
Given the severe turmoil in the financial mar-
kets, which dealt a particularly strong blow to
the City of London, it is remarkable to note
that the year-on-year decline in the economic
output of the financial sector and business-
related services sector, at 41/C252%, has remained
below the fall in GDP . The UK recession isclearly leaving its mark on the labour market.
The standardised unemployment rate has
continued its sharp rise; at 7.7% in May, it
was higher than at any time since the fourth
quarter of 1996. In July, consumer prices
were 1.8% higher than a year earlier. This
means that, of the G7 nations, the United
Kingdom has by far the highest rate of infla-
tion, a development attributable inter alia to
the sharp depreciation of the pound sterling
since early 2007.
In some of the EU member states, economic
activity seems to have stabilised in the second
quarter. On average for the April-June period,
industrial output recorded at times very
strong gains in Poland, Romania and Latvia,
whereas in other countries it at least contract-
ed at a much slower pace, in some cases. In
this entire group of countries (excluding Malta,
Cyprus, Slovenia and Slovakia, which all be-
long to the euro area), second-quarter indus-
trial output, after seasonal adjustment, was
up by 3% from the first quarter, in which it
had shrunk by 51/C252%. The year-on-year de-
cline weakened from 151/C254%t o1 11/C252%. The
deep recession in the new EU member states
has, in the meantime, left a deep mark on the
labour market. The number of unemployed
persons went up from its cyclical low in Sep-
tember 2008 by around 850,000 to 3.68 mil-
lion in June 2009; over this period, the stand-
ardised unemployment rate rose by 1.7 per-
centage points to 8.2%. Against this back-
ground, it comes as no surprise that retail
sales (excluding cars) fell perceptibly in the
second quarter, by just over 2% on the period
(after seasonal adjustment) and by 21/C254%o n
the year. In real terms, the fall is significantlyUnited
KingdomNew EU
member states

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
19greater still, as consumer price inflation stood
at 3.9% in the second quarter. However, in
mid-2008 it was nearly double that figure.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
The euro-area cyclical downswing let up sig-
nificantly in the second quarter. According to
Eurostat’s Flash Estimate, real GDP fell only
minimally in the second quarter after having
shrunk by 21/C252% in the first. The year-on-year
decline amounted to 41/C252%. The trend was by
no means the same in all countries, however.
Of the 11 euro-area member states that have
already published GDP figures for the second
quarter, four countries, including Germany
and France, reported a slight rise. Slovakia
even recorded a significant increase in its eco-
nomic activity, albeit on the back of a sharp
slump a quarter earlier. In the other countries,
especially Italy and Spain, overall output
slumped once again. Euro-area business ac-
tivity is generally expected to continue to sta-
bilise in the second half of the year. Owing to
the poor first-quarter result, the IMF, in its
July WEO update, revised its projection for
annual GDP growth for 2009 downward by
0.6 percentage point to -4.8% and is still ex-
pecting a slight decline of 0.3% for 2010.
In the second quarter, one of the main factors
that helped to rein in the slide in overall eco-
nomic activity was the stabilisation of indus-
trial output in the May-June period. A sub-
stantial share of this may be attributed to the
sharp rise in car manufacturing owing to the
environmental premiums being granted by
several euro-area governments for scrappingold cars. On average over the second quarter,
however, overall industrial output still fell by a
seasonally adjusted 3%, and its year-on-year
negative growth, at 181/C252%, remained very
high. The decline in capacity utilisation in
manufacturing over the April-July period was
no longer as precipitous as previously. New
orders, too, contracted at a less severe pace.
In April-May, orders were down by a season-
ally adjusted 1% from their level in the firstSelected indicators of 
industrial activity
in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009859095100105110115
67707376798285
80859095100105110115120125130 130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Capacity utilisation
Log scale
New orders received
by manufacturers 
working on
orders
2005 = 100Log scale
Industrial output
2005 = 100
1994 - 2008
average%
0
Of which
Excluding heavy 
transport
equipmentTotal
April-MayContractionary
pressure ebbing
Signs of
bottoming-out
in manufactur-
ing industry

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
20Deuts che Bun desbankForei gn tra de in the four major euro-area countries in the wake of the global re cession 
Of the four major euro-area countries, Germany’s e conomy 
has been hit the har dest by the global re cession. A ccording 
to the IMF interim proje ction issue d in July this year, Ger-
many’s total output will contra ct more su bstantially in 2009 
(–6.2%) than that of Fran ce (–3.0 %), Italy (–5.1 %) an d Spain 
(–4.0 %). With the ex ception of Japan (– 6.0%), the IMF has 
not pre dicted su ch a pronoun ced contra ction for any other 
major in dustrial country. Chara cterise d by e conomies with 
a lar ge manufa cturin g share whi ch are simultaneously 
extremely export-oriente d, Japan an d Germany have both 
been severely affe cted by the collapse of global manufa c-
turin g activity an d the sharp decline in global deman d. This 
is consistent with the fa ct that German net exports, after 
adjustment for seasonal an d calen dar variations, ma de a 
consi dera bly greater contri bution to ne gative growth in 
the fourth quarter of 2008 an d the ﬁ  rst quarter of 2009 
than those of the other three major euro-area countries. It 
stoo d at 4 per centa ge points of the rate of chan ge in real 
gross domesti c pro duct (GDP) on the pre ceding perio d – the 
secon d an d thir d quarters of 2008 – compare d with –¾ per-centa ge point in Fran ce, –1 per centa ge point in Italy an d a 
positive contri bution of 1½ per centa ge points in Spain.
A closer examination reveals that these marke d differen ces 
are only partly the result of sharper per centa ge declines in 
exports. For instan ce, with respe ct to the seasonally-a djuste d 
fall in real exports ( goo ds an d servi ces) durin g 2008 Q4 an d 
2009 Q1, Germany’s weak performan ce (–12¾ %) was bet-
tere d only by Fran ce (–9½ %), while in Italy (–14¼ %) an d 
Spain (–15¼ %) the decrease was even more pronoun ced. 
Instea d, a crucial fa ctor was that real imports contra cted to 
a mu ch lesser degree in Germany than in the other three 
countries, by 4¾ % as a gainst 10¾ % in Italy, 17¼ % in Spain 
and 6% in Fran ce. This comparatively mo derate downwar d 
tren d in German imports was lar gely attri buta ble to the fa ct 
that domesti c deman d in the fourth quarter of 2008 an d 
the ﬁ  rst quarter of 2009 har dly fell below its previous level 
for the same perio d (–¼ %), whereas in Fran ce it droppe d 
by ¾ %, in Italy by 2¾ % an d in Spain by 3¼ %. Given the 
high import content (45 %) of Germany’s exports, it woul d 
have been reasona ble to expe ct the consi dera ble slump in 
exports to have cause d an even lar ger decline in imports. 
Seen in this li ght, there is some evi dence to su ggest that 
imports as a share of domesti c deman d have in crease d. This 
is clearly borne out by developments in the automo bile 
market, where the environment bonus payment tri ggere d a 
boost in deman d for smaller vehi cles, whi ch pre dom inantly 
come from a broa d. This resulte d in an in crease in the share 
of forei gn cars amon g new re gistrations from 35½ % in 
2008 Q2 an d Q3 to 38¾ % in 2008 Q4 an d 2009 Q1.1
Another fa ctor is that, in Germany, the export share in GDP 
is mu ch lar ger than in any of the other three countries. In 
2008 Q4 an d 2009 Q1, exports a ccounte d for 48 % of German 
GDP, rou ghly 20 per centa ge points hi gher than the respe c-
tive levels for the other three countries. This has resulte d in 
a marke dly hi gher ( 6 per centa ge points) ne gative growth 
contri bution from exports compare d with 4 per centa ge 
points ea ch in Italy an d Spain an d 2 per centa ge points in 
the case of Fran ce. Moreover, at 42 %, German imports as 
a share of GDP are well below the domesti c export share 
and mu ch closer to the import ratios of Germany’s partner 
countries, whi ch stoo d at 29 % (Fran ce), 33 % (Italy) an d 
32% (Spain). Applyin g growth a ccountin g to deman d-side 
components, the resultin g positive contri bution of fallin g 
imports to GDP growth was the lar gest in Spain (5¾ per-
centa ge points), with Italy in se con d pla ce (3¼ per centa ge 
1 The forei gn-tra de-relate d effe ct is likely to have been even more 
signiﬁ cant, as a lar ger per centa ge of the small domesti c mo dels sol d 
in Germany are manufa cture d abroa d than is the case in the lar ger 
vehi cle se gments. — 2 It shoul d be note d that, un der this approa ch, 
various effe cts cancel ea ch other out. Consi dere d in isolation, the impute d in crease in the export-to-GDP ratio of Germany’s partners 
reduces the differen ce in growth contri bution ma de by forei gn tra de 
while a similar in crease in imports has the opposite effe ct. As the dif-
feren ce between export ratios is lar ger, the ﬁ  rst effe ct dominates on 
balan ce. — 3 The volumes are calculate d by multiplyin g the volume Exports and imports in the national 
accounts context
151050510
–––++
–20–15–10–50+5
4202
––+
Germany France Italy Spain Euro areaReal exports
Foreign trade contribution to growthReal imports
Per-
cent-
age
points
Memo item%2008 Q2-Q3
2008 Q4-2009 Q1%

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
21points), followe d by Germany at 2 per centa ge points an d 
Fran ce at 1¾ per centa ge points.
Hen ce, the relatively stron g retar ding effe ct on external 
activity in Germany is also attri buta ble to the hi gh surplus 
recorded for cross- border tra de in goo ds before the start of 
the re cession. In su ch a situation, forei gn tra de still makes 
a ne gative contri bution to growth even if the per centa ge 
decline in exports an d in imports is evenly balan ced. The 
exa ct opposite hol ds true for countries with a pre-re cession 
external tra de deﬁ cit, as was the case in Fran ce an d, above 
all, Spain. Un der su ch circumstan ces, if real imports decrease 
by a lar ger mar gin than exports, as happene d in Spain, the 
positive growth contri bution ma de by net exports will be 
correspon dingly hi gher.
There are two steps to gauging the impa ct of differen ces in 
the degree of openness an d the level of net exports on the 
pre-re cession situation. First, all four countries are assume d 
to have ha d a sta ble tra de balan ce prior to the re cession, 
with the respe ctive export an d import levels then declinin g 
in line with the o bserve d rates. Secon d, it is assume d that 
imports an d exports as a share of GDP were the same in all 
four countries. In con crete terms, a 45 % ratio, whi ch rep-
resents the mean of the a ctual German export an d import 
ratios, was assume d. Un der these con ditions, the differen ce 
between net exports’ contri bution to e conomi c growth in 
Germany an d that in Spain, Italy an d Fran ce woul d have 
been discerni bly smaller – by aroun d 1¼ per centa ge points 
for ea ch of these partner countries.2 The remainin g differ-
ence vis-à-vis Spain an d Italy can be explaine d, in net terms, 
by the smaller decline in imports in Germany. Only when 
compare d with Fran ce was the more pronoun ced fall in 
exports in Germany a key fa ctor.
External tra de statisti cs show that, in the 2008 Q4–2009 
Q1 perio d, real exports of goo ds in all four countries were 
down on the 2008 Q2–Q3 perio d by smaller mar gins, in 
seasonally a djuste d terms, than pri ce-a djuste d exports of 
goo ds an d servi ces as re corded in the national a ccounts. 
These declines ran ge from –14¾ % in Spain, –15 % in Fran ce 
and –1 6¼% in Italy to –1 6½% in Germany. One of the most 
likely reasons why Fren ch exports a ccording to the national 
accounts decline d consi dera bly more weakly than goo ds 
exports as reporte d in the forei gn tra de statisti cs is that the 
external tra de ﬂ ows in the national a ccounts are deﬂ ate d 
usin g the correspon ding pri ce in dices, whereas the series containe d in the forei gn tra de statisti cs are compile d on 
the basis of unit values.3
Viewe d in re gional terms it is strikin g that, a ccording to 
the forei gn tra de statisti cs, real exports of goo ds to the 
European Union ex euro area slumpe d the sharpest, 
althou gh Fran ce’s exports contra cted to a somewhat lesser 
extent than those of the other three countries. The lar gest 
perio d-on-perio d chan ges were re corded for exports to the 
rest of the worl d; while Germany’s exports suffere d a drop 
of 15¾ %, Fren ch exports fell by a mu ch smaller mar gin 
(9¾ %). This is due, ﬁ  rstly, to the fa ct that, in Fran ce, car 
exports, whi ch are in cluded in consumer goo ds, do not play 
as great a role as they do in Germany.4 In a ddition, imports 
of ma chinery an d equipment fell by a surprisin gly narrower 
mar gin.
All in all, the country comparison of external tra de ﬂ ows 
in 2008 Q4–2009 Q1 shows that, viewe d in isolation, the 
recession-in duced per centa ge decline in Germany’s real 
exports, as re corded in the national a ccounts, was of mu ch 
greater ma gnitu de than that in Fran ce but still somewhat 
lower than the ﬁ  gures for Italy an d Spain. A ccording to the 
forei gn tra de statisti cs, these declines were even conﬁ ne d 
to a relatively narrow ran ge of just un der two per centa ge 
points. For exports, their diver ging wei ght in GDP was the 
key fa ctor, whereas for imports the reverse is true. In deed, 
most of the diver gent tren ds in the external tra de growth 
contri butions can be attri bute d to the comparatively 
mo derate decline in German imports. This evi dence is of 
great e conomi c poli cy relevan ce inasmu ch as it tempers to 
some degree the criti cism un der whi ch the German growth 
mo del ha d come in the past few months for its stron g fo cus 
on in dustry an d exports.
of the reportin g month by the avera ge value for the base year. The 
base avera ges are calculate d by dividing the a ctual values for the base 
year by the un derlyin g volumes. — 4 Unlike the in dicators of in dustrial 
activity, whi ch list automo biles un der capital goo ds manufa cturin g inline with the NA CE con cept, in the EU forei gn tra de statisti cs motor 
vehi cles are re corded alon gside consumer goo ds. — 5 Sour ce: Euro-
stat. — 6 Exports between euro-area countries.Real exports of goods by region5
Seasonally adjusted percentage change in
2008 Q4-2009 Q1 from 2008 Q2-Q3
Destination
region Germany France Italy SpainMemo
item
Euroarea
Euro area – 15.3 – 17.9 – 17.5 – 14.4 – 14.7
6
EU ex euro area – 20.5 – 18.2 – 20.9 – 20.2 – 17.6
Rest of the world – 15.8 – 9.7 – 13.2 – 13.3 – 15.0
Total – 16.6 – 15.0 – 16.2 – 14.7 – 15.3

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
22quarter of the year, in which they had col-
lapsed by 11%. The industrial confidence in-
dicator has been trending back up slightly
since April, owing mainly to less unfavourable
output expectations and a distinct easing in
the assessment of inventories; however, as-
sessments of order books remained extremely
poor.
One of the demand-side reasons why the
manufacturing industry is close to turning the
corner is the sharp rise in new car purchases,
with new car registrations in the second quar-
ter up by a seasonally adjusted 121/C254% follow-
ing +3/C254% in the first-quarter months. They
were also up year-on-year for the first time
since the third quarter of 2007. However, in
some cases the revival of car purchases may
well have led to a redirection of purchasing
power. Real retail sales (excluding cars), after
factoring out seasonal influences, were not
able to maintain their first-quarter level.
Gross fixed capital formation is likely to have
been muted once again in the second quar-
ter. The continuing contraction of capital
goods production, excluding the increased
output of cars (most of which were pur-
chased by households), indicates that invest-
ment in new machinery and equipment has
continued to shrink significantly. In addition,
construction investment is likely to have de-
clined somewhat in April-May (seasonally
adjusted); at all events, construction output
went down slightly. Exports to non-euro-area
countries fell once again in April and May;
over this combined period, they were down
by 23/C254% on the quarter and 25% on the
year. Since imports fell even further in those
two months (after seasonal adjustment), thebalance of trade over this period was positive.
The euro-area aggregate, however, conceals
considerable differences between the large
member states in their foreign trade growth,
especially on the import side (see also the box
on pages 20-21).
The labour market situation experienced a
further significant deterioration in the second
quarter. The number of unemployed persons
rose by 640,000 in the March-June period to
14.9 million. Since hitting its cyclical low in
March 2008, the figure has risen by 3.6 mil-
lion, with Spain by itself accounting for more
than one-half of the increase. The unemploy-
ment rate in Spain rose similarly sharply, by
8.7 percentage points to 18.1% by mid-year.
This puts Spain, by a large margin, at the top
of the euro area, where the unemployment
rate was 9.4% as this report went to press.
The Netherlands recorded the lowest un-
employment, at 3.3%. Euro-area employment
fell in the first quarter of the year – after
which no data are available – by just under
1% on the quarter and by 11/C254% on the year.
Labour costs, according to preliminary esti-
mates, are likely to have grown at a some-
what slower pace in the first quarter of
2009.2On the year, hourly labour costs rose
by 3.7%, following +4% at the end of 2008.
Consumer prices in the euro area went up by
an average of 0.3% (after seasonal adjust-
ment) in the second quarter. This was due
mainly to the sharp rise in international crude
oil prices, which were passed through to
2Owing to statistical changes, currently only incomplete,
preliminary, and solely working-day adjusted data are
available.Stimulus
programmes
having clearly
recognisable
impactFurther-
deterioration in
labour market
situation
Consumer
prices driven by
the volatile
components

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
23domestic consumer prices without any long
time-lags. This more than cancelled out thefavourable price movements for unprocessedfood. Despite the perceptible quarter-on-quarter increase, year-on-year HarmonisedConsumer Price Index (HICP) inflation fellfrom 1.0% to 0.2%. This decline was duemainly to the corrections that followed thesharp rise in the prices of energy and unpro-cessed food up until the beginning of thethird quarter of 2008. In the meantime, an-nual HICP inflation has fallen below 1% in alleuro-area countries (except for Finland) and iseven negative in 12 of these countries. Ex-cluding food and energy, by contrast, onlythree of these countries have inflation ratesbelow 1%, whereas in nine of these countriesinflation is at least 1.5%. In July, euro-areaconsumer prices fell by 0.2% (after seasonaladjustment), also owing to a temporary dropin crude oil prices. Year-on-year HICP fell to-0.7%. It is particularly base effects – but notdeflationary risks – that show up in this fig-ure. A return to positive inflation rates is inthe offing for the fourth quarter.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
24Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the money
market
Against the backdrop of persistently poor
economic performance, a projected gradual
recovery and the considerable euro-area
slowdown in monetary dynamics in the
second quarter of 2009, low current and pro-
jected inflation rates as well as reliable infla-
tion expectations gave the Governing Council
of the ECB the leeway to reduce the key pol-
icy rates by a further 0.25 percentage point in
April and again in May to a level of 1%. Fur-
thermore, the Governing Council decided to
narrow the corridor around the main refinan-
cing rate to ensure that the money market, in
which activity is still ailing, was not put under
additional strain by the interest rate cuts. The
Eurosystem now charges 13/C254% for use of the
marginal lending facility and pays interest of
1/C254% on account balances under the deposit
facility.
The reduction in the main refinancing rate
was accompanied by the Governing Council’s
decision to develop a programme to buy 360
billion worth of euro-denominated covered
bonds in order to stabilise the liquidity situ-
ation of the European banking system in the
medium and long term. The ECB also decided
to offer, by December 2009, a total of three
additional 12-month fixed-rate refinancing
operations. In the first of these longer-term
refinancing operations, the Eurosystem allot-
ted a total of 3442.2 billion at an interest rate
of one percent on 25 June 2009. 1,121 credit
institutions took part in this transaction, con-
siderably more than the average number ofMain
refinancing rate
down to 1% in
second quarter
High demand
for 12-month
tender

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
25participating banks in previous refinancing
operations in the past 12 months.
As expected, the very good liquidity position
of European credit institutions after the 12-
month tender led to another significant drop
in money market interest rates. The operation
can therefore be considered an extraordinary
success. The overnight rate (EONIA) fell by
0.4 percentage point and has remained rela-
tively stable at around 0.1 percentage point
above the interest rate on the Eurosystem’s
deposit facility. Although the trading volumes
used to determine the EONIA interest rate fell
sharply following the allotment of the long-
term tender, activity on the overnight market
recently showed signs of a slight recovery.
Longer-term money market rates also dipped
noticeably again after the 12-month tender,
in line with monetary policy. The uncollatera-
lised three-month interest rate thus fell a fur-
ther 0.3 percentage point plus, and the inter-
est rate on uncollateralised 12-month liquid-
ity also additionally shrank by more than 0.2
percentage point. At the same time, the
money market continued to stabilise and key
risk premiums continued to narrow, albeit at
a slower pace. Since mid-May, the yield
spread between the interest rate on uncolla-
teralised three-month money (three-month
Euribor) and its collateralised three-month
counterpart (Eurepo) has fallen by around 0.1
percentage point to around 0.4 percentage
point and has thus returned to the level of
February 2008.Monetary developments in the euro area
Monetary expansion continued to decelerate
in the euro area in the quarter under review,
albeit at a slower pace. In seasonally adjusted
and annualised terms, M3 increased by more
than 2% in the second quarter after decreas-
ing by a rate of just under 21/C252% between
January and March. The three-month average
of the annual growth rates for April to JuneMoney market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly averages. — 2 Only on 8 October 
2008 2.75%. — 3 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month  Eurepo. —   = Average  from 
1-17 August 2009.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 200900.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
050100150200Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or fixed
interest rate for main
refinancing operations
Difference between 
uncollateralised and 
collateralised 
three-month interbank 
deposit rates 1, 32
Basis
points%
Deposit rateOvernight rate
quoted at just
over the
deposit facility
Longer-term
money market
rates down
across the
board
Continued
deceleration
of monetary
expansion

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
26Deutsche BundesbankMoney market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods from
8 April to 7 July, euro-area credit institutions’ need for
central bank liquidity determined by autonomous liquid-
ity factors fell by 512.8 billion in net terms. Although the
volume of banknotes in circulation rose sharply, as is
usual for the time of year, by a total of 515.8 billion (in
particular due to a sharp increase of 510.2 billion in the
April-May maintenance period), there was a net decrease
in the liquidity requirement owing to the development
of the remaining autonomous factors throughout the
period under review. This resulted in general govern-
ment deposits with the Eurosystem falling by a net total
of51.1 billion. In addition, if the net foreign reserves and
the other factors are taken together, a move which elim-
inates liquidity-neutral valuation effects, an additional
decline in the liquidity requirement of 527.5 billion is ap-
parent. The demand for central bank liquidity resulting
from the minimum reserve requirement also decreased in
net terms, by 52.7 billion.
In the period under review, the Eurosystem’s ample provi-
sion of liquidity with the aim of supporting the function-
ing of the money market continued to be of utmost
importance. All refinancing operations continued to be
carried out as fixed-rate tenders with full allotment with
the same maturity structure and frequency (see table on
page 29). Additionally, at its meeting on 7 May 2009, the
ECB Governing Council decided to carry out additional
longer-term refinancing operations with a maturity of
12 months, also in the form of fixed-rate tenders with
full allotment. On this basis, the Eurosystem allotted a
12-month tender for the first time at the end of June.
This had a major influence on the outstanding refinan-
cing volume which is currently based solely on credit in-
stitutions’ liquidity demand and on the shift in emphasis
from main to longer-term refinancing operations. In the
first two maintenance periods of the reporting period,
the average volume of outstanding open market oper-
ations decreased by just over 530 billion in net terms
whereas in the June-July period it increased once again,
by just under 580 billion. Over the entire reporting
period, the refinancing volume increased by approxi-
mately 5155 billion to 5835 billion in absolute terms.
There was a similar trend with respect to recourse to the
deposit facility which increased again very sharply after
the 12-month tender, having decreased perceptibly in
the April-May and May-June periods. The first-time exe-
cution of a 12-month tender also caused a clear shift in
the maturity structure of the total outstanding refinan-cing volume, in that weekly main refinancing operations
accounted for just 13% of the refinancing volume at the
end of the reporting period compared with 36% at the
beginning. On the last day of the maintenance periods
under review, the ECB carried out fine-tuning operations
to absorb excess liquidity as usual.
In the April-May reserve period, the main refinancing op-
erations were carried out at the new fixed rate of 1.25%
after the Governing Council of the ECB had approved an
interest rate reduction of 25 basis points at its meeting
on 2 April. The demand for liquidity from credit institu-
tions changed very little on average compared to the
previous period. The excess liquidity – measured against
the autonomous factors and the reserve requirements –
was approximately 590 billion on a daily average in
both periods. Nevertheless, compared to the March-April
period, average recourse to the deposit facility decreased
by515 billion to 543 billion. One reason for this is likely
to have been the reduction in the interest rate on the de-
posit facility to 0.25% as a result of the cut in the key
interest rate. The overnight rate did not fully mirror the
reduction in the key interest rate, especially at the begin-
ning of the maintenance period, meaning that EONIA fix-
ings, which in the previous periods had tended to orien-
tate more to the deposit rate, once again approached
the fixed rate of the main refinancing operations (the
EONIA rate was 51 basis points below the fixed rate on
average over the period). However, as the market partici-
pants anticipated further cuts in the key interest rate, de-
mand remained rather low in the longer-term refinan-
cing operations. Consequently, the average share of total
refinancing represented by main refinancing operations
increased slightly to 36% compared with 34% in the pre-
vious period.
The May-June maintenance period began with the inter-
est rate cut of 25 basis points to 1.00% which was ap-
proved by the ECB Governing Council at its meeting on
7 May and had been expected by the market participants.
Simultaneously, the width of the standing facilities corri-
dor was symmetrically reduced to 150 basis points in
order to prevent the interest rate for the deposit facility
from falling to 0.00%. Credit institutions’ demand for
central bank liquidity decreased noticeably again where-
by the distribution of the demand between main and
longer-term refinancing operations remained largely un-
changed.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
27At the same time, the above-benchmark surplus in liquid-
ity decreased markedly again to just over 530 billion on a
daily average. As a result of this reduction in liquidity,recourse to the deposit facility in the Eurosystem alsodecreased to an average of 522 billion. A further conse-
quence of the drop in excess liquidity was evidenced by
the development of EONIA fixings. These again orientedthemselves more strongly to the fixed rate of the mainrefinancing operations. On average over the mainten-ance period, they were 20 basis points below the main re-financing rate and, on four days in this period, the EONIAwas even recorded above the main refinancing rate.
The June-July maintenance period was largely influenced
by the introduction of the 12-month tender. Until the12-month tender was carried out on 25 June, the totaloutstanding volume of longer-term refinancing oper-ations reached its lowest levels since the introduction ofthe fixed-rate tender in October 2008. As the demand forliquidity in the main refinancing operations increasedsimultaneously, the share of total refinancing represent-ed by main refinancing operations increased to 50%. Thischanged noticeably as a result of the allotment of the12-month tender. In this tender, 5442 billion was re-
quested and allotted at a fixed rate of 1.00%. The num-
ber of bidders, at 1,121, also confirmed the credit institu-tions’ exceptionally strong interest in this operation. As aresult of the very high allotment volume, the share oftotal refinancing attributable to main refinancing oper-ations decreased to an average of 16% until the end ofthe period and the outstanding refinancing volume tem-porarily reached a record high of almost 5900 billion. The
excess liquidity, which had fallen to an average of justover 512 billion in the maintenance period until the
settlement of the 12-month operation, was 5285 billion
on average from the 25 June to the end of the period.After the 12-month tender had been carried out, averagerecourse to the deposit facility also recorded a corres-ponding very sharp increase to 5245 billion on average
until the end of the period compared to an average of511 billion before the tender. As many credit institutions
demanded significantly less liquidity in the main refinan-cing operation carried out on 24 June, instead switchingto the 12-month tender, they experienced a one-dayliquidity gap. This was bridged using, amongst otherthings, overnight credit with the Eurosystem. Thus, re-course to the marginal lending facility on 24 June was529 billion. The clear effects of the new tender operation
were also reflected by the development of EONIA fixings.From the beginning of the period until the allotment ofthe 12-month tender, the EONIA was again orientedmore strongly to the fixed rate of the main refinancingoperations (19 basis points lower on average). Owingto the increase in liquidity as a result of the 12-monthtender, EONIA decreased noticeably. Subsequently, thespread vis-/C224-vis the main refinancing rate increased to anaverage of 63 basis points below the key interest rate.
In the July-August maintenance period, the Eurosystem
began the purchase programme for covered bonds whichhad been agreed in the meeting of the ECB GoverningCouncil on 7 May 2009.Factors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
2009
Item8 Apr
to12 May13 Mayto9 June10 Juneto7 July
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due to changesin autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) – 10.2 – 2.3 – 3.3
2 General government deposits with
the Eurosystem (increase: –) – 2.9 + 0.2 + 3.8
3 Net foreign reserves
2+ 4.4 – 24.5 – 30.8
4 Other factors2– 0.4 + 29.5 + 49.3
Total – 9.1 + 2.9 + 19.0
II Monetary policy operations of the
Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing operations + 9.2 – 0.9 – 17.4(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations – 16.2 – 26.3 + 104.3
(c) Other operations + 0.6 + 1.0 – 7.8
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.6(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 15.1 + 20.4 – 97.4
Total + 8.3 – 5.8 – 17.7
III Change in credit institutions’ current
accounts (I + II) – 0.8 – 2.9 + 1.3
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) + 1.1 + 3.0 – 1.4
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribu-
tion, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of this Monthly
Report. — 2Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments with no
impact on liquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
28fell further to 4.1% on the back of 5.6% in
the previous quarter, and thus reached its
lowest level in eight years.
As in the previous quarter, there were strong
shifts towards the most liquid components of
the monetary aggregate. Overall, the narrow
monetary aggregate M1 grew in the report-
ing period by a seasonally adjusted and annu-
alised 14% compared with 11% in the first
three months of 2009. The growth of cash in
circulation, at a seasonally adjusted and an-
nualised rate of just under 4%, was relatively
sluggish following growth of 91/C252% a quarter
earlier. By contrast, overnight deposits rose
extremely sharply, by more than 16%. They
had already increased by just under 111/C252%i n
the first quarter.
Although the rise in overnight deposits af-
fected almost all domestic sectors, it was par-
ticularly marked among households and
other financial intermediaries. In the case of
households, the growth in overnight deposits
was to the detriment of short-term time de-
posits remunerated at market rates, in par-
ticular, which were sold in vast quantities,
mainly due to ever-decreasing short-term
interest rates. Overall, short-term time de-
posits fell by a seasonally adjusted and annu-
alised rate of 191/C252% in the reporting period
compared with -25% in the first quarter.
Among households, in particular, short-term
savings deposits were the main beneficiaries.
As in the two previous quarters, they once
again proved very popular. Overall, however,
holdings of other short-term deposits dimin-
ished by a seasonally adjusted and annualised
three-month rate of 61/C252% after having al-ready shrunk by almost 91/C252% in the previous
quarter.
Marketable instruments were once again bat-
tered by the financial crisis. They experienced
a decline of 51/C252% between April and June
on the back of -17% in the previous quarter.
The significant reduction in short-term inter-
est rates had a particular impact on demand
for money market fund shares/units. How-
ever, short-term bank debt securities were
also sold on balance by European non-banks,
albeit to a much lesser extent than in the
previous quarter. The decline in marketable
instruments is attributable not just to interest
rate movements but also to still existing un-
certainty among investors with regard to the
capital security and liquidity of these invest-
ment instruments. Monetary financial institu-
tions in the euro area were thus once again
unable to raise short-term marketable funds
from domestic non-banks in the third quarter
following the intensification of the financial
crisis in September 2008.
As in the previous quarters, the weak under-
lying monetary dynamics during the reporting
period has to be seen, in particular, in con-
nection with continuing muted growth in
lending. Although the growth of loans to do-
mestic private non-banks was positive for the
first time in two quarters, the seasonally ad-
justed and annualised three-month rate re-
mained low at just under 1%. Even taking
into account credit institutions’ securitisation
activities, which, in statistical terms, lead to
the underreporting of banks’ lending, loans
to the private sector remained weak. Adjust-
ed for the securitisation effect, loans to do-Highly
liquid M3
components
in particular
demand
Decline in
marketable
instruments
and other
short-term
deposits on
balance
Subdued
lending to the
private sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
29mestic private non-banks increased by a sea-
sonally adjusted and annualised 11/C252% in the
second quarter compared with just under
1/C252% in the previous quarter.
At sectoral level, it is clear that lending
growth in the second quarter was almost ex-clusively driven by lending to other financial
intermediaries. These transactions seem tostand in direct correlation with the exception-al circumstances which still prevail in the fi-
nancial markets, particularly the special role
of financing and special purpose vehicles. Inthis respect, they do not constitute traditionallending to the private non-banking sector. Inthe quarter under review, loans to other fi-
nancial intermediaries grew by a seasonallyadjusted and annualised rate of just over
25
1/C252% compared with a decrease of more
than 41/C252% between January and March.Open market operations of the Eurosystem*
Value
dateType of trans-action
1Maturityin daysActualallotmentin5billionDeviationfrom thebenchmark
2
in5billionMarginalrate/fixedrate%Allotmentratio%Weightedrate%Coverratio
3Numberof bidders
08.04.09 MRO (FRT) 7 237.6 – 130.4 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 53508.04.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 131.8 – 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 11909.04.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 182 36.1 – 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 7515.04.09 MRO (FRT) 7 249.4 67.9 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 557
16.04.09 SLTRO (FRT) 84 13.2 – 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 37
22.04.09 MRO (FRT) 7 244.1 118.6 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 56329.04.09 MRO (FRT) 7 233.2 91.7 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 52630.04.09 LTRO (FRT) 91 30.2 – 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 9006.05.09 MRO (FRT) 7 234.2 89.7 1.25 100.00 – 1.00 50312.05.09 FTO (–) 1 – 108.1 – 1.05 100.00 0.93 1.01 12813.05.09 MRO (FRT) 7 229.6 – 136.4 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 51213.05.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 116.1 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 11314.05.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 91 33.7 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 5614.05.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 182 20.7 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 9720.05.09 MRO (FRT) 7 221.3 10.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 55827.05.09 MRO (FRT) 7 276.8 23.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 70928.05.09 LTRO (FRT) 91 27.5 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 10403.06.09 MRO (FRT) 7 227.6 45.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 62009.06.09 FTO (–) 1 – 57.9 – 0.80 100.00 0.77 1.58 10110.06.09 MRO (FRT) 7 302.1 – 75.9 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 60410.06.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 56.8 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 14711.06.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 91 14.5 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 4411.06.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 182 18.2 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 11017.06.09 MRO (FRT) 7 309.6 16.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 67024.06.09 MRO (FRT) 7 167.9 – 150.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 53025.06.09 LTRO (FRT) 98 6.4 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 7025.06.09 S-LTRO (FRT) 371 442.2 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 1,12101.07.09 MRO (FRT) 7 105.9 335.4 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 40507.07.09 FTO (–) 1 – 276.0 – 0.80 100.00 0.64 1.01 165
*For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations
from 21 January 2009 to 7 April 2009, see Deutsche Bun-
desbank, Monthly Report, May 2009, p 27. — 1MRO:
main refinancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refinan-cing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-term refi-nancing operation, FTO: fine-tuning operation (+: liqui-dity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing opera-tion). FRT: fixed-rate tender. — 2Excluding (S-)LTROs
allotted in the same week. — 3Ratio of total bids to the
allotment amount.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Strong growth
in unsecuritised
loans to
financial
corporations...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
30Credit to insurers and pension funds also in-
creased significantly by 8% over the same
three-month period after shrinking by just
over 14% in the previous quarter.
By contrast, loans to non-financial corpor-
ations again decreased at an accelerated sea-
sonally adjusted and annualised rate of
31/C252%. This was because of the sharp drop in
unsecuritised loans with a maturity of up to
one year, contrasting with a slight rise in
medium-term to long-term loans. The weak
borrowing was the result of both reduced de-
mand from enterprises in the wake of a fur-
ther drop in capacity utilisation and, to a cer-
tain extent, the tightening of credit supply
conditions by banks. The recent increase in
real financing costs and the cleanup of cor-
porate balance sheets in some euro-area
countries may have also had a negative effect
on lending demand. Household borrowing
was also weak in the quarter under review;
unlike in the two previous quarters, however,
a slight increase was recorded. This was espe-
cially true of quantitatively important housing
loans, which, after falling by 1% in the previ-
ous quarter, rose by a seasonally adjusted and
annualised three-month rate of almost1/C252%.
Consumer credit, on the other hand, de-
creased by 3% in the period under review on
the back of a slight increase in the previous
quarter (11/C252%).
Lending by banks in the euro area was, for
the third consecutive quarter, funded to a
greater extent by the purchase of securitised
assets rather than the issue of loans. Banks
purchased large quantities of securities issued
by the public sector again in the quarterComponents and counterparts 
of the money stock
in the euro area
1 Calculated  from  the  cumulative  changes 
over 12 months. —  2 Taken in isolation, an 
increase curbs M3 growth. — 3 Not season-
ally adjusted. — 4 Increase: –.
Deutsche Bundesbank2001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 20090481216202428
+++++++
–12–8–40+4+8+12+16+20+24
80060040020002004006008001 000 1 0001 200 1 200
––––++++++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
of which
Net external assets position 1 3
External
assets 1Net external
asset position
External
liabilities 1 4Growth rate of M3 and
the contributions to growth in ...
Remaining balance
sheet items 1 2Net external
asset position 1
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other
non-MFIs 1 2Loans to the
private sector 1M2 – M1 1
M3 – M2 1M1 1
€ bn%%
M3
M3... but decline
in lending to
non-financial
corporations
Large securities
acquisitions by
banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
31under review. This can be attributed to the
rise in general government’s financing re-
quirements, but also to the fact that these se-
curities benefit from the issuers’ comparative-
ly high credit rating and can be used as collat-
eral for refinancing transactions in the Euro-
system. However, securities issued by the pri-
vate sector in the euro area, which are gener-
ally considered riskier, also experienced an in-
crease in the second quarter. Most of the
bonds acquired by banks originate from se-
curitisation transactions, however, and are
therefore not classified as new lending to the
private non-banking sector.
Contrary to the previous quarter, more funds
were provided on balance through foreign
payment transactions by non-banks in the
euro area in the period under review. As a re-
sult, the net external assets of the German
MFI sector rose by more than 3108 billion in
seasonally adjusted terms in the second quar-
ter of 2009 and, taken in isolation, thus had
an expansionary effect on monetary develop-
ments.
By contrast, monetary growth was slowed by
persistently strong monetary capital forma-
tion. Longer-term deposits in the euro area
increased by a seasonally adjusted and annu-
alised 7% in the second quarter of 2009
compared with more than 71/C252% in the first
quarter. While banks strengthened their ef-
forts to top up their capital and reserves, pri-
marily through state recapitalisation meas-
ures, domestic non-banks bought large quan-
tities of long-term time deposits, albeit at a
slower rate than in the previous quarter. Most
of this increased demand came from other fi-nancial intermediaries (OFIs) and thus resulted
mainly from the securitisation activities of
credit institutions, which usually accept long-
term time deposits from their special purpose
vehicles (SPVs) for securitisation. Purchases of
long-term bank debt securities by domestic
non-banks continued to be restrained; most
new debt instruments were issued to the
banking sector.
Underlying monetary dynamics – in other
words, the growth relevant to inflation –
slowed considerably in the reporting quarter.
M3 growth was subdued in the quarter
under review and bank lending to the non-
financial private sector declined on balance.
The inflation forecasts carried out using mon-
etary data indicate that the price stability risks
fell further in the second quarter. They hold
that medium-term inflation growth is most
likely to be below the 2% mark. The degree
of uncertainty associated with such inflation
forecasts remains high, however.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
Between April and June 2009, domestic in-
vestors topped up their deposits at German
banks only slightly. In seasonally adjusted and
annualised terms, investors’ balances once
again grew at a weakened three-month rate
of 11/C252% after having increased at a rate of
61/C252% in the first quarter. There were, how-
ever, stark contrasts in the growth of the vari-
ous types of short-term deposit. Domestic in-
vestors, for example, drastically reduced their
holdings of short-term time deposits remu-Significant
increase in
banks’ net
external
position
Rise in longer-
term invest-
ment at banksMedium-term
price risks
down
considerably
from monetary
perspective
Continued
shifts from
short-term time
deposits to
overnight
deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
32nerated at market rates (with an agreed ma-
turity of up to two years) given the further re-
duction in short-term interest rates. At a sea-
sonally adjusted and annualised rate of more
than 45%, the quarter-on-quarter fall was
greater than at any time since the introduc-
tion of monetary union. As in the previous
quarter, highly liquid overnight deposits
benefited from this development, despite
their growth falling from a seasonally adjust-
ed and annualised rate of 39% in the first
quarter to 251/C252% in the second quarter.
However, short-term savings deposits con-
tinued to grow at a positive rate, increasing
by more than 10% between April and June
on the back of just under 13% between
January and March.Since the fourth quarter of 2008, German
banks’ long-term deposit business with do-
mestic customers has benefited, in particular,
from the ever-steeper yield curve. Holdings of
long-term time deposits (with an agreed ma-
turity of over two years) again rose by a
strong seasonally adjusted and annualised
rate of 11% in the second quarter. Long-term
time deposits had already increased by
respective three-month rates of more than
6% (2009 Q1) and 17% (2008 Q4). In the
second quarter of 2009, too, the develop-
ment of long-term time deposits was driven
to a large extent by the activities of other
financial intermediaries, which, following
moderate expansion in the first quarter,
began purchasing long-term time deposits to
a greater extent between April and June. This
reflects a renewed surge in securitisation ac-
tivity. Long-term savings deposits (with an
agreed period of notice of more than three
months) also recovered in the second quarter
after having slowed considerably in the first
quarter. In seasonally adjusted and annualised
terms, they increased by 18%. Once again,
households were the main purchasers of
long-term savings deposits.
Overall, lending between April and June was
up considerably on the quarter, albeit primar-
ily as a result of a sharp hike in securitised
lending to the private sector at the end of the
quarter. In seasonally adjusted and annualised
terms, the total volume of outstanding loans
rose by 5% in the quarter under review on
the back of 11/C252% in the first quarter. Con-
versely, growth in loans to the domestic pri-
vate sector was weak in the second quarter.
The seasonally adjusted and annualisedLending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)
in Germany*
5billion
2009 2008
ItemApr to
JunApr to
Jun
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 56.6 – 1.2
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 70.8 + 37.7
of over 2 years + 20.3 + 0.7
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months + 9.2 – 6.8
of over 3 months + 2.7 – 3.6
Lending
to domestic enterprises and
households
Loans + 9.2 + 19.1
Securities + 4.8 – 5.4
to domestic government
Loans – 1.6 – 1.7
Securities + 10.8 – 6.3
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-
cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money market
funds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of the
Monthly Report. — 1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche BundesbankLong-term
deposit
business
benefits from
steep yield
curve
Majority of
lending again
accounted for
by financial
corporations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
33three-month growth rate for unsecuritised
lending to domestic private debtors was justunder 1
1/C252% between April and June and
therefore slightly down from the previous
quarter (in which the rate had been just over
2%). The majority of lending to the private
sector was again accounted for by lending tofinancial corporations, however.
By contrast, lending to non-financial corpor-
ations fell considerably by a seasonally adjust-ed and annualised three-month rate of -4%.
This development was driven by short-termlending (with a maturity of up to and includ-ing one year) and five-year-plus loans, thegrowth rates of which (-21% and just under-1% respectively) were clearly negative. Bycontrast, there was an increase in medium-term loans (more than one and up to and in-cluding five years). In seasonally adjusted andannualised terms, these grew by a three-month rate of more than 12
1/C252%. The most
important determinant of slow overall credit
growth was again probably weak economic
growth, which led, in particular, to lower
demand for short-term loan financing forongoing operating expenses, and is also
characterised by reduced investment demandowing to severe capacity underutilisation.Furthermore, according to the Bank LendingSurvey (BLS), bank lending conditions weretightened again in the second quarter, but to
a lesser extent than in the two previousquarters. These data therefore provide noevidence of a widespread credit crunch inGermany at present.
Unlike unsecuritised loans to non-financial
corporations, the decline in loans to house-holds, which has been evident for some time,
came to a standstill in the second quarter. Forthe first time since the third quarter of 2006,
these loans increased slightly between April
and June 2009, by a seasonally adjusted andannualised rate of almost
1/C252%. The volume of
outstanding housing loans and other unse-
curitised loans to households both increased
perceptibly.
Most of the lending to the domestic private
sector in the second quarter resulted fromthe sharp rise in securities issued by the do-mestic private sector in German banks’ port-folios, however. While banks sold large quan-tities of these securities in April, domestic
credit institutions topped up their holdings toan extremely high extent in June. On balance,the securitised lending of German banks toLoans to domestic enterprises
and households
1 End  of  month;  adjusted  for  statistical 
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20092,2502,2802,3102,3402,3702,4002,4302,460
01234Seasonally adjusted
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1€ bn
Significant drop
in unsecuritised
lending to non-
financial
corporations
Reduction of
loans to
households
stopped for
now
Increase in
securities issued
by the private
sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
34Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference 
between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the 
numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the re-
sponses given. — 3 Expectations for 2009 Q3. — 4 Reduced scale.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20093.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.510.0
–40–200+20+40
–40–200+20+40
–60–300+30+60
–60–300+30+60
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20093.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
6040200204060
–––+++
9060300306090
–––+++
2002 02Loans to non-financial corporations Loans to households
% pa
%% pa
%
%
%Changes in credit standards 2
Average loans Riskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
Riskier loansLoans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 years... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 5 yearsConsumer credit ...
Consumer creditConsumer credit
Housing loansHousing loansLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation of
over 5 years and up to 10 years
Loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...Loans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate fixation
    of up to 1 year ...
... over €1 million... over €1 million
... up to €1 million... up to €1 millionBank interest rates (new business) 1
Changes in loan margins 2, 43
333.54.04.55.05.5

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
35domestic private issuers rose by a seasonally
adjusted and annualised three-month rate ofmore than 26% between April and June.Once again, however, credit institutions’ se-curitisation activities were the main drivingforce behind this growth. Actual provision offunds to the domestic non-banking sectorwas therefore limited.
Credit to general government also experi-
enced dynamic growth. In seasonally adjustedand annualised terms, it rose by 9
1/C252% in the
second quarter. While loans stagnated, se-
curitised loans were once again responsible
for the increase in the provision of funds.
They grew at a seasonally adjusted and annu-alised three-month rate of 36%, compared
with just over 1% in the previous quarter.
The weak growth of domestic loans to the
private sector can also be attributed to,
among other things, banks’ more restrictivelending policy. According to the German BLSresults, the surveyed institutions tightenedtheir credit standards for corporate businessonly slightly on balance in the second quarterof 2009 after having tightened them consid-erably in the three previous quarters. Thisquarter-on-quarter decline in the degree towhich credit standards were tightened wasthe largest since the BLS was launched in2003. The German banks surveyed statedthat, besides the costs of holding capital re-serves, the main reasons for the slight tight-ening of credit standards for corporate busi-ness were the negative influence of the gen-eral economic forecast as well as industry andfirm-specific factors. At the same time, thebanks surveyed again widened their marginsFunding options and lending 
of German BLS banks during the financial market crisis
 *
* Banks which reported significant or insig-
nificant  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  on 
their credit standards as a percentage of all banks claiming to be active in the relevant market and to have been adversely affected in their wholesale funding. — 1 Banks claim-
ing to be active in the relevant market and to  have  been  adversely  affected  in  their wholesale  funding  as  a  percentage  of  all German BLS banks; average from 2007 Q4 to 2009 Q2.
Deutsche BundesbankQ4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
2008 2009020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100Money markets, debt securities or 
other markets
Volume
VolumeMargin
Margin
07Securitisation or use of instruments 
for credit risk transfer%%
%
%Average percentage of 
respondent banks 1Expectations for 2009 Q3
Dynamic
growth of
credit to
general
government
Credit
standards for
enterprises only
slightly more
restrictive

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
36for corporate business – which is not unusual
in times of interest rate cuts – considerably,
more so than in the euro area.
In contrast, the lending conditions for loans
to households for consumption or house pur-
chase were only slightly more restrictive
across the board. The exception to this rule
was riskier loans for house purchase: the
banks surveyed claimed to have increased
margins significantly on balance in this busi-
ness area. German results deviated most from
European results in terms of demand trends.
While demand for financing (with the excep-
tion of consumer credit) fell throughout the
euro area, German BLS institutions observed
greater demand for all types of credit under
review. However, these BLS data may over-
state the actual development of overall de-
mand owing to multiple loan requests, espe-
cially from enterprises.
The survey round in the second quarter of
2009 again contained a set of additional
questions on the isolated impact of the finan-
cial market crisis on the participating banks’
lending policy. The responses indicated that
the wholesale market refinancing problemshave eased greatly since the previous quarter.
However, a not insignificant number of sur-
veyed banks still faced constraints owing to
capital restrictions, impacting mainly on lend-
ing.
By contrast, bank lending rates on new loans
may have supported domestic lending to the
private sector. In the wake of interest rate
cuts by the Eurosystem, short-term loans to
households and non-financial corporations, in
particular, became much cheaper again, al-
beit at a significantly slower rate, despite the
wider margins mentioned above. Conversely,
interest rates on longer-term bank loans re-
mained largely unchanged according to the
interest rate statistics. Banks charged 3.4%
or 2.9% for short-term loans to enterprises
and 4.6% or 4.7% for long-term loans to en-
terprises depending on volume at the end of
June. At 3.7% with short-term interest rate
fixation, German banks were also charging
much less for housing loans than at the end
of March; by contrast, the interest rate on
housing loans with interest rates locked in for
more than five years and up to 10 years re-
mained unchanged on the quarter at 4.4%.Drop in bank
lending rates
slow

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
37Financial marketsFinancial market trends
In the second quarter of 2009, the inter-
national financial markets were characterised
by growing confidence regarding an end to
the cyclical downward movement. On either
side of the Atlantic, positive economic indica-
tors, government aid for the financial sector
and support measures of central banks led to
a recovery on the financial markets. Against
the backdrop of a somewhat higher risk
appetite, market participants apparently re-
versed earlier portfolio shifts to safe-haven
assets and increased their exposure to the
international stock markets, thus significantly
boosting share prices worldwide. At the same
time, corporate bond spreads, which had
reached record highs towards the end of the
previous quarter, narrowed significantly. Fol-
lowing temporary doubts concerning an im-
provement in economic activity towards the
end of the quarter, it was mainly positive
earnings reports by enterprises, among other
things, which ensured that the recovery in
the equity and credit markets continued in
July. On the foreign exchange markets, the
effective euro depreciated somewhat on bal-
ance since the end of the first quarter. Ex-
change rate gains against the US dollar, the
Chinese renminbi and the Japanese yen were
more than offset by losses against the pound
sterling, some commodity currencies as well
as central and eastern European currencies.
Exchange rates
After reaching up to US$1.35 at the begin-
ning of the second quarter, the euro-dollarFinancial
market setting

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
38exchange rate subsequently depreciated and
dropped below the US$1.30 mark. The an-
nouncement of the greater than expected
rise in US consumer confidence and remarks
by the Federal Reserve had given the impres-
sion that the US economy would cope com-
paratively well with the fallout from the fi-
nancial crisis and had thus bolstered the US
dollar on a broad front. At the same time,
meanwhile, the euro was weakened by most-ly negative news from the euro area – such as
the steep slide in turnover in manufacturing
in Germany or the renewed downgrading of
Ireland’s credit rating. Speculation regarding
an upcoming key interest rate cut in the Euro-
system also likely contributed to the depreci-
ation of the euro.
At the end of April, the euro started to re-
cover sharply as confidence in the economic
power in the euro area was supported follow-
ing the announcement of unexpectedly large
rises in sentiment indicators. The key interest
rate cut by the European Central Bank in May
had been generally anticipated by the mar-
kets and therefore had no discernible impact
on further exchange rate developments. In
the first half of July, the euro-dollar exchange
rate was somewhat weaker again as negative
news – such as the worse than expected
report on the US labour market and the de-
cline in US consumer confidence – temporar-
ily dampened hopes for a stabilisation of the
global economy. Positive news then caused
investors’ economic optimism to rise again,
and the euro-dollar exchange rate to tempor-
arily climb to a new annual high of US$1.44.
However, this was still 10% below its historic-
al high in the summer of last year (US$1.60).
At the end of the period under review, how-
ever, the euro traded somewhat weaker
again and stood at US$1.41, which is just
over 1% above its level at the beginning of
the year, while short-term exchange rate vola-
tility was on a continued downward trend but
still raised by historical standards.
The euro initially also depreciated markedly
against the Japanese yen in the reportingExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange  rate  at  the  start  of  monetary 
union on 4 January 1999. — 2 As calculated 
by  the  ECB  against  the  currencies  of 
21 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J A
2008 20091.201.301.401.501.60
115120130140150160170
0.700.750.800.850.900.951.00
100105110115120125Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.03 1
Euro exchange
rate develop-
ment against
the US dollar, ...
... against the
yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
39period. However, as the expectation of a cyc-
lical bottoming-out in the euro area increas-
ingly spread across the markets, the euro
picked up again and reached a new annual
high of ¥138 in the second week of June.
But already in the first half of July, the single
currency weakened significantly again and
temporarily dropped back to ¥128. The yen
also rose markedly against other currencies in
this period, after a stabilisation of the econ-
omy also appeared likely in Japan. However,
this recovery phase of the yen proved short-
lived. At the end of the period under review,
the euro stood at ¥134, which was just under
61/C252% above its level at the start of the year.
Having traded at £0.93 at the end of March
of this year, the euro-sterling exchange rate
subsequently dropped sharply in value, hit-
ting £0.84 in the second half of June. The
publication of a series of favourable economic
indicators for the United Kingdom – such as
rising house prices and the increase in the
Purchasing Managers’ Index for the manufac-
turing sector – had bolstered the British
pound on a broad front during this time. Sub-
sequently, however, the pound was hit by the
unexpected decline in British industrial output
and the announcement of the UK govern-
ment’s budget deficit, which reached a record
high in June. During the entire reporting
period, however, the euro depreciated notice-
ably against the pound sterling. As this report
went to press, the euro stood at just under
£0.86. It was thus 10% down from the be-
ginning of the year.
The euro’s average value vis-/C224-vis the 21 major
currencies in the exchange rate index fellsomewhat since the end of March. The single
currency appreciated against the US dollar,
the Chinese renminbi and the Japanese yen.
Renewed foreign exchange interventions by
the Swiss National Bank meant the euro also
appreciated against the Swiss franc in the
reporting period, but the rise in the exchange
rate was comparatively low. All in all, how-
ever, the exchange rate gains mentioned
above were more than offset by losses
against the British pound as well as against
some commodity currencies and central and
eastern European currencies. As this article
went to press, the effective exchange rate
was about 2% below its level at the begin-
ning of the year and around 10% higher than
at the start of monetary union. In real terms,
too, ie taking account of the simultaneous in-
flation differentials between the euro area
and its major trading partners, the effective
exchange rate of the euro did not move
much in the reporting period. It was thus
still significantly higher than at the launch of
monetary union.
Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
The GDP-weighted average yield on ten-year
euro-area government bonds has remained
almost constant at about 33/C254% on balance
since the end of March despite declining key
interest rates. While Japanese yields were also
virtually unchanged, ten-year US Treasuries
rose by3/C254percentage point, causing the inter-
est rate differential between the two econom-
ic areas to dwindle to just under1/C254percentage
point.... and against
the pound
sterling
Effective euro
exchange rateInternational
bond markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
40The heavy recourse of public issuers to the
bond markets as well as the emerging hope
of an end to the downward movement con-
tributed to the stabilisation and to the rise in
yields. Again this was the result of the initially
better than expected economic sentiment in-
dicators. In the course of June, uncertainty re-
surfaced among the market participants as to
the degree to which these leading indicators
can actually be interpreted as a sign that the
economy is bottoming out. Most recently,
however, first “hard” economic data support-
ed the positive assessments, such as the rise
in industrial output and in new orders in Ger-
many as well as a decline in applications for
jobless benefits in the United States. Invest-
ors’ decreasing risk aversion in this environ-
ment led to a reversal of the safe-haven flows
from the bond markets to the equity markets.At the same time, declining premiums on the
credit default swaps of all major industrial
countries indicated a reduction of the risk
premium which investors demanded in view
of the government’s funding requirements
for financial market stabilisation packages
and real economic support measures. In this
context, news that ten US banks have already
fully paid back the government assistance of
US$68 billion that had been allocated to
them is also likely to have been a positive fac-
tor. This also fuelled hopes for Europe that
the risks associated with the strain on govern-
ment coffers could turn out to be lower than
previously feared. Nevertheless, there is still
great uncertainty about further developments
on the bond markets, especially in the United
States. The implied volatility calculated from
options on futures contracts on long-term
government bonds serves as an indicator of
this. While it declined for Germany in the
reporting period, it is higher than at the end
of March in the USA. On both sides of the
Atlantic, this measure of uncertainty remains
above its five-year average.
At the end of the period under review, the
yield curve was just about as steep as at the
end of the first quarter. In the case of Federal
securities, the spread between ten and two-
year yields is just under 21/C254percentage
points. Just as shorter-term interest rates in-
creased slightly although key interest rate
cuts in the Eurosystem had already been part-
ly priced in, the yields on longer-term paper
were also somewhat higher. At the same
time, yield differentials within the euro area
narrowed.Bond yields in the euro area
Source:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank 
calculations.  —  1 GDP-weighted  yield  of 
euro-area government bonds excluding Ger-
many. — 2 Unweighted standard deviation 
of interest rate premiums of euro-area gov-
ernment bonds versus Germany.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 20093.03.54.04.55.05.5
020406080Weekly averages
Dispersion of yield spreads
to Germany 2
(enlarged scale)Yield on ten-year
government bonds outstanding
GermanyEuro area
excluding Germany 1%
Basis
points
Steep German
yield curve

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
41The financing conditions for European enter-
prises have improved significantly in line withthe recovery of the financial markets and thelower uncertainty. Spreads on corporatebonds of the lowest investment grade cat-egory, BBB, which had reached record highstowards the end of the first quarter, de-creased by 400 basis points. The correspond-ing absolute yields also declined to a similardegree. The easing reflected declining creditrisk premiums, such as those shown in theiTraxx Europe Index. Lower liquidity premiumsalso likely contributed to the decline in spreads.Compared with their long-term average, theinterest rate premiums on BBB-rated corpor-ate bonds – about 320 basis points as this art-icle went to press – are nevertheless still at arelatively high level.
1
In the second quarter of 2009, domestic debt
securities worth 3442 billion (gross) were is-
sued in the German bond market. Issuance
was thus lower than in the previous quarter.
However, owing to a decline in redemptionsand taking changes in issuers’ holdings of
their own bonds into account, bonds worth345
1/C252billion net were issued in the market,
while in the previous three months, debt se-
curities had been redeemed on balance. Sales
of foreign debt securities in Germany also
rose significantly on the quarter to 326 bil-
lion, which was mainly accounted for by
euro-denominated paper ( 323 billion). In the
first quarter of 2009, residents purchased for-eign bonds to the tune of 37
1/C252billion. All in
all, the capital inflow from the sale of domes-
tic and foreign debt securities in Germany
was therefore 371 billion, which is the high-est figure since the onset of the financial crisis
in July 2007.
In the second quarter of 2009, the public sec-
tor increased its bond market debt by the re-
cord sum of 3531/C252billion. Thus, it made use
of the capital market to a much greater de-
gree than in the first three months of the year
(332 billion). The majority of the borrowed
funds – 349 billion – was accounted for by
central government, almost doubling the net
sales of the previous quarter ( 326 billion). The
record issuance of Treasury discount paper(Bubills) amounting to 330
1/C252billion, whose
maturity spectrum had already been extend-
ed in the last quarter from previously six
months to include additional three, nine andFinancing conditions on the 
European capital market
Sources:  Bloomberg,  Merrill  Lynch  and 
Thomson  Reuters.  —  1 Yield  spread  of 
seven  to  ten-year  euro-denominated  BBB-rated  corporate  bonds  over  euro-area government  bonds  of  similar  maturity. — 2 Credit default risk premiums for 125 Euro-
pean companies with an investment grade rating.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009012345678
012Weekly averages
Per- 
centage pointsPer- 
centage 
points
iTraxx Europe 125 2Interest rate spread 
of BBB bonds 1
1For the development of the financing conditions of
credit institutions, see also explanatory notes on p 44.Improved
financing
conditions for
enterprises
Net issues
in the bond
market
High borrowing
by central
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
42twelve-month paper, was particularly striking
again. Moreover, on balance, central govern-
ment sold two-year Federal Treasury notes
(Sch/C228tze, 38 billion) and, at the long end of
the maturity spectrum, ten and thirty-year
Federal bonds ( 331/C252billion and 33 billion, re-
spectively). By contrast, it redeemed five-year
Federal notes (Bobls) amounting to 331/C252bil-
lion net. As in the previous quarter, the dis-
proportionately high borrowing in the short
maturity spectrum could have served to fi-
nance the Special Fund Financial Market Sta-
bilisation (SoFFin). The federal states also in-
creased their capital market debt ( 35 billion).
Against the backdrop of easing financing
conditions on the capital market, domestic
enterprises without a banking licence issued
debt securities amounting to 371/C252billion inthe reporting quarter, compared with 361/C252
billion in the previous three-month period. As
in the previous quarter, enterprises issued
only longer-term paper on balance ( 3141/C252bil-
lion), while redeeming commercial paper.
In the reporting period, credit institutions
clearly reduced their capital market debt ( 316
billion). However, the reduction was not as
high as the record figures of the previous
two quarters ( 3421/C252billion in each case). The
credit institutions mainly redeemed public
Pfandbriefe and other bank debt securities
(312 billion and 36 billion, respectively) as
well as small amounts of mortgage Pfand-
briefe ( 311/C252billion). Specialised credit institu-
tions, which include the public promotional
banks, issued paper worth 34 billion (net).
Domestic and foreign investors purchased
about the same amount of German debt
securities, buying paper worth 3351/C252billion
net and 336 billion net, respectively. In the
second quarter, domestic credit institutions
added debt securities worth 3271/C252billion – ex-
clusively domestic paper – to their portfolios,
on balance. In particular, they purchased cor-
porate bonds ( 3131/C252billion), public bonds
(3101/C252billion) and own debt securities ( 39 bil-
lion). Domestic non-banks switched out of
domestic paper (- 3231/C252billion) and into for-
eign paper ( 331 billion). Non-resident invest-
ors purchased public bonds exclusively and in
record amounts ( 3461/C252billion).
In the reporting period, the international
stock markets were marked by increasing
hopes of an imminent end to the sharp cyclic-
al downward movement of the previous twoInvestment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2008 2009
Item Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents – 16.0 – 1.4 35.3
Credit institutions 33.3 10.1 27.4
of which
Foreign debt securities 20.5 – 25.5 – 5.4
Non-banks – 49.3 – 11.6 7.9
of which
Domestic debt securities – 58.6 – 44.6 – 23.3
Non-residents 46.7 4.6 36.0
Shares
Residents 37.9 15.5 13.2
Credit institutions – 14.3 – 5.1 – 2.4
of which
Domestic shares – 3.3 – 3.6 – 2.0
Non-banks 52.1 20.6 15.5
of which
Domestic shares 49.3 16.5 11.1
Non-residents – 44.7 – 4.6 – 0.6
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 2.8 5.9 – 4.7
Investment in funds open to the
general public 1.2 1.8 5.1
of which: Share-based funds 1.1 0.7 2.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
Issues by
non-banksNet redemp-
tions by credit
institutions
Purchases of
debt securities
Strong gains
in the
international
stock markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
43quarters. The government aid for the banking
system and the announcement and imple-mentation of unconventional monetary policymeasures have also likely supported shareprices worldwide. In the United States, betterthan expected results of stress tests for USbanks in early May boosted investor confi-dence regarding the overall state of the finan-cial sector. Against the backdrop of brighten-ing economic indicators and declining riskaversion, investors on both sides of the Atlan-tic apparently reversed earlier portfolio shiftsfrom equity markets to bond markets (safe-haven flows). This significantly lifted shareprices.
In this environment, which was initially
marked mainly by improved sentiment indica-tors, unexpectedly weak reports from the USlabour market in the second half of June,which fuelled doubts concerning a rapid endto the recession, and other factors, put tem-porary pressure on the international stockmarkets. However, supported by some favour-able economic reports, which also included“hard” data, upwardly revised medium-termearnings expectations of European enter-prises and surprisingly positive US quarterlyresults, in particular from the financial sector,the upward movement on the stock marketsresumed, with European bank shares record-
ing especially strong gains. At the same time,the uncertainty regarding further share pricedevelopments was significantly reduced andcame close to its long-term average again. Asmeasured by the broad-based stock price in-
dices, European and Japanese shares record-ed gains of 27% on balance since the end ofMarch; US equities appreciated 23%.The risk premium on equity investments,
which can be determined using a dividenddiscount model, decreased further in the re-porting period and is now at about the levelof the summer of 2008. Together with de-clining share price uncertainty, this indicatesgreater confidence on the stock markets. Thedividend discount model shows that, besidesdeclining risk aversion, improved analyst esti-mates of medium and long-term expectedcorporate earnings also contributed to the
higher share prices.
Against the backdrop of the decline in uncer-
tainty on the stock markets, issuing activityon the domestic stock market remained quite
buoyant. At 38
1/C252billion, domestic enterprises
issued a similar volume of new shares as in
the previous quarter. The new issues reflect,European and
US equity markets
Source: Thomson Reuters.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 200980100120140160180200220
0102030405060End-of-month levels
Lin scale
VolatilitiesLog scale
Price indices
(January 2003 = 100)
%
Dow Jones EURO STOXX (VStoxx)Dow Jones EURO STOXX
S&P 500 (VIX)S&P 500
Declining risk
premiums
on equity
investments
Stock market
funding and
stock purchases

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
44Deuts che Bun desbankEurosystem pur chases of covere d bon ds –
impli cations for the German Pfan dbrief market
In view of the effe cts the ﬁ  nan cial crisis was havin g on 
the real e conomy, the Governin g Coun cil of the E CB 
decided at its meetin g on 7 May 2009 to pur chase 
euro- denominate d covere d bon ds issue d in the euro 
area. A total of € 60 billion was earmarke d for this 
pur chase pro gramme, whi ch will fo cus primarily on 
covere d bank bon ds with, as a rule, a minimum rat-
ing of AA an d a minimum issue size of €500 million. 
To be eli gible, bon ds are generally re quire d to have a 
resi dual maturity of between three an d ten years. This 
measure of the Eurosystem aims to boost primary an d 
secon dary market li quidity for private debt se curities. 
Given that the consoli dation of banks’ balan ce sheets 
is likely to continue in the foreseea ble future, the 
objective of the pro gramme is to grant private-se ctor 
borrowers greater s cope for o btainin g ﬁ nan ce, an d 
to ease issuin g credit institutions’ fun ding con ditions. 
In parti cular, it is hope d that improve d market depth 
and liquidity will have the effe ct of narrowin g the risk 
premiums (sprea ds) of covere d bon ds versus govern-
ment bon ds in the se con dary markets. Ultimately, the 
pur chase pro gramme seeks to en coura ge len ding by 
banks to non-ﬁ  nan cial enterprises. By 17 Au gust 2009, 
the Eurosystem ha d pur chase d covere d bon ds worth a 
total of €7.1 billion.1
The Eurosystem measure is also beneﬁ cial to the 
German Pfan dbrief market. In deed, the pro gramme’s 
announ cement alone, ma de in early May, le d to a 
reduced interest rate sprea d across the entire maturity 
ran ge. On 8 May 2009, 84 % of all Pfan dbriefe issue d 
in Germany showe d a lower sprea d versus mat ched-
maturity Bun ds than on 6 May 2009, one day before 
the measure was announ ced. On that day the sprea d 
narrowe d on an avera ge for all maturities by 8 basis 
points. More re cently, too, the yiel d curve base d on 
German mort gage an d pu blic Pfan dbriefe has move d 
noti ceably closer to that for Bun ds compare d with May, 
parti cularly in the short an d me dium-term maturity 
segments (see chart top ri ght). Even after allowin g 
for the effe ct of the announ cement, Pfan dbrief yiel ds 
– for example, on Pfan dbriefe with a maturity of three 
years – fell by a further 27 basis points vis-à-vis yiel ds 
on Bun ds. While the lower sprea ds point to re duced 
liquidity risk premiums, there was har dly any discern-
ible impa ct on se con dary market tra ding volumes until 
the pur chase pro gramme was a ctually laun ched. Tra d-
ing activity did pi ck up on ce pur chases got un derway 
in July. Bi d-ask sprea ds are still hi gher than they were 
prior to the ﬁ  nan cial crisis, however. By comparison, primary market a ctivity grew as soon as the pro gramme 
was announ ced on 7 May 2009. Almost half of the 
total volume of covere d bank bon ds issue d in the euro 
area in the ﬁ  rst half year was brou ght to market after 
the announ cement (see chart below), with German 
Pfan dbrief issuers a ccountin g for over half of those 
issues. In contrast with the other euro-area countries, 
issuin g activity in Germany’s primary market in the ﬁ  rst 
half of 2009 rou ghly mat ched the previous half year’s 
level, despite the ﬁ  nan cial crisis. This in dicates that 
sales opportunities continue to exist for the German 
Pfan dbrief.
1 According to E CB ﬁ gures, in the perio d from 6 to 31 July 
2009, almost two-thir ds of pur chases were implemente d on 
the se con dary market.Pfandbrief issues in Germany and 
covered bond issues in the other 
euro-area countries
Source: Bloomberg.2006 2007 2008 2009020406080100other euro-area countriesGermany
of which: 
after
7 May 2009
H2 H2 H2 H1 H1 H1 H1 July€ bnPfandbrief/Bund spread
(yield curve comparison)
0.600.750.901.051.20
Residual maturity in yearsPer-
centage
points
91 0 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 117 August 20098 May 20096 May 2009

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
45among other things, capital increases by fi-
nancial enterprises, which have partly comeabout with the help of the government. List-ed equities accounted for 35
1/C252billion. As in
the preceding two quarters, only resident
non-banks, on balance, purchased German
shares ( 311 billion). By contrast, domestic
credit institutions and non-resident investors
reduced their holdings of German shares by
32 billion and 31/C252billion, respectively. The
outstanding amount of foreign equities in the
German market increased by 34 billion on
balance. It was only domestic non-banks
that purchased these securities in net terms(34 billion), while credit institutions sold for-
eign shares to a small extent ( 3
1/C252billion).
In the reporting period, domestic investmentcompanies recorded small inflows of fundsamounting to 3
1/C252billion, following 371/C252bil-
lion in the previous quarter. Share certificates
were sold only by funds open to the general
public ( 35 billion), while the specialised funds
reserved for institutional investors suffered
outflows of 341/C252billion. Of the funds open to
the general public, share-based funds, open-
end real estate funds and bond funds, in par-
ticular, were able to sell own shares ( 321/C252bil-
lion, 32 billion and 311/C252billion, respectively).
Against the backdrop of the further decline in
money market rates, money market funds, by
contrast, again suffered outflows of funds
(31 billion). The holdings of shares in the
other fund categories hardly changed overall
in the second quarter. The funds operated byforeign companies and traded on the Germanmarket sold share certificates worth 31
1/C252bil-
lion net. Domestic and foreign investment
certificates were purchased in net terms onlyMajor items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2008 2009
Item Q2 Q1 Q2
I Current account 1, 2 + 42.8 + 20.1 + 22.9
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 53.6 + 26.8 + 31.1
Services 1 – 3.7 – 3.8 – 3.8
Income 1 + 0.8 + 13.4 + 1.9
Current transfers 1 – 5.1 – 13.2 – 3.3
II Capital transfers 1, 4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 79.5 + 3.0 – 49.8
1 Direct investment – 28.3 – 8.0 – 8.9
German investment
abroad – 32.2 – 9.4 – 18.0
Foreign investment in
Germany + 3.9 + 1.4 + 9.1
2 Portfolio investment – 20.9 – 10.4 + 6.9
German investment
abroad – 24.1 – 7.1 – 28.5
Shares + 12.4 + 0.6 – 1.3
Mutual fund shares – 6.8 – 0.1 – 1.4
Debt securities – 29.7 – 7.5 – 25.8
Bonds and notes 5 – 27.5 – 13.4 – 28.0
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes – 28.7 – 17.4 – 25.8
Money marketinstruments – 2.2 + 5.9 + 2.2
Foreign investmentin Germany + 3.2 – 3.3 + 35.4
Shares – 44.0 – 8.2 – 0.5
Mutual fund shares + 0.5 + 0.3 – 0.0
Debt securities + 46.7 + 4.6 + 36.0
Bonds and notes
5 + 36.4 – 17.7 + 4.4
of which
Public bonds and
notes + 23.7 + 7.9 + 20.5
Money market
instruments + 10.3 + 22.3 + 31.5
3 Financial derivatives 6 – 16.4 + 2.9 – 0.5
4 Other investment 7 – 13.0 + 18.1 – 47.4
Monetary financial
institutions 8 – 27.8 + 83.7 – 10.1
of which: short-term + 20.0 + 87.3 + 9.7
Enterprises and
households + 26.3 – 23.9 – 1.0
of which: short-term + 29.4 – 19.8 – 4.8
General government – 1.6 + 16.7 – 19.5
of which: short-term – 1.1 + 17.5 – 18.1
Bundesbank – 9.9 – 58.5 – 16.8
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 – 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.0
IV Errors and omissions + 36.3 – 23.1 + 26.6
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankSales and
purchases of
mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
46by resident non-banks ( 321/C252billion). By con-
trast, domestic credit institutions sold fund
shares ( 31 billion).
Direct investment
In the second quarter of 2009, the net capital
exports recorded among direct investment
were somewhat higher than in the previous
three months. They amounted to 39 billion
compared with 38 billion from January to
March.
The main reason for this was that German
proprietors provided their foreign branches
with additional capital ( 318 billion, compared
with 391/C252billion in the first quarter). Above
all, they increased their equity capital abroad
(3131/C252billion). About half of this amount was
accounted for by the increase in capital re-
serves to offset losses that were incurred in2008. Further capital outflows – albeit much
smaller – were recorded in the context of
reinvested earnings and intra-group credit
transactions with branches abroad (together
341/C252billion). The main regional targets for
direct investment – for which the financial
sector again played an important role – were
the United Kingdom ( 361/C252billion) and the
United States ( 341/C252billion).
Foreign firms also increased the financial pos-
ition of their branches in Germany in the
second quarter ( 39 billion, compared with
311/C252billion in the first quarter). This was
done mainly by means of intra-group credit
transactions. For example, foreign parent
companies provided their affiliated enter-
prises domiciled in Germany with capital es-
pecially within the framework of financial
credits. Investment in Germany mainly came
from Luxembourg ( 331/C252billion) and the
United States ( 321/C252billion).German direct
investment
abroadForeign direct
investment in
Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
47Economic conditions
in GermanyMacroeconomic situation
The decline in overall economic output in
Germany came to a halt in the second quar-
ter. Following the sharp downturn in the
fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter
of 2009, price-adjusted GDP – according to
the flash estimate of the Federal Statistical
Office – rose by a seasonally and calendar-
adjusted 0.3% on the quarter, after declining
by 5.9% in the preceding six-month period.
Economic output was also 5.9% down on
the year in the reporting quarter after calen-
dar adjustment. Overall capacity utilisation is
exceptionally low at present and is associated
with a marked underutilisation of the work-
force. This already takes into account the fact
that the decline in the first quarter of 2009,
at 3.5%, was somewhat weaker than initially
reported. This year, hardly any changes were
made during the revision of the previous
year’s figures. These revisions are carried out
in the summer of each year to reflect new
statistical basic information.1
The main reason for the braking of the sharp
downturn in global economic output is that
the paralysing effect brought about by the
Lehman insolvency has – not least owing to
the extensive and very broadly based meas-
ures to stabilise the financial markets – mark-
edly abated. Furthermore, strong expansion-
ary stimuli were generated worldwide by the
wide-scale use of monetary and fiscal policy
1The type and scope of the statistical revisions of a large
number of economic indicators over an extended period
of time can now be researched in detail using the Bun-
desbank’s real-time database, which is freely accessible
via the Bundesbank’ s website (see also the explanatory
notes on pages 50 and 51).End to
economic
downturn in
2009 Q2
Global stability
measures
brake global
economic
downturn

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
48instruments. As a result, the slump in global
output and world trade, which had placed an
exceptional strain on the German economy in
the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quar-
ter of 2009, came to a halt. Nevertheless,
economic secondary effects in the form of
inventory adjustments and declining corpor-
ate investment continued to have a detrimen-
tal impact on overall economic output in the
second quarter of 2009. By contrast, con-
struction activity and private consumption
were in rather robust shape. Besides the fa-
vourable weather-related effects in the con-
struction sector, this was due to the fact that
impulses emanating from the government
economic stimulus packages were having a
significant impact. Consumer sentiment was
also supported by the favourable price cli-
mate and, compared with the overall eco-nomic environment, the downward pressure
stemming from the labour market remained
within narrow bounds.
Although German enterprises saw a further
reduction in exports in the second quarter of
2009, compared with the already weak result
posted in the first quarter, the seasonally ad-
justed decline in exports – according to the
available indicators – was much weaker than
in the preceding two quarters, however. Fur-
thermore, data on the regional structure of
foreign trade flows, which are now available
for the first five months of this year, indicate
that initial demand stimuli from East Asia
were apparent in the second quarter. For ex-
ample, the value of exports to China on an
average for April and May was 3.1% up on
the average for the first quarter in seasonally
adjusted terms. Moreover, slight growth was
also recorded in nominal exports to South-
East Asian emerging market economies.
There was a further sharp reduction in ex-
ports of goods to euro-area partner countries
in April and May. This could be due to the
fact that the decline recorded for this group
of countries in the first quarter, at over 10%,
was weaker than the drop in exports to most
of the other trading partners.
Imports in the reporting period are likely to
have declined by much the same amount as
in the first quarter of 2009 and the fourth
quarter of 2008 in seasonally adjusted terms.
The rather low level of import activity was
probably due largely to the fact that enter-
prises substantially cut back their procure-
ment of raw materials as well as inputs and
intermediary products against the backdropOverall output
1 Price-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009100102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+42000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP 1
Year-on-year change%
Lin scaleRays of hope
for export
business
Import activity
under strong
pressure

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
49of the high level of pressure on inventories.
Furthermore, given the renewed rise in heat-ing oil prices during the second quarter, oilimports may have declined again once theheating period was over. Purchases ofmachinery and equipment from abroad alsoremained weak. These dampening effectsevidently far outweighed the high level of im-ports of foreign-manufactured cars, broughtabout by the environmental premium for thescrapping of old cars.
With capacity utilisation at exceptionally low
levels, enterprises again invested less in ma-chinery and equipment in seasonally adjustedterms in the second quarter than in the first.However, the downswing slowed down no-ticeably in the reporting period after thesharpest quarter-on-quarter decline sinceGerman reunification, at just over 17%, hadbeen recorded in the preceding three months.Furthermore, industrial investment demandappears to have become more broadly basedagain recently. While there were slumps indemand across the entire range of machineryand equipment in the first quarter, demandfor new machinery and transport equipmentin particular fell again substantially at the endof the period under review. By contrast, pur-chases of electrical equipment and goods inthe information and communications tech-
nology sector decreased to a much lesser ex-tent.
Construction investment is likely to have
posted a marked seasonally adjusted increase
in the second quarter, which was fuelled, onthe one hand, by a counterreaction toweather-related losses in January and Febru-ary. On the other hand, construction activity
received impetus from a spate of public-sector orders, even though the financial re-sources earmarked for infrastructure projectsin the economic stimulus packages have hadonly a minor impact on demand so far. More-over, housing investment is likely to have in-creased noticeably.
As at the beginning of the year, household
spending in the second quarter of 2009 is
likely to have posted an increase in seasonallyadjusted terms. Thus, consumption in Ger-many is remarkable in continuing to defy thenegative effects of the global economic andfinancial crisis. Consumer sentiment has been
improving continuously since the abrupt de-terioration around mid-2008. This is due,first, to the exceptionally favourable price cli-Foreign trade by region
Percentage change
2009 Q1
compared with2008 Q4Average of Apr-May2009 comparedwith 2009 Q1
nominal/seasonally and calendar adjusted
Item Exports Imports Exports Imports
Total – 14.1 – 9.8 – 5.1 – 8.3
Selected countries
or groups ofcountries
Euro-areacountries (15) – 10.7 – 7.8 – 5.3 – 6.6New EU memberstates (8)
1 – 15.9 – 10.0 – 4.2 – 0.8
Other EU
countries (3) – 16.0 – 13.4 – 5.7 – 3.6United Statesof America – 16.2 – 0.8 – 2.8 – 18.0
Japan – 14.0 – 11.8 – 2.9 – 17.7China – 3.0 – 10.5 3.1 – 3.9RussianFederation – 23.2 – 31.1 – 20.1 – 8.4OPEC countries – 24.1 – 28.4 – 4.8 – 5.1South-East Asianemergingeconomies
2 – 12.7 – 13.8 0.6 – 6.9
1Excluding Slovenia, Cyprus, Malta and Slovakia, which now be-
long to the euro area. — 2Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea,
Taiwan, Brunei Daressalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thai-land.
Deutsche BundesbankDecline in
investment in
machinery and
equipment no
longer as steep
Weather-
related effects
and public
orders
stimulate
construction
investmentConsumer
climate still
robust

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
50Deutsche BundesbankPublication of a comprehensive real-time database for the German economy
A large number of economic data are only provisional
since initial publications are based in part on estimates.
They are therefore subject to subsequent statistical revi-
sions, which means that the results for one and the same
reporting period may change over time. Real-time data
sets store the data vintages of macroeconomic time series
in chronological order. This makes it possible to analyse
the susceptibility of economic indicators to revision and
to trace the “revision history” of the results for individual
periods. In addition, a database of this kind permits the
exact reconstruction of the information base at given
points in time in the past, which is important both for as-
sessing the quality of economic projections and for evalu-
ating economic policy decisions against their historical
background.
In the past few years, the Bundesbank has been systemat-
ically collecting and processing the historical vintages of
many economic indicators – like other central banks have
done for their own country. This extensive database,
which is attracting growing interest from commentators
on current economic developments and researchers alike,
has now been made generally available to the public in
the statistics section of the Bundesbank’s website. The
internet platform provided especially for this purpose
offers a large number of different search options, screen
views in table and graph formats as well as customised
data export functions (CSV, Excel).
The address is
http://www.bundesbank.de/statistik/statistik_
realtime.en.php.
Contents
The real-time database currently contains historical data
vintages of some 280 economic indicators from the na-
tional accounts, the monthly business activity and labour
market reports as well as price statistics, as both raw data
and in seasonally adjusted and/or seasonally and
calendar-adjusted form, depending on current availabil-
ity. This includes the overwhelming majority of those
macroeconomic indicators which are not only relevant
for economic analysis but are also subject to regular revi-
sion. There are plans to add data from other revision-
prone accounting systems.
The period covered by past data vintages varies from in-
dicator to indicator. Generally, complete historical datavintages of the national accounts and of the monthly
economic indicators – marked with the exact dates of
publication – are available since May 2005 and November
2005 respectively. For key economic variables (such as
GDP and use of GDP, industrial production and orders
received by industry), the data go back to the beginning
of pan-German statistical reporting in 1995. These data
vintages were recorded manually and are subject to on-
going quality review. The database is updated constantly.
Data structure
The evolution of an economic indicator over time is gen-
erally shown as a time series. When an indicator value for
the current reporting period is published, the results for
previous periods are often revised, too. In this case, not
only is the time series augmented by a new figure, but in-
dicator values that have already been published are also
replaced by new results. In the usual time series format
for displaying economic indicators, only the current vin-
tage is shown. Typically, this results in a loss of informa-
tion on past revisions.
By contrast, in a real-time database, a data matrix is allo-
cated to each indicator. In this matrix, the reporting
periods are listed vertically – as in the time series struc-
ture – while the data vintages are written next to each
other in columns headed by the date of publication. The
indicator’s “revision history” is therefore completely
identifiable. It is, for example, possible to read off in the
lines of the matrix how the statistical record of a given
reporting period has changed between publication
dates. Moreover, the main diagonals of the matrix gener-
ally provide insights into the revision structure of the in-
dicator. If there is precisely one publication for each re-
porting period, the real-time data matrix is triangular at
the bottom end, with initial publications located in the
lowermost diagonal, second publications in the diagonal
directly above it etc. The difference between the two di-
agonals is usually termed the “first revision”. Systematic
cross-comparisons of various diagonals provide a detailed
insight into the scale and time profile of the revisions to
an indicator.
The characterisation of the revision structure using de-
scriptive methods generally relates to those revisions
which incorporate information from lagging primary
statistics. A distinction should be made between such
regular revisions and benchmark revisions which result in
1See, for example, T A Knetsch and H-E Reimers (2009), Dealing with
benchmark revisions in real-time data: The case of German pro-
duction and orders statistics, Oxford Bulletin of Economics andStatistics 71, 2, pp 209-235. — 2See, for example, C Gerberding,
F Seitz and A Worms (2005): How the Bundesbank really conducted

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
51the introduction of new conventions, measurement sys-
tems and survey procedures into the statistical method-ologies. In empirical studies, inadequate recognition of
benchmark revisions can lead to considerable biases in
the statistical revision measures.
1Users are alerted to
conceptual changes in the measurement of an economic
phenomenon by means of metadata sheets which are at-
tached to the indicators. The real-time database also sup-
plies detailed information on the base year or the unit of
measurement or currency in the form of vintage-relatedattributes. Major statistical changeovers (such as theintroduction of chain-linked volume indices at previous
year’s prices in the national accounts) may, however, also
lead to a change in the key under which an indicator isstored in the database. The table above illustrates thestructure of a real-time data matrix using the indicator
“Real output of the German economy”. The statistical
measurement of this indicator has been fundamentallychanged by two benchmark revisions since 1995.“Data snapshots”
Real-time databases additionally offer the user the possi-
bility of reconstructing the information on economic in-
dicators that was actually available at a given point of
time in the past. As these data panels are the points ofreference for projections as well as the basis for decisions
on economic policy, this option plays a major role not
only in the evaluation of forecasts and forecasting
methods but also for an understanding and scholarly as-sessment of economic policy. Judging ex post whether an
economic policy decision was appropriate and/or con-
formed with a defined strategy can distort the results if
the analysis is not based on the data available at the timethe decision was taken.
2The data vintages of specific
points in time in the past can be exported as “snapshots”
for a given set of indicators.
monetary policy, North American Journal of Economics and
Finance 16, pp 277-292.Excerpt from the real-time data matrix
for the economic indicator “Real output of the German economy”
Statistical indicator
definition Quarterly GDP, seasonally and calendar-adjusted, at constant pricesQuarterly GDP, seasonally and calendar-adjusted, at previous year’s prices
Database key Q:DE:Y:A:AG1:CA010:C:A Q:DE:Y:A:AG1:CA010:A:I
Publication date 6.9.1995 7.12.1995 ... 4.3.1999 8.6.1999 ... 15.2.2005 12.5.2005 ... 15.5.2009 13.8.2009Base year 1991 1991 1991 1995 1995 – – –Measurement unit DM bn DM bn DM bn 5bn 5bn 2000=100 2000=100 2000=100
1991 Q1 709.4 709.4 713.3 428.56 429.86 86.04 85.95 85.94
1991 Q2 717.3 717.3 716.4 428.97 428.43 85.32 85.30 85.31...
1995 Q1 750.1 750.1 746.2 447.89 447.23 89.77 89.82 89.81
1995 Q2 758.1 758.1 751.1 451.37 451.26 90.77 90.73 90.731995 Q3 758.0 748.9 451.57 451.16 90.92 90.86 90.87
1995 Q4 749.3 451.01 451.14 90.67 90.80 90.80...
1998 Q3 800.2 472.99 468.18 94.88 94.96 94.97
1998 Q4 797.2 472.33 468.67 94.85 94.78 94.791999 Q1 474.40 473.56 95.84 95.83 95.821999 Q2 472.39 95.71 95.78 95.78
...
2004 Q3 502.77 102.62 101.80 101.85
2004 Q4 501.60 102.48 101.83 101.84
2005 Q1 103.55 102.00 101.98
2005 Q2 102.72 102.57
...2008 Q4 107.61 107.74
2009 Q1 103.52 103.93
2009 Q2 104.26

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
52mate, but also to the multitude of economic
policy measures implemented between early
autumn 2008 and the beginning of 2009.
Therefore, the government measures to sta-
bilise the banking system and the political de-
termination to guarantee the deposits of Ger-
man savers were able to avert the undermin-
ing of confidence in the functional viability of
the financial sector.
Moreover, the fiscal policy programmes –
with the exception of the environmental pre-
mium for the scrapping of old cars, which
served as a selective purchase incentive – fo-
cused on strengthening households’ dispos-
able income. In particular, the Federal Gov-
ernment’s second economic stimulus package
of January 2009 incorporated a number of
tax relief measures and additional transferpayments. These measures, together with the
rise in child benefit, which had already been
passed, and the reintroduction of the original
commuting allowance (including a tax rebate
for 2007), appreciably boosted the disposable
income of households in the first half of
2009. Finally, arrangements extending short-
time working offered firms strong incentives
to resort less to laying off employees. As a re-
sult, the risk of unemployment has so far not
been uppermost in households’ minds when
assessing their economic prospects.
Sectoral trends
The slump in industrial sector output recorded
in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first
quarter of 2009 did not continue in the re-
porting period. Although industrial output in
the second quarter of 2009 declined further
by a seasonally adjusted 0.4% on the quarter,
a trend towards stabilisation has now
emerged. For example, following the very
weak result in April – which was influenced,
in part, by the exceptional production stop-
pages over the Easter holidays – industrial
output went up by a seasonally adjusted
5.2% in May. This level was also maintained
in June. Owing to the comparatively strong
growth in demand for intermediate goods,
output in this area went up again slightly on
a quarterly average. By contrast, there was a
further decline in the production of capital
goods, as well as in consumer goods, in the
second quarter. This was attributable above
all to the mechanical engineering sector,
while the production of motor vehicles, trail-
ers and semi-trailers soared by 13%. TheCyclical position of industry 
in the output demand 
scheme *
* Order-based  industry.  Bundesbank  calcula-
tions based on Federal Statistical Office and Ifo 
Institute data. — 1 Percentage deviation from 
normal capacity utilisation.
Deutsche Bundesbank– 18 – 18 – 15 – 12 – 9 – 6 – 3 0 + 3 + 6 + 92015105051015
––––+++
2000 Q2
2003 Q2Order capacity
index
Capacity utilisation12008 Q32007 Q4
2009 Q2
2009 Q12008 Q41993 Q1for comparison:
1993 Q4
Clear influence
of fiscal policy
measuresTrend towards
stabilisation in
industrial
output ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
53year-on-year decline in industrial output in
the second quarter of 2009, at just over20%, remained at much the same level as inthe first quarter.
According to the survey carried out by the Ifo
Institute, capacity utilisation in the manufac-turing industry in July was up slightly on thelevel recorded in April, although it was still ata historically low level on a longer-term aver-age. As was the case three months earlier,manufacturers of capital goods recorded theirlowest level of production capacity utilisationat the beginning of the third quarter as well,while manufacturers of consumer goodsposted relatively moderate results. However,if the average value of the reports for Apriland July is taken as a measure of averagecapacity utilisation for the second quarter,capacity utilisation again declined furthercompared with the corresponding value cal-culated for the first quarter. This is also largelyconsistent with the results of production stat-istics. A rise in the volume of orders receivedand a revival of output, combined with a stilllow level of capacity utilisation, is a typicalconstellation for an economic turnaround.This is also suggested by the fact that theorder capacity index calculated by the Bun-desbank in the second quarter picked upfrom its all-time low recorded in the first
quarter of 2009. It must be borne in mind,however, that there is heightened uncertaintywith regard to the sustainability of this devel-opment.
Construction output between April and June
2009 rose by 2.3% on the quarter afteradjustment for seasonal variations. Growthwas somewhat stronger owing to weather-
related effects; furthermore, the stimulating
effects of the economic recovery programmesstarted to take hold. Civil engineering grewmuch more sharply (4.5%) than structuralengineering (1.1%) quarter on quarter. Theconstruction-oriented services sectors are also
likely to have benefited from the favourableconstruction activity. Given the robust privateconsumption, much the same may be as-Output in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20099095100105110115120
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10
95100105110115120
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+302005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Log scale
Industry
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Log scale
Construction
Lin Scale
Year-on-year
change%%... points to a
turnaround
phase in
industrial
activity
Economic
activity
stimulated by
construction
output as well
as by
construction
and
consumption-
oriented service
providers

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
54sumed for the classic retail trade and the
motor vehicle industry. Other, more non-
business-related services sectors were prob-
ably also much less severely affected by the
economic crisis than wholesale and foreign
trade, the transport sector and other indus-
trial service providers.
Employment and unemployment
Firms are responding to the cyclically-induced
low level of output by making further staffing
cut-backs. According to provisional figures re-
leased by the Federal Statistical Office, the
decline in the number of people in work in
the second quarter of 2009, at a seasonally
adjusted 105,000 or 0.3%, was noticeably
greater than in the previous period when, fol-
lowing a data revision, this figure was re-
duced from -123,000 to -34,000. However,
with a decrease of just 0.1% on the year, the
decline in employment has so far been ex-
tremely modest when compared with the
sharp contraction in output.
The impact of the massive economic slump
on the labour market has so far been damp-
ened largely by reducing the number of hours
worked per employee. Whereas in the first
quarter of 2009, firms focused on trimming
overtime, running down working time ac-
counts and reducing the working week,
short-time working has again gained in im-
portance in the meantime. In the first quarter
of 2009, 972,000 persons were receiving
short-time working benefits (836,000 of
whom for economic reasons); this figure may
have increased to between 1.3 million and1.4 million in the second quarter. Although
there were significantly fewer new registra-
tions for economically induced short-time
working arrangements than in the previous
period, 932,000 employees were still making
use of this facility. In this connection, it should
be noted that, since July 2009, when the
period of entitlement to short-time working
benefits was extended to 24 months, it is no
longer necessary to submit a new application
in the case of interruptions. As a result, the
current volume of registrations (over three
million since October 2008) will allow for a
large volume of short-time work for some
time to come.
Job losses have been concentrated in three
sectors so far. In manufacturing, which has
been especially hard hit by the global demand
shock, the number of employees subject to
social security contributions in May – accord-
ing to provisional data from the Federal Em-
ployment Agency – was 1.8% down on the
year.2The decline was even more pro-
nounced in the sector “other business ser-
vices”, at 3.5%. This is where most subcon-
tracted workers are also recorded, irrespect-
ive of the sector in which they work. The
number of such workers fell by one-quarter
year on year. The deterioration in industrial
orders is likely to have been the main reason
for this. In the logistics sector, too, which also
has very close links with manufacturing, em-
ployment was cut back perceptibly (-1.1%).
By contrast, there was a rise in employment
in the areas of education, health and social
2According to the industrial report of the Federal Statis-
tical Office, which records only firms with 50 employees
or more, the decline in June was as much as 3.0%.Further decline
in employment
Increasing
importance of
short-time
workSectoral
employment
trends

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
55work as well as in other services (including
services for households) by an average of3.7%. This reflects, for example, increases instaffing levels in the areas of childcare, full-time schools as well as care for the elderlyand the sick. A significant part of this increaseis likely to have been accounted for by jobsfor part-time employees subject to socialsecurity contributions, the number of which –according to Federal Employment Agencyestimates – might have risen by 200,000 onthe year, while the number of full-time em-ployees went down by 180,000. The numberof persons working primarily in the tertiarysector in low-paid part-time jobs went upconsiderably, both in terms of those workingon a full-time and a part-time basis.
The decline in employment is likely to con-
tinue throughout the remainder of the year.Although the Ifo employment barometer fortrade and industry has broken away slightlyfrom its cyclical low, it is still in contractionaryterritory. The number of job vacancies report-ed to the Federal Employment Agency fornon-government-assisted jobs subject toregular social security contributions is still de-clining. On an average for the second quarter,this figure was just over one-quarter down onthe year. The decline in west German industryand in sectors with a close economic link to
it was particularly pronounced. By contrast,there was a sharp rise in vacancies in the areaof social services. This is also consistent withthe results of the quarterly survey of the Insti-tute for Employment Research (IAB), which
recorded a decrease of one-fifth for thesecond quarter of 2009 in the number of va-cancies in the economy as a whole.Labour market
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
1 Not seasonally adjusted. — 2 Introduction 
of seasonal short-time working benefits at 
the  end  of  2006. —  3 From  January  2005, 
unemployed including persons formerly re-ceiving social assistance but able to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank38.539.039.540.040.5
02004006008001 000 1 000
3.03.54.04.55.0
1,00050005001,000
––++
681012Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
0Thou-
sandThou-
sand
Thou-
sand
%
3Employed
2Short-time workers1
UnemployedYear-on-year change
Year-on-year change
Unemployment rateJuly
July
July–5000+500+1,000
Advance notification of 
short-time work1
JulyOutlook for
employment
still gloomy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
56The official unemployment figure in the
second quarter of 2009 went up by a season-
ally adjusted 130,000 to 3.47 million, com-
pared with an increase of 139,000 in the first
three months of the year. In the second quar-
ter of 2009, too, the rise in unemployment
was therefore greater than the decline in em-
ployment. The contrast is even more apparent
if more recent changes in the statistical defin-
ition – above all, the non-inclusion of persons
newly registered with private employment
agencies – are excluded. Defined in this way,
unemployment in the broader sense might
have gone up even more sharply in the
second quarter, as in the first quarter, with an
increase of just over 150,000.
Four-fifths of the quarter-on-quarter increase
in the number of persons officially registered
as unemployed was concentrated on the
group of persons out of work who are
covered by the statutory insurance scheme.
Persons out of work receiving basic welfare
allowance accounted for only one-fifth. The
majority of persons newly affected by un-
employment are likely to have been entitled
to unemployment benefits; recipients are re-
quired to have held a position subject to so-
cial security contributions for a period of
12 months within the last 24 months. One
reason for the rise in the number of persons
receiving the basic welfare allowance is the
increased difficulty in moving from unemploy-
ment into paid employment in the current
economic setting. Another is the inflow of
persons who have been in paid employment
up to now, but who do not yet qualify for un-
employment benefits. It is primarily men who
have borne the brunt of the effects of theeconomic crisis, which has so far been con-
centrated on the industrial sector, yet they
were also the main beneficiaries of the previ-
ous economic upturn. By contrast, the rise in
unemployment among women, who are like-
ly to have benefited to a much greater extent
from the additional employment opportun-
ities in social services, has so far been much
weaker. A certain share of job vacancies in
this area could even have been filled from the
hidden reserve, which, in light of the demo-
graphically induced decline in the labour sup-
ply, may explain the surprising discrepancy
between the development of unemployment
and employment trends. In terms of age
groups, both younger and older workers are
disproportionately affected by the rising level
of underemployment. Younger workers are
likely to experience greater difficulties in find-
ing paid employment after completing pro-
fessional training. Furthermore, persons who
have been employed for a relatively short
period of time are usually at a disadvantage
in the event of compulsory redundancies.
One important factor regarding older workers
is that the regulation allowing unemployed
persons over the age of 57 to draw un-
employment benefits without having to seek
employment, and therefore without being
registered as unemployed, has now been dis-
continued.
The seasonally adjusted number of persons
registered as unemployed in July showed little
change on the month. The corresponding un-
employment rate held steady at 8.3%. By
comparison, the figure one year earlier had
been 7.7%. Unemployment in the broader
sense, which is not affected by the reorgan-Rise in
unemployment
Structure of
unemployment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
57isation of the statistics, might have increased
by 30,000 on the month.
Wages and prices
As in the previous quarter, a number of col-
lective pay agreements were concluded in the
reporting period with significantly lower ne-
gotiated rates, in most cases, than in the pre-
vious year. This was the case, for instance, in
the printing industry, retail trade, insurance
and in the wood and plastics processing in-
dustry. Given the difficult economic situation,
one-off lump sum payments, together with
extended contract durations, were initially
agreed in most cases. Permanent straight-line
wage increases are to follow in a second
stage. Here, trade unions were willing to sub-
stantially reduce their original demands. In ex-
change, employers abstained from using add-
itional opening clauses.
The level and structure of minimum wages
played a particular role in the wage negoti-
ations in the construction and the painting
and lacquering sectors. Here, there was a vis-
ible trend away from the minimum wage
agreements graduated according to qualifica-
tion and region towards a uniform rate at
a higher level. Minimum wage agreements
have been concluded in a total of 11 sectors
so far, six of which have been declared as
generally binding.3Wage bargainers are ex-
pecting that minimum wage levels will be de-
clared generally binding in a further five sec-
tors in the near future.4According to trade
union estimates, around 2.6 million persons
are employed to date in sectors where min-imum wage agreements are in place, and
this would increase further by just under
400,000.
The Deutsche Bundesbank’s pay rate statistics
show that the year-on-year increase in nego-
tiated pay rates in the second quarter of
2009, at 2.8%, was not quite as sharp as in
the first three months of the year. Excluding
collectively agreed one-off and special pay-
ments, the increase in rates of pay remained
unchanged on the year at 2.7%. AccordingNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-
sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 200900.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay total
Basic pay 1%
H1
3The generally binding minimum wage agreement for
the demolition and scrappage sector has been suspend-
ed.
4These are the security services industry, the waste man-
agement industry, industrial laundries, further training fa-
cilities for job seekers receiving unemployment benefits
under the statutory insurance scheme and job seekers re-
ceiving the basic welfare allowance, as well as special
mining services.2009 wage
round with
lower
negotiated
rates
Extension of
sector-specific
minimum wage
agreementsSlower growth
in negotiated
pay rates in
2009 Q2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
58to the negotiated wage index of the Federal
Statistical Office, which refers to basic pay
rates and excludes civil servants, the increase
in April, at 2.8%, was more or less on a par
with the previous year. According to the WSI
(Institute of Economic and Social Research),
based on the wage agreements from the first
half of 2009 and taking account of the wage
increases concluded in the previous year, the
average annual increase amounts to 3.0%.
Price reductions at the upstream stages of the
economy continued at a slower pace in the
second quarter of 2009. Import prices fell by
a seasonally adjusted 1.6% on the first quar-
ter and industrial producer prices in domestic
and foreign sales dropped by 2.4% and 0.6%
respectively. The year-on-year decline in the
prices of imports stood at 10.1%, in domestic
sales 3.6%, and 2.5% in the case of exports.
The terms of trade improved by 8.3% on the
second quarter of 2008. By contrast, there
was a slight seasonally adjusted rise in con-
sumer prices after they had declined in the
previous two quarters. Nevertheless, the year-
on-year increase in the national consumer
price index (CPI) narrowed to 0.3% on a
quarterly average. A moderate year-on-year
decline in consumer prices is to be expected
for the third quarter.
In annual terms, the downward price correc-
tions at the upstream stages of the economy
were still very pronounced. The decline in the
case of imported energy at more than one-
third, which was due to the significantly high-
er share of crude oil and refined petroleum
products, was much higher than that of en-
ergy from domestic production (6.2%). Thelower level of processing undergone by im-
ported intermediate goods also explains why
the decrease, at 9.8%, was perceptibly sharp-
er than in the case of corresponding domes-
tically produced goods. However, owing to
developments on the commodity markets,
the decline in prices of intermediate goods
weakened substantially at the end of the
period under review. In the case of energy, it
almost came to a complete standstill.
The downward trend which had been ob-
served in energy prices since the second quar-
ter of 2008, and in the prices of other inter-
mediate goods since the third quarter of
2008, is now also making itself increasingly
felt at the upstream stages of the economy in
the prices of finished products. The prices of
imported capital goods fell perceptibly. The
rise in prices of domestically produced capital
goods came to a halt. In the consumer goods
group, however, the decline in food prices ap-
pears to be petering out. Domestic agricul-
tural producer prices are also showing signs
of stabilisation at a reduced level. Conversely,
the price increase in the case of consumer
durables at the domestic producer level
showed a marked fall, and there was even a
decline in the corresponding import prices.
Construction prices, which have risen sub-
stantially in recent years, fell slightly on the
quarter, but were still up 1.5% year on year.
Despite the generally favourable framework
conditions, consumer prices rose quite signifi-
cantly over the course of the second quarter
of 2009, at a seasonally adjusted 0.4%. This
was due mainly to the pick-up in crude oil
prices and a sharp rise in tobacco prices inPrice climate
still favourable
on the whole
Declining price
reductions for
energy and
intermediate
goodsIncreasing
pressure on
prices of
finished goods
Moderate rise
in consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
59June. However, there was an increase of just
0.1% on the preceding three-month periodon a quarterly average. Baseline effects alsomeant that the year-on-year increase wentdown from 0.9% to 0.3%; in the secondquarter of 2008, the cost of energy and foodin particular became considerably more ex-pensive.
With regard to energy prices, there was a
quarter-on-quarter rise in the cost of fuel inthe second quarter. By contrast, there washardly any change in the cost of heating oil.Prices of gas, which lag behind crude oilprices, fell sharply. The fall in food prices wasagain somewhat greater than in the firstquarter of 2009. With regard to seasonalfood products, there was a particularly sharpdecline in vegetable prices. The cost of dairyproducts also declined further (for detailsabout the price developments of dairy prod-ucts, see the explanatory notes on pages 60and 61). By contrast, prices of industrialgoods (excluding energy) experienced a slightrise in the rate of increase – even withouttobacco products. The rise in the prices ofservices and housing rents continued at amoderate pace.
Consumer prices declined by a seasonally ad-
justed 0.4% in July and, at -0.5%, the annual
rate of change in the CPI recorded a negativeresult for the first time in 22 years. The Har-monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) wasdown by as much as 0.7% on the year. Thiswas due mainly to the fact that the sharp en-
ergy and food price hikes in the second halfof 2007 and in the first half of 2008, whichhad driven up the annual CPI rate to 3.3% byImport, producer and 
consumer prices
1 Rebased from the original basis. — 2 Not 
seasonally adjusted, quarterly. — 3 National 
consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 200995100105110115
95100105 105110115
95100105 105110115120125130135
95100105 105110115
95100105110
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Construction prices 2Producer prices
of agriculturalproducts
 1Producer pricesof industrialproductsImport pricesLog scale
%
JulyStructure of the
price increase
CPI rates
temporarily
negative

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
60Deuts che Bun desbankMarke d ﬂ uctuations in milk pri ces: causes an d future developments
One of the main drivin g for ces behin d the a cceleration 
in consumer pri ces in the se con d quarter of 2008, also 
in Germany, was the sharp growth in a gricultural pri ces, 
whi ch was spurre d on by the global markets. This growth 
eventually le d to a peak in the CPI inﬂ  ation rate of 3.3 % in 
mid-2008. The supply an d deman d con ditions in the global 
markets have sin ce chan ged drasti cally. First, the global economi c crisis has re duced the deman d for hi gher- qual-
ity foo dstuffs. Secon d, the a bsen ce of weather-in duced 
shorta ges an d the rea ction to the rise in sales pri ces 
pushe d up supply on the worl d market. This resulte d in 
severe downwar d revisions of quotations on the inter-
national a gricultural markets. For example, a ccording to 
data from the Foo d an d Agriculture Or ganisation of the 
Unite d Nations (FAO), worl d market pri ces of the most 
important internationally tra ded dairy pro ducts (skimme d 
and whole milk pow der as well as butter) have now fallen 
back to summer 200 6 levels on avera ge, after they ha d 
risen to more than two-an d-a-half times that amount 
within a one-year perio d. In the European Union, pri ces 
for milk deliveries to dairies are currently even lower than 
they were prior to the pri ce sho ck, 4  as are the pri ces pai d 
out to German dairy farmers. Conversely, in July 2009 the 
avera ge consumer pri ces for dairy pro ducts far ex ceeded 
their mi d-2007 levels both in Germany an d in the other 
euro-area countries. Further pri ce a djustments are to be 
expe cted, however. Althou gh dairy pro ducts do not play 
such a si gniﬁ cant role in terms of consumption – in Ger-
many in 2005, dairy pro ducts a ccounte d for only 1 ½ % of 
total expen diture in the basket of goo ds, upon whi ch the 
consumer pri ce in dex is base d – pri ce ﬂ uctuations on this 
scale have a per cepti ble impa ct on the overall in dex, an d 
play an important role in the consumers’ per ceptions.
Consumer pri ces ha d rea cted quite differently to the rise 
in milk quotations, both in respe ct of time an d scope. The 
pri ce sho ck was passe d on relatively quickly in the case of 
less heavily pro cesse d “simple” pro ducts, su ch as butter, 
farm cheese, cream an d fresh milk, while the pri ces of 
heavily pro cesse d an d diverse “ complex” pro ducts, like 
yoghurt an d cheese, followe d with some delay. The per-
centa ge mark-up was also smaller in this case. The pri ce 
for butter an d farm cheese, for example, rose by nearly 
one-half, while fresh milk pri ces in crease d by almost one-
thir d. In contrast, the rise in har d cheese pri ces, at aroun d 
one-ﬁ  fth, was consi dera bly more mo derate. Furthermore, 
these pri ces did not peak until O ctober 2008, when 
pro ducer pri ces of milk ha d again fallen marke dly. By con-
trast, the peak pri ce for butter ha d alrea dy been rea ched 
in Novem ber 2007 an d for fresh milk in April 2008.
1 Rebase d from the ori ginal basis; seasonally a djuste d. — 2 Fresh 
whole milk, lon g-life milk, con dense d milk, farm cheese, cream, but-
ter. — 3 Yo ghurt with or without a dded fruit, rea dy-ma de desserts (not 
yoghurt), fresh, soft, har d an d semi-har d cheese. — 4 See European 
Commission, Dairy market situation 2009, Communi cation from the Commission to the Coun cil, COM (2009) 385/4. — 5 This can be proven 
usin g an error corre ction mo del. A distin ction is ma de between two 
sub samples: January 1991 to De cem ber 200 6 an d January 2007 to 
May 2009, so that the perio d of stron g pri ce ﬂ uctuations can be consi d-
ere d separately. For the perio d 1991 to 200 6, the consumer pri ce a djust-Prices of milk and dairy products in 
Germany
2006 2007 2008 20098090100110120130140150
901001101201301402005 = 100, log scale
90100110120130Agricultural
producer prices 1
Consumer prices for “simple “
dairy products 2
Consumer prices for “complex “
dairy products 3

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
61In a similar manner to the pri ce in crease, the decline in 
agricultural pro ducer pri ces ha d a comparatively swift 
impa ct on less heavily pro cesse d dairy pro ducts. Since 
rea chin g their peak levels, retail pri ces for butter have 
fallen by just over 35 %, an d by aroun d 25 % in the case 
of fresh milk. Butter an d milk pri ces are currently cheaper 
for consumers than they were prior to the pri ce sho ck, 
with pri ce re ductions of 5 % an d 2 ½ % respe ctively. In the 
case of hi ghly differentiate d pro ducts, pri ces have barely 
fallen so far. Unlike the pri ce in crease, the decline has not 
lar gely been a continuous pro cess, but rather stepwise, 
with the drivin g for ce behin d this comin g mostly from 
foo d discounters. The foo d discounters initially fo cuse d 
their pri ce re ductions on butter an d milk. This is why the 
time la gs between the a djustment of pro ducer an d con-
sumer pri ces in the case of less heavily pro cesse d pro ducts 
were, in some cases, even shorter than durin g the phase 
of risin g pri ces. Consi dera bly lar ger time la gs were visi ble 
in the case of heavily pro cesse d pro ducts, however. Foo d 
discounters did not begin to fo cus their pri ce re ductions 
on cheese until the se con d half of 2009. In July 2009, the 
wei ghte d avera ge of dairy pro duct pri ces still ex ceeded 
the pre-pri ce sur ge level by 8 %.
This therefore raises the question as to how far consumer 
pri ces for dairy pro ducts will continue to fall, an d how 
quickly this a djustment coul d o ccur. An e conometri c 
analysis can be use d to show that there is a lon g-term 
equili brium relationship between pro ducer an d consumer 
pri ces in this se gment. Deviations from this e quili brium 
relationship prompt an a djustment of consumer pri ces, 
while pro ducer pri ces do not respon d.5 A comparison of 
the pattern derive d from the estimate d mo del with the 
actual tren d disproves the presumption that consumer 
pri ces are currently deviatin g from their usual course. 
However, given that the a djustment throu gh to the 
estimate d equili brium relationship is not yet complete, 
further pri ce corre ctions are likely. A ccording to the 
mo del results, if a gricultural pro ducer pri ces remain at 
the current level for some time to come, the next twelve 
months will see a further drop in consumer pri ces for dairy 
pro ducts of aroun d 7%, espe cially for heavily pro cesse d 
pro ducts.  Conversely, a re covery in milk pro ducer pri ces woul d cause consumer pri ces of “simple” dairy pro ducts 
to rise a gain.
According to the Harmonise d In dex of Consumer Pri ces, 
consumer pri ces of dairy pro ducts an d fats (also in cluding 
eggs, ve geta ble oils an d oils 6 ) in Germany rose espe cially 
quickly an d extraor dinarily sharply compare d with other 
European countries. That sai d, however, the downwar d 
adjustment also took pla ce more quickly an d on a greater 
scale. While pri ces in Germany have been fallin g again 
sin ce April 2008, pri ces in other euro-area countries 
did not peak until Septem ber 2008. The severity of the 
downwar d revision, at just over 10 %, was also more than 
three times as hi gh as in the euro-area partner countries. 
The greater volatility of German consumer pri ces is also 
likely to be conne cted with the hi ghly competitive retail 
stru cture in Germany, whi ch is chara cterise d by a lar ge 
proportion of discount retailers with low gross mar gins. 
This means that ﬂ  uctuations in pro ducer pri ces are passe d 
on to consumers comparatively swiftly. This is backed up 
by a stu dy by the Statisti cal Ofﬁ  ce of the European Com-
munities in 200 6, whi ch shows that consumer pri ces for 
the pro duct cate gories analyse d here were consi dera bly 
lower than in other euro-area countries.7 In July, pri ces in 
these pro duct groups were still 8 ½ % up on the pre-pri ce-
sho ck level, both in Germany an d in the other euro-area 
countries.
ment coefﬁ cient is 0.01 (LR statisti c 7. 6; 5 per cent criti cal value 3.8), 
while the pro ducer pri ce coefﬁ cient is not si gniﬁ cant. For the perio d 
2007 to May 2009, the coefﬁ cient for the consumer pri ce a djustment 
is estimate d to be 0.08 (LR statisti c 5.0), while the pro ducer pri ce coef-
ﬁ cient is a gain statisti cally insi gniﬁ cant. — 6 Only comparatively hi gh aggregate d data (4-ﬁ  gure COICOP) are provi ded for the Harmonise d 
Index of Consumer Pri ces. — 7 See E Bo chert an d S Reine cke, Eatin g, 
drinkin g, smokin g – comparative pri ce levels in 37 European countries 
for 200 6, Eurostat, Statisti cs in Fo cus 90/2007.Consumer prices for dairy products and 
eggs, as well as edible fats and oils 
2006 2007 2008 2009100110120
100110120Germany
Euro area excluding
Germany2005 = 100, log scale

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
62mid-2008, were later retracted in part. The
marked month-on-month decline is largely
attributable to the more volatile components,
which became more expensive in June. Price
developments in the case of other goods and
services, as well as of housing rents, were
much less volatile, with the result that the an-
nual rate (excluding energy and food) fluctu-
ated, with no clear trend, between 1.2% and
1.6% over the past few months. Against the
backdrop of an, on the whole, favourable
price trend, a reduction of the negative year-
on-year figure is initially to be expected in the
coming months, followed by a return to mod-
erately positive rates later in the year.
Orders received and outlook
Given the marked – albeit not yet broadly
based – impulses stemming from foreign
trade, together with construction activity,
which is still being positively influenced by
special factors, and the private consumption
activity, the outlook for the overall situation
of the German economy has become increas-
ingly stable. According to the leading indica-
tors, there may even be a perceptible pick-up
in overall economic output from a very low
level in the third quarter of 2009, especially
as the rise in demand, against the backdrop
of cleared inventories, is likely to be convert-
ed into production relatively quickly. Even so,
a cyclical turnaround is not yet guaranteed.
At present, the expansionary effects of the
massive monetary and fiscal policy stimuli, in
particular, are starting to unfold both in Ger-
many and abroad. However, given the pat-
tern of specialisation of the German econ-omy, an endogenously sustained recovery
process relies predominately on steady and
broadly based stimuli from exports. This is re-
inforced by the fact that enterprises’ propen-
sity to invest is likely to remain weak for some
time to come and consumption could be-
come less resilient during the course of the
year.
Given the fact that the labour market situ-
ation is likely to deteriorate further, the rather
favourable consumer sentiment on the basis
of a cyclical comparison, which, according to
the most recent survey results from the mar-
ket research institution GfK in June, bright-
ened again across all components, appears to
be more of a transient nature. The income-
supporting measures in the shape of tax re-
ductions and transfer payments will not be as
substantial in the second half of 2009 as in
the first, even though the pension increase
on 1 July, the lower health insurance contri-
butions and the increase in the standard
rate for recipients of unemployment benefits
(Hartz IV) favour to an above-average extent
households that tend to have a higher pro-
pensity to consume. The propensity to make
large purchases has risen again from an al-
ready rather elevated level; it could, however,
decline perceptibly towards the end of the
year if the demand for new cars suffers a set-
back once the additional funds that were
made available for the car scrapping scheme
have also been exhausted.
Construction investment will increasingly
benefit from the fiscal policy stimuli in the
second half of the year. It usually takes some
time before public-sector infrastructure pro-Economy in
stabilisation
phaseConsumer
sentiment still
relatively
favourable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
63jects are actually implemented, which means
that many measures were not initiated untilthe second quarter. On an average for Apriland May – more recent data are not yet avail-able – public-sector construction orders werestill 16
1/C252% up on the fourth quarter of 2008
in seasonally adjusted terms. Whereas cen-
tral, state and local authorities had initially fo-
cused primarily on civil engineering projects,
public-sector building construction also pickedup at the end of the period under review. Fur-
thermore, it is also to be expected that con-struction firms will make use of the summerand autumn months to work off the strongincrease in approved new housing projects.There was further growth in the number of
industrial orders in May.
The underlying trend in firms’ orders of ve-
hicles, machinery and other equipment willcontinue to decline. If the sector “manufac-ture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers” is excluded, which is currently dis-torted owing to the strong non-commercialdemand, domestic orders for capital goods inthe second quarter were still down by a sea-sonally adjusted 4
1/C252% on the quarter, after
very strong decreases had been recorded in
the first quarter of 2009 and the final quarter
of 2008, at 221/C252% and 131/C252% respectively.
The cyclically induced restraint in investment
is due largely to the significant capacityunderutilisation at present. This, in turn,
lowers demand for external financing. Addedto this is the fact that the cyclical sensitivity ofnon-financial asset formation during periodsof weakness is usually more pronounced thanthe corresponding cyclical responsiveness ofDemand for industrial goods 
and constuction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20098090100110120130
01020
++
–40–30–20–100
90100110120130
758090
90100110120
8090
90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total industrial 
orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction orders%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%April-
May
April-
MayStimuli from
public construc-
tion orders and
catching-up
effects in
housing
construction
Business
investment
cyclically weak
Response
pattern of the
financial
balance

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
64corporate earnings. Owing to the interaction
of these two response patterns, the financial
balance of non-financial corporations – both
in relation to value added – improved percep-
tibly during the course of the last two periods
of weak economic activity in 1992/1993 and
from 2001 to 2003, compared with the re-
spective levels at the end of the preceding up-
swing. A similar response pattern is entirelyplausible for the current cycle, albeit possibly
in a weaker form.
In this connection, it is also significant that
non-financial corporations’ retained profits
and net capital transfers received were great-
er than the expenditure on additional fixed
assets, even during the upswing between
2006 and 2008. This combined with an accel-
erator mechanism which set in at a later
stage points to structurally improved profit-
ability and thus to a lower net demand for ex-
ternal financing. What is more, since the late
1990s, German firms have significantly bol-
stered their financial robustness and built up
considerable reserves. According to the re-
sults of the Bundesbank’s corporate balance
sheet statistics, between 1998 and 2007 they
raised their equity capital and return on sales
ratios perceptibly and lightened their invest-
ment burden.
Another key factor in building up resilience to
crisis situations has been that, in the past
years of buoyant economic activity, undercap-
italised firms not only positioned themselves
more strongly in absolute terms, but also nar-
rowed the gap between themselves and en-
terprises with a sounder equity base. This
trend is apparent across the board. For ex-
ample, smaller and medium-sized enterprises
in particular significantly built up their capital
between 2005 and 2007. Their share of the
balance sheet total went up from 143/C254%t o
181/C252%. A further important factor in this
connection is that, along with the construc-
tion sector and the retail trade, sectors in
which a large number of enterprises typically
face a high risk of insolvency during a reces-Cyclical susceptibility
of the financing gap of 
non-financial corporations *
* Special effects in connection with the as-
sumption of the Treuhand agency ’s debt by 
the  Federal  Government  in  the  first  and 
third quarters of 1995 and the auctioning 
of  UMTS  licences  in  the  third  quarter  of 
2000 are factored out. — 1 Including net ac-
quisitions  of  non-produced,  non-financial 
assets. — 2 Including net capital transfers.
Deutsche Bundesbank1991 95 00 05 20081086420246810
–––––+++++
Financial balanceNet investment 1
Savings 2Periods of
cyclical weaknessAs a percentage of gross value added Firms’ finances
in sound
condition so far

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
65sion, are benefiting the most from the eco-
nomic stimuli generated by the fiscal policies.
Industry appears to have overcome the main
effects of the massive shock to demand re-sulting from the international financial andeconomic crisis. German industry receivedconsiderably more orders compared with thelow recorded in the first quarter of 2009;orders were 6.1% up on the preceding periodafter adjustment for seasonal variations. Whiledomestic orders grew at a below-averagerate of 3.1%, the volume of orders from theeuro area went up by 6.6%, and non-euroarea orders by as much as 10.6%. From thesummer onwards, this will revive the exportbusiness, which is of great importance toGerman industrial enterprises. This is consist-ent with the fact that the Ifo business climatefor the manufacturing sector has brightenedfurther. Not only were business and exportexpectations better rated – as they have beenfor some time – the current situation was as-sessed less pessimistically as well. With theimprovement in foreign demand, a major re-quirement is in place for enterprises to con-tinue to build up confidence. If this picture isconfirmed and if enterprises gear their staff-ing and investment plans towards this per-spective, the monetary and fiscal policy stim-uli would have had a stabilising effect at justthe right time, and the massive expansion ofshort-time work could fulfil its bridging func-tion for the labour market.
Further revival
of export
demand key
requirement for
sustainable
recovery

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
66Public finances* General government budget
The state of public finances is deteriorating
dramatically in the current year. Whereas a
virtually balanced general government budget
was recorded for 2008, this year’s deficit is
likely to rise above 3% of GDP and thus ex-
ceed the ceiling stipulated in the EC Treaty.
This is due, on the one hand, to the direct
impact of the cyclical downturn on public
finances. It should be borne in mind, how-
ever, that gross wages and salaries as well as
private consumption, which are of particular
significance for public finances, are currently
experiencing a far less unfavourable develop-
ment than GDP and that growth in unemploy-
ment is likely to remain limited on an annual
average. Nevertheless, there are indications
of an exceptionally sharp decline in revenue
from profit-related taxes, which is significant-
ly steeper than the regular macroeconomic
reference variable would suggest and should
be regarded as a countermovement to the
unusually strong growth of the past few
years. On the other hand, extensive deficit-
increasing measures (especially the fiscal
stimulus packages), equivalent to a total vol-
ume of around 11/C254% of GDP in 2009, are
having an impact. Government debt will
shoot up to 313/C254trillion and could reach
almost 75% of GDP . As well as the substan-
tial deficit, both the fall in nominal GDP and
measures supporting financial institutions
that have no impact on the deficit are also
*The “General government budget” section starts with
an analysis based on data contained in the national ac-
counts and on the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent re-
porting on budgets of the various levels of government
and social security schemes is based on the budgetary
figures as defined in the government’ s budgetary finan-
cial statistics.Dramatic
deterioration in
public finances
in 2009

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
67playing a role in this respect (see also Annex
on page 77).
Government revenue will fall markedly this
year. Although key macroeconomic variablesare developing less unfavourably than therapidly declining GDP , the sharp cyclicaldownturn is having a clear impact. Anotherfactor is the expected exceptionally steep de-cline in revenue from profit-related taxes.Moreover, tax cuts – particularly the changesto income tax rates and to the tax depreci-ation rules contained in the stimulus pack-ages as well as the additional tax relief meas-ures for enterprises adopted in July – are lead-ing to revenue shortfalls. In the area of socialcontributions, by contrast, legislative changeswill have virtually no net impact as the lowercontribution rate to the Federal EmploymentAgency will virtually be offset by higher aver-age annual contribution rates to the statutoryhealth and public long-term care insuranceschemes. Furthermore, contribution paymentson behalf of unemployed persons and recipi-ents of short-time working benefits are help-ing to stabilise receipts. All in all, the revenueratio will rise perceptibly in 2009 as GDP isdeclining even more sharply than revenue.
However, growth in the expenditure ratio will
be much stronger still. This reflects the impact
of weak economic activity both through high-er spending owing to unfavourable labourmarket developments and through the de-nominator effect of the fall in GDP . Neverthe-less, expenditure growth is accelerating again
perceptibly over and above the direct cyclicalinfluences. The additional outlays arisingfrom the fiscal stimulus packages alone willcome to around
1/C252% of GDP in 2009, the
largest areas of spending being the car scrap-
ping incentive, the temporary expansion both
of government investment and of active la-
bour market policy measures and the one-offchild bonus. Higher expenditure on certain
healthcare services and a permanent topping-up of child benefit had already been resolvedpreviously. In addition, spending on old-ageprovision and public sector payrolls is growingperceptibly faster than in previous years.
The public finance situation is likely to take
another sharp turn for the worse next year.The debt ratio could rise to around 80%. Thedeficit ratio may increase again significantlyto 6% (as is assumed by the Financial Plan-ning Council). The factors behind this devel-opment will be the same as in 2009. First, thecyclical influence will drive up the deficit per-ceptibly even if the macroeconomic develop-ment stabilises, partly because the growthstructure – unlike in 2009 – is likely to be ra-ther unfavourable for public finances. Second,fiscal policy measures will lead to a substan-tial net increase in the deficit. Finally, theweak development in revenue from profit-related taxes is likely to continue. This willprobably lead to a marked decline in the rev-enue ratio. The main measures driving thistrend are the greater tax deductibility of con-tributions to the health and long-term careinsurance schemes and the renewed adjust-ment to income tax rates. By contrast, the ex-penditure ratio is likely to continue to in-crease, reaching 50%, even though some ofthe temporary stimulus measures introducedin 2009 – such as the car scrapping incentiveand the one-off child bonus – will haveClear decline in
revenue but ...
... revenue ratio
increasing
Rise in
expenditure
ratio even
sharperFurthersubstantial
deterioration
in 2010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
68ceased to take effect. Alongside cyclical ef-
fects, the rise in expenditure on old-age provi-
sion and healthcare, among other things, will
be a key factor in this.
Having reported virtually balanced budgets in
2007 and 2008, Germany is rapidly heading
for an extremely large deficit ratio, while the
debt ratio is set to reach a new high. This
reflects the effect of the automatic stabilisers
and the fiscal stabilisation measures, the scale
of which is justifiable in view of the drastic
economic slump. These measures are provid-
ing a short-term boost to economic activity.
At the same time, however, they are one of
the factors behind the substantial consolida-
tion requirement. The deficit forecast for
2010 is actually due only to a minor extent to
temporary measures and effects and cyclical
factors. Rather, the structural deficits that
already existed in 2008 will also be driven up
substantially both this year and next by per-
manent cuts in taxes and social contributions
and a perceptible increase in the structural
expenditure ratio. Without fiscal consolida-
tion, the general government debt ratio
would rapidly expand further, leading – par-
ticularly if interest rates start to rise again – to
a swift increase in the interest burden. Fiscal
policymakers will therefore be confronted
with a major consolidation task in the coming
legislative period.
In light of this situation, the new debt rules
for central and state government constitute a
major step forward. Unlike previous regu-
lations, they stipulate a cyclically adjusted
budgetary position that is generally at least
close to balance. This means that the nationalrules are more closely aligned with the obliga-
tions of the European Stability and Growth
Pact. In order to be sure of achieving this tar-
get within the specified transitional periods,
considerable efforts are required both on a
central government and on a state govern-
ment level. It is important to remember that,
given reduced potential growth, the cyclically
adjusted expenditure ratio increases even
if expenditure rises only moderately; tight
spending curbs are therefore required in
order to achieve consolidation via the ex-
penditure side. As the ceiling of 3% of GDP
for the general government deficit stipulated
in the EC Treaty is likely to be substantially ex-
ceeded for a prolonged period of time if no
further measures are taken, it can also be ex-
pected that an excessive deficit procedure will
be initiated against Germany, obliging it to
rapidly bring its deficit ratio back below the
reference value.
Budgetary development of central, state
and local government
Tax revenue
In the second quarter of 2009, tax revenue1
was down by 8% on the same quarter in
2008 (see chart on page 69 and table on
page 70). As expected, the decline in revenue
was thus much greater than in the first quar-
ter. The economic downturn had an increas-
ing impact, and the various tax relief meas-
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the quarter under review.Large
consolidation
requirement ...
... also to
comply with
national and
European
budgetary rulesSharp decline
in tax revenue
in Q2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
69ures taken in order to stabilise the economy
likewise increasingly led to revenue shortfalls.
Revenue from income-related taxes fell by
19%. Wage tax receipts declined steeply, asthe development in gross wages and salarieswas sluggish and the reduced rates becameeffective retroactively for the entire first halfof the year. Moreover, the amounts deductedfrom the revenue total increased sharply; therise in child benefit at the beginning of theyear was augmented by the one-off childbonus and the last increment in the subsidiesfor supplementary private pension plans, thebulk of which were paid out in May. Particu-larly large shortfalls were recorded for theprofit-related taxes. Receipts from corpor-ation tax plummeted owing primarily to loweradvance payments for current profits andhigh refunds for 2008; in addition, largedrops in revenue from investment income taxwere recorded as a result of lower profit dis-tributions
2. Receipts from assessed income
tax likewise decreased sharply owing to tax
refunds following the Federal Constitutional
Court’s ruling reinstating the standard travel
allowance for commuters and to tax reliefmeasures; without these factors they would
have remained quite stable. Consumption-related tax revenue, which sometimes swingsvery erratically from one quarter to the next,experienced a marked rise of 3
1/C252%. Com-
bined with the weak first quarter, this
amounted to a small increase of1/C252% in the
first six months of 2009.
According to the latest official tax estimate in
May, a significant revenue decline of almost
61/C252% is expected for 2009 as a whole (ex-cluding local government taxes) after taking
account of the additional tax relief measuresfor enterprises adopted since then (taxationonly of actual turnover revenue, temporaryliberalisation regarding purchases of shellcompanies and the interest payment offsetlimit, tax relief on agricultural (“red”) diesel).Although, taken together, shortfalls owing totax relief and to tax refunds following the re-
instatement of the standard travel allowancefor commuters will fall later this year in com-Tax revenue *
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local gov-
ernment taxes, which are not yet known for the last quarters recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 200986420246810121416
––––++++++++Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
2Since withholding tax was introduced at the beginning
of the year, investment income has generally been taxed
at source at a rate of 25%. For private income, this is
mostly also the final tax rate; however, particularly for
business earnings, refunds and back payments are still
made if tax assessments are submitted. Although with-
holding tax is expected to generate shortfalls overall, the
adjustment to investment income tax rates per se is ini-
tially leading to windfalls as the extra revenue from the
higher tax rate on dividends outweighs the effect of the
rate reduction for interest income owing to the larger tax
base.Large income
tax shortfalls
Increased
revenue from
consumption-
related taxes
Clear decline in
2009 as whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
70parison with the second quarter, there is likely
to be a weaker momentum in wages and em-
ployment. All in all, however, forecasting un-
certainty is currently very high.3
Central government budget
While the central government budget record-
ed a surplus of 321/C252billion in the second
quarter of 2009, this was lower than the posi-
tive balance reported a year earlier ( 341/C252bil-
lion). Revenue fell by just under 21/C252%. This
was chiefly due to the fall in tax receipts
which, however, were stabilised perceptibly
by significantly lower contributions to the EU,
which are offset against tax revenue. While
expenditure grew by barely1/C252%, this was de-
ceptively low. Adjusted for the windfall effectamounting to 32 billion arising from the
changed payment deadline for regular grants
to the Federal Employment Agency, the rise
came to just over 3%.
The second supplementary budget adopted
following the May tax estimate envisages a
further increase of 312 billion in net borrow-
ing vis-/C224-vis the first supplementary budget
passed in February in connection with the
second fiscal stimulus package. Net borrow-
ing is thus now forecast to total around 349
billion this year. The ceiling of just under 333
billion arising from the pegging of net bor-
rowing to planned investment expenditure
laid down in Article 115 of the German BasicTax revenue
H1 Q2Estimate
for
2009 1, 2
2008 2009 2008 2009
Year-on-year
changeYear-on-year
changeYear-
on-year
percent-
age
Type of tax 5billion 5billion as % 5billion 5billion as % change
Tax revenue, total 2 249.7 237.3 – 12.4 – 5.0 130.8 120.5 – 10.3 – 7.9 – 6.3
of which
Wage tax 67.5 64.5 – 3.0 – 4.5 34.7 30.5 – 4.2 – 12.2 – 4.2
Profit-related taxes 3 42,2 34,0 – 8.1 – 19.2 25.3 18.0 – 7.3 – 28.8 – 23.6
Assessed income tax 14.1 12.1 – 2.0 – 13.9 10.4 9.1 – 1.3 – 12.1 – 30.1
Investment income
tax 4 18.5 17.2 – 1.3 – 7.3 10.1 8.5 – 1.5 – 15.3 – 11.2
Corporation tax 9.5 4.7 – 4.8 – 50.3 4.8 0.3 – 4.5 – 92.9 – 33.6
Turnover taxes 5 86.2 86.5 + 0.3 + 0.4 41.9 43.4 + 1.5 + 3.7 – 0.6
Energy tax 14.2 14.8 + 0.6 + 4.2 9.6 10.1 + 0.5 + 5.1 – 3.6
Tobacco tax 5.8 5.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 3.3 3.6 + 0.3 + 9.0 – 1.4
1According to official tax estimate of May 2009, addi-
tionally including legislative changes adopted in the
meantime (Citizens’ Relief Act Governing Health Insur-
ance, Act Amending the Energy Tax Act). — 2Including
EU shares in German tax revenue, but excluding receipts
from local government taxes, which are not yet knownfor the last quarter recorded. — 3Employee refunds,
grants paid to home owners and investors deducted from
revenue. — 4Withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5Turn-
over tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Development of tax
revenue in Germany and current tax policy issues, Month-
ly Report, October 2008, pp 33-57.Smaller surplus
in Q2Jump in deficit
in second
supplementary
budget due to
tax revenue
shortfalls and ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
71Law will be exceeded by an even greater
amount by invoking the exemption clausethat this is warranted by the need to avert adisruption to the overall economic equilib-rium. The budget covers revenue shortfalls of38 billion projected in the latest tax estimate
and of 31
1/C252billion owing to additional tem-
porary tax relief measures. By contrast, a
windfall of almost 33 billion will ensue, via a
retransfer from the Redemption Fund for In-
herited Liabilities, from a one-off decisionthat the Bundesbank’s entire profit – and not
just the share exceeding the threshold of 33
1/C252
billion to be transferred to the Redemption
Fund – will be booked to central governmentand appropriated in its budget. The envisaged
additional expenditure is largely necessitated
by a loan to the health insurance fund ( 34 bil-
lion) and benefits for the long-term un-
employed ( 31
1/C252billion). Revenue is now pre-
dicted to decline by just over 6% overall
(3161/C252billion, of which 315 billion are tax
shortfalls) in 2009 compared with the actualoutturn for 2008 and expenditure to increase
by 7
1/C252%(321 billion, of which 381/C252billion re-
lates to spending on the statutory health in-
surance scheme and 33 billion results from
long-term unemployment). Budgetary bur-
dens that are not yet covered, eg a decline inreceipts from motorway tolls and CO
2emis-
sion rights caused by the recession, could be
accommodated from today’s perspective by
cautious budgeting, such as in the estimated
central government loans to the health insur-ance fund.
Central government’s draft budget for 2010
foresees net borrowing ballooning by a fur-ther337 billion to 386 billion next year, basedonce again on the justification of a disruptionof the macroeconomic equilibrium. Expend-iture is forecast to increase again sharply by8% ( 324
1/C252billion) compared with the second
supplementary budget for 2009. On bal-
ance, this is due almost entirely to additional
unemployment-related costs, including spend-
ing of 320 billion on a loan to the Federal Em-
ployment Agency and of 331/C252billion on un-
employment benefit II and related payments.
The grant to the statutory pension insurance
scheme is set to increase in the wake of the
growth in average remuneration in 2008(31
1/C252billion), while payments to the health
insurance fund will rise only marginally on the
year as the sizeable upping of the regular
grant will be practically offset by the dropout
of the loan granted to it in 2009. By contrast,interest expenditure is estimated to be justCentral government fiscal 
deficit / surplus
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q415105051015
–––+++
–20–15–10–5€ bnCumulative from start of year
20092009
20082008
20072007Quarterly results€ bn
... additional
spending
Renewed
dramatic rise in
new borrowing
in 2010 draft
budget

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
72over 32 billion lower owing largely to the
non-recurrence of one-off payments incurred
this year by the special fund for the redemp-
tion of inflation-indexed government debt in-
struments and to substantial refinancing sav-
ings. Revenue will slide by a further 5%
(3121/C252billion), mainly on account of falling
tax receipts (-41/C252%o r 310 billion, of which
around 361/C252billion will be incurred by per-
manent relief measures in the form of tax
allowances for insurance contributions and
lower income tax rates) and the dropout of
the extra proceeds from the Bundesbank’s
profit distribution.
Pursuant to the new debt rules adopted in
June,4central government’s structural net
borrowing (net borrowing adjusted for a cyc-
lical component and financial transactions) isto be reduced in equal annual steps between
2011 and 2016 to the then permissible ceil-
ing of 0.35% of GDP . The path to consolida-
tion is mapped out in the new medium-term
financial plan until 2013. After deducting net
financial transactions5amounting to 321 bil-
lion and the estimated cyclical component of
326 billion, the structural component of the
2010 deficit is estimated to be 3391/C252billion
or 1.6% of GDP . This means that annual
structural reductions of 0.2 percentage point
(around 35 billion) will be required during the
transitional phase. As net financial transac-
tions and the cyclical component are likewise
expected to fall, the new medium-term finan-
cial plan envisages that net borrowing will de-
crease by up to 3141/C252billion (1/C252% of GDP)
per year to 346 billion in 2013. However, the
planned reduction is based solely on global,
non-specific cost savings – growing from 35
billion in 2011 to 181/C252billion by 2013 – rather
than on specific consolidation measures. If
this global figure is factored out, the struc-
tural deficit will actually increase further by
then (see chart on page 73).
There will therefore be a considerable need
for consolidation in the next legislative period,
which could become larger still if the cyclical
component were to be revised in the remain-
der of the year and assessed as being notably
less negative.6Owing, not least, to the uncer-
tainties surrounding estimations of the cyclic-Central government’s medium-term
financial plan
5billion
Financial planActual
2008Target
2009 3Draft
2010 2011 2012 2013
Expenditure 1 282.3 303.3 327.7 321.1 318.3 313.5
of which
Investment 24.3 32.8 48.6 43.3 39.1 35.0
Revenue 1, 2 270.7 254.2 241.6 249.4 259.6 267.6
of which
Taxes 1 239.2 224.1 213.8 221.9 232.4 240.6
Privatisation
proceeds 6.7 2.0 2.3 3.3 3.6 3.6
Net borrowing 11.5 49.1 86.1 71.7 58.7 45.9
Memo item
Percentage
increase in
expenditure 4.4 7.4 8.0 – 2.0 – 0.9 – 1.5
1After deduction of supplementary central government grants to
state government, of shares in revenue from energy tax and of com-
pensation in connection with the 2009 motor vehicle tax reform. —
2Including proceeds from coin seigniorage. — 3Pursuant to the
second supplementary budget.
Deutsche Bundesbank
4See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The reform of the bor-
rowing limits for central and state government, Monthly
Report, May 2009, pp 78-79.
5Granted and repaid loans as well as acquisitions and
sales of participating interests are considered to be finan-
cial transactions.
6This is suggested inter alia by the European Commis-
sion’s spring estimate up to 2010.New financial
plan shows big
consolidation
needConsolidation
required in
next legislative
period

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
73ally adjusted budgetary position, it would
thus seem wise to plan in a safety margin
below the 0.35% ceiling.7As things stand,
therefore, there will be no leeway for unfund-
ed deficit-increasing measures in the coming
years.
In addition to the expected substantial deficit
in the core budget, central government’s off-
budget entities are also likely to record very
large deficits in 2009. They ran up a deficit of
315 billion in the first half of this year, com-
pared with a surplus of 311/C252billion in the
same period last year. The Financial Market
Stabilisation Fund (Soffin) alone recorded a
deficit of 3131/C252billion in the first six months
of 2009 owing to sizeable capital injections
into credit institutions. By contrast, the Invest-
ment and Repayment Fund, which now has
expenditure authorisations totalling 325 bil-
lion, recorded a deficit of only 31 billion,
which was almost entirely attributable to the
car scrapping incentive. The outflow of in-
vestment funds will probably rise significantly
by the end of the year, as an increasing num-
ber of projects will be initiated and funded.
Overall, the off-budget entities could record a
deficit of 325 billion in 2009.
State government8
The deterioration in the fiscal balance of state
government continued in the second quarter.
After recording a surplus of 361/C252billion last
year, state governments posted a deficit of
321/C252billion this time. Revenue fell sharply by
9% owing primarily to the steep decline in tax
receipts. Spending rose by 31/C252%. Not least,personnel expenditure increased significantly
as a result of the pay settlement for salaried
staff concluded in March and its extension to
public sector employees with civil servant sta-
tus as well as retired civil servants in most fed-
eral states. These figures exclude the substan-
tial capital injection of 33 billion into HSH
Nordbank financed outside the core budgets
of Schleswig-Holstein and Hamburg.
The current state budgets, most of which
take account of the second economic stimu-
lus package but have not yet been fully ad-
justed to the latest – less favourable – tax esti-Net borrowing plus
global savings
in central government’s 
medium-term financial plan
1 Excluding the estimates for financing the 
resolutions envisaged in the Higher Educa-
tion Pact (€2½ billion ), which are not attrib-
uted to individual years from 2011 to 2013.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 20130102030405060708090Financial transactions
Cyclical component
Global savings 1
Structural deficit€ bn
7See Deutsche Bundesbank, The reform of the borrow-
ing limits for central and state government, Monthly Re-
port, May 2009, pp 78-79.
8The development of local government finances in the
first quarter was analysed in greater detail in the short
articles in the Bundesbank Monthly Report of July 2009.
These are the most recent data available.Off-budget
entities with
large deficits
Deterioration
in fiscal balance
continued
in Q2Large full-year
deficit expected

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
74mate, already project a deficit of 322 billion
for 2009. However, this does not include the
37 billion injected into Bayern LB, which was
allocated to the 2008 budgetary accounts,
or – as in the case of HSH Nordbank – the
planned capital injection of 32 billion into
LBBW by Baden-W/C252rtemberg.
Against the backdrop of ongoing large def-
icits through 2010 and beyond and the fore-
seeable sharp rise in state civil servant pen-
sion obligations, it is imperative to rapidly
consolidate state government budgets once
the crisis has been overcome – even though
the new debt rule will not have full binding
effect on state government until 2020. The
rule stipulates that, as a general principle,
state government budgets must be balanced.
However, the German constitution (Basic Law)
does not specify that state governments
should adjust their borrowing limit for finan-
cial transactions and cyclical influences or
how they should handle infringements of the
borrowing limit, and these matters seem, as
yet, to be largely unresolved. It would there-
fore appear sensible to enshrine these points
in the state government constitutions. A uni-
form and transparent procedure would facili-
tate monitoring of budgetary developments
by the new Stability Council, which will begin
work as early as 2010, and by the general
public. Prompt decisions would be desirable
in order, among other things, to be able to
quantify the consolidation requirement for
the individual states and plan corrective
measures as soon as possible.Social security funds9
Statutory pension insurance scheme
The surplus of 31/C252billion recorded by the
statutory pension insurance scheme in the
second quarter of 2009 was down by one-
half on the year. Both total revenue and con-
tributions grew by just under1/C252%. Although
employees’ compulsory contributions (includ-
ing contributions for recipients of short-time
working benefits) fell by1/C252%, contributions
for recipients of unemployment benefits were
up by one-fifth on the year. This illustrates
that falling employment will cause only a
moderate decline in revenue to the statutory
pension insurance scheme as long as un-
employment benefit I or short-time working
benefits are being paid. Should unemploy-
ment become more deeply entrenched, how-
ever, revenue can be expected to shrink more
sharply.10Expenditure was up by 11/C252%o n
the year. This was caused primarily by a rise
of just under 11/C252% in pension payments, re-
sulting from the pension increase of 1.1% in
mid-2008 and marginal growth of just under
1/C252% in the number of pensions. In addition,
health insurance contributions for pensioners
grew markedly following the launch of the
health insurance fund on 1 January 2009
9The financial development of the statutory health and
public long-term care insurance schemes in the first quar-
ter was analysed in the short articles of the Monthly Re-
port of June 2009. These are the most recent data avail-
able.
10For each recipient of unemployment benefit I the Fed-
eral Employment Agency transfers social contributions on
the basis of 80% of his/her previous gross remuneration
(averaging just over 32,500 per month in western Ger-
many and just under 32,200 in eastern Germany). If the
recipient subsequently claims (means-tested) unemploy-
ment benefit II, the assessment base decreases to 3205
per month.Implementation
of debt rule still
largely unclearFinancial
development in
Q2 still robust

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
75with a uniform contribution rate of 15.5%
(compared with an average of 14.9% a yearearlier).
The revenue base is likely to weaken further
in the second half of the year owing to theeconomic crisis. Moreover, pensions wereraised very sharply on 1 July 2009 – by 2.41%in western Germany and 3.38% in easternGermany. This is due, first, to last year’sstrong growth in earnings subject to contri-butions and, second, to the renewed sus-pension of the factor dampening pensionincreases through a standard deduction forcontribution payers’ assumed own supple-mentary old-age provision (“Riester reformsteps”). This added just over 0.6 percentagepoint to the pension increase.
11The cut in the
contribution rate to the health insurance
fund in mid-2009 to 14.9% will provide
some, albeit significantly smaller financial
relief.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a
deficit of almost 36 billion in the second quar-
ter. This equates to a year-on-year deterior-
ation of 351/C252billion and reflects both the im-
pact of the macroeconomic downturn and
special factors. Total receipts fell by one-third,
which was attributable in no small measure
to the renewed lowering of the contributionrate from 3.3% to 2.8% and, to an even
greater extent, to the fact that the Federalgrant (just under 38 billion per year or previ-
ously almost 32 billion per quarter) is no long-
er transferred in equal monthly instalmentsbut as a one-off payment at the end of theyear. But even without these two extraordin-ary factors, revenue would have fallen by justover 2
1/C252% in the second quarter.
Expenditure growth likewise reflects the in-
creasing impact of the macroeconomic slow-down on the labour market and, additionally,
the sharp increase in the implementation of vo-cational training measures. Furthermore, claim-ing short-time benefits has temporarily becomemuch more appealing for firms and thus moreFinances of the
German statutorypension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009545658606264
–20+2+4Quarterly
€ bn€ bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
11In order nonetheless to achieve the aspired objective
of curbing the increase in contribution rates, legislation is
planned to retroactively claw back the suspended pen-
sion modifications as well as the pension decreases
waived in recent years. If the existing rules are applied,
this means that hardly any pension increases are to be ex-
pected in the coming years.Financial
deterioration
over remainder
of 2009
Agency’s
financial
situation again
worseRecessiondriving up
Agency’s costs

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
76costly for the Agency.12Spending consequently
soared by 191/C252%(32 billion) in the second
quarter. The higher payments for short-time
working benefits, unemployment benefit I and
active labour market policy measures were a
key factor behind this. In addition, insolvency
benefit payments grew substantially.13
Including the unscheduled expenditure ap-
proved recently, the Federal EmploymentAgency is expected to record a deficit of 3161/C252
billion for the year as a whole. Its reserves
would then be almost completely exhausted
by as early as the end of 2009. In particular,
the funds earmarked for short-time working
benefits were adjusted given the increased re-
course to this facility and the most recent
benefit extensions, though the estimates for
unemployment and insolvency benefits were
likewise revised upwards significantly.
Should unemployment increase, the deficit
can be expected to rise next year. Given the
depletion of the Federal Employment Agen-
cy’s own reserves, this will need to be offset
using central government funds. In the draft
Federal budget for 2010, the sum of 320 bil-
lion – above and beyond the regular Federal
grant of just under 38 billion – is envisaged
for a loan. The loan will be interest-free and
will not need to be repaid until the Federal
Employment Agency records sufficient sur-
pluses. Since it will hardly be possible for the
Agency to achieve a structurally balanced
budget with a contribution rate of 2.8% (or
3.0% from 2011), it will probably be unable
to repay the central government loans under
these conditions.Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1 Excluding central government liquidity as-
sistance. — 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants’ pension fund set up in 2008.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 200968101214
1.82.43.03.64.24.85.46.06.6
–6–4–20+2+4+6Quarterly
€ bn€ bnLog scale
Expenditure, 
total 2Revenue 1
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment
    benefit and short-time
    working benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)€ bn
12In principle, social contributions – based on 80% of
the salary lost due to short-time working – are to be paid
by the employer. The second economic stimulus package
stipulated that the Federal Employment Agency would
refund 50% of these costs or 100% if the firm provides
retraining. It was recently decided that social contribu-
tions for recipients of short-time working benefits would
be refunded in full from the seventh month of short-time
working regardless of whether retraining measures are in
place. In addition, the maximum period of entitlement to
short-time working benefits was extended initially from
12 to 18 months and, from 30 April, to 24 months.
13In the first half of the year, only one-half of this ex-
penditure was covered by the insolvency benefit contri-
butions paid by enterprises. The contribution rate is
based on the original budget plan. It is adjusted for actual
expenditure in the following year.Large deficit in
2009 with
stabilising
function
Central
government
loan required
in 2010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
77Annex
Statistical recording of financial market stabil-
isation measures in connection with the Maas-
tricht deficit and debt levels
The numerous, predominantly government meas-
ures taken to support financial institutions during
the financial crisis are raising questions about how
they should be recorded in the EU statistical sys-
tems. Whether and to what extent the measures
taken are reflected in the member states’ deficit
and debt levels ultimately depends on how such
government interventions are evaluated.14The
task of statistical recording is additionally ham-
pered because the various stabilisation instruments
that have been devised to date are very diverse
and in some cases very complex and because at-
tempts to determine the actual value of the finan-
cial assets in question are fraught with much un-
certainty. The most commonly deployed measures
include capital injections, guarantees, loans and
the purchase of impaired assets. Additional instru-
ments relate to providing banks with government
bonds eligible for refinancing purposes. Constructs
involving the setting-up of special entities charged
with carrying out the support measures are par-
ticularly intricate. Thus support measures may be
carried out not just by dedicated government spe-
cial funds but also by public enterprises and special
purpose vehicles set up under private law in which
the state holds no majority stake but provides a
risk shield.
The need for accurate and timely recording of pub-
lic finance statistics is particularly great in the euro
area as a solid and transparent statistical base is a
key prerequisite for ensuring the effectiveness and
credibility of the European fiscal rules. The latter
are intended to safeguard the sustainability ofpublic finances in the EU and in the euro area. The
EU has an established institutional framework for
statistics. As the European Commission’s statistical
office, Eurostat is responsible for providing and as-
sessing the quality of data used in the EU budget-
ary surveillance procedure. In addition, Eurostat is
charged with the task of clarifying any unresolved
issues with regard to applying the accounting rules
of the current European System of Accounts (ESA
95), which must be used for calculating the Maas-
tricht deficit and debt levels. In complicated cases
or those that are of general interest, the Commit-
tee on Monetary, Financial and Balance of Pay-
ments Statistics (CMFB) should first be consulted.
The CMFB is a committee of experts and as such
enjoys the status of an advisory body. Expert opin-
ions issued by the CMFB based on consultation
procedures are intended inter alia to lend rapid
and independent technical support to Eurostat’s
decision-making process and protect it against pol-
itical lobbying.15In accordance with the European
Statistical System (ESS) Action Plan published by
Eurostat, care must be taken when interpreting
the ESA 95 rules to ensure that consistency is
maintained both over time and between member
states.
The CMFB published two opinions on 18 March
2009 providing clarification of key statistical
accounting aspects associated with government
intervention to support financial institutions and
financial markets during the financial crisis.16
14See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The impact of the fi-
nancial market crisis on public finances, Monthly Report,
November 2008, pp 64 and 65.
15See the ECOFIN Council conclusions of 8 November
2005.
16See CMFB website (www.cmfb.org), opinions from
18 March 2009.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
78Ahead of the notifications by member states be-
fore 1 April, Eurostat welcomed these opinions as
a suitable approach to recording statistics in the
absence of corresponding guidelines of its own.
On 15 July 2009, Eurostat published a decision and
a technical guidance note.17It concluded that the
exceptional situation of the financial crisis raises
particular challenges for statisticians, above all,
concerning the valuation of financial assets, the
measurement of risks and the rapid development
of new forms of intervention. With this in mind,
Eurostat compiled a set of rules which explicitly
apply only to the unique circumstances of the
financial crisis. Given the individuality and com-
plexity of the transactions, a need for specific clari-
fication and interpretation in individual cases will
persist, however.
In principle, special rules for recording support
measures in this exceptional financial crisis are jus-
tified inter alia by the fact that market values,
which for example would be needed to determine
a possible capital transfer share (to be recorded as
deficit-increasing) if transaction values deviate, can
no longer be reliably determined as a result of the
uncertainty surrounding asset values. In such
cases, the recording guidance to resolve valuation
problems established by Eurostat on the basis of
the CMFB opinions provides a working approxima-
tion to the valuations required. In a departure from
the ESA 95 provisions and the CMFB recommenda-
tions, the rules regarding the basic definition of
the general government sector have been amend-
ed and the fundamental principle of recording
according to economic substance rather than form
has been partially abandoned. Consequently, it is
conceivable at present that similar support meas-
ures may be treated differently depending on their
form. This also runs counter to the objective stated
in the action plan that all member states shouldrecord statistics consistently both over time and
between countries. In this context, it is worrying
that – in contrast to the CMFB vote and transac-
tions that have already been recorded – in individ-
ual countries certain transactions are now to be
recorded as not increasing the deficit or debt level.
On the whole, it is expected that the current gov-
ernment support measures, which are likely to
place considerable financial burdens on the
state,18will to a large extent initially not be
reflected in the officially published Maastricht
deficit level and only to some degree in the Maas-
tricht debt level.
Asset purchases by government
If government purchases securities from financial
institutions at a higher price than the current
market price, ESA 95 stipulates that the difference
should be recorded as a capital transfer that
increases the deficit. All other things being equal,
such a purchase – which is typically debt-financed
– would push up the Maastricht debt level, which
is calculated as gross indebtedness (excluding the
deduction of government financial assets). At
present, when actually recording these purchases,
the problem may arise that the market price is
either not known or cannot be determined.
Recourse must then be made to alternative valu-
ation approaches in order to record these in the
statistics. Broadly following the CMFB opinion, the
Eurostat decision specifies how market prices can
be approximated during times of financial crisis. If
the capital markets in question are inactive, a first
possible approximation would be the value deter-
17See http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/por-
tal/eurostat/home.
18See inter alia European Commission, Public Finances
in EMU 2009, European Economy 5/2009.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
79mined during an auction procedure. If there are no
auction prices, then the last book value can beused if this is a fair value as defined in international
accounting standards and if it was calculated
shortly after the government purchase. If theserequirements are not met, then the price to be
used should be determined by means of independ-ent valuation (in accordance with market-basedmethods). If a price cannot be calculated in thisway either, the final option would be to use thetransaction price. In this case, however, a (retro-
active) correction would have to be made subse-quently if the assets are revalued in the followingyear or sold on at a lower price and the marketenvironment has not changed significantly in themeantime. Finally, if and when the asset is sold onat an even later date at less than the recordedpurchase price, the resulting negative difference isalso to be recorded as a deficit-increasing capital
transfer if the valuation at the time of purchasewas based on book values (fair value), on inde-pendent market-based valuation methods, or ontransaction values.
Recapitalisation of financial institutionsWhen recording capital transfers by government,
the issue generally arises as to whether govern-ment invests funds in the same way as a private in-vestor, ie in anticipation of a market rate of return,or whether government instead offsets incurredlosses for other reasons. As a rule, financial trans-actions, such as the acquisition of shares, are re-corded at the transaction value in the national ac-counts. However, if a transaction is not just com-mercially motivated but also contains a transfercomponent, it should be recorded accordingly. For
instance, if government were to purchase, as part
of a capital increase, new quoted equity above thecurrent market price, the difference would have tobe recorded as a deficit-increasing capital transfer.
This is likely to be the case, for example, for theFinancial Market Stabilisation Fund (Soffin)’s
topping-up of its equity holding in Hypo Real
Estate to 90% in June 2009. The assessment be-comes more difficult if the capital injection takes
the form of unquoted preference shares or otherhybrid instruments. Given the prevailing uncer-tainty surrounding asset values during the financialcrisis, Eurostat resolved, in accordance with theCMFB’s recommendations, that government cap-
ital injections in the form of preference shares forwhich a return has been agreed in line with currentEU state aid rules are to be treated as normalfinancial investment (ie they have no impact onthe Maastricht deficit). However, the Maastrichtdebt level would increase ceteris paribus due to
refinancing requirements. Given the current valu-ation uncertainty, this can be understood as an
exceptional rule that is acceptable as a workingapproach. Nevertheless, as things currently stand,this is likely to understate the present burden ascapital injections to stabilise credit institutionsgranted in the context of an approved state aidtypically also contain a subsidy component.
Delimitation of the general government sector
– recording newly set up financial vehicles
Pursuant to ESA 95, entities that do not have suffi-
cient decision-making autonomy in respect ofexercising their principal function should be con-solidated with the entities that determine theirgeneral business policy. Decision-making auton-omy means not just the formal recording of assetson a balance sheet but also being entitled to ex-change ownership of these in transactions with
third parties. As a rule, the activities of financial
vehicles set up with state backing for the sole pur-pose of rescuing distressed financial institutions or

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
80supporting the financial sector in the throes of the
financial turmoil are largely predetermined by gov-
ernment and the entities themselves thus have no
sufficient autonomy of decision in respect of exer-
cising their principal function. Similarly, it seems
clear that government determines the general
business policy of such an entity which it guaran-
tees and therefore largely controls this entity. ESA
95 expressly stipulates that government may also
enjoy a corresponding control – eg owing to spe-
cial legislation, decree or regulation – without ne-
cessarily being the majority stakeholder. Financial
vehicles established to support the financial sector
under terms specified by government and whose
existence and activities would not be possible
without a government guarantee can hardly be re-
garded as financial intermediaries given the lack or
considerably restricted possibility of risk assump-
tion. Moreover, they usually have neither a bank-
ing licence nor a notable capital base. Conse-
quently, the special purpose vehicles set up to sup-
port the regional wholesale banks ( Landesbanken )
SachsenLB and WestLB have been recorded inside
the general government sector in the German na-
tional accounts. There is also no doubt that Soffin
must be classified under the government sector. In
its opinion, CMFB recommends assigning financial
vehicles to the general government sector if they
can be registered as an institutional unit and if the
majority of their shares is held by non-government
units, but their activities are predetermined by gov-
ernment and for which government bears the
brunt of the risks (for instance, by guaranteeing
their refinancing).
According to the Eurostat decision, by contrast,
the key factor for determining to which sector a
special purpose vehicle should be assigned is
whether the majority stake is held by government
or non-government units. This diverges from theconcept of control defined in ESA 95 outlined
above and could result in a sectoral classification
which is at odds with economic reality. However,
the Eurostat decision should not be taken to mean
that all special purpose vehicles set up in connec-
tion with the financial crisis and where the majority
stakeholder is a non-government unit are to be re-
corded outside the government sector. The new
rules specify that this is the case only if the entity
has been established to operate only for a short
period of time (ie for the duration of the financial
crisis) and if losses are expected to be low relative
to total debt. To estimate the expected losses,
Eurostat proposes considering the quality of the
collateral or of any other arrangements that limit
liability. This appears to be difficult, however, espe-
cially as it is precisely in times of financial crisis that
it is difficult to determine the true value of financial
assets. In the case of existing special purpose
vehicles for Landesbanken and of the bad bank
models pursuant to the Financial Market Stabilisa-
tion Amendment Act of 17 July 2009, however,
these entities would be classified under the gov-
ernment sector on the basis of the duration criter-
ion alone as these have apparently been set up to
operate for a considerable period of time. On the
whole, these additional criteria provide only a limit-
ed approach to deciding the sectoral assignment
of entities which is neither derived from ESA 95
nor is consistent with the CMFB’s recommenda-
tions.
Guarantees
Pursuant to ESA 95, guarantees – unless they are
tradable or can be offset on the market and thus
have a market value – are contingent liabilities and
as such are not counted towards the debt level.
Government guarantees granted in connection
with the financial crisis may comprise deposits,

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
81debt instruments or financial assets, for example.
Guarantees granted to entities assigned to thegovernment sector have no impact on the (consoli-
dated) government sector even if they are called.
For all other support measures designated as guar-antees, however, a case-by-case decision must be
made as to whether this labelling is in line with theESA 95 provisions.
Support measures provided via public
enterprises
In the case of the support measures taken by the
KfW Banking Group in 2007 to support IKB (in par-ticular, assumption of the obligations to the Rhine-land Funding conduit), Eurostat initially decidedthat these transactions clearly ran counter to KfW’sown economic interests and that this is a materialindication that KfW acted on behalf of govern-
ment. Furthermore, the general notion was con-firmed that the measures were taken for the publicbenefit, so that ultimately government (and notKfW) was to be regarded as the principal party tothe transaction. To capture the economic realitybehind a transaction more accurately, ESA 95stipulates that the transaction is to be recorded inthe accounts of the principal party to the transac-tion. In the case of public enterprises, in particular,Eurostat has carefully examined in the pastwhether certain transactions which transcend nor-mal business activities may have been carried outon behalf of government. On the basis of a Euro-stat decision, Germany therefore initially assignedthe transactions of 37.3 billion net made by KfW
in 2007 to the government deficit. However, pur-suant to the latest Eurostat decision, which followsthe CMFB opinion on this point, a written instruc-
tion or irrefutable evidence proving that KfW actedon government instructions would be required for
the transaction to be classified as increasing the
deficit. The support measures undertaken by KfWin 2007 thus ought to be subtracted from the gen-
eral government deficit. However, the measurestaken by KfW in 2008 to support IKB (in particular,recapitalisation) would remain assigned to the gov-ernment sector because a corresponding provisionhad been made for this in the budget, thus proving
that this action was undertaken on behalf of gov-ernment.
Exchange and loan of financial assetsTo safeguard banks’ liquidity, they can temporarily
be offered government bonds in exchange fornon-eligible securities. It is questionable whether
the transfer of government bonds on a temporarybasis – albeit for a significantly longer period thanis usual for securities lending transactions – has tobe included in the calculation of the Maastrichtdebt level or whether the securities remain in thegovernment’s portfolio (as lender) as with conven-tional securities lending transactions, thereby hav-ing no impact on outstanding government debt.The Eurostat decision states that the way in whichthe transactions are recorded depends, first, onthe duration of the transaction and, second, onthe risks which the transactions entail for govern-ment. However, the latter are likely to be difficultto assess given the current extreme uncertainty.Moreover, the duration of the transaction is notspecified and thus requires further clarification.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
82

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 5*
2 External transactions and positions 5*
3 General economic indicators 6*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors of
economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*
5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financialsectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
individual taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*
6 Labour market 65*
7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in
Stage III of European Economic and
Monetary Union 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and indicators of the Germaneconomy’s price competitiveness 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
 I Key economic data for the euro area  
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2007          Oct 6.6 11.3 12.5 12.1 9.3 12.3 8.7 3.94 4.69 4.4
         Nov 6.3 11.0 12.4 12.2 9.1 12.1 8.0 4.02 4.64 4.2         Dec 4.0 10.2 11.6 11.9 10.1 12.8 8.5 3.88 4.85 4.3
2008          Jan 4.4 10.5 11.7 11.6 10.0 12.8 8.6 4.02 4.48 4.2
         Feb 3.6 10.8 11.5 11.1 9.9 12.7 7.4 4.03 4.36 4.1
         Mar 2.8 9.9 10.1 10.7 9.8 12.4 6.2 4.09 4.60 4.1
         Apr 2.5 10.5 10.5 10.3 10.0 12.2 6.1 3.99 4.78 4.3
         May 2.3 10.3 10.2 10.1 9.5 12.0 6.1 4.01 4.86 4.4         June 1.5 9.7 9.7 9.7 9.1 11.2 5.2 4.01 4.94 4.8
         July 0.4 9.3 9.3 9.3 9.2 11.0 4.9 4.19 4.96 4.7
         Aug 0.3 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.3 10.9 4.9 4.30 4.97 4.5         Sep 1.2 9.0 8.7 8.8 8.6 10.2 5.0 4.27 5.02 4.4
         Oct 3.7 9.3 8.7 8.4 7.5 8.9 3.3 3.82 5.11 4.3
         Nov 2.2 8.7 7.7 8.0 7.4 8.4 3.7 3.15 4.24 4.1         Dec 3.3 8.3 7.5 7.0 6.4 7.1 2.9 2.49 3.29 3.7
2009          Jan 5.1 7.5 5.9 6.4 6.1 6.3 3.6 1.81 2.46 3.9
         Feb 6.1 6.9 5.8 5.6 5.9 5.7 4.5 1.26 1.94 4.0         Mar 5.9 6.2 5.1 5.2 5.2 4.6 4.2 1.06 1.64 3.9
         Apr 8.3 5.9 4.9 4.6 4.3 3.6 4.1 0.84 1.42 3.9
         May 7.9 5.0 3.7 4.1 3.9 3.0 4.8 0.78 1.28 4.0         June 9.3 4.8 3.5 ... 4.3 3.0 5.0 0.70 1.23 4.2
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.36 0.97 4.0
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2007          Oct + 4,067 + 6,291 − 48,441 + 31,023 − 52,796 − 26,674 + 7 1.4227 109.6 110.6
         Nov − 48 + 4,689 − 2,984 + 7,833 − 16,371 + 5,352 + 202 1.4684 111.2 112.2
         Dec + 3,221 − 2,977 − 41,135 − 26,289 − 31,813 + 12,463 + 4,504 1.4570 111.5 112.2
2008          Jan − 18,189 − 8,302 + 45,317 − 32,392 + 38,169 + 45,946 − 6,407 1.4718 112.2 112.9
         Feb + 7,277 + 4,396 − 17,774 − 20,152 + 9,135 − 11,306 + 4,548 1.4748 112.0 112.5         Mar − 6,345 + 1,441 + 7,978 − 22,684 + 18,508 + 15,368 − 3,215 1.5527 114.8 115.6
         Apr − 7,480 + 5,112 + 25,706 − 23,010 − 21,035 + 73,010 − 3,258 1.5751 116.3 117.0
         May − 24,029 − 1,586 + 39,088 − 5,351 − 9,148 + 50,861 + 2,726 1.5557 115.8 116.6         June + 367 + 2,566 + 14,945 − 25,060 + 48,514 − 9,033 + 524 1.5553 115.8 116.5
         July − 4,127 + 389 + 48,527 − 1,555 + 28,977 + 23,374 − 2,268 1.5770 116.2 116.7
         Aug − 11,468 − 7,125 + 359 − 11,849 + 11,033 − 1,115 + 2,290 1.4975 113.9 114.1         Sep − 7,547 − 2,277 + 12,774 − 22,499 + 73,131 − 39,478 + 1,620 1.4370 112.0 112.1
         Oct − 8,145 + 3,945 + 74,966 − 11,986 + 139,410 − 44,512 − 7,946 1.3322 107.9 108.2
         Nov − 15,964 − 4,036 + 15,103 − 51,900 + 44,192 + 23,180 − 369 1.2732 107.1 107.5         Dec − 5,342 − 517 + 36,279 − 13,857 + 3,900 + 38,345 + 7,892 1.3449 112.4 112.9
2009          Jan − 28,409 − 13,949 + 45,405 − 9,350 + 9,541 + 39,884 + 5,329 1.3239 111.9 112.3
         Feb − 7,019 + 333 + 34,469 − 8,509 + 84,261 − 42,491 + 1,208 1.2785 110.4 110.7         Mar − 6,957 + 3,350 + 67,982 − 20,646 + 99,881 − 10,410 − 843 1.3050 113.3 113.5
         Apr − 9,375 + 3,889 − 2,481 − 4,467 − 1,251 + 3,113 + 124 1.3190 112.5 112.8
         May − 12,951 + 2,191 + 24,667 + 6,143 + 64,087 − 43,306 − 2,257 1.3650 113.0 113.2         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.4016 114.0 114.2
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.4088 113.8 114.0
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-21 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
5* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1
 
2006 2.9 3.0 3.2 4.9 2.2 4.5 5.7 2.0
2007 2.7 2.8 2.5 4.2 2.3 4.0 6.0 1.62008 0.7 1.1 1.3 1.0 0.4 2.9 − 2.3 − 1.0
2008          Q1 2.2 1.9 2.1 2.6 1.7 3.4 − 1.4 0.2
         Q2 1.5 2.0 3.4 2.5 1.4 3.3 − 1.6 − 0.2         Q3 0.5 1.5 1.4 1.7 0.4 2.9 − 1.0 − 1.0         Q4 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.3 − 1.7 2.2 − 8.0 − 3.1
2009          Q1 − 4.9 − 3.4 − 6.4 − 7.4 − 3.1 0.3 − 8.5 − 6.5
         Q2 − 4.7 ... − 7.1 ... − 3.1 − 0.3 ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,2
 
2006 4.2 5.0 5.7 9.9 1.4 0.8 2.9 3.6
2007 3.7 2.9 6.0 4.3 1.2 2.3 5.0 2.1
2008 − 1.7 − 0.6 0.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 4.2 − 1.5 − 3.3
2008          Q1 2.8 1.7 5.0 4.0 1.6 − 3.9 0.8 0.9
         Q2 1.1 2.6 3.1 2.6 − 0.3 − 2.3 0.6 0.2         Q3 − 1.5 1.4 0.0 0.6 − 2.2 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 4.1         Q4 − 9.0 − 7.8 − 7.6 − 8.2 − 9.1 − 7.6 − 7.1 − 10.2
2009          Q1 − 18.4 − 16.5
9 − 20.3 − 22.4 − 15.8 − 8.2 − 2.6 − 21.0
         Q2 e − 18.6 ... 9p − 20.7 − 23.7 − 15.4 − 11.1 p − 0.5 − 22.0
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 
2006 82.8 82.7 85.5 86.0 85.0 75.7 75.7 77.6
2007 84.2 83.2 87.5 87.3 86.6 76.9 76.6 78.2
2008 83.0 82.9 86.5 84.4 85.8 76.4 ... 75.9
2008          Q2 83.7 83.4 87.6 85.2 86.2 77.3 75.3 76.2
         Q3 82.8 82.1 86.2 84.3 85.9 76.2 ... 75.6         Q4 81.5 82.4 84.8 81.9 84.1 75.4 ... 75.2
2009          Q1 74.7 75.4 76.2 72.0 76.0 73.4 ... 70.4
         Q2 70.3 70.4 71.8 66.5 71.2 70.3 ... 66.2         Q3 69.5 71.5 71.1 65.3 70.3 68.3 ... 64.6
 
Unemployment rate 4
 
2006 8.3 8.3 9.8 7.7 9.2 8.9 4.5 6.8
2007 7.5 7.5 8.4 6.9 8.4 8.3 4.6 6.1
2008 7.5 7.0 7.3 6.4 7.8 7.7 6.0 6.8
2009          Jan 8.5 7.5 7.2 7.1 8.6 8.7 9.3 7.4
         Feb 8.8 7.7 7.3 7.4 8.8 8.7 10.3 7.4         Mar 9.0 8.0 7.5 7.7 9.0 8.7 11.0 7.4
         Apr 9.2 8.1 7.6 8.0 9.1 ... 11.5 ...
         May 9.3 8.1 7.7 8.3 9.3 ... 12.0 ...         June 9.4 8.1 7.7 8.5 9.4 ... 12.2 ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2006 2.2 2.3 1.8 1.3 1.9 3.3 2.7 2.2
2007 5 2.1 1.8 2.3 1.6 1.6 3.0 2.9 2.0
2008 6 3.3 4.5 2.8 3.9 3.2 4.2 3.1 3.5
2009          Feb 7 1.2 1.9 1.0 2.7 1.0 1.8 0.1 1.5
         Mar 0.6 0.6 0.4 2.0 0.4 1.5 − 0.7 1.1
         Apr 0.6 0.7 0.8 2.1 0.1 1.1 − 0.7 1.2
         May 0.0 − 0.2 0.0 1.5 − 0.3 0.7 − 1.7 0.8         June − 0.1 − 1.0 0.0 1.6 − 0.6 0.7 − 2.2 0.6
         July
p − 0.7 − 1.7 − 0.7 1.2 − 0.8 0.7 − 2.6 − 0.1
 
General government financial balance 8
 
2006 − 1.3 0.3 − 1.5 4.0 − 2.3 − 2.8 3.0 − 3.3
2007 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 5.2 − 2.7 − 3.6 0.2 − 1.5
2008 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.1 4.2 − 3.4 − 5.0 − 7.1 − 2.7
 
General government debt 8
 
2006 68.2 87.9 67.6 39.2 63.7 95.9 24.9 106.5
2007 66.0 84.0 65.1 35.1 63.8 94.8 25.0 103.5
2008 69.3 89.6 65.9 33.4 68.0 97.6 43.2 105.8
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — are collected in January, April, July and October. — 4  Standardised, as a
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of the euro area calculated from seaso- percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. — 5  Including
nally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for
6*I. Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
I.  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1
 
6.4 3.3 3.4 3.5 1.4 8.5 5.9 3.9 4.1 2006
5.2 4.2 3.6 3.5 1.9 10.4 6.8 3.7 4.4 2007
− 0.9 2.5 2.0 2.0 0.0 6.4 3.5 1.2 3.7 2008
1.0 3.4 3.6 3.4 0.6 9.3 5.7 2.9 4.3 2008          Q1
1.1 4.2 3.2 3.0 0.6 7.9 5.5 2.3 3.8          Q2
− 0.9 3.1 1.9 2.3 0.4 6.6 3.9 0.4 3.4          Q3
− 4.8 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.7 2.5 − 0.8 − 0.8 2.8          Q4
− 5.5 − 3.3 − 4.5 − 4.7 − 4.6 − 5.6 − 8.5 − 3.3 0.9 2009          Q1
... ... − 5.1 − 4.4 ... − 5.3 ... ... − 1.0          Q2
 
Industrial production1,2
 
2.2 − 1.5 7.8 3.1 12.2 6.1 3.9 0.4 2006
− 0.3 − 2.3 5.8 0.1 16.0 7.2 2.0 4.6 2007
− 5.4 − 1.5 0.9 − 4.1 4.6 − 1.8 − 7.3 4.1 2008
− 3.3 − 7.4 3.5 − 3.5 13.4 3.2 − 0.8 6.5 2008          Q1
− 2.0 − 5.2 3.1 − 3.6 11.9 2.6 − 5.4 6.4          Q2
2.1 − 0.5 1.8 − 2.3 5.7 − 1.3 − 6.3 4.2          Q3
− 17.9 − − 6.4 − 4.5 − 6.8 − 11.1 − 11.3 − 16.6 − 0.3          Q4
− 24.3 − − 10.0 − 12.5 − 12.5 − 23.3 − 19.7 − 22.6 − 9.0 2009          Q1
p − 19.2 − − 12.7 ... − 9.7 ... − 22.4 − 18.7 ...          Q2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 
85.2 81.6 82.0 83.4 78.4 75.4 83.9 80.5 69.9 2006
87.3 80.8 83.6 85.2 81.8 73.6 85.9 81.0 70.0 200785.1 79.0 83.4 83.0 79.8 72.0 84.1 79.2 72.0 2008
84.5 82.4 83.4 84.0 82.3 72.7 85.3 80.2 73.2 2008          Q2
85.9 78.2 83.6 82.4 79.7 71.5 83.8 79.0 72.3          Q3
83.9 75.9 82.9 81.9 79.0 68.9 82.6 76.4 70.1          Q4
72.6 69.0 77.5 77.2 76.4 53.3 75.2 73.5 69.5 2009          Q1
65.2 65.9 74.6 73.2 70.6 50.9 69.1 69.8 66.7          Q2
67.4 71.0 75.5 73.5 71.5 51.9 69.3 67.9 64.8          Q3
 
Unemployment rate 4
 
4.6 7.1 3.9 4.8 7.8 13.4 6.0 8.5 4.6 2006
4.2 6.4 3.2 4.4 8.1 11.1 4.9 8.3 4.0 20074.9 6.0 2.8 3.8 7.7 9.5 4.4 11.3 3.7 2008
5.6 6.4 2.8 4.2 8.5 9.7 4.6 15.6 4.2 2009          Jan 
5.8 6.6 2.9 4.3 8.8 10.1 4.9 16.5 4.4          Feb 
6.0 6.8 3.1 4.4 9.1 10.6 5.3 17.2 4.7          Mar 
6.1 7.0 3.2 4.3 9.2 11.0 5.7 17.6 5.1          Apr 
6.3 7.2 3.2 4.4 9.3 11.3 6.0 17.9 5.3          May6.4 7.3 3.3 4.4 9.3 11.7 6.1 18.1 5.4          June
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.0 2.6 1.7 1.7 3.0 4.3 2.5 3.6 2.2 2006
2.7 0.7 1.6 2.2 2.4 1.9 3.8 2.8 2.2 20074.1 4.7 2.2 3.2 2.7 3.9 5.5 4.1 4.4 2008
0.7 3.5 1.9 1.4 0.1 2.4 2.1 0.7 0.6 2009          Feb 
− 0.3 3.9 1.8 0.6 − 0.6 1.8 1.6 − 0.1 0.9          Mar 
− 0.3 4.0 1.8 0.5 − 0.6 1.4 1.1 − 0.2 0.6          Apr 
− 0.9 3.4 1.5 0.1 − 1.2 1.1 0.5 − 0.9 0.5          May
− 1.0 2.8 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.6 0.7 0.2 − 1.0 0.1          June
− 1.5 0.8
p − 0.1 p − 0.4 − 1.4 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.8          July
 
General government financial balance 8
 
1.4 − 2.6 0.6 − 1.6 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 1.3 2.0 − 1.2 2006
3.6 − 2.2 0.3 − 0.5 − 2.6 − 1.9 0.5 2.2 3.4 20072.6 − 4.7 1.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 3.8 0.9 2008
 
General government debt 8
 
6.7 63.7 47.4 62.0 64.7 30.4 26.7 39.6 64.6 20066.9 62.1 45.6 59.4 63.5 29.4 23.4 36.2 59.4 2007
14.7 64.1 58.2 62.5 66.4 27.6 22.8 39.5 49.1 2008
Slovenia from 2007 onwards. — 6  Including Malta and Cyprus from 2008 states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). —
onwards. — 7  Including Slovakia from 2009 onwards. — 8  As a percentage 9  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way of
of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey. 
7*I.  Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2007          Nov 95.1 97.1 12.0 − 2.0 − 2.8 28.8 79.2 50.4 − 4.9 2.5 0.8 − 13.4 5.2
         Dec 121.3 123.3 64.7 − 2.0 − 12.6 − 48.1 − 136.1 − 88.1 83.9 48.9 0.4 1.6 33.1
2008          Jan 127.6 110.5 19.0 17.1 13.6 − 19.3 234.5 253.8 19.0 − 3.4 1.8 11.8 8.8
         Feb 57.9 65.0 3.5 − 7.1 2.6 − 18.3 80.0 98.3 − 10.4 − 8.9 − 1.1 − 4.4 4.0         Mar 153.4 139.3 28.0 14.1 7.4 − 48.2 − 55.3 − 7.1 29.4 5.5 − 2.3 14.9 11.4
         Apr 189.4 165.7 87.3 23.7 11.5 − 73.9 80.2 154.1 17.3 3.9 − 1.5 10.8 4.2
         May 86.1 84.2 16.9 1.8 9.4 − 69.6 − 20.3 49.4 18.8 13.1 − 1.7 15.9 − 8.5         June 53.5 44.9 − 24.0 8.6 − 3.6 16.4 − 131.1 − 147.6 37.3 8.5 − 0.9 17.6 12.1
         July 101.5 97.5 37.6 4.0 3.0 − 11.8 22.6 34.4 28.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 15.9 14.8
         Aug 17.2 24.1 27.3 − 6.9 − 0.1 − 7.8 19.9 27.7 7.0 − 4.3 − 1.3 − 0.2 12.8
         Sep 38.9 66.7 − 20.9 − 27.8 − 38.0 21.6 17.2 − 4.4 11.3 − 14.8 − 1.3 − 10.6 38.1
         Oct 17.3 24.9 6.9 − 7.6 − 7.1 42.5 − 55.9 − 98.4 − 44.9 − 1.9 2.6 − 65.7 20.0
         Nov 88.1 49.7 31.0 38.4 40.7 11.6 − 85.6 − 97.1 19.3 − 1.0 3.4 − 8.6 25.4         Dec − 12.7 − 25.0 46.3 12.2 18.8 20.9 − 177.3 − 198.2 40.0 24.7 3.7 12.2 − 0.6
2009          Jan 101.4 31.3 7.1 70.1 56.0 − 121.0 − 44.3 76.7 61.1 31.4 2.1 6.7 20.8
         Feb 26.2 − 7.6 14.2 33.8 37.1 44.7 − 105.2 − 149.9 45.8 13.2 − 0.3 24.0 8.9         Mar 55.5 15.3 13.2 40.3 48.9 − 4.9 − 129.8 − 124.9 15.4 23.6 0.4 1.7 − 10.3
         Apr 76.3 43.7 47.9 32.6 21.4 32.8 41.2 8.3 13.4 14.5 0.1 − 5.5 4.3
         May 25.2 12.9 − 1.3 12.3 19.8 34.5 − 52.4 − 86.9 58.8 19.1 1.3 24.2 14.2         June 114.3 41.5 6.4 72.8 49.2 39.6 − 52.4 − 91.9 54.0 22.5 0.9 13.4 17.2
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2007          Nov − 1.9 4.5 1.4 − 6.4 − 5.2 17.3 28.1 10.7 − 15.0 − 0.7 1.0 − 12.0 − 3.2
         Dec 5.8 11.7 − 0.9 − 5.9 − 4.4 21.0 − 0.9 − 21.9 − 2.1 5.1 1.0 − 10.0 1.8
2008          Jan 35.9 36.4 16.0 − 0.5 3.2 − 41.6 − 12.1 29.6 2.3 1.1 − 0.1 1.0 0.4
         Feb − 7.9 − 13.2 − 18.2 5.3 8.7 7.1 29.0 21.9 − 8.3 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 6.5 − 0.1         Mar 44.0 43.5 26.5 0.5 2.7 − 7.9 21.4 29.3 4.2 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.9 7.7
         Apr 49.9 40.4 29.4 9.4 4.9 − 3.2 17.7 20.9 0.2 0.3 − 1.4 1.6 − 0.3
         May − 12.8 − 7.1 − 14.3 − 5.8 − 0.6 5.8 − 6.7 − 12.5 − 12.3 0.1 − 1.4 − 4.3 − 6.8         June − 16.9 − 4.1 − 24.2 − 12.8 − 11.8 − 1.1 − 32.5 − 31.4 3.6 − 0.3 − 0.8 0.7 4.0
         July 10.1 13.9 2.7 − 3.8 − 3.8 0.1 − 6.8 − 6.9 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 6.9
         Aug 25.7 30.3 25.8 − 4.6 − 4.2 − 10.2 − 5.1 5.1 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.7 2.3
         Sep 1.3 18.6 2.2 − 17.3 − 14.8 34.7 71.4 36.7 − 7.4 − 3.0 − 1.1 − 6.3 2.9
         Oct − 9.9 − 12.8 − 10.7 3.0 1.2 23.2 − 2.8 − 26.0 − 14.2 − 3.1 3.0 − 16.8 2.8
         Nov 7.4 12.0 1.2 − 4.6 − 2.5 − 38.2 − 76.5 − 38.3 − 5.6 0.8 3.7 − 9.9 − 0.3         Dec 13.7 15.4 30.8 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 31.1 − 24.7 27.3 29.8 3.8 − 18.0 11.7
2009          Jan 36.2 29.7 7.1 6.5 6.9 − 58.9 − 53.5 5.4 1.0 3.7 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.2
         Feb − 9.0 − 6.6 6.7 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 24.7 − 23.0 − 13.6 6.8 − 0.0 − 9.7 − 10.7         Mar 9.2 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 31.3 − 35.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 2.6 0.8 − 6.8 0.4
         Apr 20.1 13.4 12.0 6.7 4.9 19.7 40.7 21.0 − 8.3 3.9 0.2 − 5.9 − 6.5
         May − 3.2 − 4.1 − 8.6 1.0 5.2 28.5 − 4.9 − 33.4 3.2 2.6 1.5 2.7 − 3.6         June 15.2 15.7 4.5 − 0.4 1.4 − 22.8 − 18.8 3.9 34.6 13.6 1.0 1.5 18.6
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
15.4 17.3 − 96.2 61.9 41.1 5.1 36.0 27.3 − 6.5 8.3 11.7 14.3 2007          Nov 
− 48.9 − 73.8 − 112.0 159.9 70.3 19.9 50.4 68.5 21.0 − 18.8 − 36.5 7.4          Dec 
15.4 44.0 − 29.9 − 30.4 − 62.2 − 16.5 − 45.8 31.0 0.9 24.2 43.8 − 7.8 2008          Jan 
20.1 5.1 − 24.7 27.3 − 47.1 5.6 − 52.6 77.0 − 2.6 7.1 11.6 − 21.3          Feb 
11.2 − 8.0 − 72.6 81.2 54.5 4.1 50.4 20.8 5.8 − 0.5 − 1.8 − 6.3          Mar 
− 2.4 5.5 − 95.1 80.0 − 15.1 8.5 − 23.6 95.9 − 0.8 14.9 9.3 − 9.0          Apr 
− 24.0 − 65.3 − 86.9 62.6 28.2 4.3 23.9 37.9 − 3.6 4.4 4.7 15.2          May
37.3 − 27.1 − 22.3 48.4 47.8 6.3 41.5 3.9 − 3.4 − 3.0 − 23.2 0.1          June
− 30.4 62.1 − 29.2 11.5 − 77.2 6.7 − 84.0 98.6 − 9.9 2.9 8.8 6.1          July
5.9 − 18.3 − 14.8 − 1.8 − 53.0 − 2.7 − 50.3 53.7 − 2.5 9.8 14.6 − 7.7          Aug 4.5 − 11.3 − 56.0 70.5 83.2 1.1 82.1 − 2.6 − 10.1 2.4 − 27.6 10.8          Sep 
65.1 − 62.3 − 102.0 105.2 56.6 41.7 14.9 53.1 − 4.6 5.0 − 1.3 − 6.9          Oct 69.9 − 33.9 − 44.4 49.5 25.5 4.8 20.7 19.6 4.4 − 12.6 10.1 − 2.5          Nov 
− 66.5 − 36.7 − 71.4 104.6 75.6 19.3 56.3 − 15.2 44.2 − 6.3 − 19.2 − 7.7          Dec 
62.5 − 54.4 − − 88.8 − 71.7 18.2 − 12.0 30.2 − 135.0 45.1 − 6.4 34.8 − 45.5 2009          Jan 
14.0 − 4.2 − 15.2 − 6.7 4.5 3.6 0.9 − 34.4 23.2 3.4 20.2 − 1.7          Feb 12.7 22.3 − 0.2 10.8 33.4 4.0 29.4 − 43.3 20.7 11.2 0.9 − 22.7          Mar 
− 13.3 22.9 − 86.2 73.5 83.8 9.3 74.5 − 32.0 21.8 − 0.3 2.5 10.4          Apr − 6.7 16.5 − − 8.9 1.3 23.7 2.8 20.9 − 38.8 16.3 − 1.9 0.4 − 8.7          May
20.8 77.2 − 1.9 29.8 90.7 3.0 87.7 − 72.5 11.6 11.0 − 22.7 − 16.3          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
5.7 − 22.6 1.1 1.5 47.3 30.9 10.7 − 4.1 5.1 − 0.0 4.6 2007          Nov 
− 6.5 10.5 0.9 4.7 24.9 − 15.4 51.1 6.4 − 13.1 − 0.4 − 3.7          Dec 
− 0.1 − 21.3 0.7 − 4.1 13.4 2.6 − 5.1 − 4.8 15.4 − 0.0 5.2 2008          Jan 
− 1.3 − 7.3 2.1 1.5 16.1 − 4.2 19.7 − 2.1 3.9 0.5 − 1.7          Feb 
2.3 23.9 1.4 1.4 5.7 8.8 0.7 − 1.6 0.8 − 1.5 − 1.4          Mar 
− 3.3 29.7 0.4 2.8 20.1 − 13.3 25.2 − 2.7 9.0 − 1.5 3.4          Apr 
2.2 − 7.5 2.1 0.4 10.6 2.8 17.4 − 2.1 0.2 − 0.6 − 7.1          May
− 0.3 − 27.2 0.9 2.2 5.8 8.4 − 4.3 − 2.1 7.9 − 0.1 − 3.9          June− 2.2 5.1 0.2 2.0 1.6 − 22.4 35.6 − 5.1 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 0.7          July
0.1 2.1 2.4 − 1.0 14.9 1.4 14.1 − 3.2 5.0 − 0.3 − 2.1          Aug 
0.7 24.9 2.1 0.5 17.9 16.3 − 0.8 − 3.3 7.8 − 0.4 − 1.7          Sep 
− 1.4 − 8.6 7.5 10.6 37.5 28.2 13.9 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 3.9 1.8          Oct 
0.2 − 59.5 1.3 1.3 34.2 9.2 9.9 − 1.1 2.8 − 0.8 14.1          Nov 
− 0.0 − 17.3 1.1 5.6 − 2.7 1.5 − 2.2 8.1 − 9.9 − 0.8 0.6          Dec 
0.6 − 31.0 17.5 − 18.2 6.7 57.9 − 47.7 3.8 6.3 − 0.3 − 13.2 2009          Jan 
8.1 − 14.2 1.5 0.7 8.9 17.2 − 23.0 5.3 6.6 0.8 1.9          Feb 3.2 0.2 − 0.3 1.3 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 19.4 2.8 13.7 − 0.6 − 17.2          Mar 
14.4 7.2 1.3 1.6 26.5 32.1 − 20.8 3.1 4.9 − 0.1 7.3          Apr 12.0 20.1 0.4 0.1 − 9.9 4.1 − 15.0 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 0.6          May
− 9.2 − 15.4 − 0.3 1.5 − 17.6 20.1 − 33.9 3.7 2.5 − 0.3 − 9.7          June
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2007          May 21,154.0 13,529.8 11,196.2 9,573.3 735.4 887.6 2,333.6 814.5 1,519.0 5,244.5 2,379.8
         June 21,359.0 13,618.2 11,303.8 9,684.6 768.0 851.1 2,314.4 814.6 1,499.8 5,239.6 2,501.2
         July 21,417.0 13,699.9 11,406.3 9,784.0 784.4 837.8 2,293.6 816.0 1,477.6 5,287.6 2,429.5
         Aug 21,411.9 13,697.9 11,438.9 9,822.7 788.2 828.0 2,259.0 810.6 1,448.4 5,283.3 2,430.7
         Sep 21,633.8 13,807.9 11,561.9 9,923.8 811.3 826.9 2,246.0 810.3 1,435.7 5,251.7 2,574.2
         Oct 22,176.4 14,161.1 11,763.5 10,001.8 885.2 876.5 2,397.6 960.8 1,436.8 5,371.5 2,643.8
         Nov 22,376.3 14,250.3 11,852.4 10,082.5 899.1 870.8 2,397.9 961.6 1,436.3 5,395.6 2,730.4         Dec 22,317.5 14,370.9 11,976.7 10,139.6 954.9 882.2 2,394.2 972.3 1,422.0 5,259.8 2,686.8
2008          Jan 22,822.3 14,571.4 12,139.2 10,280.7 967.3 891.2 2,432.2 978.7 1,453.5 5,502.6 2,748.2
         Feb 22,957.8 14,620.1 12,195.4 10,336.8 988.1 870.5 2,424.8 969.0 1,455.8 5,537.2 2,800.4         Mar 22,989.5 14,745.7 12,315.7 10,437.3 1,009.6 868.9 2,430.0 975.6 1,454.4 5,368.8 2,875.0
         Apr 23,174.8 14,928.9 12,478.9 10,511.5 1,042.9 924.4 2,449.9 988.0 1,462.0 5,460.2 2,785.7
         May 23,368.1 15,008.2 12,561.2 10,576.9 1,067.3 917.0 2,447.0 980.3 1,466.6 5,446.2 2,913.7
         June 23,306.9 15,039.5 12,590.0 10,640.3 1,091.0 858.7 2,449.5 992.4 1,457.0 5,287.8 2,979.6
         July 23,302.9 15,140.5 12,682.7 10,697.4 1,108.3 877.1 2,457.8 993.5 1,464.3 5,329.7 2,832.8
         Aug 23,515.6 15,175.9 12,720.7 10,704.9 1,137.6 878.1 2,455.2 986.9 1,468.2 5,506.9 2,832.9         Sep 23,777.8 15,214.3 12,784.2 10,800.8 1,109.2 874.3 2,430.1 997.3 1,432.8 5,608.1 2,955.4
         Oct 24,460.1 15,268.8 12,841.0 10,857.5 1,148.4 835.0 2,427.8 997.6 1,430.2 5,777.2 3,414.2
         Nov 24,587.9 15,346.3 12,872.1 10,866.9 1,181.6 823.6 2,474.2 995.2 1,479.0 5,662.1 3,579.5         Dec 24,107.6 15,502.7 12,963.8 10,768.8 1,408.8 786.3 2,538.9 986.2 1,552.6 5,236.4 3,368.4
2009          Jan 24,488.5 15,681.6 13,056.8 10,855.5 1,412.0 789.3 2,624.8 1,001.8 1,622.9 5,385.2 3,421.7
         Feb 24,430.4 15,701.6 13,042.5 10,832.4 1,433.0 777.1 2,659.1 998.5 1,660.7 5,300.9 3,427.8         Mar 24,151.3 15,730.8 13,031.4 10,811.1 1,450.0 770.3 2,699.4 989.4 1,710.1 5,036.4 3,384.1
         Apr 24,236.7 15,810.5 13,078.4 10,807.6 1,475.2 795.6 2,732.1 1,000.5 1,731.6 5,098.8 3,327.4
         May 23,901.7 15,807.4 13,069.7 10,804.8 1,472.2 792.7 2,737.7 992.8 1,744.8 4,964.2 3,130.2
         June 24,082.1 15,916.3 13,104.9 10,835.2 1,490.9 778.8 2,811.4 1,016.2 1,795.2 4,914.8 3,251.0
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2007          May 5,076.7 3,516.3 2,814.6 2,352.1 131.6 330.9 701.7 407.3 294.5 1,346.5 213.9
         June 5,070.7 3,488.8 2,801.2 2,364.9 133.7 302.6 687.6 402.2 285.3 1,368.3 213.5
         July 5,084.0 3,494.2 2,806.6 2,365.9 139.8 300.9 687.6 407.6 280.0 1,377.5 212.4
         Aug 5,097.5 3,490.3 2,820.4 2,383.6 141.2 295.6 669.8 401.7 268.1 1,387.0 220.3         Sep 5,152.6 3,497.4 2,837.2 2,394.9 145.2 297.1 660.2 395.5 264.7 1,423.6 231.6
         Oct 5,138.6 3,490.1 2,836.5 2,399.8 150.4 286.2 653.6 394.0 259.7 1,416.2 232.3
         Nov 5,155.4 3,486.8 2,839.6 2,401.8 151.5 286.3 647.1 392.7 254.4 1,434.8 233.8
         Dec 5,159.0 3,491.7 2,850.6 2,413.7 148.7 288.2 641.1 391.2 249.9 1,432.7 234.6
2008          Jan 5,167.5 3,535.3 2,894.6 2,438.5 145.8 310.3 640.7 387.4 253.3 1,407.0 225.2
         Feb 5,186.3 3,525.7 2,879.9 2,442.3 144.4 293.3 645.8 383.9 261.9 1,427.6 233.0         Mar 5,222.7 3,565.8 2,919.8 2,456.6 163.7 299.5 646.0 381.6 264.4 1,422.9 234.1
         Apr 5,300.6 3,614.0 2,958.7 2,466.4 161.4 330.8 655.4 386.3 269.0 1,441.3 245.3
         May 5,283.0 3,600.6 2,951.1 2,473.1 162.5 315.5 649.5 381.1 268.4 1,436.0 246.5         June 5,230.1 3,581.4 2,944.7 2,491.9 162.8 290.0 636.6 380.1 256.6 1,399.5 249.2
         July 5,239.5 3,592.2 2,959.4 2,503.6 162.1 293.7 632.9 380.0 252.9 1,394.5 252.8
         Aug 5,284.5 3,623.9 2,995.2 2,511.9 187.2 296.1 628.8 379.8 249.0 1,410.0 250.6         Sep 5,383.1 3,627.7 3,016.0 2,530.7 188.4 296.9 611.7 377.3 234.4 1,501.9 253.5
         Oct 5,457.7 3,632.1 3,016.4 2,540.2 186.7 289.5 615.7 379.4 236.3 1,554.5 271.1
         Nov 5,385.6 3,637.4 3,026.4 2,549.0 191.6 285.8 611.1 377.3 233.8 1,463.2 285.0         Dec 5,310.8 3,642.6 3,035.0 2,529.4 224.5 281.1 607.6 374.9 232.8 1,379.1 289.1
2009          Jan 5,343.8 3,682.0 3,065.9 2,557.6 219.9 288.4 616.1 374.8 241.3 1,367.2 294.6
         Feb 5,315.0 3,672.2 3,058.5 2,544.1 235.8 278.6 613.8 372.8 241.0 1,348.2 294.6         Mar 5,282.0 3,674.0 3,065.2 2,555.9 235.1 274.3 608.8 368.1 240.7 1,278.5 329.5
         Apr 5,330.0 3,694.6 3,079.0 2,557.4 234.9 286.8 615.6 369.8 245.8 1,319.6 315.8
         May 5,261.9 3,684.9 3,068.7 2,556.8 234.0 277.8 616.2 365.5 250.8 1,292.8 284.3
         June 5,225.1 3,698.7 3,082.9 2,566.5 246.0 270.5 615.8 363.7 252.1 1,274.8 251.6
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
597.7 8,128.2 7,616.3 7,704.5 2,983.3 1,364.5 152.4 1,712.5 1,383.6 108.3 2007          May
605.0 8,253.8 7,724.2 7,807.1 3,042.5 1,389.6 156.6 1,731.7 1,377.7 108.9          June
613.0 8,258.1 7,752.9 7,845.3 3,012.0 1,445.9 162.6 1,746.4 1,368.7 109.8          July
610.7 8,229.9 7,735.9 7,824.5 2,939.5 1,506.8 167.9 1,739.8 1,360.6 109.9          Aug 
610.5 8,343.9 7,816.0 7,907.6 3,007.5 1,530.6 169.6 1,734.3 1,354.4 111.2          Sep 
613.6 8,564.2 8,051.9 8,130.7 2,974.5 1,627.8 181.4 1,748.7 1,486.1 112.3          Oct 
618.7 8,633.4 8,110.4 8,174.4 3,004.6 1,633.7 193.2 1,749.7 1,479.9 113.3          Nov 638.6 8,772.4 8,301.5 8,363.6 3,056.0 1,696.7 198.2 1,797.4 1,501.4 113.9          Dec 
623.2 8,829.7 8,325.4 8,408.2 3,032.0 1,751.8 204.6 1,796.2 1,508.5 115.2 2008          Jan 
628.8 8,859.4 8,341.1 8,413.9 2,981.2 1,821.7 205.0 1,785.5 1,506.2 114.4          Feb 
632.9 8,941.1 8,418.7 8,491.2 3,032.0 1,842.8 203.2 1,788.7 1,512.2 112.3          Mar 
641.4 9,018.0 8,495.3 8,566.9 3,010.7 1,931.2 208.1 1,794.1 1,511.8 111.0          Apr 
645.8 9,066.5 8,561.9 8,628.1 3,034.6 1,959.3 208.6 1,807.4 1,508.6 109.6          May
652.1 9,148.6 8,603.7 8,666.2 3,070.3 1,950.3 215.5 1,815.6 1,505.5 108.9          June
658.8 9,127.2 8,605.9 8,679.6 2,993.9 2,040.9 225.1 1,814.8 1,496.6 108.3          July
656.1 9,142.0 8,605.9 8,687.5 2,949.6 2,090.0 233.3 1,812.7 1,494.7 107.2          Aug 657.2 9,210.9 8,667.1 8,748.6 3,032.3 2,089.3 236.5 1,799.4 1,484.9 106.1          Sep 
698.9 9,375.5 8,763.8 8,849.4 3,056.9 2,160.2 237.7 1,802.6 1,483.0 109.0          Oct 
703.7 9,482.7 8,816.0 8,878.1 3,067.1 2,172.9 239.5 1,798.4 1,487.7 112.6          Nov 723.0 9,656.7 9,094.3 9,133.3 3,113.8 2,160.8 235.5 1,974.8 1,531.9 116.5          Dec 
712.3 9,773.7 9,126.7 9,183.4 3,188.5 2,046.2 241.2 2,012.8 1,577.4 117.3 2009          Jan 
716.0 9,792.7 9,138.3 9,186.1 3,189.3 2,002.6 249.9 2,026.5 1,600.5 117.2          Feb 
719.9 9,822.8 9,167.4 9,206.9 3,207.4 1,961.2 251.2 2,048.4 1,620.9 117.8          Mar 
729.2 9,892.1 9,251.7 9,290.1 3,260.2 1,949.4 252.6 2,065.4 1,643.8 118.8          Apr 
732.0 9,891.6 9,262.1 9,297.1 3,280.4 1,904.6 251.1 2,082.6 1,658.1 120.2          May
735.0 9,964.0 9,307.6 9,344.1 3,359.2 1,847.9 240.4 2,105.5 1,669.8 121.3          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
161.1 2,485.8 2,408.2 2,340.0 744.1 277.2 28.7 719.4 466.2 104.4 2007          May
163.7 2,507.3 2,427.9 2,359.0 755.7 284.4 30.2 721.5 462.2 105.0          June
166.0 2,508.5 2,434.9 2,365.2 756.8 291.7 31.7 722.9 456.5 105.6          July
165.1 2,524.3 2,451.3 2,377.6 751.4 311.8 32.7 723.2 452.7 105.8          Aug 164.6 2,551.8 2,476.1 2,400.8 761.4 323.9 33.7 726.2 449.1 106.4          Sep 
165.8 2,549.0 2,474.8 2,400.1 748.5 340.1 36.2 723.3 444.4 107.5          Oct 
167.3 2,592.5 2,509.1 2,430.6 779.5 340.4 39.4 722.4 440.4 108.5          Nov 
172.0 2,634.0 2,554.6 2,473.5 763.6 384.6 42.7 726.2 446.8 109.5          Dec 
167.9 2,628.9 2,548.6 2,476.2 769.4 383.1 45.0 727.3 442.1 109.4 2008          Jan 
169.4 2,638.9 2,559.5 2,487.6 764.9 402.2 45.8 726.2 440.0 108.5          Feb 
170.8 2,645.3 2,564.1 2,492.0 773.5 402.6 45.5 725.5 438.4 106.5          Mar 
173.6 2,650.1 2,574.0 2,498.9 760.6 425.8 46.0 725.6 435.7 105.1          Apr 
174.0 2,671.0 2,591.1 2,508.4 763.8 435.1 46.3 725.8 433.7 103.7          May176.2 2,671.2 2,589.5 2,502.9 770.0 425.7 47.4 725.3 431.6 102.9          June
178.2 2,676.3 2,596.5 2,512.2 750.5 458.7 49.2 724.8 426.5 102.5          July
177.2 2,688.5 2,608.0 2,522.6 751.6 472.1 50.3 724.0 423.4 101.3          Aug 177.7 2,698.7 2,618.7 2,532.2 768.0 471.5 51.5 720.9 420.1 100.3          Sep 
188.3 2,742.6 2,664.9 2,580.8 798.6 489.4 52.8 718.1 418.8 103.2          Oct 
189.6 2,760.1 2,685.4 2,592.5 804.1 492.9 54.6 716.3 417.6 106.9          Nov 195.2 2,799.3 2,728.0 2,632.6 800.8 493.7 54.4 747.3 425.7 110.7          Dec 
177.0 2,819.7 2,748.0 2,657.0 859.6 452.3 53.7 751.4 429.4 110.7 2009          Jan 
177.7 2,834.1 2,754.4 2,660.1 872.0 432.0 52.8 758.1 434.7 110.6          Feb 
179.0 2,821.3 2,740.2 2,650.6 870.1 418.5 52.7 760.7 437.3 111.3          Mar 
180.6 2,854.6 2,759.1 2,667.2 880.6 418.0 52.0 764.7 439.8 112.1          Apr 
180.7 2,860.9 2,753.2 2,661.0 884.4 401.8 51.8 767.2 442.2 113.6          May182.2 2,856.1 2,755.9 2,666.6 902.2 372.6 50.8 780.8 445.7 114.6          June
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2007          May 199.9 223.8 116.9 79.0 2.6 22.6 2.3 0.4 285.2 280.3 702.3 2,731.9 2,069.7
         June 221.0 225.8 116.1 81.1 3.5 22.5 2.2 0.5 282.2 277.9 698.9 2,753.9 2,075.4
         July 180.2 232.6 121.7 82.3 3.6 22.4 2.1 0.5 287.1 282.5 712.4 2,754.7 2,076.0
         Aug 173.8 231.6 116.1 86.9 3.7 22.5 2.0 0.5 297.6 292.9 705.9 2,789.3 2,109.1         Sep 195.9 240.5 121.6 89.9 3.7 22.9 1.9 0.5 295.3 290.4 682.2 2,793.8 2,134.0
         Oct 184.3 249.3 127.1 86.5 3.7 23.0 1.8 7.1 293.5 288.5 684.0 2,848.7 2,193.9
         Nov 199.7 259.4 129.8 93.8 4.0 23.0 1.8 6.9 301.8 297.0 696.7 2,841.9 2,197.0         Dec 150.8 258.0 125.2 95.7 4.5 24.2 1.8 6.7 282.9 278.7 660.4 2,849.6 2,212.5
2008          Jan 168.8 252.6 123.1 91.0 3.9 24.3 1.8 8.7 307.3 303.5 737.2 2,837.6 2,199.7
         Feb 189.0 256.5 122.1 95.6 4.1 24.7 1.7 8.3 314.3 309.9 749.6 2,803.5 2,178.6         Mar 199.9 250.0 118.5 92.1 5.1 24.4 1.7 8.1 314.0 309.9 742.5 2,809.5 2,200.6
         Apr 197.5 253.6 119.0 95.2 5.2 24.6 1.7 7.9 328.9 322.8 751.3 2,812.6 2,197.3
         May 173.9 264.6 120.9 104.5 5.4 24.6 1.6 7.6 333.3 327.3 755.8 2,844.8 2,227.0         June 211.2 271.2 124.0 107.9 5.9 24.5 1.6 7.4 330.3 324.5 733.0 2,856.5 2,241.9
         July 180.8 266.8 118.8 108.8 5.9 24.5 1.6 7.2 333.1 329.0 743.2 2,878.1 2,260.7
         Aug 186.7 267.8 117.5 111.2 6.0 24.5 1.6 7.1 343.1 338.3 757.9 2,888.7 2,261.2         Sep 191.2 271.1 121.1 111.0 5.9 24.7 1.5 6.8 345.6 341.0 731.1 2,906.9 2,267.9
         Oct 256.3 269.8 122.9 108.2 5.9 24.8 1.5 6.6 351.0 347.4 729.8 2,890.9 2,209.9
         Nov 326.2 278.4 129.3 110.9 5.8 24.6 1.5 6.4 336.6 333.4 739.7 2,871.2 2,207.9         Dec 259.6 263.7 124.2 102.1 5.0 24.7 1.6 6.1 330.1 327.4 726.3 2,828.2 2,224.0
2009          Jan 325.1 265.2 125.7 99.7 5.0 24.6 1.9 8.2 324.0 321.4 759.9 2,824.4 2,194.4
         Feb 339.1 267.5 130.1 97.3 5.3 24.6 2.1 8.0 327.4 324.6 779.9 2,849.0 2,215.5         Mar 351.8 264.1 134.8 89.4 4.6 24.9 2.5 7.9 338.5 335.5 780.8 2,801.4 2,200.0
         Apr 338.2 263.8 139.8 84.0 4.9 24.9 2.6 7.7 338.2 335.4 782.0 2,811.1 2,196.3
         May 331.5 263.0 137.9 84.8 4.9 25.0 2.8 7.5 336.2 333.4 771.6 2,806.9 2,215.1         June 352.7 267.3 147.3 80.2 4.7 25.0 2.9 7.3 347.2 344.5 749.0 2,804.9 2,201.1
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2007          May 48.9 97.0 23.9 50.3 1.9 19.0 1.4 0.4 28.0 28.0 28.8 907.9 667.6         June 49.7 98.5 22.1 52.9 2.8 18.9 1.3 0.5 32.7 32.7 30.3 902.7 658.2
         July 43.0 100.4 23.6 53.3 2.9 18.9 1.2 0.5 25.7 25.7 29.9 906.0 665.5
         Aug 42.6 104.1 21.6 59.0 2.9 18.9 1.2 0.5 28.4 28.4 26.0 900.4 662.5         Sep 41.3 109.7 24.1 61.8 2.9 19.3 1.1 0.5 36.3 36.3 22.4 889.3 655.7
         Oct 40.9 108.1 25.7 58.7 2.9 19.3 1.1 0.4 34.6 34.6 21.4 891.6 658.3
         Nov 46.7 115.2 25.4 65.9 3.1 19.3 1.0 0.4 39.7 39.7 21.4 881.2 655.5         Dec 40.1 120.3 26.1 69.1 3.5 20.3 1.0 0.4 26.6 26.6 21.1 866.9 646.7
2008          Jan 40.0 112.7 23.4 64.5 3.0 20.4 0.9 0.4 42.1 42.1 21.0 873.7 652.8
         Feb 38.7 112.6 23.5 63.9 3.2 20.6 0.9 0.4 45.9 45.9 21.5 862.3 642.2         Mar 40.8 112.4 23.1 63.2 4.2 20.7 0.9 0.4 46.7 46.7 20.0 854.3 648.3
         Apr 37.5 113.7 22.8 64.5 4.2 20.9 0.9 0.4 55.7 55.7 18.4 859.7 644.1
         May 39.7 122.9 24.3 72.2 4.3 20.8 0.9 0.4 56.0 56.0 17.8 848.4 630.4         June 39.4 128.8 26.3 75.5 4.8 21.0 0.9 0.4 63.9 63.9 17.7 842.9 626.2
         July 37.3 126.9 23.4 76.7 4.5 21.1 0.8 0.3 58.1 58.1 17.7 842.4 619.3
         Aug 37.3 128.6 24.6 77.1 4.6 21.1 0.8 0.3 63.1 63.1 17.3 846.5 619.4         Sep 38.0 128.4 25.0 76.4 4.6 21.3 0.8 0.3 70.9 70.9 16.9 845.5 607.4
         Oct 36.6 125.1 25.0 73.2 4.5 21.3 0.8 0.3 69.8 69.8 13.0 853.5 600.2
         Nov 36.7 130.8 28.7 75.7 4.4 21.0 0.8 0.3 71.0 71.0 12.3 854.6 607.1         Dec 36.7 129.9 32.0 72.0 3.6 21.2 0.8 0.3 61.1 61.1 11.5 819.1 596.4
2009          Jan 37.3 125.4 32.2 67.2 3.6 21.1 1.0 0.4 67.4 67.4 11.1 822.0 575.4
         Feb 45.4 128.6 37.1 65.0 3.9 21.1 1.0 0.4 74.0 74.0 12.0 814.7 563.9         Mar 48.6 122.2 36.3 59.5 3.4 21.4 1.1 0.5 87.7 87.7 11.4 779.4 542.7
         Apr 62.7 124.6 41.4 56.8 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 92.6 92.6 11.2 782.5 531.5
         May 74.7 125.1 41.0 57.6 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 90.9 90.9 10.9 776.7 538.0         June 65.8 123.7 43.0 54.3 3.2 21.3 1.3 0.6 93.4 93.4 10.7 768.9 525.9
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
177.2 74.1 2,480.7 4,556.9 1,331.2 13.3 2,807.1 − 3,780.3 6,922.0 8,160.4 5,655.7 239.9 2007          May
164.3 74.7 2,514.9 4,498.1 1,357.9 − 12.2 2,921.2 − 3,849.4 7,016.7 8,236.1 5,736.4 242.4          June
151.2 84.9 2,518.6 4,538.4 1,382.8 − 4.2 2,874.6 − 3,836.1 7,057.3 8,292.1 5,780.4 245.4          July
170.7 86.3 2,532.3 4,582.8 1,382.4 − 31.0 2,844.0 − 3,754.3 7,038.4 8,298.2 5,787.3 244.2          Aug 190.1 88.9 2,514.8 4,572.0 1,399.2 − 37.7 2,974.4 − 3,827.5 7,133.3 8,389.2 5,782.9 243.7          Sep 
208.4 86.4 2,554.0 4,681.6 1,464.2 − 28.7 3,055.0 − 3,795.9 7,223.1 8,494.5 5,909.3 120.6          Oct 
217.5 90.9 2,533.5 4,692.3 1,462.3 − 19.6 3,148.5 − 3,835.9 7,281.8 8,587.7 5,888.9 122.3          Nov 219.6 96.4 2,533.6 4,599.4 1,492.7 − 56.5 3,077.7 − 3,908.6 7,445.9 8,704.1 5,968.5 127.8          Dec 
198.3 97.9 2,541.3 4,866.4 1,520.1 − 45.4 3,145.8 − 3,858.5 7,458.7 8,798.6 6,005.8 118.9 2008          Jan 
175.7 99.0 2,528.9 4,925.7 1,519.6 − 38.3 3,194.9 − 3,807.9 7,480.5 8,818.3 5,981.3 114.2          Feb 
168.1 111.8 2,529.7 4,834.8 1,506.7 − 27.0 3,234.8 − 3,859.3 7,554.4 8,889.9 5,969.9 113.8          Mar 
158.1 112.9 2,541.7 5,009.6 1,500.1 − 40.5 3,153.1 − 3,844.9 7,635.8 8,986.0 5,979.3 111.5          Apr 
161.9 125.5 2,557.4 5,062.3 1,488.0 − 49.7 3,220.9 − 3,874.9 7,700.2 9,075.7 5,994.6 110.9          May154.1 130.3 2,572.1 4,889.7 1,494.4 − 66.3 3,268.4 − 3,921.5 7,745.1 9,091.4 6,022.8 112.0          June
151.3 137.7 2,589.2 4,931.7 1,517.5 − 62.7 3,175.6 − 3,846.0 7,761.5 9,125.5 6,061.4 111.0          July
142.7 137.4 2,608.6 5,118.8 1,528.7 − 54.3 3,134.2 − 3,797.0 7,769.9 9,149.6 6,088.8 109.9          Aug 149.1 140.3 2,617.5 5,178.6 1,563.9 − 68.7 3,252.1 − 3,883.4 7,848.7 9,213.5 6,118.3 108.8          Sep 
142.6 136.4 2,611.8 5,291.2 1,570.3 − 74.9 3,627.1 − 3,951.1 7,981.4 9,340.3 6,125.1 106.3          Oct 
139.1 137.9 2,594.2 5,166.4 1,609.1 − 77.9 3,755.9 − 3,976.2 8,027.8 9,380.6 6,145.3 109.5          Nov 140.3 129.2 2,558.7 4,779.3 1,613.6 − 117.1 3,567.1 − 4,043.3 8,113.0 9,438.2 6,294.4 115.1          Dec 
95.8 123.7 2,605.0 4,999.9 1,658.6 − 140.2 3,575.4 − 4,099.9 8,104.5 9,407.4 6,426.6 106.6 2009          Jan 
91.0 126.8 2,631.2 4,861.9 1,670.3 − 116.5 3,549.4 − 4,106.2 8,096.8 9,421.5 6,477.8 103.6          Feb 68.6 128.8 2,604.1 4,645.3 1,645.8 − 99.5 3,496.0 − 4,134.9 8,097.4 9,413.4 6,448.8 105.5          Mar 
68.2 139.9 2,603.1 4,674.7 1,646.9 − 115.7 3,477.8 − 4,202.8 8,170.8 9,498.4 6,466.7 104.4          Apr 
56.2 145.0 2,605.7 4,513.1 1,659.1 − 120.0 3,310.9 − 4,223.0 8,161.9 9,470.3 6,500.1 105.1          May42.0 142.6 2,620.2 4,429.1 1,676.2 − 128.2 3,504.6 − 4,313.6 8,191.5 9,471.8 6,555.5 104.2          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
17.2 52.9 837.7 796.4 342.6 − 149.7 636.9 90.4 768.0 1,593.7 1,720.6 2,023.6 − 2007          May
14.7 54.7 833.4 761.0 352.3 − 162.7 647.1 91.6 777.8 1,611.6 1,744.0 2,031.6 −          June
14.4 60.4 831.2 753.5 361.7 − 148.8 647.6 92.1 780.4 1,617.7 1,748.0 2,040.8 −          July
15.5 59.9 824.9 772.0 360.3 − 170.4 656.6 94.4 773.0 1,633.3 1,763.2 2,033.5 −          Aug 16.8 57.0 815.5 785.8 362.4 − 172.4 676.9 96.1 785.5 1,658.1 1,790.7 2,030.3 −          Sep 
22.8 48.0 820.7 772.9 366.1 − 167.7 670.8 97.5 774.2 1,657.5 1,784.4 2,037.4 −          Oct 
27.4 48.4 805.5 777.4 363.0 − 200.2 680.4 98.6 804.9 1,695.2 1,832.1 2,019.1 −          Nov 27.0 45.1 794.8 754.6 368.0 − 194.9 682.8 99.5 789.7 1,737.4 1,857.2 2,019.3 −          Dec 
30.2 46.9 796.6 779.2 374.4 − 220.0 668.2 100.2 792.9 1,731.4 1,871.6 2,028.4 − 2008          Jan 
27.2 48.2 787.0 794.7 377.0 − 228.9 674.8 102.4 788.4 1,744.4 1,887.1 2,019.8 −          Feb 
25.0 48.8 780.6 813.3 379.8 − 212.8 676.2 103.7 796.6 1,751.3 1,891.8 2,013.5 −          Mar 
24.7 52.5 782.5 837.1 375.4 − 187.9 692.0 104.1 783.4 1,760.6 1,911.9 2,009.9 −          Apr 
19.6 51.6 777.3 824.7 369.6 − 197.6 693.0 106.3 788.1 1,780.6 1,925.6 1,997.6 −          May13.3 53.9 775.8 789.2 375.0 − 228.6 698.8 107.2 796.3 1,782.2 1,931.0 2,000.4 −          June
12.2 54.3 775.9 783.7 381.7 − 223.0 702.7 107.4 773.9 1,790.4 1,932.6 2,006.2 −          July
13.7 50.9 782.0 803.1 382.3 − 241.0 724.7 109.8 776.2 1,804.4 1,949.4 2,011.0 −          Aug 13.5 49.5 782.5 850.4 391.3 − 238.3 747.6 111.8 793.1 1,817.9 1,968.8 2,016.5 −          Sep 
19.2 45.6 788.7 862.4 388.3 − 248.6 776.8 119.3 823.6 1,863.0 2,010.7 2,019.9 −          Oct 
33.2 45.7 775.7 815.4 395.6 − 309.6 786.2 120.6 832.8 1,878.8 2,040.9 2,015.9 −          Nov 41.9 37.5 739.8 762.8 406.3 − 334.6 785.4 121.8 832.8 1,883.0 2,034.9 2,025.6 −          Dec 
32.7 33.5 755.8 791.6 414.8 − 353.2 770.3 139.2 891.8 1,898.9 2,043.7 2,054.1 − 2009          Jan 
34.5 33.5 746.8 770.8 407.4 − 376.1 778.2 140.7 909.1 1,898.4 2,052.3 2,044.4 −          Feb 
19.3 31.4 728.8 751.2 400.0 − 382.6 813.6 140.4 906.4 1,878.9 2,028.6 2,022.7 −          Mar 
24.5 33.4 724.5 774.4 390.7 − 373.8 797.8 141.8 922.0 1,893.1 2,054.9 2,013.9 −          Apr 
25.8 32.5 718.4 727.4 389.3 − 361.3 767.1 142.2 925.5 1,883.5 2,043.6 2,010.3 −          May22.0 26.6 720.3 731.5 407.9 − 390.7 747.5 141.9 945.2 1,873.0 2,025.7 2,045.4 −          June
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2007          Jan 325.8 322.3 120.0 0.1 − 0.2 1.0 619.5 45.0 − 72.7 175.3 794.9
         Feb 322.1 300.5 124.6 0.1 0.1 0.1 1.5 604.6 47.9 − 83.1 176.5 781.2         Mar 321.6 288.7 134.6 0.0 − 0.5 0.8 606.2 47.1 − 90.0 180.6 787.2
         Apr 323.6 281.7 145.7 0.5 − 0.3 0.9 614.8 48.2 − 95.2 182.6 797.7
         May 326.1 281.6 150.0 0.3 − 0.5 0.1 620.0 51.3 − 97.2 183.2 803.8
         June 326.4 284.9 150.0 0.3 − 0.2 0.2 625.2 49.1 − 99.4 186.2 811.7
         July 323.0 295.4 150.0 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 631.3 53.9 − 106.4 189.6 821.2
         Aug 316.7 301.7 150.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 639.7 52.3 − 115.8 192.0 832.1
         Sep 317.3 268.7 171.7 0.2 10.7 0.4 1.7 639.2 52.3 − 117.8 192.7 832.4
         Oct 321.9 194.3 262.3 0.3 − 1.6 0.9 637.3 63.7 − 118.0 193.4 832.3
         Nov 327.6 180.2 265.0 0.1 − 0.6 5.1 640.1 55.9 − 123.3 194.4 835.1
         Dec 327.5 173.0 278.6 0.3 − 0.4 2.2 644.6 61.9 − 126.6 196.8 841.9
2008          Jan 343.8 255.7 268.8 0.3 − 1.1 68.4 668.2 46.4 − 116.4 200.9 870.2
         Feb 353.6 173.8 268.5 0.2 − 0.4 0.6 651.7 51.7 − 110.7 202.4 854.5
         Mar 343.3 181.3 268.5 0.1 0.3 0.3 − 653.2 59.7 − 125.0 205.3 858.7
         Apr 349.4 181.5 278.6 0.1 2.6 0.6 0.4 662.1 66.4 − 124.8 207.5 870.3
         May 364.5 174.4 295.0 0.1 − 0.3 0.8 667.6 68.8 − 112.2 208.6 876.6         June 375.0 172.8 287.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.5 671.4 67.3 − 111.5 208.1 879.7
         July 376.4 185.4 275.4 0.1 − 0.4 0.5 677.2 64.9 − 118.3 212.7 890.3
         Aug 374.5 166.3 299.3 0.1 − 0.3 0.6 686.1 61.3 − 123.0 214.8 901.2
         Sep 376.6 163.5 300.0 0.1 − 0.6 0.7 685.0 61.1 − 121.2 214.0 899.5
         Oct 417.3 174.1 334.3 7.5 5.9 19.9 45.5 684.3 55.2 − 82.6 216.8 921.0
         Nov 549.0 301.6 452.5 12.7 4.2 213.7 2.3 722.1 85.0 78.2 218.6 1 154.4
         Dec 580.5 337.3 457.2 2.7 − 200.9 4.9 731.1 107.8 114.3 218.7 1 150.7
2009          Jan 581.3 219.2 613.6 2.9 − 238.5 3.3 753.1 99.9 100.6 221.5 1 213.1
         Feb 547.4 224.9 551.4 2.1 − 175.4 6.1 740.2 102.7 79.3 222.1 1 137.7
         Mar 512.7 224.3 472.4 1.6 − 95.5 4.0 741.5 110.1 41.4 218.6 1 055.5
         Apr 508.0 230.5 443.1 1.1 − 57.8 3.7 747.3 139.0 13.3 221.6 1 026.6
         May 512.4 239.7 426.9 0.7 − 42.7 3.1 757.5 141.9 13.7 220.8 1 021.0
         June 487.9 238.8 400.6 0.7 − 22.3 2.1 759.8 141.7 − 15.8 217.9 1 000.0
         July 457.1 221.4 504.9 1.3 − 119.7 9.9 763.1 137.9 − 65.1 219.2 1 102.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
2007          Jan 82.5 165.0 81.0 0.0 − 0.0 − 167.8 0.1 119.4 41.4 209.2
         Feb 82.2 153.7 86.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 164.8 0.1 115.7 41.9 206.7
         Mar 82.0 135.0 95.7 0.0 − 0.2 − 165.3 0.1 104.5 42.8 208.2
         Apr 82.7 128.2 103.9 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 167.1 0.1 104.2 43.2 210.4
         May 83.4 130.6 107.1 0.2 − 0.1 0.0 168.3 0.1 109.2 43.5 212.0
         June 83.6 124.0 108.7 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 170.6 0.1 101.4 44.1 214.8
         July 82.7 125.1 108.8 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 171.8 0.1 99.7 45.0 216.8
         Aug 81.1 135.4 104.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 173.9 0.1 102.6 44.9 218.8
         Sep 81.1 125.0 114.2 0.2 4.1 0.3 0.6 174.1 0.1 104.4 45.2 219.6
         Oct 82.4 93.2 142.9 0.2 − 0.9 0.2 173.5 0.1 98.8 45.2 219.6
         Nov 84.6 78.3 139.0 0.0 − 0.4 1.5 174.1 0.0 80.0 45.9 220.5
         Dec 84.6 73.2 133.6 0.3 − 0.3 0.7 175.2 0.1 68.7 46.7 222.1
2008          Jan 91.5 102.1 134.6 0.1 − 0.6 26.4 180.6 0.1 73.7 46.9 228.1
         Feb 96.0 60.8 130.6 0.0 − 0.2 0.1 176.2 0.0 63.3 47.7 224.1         Mar 90.8 59.8 122.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 − 177.5 0.1 46.9 48.6 226.3
         Apr 92.9 76.7 109.9 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 179.7 0.0 52.4 48.6 228.7
         May 99.6 75.7 112.7 0.0 − 0.2 0.2 181.0 0.0 57.9 48.6 229.8
         June 104.4 73.5 112.8 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 182.7 0.1 58.9 49.1 231.8
         July 102.8 79.4 107.2 0.0 − 0.1 0.1 183.6 0.1 55.9 49.5 233.2
         Aug 99.6 70.8 111.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 185.5 0.0 46.5 50.1 235.7
         Sep 100.6 76.7 105.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 185.7 0.1 46.2 50.2 236.2
         Oct 114.4 74.8 118.6 0.9 3.6 10.1 8.6 186.2 0.2 55.9 51.2 247.5
         Nov 138.6 103.6 163.2 2.7 2.0 88.8 1.1 198.9 0.3 68.7 52.3 339.9
         Dec 146.9 105.1 158.5 2.0 − 84.2 1.1 197.9 0.2 77.2 52.0 334.0
2009          Jan 141.2 72.4 198.1 2.4 − 91.5 1.2 195.8 4.1 68.5 52.8 340.2
         Feb 132.9 79.4 178.5 1.3 − 77.9 2.2 185.0 2.5 71.4 53.2 316.1
         Mar 135.3 72.9 147.8 1.2 − 51.9 1.7 185.3 9.6 55.7 52.9 290.1
         Apr 142.9 74.7 122.8 0.7 − 38.9 1.6 186.3 14.6 46.2 53.4 278.7
         May 150.7 87.5 111.9 0.1 − 24.1 1.3 189.1 26.2 56.3 53.3 266.5         June 145.7 95.0 103.4 0.7 − 15.4 0.6 189.3 32.3 54.3 52.8 257.4
         July 138.0 81.0 141.5 0.6 − 49.4 4.5 190.2 23.5 40.4 53.2 292.8
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem forof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 1.2 + 9.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 20.9 − 9.9 − 6.3 + 2.1 + 23.1 2007          Jan 
− 3.7 − 21.8 + 4.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 14.9 + 2.9 − 10.4 + 1.2 − 13.7          Feb 
− 0.5 − 11.8 + 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.6 − 0.8 − 6.9 + 4.1 + 6.0          Mar 
+ 2.0 − 7.0 + 11.1 + 0.5 − − 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 5.2 + 2.0 + 10.5          Apr 
+ 2.5 − 0.1 + 4.3 − 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.2 + 3.1 − 2.0 + 0.6 + 6.1          May
+ 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 5.2 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 3.0 + 7.9          June
− 3.4 + 10.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 6.1 + 4.8 − 7.0 + 3.4 + 9.5          July
− 6.3 + 6.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − + 8.4 − 1.6 − 9.4 + 2.4 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 0.6 − 33.0 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.3          Sep 
+ 4.6 − 74.4 + 90.6 + 0.1 − 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 11.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 5.7 − 14.1 + 2.7 − 0.2 − − 1.0 + 4.2 + 2.8 − 7.8 − 5.3 + 1.0 + 2.8          Nov 
− 0.1 − 7.2 + 13.6 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − 2.9 + 4.5 + 6.0 − 3.3 + 2.4 + 6.8          Dec 
+ 16.3 + 82.7 − 9.8 − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 66.2 + 23.6 − 15.5 + 10.2 + 4.1 + 28.3 2008          Jan 
+ 9.8 − 81.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − − 0.7 − 67.8 − 16.5 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 1.5 − 15.7          Feb 
− 10.3 + 7.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 1.5 + 8.0 − 14.3 + 2.9 + 4.2          Mar 
+ 6.1 + 0.2 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 8.9 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 11.6          Apr 
+ 15.1 − 7.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.4 + 12.6 + 1.1 + 6.3          May+ 10.5 − 1.6 − 7.1 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 3.1          June
+ 1.4 + 12.6 − 12.5 − 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.0 + 5.8 − 2.4 − 6.8 + 4.6 + 10.6          July
− 1.9 − 19.1 + 23.9 − 0.0 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 8.9 − 3.6 − 4.7 + 2.1 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 2.1 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 1.7          Sep 
+ 40.7 + 10.6 + 34.3 + 7.4 + 5.9 + 19.3 + 44.8 − 0.7 − 5.9 + 38.6 + 2.8 + 21.5          Oct 
+ 131.7 + 127.5 + 118.2 + 5.2 − 1.7 +193.8 − 43.2 + 37.8 + 29.8 +160.8 + 1.8 + 233.4          Nov 
+ 31.5 + 35.7 + 4.7 − 10.0 − 4.2 − 12.8 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 22.8 + 36.1 + 0.1 − 3.7          Dec 
+ 0.8 − 118.1 + 156.4 + 0.2 − + 37.6 − 1.6 + 22.0 − 7.9 − 13.7 + 2.8 + 62.4 2009          Jan 
− 33.9 + 5.7 − 62.2 − 0.8 − − 63.1 + 2.8 − 12.9 + 2.8 − 21.3 + 0.6 − 75.4          Feb 
− 34.7 − 0.6 − 79.0 − 0.5 − − 79.9 − 2.1 + 1.3 + 7.4 − 37.9 − 3.5 − 82.2          Mar 
− 4.7 + 6.2 − 29.3 − 0.5 − − 37.7 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 28.9 − 28.1 + 3.0 − 28.9          Apr 
+ 4.4 + 9.2 − 16.2 − 0.4 − − 15.1 − 0.6 + 10.2 + 2.9 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 5.6          May
− 24.5 − 0.9 − 26.3 − 0.0 − − 20.4 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 29.5 − 2.9 − 21.0          June
− 30.8 − 17.4 + 104.3 + 0.6 − + 97.4 + 7.8 + 3.3 − 3.8 − 49.3 + 1.3 + 102.0          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 0.2 + 9.8 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − + 5.3 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.0 + 5.3 2007          Jan 
− 0.4 − 11.4 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 2.9 − 0.0 − 3.7 + 0.5 − 2.4          Feb 
− 0.1 − 18.7 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.0 − 11.2 + 0.9 + 1.5          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 6.8 + 8.2 + 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.2          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.6          May
+ 0.1 − 6.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 7.8 + 0.6 + 2.8          June
− 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 2.0          July
− 1.6 + 10.3 − 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 2.0          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 10.4 + 9.3 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.7          Sep 
+ 1.3 − 31.9 + 28.7 + 0.1 − 4.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 2.2 − 14.9 − 3.8 − 0.2 − − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 18.8 + 0.7 + 0.9          Nov 
− 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.5 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 11.3 + 0.8 + 1.6          Dec 
+ 6.9 + 28.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.4 + 25.6 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.2 + 6.0 2008          Jan 
+ 4.5 − 41.3 − 4.0 − 0.1 − − 0.4 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.8 − 4.0          Feb 
− 5.2 − 1.0 − 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 0.9 + 2.2          Mar 
+ 2.1 + 16.9 − 12.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 6.7 − 1.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 1.1          May
+ 4.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 1.7 + 5.9 − 5.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 1.4          July
− 3.2 − 8.6 + 4.7 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 9.4 + 0.6 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 1.0 + 5.9 − 6.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4          Sep 
+ 13.8 − 1.9 + 13.5 + 0.8 + 3.6 + 10.0 + 8.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.7 + 0.9 + 11.4          Oct 
+ 24.2 + 28.8 + 44.6 + 1.9 − 1.6 + 78.6 − 7.5 + 12.7 + 0.1 + 12.8 + 1.1 + 92.4          Nov 
+ 8.3 + 1.5 − 4.6 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 − 0.3 − 5.9          Dec 
− 5.7 − 32.7 + 39.5 + 0.4 − + 7.3 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 4.0 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 6.1 2009          Jan 
− 8.3 + 7.0 − 19.5 − 1.0 − − 13.6 + 0.9 − 10.8 − 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.3 − 24.0          Feb 
+ 2.3 − 6.4 − 30.7 − 0.2 − − 26.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 7.2 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 26.0          Mar 
+ 7.6 + 1.8 − 25.1 − 0.5 − − 12.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 5.0 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 11.4          Apr 
+ 7.8 + 12.8 − 10.9 − 0.6 − − 14.8 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 11.6 + 10.1 − 0.2 − 12.2          May− 5.0 + 7.5 − 8.5 + 0.5 − − 8.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 9.1          June
− 7.7 − 13.9 + 38.1 − 0.0 − + 34.1 + 3.8 + 0.9 − 8.9 − 13.9 + 0.4 + 35.4          July
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingeuro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2008 Dec                  5 2,036.5 220.0 162.2 12.5 149.6 248.9 10.1 10.1 −
                              12 2,053.8 219.9 156.5 12.5 144.0 238.4 9.5 9.5 −
                              19 2,021.5 219.8 152.8 12.5 140.2 221.4 8.9 8.9 −
                              26 2,043.5 219.7 149.7 12.5 137.1 229.5 9.2 9.2 −
2009 Jan                  2 3 2,088.9 3 218.4 162.1 13.2 148.8 3 225.8 19.7 19.7 −
                                9 2,045.6 218.4 159.5 13.2 146.3 218.0 20.5 20.5 −
                              16 2,010.7 218.4 159.1 13.2 145.9 204.8 21.5 21.5 −
                              23 2,039.8 218.3 161.7 13.2 148.5 205.9 22.8 22.8 −
                              30 1,907.0 218.3 159.2 13.2 146.0 171.2 22.5 22.5 −
         Feb                  6 1,893.8 218.3 159.7 13.2 146.5 170.9 22.3 22.3 −
                              13 1,834.1 218.2 159.2 13.1 146.1 168.3 21.3 21.3 −
                              20 1,858.4 218.0 159.3 13.1 146.2 166.9 21.7 21.7 −
                              27 1,820.3 217.8 155.7 13.1 142.6 134.7 21.6 21.6 −
         Mar                  6 1,840.8 217.7 156.8 13.1 143.7 136.0 21.0 21.0 −
                              13 1,829.4 217.6 155.3 13.2 142.0 144.1 20.3 20.3 −
                              20 1,822.5 217.6 154.3 13.2 141.1 143.6 17.4 17.4 −
                              27 1,803.1 217.5 152.4 13.2 139.1 140.8 17.0 17.0 −
2009 Apr                  3 3 1,836.4 3 241.7 3 158.6 14.4 3 144.2 3 151.3 17.2 17.2 −
                                9 1,827.8 241.7 158.1 14.4 143.7 142.1 17.9 17.9 −
                              17 1,840.1 241.7 157.0 14.4 142.7 139.4 19.4 19.4 −
                              24 1,824.0 240.8 157.9 14.4 143.6 125.3 20.4 20.4 −
         May                 1 1,799.2 240.8 157.1 14.3 142.8 125.3 20.5 20.5 −
                                8 1,795.1 240.8 159.3 16.2 143.1 123.1 21.4 21.4 −
                              15 1,764.2 240.8 159.0 16.8 142.3 121.4 20.6 20.6 −
                              22 1,736.9 240.8 159.3 17.0 142.3 103.7 19.1 19.1 −
                              29 1,799.6 240.8 158.0 17.0 141.0 103.0 18.1 18.1 −
         June                 5 1,747.8 240.8 156.6 17.0 139.6 99.6 18.8 18.8 −
                              12 1,726.6 240.7 162.3 17.0 145.3 90.9 18.4 18.4 −
                              19 1,719.7 240.7 161.7 17.0 144.7 74.5 17.5 17.5 −
                              26 1,997.3 240.6 159.7 17.2 142.5 75.1 17.8 17.8 −
         July                 3 3 1,911.6 3 232.1 3 158.9 16.8 3 142.0 3 66.5 18.3 18.3 −
                              10 1,888.9 232.1 160.4 16.8 143.6 69.0 19.5 19.5 −
                              17 1,875.7 232.1 159.6 16.8 142.8 62.9 20.6 20.6 −
                              24 1,867.8 232.1 159.6 16.8 142.8 62.6 19.9 19.9 −
                              31 1,854.1 232.1 159.6 17.1 142.5 61.2 18.7 18.7 −
         Aug                  7 1,835.9 232.1 158.0 17.0 141.0 60.8 17.5 17.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2007          Sep 3 394.0 3 57.2 3 31.4 2.5 3 28.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 394.6 57.2 31.1 2.5 28.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 410.3 57.2 30.8 2.5 28.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 483.7 3 62.4 3 30.1 2.4 3 27.7 7.1 0.3 0.3 −
2008          Jan 415.5 62.4 30.4 2.4 28.0 6.9 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 432.2 62.4 30.8 2.4 28.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 453.4 3 65.1 3 30.0 2.3 3 27.6 4.5 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 439.6 65.1 31.1 2.3 28.7 8.1 0.3 0.3 −         May 439.2 65.1 30.2 2.5 27.6 14.5 0.3 0.3 −
         June 447.2 64.9
3 30.3 2.5 3 27.8 12.2 0.3 0.3 −
         July 435.9 64.9 29.1 2.5 26.6 9.4 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 449.0 64.9 29.1 2.5 26.7 10.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 519.7 3 68.8 3 31.1 2.6 3 28.5 3 39.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 591.6 68.8 34.5 2.6 31.9 50.5 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 577.1 68.8 34.8 3.3 31.5 61.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 612.9 3 68.2 3 31.0 3.3 3 27.7 63.3 0.3 0.3 −
2009          Jan 560.5 68.2 28.7 3.3 25.5 46.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 547.5 68.2 29.0 3.3 25.7 45.3 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 539.7 3 75.7 3 32.1 3.5 3 28.6 3 50.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 540.5 75.7 32.7 3.5 29.2 42.0 0.3 0.3 −         May 555.9 75.7 32.3 4.7 27.6 37.5 0.3 0.3 −
         June
3 628.3 3 73.0 31.7 4.5 27.2 3 30.8 0.3 0.3 −
         July 572.3 73.0 31.8 4.7 27.1 25.3 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other
 claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
797.6 340.2 455.3 − − 2.0 0.1 58.0 121.0 37.5 381.4 2008 Dec                  5
837.4 218.6 616.1 − − 2.7 0.0 57.1 121.4 37.5 376.1                               12
829.6 210.4 616.9 − − 2.2 0.1 54.8 120.8 37.5 375.9                               19
843.2 224.4 616.9 − − 1.8 0.1 58.4 121.3 37.5 375.0                               26
857.5 239.6 616.9 − − 0.9 0.1 58.1 3 282.7 37.5 3 227.1 2009 Jan                  2
828.5 216.8 610.2 − − 1.5 0.1 58.9 280.2 37.4 226.1                                 9
821.9 204.5 610.2 − − 7.1 0.1 37.3 279.8 37.4 230.5                               16
842.4 252.2 588.5 − − 1.6 0.1 34.9 282.0 37.4 234.2                               23
748.3 214.9 528.6 − − 4.8 0.0 33.5 283.0 37.4 233.5                               30
737.2 207.8 528.6 − − 0.8 0.0 30.2 281.4 37.4 236.4          Feb                  6
681.3 198.4 482.3 − − 0.6 0.0 27.7 283.7 37.4 237.0                               13
699.7 215.9 482.3 − − 1.4 0.1 30.7 285.1 37.4 239.4                               20
700.9 238.4 461.8 − − 0.7 0.0 27.5 285.3 37.4 239.5                               27
696.8 244.1 452.2 − − 0.5 0.0 29.1 286.2 37.4 259.7          Mar                  6
680.8 227.7 452.8 − − 0.3 0.0 28.8 288.2 37.4 256.9                               13
680.1 226.1 452.8 − − 1.2 0.1 29.5 289.5 37.4 253.0                               20
661.9 230.0 430.7 − − 1.1 0.0 32.0 290.6 37.4 253.4                               27
669.6 238.1 430.7 − − 0.8 0.0 33.1 3 291.9 37.4 3 235.6 2009 Apr                  3
667.9 237.6 428.5 − − 1.8 0.0 33.6 293.9 37.4 235.2                                 9
681.7 249.4 432.2 − − 0.1 0.0 32.0 292.8 37.4 238.7                               17
676.4 244.1 432.2 − − 0.1 0.0 31.4 294.0 37.4 240.3                               24
655.0 233.2 419.1 − − 2.8 0.0 27.9 294.1 36.8 241.6          May                  1
653.4 234.2 419.1 − − 0.0 0.0 26.5 292.4 36.8 241.5                                 8
627.3 229.6 397.6 − − 0.1 0.1 24.9 292.8 36.8 240.5                               15
619.1 221.3 397.6 − − 0.1 0.1 25.4 294.7 36.8 238.1                               22
680.6 276.8 403.5 − − 0.2 0.0 25.9 296.6 36.8 239.8                               29
632.9 227.6 403.6 − − 1.7 0.0 24.1 298.2 36.8 240.2          June                  5
611.0 302.1 308.7 − − 0.2 − 23.9 300.6 36.8 242.0                               12
618.9 309.6 308.7 − − 0.5 0.0 24.0 301.0 36.8 244.7                               19
896.8 167.9 728.6 − − 0.3 0.0 24.5 301.6 36.8 244.4                               26
834.6 105.9 728.6 − − 0.1 0.1 23.1 302.2 32.3 3 239.7          July                  3
808.0 106.4 701.5 − − 0.1 0.0 23.0 301.7 36.2 239.0                               10
801.9 100.3 701.5 − − 0.1 0.0 22.8 301.2 36.2 238.4                               17
789.8 88.3 701.5 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 305.6 36.2 237.8                               24
775.7 94.8 680.8 − − 0.2 0.0 24.3 306.6 36.2 239.5                               31
761.6 80.8 680.7 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 308.8 36.2 236.7          Aug                  7
 Deutsche Bundesbank
223.3 83.8 139.3 − − 0.2 − 4.3 − 4.4 3 73.1 2007          Sep 
202.2 62.9 139.3 − − 0.0 − 7.0 − 4.4 92.4          Oct 
207.2 77.3 129.9 − − 0.0 − 10.1 − 4.4 100.3          Nov 
268.0 133.1 134.8 − − 0.1 − 13.1 − 4.4 3 98.4          Dec 
172.7 47.0 125.7 − − 0.0 − 17.3 − 4.4 120.9 2008          Jan 
178.7 59.0 119.7 − − − − 18.5 − 4.4 137.1          Feb 
213.1 98.4 103.5 11.2 − 0.0 − 20.6 − 4.4 3 115.4          Mar 
192.5 80.1 112.4 − − 0.0 − 19.9 − 4.4 118.1          Apr 184.5 71.2 113.2 − − 0.1 − 19.9 − 4.4 120.2          May
192.4 86.5 105.9 − − 0.0 − 18.4 − 4.4 124.3          June
184.5 75.5 109.0 − − 0.0 − 20.3 − 4.4 122.9          July
180.4 76.6 103.8 − − 0.0 − 22.9 − 4.4 136.8          Aug 223.5 69.2 153.5 − − 0.8 − 25.2 − 4.4
3 127.2          Sep 
297.1 107.2 186.4 − − 3.5 − 38.5 − 4.4 97.4          Oct 
263.3 101.4 159.7 − − 2.2 − 23.5 − 4.4 120.9          Nov 
277.7 75.3 201.6 − − 0.8 − 22.0 − 4.4 3 146.0          Dec 
245.4 74.4 169.2 − − 1.8 − 3.9 − 4.4 162.9 2009          Jan 
219.4 75.4 143.4 − − 0.6 − 4.4 − 4.4 176.4          Feb 
186.7 71.6 114.6 − − 0.6 − 5.0 − 4.4 3 184.6          Mar 
194.6 83.6 110.6 − − 0.4 − 6.0 − 4.4 184.8          Apr 225.0 121.5 103.4 − − 0.2 − 5.9 2.1 4.4 172.6          May
273.5 71.6 201.6 − − 0.3 − 6.5 4.4 4.4
3 203.8          June
231.8 48.8 182.9 − − 0.1 − 4.5 6.5 4.4 194.6          July
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2008 Dec                  5 2,036.5 740.5 427.3 176.7 250.5 − − 0.2 0.2 − 125.8 116.3 9.6
                              12 2,053.8 743.5 457.8 298.5 159.2 − − 0.1 5.2 − 123.8 112.9 10.9
                              19 2,021.5 753.3 436.4 205.7 230.7 − − 0.1 0.2 − 129.7 119.5 10.2
                              26 2,043.5 765.4 455.8 225.9 229.8 − − 0.1 0.2 − 116.1 107.9 8.2
2009 Jan                  2 5 2,088.9 763.7 504.3 213.3 281.7 − 9.2 0.1 0.3 1.0 93.8 85.4 8.5
                                9 2,045.6 751.1 475.3 157.5 315.3 − 2.3 0.2 0.3 1.0 98.7 90.8 7.9
                              16 2,010.7 743.3 450.8 169.2 281.4 − − 0.1 0.3 1.0 106.6 97.9 8.7
                              23 2,039.8 740.0 450.5 251.7 198.7 − − 0.1 0.4 − 130.6 121.9 8.7
                              30 1,907.0 740.3 365.6 200.5 164.9 − − 0.1 0.4 − 127.8 120.3 7.4
         Feb                  6 1,893.8 741.9 376.3 195.0 180.7 − − 0.6 0.6 − 89.2 80.9 8.3
                              13 1,834.1 740.7 323.6 247.5 75.9 − − 0.1 0.3 − 90.9 82.6 8.3
                              20 1,858.4 739.3 324.3 243.4 80.0 − − 0.9 0.3 − 114.1 105.7 8.4
                              27 1,820.3 742.1 297.2 191.7 104.9 − − 0.6 0.3 − 136.9 128.9 8.0
         Mar                  6 1,840.8 746.0 315.6 179.4 135.6 − − 0.6 0.3 − 130.4 122.2 8.2
                              13 1,829.4 746.3 306.6 244.2 61.8 − − 0.6 0.3 − 132.7 124.4 8.3
                              20 1,822.5 745.8 293.0 228.6 63.9 − − 0.5 0.3 − 145.2 136.9 8.4
                              27 1,803.1 745.8 263.8 218.5 45.1 − − 0.2 0.2 − 155.6 147.4 8.2
2009 Apr                  3 5 1,836.4 752.8 268.4 189.6 78.5 − − 0.2 0.2 − 151.3 143.1 8.2
                                9 1,827.8 762.1 253.9 232.1 21.5 − − 0.2 0.3 − 155.8 147.2 8.6
                              17 1,840.1 756.6 278.4 256.3 21.9 − − 0.2 0.3 − 149.8 141.3 8.5
                              24 1,824.0 752.7 280.4 249.1 31.1 − − 0.2 0.4 − 152.3 143.9 8.4
         May                 1 1,799.2 759.2 241.7 173.9 67.8 − − 0.0 0.4 − 164.9 156.7 8.2
                                8 1,795.1 759.5 264.1 188.8 75.3 − − 0.0 0.4 − 139.1 130.7 8.4
                              15 1,764.2 758.0 239.4 217.8 21.6 − − 0.0 0.3 − 142.9 134.7 8.2
                              22 1,736.9 758.2 222.3 206.7 15.6 − − 0.0 0.2 − 149.5 141.1 8.3
                              29 1,799.6 761.4 271.0 247.9 23.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 159.2 151.2 8.1
         June                 5 1,747.8 763.5 235.8 206.9 28.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 145.0 136.7 8.3
                              12 1,726.6 762.8 224.9 213.5 11.3 − − 0.1 0.2 − 152.9 144.9 8.0
                              19 1,719.7 760.8 226.3 213.5 12.7 − − 0.0 0.2 − 159.8 150.3 9.5
                              26 1,997.3 762.1 504.5 268.2 236.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 161.3 153.4 7.9
         July                 3 5 1,911.6 768.7 484.3 168.3 316.0 − − 0.0 0.3 − 116.8 109.1 7.8
                              10 1,888.9 770.3 427.4 271.8 155.5 − − 0.0 0.3 − 132.6 124.7 7.9
                              17 1,875.7 770.4 419.4 229.5 189.9 − − 0.0 0.3 − 142.8 132.4 10.3
                              24 1,867.8 768.4 389.8 194.5 195.3 − − 0.0 0.3 − 167.2 157.2 10.1
                              31 1,854.1 772.8 394.8 186.1 208.7 − − 0.0 0.3 − 151.7 141.6 10.1
         Aug                  7 1,835.9 775.0 404.1 182.1 222.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 124.6 114.5 10.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2007          Sep 5 394.0 173.1 47.0 42.2 4.8 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Oct 394.6 174.3 43.3 43.1 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.3
         Nov 410.3 175.4 52.9 52.7 0.2 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Dec 5 483.7 183.8 109.5 64.0 4.9 40.6 − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2008          Jan 415.5 176.2 42.6 42.4 0.2 − − − − − 0.8 0.0 0.8
         Feb 432.2 177.1 54.3 54.2 0.2 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Mar 5 453.4 179.0 70.1 69.3 0.8 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 439.6 181.4 53.4 53.3 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.0 0.7
         May 439.2 182.0 50.5 50.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         June 447.2 183.8 56.0 55.1 0.9 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         July 435.9 186.0 41.2 40.9 0.4 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Aug 449.0 185.1 50.6 50.5 0.1 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.3         Sep 
5 519.7 185.3 111.5 65.8 45.7 − − − − − 0.7 0.1 0.6
         Oct 591.6 197.1 146.4 48.4 98.0 − − − − − 7.9 0.2 7.7
         Nov 577.1 198.1 138.3 52.5 85.7 − − − − − 2.9 0.1 2.8
         Dec 5 612.9 206.6 166.9 100.7 66.3 − − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
2009          Jan 560.5 184.7 127.2 49.3 77.8 − − − − − 2.6 2.2 0.5
         Feb 547.5 185.2 106.6 54.2 52.4 − − − − − 12.5 11.9 0.6
         Mar 5 539.7 186.5 100.0 53.1 46.9 − − − − − 15.7 15.4 0.3
         Apr 540.5 189.5 80.0 48.3 31.7 − − − − − 30.8 30.2 0.6
         May 555.9 190.0 87.2 71.1 16.1 − − − − − 36.8 36.2 0.5
         June 5 628.3 190.6 176.7 75.1 101.5 − − − − − 23.7 23.4 0.4
         July 572.3 192.9 120.7 44.5 76.2 − − − − − 23.9 23.5 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-
ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
315.1 0.5 15.8 15.8 − 5.4 165.5 − 168.7 71.7 2008 Dec                  5
300.8 2.3 13.1 13.1 − 5.4 161.6 − 168.7 71.7                               12
279.0 2.8 13.1 13.1 − 5.4 161.2 − 168.7 71.7                               19
286.0 2.9 10.2 10.2 − 5.4 161.2 − 168.7 71.7                               26
286.8 5 4.5 5 11.3 5 11.3 − 5.4 5 169.2 − 5 176.6 72.0 2009 Jan                  2
282.1 1.8 11.5 11.5 − 5.4 170.6 − 176.6 71.1                                 9
271.0 2.4 7.9 7.9 − 5.4 174.2 − 176.6 71.1                               16
280.2 1.4 7.8 7.8 − 5.4 175.9 − 176.6 71.1                               23
232.2 1.8 8.1 8.1 − 5.4 177.6 − 176.6 71.1                               30
244.5 0.8 9.4 9.4 − 5.4 177.9 − 176.6 71.1          Feb                  6
238.9 − 0.1 10.5 10.5 − 5.4 175.8 − 176.6 71.4                               13
236.4 − 0.3 10.7 10.7 − 5.4 179.8 − 176.6 71.7                               20
202.6 − 0.3 9.8 9.8 − 5.4 177.9 − 176.6 71.7                               27
204.7 − 0.2 10.1 10.1 − 5.4 180.1 − 176.6 71.7          Mar                  6
211.5 0.2 10.3 10.3 − 5.4 167.5 − 176.6 72.0                               13
208.0 2.6 8.9 8.9 − 5.4 164.6 − 176.6 72.0                               20
207.2 2.6 8.5 8.5 − 5.4 165.1 − 176.6 72.2                               27
209.2 5 3.1 5 10.4 5 10.4 − 5.6 5 159.9 − 5 203.0 72.6 2009 Apr                  3
200.0 2.9 11.3 11.3 − 5.6 160.0 − 203.0 73.1                                 9
197.4 1.4 12.2 12.2 − 5.6 162.7 − 203.0 72.9                               17
184.2 1.7 10.6 10.6 − 5.6 160.4 − 203.0 72.8                               24
179.9 2.9 9.1 9.1 − 5.6 159.8 − 203.0 72.8          May                  1
178.0 1.5 11.4 11.4 − 5.6 159.6 − 203.0 72.8                                 8
171.0 2.7 10.7 10.7 − 5.6 157.8 − 203.0 72.8                               15
154.7 2.0 11.9 11.9 − 5.6 156.8 − 203.0 72.8                               22
156.4 1.8 11.3 11.3 − 5.6 156.7 − 203.0 73.0                               29
152.2 5.1 8.5 8.5 − 5.6 156.0 − 203.0 73.0          June                  5
131.8 3.2 11.2 11.2 − 5.6 158.1 − 203.0 73.0                               12
118.7 3.5 10.2 10.2 − 5.6 158.8 − 203.0 73.0                               19
117.9 5.4 7.3 7.3 − 5.6 157.2 − 203.0 73.0                               26
107.8 5.3 8.5 8.5 − 5.4 5 153.7 − 5 187.8 73.0          July                  3
123.2 4.8 10.3 10.3 − 5.4 153.8 − 187.8 73.0                               10
109.5 3.7 11.9 11.9 − 5.4 151.6 − 187.8 73.0                               17
107.0 4.4 12.4 12.4 − 5.4 152.1 − 187.8 73.0                               24
98.3 3.2 14.0 14.0 − 5.4 152.8 − 187.8 73.0                               31
98.3 3.1 12.2 12.2 − 5.4 152.0 − 187.8 73.0          Aug                  7
 Deutsche Bundesbank
5.4 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.3 13.6 96.1 5 49.5 5.0 2007          Sep 
7.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.3 13.0 97.5 49.5 5.0          Oct 
11.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.3 14.1 98.6 49.5 5.0          Nov 
14.0 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.3 5 13.1 99.5 5 55.0 5.0          Dec 
18.4 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.3 13.3 100.2 55.0 5.0 2008          Jan 
19.4 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 14.1 102.4 55.0 5.0          Feb 
21.7 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.3 10.7 103.7 5 58.1 5.0          Mar 
21.2 0.0 4.3 4.3 − 1.3 10.2 104.1 58.1 5.0          Apr 
21.2 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.3 11.3 106.3 58.1 5.0          May
19.6 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.3 12.5 107.2 5 57.4 5.0          June
22.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 12.2 107.4 57.4 5.0          July
24.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.3 13.1 109.8 57.4 5.0          Aug 
24.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.3 5 15.1 111.8 5 62.2 5.0          Sep 
21.7 11.9 3.8 3.8 − 1.3 14.8 119.3 62.2 5.0          Oct 
16.1 13.5 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 15.9 120.6 62.2 5.0          Nov 
9.2 18.4 2.5 2.5 − 1.3 16.9 121.8 5 63.1 5.0          Dec 
6.9 13.4 0.1 0.1 − 1.3 17.0 139.2 63.1 5.0 2009          Jan 
7.5 7.6 0.2 0.2 − 1.3 17.7 140.7 63.1 5.0          Feb 
7 . 5 0 . 0−−− 1 . 4 5 11.6 140.4 5 71.5 5.0          Mar 
8.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 1.4 12.1 141.8 71.5 5.0          Apr 
8.7 0.1 0.5 0.5 − 1.4 12.6 142.2 71.5 5.0          May
9.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 1.3 5 12.4 141.9 5 66.6 5.0          June
6.7 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 1.3 12.2 141.8 66.6 5.0          July
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.22004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.92007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.82008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2007          Sep 7,500.9 14.4 2,438.4 1,756.8 1,201.2 555.6 681.5 429.9 251.7 3,493.0 3,074.0 2,552.6 2,278.5
         Oct 7,500.5 14.5 2,453.6 1,770.9 1,208.5 562.4 682.7 430.2 252.5 3,485.7 3,058.5 2,543.7 2,278.4
         Nov 7,553.6 14.1 2,489.4 1,791.5 1,226.5 565.1 697.9 443.9 253.9 3,482.3 3,057.5 2,544.1 2,279.6
         Dec 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008          Jan 7,574.1 14.1 2,506.6 1,798.8 1,240.4 558.5 707.8 454.1 253.7 3,530.9 3,084.8 2,585.0 2,297.3
         Feb 7,596.6 13.6 2,512.7 1,806.7 1,250.0 556.7 706.0 450.6 255.5 3,521.3 3,079.8 2,577.1 2,306.5         Mar 7,641.7 14.2 2,516.2 1,818.8 1,262.4 556.4 697.4 442.9 254.5 3,561.3 3,095.9 2,593.5 2,316.4
         Apr 7,725.9 13.9 2,520.4 1,824.8 1,264.1 560.7 695.6 445.9 249.7 3,609.6 3,145.8 2,632.0 2,323.2
         May 7,729.1 14.1 2,540.8 1,844.9 1,274.1 570.9 695.8 436.6 259.3 3,596.2 3,130.8 2,620.8 2,326.7         June 7,688.7 13.8 2,556.9 1,855.1 1,281.7 573.3 701.8 436.9 265.0 3,576.9 3,098.7 2,604.6 2,333.7
         July 7,675.4 14.2 2,532.5 1,833.9 1,263.1 570.8 698.6 430.6 268.1 3,587.8 3,110.1 2,616.3 2,341.6
         Aug 7,744.7 14.2 2,556.0 1,860.3 1,284.2 576.2 695.7 427.4 268.3 3,619.5 3,137.0 2,645.3 2,344.2         Sep 7,896.2 13.7 2,614.7 1,918.3 1,351.8 566.6 696.3 431.1 265.2 3,623.3 3,134.6 2,657.2 2,354.8
         Oct 8,030.2 15.4 2,670.4 1,962.1 1,399.6 562.5 708.3 453.2 255.1 3,627.7 3,135.2 2,653.3 2,357.7
         Nov 7,985.4 15.1 2,705.1 1,995.0 1,408.3 586.8 710.1 462.5 247.6 3,633.0 3,134.5 2,657.2 2,362.4         Dec 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009          Jan 7,906.4 14.0 2,676.9 1,975.0 1,382.5 592.5 701.9 465.2 236.7 3,677.6 3,189.7 2,706.2 2,375.7
         Feb 7,846.4 13.9 2,649.2 1,950.8 1,357.1 593.7 698.4 466.0 232.4 3,667.8 3,183.1 2,702.3 2,368.3         Mar 7,777.1 13.9 2,611.1 1,923.6 1,312.9 610.7 687.4 458.5 228.9 3,669.6 3,193.6 2,716.4 2,383.4
         Apr 7,802.2 15.3 2,584.9 1,902.2 1,295.0 607.1 682.7 454.9 227.8 3,690.1 3,216.1 2,730.5 2,385.5
         May 7,685.1 15.8 2,537.1 1,869.2 1,263.7 605.5 667.9 444.2 223.7 3,680.5 3,198.6 2,714.9 2,384.7         June 7,710.7 15.0 2,601.6 1,943.9 1,333.2 610.7 657.8 436.9 220.9 3,694.3 3,211.7 2,725.6 2,388.3
 Changes 1
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.4
2004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2005 197.2 0.1 101.8 13.2 25.7 − 12.5 88.6 50.5 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 349.0 1.1 76.2 − 2.4 25.2 − 27.6 78.6 17.3 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.32007 509.7 1.5 210.1 132.5 153.3 − 20.8 77.6 41.6 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.12008 322.2 − 0.1 187.8 167.0 130.1 36.9 20.8 35.1 − 14.4 140.5 102.8 131.1 65.7
2007          Oct 26.7 0.2 16.8 14.7 7.2 7.5 2.1 0.4 1.8 5.7 − 5.9 − 2.6 1.0
         Nov 63.1 − 0.4 35.9 20.7 18.0 2.7 15.3 13.7 1.6 − 1.9 − 0.2 1.2 1.9         Dec 39.4 3.7 34.3 56.7 64.0 − 7.3 − 22.4 − 22.5 0.2 5.8 4.9 12.5 9.6
2008          Jan − 31.3 − 3.7 − 33.0 − 63.9 − 65.9 2.0 30.9 31.6 − 0.7 35.9 26.2 32.1 10.5
         Feb 33.0 − 0.5 6.4 8.0 9.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 3.5 1.9 − 7.9 − 4.1 − 6.9 10.1
         Mar 66.1 0.6 3.9 12.3 12.5 − 0.1 − 8.4 − 7.7 − 0.7 44.0 18.4 18.3 11.7
         Apr 81.6 − 0.3 5.4 8.0 2.8 5.2 − 2.6 2.2 − 4.8 49.9 50.6 39.1 7.3
         May 5.2 0.2 22.9 20.5 10.2 10.2 2.5 − 7.1 9.6 − 12.8 − 14.3 − 10.6 4.0         June − 25.4 − 0.4 23.5 14.5 7.6 6.8 9.0 3.3 5.8 − 16.9 − 30.6 − 14.8 7.8
         July − 1.1 0.4 − 8.5 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 6.3 3.2 10.1 11.4 11.7 7.8
         Aug 52.5 − 0.0 29.2 32.1 27.0 5.1 − 2.9 − 3.2 0.2 25.7 24.2 26.4 0.4         Sep 132.4 − 0.5 58.4 57.9 67.6 − 9.7 0.5 3.7 − 3.2 1.3 − 3.5 10.7 9.2
         Oct 59.4 1.7 54.7 43.3 47.9 − 4.6 11.5 22.1 − 10.6 − 9.9 − 6.9 − 11.0 − 4.6
         Nov − 10.3 − 0.4 44.8 42.6 18.3 24.3 2.2 9.6 − 7.4 7.4 0.9 5.6 6.4         Dec − 39.8 2.7 − 20.0 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 17.2 − 9.6 − 7.6 13.7 30.6 30.4 − 4.8
2009          Jan − 33.5 − 3.8 − 5.1 − 15.4 − 21.8 6.4 10.3 12.1 − 1.8 36.2 27.8 20.9 16.5
         Feb − 74.5 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 24.2 − 25.4 1.2 − 2.9 0.8 − 3.7 − 9.0 − 5.1 − 2.5 − 6.7         Mar − 57.8 0.1 − 37.4 − 26.9 − 44.1 17.2 − 10.5 − 7.3 − 3.2 9.2 13.9 17.4 18.4
         Apr 20.6 1.4 − 26.7 − 21.5 − 17.9 − 3.6 − 5.2 − 3.7 − 1.6 20.1 22.4 13.9 2.2
         May − 79.4 0.5 − 38.0 − 23.4 − 27.9 4.6 − 14.6 − 10.5 − 4.1 − 3.2 − 13.7 − 11.9 2.1         June 25.6 − 0.8 64.8 74.7 69.5 5.2 − 9.8 − 7.2 − 2.6 15.2 14.4 11.9 4.9
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008
274.0 521.4 366.1 155.3 419.0 284.7 116.4 134.3 24.9 109.5 1,334.3 1,039.6 220.9 2007          Sep 
265.3 514.8 364.6 150.3 427.1 292.8 121.4 134.4 24.9 109.4 1,325.3 1,022.3 221.5          Oct 
264.5 513.4 362.9 150.5 424.8 295.5 122.2 129.3 25.4 103.9 1,344.7 1,031.3 223.1          Nov 267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4          Dec 
287.6 499.9 357.1 142.8 446.1 309.7 141.2 136.4 25.9 110.5 1,307.3 1,006.0 215.2 2008          Jan 
270.6 502.7 353.4 149.3 441.5 302.8 135.7 138.7 26.1 112.7 1,326.0 1,022.5 223.1          Feb 
277.1 502.5 350.9 151.5 465.4 326.3 140.3 139.1 26.2 112.9 1,327.0 1,035.8 223.0          Mar 
308.7 513.8 355.9 158.0 463.8 326.7 143.2 137.1 26.0 111.1 1,347.9 1,061.0 234.1          Apr 
294.2 509.9 350.7 159.3 465.4 330.3 146.5 135.1 26.0 109.1 1,342.9 1,054.7 235.2          May270.9 494.1 349.4 144.7 478.3 340.1 158.3 138.1 26.2 111.9 1,303.5 1,013.6 237.6          June
274.7 493.8 349.6 144.2 477.7 343.1 161.9 134.6 26.0 108.7 1,299.8 1,011.4 241.2          July
301.1 491.7 349.0 142.8 482.4 349.9 167.7 132.6 26.4 106.2 1,316.1 1,027.0 239.0          Aug 302.4 477.5 344.8 132.7 488.7 358.9 175.9 129.8 28.0 101.8 1,401.2 1,106.2 243.3          Sep 
295.6 481.9 346.7 135.2 492.5 363.1 182.5 129.3 28.3 101.1 1,455.9 1,166.6 260.8          Oct 
294.8 477.2 344.2 133.0 498.5 369.2 186.6 129.4 28.6 100.8 1,357.6 1,078.6 274.7          Nov 329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7          Dec 
330.5 483.5 344.3 139.2 487.9 359.7 182.0 128.3 26.1 102.1 1,256.5 991.4 281.4 2009          Jan 
334.1 480.8 342.4 138.3 484.7 356.1 175.8 128.5 25.9 102.7 1,233.9 974.1 281.6          Feb 
333.0 477.1 338.1 139.0 476.0 348.8 172.5 127.2 25.5 101.7 1,169.9 916.9 312.7          Mar 
345.0 485.6 340.5 145.1 474.1 348.6 171.9 125.5 24.8 100.7 1,213.3 961.0 298.7          Apr 
330.1 483.7 336.6 147.0 481.9 353.8 172.1 128.1 24.4 103.7 1,184.7 933.9 267.1          May337.3 486.1 336.5 149.7 482.5 357.3 178.2 125.2 22.7 102.5 1,165.0 912.3 234.8          June
Changes 1
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.1 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.7 31.6 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.9 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.9 136.8 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.8 − 11.5 37.7 42.3 40.4 − 4.6 1.6 − 6.1 − 35.6 − 3.7 29.7 2008
− 3.6 − 3.3 − 1.5 − 1.8 11.5 11.5 5.4 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 4.3 − 9.7 − 0.3 2007          Oct 
− 0.7 − 1.4 − 1.7 0.3 − 1.7 3.3 1.2 − 5.0 0.5 − 5.5 28.3 16.7 1.1          Nov 
2.9 − 7.6 − 2.1 − 5.4 0.9 − 0.8 3.0 1.7 0.6 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 3.7          Dec 
21.6 − 5.8 − 3.6 − 2.2 9.7 4.4 9.9 5.3 − 0.1 5.4 − 12.6 − 10.3 − 17.9 2008          Jan 
− 17.0 2.8 − 3.7 6.5 − 3.8 − 6.2 − 5.0 2.4 0.2 2.2 28.6 24.6 6.4          Feb 
6.7 0.1 − 2.4 2.5 25.6 25.2 5.4 0.4 0.2 0.2 21.5 30.8 − 3.9          Mar 
31.8 11.5 4.7 6.8 − 0.7 1.3 3.8 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.8 16.5 20.9 10.2          Apr 
− 14.6 − 3.8 − 5.2 1.4 1.5 3.5 3.2 − 2.0 0.0 − 2.0 − 5.6 − 6.8 0.4          May− 22.6 − 15.8 − 1.3 − 14.6 13.7 10.7 12.3 3.0 0.2 2.8 − 33.2 − 34.6 1.6          June
3.9 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 2.2 3.4 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 − 6.0 − 4.1 2.8          July
26.0 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 1.5 3.9 4.0 − 2.3 0.3 − 2.6 − 4.4 − 3.1 1.9          Aug 
1.6 − 14.2 − 4.1 − 10.1 4.8 7.8 7.2 − 3.1 1.6 − 4.7 71.0 66.2 2.1          Sep 
− 6.4 4.0 1.8 2.3 − 2.9 − 1.9 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 7.4 15.8          Oct − 0.8 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 2.2 6.5 6.4 4.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 75.4 − 65.3 13.2          Nov 
35.2 0.2 − 0.2 0.3 − 16.9 − 15.0 − 10.7 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 33.1 − 29.2 − 3.1          Dec 
4.4 7.0 1.3 5.6 8.3 8.8 6.1 − 0.5 − 1.7 1.2 − 51.7 − 47.8 − 9.1 2009          Jan 
4.2 − 2.7 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 3.9 − 4.1 − 6.7 0.3 − 0.3 0.5 − 24.6 − 20.6 − 13.7          Feb 
− 1.0 − 3.5 − 4.2 0.7 − 4.7 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 38.9 − 35.7 9.3          Mar 
11.7 8.5 2.4 6.1 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 40.3 41.5 − 14.5          Apr 
− 14.0 − 1.8 − 3.8 2.0 10.5 7.8 2.4 2.8 − 0.5 3.2 − 6.2 − 6.7 − 32.6          May
7.1 2.5 − 0.2 2.6 0.9 3.7 6.3 − 2.9 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 18.7 − 20.9 − 35.0          June
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.62008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2007          Sep 7,500.9 1,698.6 1,380.9 317.7 2,551.3 2,441.3 768.5 1,117.9 405.7 554.8 448.5 68.6 16.6
         Oct 7,500.5 1,714.2 1,377.3 336.9 2,548.5 2,438.7 757.6 1,129.9 420.3 551.2 443.8 68.9 16.1
         Nov 7,553.6 1,719.0 1,393.4 325.7 2,592.0 2,474.9 785.8 1,141.0 430.8 548.1 439.7 70.5 18.6         Dec 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008          Jan 7,574.1 1,734.4 1,393.6 340.7 2,628.1 2,514.1 770.0 1,193.6 476.6 550.5 441.2 74.1 22.1
         Feb 7,596.6 1,736.2 1,395.6 340.6 2,638.4 2,525.9 768.8 1,209.6 491.5 547.6 439.2 73.7 19.1         Mar 7,641.7 1,759.3 1,432.8 326.5 2,644.7 2,524.5 769.7 1,211.0 492.4 543.8 437.5 79.3 26.3
         Apr 7,725.9 1,790.8 1,439.8 351.1 2,649.4 2,535.5 758.9 1,236.8 517.2 539.8 434.8 76.4 23.7
         May 7,729.1 1,785.2 1,443.6 341.6 2,670.6 2,550.5 761.5 1,252.7 533.4 536.3 432.8 80.4 26.1         June 7,688.7 1,764.2 1,448.9 315.3 2,670.8 2,551.5 768.8 1,249.3 530.1 533.4 430.7 79.8 27.1
         July 7,675.4 1,749.7 1,439.1 310.6 2,675.9 2,557.0 746.2 1,283.0 563.6 527.9 425.6 81.7 27.3
         Aug 7,744.7 1,753.3 1,446.9 306.3 2,688.1 2,569.2 748.7 1,296.8 577.6 523.6 422.5 81.6 27.1         Sep 7,896.2 1,832.7 1,529.1 303.5 2,698.0 2,573.6 758.0 1,296.4 578.4 519.2 419.2 86.4 34.4
         Oct 8,030.2 1,913.9 1,642.3 271.6 2,734.7 2,620.5 786.9 1,312.8 598.0 520.8 417.8 77.6 28.8
         Nov 7,985.4 1,862.4 1,595.7 266.7 2,757.2 2,645.5 804.3 1,317.8 603.6 523.4 416.7 75.0 25.6         Dec 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009          Jan 7,906.4 1,794.4 1,533.3 261.1 2,817.1 2,701.2 857.7 1,304.6 557.0 539.0 428.6 80.7 33.6
         Feb 7,846.4 1,760.2 1,509.8 250.4 2,821.6 2,714.6 882.6 1,287.7 534.4 544.3 433.9 73.4 25.7
         Mar 7,777.1 1,693.9 1,456.2 237.6 2,805.6 2,699.1 879.3 1,272.1 515.8 547.8 436.6 73.2 26.8
         Apr 7,802.2 1,701.3 1,458.7 242.6 2,823.8 2,716.8 895.8 1,269.8 509.3 551.1 439.1 74.4 25.4
         May 7,685.1 1,678.3 1,445.4 232.9 2,824.1 2,711.3 898.8 1,257.5 494.8 555.0 441.5 74.2 26.0         June 7,710.7 1,695.4 1,469.1 226.3 2,832.3 2,716.6 918.7 1,238.2 461.7 559.7 445.1 73.2 26.0
 Changes 1
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.4
2002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.42004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 197.2 32.8 26.9 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 349.0 105.5 81.5 24.0 123.0 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.42007 509.7 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.2 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.7 5.62008 322.2 66.4 121.8 − 55.3 162.4 173.2 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2007          Oct 26.7 16.8 − 3.1 20.0 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 10.7 11.9 14.5 − 3.6 − 4.7 0.4 − 0.4
         Nov 63.1 5.9 16.5 − 10.6 43.6 36.3 28.4 11.0 10.2 − 3.1 − 4.1 1.6 2.5         Dec 39.4 58.9 85.7 − 26.8 41.7 43.4 − 16.2 52.3 47.1 7.3 6.3 4.8 0.8
2008          Jan − 31.3 − 61.6 −101.1 39.5 − 6.8 − 4.2 0.4 0.4 − 1.3 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 2.5 1.9
         Feb 33.0 3.0 2.4 0.6 10.8 12.2 − 0.9 16.1 14.9 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 3.0         Mar 66.1 26.4 38.4 − 12.0 7.6 − 0.7 1.5 1.6 1.2 − 3.7 − 1.6 5.9 7.3
         Apr 81.6 32.6 7.9 24.8 4.7 10.6 − 11.1 25.8 24.7 − 4.1 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 2.3
         May 5.2 − 1.2 4.0 − 5.2 19.2 15.0 2.6 15.9 16.3 − 3.5 − 2.1 2.1 0.5         June − 25.4 − 18.0 5.9 − 23.9 0.6 1.3 7.4 − 3.3 − 3.2 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.4 1.0
         July − 1.1 − 1.7 3.0 − 4.7 5.1 5.4 − 22.7 33.6 33.5 − 5.6 − 5.1 1.9 0.3
         Aug 52.5 5.4 11.4 − 6.0 10.3 11.2 1.9 13.6 13.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 0.4         Sep 132.4 76.2 80.5 − 4.2 8.4 3.7 8.8 − 0.7 0.6 − 4.4 − 3.3 4.0 7.2
         Oct 59.4 67.6 103.9 − 36.3 32.0 44.4 27.1 15.7 18.9 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.0 − 6.2
         Nov − 10.3 − 36.2 − 29.9 − 6.3 27.7 29.9 17.5 9.8 7.8 2.6 − 1.1 − 2.3 − 3.3         Dec − 39.8 − 26.1 − 4.6 − 21.5 42.7 44.4 6.4 26.2 − 3.5 11.8 8.1 − 1.6 − 3.0
2009          Jan − 33.5 − 42.8 − 57.3 14.5 16.7 12.4 47.1 − 38.5 − 42.1 3.8 3.8 5.8 11.2
         Feb − 74.5 − 35.2 − 24.4 − 10.8 4.6 13.2 24.8 − 16.9 − 22.7 5.3 5.3 − 7.1 − 7.8         Mar − 57.8 − 60.9 − 49.1 − 11.8 − 15.1 − 14.8 − 2.6 − 15.8 − 18.5 3.5 2.8 0.1 1.2
         Apr 20.6 6.5 1.7 4.8 17.9 17.2 33.2 − 19.3 − 23.6 3.3 3.1 1.1 − 1.4
         May − 79.4 − 14.7 − 5.8 − 8.9 1.7 − 4.5 3.5 − 11.9 − 14.1 3.9 2.4 0.3 0.7
         June 25.6 17.2 23.8 − 6.5 8.3 5.3 19.9 − 19.3 − 33.1 4.7 3.6 − 0.8 0.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 2006
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008
49.8 16.5 2.3 1.7 41.3 39.6 36.3 30.3 1,651.5 170.7 703.6 426.5 402.7 2007          Sep 
50.5 17.5 2.3 1.7 40.9 38.2 34.6 29.2 1,664.4 179.3 687.5 427.7 394.5          Oct 
49.6 18.1 2.3 1.7 46.6 41.9 39.7 29.1 1,658.9 188.3 687.0 427.5 400.4          Nov 53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2          Dec 
49.6 18.9 2.3 1.8 40.0 37.4 42.1 28.8 1,644.1 190.6 679.2 430.8 386.7 2008          Jan 
52.3 23.6 2.3 1.8 38.7 37.1 45.9 29.0 1,631.9 189.7 694.5 431.8 389.0          Feb 
50.7 23.0 2.3 1.8 40.8 37.6 46.7 27.2 1,622.3 188.1 703.1 447.5 390.9          Mar 
50.4 23.5 2.3 1.8 37.5 35.3 55.7 25.4 1,628.2 195.8 729.3 442.8 404.2          Apr 
52.0 24.6 2.3 1.8 39.7 36.7 56.0 24.6 1,629.9 201.4 716.8 444.5 401.5          May50.5 23.4 2.3 1.8 39.4 37.8 63.9 23.8 1,641.4 217.1 679.2 442.6 402.9          June
52.0 25.5 2.3 1.7 37.2 35.2 58.1 23.5 1,644.8 222.2 674.8 443.6 405.0          July
52.3 26.4 2.3 1.7 37.3 36.3 63.1 23.2 1,655.8 224.7 687.9 448.7 424.6          Aug 49.7 25.5 2.3 1.7 38.0 37.5 70.9 22.4 1,642.2 219.9 741.6 445.3 443.0          Sep 
46.5 21.8 2.3 1.7 36.6 35.5 69.8 18.6 1,637.0 214.5 747.9 453.9 454.4          Oct 
47.1 23.9 2.3 1.7 36.7 34.4 71.0 17.5 1,655.9 242.5 713.2 448.2 460.1          Nov 49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5          Dec 
44.6 19.7 2.4 1.8 35.2 33.0 67.4 15.9 1,614.6 215.8 697.5 462.3 437.1 2009          Jan 
45.2 19.3 2.5 1.8 33.6 32.7 74.0 15.4 1,604.9 211.4 686.7 441.5 442.1          Feb 
44.0 18.2 2.5 1.8 33.2 32.0 87.7 14.8 1,580.2 201.3 664.6 447.9 482.5          Mar 
46.5 21.0 2.5 1.9 32.6 32.0 92.6 14.4 1,579.0 203.6 697.7 430.2 463.3          Apr 
45.7 19.9 2.5 1.9 38.5 36.5 90.9 14.1 1,574.2 196.6 646.6 425.4 431.7          May44.7 19.1 2.5 1.9 42.6 40.6 93.4 13.6 1,571.0 185.5 652.1 441.8 411.0          June
Changes 1
− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001
− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.3 − 9.4 22.4 14.4 18.5 2005
− 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.2 0.3 34.3 21.7 32.1 27.9 29.2 2006
8.1 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.4 48.7 49.1 42.9 59.1 2007
− 7.5 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.3 − 32.4 50.7 1.7 39.2 61.1 2008
0.9 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 1.1 16.0 10.5 − 11.9 1.7 9.2 2007          Oct 
− 1.0 0.5 0.0 − 0.0 5.7 3.7 5.1 − 0.1 − 2.5 8.7 5.0 0.3 5.8          Nov 
3.9 4.0 0.1 0.0 − 6.5 − 3.7 − 13.1 − 0.5 − 20.2 − 5.9 − 25.2 1.0 − 3.2          Dec 
− 4.4 − 3.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.9 15.4 0.2 6.7 8.3 22.8 2.6 − 10.6 2008          Jan 
2.9 4.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.3 3.9 0.2 − 8.9 − 0.7 21.1 1.0 1.8          Feb 
− 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 0.0 2.3 0.7 0.8 − 1.8 − 3.5 − 1.5 17.9 16.9 1.9          Mar 
− 0.3 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 9.0 − 1.8 5.5 7.7 23.5 − 3.9 12.0          Apr 
1.6 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 1.4 0.2 − 0.8 1.6 4.5 − 12.8 1.8 − 2.9          May
− 1.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 1.1 7.9 − 0.8 14.0 15.8 − 34.1 4.1 0.9          June
1.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 5.8 − 0.3 4.5 5.7 − 5.8 1.5 1.4          July
− 0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 1.1 5.0 − 0.3 2.9 2.3 0.6 3.3 25.1          Aug 
− 3.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.7 1.3 7.8 − 0.8 − 20.8 − 5.0 44.7 − 4.9 21.6          Sep 
− 4.9 − 5.0 0.1 0.0 − 1.4 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 29.2 − 5.5 − 26.6 3.8 16.8          Oct 
0.9 2.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 1.1 2.8 − 1.1 21.6 28.1 − 26.6 − 4.3 5.7          Nov 
1.3 1.3 0.1 0.0 − 0.1 0.4 − 9.9 − 1.1 − 26.9 − 9.0 − 23.1 17.3 − 12.8          Dec 
− 5.5 − 5.7 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.8 6.3 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 17.7 11.9 − 3.2 − 9.5 2009          Jan 
0.7 − 0.3 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.3 6.6 − 0.5 − 9.5 − 4.7 − 13.0 − 20.8 − 6.5          Feb 
− 1.1 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 13.7 − 0.6 − 13.0 − 9.9 − 9.5 8.9 18.7          Mar 
2.4 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.4 4.9 − 0.4 − 3.3 2.3 31.4 − 18.2 − 18.2          Apr 
− 0.5 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 5.9 4.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 4.5 − 6.9 − 39.6 3.1 − 32.3          May− 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 0.0 3.8 4.1 2.5 − 0.5 − 3.4 − 11.1 5.5 16.4 − 20.5          June
2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2009          Jan 1,976 7,970.4 65.8 3,327.2 2,449.9 807.9 4,012.7 544.6 2,715.0 1.4 736.4 166.5 398.2
         Feb 1,977 7,910.9 68.3 3,281.8 2,410.6 806.6 3,996.7 523.5 2,715.5 1.2 741.9 165.7 398.3
         Mar 1,977 7,840.3 68.1 3,193.5 2,313.8 833.7 3,982.3 541.0 2,693.7 1.2 732.9 169.0 427.4
         Apr 1,977 7,864.9 63.9 3,198.8 2,325.1 831.9 4,020.3 549.1 2,705.8 1.2 747.2 169.1 412.9
         May 1,976 7,746.9 89.1 3,126.9 2,244.9 846.0 3,991.0 538.4 2,698.1 1.1 735.2 160.3 379.6         June 1,967 7,771.9 93.2 3,172.8 2,287.9 850.3 4,001.7 539.6 2,697.6 1.0 748.0 158.1 346.2
Commercial banks 5
2009          May 273 2,340.1 38.6 944.9 792.7 146.2 1,113.3 269.2 621.0 0.5 217.2 77.8 165.5
         June 273 2,355.0 42.2 982.5 831.9 144.3 1,114.0 271.2 623.3 0.5 216.1 76.2 140.0
   Big banks 6
2009          May 5 1,397.2 24.4 597.3 500.3 92.7 569.7 154.1 280.4 0.4 129.0 71.0 134.6         June 5 1,365.1 30.6 587.3 490.8 91.7 566.9 153.3 280.2 0.3 129.5 69.5 110.8
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2009          May 166 749.0 12.2 241.9 188.0 52.2 463.9 83.1 297.0 0.1 84.8 6.5 24.6         June 165 778.0 9.6 267.5 214.9 51.1 471.0 88.9 299.2 0.1 84.0 6.4 23.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2009          May 102 193.9 2.0 105.7 104.3 1.4 79.6 32.0 43.6 0.0 3.4 0.3 6.2         June 103 211.9 2.0 127.8 126.2 1.6 76.2 29.1 44.0 0.0 2.5 0.3 5.7
Landesbanken
2009          May 10 1,517.7 8.4 715.1 532.5 173.0 693.5 106.7 448.6 0.1 127.4 28.5 72.1         June 10 1,521.2 6.5 721.0 542.2 168.6 697.0 100.2 446.6 0.1 139.1 27.9 68.9
Savings banks
2009          May 434 1,058.2 22.3 272.2 107.1 155.6 726.0 64.7 568.1 0.3 92.6 18.8 18.8         June 434 1,064.6 22.2 276.1 107.4 161.1 729.1 66.6 569.0 0.3 92.8 18.8 18.4
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2009          May 2 266.2 1.2 169.2 119.9 47.6 67.5 17.7 20.1 0.0 29.1 15.3 13.0
         June 2 269.7 0.3 169.0 121.1 46.5 72.6 22.6 20.0 0.0 29.6 15.3 12.4
Credit cooperatives
2009          May 1,195 670.5 13.9 192.4 80.8 105.5 433.2 35.1 344.0 0.1 53.7 11.0 20.0
         June 1,186 680.4 14.8 197.9 81.9 110.1 436.8 36.1 345.2 0.1 55.2 11.0 19.9
Mortgage banks
2009          May 19 811.4 0.7 290.1 186.4 102.5 501.8 14.0 365.8 − 121.4 1.3 17.5         June 19 796.4 1.1 283.5 178.8 102.6 494.5 10.0 363.1 − 121.0 1.3 16.0
Building and loan associations
2009          May 25 189.2 0.2 54.1 37.2 16.9 122.1 1.6 108.7 . 11.8 0.3 12.5         June 25 192.2 0.1 56.7 38.1 18.6 122.5 1.5 109.1 . 11.9 0.3 12.4
Special purpose banks
2009          May 18 893.7 3.8 488.9 388.4 98.6 333.6 29.5 221.9 − 81.9 7.2 60.2         June 18 892.6 5.9 486.0 386.4 98.4 335.1 31.3 221.3 − 82.3 7.3 58.2
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2009          May 150 849.3 11.2 344.3 279.8 63.4 450.6 87.4 276.8 0.2 84.1 6.5 36.8         June 150 888.1 11.7 389.3 325.5 62.9 445.9 84.3 276.1 0.2 83.0 6.4 34.9
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2009          May 48 655.5 9.2 238.6 175.5 61.9 370.9 55.4 233.2 0.1 80.6 6.2 30.5         June 47 676.2 9.7 261.5 199.3 61.3 369.7 55.2 232.2 0.1 80.4 6.1 29.2
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,269.8 408.1 1,861.7 3,106.7 1,008.2 569.0 831.9 120.0 548.0 434.9 149.6 1,699.5 376.7 517.7 2009          Jan 
2,242.5 410.7 1,831.8 3,099.9 1,012.6 548.2 838.1 116.8 553.4 440.4 147.6 1,679.2 366.5 522.7          Feb 
2,161.4 405.1 1,756.3 3,090.4 1,017.7 533.0 838.0 123.5 557.0 443.2 144.6 1,657.2 370.2 561.1          Mar 
2,187.0 381.8 1,805.2 3,128.4 1,032.6 553.9 841.0 144.9 560.4 445.7 140.6 1,645.2 363.3 541.0          Apr 
2,163.6 336.1 1,827.5 3,076.2 1,037.9 525.8 811.1 138.1 564.3 448.1 137.2 1,643.9 355.0 508.2          May2,188.4 364.6 1,823.7 3,084.8 1,058.6 500.5 823.3 137.8 569.0 451.8 133.5 1,638.2 374.0 486.5          June
Commercial banks 5
775.4 214.9 560.5 1,030.6 488.7 228.5 170.7 66.4 118.8 87.7 23.9 227.2 110.6 196.2 2009          May
794.6 246.1 548.5 1,035.9 498.9 220.3 171.9 66.4 121.2 90.5 23.5 226.9 121.7 175.9          June
Big banks 6
476.0 143.1 332.9 562.3 246.4 131.9 107.8 58.5 67.9 62.1 8.3 184.3 67.4 107.2 2009          May
453.7 133.0 320.7 560.2 245.7 128.0 108.0 58.5 70.2 64.5 8.3 184.8 78.2 88.2          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
163.4 46.8 116.6 422.9 219.5 84.2 52.8 7.7 50.9 25.6 15.4 42.9 37.2 82.6 2009          May
184.1 65.1 119.0 432.5 230.3 82.4 53.8 7.9 50.9 25.9 15.0 42.1 37.5 81.8          June
Branches of foreign banks
136.0 25.0 111.0 45.5 22.7 12.4 10.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 6.0 6.4 2009          May
156.8 48.0 108.8 43.2 23.0 9.9 10.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 6.0 5.9          June
Landesbanken
495.9 55.3 440.6 406.6 74.5 123.6 191.9 64.4 14.2 13.0 2.4 464.5 65.2 85.5 2009          May
486.5 55.3 431.2 411.2 75.3 115.2 204.2 61.2 14.1 12.9 2.4 465.8 73.1 84.6          June
Savings banks
201.1 14.4 186.7 714.7 276.9 67.5 14.5 − 273.0 212.6 82.8 36.8 56.9 48.7 2009          May
209.3 15.7 193.5 711.5 279.8 62.9 14.7 − 274.1 213.4 80.0 35.7 57.3 50.8          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
141.2 28.8 112.4 42.2 10.8 13.3 15.8 5.0 − − 2.3 54.3 11.4 17.2 2009          May
140.2 27.0 113.2 45.2 12.9 14.2 15.8 7.4 − − 2.3 57.0 11.2 16.0          June
Credit cooperatives
103.8 4.3 99.5 465.4 178.3 76.8 27.8 − 157.5 134.0 25.0 33.2 39.1 28.9 2009          May
114.5 4.3 110.2 464.5 180.6 73.3 27.4 0.0 158.8 134.3 24.3 32.4 39.4 29.5          June
Mortgage banks
236.0 6.4 229.6 187.8 3.5 6.9 176.9 − 0.4 0.4 0.0 346.4 18.6 22.6 2009          May
230.4 4.7 225.7 186.3 3.9 5.5 176.4 − 0.4 0.4 0.0 339.3 18.5 21.9          June
Building and loan associations
27.1 1.9 25.2 125.9 0.3 2.0 122.6 − 0.3 0.3 0.6 6.7 7.3 22.2 2009          May
29.5 2.2 27.3 125.9 0.4 2.0 122.6 − 0.3 0.3 0.6 7.3 7.3 22.2          June
Special purpose banks
183.1 10.1 173.0 103.1 4.9 7.1 90.9 2.3 − − 0.2 474.7 45.9 86.9 2009          May
183.4 9.2 174.1 104.3 6.8 7.0 90.2 2.8 − − 0.4 473.9 45.4 85.6          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
291.5 79.4 212.2 371.8 167.5 93.0 82.7 23.1 19.4 19.1 9.3 83.7 42.3 60.0 2009          May
330.4 122.9 207.6 376.0 171.8 93.1 82.9 26.3 19.3 19.1 8.8 81.6 42.2 57.9          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
155.5 54.4 101.1 326.4 144.7 80.6 72.6 22.9 19.3 19.1 9.1 83.7 36.3 53.5 2009          May
173.7 74.9 98.8 332.8 148.8 83.2 72.8 26.3 19.3 19.1 8.7 81.6 36.3 51.9          June
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
1999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.52007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.72008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2008          Jan 13.8 43.6 1,723.3 1,194.0 0.0 29.2 500.2 1.9 2,998.5 2,652.9 1.5 2.2 341.9
         Feb 13.2 52.1 1,722.2 1,194.4 − 29.3 498.5 1.9 2,993.2 2,658.6 1.3 2.1 331.1         Mar 13.8 69.6 1,716.3 1,189.6 − 29.7 497.0 1.9 3,009.0 2,666.0 1.3 2.5 339.3
         Apr 13.5 53.9 1,739.3 1,207.2 − 31.3 500.8 1.9 3,058.8 2,677.9 1.2 2.0 377.7
         May 13.7 50.2 1,763.7 1,220.9 0.0 33.2 509.5 1.9 3,043.7 2,676.2 1.2 3.2 363.2         June 13.3 54.7 1,773.8 1,224.3 0.0 37.2 512.3 1.9 3,011.5 2,681.9 1.1 3.6 324.8
         July 13.6 41.2 1,766.2 1,218.9 − 37.5 509.8 1.9 3,018.8 2,690.2 1.1 2.8 324.8
         Aug 13.7 48.2 1,785.7 1,232.3 − 38.9 514.6 1.9 3,045.3 2,692.1 1.1 2.9 349.3         Sep 13.4 68.5 1,823.5 1,279.2 0.0 38.0 506.3 1.9 3,044.8 2,698.6 1.0 2.5 342.7
         Oct 14.6 51.4 1,884.6 1,343.9 0.0 39.3 501.4 1.9 3,045.1 2,703.4 1.0 2.3 338.4
         Nov 14.4 54.7 1,914.5 1,349.3 0.0 57.6 507.6 1.9 3,044.6 2,705.5 1.1 2.0 336.1         Dec 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009          Jan 13.5 51.8 1,893.6 1,327.3 0.0 54.5 511.8 1.9 3,097.3 2,718.9 1.1 3.1 374.3
         Feb 13.4 54.4 1,865.5 1,299.3 0.0 52.2 514.0 1.9 3,091.2 2,709.8 0.9 3.2 377.2         Mar 13.5 54.1 1,835.7 1,255.7 0.0 35.9 544.2 1.7 3,101.4 2,720.6 0.9 3.7 376.2
         Apr 14.9 48.5 1,819.9 1,243.3 0.0 32.5 544.1 1.7 3,124.3 2,725.1 0.9 5.4 392.9
         May 15.4 73.3 1,771.0 1,187.2 0.0 29.3 554.6 1.6 3,106.5 2,720.5 0.9 5.8 379.3         June 14.6 78.1 1,840.0 1,251.2 0.0 26.3 562.4 1.6 3,121.8 2,724.0 0.8 3.7 393.3
Changes *
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.82007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.22008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1
+ 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2008          Jan − 3.7 − 21.0 − 44.3 − 44.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 3.8 − 0.8 + 22.7 + 5.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 17.1
         Feb − 0.6 + 8.5 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 5.3 + 5.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 10.8
         Mar + 0.6 + 17.5 − 5.9 − 4.8 − + 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 15.9 + 7.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 8.2
         Apr − 0.3 − 15.7 + 24.0 + 18.7 − + 1.6 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 49.8 + 11.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 38.4
         May + 0.2 − 3.6 + 24.6 + 13.9 + 0.0 + 1.9 + 8.8 − 0.0 − 15.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 14.5         June − 0.4 + 4.5 + 10.0 + 3.3 − + 4.0 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 32.1 + 5.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 38.1
         July + 0.3 − 13.6 + 7.6 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.8 + 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0
         Aug + 0.1 + 7.1 + 25.4 + 19.3 − + 1.3 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 26.6 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 24.5         Sep − 0.3 + 20.2 + 37.8 + 46.9 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 8.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 6.5
         Oct + 1.3 − 17.1 + 61.1 + 64.7 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 4.9 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.3
         Nov − 0.2 + 4.8 + 38.0 + 13.6 − + 18.3 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.4         Dec + 3.0 + 47.8 − 51.3 − 49.7 − − 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 23.2 − 9.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 31.7
2009          Jan − 3.9 − 50.8 + 31.9 + 29.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 26.2 + 20.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 6.4
         Feb − 0.1 + 2.6 − 28.1 − 28.0 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 9.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9         Mar + 0.0 − 0.3 − 29.8 − 43.6 − − 16.3 + 30.1 − 0.2 + 9.2 + 9.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0
         Apr + 1.5 − 5.5 − 15.9 − 12.4 − − 3.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 22.8 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 16.7
         May + 0.5 + 24.7 − 45.4 − 52.6 − − 3.2 + 10.5 − 0.1 − 16.9 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 12.8         June − 0.9 + 4.8 + 69.0 + 64.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 7.9 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 14.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  
8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
37.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008
− 51.9 110.5 1,393.3 136.9 1,256.4 0.0 44.0 2,587.3 785.1 1,130.6 550.5 121.1 33.6 2008          Jan 
− 51.4 110.5 1,394.9 139.2 1,255.7 0.0 43.6 2,601.7 784.9 1,147.5 547.6 121.7 33.6          Feb 
− 50.8 111.9 1,432.6 142.8 1,289.7 0.0 42.8 2,601.9 786.3 1,150.0 543.8 121.8 33.2          Mar 
− 50.4 111.0 1,439.6 132.6 1,306.9 0.0 42.7 2,620.8 779.4 1,178.8 539.8 122.8 33.1          Apr 
− 50.2 110.8 1,443.2 133.5 1,309.6 0.0 42.5 2,636.4 782.6 1,193.5 536.3 124.0 33.1          May− 49.2 106.7 1,448.6 134.8 1,313.8 0.0 41.6 2,646.4 793.1 1,194.4 533.5 125.4 32.9          June
− 49.7 110.5 1,438.6 122.5 1,316.1 0.0 41.9 2,644.7 768.2 1,221.5 527.9 127.1 32.5          July
− 49.3 110.2 1,446.4 124.6 1,321.8 0.0 42.3 2,660.4 771.9 1,236.7 523.6 128.1 32.5          Aug − 48.4 108.2 1,528.8 151.4 1,377.4 0.0 42.0 2,676.0 784.7 1,242.4 519.3 129.6 32.3          Sep 
− 48.1 108.8 1,641.8 162.0 1,479.7 0.0 43.2 2,719.2 812.8 1,252.5 520.8 133.1 32.3          Oct 
− 47.8 108.4 1,595.2 155.9 1,439.3 0.0 43.2 2,748.8 832.8 1,257.9 523.4 134.7 32.2          Nov − 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3          Dec 
− 46.9 115.6 1,532.6 155.0 1,377.6 0.0 41.9 2,799.9 884.4 1,242.7 539.0 133.8 31.9 2009          Jan 
− 46.5 116.4 1,509.5 159.0 1,350.4 0.0 42.0 2,820.0 912.1 1,231.8 544.3 131.9 31.8          Feb 
− 46.4 119.5 1,455.9 138.3 1,317.7 0.0 40.6 2,817.3 914.0 1,226.4 547.8 129.1 30.9          Mar 
− 45.5 119.1 1,458.0 153.2 1,304.8 0.0 39.6 2,839.6 932.2 1,231.1 551.1 125.2 31.1          Apr 
− 44.7 110.6 1,444.8 121.6 1,323.1 0.0 38.3 2,837.0 935.4 1,224.4 555.1 122.1 31.2          May− 44.2 108.4 1,467.8 117.4 1,350.3 0.0 37.6 2,847.3 956.0 1,213.1 559.7 118.5 31.1          June
Changes *
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008
− − 0.7 + 1.1 − 101.0 + 14.9 − 115.9 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 8.0 + 5.0 + 5.2 − 4.9 + 2.7 − 0.1 2008          Jan 
− − 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 14.5 − 0.1 + 16.9 − 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.0          Feb 
− − 0.5 + 1.4 + 37.7 + 3.7 + 34.0 − − 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 0.4          Mar 
− − 0.5 + 0.1 + 8.0 − 9.7 + 17.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 18.7 − 7.2 + 28.8 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 15.6 + 3.1 + 14.7 − 3.5 + 1.2 − 0.0          May
− − 1.0 + 0.3 + 5.5 + 1.3 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 9.9 + 10.5 + 0.9 − 2.9 + 1.4 − 0.2          June
− + 0.5 + 4.4 + 3.0 − 9.7 + 12.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 24.9 + 27.1 − 5.6 + 1.7 − 0.5          July
− − 0.4 − 0.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 + 11.6 − + 0.4 + 15.7 + 3.8 + 15.2 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.0          Aug − − 1.0 − 2.0 + 82.3 + 26.8 + 55.5 − − 0.3 + 15.5 + 12.8 + 5.7 − 4.4 + 1.4 − 0.2          Sep 
− − 0.3 + 0.5 + 113.0 + 11.1 + 101.9 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 43.2 + 28.1 + 10.1 + 1.5 + 3.5 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 30.7 − 3.3 − 27.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 34.3 + 20.0 + 10.1 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.6 + 2.8 − 12.7 − 17.4 + 4.7 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 33.5 + 1.8 + 19.2 + 11.8 + 0.6 + 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.3 + 4.4 − 49.9 + 16.5 − 66.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 18.5 + 49.7 − 33.5 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 2009          Jan 
− − 0.3 + 0.7 − 23.1 + 4.0 − 27.1 − + 0.1 + 20.2 + 27.7 − 10.9 + 5.3 − 2.0 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 0.6 + 3.2 − 53.6 − 20.7 − 32.8 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 3.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 + 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9          Mar 
− − 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 14.9 − 13.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 22.3 + 34.9 − 12.0 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.2 − 2.6 − 9.8 − 31.6 + 21.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 2.6 + 3.0 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.0          May
− − 0.4 − 2.2 + 23.0 − 4.2 + 27.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 10.3 + 20.6 − 11.3 + 4.7 − 3.7 − 0.1          June
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.92007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.92008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2008          Jan 0.3 1,438.2 1,113.1 814.1 298.9 11.7 313.4 2.1 921.4 513.3 215.3 298.0 24.4 383.7
         Feb 0.4 1,436.6 1,107.9 803.7 304.3 15.8 312.9 2.0 934.3 526.3 225.5 300.8 25.2 382.8
         Mar 0.4 1,446.0 1,116.7 810.0 306.7 18.2 311.1 2.0 940.1 527.5 226.7 300.7 19.6 393.1
         Apr 0.4 1,466.2 1,140.2 829.7 310.6 16.7 309.3 2.0 939.4 535.3 226.2 309.1 17.7 386.5
         May 0.4 1,457.7 1,118.4 805.0 313.5 21.5 317.8 2.1 945.1 544.8 229.9 314.8 18.5 381.8         June 0.5 1,453.6 1,108.0 790.9 317.1 28.3 317.2 1.9 929.1 526.2 194.2 332.0 19.3 383.6
         July 0.6 1,445.9 1,096.0 766.6 329.5 32.2 317.7 1.9 929.5 533.3 196.0 337.3 18.2 378.0
         Aug 0.5 1,444.6 1,093.5 754.7 338.8 32.5 318.6 2.0 949.7 554.6 203.1 351.5 17.3 377.8         Sep 0.4 1,521.0 1,171.1 814.7 356.4 32.1 317.8 2.0 967.1 569.7 203.4 366.3 18.5 378.9
         Oct 0.8 1,571.1 1,232.6 859.9 372.7 27.3 311.3 2.0 990.1 597.4 208.6 388.8 17.0 375.6
         Nov 0.7 1,509.6 1,181.4 807.5 373.9 21.5 306.7 2.0 961.6 574.4 183.8 390.5 12.8 374.4         Dec 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009          Jan 0.4 1,433.6 1,122.7 743.9 378.8 14.8 296.1 1.9 915.4 541.1 153.8 387.3 12.2 362.1
         Feb 0.4 1,416.2 1,111.4 733.1 378.3 12.2 292.6 1.9 905.6 529.5 141.1 388.4 11.3 364.7
         Mar 0.5 1,357.7 1,058.2 686.2 372.0 10.0 289.5 1.9 880.9 514.4 135.4 379.1 9.8 356.6
         Apr 0.4 1,378.9 1,081.8 713.6 368.2 9.2 287.9 1.9 896.0 530.1 147.2 382.9 11.6 354.3
         May 0.4 1,355.9 1,057.7 691.4 366.3 6.7 291.4 2.0 884.5 516.3 143.5 372.8 12.3 355.9         June 0.5 1,332.8 1,036.7 653.2 383.5 8.2 287.8 2.0 879.9 513.5 142.6 370.9 11.6 354.7
Changes *
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.52007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.32008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2008          Jan − 0.0 + 6.6 + 9.1 + 11.9 − 2.8 − 1.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 15.6 + 21.9 + 18.5 + 3.4 − 2.9 − 3.4
         Feb + 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.2 − 7.2 + 7.0 + 4.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 17.9 + 16.5 + 11.6 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.3         Mar + 0.1 + 19.8 + 18.7 + 12.8 + 5.8 + 2.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 8.7 + 3.9 + 4.8 − 5.1 + 12.2
         Apr − 0.0 + 17.7 + 20.7 + 16.9 + 3.8 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 6.6 − 0.3 + 6.8 − 2.0 − 7.4
         May + 0.1 − 6.8 − 20.0 − 25.0 + 5.0 + 4.8 + 8.4 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 9.2 + 3.6 + 5.5 + 0.8 − 4.6
         June + 0.0 + 2.8 − 3.5 − 10.7 + 7.2 + 6.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 12.4 − 14.9 − 34.8 + 20.0 + 0.9 + 1.5
         July + 0.2 − 9.2 − 13.5 − 25.2 + 11.7 + 3.9 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 4.3 − 1.1 − 6.0
         Aug − 0.1 − 15.5 − 16.4 − 20.7 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 11.5 + 4.7 + 6.9 − 1.1 − 3.4         Sep − 0.1 + 65.8 + 67.5 + 53.7 + 13.7 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 9.2 + 8.9 − 1.5 + 10.3 + 1.1 − 0.7
         Oct + 0.4 + 9.5 + 21.6 + 19.2 + 2.5 − 5.0 − 7.2 + 0.0 − 10.3 + 3.6 − 1.1 + 4.7 − 2.0 − 11.8
         Nov − 0.2 − 53.9 − 43.8 − 46.5 + 2.8 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 12.5 − 7.4 − 10.3 + 2.9 − 4.2 − 0.9         Dec − 0.3 − 31.8 − 19.9 − 22.1 + 2.2 − 5.9 − 6.0 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 25.2 − 27.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 − 2.0
2009          Jan + 0.1 − 39.9 − 34.8 − 39.1 + 4.2 − 0.8 − 4.2 + 0.1 − 15.8 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.9 − 0.7 − 9.7
         Feb − 0.0 − 19.3 − 13.5 − 12.0 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 13.6 − 13.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.8         Mar + 0.1 − 42.4 − 37.7 − 38.1 + 0.4 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 9.8 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.7
         Apr − 0.1 + 18.4 + 21.3 + 26.0 − 4.7 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 13.0 + 14.5 + 11.6 + 2.9 + 1.5 − 3.0
         May − 0.0 − 14.1 − 10.9 − 14.3 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 6.3 − 2.9 − 1.1 − 1.8 + 0.8 + 8.4         June + 0.1 − 23.9 − 21.2 − 38.2 + 17.0 + 1.0 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills a nd bills
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
13.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 20065.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 2008
25.0 50.9 784.6 205.1 579.5 465.6 113.9 0.2 318.5 100.2 218.3 115.7 102.6 3.1 2008          Jan 
25.0 50.2 787.8 200.4 587.4 473.8 113.6 0.2 330.5 94.1 236.4 135.7 100.7 3.0          Feb 
24.2 49.8 791.6 229.5 562.1 449.4 112.7 0.3 327.6 100.5 227.2 129.6 97.5 2.8          Mar 
24.5 49.7 830.8 216.1 614.7 501.7 113.1 0.3 334.1 98.2 236.0 139.0 97.0 2.8          Apr 
24.4 49.8 823.2 230.4 592.7 481.1 111.6 0.3 326.0 94.4 231.6 131.7 99.9 2.8          May24.4 49.7 769.2 230.7 538.5 431.6 106.9 0.3 313.9 101.2 212.7 114.2 98.5 2.7          June
23.7 49.8 746.6 198.8 547.7 439.8 107.9 0.3 328.7 100.7 228.0 130.9 97.2 2.6          July
24.4 49.9 748.0 171.6 576.5 465.4 111.1 0.3 337.6 103.8 233.8 136.4 97.4 2.6          Aug 24.7 48.6 815.2 258.3 556.9 436.1 120.8 0.3 323.3 101.1 222.2 125.6 96.6 2.5          Sep 
26.3 49.2 780.1 243.5 536.6 415.1 121.5 0.3 325.3 103.6 221.7 117.9 103.8 2.7          Oct 
26.5 49.0 752.0 254.4 497.6 369.7 127.9 0.3 307.8 103.7 204.1 101.4 102.7 2.6          Nov 25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5          Dec 
25.9 50.9 737.2 253.1 484.1 359.6 124.6 0.3 306.8 123.8 183.0 82.4 100.7 2.6 2009          Jan 
26.1 49.4 733.1 251.7 481.4 356.7 124.6 0.3 279.9 100.5 179.4 78.5 100.9 2.5          Feb 
24.1 49.5 705.4 266.8 438.7 315.7 122.9 0.3 273.0 103.7 169.3 71.3 98.0 2.5          Mar 
24.2 50.0 729.0 228.6 500.4 378.6 121.8 0.3 288.8 100.4 188.4 91.5 96.9 2.4          Apr 
23.8 49.7 718.8 214.4 504.4 353.6 150.8 0.3 239.2 102.5 136.7 72.1 64.7 2.3          May23.3 49.7 720.6 247.2 473.4 321.9 151.5 0.3 237.5 102.5 135.0 70.9 64.1 2.1          June
Changes *
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008
+ 0.1 + 2.2 + 46.6 + 40.7 + 5.9 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 + 24.3 − 8.3 − 6.5 − 1.8 − 0.0 2008          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 7.4 − 3.4 + 10.7 + 10.7 + 0.0 − + 13.9 − 5.7 + 19.5 + 20.7 − 1.2 − 0.1          Feb 
− 0.7 + 0.7 + 11.5 + 31.0 − 19.6 − 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 7.3 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 1.6 − 0.2          Mar 
+ 0.2 − 0.2 + 38.2 − 14.2 + 52.4 + 51.3 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 2.8 + 8.6 + 9.6 − 0.9 − 0.0          Apr 
− 0.1 + 0.0 − 3.7 + 16.2 − 19.9 − 20.7 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 10.3 − 5.7 − 4.5 − 7.2 + 2.7 − 0.0          May
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 48.9 + 1.0 − 49.9 − 47.8 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 17.9 − 17.0 − 0.9 − 0.1          June
− 0.7 − 0.1 − 23.6 − 32.2 + 8.5 + 7.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 14.4 − 0.6 + 15.0 + 16.6 − 1.6 − 0.0          July
+ 0.7 − 0.4 − 11.1 − 29.7 + 18.6 + 16.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 6.4 + 2.1 + 4.2 + 5.4 − 1.1 − 0.0          Aug + 0.4 − 1.7 + 59.5 + 85.7 − 26.2 − 35.3 + 9.1 − 0.0 − 17.7 − 3.1 − 14.6 − 12.7 − 1.9 − 0.1          Sep 
+ 1.6 − 0.8 − 61.4 − 22.2 − 39.2 − 40.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 13.0 + 0.1 − 13.2 − 13.3 + 0.1 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 0.1 − 26.4 + 11.0 − 37.3 − 44.0 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 10.4 + 2.9 − 13.3 − 13.5 + 0.2 − 0.1          Nov − 1.0 − 2.6 − 38.1 − 31.8 − 6.3 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 7.6 − 9.8 + 2.2 + 3.4 − 1.2 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.3 + 4.6 + 18.3 + 32.1 − 13.8 − 12.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 14.2 + 30.4 − 16.3 − 14.8 − 1.4 + 0.1 2009          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 27.4 − 23.4 − 4.0 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 0.1          Feb 
− 1.6 + 0.8 − 17.5 + 17.9 − 35.4 − 35.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 4.0 − 7.1 − 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 22.5 − 37.8 + 60.3 + 60.8 − 0.5 − + 14.8 − 3.3 + 18.1 + 19.8 − 1.6 − 0.1          Apr 
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 36.3 − 11.5 − 24.9 − 23.8 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 3.1 − 13.6 − 14.3 + 0.7 − 0.1          May− 0.5 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 32.8 − 30.9 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.2          June
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.82007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.32008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2008          Jan 2,998.5 2,654.4 341.7 310.0 309.1 0.9 31.8 30.5 1.3 2,656.7 2,188.9
         Feb 2,993.2 2,659.9 348.3 317.6 316.7 0.9 30.7 29.4 1.2 2,644.9 2,173.1         Mar 3,009.0 2,667.3 359.5 329.7 328.8 0.8 29.8 28.2 1.6 2,649.5 2,177.1
         Apr 3,058.8 2,679.1 366.6 332.5 331.7 0.8 34.1 32.8 1.2 2,692.3 2,212.7
         May 3,043.7 2,677.4 363.1 332.6 331.5 1.1 30.5 28.4 2.1 2,680.7 2,201.4         June 3,011.5 2,683.0 371.0 338.9 337.8 1.1 32.1 29.6 2.5 2,640.5 2,178.7
         July 3,018.8 2,691.2 374.4 340.5 339.9 0.6 34.0 31.8 2.1 2,644.3 2,184.7
         Aug 3,045.3 2,693.2 369.9 335.0 334.3 0.7 34.9 32.8 2.1 2,675.4 2,218.7         Sep 3,044.8 2,699.6 378.5 345.9 345.0 0.9 32.6 31.1 1.6 2,666.2 2,221.6
         Oct 3,045.1 2,704.4 374.5 337.9 337.5 0.4 36.7 34.8 1.9 2,670.6 2,225.5
         Nov 3,044.6 2,706.6 375.8 341.3 340.9 0.4 34.5 32.9 1.6 2,668.8 2,226.4         Dec 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009          Jan 3,097.3 2,719.9 395.2 353.9 353.2 0.7 41.4 39.0 2.4 2,702.0 2,260.4
         Feb 3,091.2 2,710.7 386.9 344.0 343.6 0.5 42.8 40.1 2.8 2,704.3 2,266.9
         Mar 3,101.4 2,721.5 410.5 368.3 367.9 0.4 42.2 39.0 3.3 2,690.9 2,256.7
         Apr 3,124.3 2,726.0 408.5 362.5 362.1 0.4 46.0 41.0 5.0 2,715.8 2,276.8
         May 3,106.5 2,721.4 401.9 360.4 359.5 0.9 41.4 36.5 5.0 2,704.6 2,263.1         June 3,121.8 2,724.8 401.8 362.3 362.0 0.3 39.5 36.0 3.4 2,720.0 2,274.1
Changes *
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.62007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.12008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2008          Jan + 22.7 + 4.9 + 10.6 + 8.2 + 7.6 + 0.5 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 12.2 + 20.5
         Feb − 5.3 + 5.5 + 6.8 + 7.9 + 7.9 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 12.1 − 16.0         Mar + 15.9 + 7.4 + 11.2 + 12.0 + 12.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.4 + 4.6 + 4.0
         Apr + 49.8 + 11.6 + 7.3 + 2.8 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 4.4 + 4.6 − 0.2 + 42.5 + 35.6
         May − 15.1 − 1.8 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 4.5 + 0.8 − 11.5 − 11.3
         June − 32.1 + 5.6 + 7.9 + 6.2 + 6.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 40.0 − 22.6
         July + 6.8 + 7.7 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.2 − 0.4 + 3.4 + 5.6
         Aug + 26.6 + 2.1 − 4.6 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 31.2 + 34.1         Sep − 0.5 + 6.4 + 8.7 + 10.9 + 10.7 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 9.2 + 2.8
         Oct + 0.4 + 4.8 − 3.1 − 7.1 − 6.6 − 0.5 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 + 3.0
         Nov − 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.9         Dec + 23.2 − 9.6 − 2.8 − 3.8 − 5.6 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.6 + 26.0 + 26.9
2009          Jan + 26.2 + 19.8 + 21.0 + 15.1 + 16.7 − 1.5 + 5.8 + 4.4 + 1.4 + 5.2 + 3.9
         Feb − 6.1 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 9.8 − 9.6 − 0.2 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3 + 6.5         Mar + 9.2 + 9.7 + 23.6 + 24.2 + 24.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 14.4 − 11.3
         Apr + 22.8 + 4.5 − 2.0 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 24.9 + 20.2
         May − 16.9 − 4.6 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 10.4 − 12.9         June + 15.8 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 2.8 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 15.1 + 10.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfoli os
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
1,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
1,988.3 209.5 1,778.8 200.6 47.4 467.9 326.6 31.5 295.1 141.3 − 4.5 2008          Jan 
1,989.8 210.5 1,779.4 183.3 46.9 471.8 324.0 32.9 291.1 147.8 − 4.5          Feb 
1,987.5 211.5 1,776.1 189.6 46.3 472.4 322.7 33.6 289.1 149.7 − 4.5          Mar 
1,991.6 211.9 1,779.7 221.1 45.9 479.6 323.0 34.0 289.0 156.6 − 4.5          Apr 
1,995.2 212.1 1,783.2 206.2 45.7 479.3 322.3 33.5 288.8 157.0 − 4.5          May1,995.9 213.3 1,782.6 182.8 44.7 461.8 319.8 32.4 287.3 142.0 − 4.5          June
2,001.8 213.3 1,788.4 182.9 45.2 459.7 317.8 32.1 285.7 141.9 − 4.5          July
2,009.9 215.6 1,794.3 208.8 44.9 456.7 316.2 31.7 284.6 140.5 − 4.4          Aug 2,009.8 215.4 1,794.4 211.9 44.0 444.6 313.7 31.0 282.8 130.9 − 4.4          Sep 
2,020.3 218.1 1,802.1 205.3 43.6 445.0 311.9 29.8 282.1 133.2 − 4.5          Oct 
2,021.5 218.7 1,802.8 204.9 43.3 442.4 311.3 29.9 281.4 131.2 − 4.5          Nov 2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5          Dec 
2,022.5 222.9 1,799.5 238.0 42.5 441.6 305.3 29.7 275.6 136.3 − 4.4 2009          Jan 
2,024.7 225.8 1,799.0 242.2 42.2 437.4 302.4 29.2 273.2 135.0 − 4.4          Feb 
2,015.5 224.4 1,791.1 241.1 42.0 434.3 299.2 28.8 270.4 135.1 − 4.4          Mar 
2,023.4 229.0 1,794.4 253.5 41.1 439.0 299.5 29.2 270.3 139.4 − 4.4          Apr 
2,025.2 230.2 1,795.0 237.9 40.3 441.5 300.2 30.4 269.8 141.4 − 4.4          May2,026.3 233.0 1,793.3 247.8 39.9 445.9 300.4 30.8 269.6 145.5 − 4.3          June
Changes *
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.9 + 19.5 − 0.6 − 8.4 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 5.6 − 2.4 − − 0.1 2008          Jan 
+ 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 17.3 − 0.5 + 3.9 − 2.6 + 1.4 − 4.1 + 6.6 − + 0.0          Feb 
− 2.3 + 1.0 − 3.3 + 6.3 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 1.9 + 1.9 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.0 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 31.6 − 0.5 + 7.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 6.9 − + 0.0          Apr 
+ 3.7 + 0.2 + 3.5 − 14.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 − − 0.0          May
+ 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 23.3 − 1.0 − 17.4 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.5 − 14.8 − − 0.0          June
+ 5.5 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 1.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 8.3 + 2.4 + 5.8 + 25.9 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − − 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.1 − 0.9 − 12.0 − 2.4 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 9.6 − − 0.1          Sep 
+ 9.6 + 1.8 + 7.8 − 6.6 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 2.3 − + 0.1          Oct 
+ 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.0 − + 0.0          Nov − 3.8 + 2.3 − 6.1 + 30.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 1.0 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.5 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 4.2 − − 0.0 2009          Jan 
+ 2.3 + 2.8 − 0.6 + 4.2 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 10.2 − 3.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.1 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 7.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 12.3 − 0.9 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 4.3 − + 0.0          Apr 
+ 1.8 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 14.8 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 1.9 − − 0.0          May+ 0.8 + 2.6 − 1.8 + 9.9 − 0.4 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 4.1 − − 0.0          June
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *x
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2007 2,289.0 1,166.7 1,101.3 914.4 186.8 1,259.7 306.2 145.4 41.3 47.0 135.7 33.2 65.4 101.4
2008          June 2,333.8 1,160.3 1,096.0 910.3 185.7 1,309.3 304.4 158.2 43.0 47.6 134.5 34.2 68.5 129.7
         Sep 2,355.0 1,161.4 1,097.1 911.0 186.1 1,329.2 304.3 158.6 43.8 47.8 134.7 35.1 71.5 138.9         Dec 2,357.5 1,157.4 1,093.4 907.1 186.3 1,332.6 302.8 157.4 56.1 52.1 138.9 34.6 74.0 127.6
2009          Mar 2,383.5 1,150.8 1,087.5 901.5 186.0 1,363.1 301.2 160.9 61.7 62.8 131.0 34.0 74.5 161.5
         June 2,388.5 1,149.7 1,087.4 899.6 187.7 1,365.5 300.9 160.4 62.7 63.4 128.8 34.8 74.7 173.3
 Short-term lending
2007 301.7 − 8.6 − 8.6 261.6 4.6 46.2 4.4 8.5 52.0 3.1 7.2 52.1
2008          June 338.0 − 8.6 − 8.6 299.0 4.8 54.9 4.8 9.3 50.6 3.8 7.9 77.2
         Sep 345.2 − 8.6 − 8.6 305.3 4.7 53.2 5.0 9.1 50.4 3.8 6.9 85.5         Dec 335.5 − 8.4 − 8.4 294.8 4.5 51.4 5.4 10.4 54.7 3.1 7.4 70.9
2009          Mar 368.0 − 8.7 − 8.7 328.1 4.8 54.6 6.5 15.2 48.9 3.4 7.6 106.1
         June 362.2 − 8.8 − 8.8 322.3 4.8 51.5 6.2 15.8 46.8 3.7 7.8 109.2
 Medium-term lending
2007 207.7 − 32.2 − 32.2 141.5 10.4 22.3 2.2 5.6 13.1 2.9 12.5 17.4
2008          June 213.3 − 31.2 − 31.2 148.7 10.5 24.1 1.9 5.7 13.5 3.0 12.8 18.9
         Sep 215.4 − 30.8 − 30.8 152.5 10.7 25.4 1.8 5.9 13.7 3.1 14.0 17.5         Dec 222.0 − 30.3 − 30.3 159.1 10.9 27.1 2.7 6.6 13.8 3.1 14.5 18.0
2009          Mar 224.4 − 31.4 − 31.4 160.0 11.3 29.0 3.4 8.2 13.2 2.9 14.5 16.9
         June 233.0 − 31.6 − 31.6 167.1 11.5 31.6 3.6 8.8 13.2 3.0 14.6 21.0
 Long-term lending
2007 1,779.6 1,166.7 1,060.5 914.4 146.0 856.5 291.2 76.9 34.7 33.0 70.6 27.2 45.7 31.9
2008          June 1,782.6 1,160.3 1,056.2 910.3 146.0 861.6 289.1 79.2 36.3 32.6 70.3 27.5 47.8 33.6
         Sep 1,794.4 1,161.4 1,057.7 911.0 146.7 871.3 288.8 80.1 37.0 32.9 70.5 28.1 50.7 35.9         Dec 1,800.0 1,157.4 1,054.6 907.1 147.5 878.7 287.5 78.9 48.0 35.2 70.4 28.4 52.1 38.6
2009          Mar 1,791.1 1,150.8 1,047.3 901.5 145.8 875.1 285.1 77.2 51.8 39.4 68.9 27.7 52.4 38.5
         June 1,793.3 1,149.7 1,047.0 899.6 147.4 876.2 284.5 77.3 52.9 38.8 68.8 28.0 52.2 43.0
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2008          Q2 + 17.3 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 16.2 + 0.9 + 5.3 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 2.7 + 3.3
         Q3 + 20.6 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 19.2 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 3.0 + 10.8         Q4 − 1.7 − 3.2 − 3.5 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 4.2 + 0.7 + 4.4 − 0.5 + 2.5 − 12.8
2009          Q1 + 25.0 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.4 − 1.6 + 29.5 − 1.6 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 2.0 − 7.5 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 33.8
         Q2 + 4.9 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 2.2 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 10.1
 Short-term lending
2008          Q2 + 8.9 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 9.1 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.8
         Q3 + 7.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 6.3 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 8.5         Q4 − 8.7 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 9.5 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 4.5 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 14.6
2009          Q1 + 31.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 32.1 + 0.3 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 5.8 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 33.9
         Q2 − 5.6 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 5.6 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.6
 Medium-term lending
2008          Q2 + 1.8 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0         Q3 + 2.0 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.7         Q4 + 4.6 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 + 5.5 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.5
2009          Q1 + 1.9 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0
         Q2 + 8.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.0
 Long-term lending
2008          Q2 + 6.5 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 5.4 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.5         Q3 + 11.5 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 3.0         Q4 + 2.4 − 3.2 − 2.8 − 3.5 + 0.7 + 4.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.2
2009          Q1 − 8.2 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.4 − 1.5 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1
         Q2 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 4.5
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations 1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. —
always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
690.3 165.0 46.2 197.5 386.6 58.2 1,015.2 791.6 223.7 129.3 17.2 14.0 3.5 2007
693.5 166.1 48.5 197.2 383.9 58.9 1,010.8 788.1 222.6 130.6 17.1 13.8 3.5 2008          June
698.8 167.1 49.0 198.4 382.4 58.6 1,012.3 789.5 222.8 130.4 17.9 13.5 3.3          Sep 
691.9 169.4 51.7 190.2 381.4 58.2 1,011.4 787.3 224.0 132.1 17.1 13.5 3.3          Dec 
676.8 183.9 51.9 168.0 378.3 58.2 1,007.2 783.0 224.2 134.7 16.2 13.2 3.2 2009          Mar 
667.5 181.2 50.7 171.3 380.3 55.7 1,010.3 783.4 226.8 137.2 16.1 12.7 3.1          June
Short-term lending
88.0 13.0 13.0 23.3 35.7 9.4 39.2 4.0 35.2 2.5 17.2 0.8 0.0 2007
90.5 13.5 15.4 22.5 35.3 10.2 38.2 3.9 34.4 2.5 17.1 0.8 0.0 2008          June
91.4 13.6 14.7 23.7 35.0 9.9 39.2 3.9 35.3 2.4 17.9 0.7 0.0          Sep 
91.4 13.4 17.0 19.3 35.4 9.4 39.7 3.9 35.8 2.8 17.1 1.0 0.0          Dec 
85.7 12.9 16.6 16.2 35.8 10.0 39.1 3.9 35.2 3.0 16.2 0.8 0.0 2009          Mar 
81.0 12.0 15.5 16.4 35.5 9.8 39.2 3.9 35.3 3.1 16.1 0.7 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
65.7 7.4 7.5 17.7 27.4 3.7 65.4 21.7 43.6 35.8 − 0.7 0.0 2007
68.8 8.4 7.8 19.3 27.1 3.8 63.9 20.6 43.3 35.5 − 0.6 0.0 2008          June
71.2 8.7 8.5 19.5 26.8 3.9 62.3 20.1 42.2 34.4 − 0.6 0.0          Sep 
73.3 8.2 9.2 21.3 26.7 4.0 62.3 19.5 42.8 35.1 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
71.9 8.3 9.8 20.0 26.5 4.1 63.9 20.1 43.8 36.7 − 0.5 0.0 2009          Mar 
71.3 7.9 10.3 20.8 26.8 4.1 65.4 20.1 45.2 38.1 − 0.5 0.0          June
Long-term lending
536.6 144.7 25.7 156.5 323.5 45.1 910.6 765.8 144.8 90.9 − 12.5 3.4 2007
534.2 144.3 25.2 155.3 321.5 44.9 908.6 763.7 144.9 92.7 − 12.4 3.4 2008          June
536.2 144.7 25.8 155.1 320.6 44.8 910.9 765.5 145.3 93.6 − 12.2 3.3          Sep 
527.2 147.8 25.6 149.7 319.3 44.8 909.4 763.9 145.4 94.2 − 11.9 3.2          Dec 
519.1 162.7 25.6 131.8 316.0 44.1 904.3 759.0 145.2 95.0 − 11.8 3.2 2009          Mar 
515.2 161.3 24.8 134.2 318.1 41.9 905.7 759.4 146.3 96.0 − 11.4 3.0          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 3.0 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 2008          Q2
+ 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 1.0 − 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1          Q3
+ 2.0 + 0.5 + 2.4 − 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 6.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 2009          Q1
− 5.5 − 2.2 − 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2          Q2
Short-term lending
+ 2.1 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 2008          Q2
+ 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
+ 2.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
− 2.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 2009          Q1
− 3.7 − 0.6 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2008          Q2
+ 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 1.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
+ 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 1.6 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2009          Q1
+ 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
− 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.1 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2008          Q2
+ 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.1          Q3
− 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.3 − − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
− 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 − − 0.1 − 0.1 2009          Q1
− 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.8 + 2.6 + 1.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.5 − − 0.4 − 0.2          Q2
loans, even in the form of instalment credit. — x As of December 2008, the individual sectors. As the resulting breaks could only be statistically adjusted
data are collected according to the Federal Statistical Office’s "Classification in part, the data from 2008 Q4 onwards are not fully comparable with those
of Economic Activities", Edition 2008 (WZ 2008). The changeover from the from preceding quarters. 
"old" to the "new" classification resulted in many changes within the
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2006 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 289.5 673.3 11.7 661.6 586.5 97.5 37.8 30.4 11.2
2007 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 418.9 706.5 22.8 683.7 555.4 118.4 36.4 35.0 22.6
2008 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2008          July 2,644.7 768.2 1,221.5 501.6 719.9 29.6 690.4 527.9 127.1 32.5 35.7 52.6
         Aug 2,660.4 771.9 1,236.7 515.4 721.3 30.8 690.5 523.6 128.1 32.5 35.7 55.1         Sep 2,676.0 784.7 1,242.4 521.6 720.8 32.2 688.6 519.3 129.6 32.3 35.7 64.9
         Oct 2,719.2 812.8 1,252.5 534.6 717.9 32.8 685.1 520.8 133.1 32.3 35.6 63.3
         Nov 2,748.8 832.8 1,257.9 540.2 717.6 33.5 684.1 523.4 134.7 32.2 34.8 68.9         Dec 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2009          Jan 2,799.9 884.4 1,242.7 493.9 748.8 32.7 716.1 539.0 133.8 31.9 34.2 65.7
         Feb 2,820.0 912.1 1,231.8 477.0 754.8 32.7 722.1 544.3 131.9 31.8 34.1 73.0         Mar 2,817.3 914.0 1,226.4 469.1 757.3 32.4 724.9 547.8 129.1 30.9 34.1 86.4
         Apr 2,839.6 932.2 1,231.1 469.7 761.4 32.9 728.4 551.1 125.2 31.1 34.0 91.9
         May 2,837.0 935.4 1,224.4 461.0 763.4 33.7 729.7 555.1 122.1 31.2 34.6 91.4
         June 2,847.3 956.0 1,213.1 436.9 776.2 33.4 742.8 559.7 118.5 31.1 34.7 93.6
Changes *
2007 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 + 127.5 + 33.0 + 11.0 + 22.0 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 + 3.3 + 9.9
2008 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 + 114.5 + 42.1 + 10.0 + 32.0 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 36.7
2008          July − 1.7 − 24.9 + 27.1 + 25.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 5.6 + 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 4.5
         Aug + 15.7 + 3.8 + 15.2 + 13.8 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5         Sep + 15.5 + 12.8 + 5.7 + 6.3 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 2.0 − 4.4 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.8
         Oct + 43.2 + 28.1 + 10.1 + 13.0 − 2.9 + 0.6 − 3.5 + 1.5 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6
         Nov + 34.3 + 20.0 + 10.1 + 7.6 + 2.5 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 5.7         Dec + 33.5 + 1.8 + 19.2 − 8.8 + 27.9 − 0.9 + 28.9 + 11.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.7
2009          Jan + 18.5 + 49.7 − 33.5 − 36.7 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.4
         Feb + 20.2 + 27.7 − 10.9 − 16.9 + 6.0 + 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 7.4         Mar − 3.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 − 7.9 + 1.8 − 0.3 + 2.1 + 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 13.4
         Apr + 22.3 + 34.9 − 12.0 − 16.1 + 4.1 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5
         May − 2.6 + 3.0 − 6.5 − 8.5 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5         June + 10.3 + 20.6 − 11.3 − 24.1 + 12.8 − 0.3 + 13.1 + 4.7 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.2
Domestic government End of year or month *
2006 134.4 26.7 104.0 51.1 52.9 2.1 50.8 2.1 1.6 28.2 0.8 −
2007 158.5 28.0 127.7 71.9 55.8 3.7 52.1 1.4 1.5 27.6 4.5 −2008 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
2008          July 162.0 25.4 134.0 77.9 56.1 4.4 51.8 1.2 1.4 24.3 4.4 −
         Aug 164.8 26.9 135.3 78.9 56.3 4.5 51.8 1.2 1.4 24.3 4.4 −         Sep 165.8 27.0 136.3 80.4 55.9 4.6 51.3 1.2 1.4 24.2 4.4 −
         Oct 160.4 27.2 130.7 75.2 55.5 4.5 51.0 1.1 1.4 24.3 4.4 −
         Nov 164.9 30.5 131.9 77.4 54.5 4.3 50.2 1.1 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
         Dec 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
2009          Jan 158.4 33.3 122.3 69.8 52.5 3.7 48.8 1.3 1.4 24.1 3.9 −
         Feb 161.1 38.0 120.2 67.4 52.8 3.9 48.9 1.5 1.5 24.0 3.9 0.2         Mar 154.1 37.2 113.7 61.9 51.9 3.4 48.5 1.7 1.5 24.1 3.9 0.1
         Apr 156.6 42.0 111.3 59.7 51.6 3.6 48.0 1.7 1.5 24.1 3.9 1.1
         May 161.5 42.5 115.7 63.9 51.8 3.8 48.0 1.8 1.5 24.1 3.9 2.2         June 164.1 44.9 115.8 64.5 51.3 3.6 47.7 1.9 1.5 24.0 3.9 3.5
Changes *
2007 + 23.5 + 1.2 + 23.0 + 20.8 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 2.6 −
2008 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.5 + 5.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.0
2008          July − 4.5 − 3.1 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Aug + 2.7 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Sep + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Oct − 5.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 5.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Nov + 6.9 + 3.3 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 −         Dec − 0.3 + 3.7 − 4.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
2009          Jan − 6.3 − 0.9 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 2.8 + 4.7 − 2.1 − 2.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2         Mar − 7.0 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 5.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Apr + 2.4 + 4.7 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 4.9 + 0.5 + 4.4 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2         June + 2.6 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2006 2,260.2 721.0 858.8 238.4 620.4 9.6 610.8 584.5 95.9 9.6 29.5 11.2
2007 2,420.6 752.0 997.7 347.0 650.7 19.0 631.7 554.0 116.9 8.8 30.5 22.6
2008 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2008          July 2,482.7 742.7 1,087.5 423.7 663.8 25.2 638.6 526.7 125.7 8.2 31.3 52.6
         Aug 2,495.7 745.0 1,101.5 436.5 665.0 26.3 638.7 522.4 126.7 8.2 31.3 55.1         Sep 2,510.1 757.7 1,106.2 441.3 664.9 27.7 637.3 518.1 128.1 8.1 31.2 64.9
         Oct 2,558.8 785.6 1,121.8 459.5 662.4 28.4 634.0 519.7 131.6 8.0 31.2 63.3
         Nov 2,583.8 802.3 1,126.0 462.9 663.1 29.2 633.9 522.2 133.3 8.0 30.9 68.9         Dec 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2009          Jan 2,641.5 851.1 1,120.4 424.0 696.3 29.0 667.3 537.7 132.4 7.8 30.3 65.7
         Feb 2,658.9 874.1 1,111.6 409.6 702.0 28.8 673.2 542.8 130.4 7.8 30.2 72.8         Mar 2,663.2 876.8 1,112.7 407.2 705.4 29.0 676.4 546.2 127.6 6.8 30.2 86.3
         Apr 2,683.0 890.1 1,119.7 410.0 709.7 29.3 680.4 549.4 123.7 7.0 30.1 90.9
         May 2,675.4 892.9 1,108.7 397.1 711.6 29.9 681.7 553.3 120.6 7.1 30.7 89.2
         June 2,683.2 911.1 1,097.3 372.4 724.9 29.9 695.1 557.8 117.0 7.1 30.8 90.2
Changes *
2007 + 157.7 + 30.3 + 137.6 + 106.8 + 30.8 + 9.4 + 21.4 − 30.5 + 20.2 − 0.7 + 0.7 + 9.9
2008 + 199.1 + 48.1 + 154.0 + 109.4 + 44.6 + 10.0 + 34.6 − 20.0 + 17.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 36.7
2008          July + 2.9 − 21.8 + 28.5 + 26.8 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 5.5 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 4.5
         Aug + 13.0 + 2.3 + 13.9 + 12.7 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 4.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5         Sep + 14.7 + 12.7 + 4.9 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 1.3 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 9.8
         Oct + 48.7 + 27.9 + 15.7 + 18.2 − 2.5 + 0.7 − 3.2 + 1.6 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6
         Nov + 27.4 + 16.7 + 6.5 + 3.8 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 1.8 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.7         Dec + 33.8 − 1.9 + 23.2 − 6.8 + 30.0 − 0.2 + 30.2 + 11.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.7
2009          Jan + 24.8 + 50.6 − 27.9 − 31.1 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.4
         Feb + 17.4 + 23.0 − 8.8 − 14.4 + 5.7 − 0.2 + 5.9 + 5.2 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.2         Mar + 4.0 + 2.7 + 0.4 − 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.4
         Apr + 19.9 + 30.2 − 9.6 − 13.9 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.6
         May − 7.6 + 2.6 − 10.9 − 12.8 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 3.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.6         June + 7.7 + 18.2 − 11.4 − 24.7 + 13.3 − 0.1 + 13.4 + 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.9
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2006 874.9 256.1 594.1 122.8 471.3 3.2 468.1 4.5 20.2 9.1 20.0 11.2
2007 961.9 264.9 672.9 178.6 494.3 5.5 488.8 3.9 20.1 8.3 21.5 22.62008 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.3
2008          July 1,011.5 262.8 725.2 219.0 506.2 7.3 498.9 3.8 19.7 7.9 22.6 52.6
         Aug 1,018.6 264.5 731.0 224.2 506.7 7.6 499.2 3.8 19.3 7.9 22.6 55.1         Sep 1,039.2 280.7 735.3 226.3 509.1 8.4 500.6 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.4 64.9
         Oct 1,049.5 293.9 732.4 225.5 506.9 8.4 498.5 3.8 19.4 7.8 22.5 63.3
         Nov 1,052.3 292.4 736.6 229.6 507.0 8.2 498.9 3.8 19.4 7.8 22.3 68.9
         Dec 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.3
2009          Jan 1,091.9 321.5 747.2 208.8 538.4 8.2 530.1 3.9 19.3 7.5 21.8 65.7
         Feb 1,098.3 323.5 751.5 207.1 544.3 8.4 536.0 4.1 19.3 7.5 21.8 72.8         Mar 1,106.1 318.9 763.7 217.1 546.6 8.6 538.0 4.3 19.2 6.7 21.7 86.3
         Apr 1,120.1 313.6 782.9 232.5 550.5 9.0 541.5 4.4 19.1 6.9 21.6 90.9
         May 1,106.5 305.7 777.2 225.7 551.5 9.2 542.2 4.5 19.2 7.0 21.5 89.2         June 1,116.0 319.8 772.3 208.2 564.1 9.1 555.0 4.7 19.3 7.0 21.5 90.2
Changes *
2007 + 84.8 + 8.1 + 77.6 + 53.9 + 23.7 + 2.3 + 21.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 9.9
2008 + 110.4 + 27.0 + 84.4 + 45.0 + 39.3 + 2.1 + 37.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 36.7
2008          July + 0.9 − 20.6 + 21.5 + 19.9 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 4.5
         Aug + 7.1 + 1.8 + 5.8 + 5.2 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5         Sep + 16.5 + 15.6 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 9.8
         Oct + 10.4 + 13.2 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.6
         Nov + 5.0 − 1.5 + 6.5 + 4.4 + 2.0 − 0.2 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.7         Dec + 22.1 + 0.2 + 22.0 − 5.0 + 26.9 − 0.5 + 27.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.7
2009          Jan + 18.4 + 28.8 − 10.5 − 14.9 + 4.4 + 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 6.4
         Feb + 6.5 + 2.0 + 4.3 − 1.7 + 6.0 + 0.2 + 5.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.2         Mar + 7.4 − 4.5 + 11.9 + 9.9 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.4
         Apr + 15.1 + 12.5 + 2.6 − 1.3 + 3.9 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 4.6
         May − 13.5 − 7.9 − 5.7 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.6         June + 9.4 + 14.1 − 4.9 − 17.6 + 12.6 − 0.2 + 12.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2006 1,385.3 464.9 450.3 81.7 307.4 61.1 14.6 264.7 245.7 30.1 198.6 16.9
2007 1,458.7 487.1 472.1 83.9 320.9 67.2 15.0 324.8 300.7 41.7 234.3 24.7
2008 1,543.2 507.8 491.8 85.1 336.5 70.3 16.0 390.6 367.2 50.4 281.0 35.8
2009          Jan 1,549.6 529.6 513.1 91.3 348.3 73.5 16.5 373.2 350.6 45.0 272.3 33.2
         Feb 1,560.6 550.6 532.6 94.1 361.5 77.0 18.0 360.1 338.2 41.3 265.4 31.5         Mar 1,557.1 557.9 539.5 93.6 368.1 77.9 18.3 349.0 327.5 37.6 260.0 29.9
         Apr 1,562.9 576.5 558.4 98.7 377.3 82.5 18.1 336.8 315.8 35.1 251.5 29.2
         May 1,568.9 587.2 568.5 99.8 384.8 84.0 18.7 331.5 310.6 34.1 247.9 28.7         June 1,567.2 591.3 572.5 98.9 388.6 85.0 18.8 325.0 304.6 32.3 244.5 27.9
Changes *
2007 + 72.9 + 22.2 + 21.8 + 2.2 + 16.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 60.0 + 54.9 + 11.6 + 35.6 + 7.8
2008 + 88.7 + 21.1 + 19.5 + 1.2 + 15.2 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 69.7 + 66.6 + 9.4 + 46.1 + 11.1
2009          Jan + 6.4 + 21.8 + 21.3 + 6.2 + 11.8 + 3.2 + 0.5 − 17.5 − 16.6 − 5.4 − 8.7 − 2.6
         Feb + 10.9 + 21.0 + 19.5 + 2.8 + 13.1 + 3.5 + 1.5 − 13.0 − 12.4 − 3.7 − 6.9 − 1.8
         Mar − 3.4 + 7.2 + 7.0 − 0.6 + 6.6 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 11.5 − 11.0 − 3.7 − 5.6 − 1.7
         Apr + 4.8 + 17.7 + 17.9 + 5.2 + 10.1 + 2.6 − 0.2 − 12.2 − 11.7 − 2.5 − 8.5 − 0.7
         May + 6.0 + 10.5 + 9.9 + 1.1 + 7.3 + 1.6 + 0.6 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 0.6
         June − 1.7 + 4.1 + 4.0 − 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 6.4 − 6.0 − 1.8 − 3.4 − 0.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2006 134.4 41.9 2.1 6.2 33.6 0.0 9.5 18.0 5.4 2.5 10.0 0.1 18.5
2007 158.5 38.3 1.9 3.1 33.2 0.0 8.2 27.9 6.0 11.2 10.6 0.1 19.1
2008 164.7 34.8 2.3 3.7 28.9 0.0 6.6 28.2 6.9 9.9 11.3 0.1 17.3
2009          Jan 158.4 33.0 1.1 2.9 28.9 0.0 6.6 29.2 6.2 11.7 11.2 0.1 17.2
         Feb 161.1 32.7 1.0 2.7 29.0 0.0 6.6 29.6 6.4 11.7 11.3 0.1 17.2         Mar 154.1 32.0 0.9 2.7 28.3 0.0 6.6 28.4 7.1 10.6 10.6 0.1 17.1
         Apr 156.6 32.0 0.7 3.2 28.1 0.0 6.6 30.1 10.3 9.1 10.6 0.2 17.0
         May 161.5 36.5 1.6 6.7 28.2 0.0 6.6 27.3 6.8 9.7 10.7 0.2 17.0         June 164.1 40.6 2.0 10.5 28.0 0.0 6.6 30.9 10.5 9.8 10.4 0.2 17.0
Changes *
2007 + 23.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.6 + 8.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8
2008 + 8.5 − 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6
2009          Jan − 6.3 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 − − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb + 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Mar − 7.0 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Apr + 2.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 3.2 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 4.9 + 4.4 + 0.8 + 3.5 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 2.8 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         June + 2.6 + 4.1 + 0.5 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.3 − − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
19.1 115.6 149.2 6.4 142.7 580.0 571.1 8.9 75.7 0.5 9.5 − 2006
24.1 168.4 156.4 13.5 142.8 550.1 542.4 7.7 96.8 0.5 9.0 − 2007
23.4 231.5 159.2 21.3 137.9 530.2 523.1 7.1 114.6 0.3 8.5 − 2008
22.6 215.2 158.0 20.8 137.1 533.8 526.6 7.2 113.1 0.3 8.5 − 2009          Jan 
22.0 202.5 157.6 20.4 137.2 538.7 531.4 7.3 111.1 0.3 8.4 −          Feb 
21.5 190.1 158.8 20.5 138.4 541.9 534.3 7.6 108.4 0.1 8.4 −          Mar 
21.0 177.5 159.2 20.4 138.9 545.0 537.2 7.8 104.6 0.1 8.5 −          Apr 
20.9 171.3 160.1 20.7 139.4 548.8 540.8 8.0 101.4 0.1 9.2 −          May20.4 164.2 160.8 20.8 140.0 553.2 544.9 8.2 97.7 0.1 9.3 −          June
Changes *
+ 5.0 + 52.9 + 7.1 + 7.1 + 0.0 − 29.9 − 28.7 − 1.2 + 20.6 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 2007
+ 3.1 + 64.4 + 5.3 + 7.9 − 2.6 − 19.9 − 19.3 − 0.6 + 17.8 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2008
− 0.8 − 16.3 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 3.6 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2009          Jan 
− 0.6 − 12.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.8 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Feb 
− 0.4 − 12.3 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 3.2 + 2.9 + 0.3 − 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Mar 
− 0.5 − 12.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 3.2 + 2.9 + 0.2 − 3.8 − + 0.1 −          Apr 
− 0.2 − 6.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 3.8 + 3.6 + 0.2 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 −          May
− 0.5 − 7.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 4.4 + 4.2 + 0.2 − 3.7 − + 0.1 −          June
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
 
  
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
30.5 11.5 12.7 3.4 3.0 0.3 44.0 7.8 29.7 6.0 0.6 0.0 2006
37.8 12.3 19.5 3.6 2.5 0.3 54.5 7.7 38.1 8.4 0.3 0.0 2007
42.5 14.3 22.0 3.9 2.2 0.2 59.2 10.7 39.8 8.4 0.3 0.0 2008
38.8 12.7 19.9 3.9 2.3 0.2 57.3 13.2 35.3 8.5 0.3 0.0 2009          Jan 
41.8 16.2 19.2 3.9 2.5 0.2 57.0 14.4 33.7 8.6 0.3 0.0          Feb 
40.2 16.1 17.5 4.0 2.6 0.4 53.5 13.1 31.1 8.9 0.4 0.0          Mar 
40.1 16.8 16.7 4.0 2.6 0.4 54.3 14.2 30.8 8.9 0.4 0.0          Apr 
43.4 19.8 16.7 4.1 2.7 0.4 54.4 14.4 30.9 8.8 0.4 0.0          May40.4 17.9 15.7 4.0 2.7 0.4 52.3 14.5 28.5 8.8 0.5 0.0          June
Changes *
+ 7.4 + 0.9 + 6.8 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 10.5 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 2007
+ 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2008
− 3.6 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 2.5 − 4.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2009          Jan 
+ 3.0 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 − − 0.3 + 1.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0          Feb 
− 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 1.3 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 −          Mar 
− 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − − + 0.3 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 3.2 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          May
− 3.0 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 2.1 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          June
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2006 594.9 586.5 487.4 384.4 99.1 89.8 8.3 6.4 13.2 107.6 97.5 70.5 10.0
2007 563.8 555.4 446.0 354.6 109.4 101.4 8.4 6.1 14.2 130.7 118.4 64.5 12.3
2008 544.1 535.2 424.8 344.0 110.4 103.2 8.9 6.3 14.9 150.8 135.4 59.6 15.4
2009          Feb 553.4 544.3 433.9 350.4 110.4 103.7 9.1 6.5 0.4 147.6 131.9 60.1 15.7
         Mar 557.0 547.8 436.7 352.6 111.2 104.4 9.2 6.5 0.4 144.6 129.1 59.5 15.5
         Apr 560.4 551.1 439.1 353.9 112.1 105.3 9.2 6.6 0.4 140.6 125.2 59.8 15.4
         May 564.3 555.1 441.5 356.0 113.5 106.4 9.2 6.6 0.4 137.2 122.1 60.8 15.0
         June 569.0 559.7 445.2 358.1 114.5 107.3 9.3 6.6 0.4 133.5 118.5 61.1 15.0
Changes *
2007 − 31.0 − 31.1 − 41.4 − 28.8 + 10.3 + 11.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 . + 22.4 + 20.1 − 6.7 + 2.2
2008 − 19.7 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 . + 20.1 + 17.0 − 4.9 + 3.2
2009          Feb + 5.4 + 5.3 + 5.3 + 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 2.0 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Mar + 3.6 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 1.9 − 2.4 − 0.0 + 0.5
         Apr + 3.3 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 2.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 4.0 − 3.9 + 0.3 − 0.0
         May + 3.9 + 3.9 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 3.5 − 3.1 + 0.9 − 0.4         June + 4.7 + 4.7 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 3.7 − 3.7 + 0.4 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
  
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2006 1,636.2 392.5 41.1 301.5 30.9 68.3 118.3 1,449.5 1.8 0.2 0.8 0.7 51.4 1.2
2007 1,659.1 375.7 54.2 305.1 51.2 109.6 147.5 1,402.0 1.9 0.1 1.1 0.7 53.6 1.42008 1,640.1 395.9 50.7 314.1 64.0 162.6 153.3 1,324.2 2.3 0.2 1.3 0.8 52.5 1.6
2009          Feb 1,627.8 396.9 49.3 334.7 61.5 147.9 137.8 1,342.1 2.0 0.2 1.1 0.8 51.4 1.6
         Mar 1,607.6 389.6 48.3 322.4 65.0 117.0 161.4 1,329.2 1.9 0.1 1.0 0.7 49.5 1.6
         Apr 1,596.7 389.0 50.3 326.2 59.5 110.1 159.7 1,326.9 1.7 0.1 0.9 0.7 48.4 1.6
         May 1,595.8 390.7 50.6 317.1 59.3 108.0 158.3 1,329.5 1.6 0.1 0.8 0.7 48.0 2.1
         June 1,590.3 390.8 49.4 319.9 58.7 102.4 150.3 1,337.5 1.5 0.1 0.7 0.7 47.9 2.1
Changes *
2007 + 21.7 − 17.5 + 12.9 + 3.6 + 20.2 + 40.7 + 32.3 − 51.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.0
2008 − 17.0 + 18.2 − 3.7 + 9.0 + 12.8 + 53.1 + 5.8 − 75.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.1
2009          Feb − 19.2 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 6.1 − 4.5 − 6.1 − 9.3 − 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.0
         Mar − 19.9 − 7.3 − 1.0 − 12.3 + 3.5 − 30.9 + 23.6 − 12.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.0
         Apr − 10.9 − 0.6 + 2.0 + 3.8 − 5.5 − 6.9 − 1.7 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.0
         May − 0.9 + 1.7 + 0.3 − 9.1 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 1.5 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5         June − 5.5 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 2.7 − 0.7 − 5.6 − 8.0 + 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2008 25 188.4 39.8 0.1 13.4 29.4 68.9 11.9 11.0 0.2 25.2 120.0 6.5 7.5 7.3 97.6
2009          Apr 25 187.3 37.2 0.1 15.6 29.7 68.6 11.8 11.6 0.2 25.4 119.3 6.6 7.0 7.3 6.7
         May 25 189.2 37.3 0.1 17.0 29.7 68.6 11.9 11.8 0.2 26.9 119.3 6.6 6.7 7.3 6.4
         June 25 192.2 38.2 0.1 18.6 29.7 69.0 11.9 11.9 0.2 29.3 119.3 6.5 7.3 7.3 6.8
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Apr 15 136.3 22.6 0.0 11.1 19.0 53.7 10.8 7.0 0.1 21.4 78.3 6.4 7.0 4.7 4.2
         May 15 138.0 22.7 0.0 12.4 19.0 53.7 10.8 7.2 0.1 22.9 78.3 6.4 6.7 4.7 3.9
         June 15 141.0 23.5 0.0 14.2 19.0 54.1 10.9 7.3 0.1 25.2 78.3 6.3 7.3 4.7 4.2
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Apr 10 51.0 14.6 0.0 4.5 10.7 14.9 1.0 4.7 0.1 4.0 41.0 0.2 − 2.6 2.5
         May 10 51.2 14.6 0.0 4.5 10.7 14.9 1.1 4.7 0.1 4.0 41.0 0.2 − 2.6 2.4
         June 10 51.1 14.7 0.0 4.5 10.7 14.9 1.0 4.7 0.1 4.1 41.0 0.2 − 2.6 2.6
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2008 24.2 2.7 6.6 50.7 38.2 48.1 24.3 4.2 9.9 3.9 14.0 10.1 7.6 10.2 8.4 0.5
2009          Apr 2.1 0.0 0.5 4.5 3.1 3.7 1.8 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.0 10.7 7.7 0.9 0.1
         May 1.9 0.0 0.5 3.9 2.7 3.3 1.5 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.0 11.0 7.8 0.9 0.0
         June 2.1 0.0 0.5 4.2 2.7 3.6 1.6 0.3 0.8 0.3 1.2 11.2 7.8 1.0 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Apr 1.3 0.0 0.3 3.2 2.1 2.7 1.3 0.3 0.6 0.3 0.8 6.5 4.0 0.6 0.0
         May 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.7 2.3 1.0 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.8 6.7 4.1 0.6 0.0
         June 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.7 2.5 1.0 0.2 0.5 0.2 1.0 6.9 4.1 0.7 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Apr 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.1 3.7 0.3 0.0
         May 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.7 0.3 0.0
         June 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.0 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.7 0.3 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
with
foreign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to market
foreign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2006 53 213 1,743.7 711.6 635.5 194.1 441.4 76.1 897.7 671.8 18.5 17.9 653.3 226.0 134.3
2007 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 20.7 789.8 255.3 161.82008 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 19.2 610.3 194.9 159.5
2008          Aug 54 225 1,882.8 774.3 708.1 235.0 473.1 66.2 980.2 739.5 21.3 19.9 718.1 240.8 128.2
         Sep 54 224 1,976.4 825.2 761.1 281.5 479.6 64.1 1,027.2 788.1 21.2 19.8 766.9 239.1 124.0
         Oct 55 228 2,103.9 868.2 804.7 274.3 530.4 63.6 1,043.8 797.6 23.1 22.1 774.5 246.1 191.9
         Nov 54 226 1,970.8 810.0 748.3 253.6 494.7 61.7 983.3 758.8 23.2 22.2 735.6 224.5 177.5
         Dec 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 19.2 610.3 194.9 159.5
2009          Jan 56 231 1,816.9 759.6 701.4 257.6 443.8 58.2 880.2 678.9 22.8 21.8 656.0 201.3 177.1
         Feb 56 231 1,797.0 725.5 668.8 252.6 416.2 56.8 855.8 659.1 25.1 24.0 634.0 196.7 215.7         Mar 56 230 1,718.0 715.1 659.8 257.7 402.0 55.3 801.5 614.9 21.5 20.4 593.5 186.6 201.4
         Apr 56 230 1,786.9 753.9 698.6 276.3 422.3 55.3 815.6 633.6 24.7 23.7 608.9 182.1 217.4
         May 56 228 1,723.8 722.6 670.3 266.7 403.5 52.3 780.3 607.2 23.6 22.6 583.6 173.1 220.9
Changes *
2007 − 1 + 5 +406.5 +132.8 +136.4 + 44.5 + 91.9 − 3.6 +240.6 +196.1 + 3.1 + 2.9 +192.9 + 44.5 + 33.1
2008 + 4 + 8 −359.4 − 98.5 − 89.3 + 6.3 − 95.5 − 9.2 −256.8 −190.7 − 1.5 − 1.6 −189.3 − 66.1 − 4.1
2008          Aug − + 1 − 21.0 − 10.0 − 10.8 − 0.9 − 9.8 + 0.8 − 7.2 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 6.5 − 3.8
         Sep − − 1 + 62.2 + 40.1 + 42.7 + 46.5 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 28.0 + 34.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 34.1 − 6.0 − 5.9
         Oct + 1 + 4 + 15.3 + 4.5 + 6.6 − 7.2 + 13.8 − 2.0 − 52.7 − 44.8 + 2.0 + 2.3 − 46.7 − 7.9 + 63.4
         Nov − 1 − 2 −129.0 − 57.9 − 56.3 − 20.7 − 35.6 − 1.7 − 56.9 − 35.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 35.6 − 21.3 − 14.2         Dec + 2 − −165.3 − 48.6 − 49.9 − 8.7 − 41.2 + 1.3 −101.6 − 83.6 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 80.5 − 18.0 − 15.0
2009          Jan − + 5 + 30.8 + 3.0 + 7.5 + 12.8 − 5.3 − 4.5 + 11.8 + 15.2 + 2.7 + 2.6 + 12.5 − 3.3 + 16.0
         Feb − − − 25.7 − 35.9 − 34.4 − 5.0 − 29.4 − 1.5 − 28.3 − 22.9 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 25.1 − 5.4 + 38.6         Mar − − 1 − 37.2 + 4.0 + 4.8 + 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 28.0 − 24.1 − 3.6 − 3.6 − 20.5 − 3.9 − 13.2
         Apr − − + 61.7 + 37.0 + 37.2 + 18.6 + 18.6 − 0.2 + 8.9 + 14.5 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 11.3 − 5.6 + 15.7
         May − − 2 − 27.3 − 17.6 − 15.2 − 9.6 − 5.6 − 2.5 − 15.0 − 10.8 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 9.8 − 4.1 + 5.3
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2006 40 142 761.2 341.9 262.8 124.1 138.7 79.1 347.3 218.7 38.0 36.4 180.7 128.6 72.1
2007 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 36.8 138.1 87.9 59.02008 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 41.6 154.3 71.3 82.2
2008          Aug 39 121 608.6 270.4 204.9 99.5 105.4 65.5 273.8 192.2 40.3 39.5 151.9 81.7 64.3
         Sep 39 121 619.4 275.6 211.4 105.3 106.0 64.3 277.4 199.7 39.8 39.0 159.9 77.7 66.4
         Oct 39 119 620.2 267.2 204.1 90.5 113.6 63.1 280.6 201.8 42.3 41.7 159.5 78.7 72.4
         Nov 39 118 611.9 255.9 193.0 87.4 105.6 62.9 280.6 204.4 43.8 43.2 160.6 76.2 75.4
         Dec 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 41.6 154.3 71.3 82.2
2009          Jan 38 115 580.6 244.3 184.1 78.6 105.5 60.2 272.4 199.6 43.5 43.0 156.1 72.7 64.0
         Feb 38 115 573.5 241.0 180.0 77.2 102.9 60.9 270.4 199.4 43.5 43.0 155.9 71.0 62.1         Mar 38 113 560.7 227.1 168.1 75.8 92.3 59.0 264.4 194.3 43.1 42.6 151.2 70.1 69.2
         Apr 38 113 552.1 229.9 172.0 74.2 97.8 57.9 266.9 195.0 43.5 42.9 151.5 71.9 55.2
         May 37 112 533.6 220.1 165.1 74.3 90.7 55.0 261.4 191.7 43.1 42.5 148.7 69.7 52.1
Changes *
2007 − 1 − 22 −155.7 − 64.1 − 55.8 − 19.3 − 36.5 − 8.3 − 79.1 − 38.8 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 38.6 − 40.4 − 12.5
2008 − 1 − 4 − 0.2 − 24.2 − 19.8 − 19.3 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 1.1 + 17.5 + 4.4 + 4.8 + 13.2 − 16.4 + 22.9
2008          Aug − − + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.0
         Sep − − + 6.7 + 2.9 + 5.1 + 5.8 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 1.9 + 5.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 6.4 − 4.0 + 1.9
         Oct − − 2 − 14.0 − 16.4 − 11.7 − 14.8 + 3.1 − 4.7 − 3.1 − 4.1 + 2.5 + 2.6 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 5.5
         Nov − − 1 − 6.3 − 10.5 − 10.3 − 3.2 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 3.7 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 2.5 + 3.0         Dec − 1 − 2 − 6.3 − 4.3 − 6.0 − 1.9 − 4.1 + 1.6 − 9.1 − 4.2 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 4.9 + 7.1
2009          Jan − − 1 − 24.3 − 6.6 − 2.6 − 6.9 + 4.3 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 18.5
         Feb − − − 8.2 − 3.9 − 4.5 − 1.5 − 3.0 + 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.7 − 2.0         Mar − − 2 − 6.3 − 10.3 − 10.0 − 1.3 − 8.6 − 0.4 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 7.4
         Apr − − − 9.8 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 + 5.1 − 1.4 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 14.1
         May − 1 − 1 − 13.5 − 7.2 − 5.6 + 0.2 − 5.8 − 1.5 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 2.9
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report , are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,442.7 984.9 398.5 586.4 457.8 53.8 49.3 46.2 4.6 4.1 403.9 181.5 27.8 91.7 2006
1,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 47.5 4.1 3.9 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5 20071,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 34.6 8.5 8.0 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2 2008
1,585.4 1,116.1 509.3 606.8 469.3 47.8 43.2 41.0 4.6 4.0 421.5 165.7 34.2 97.6 2008          Aug 
1,686.5 1,171.4 575.6 595.8 515.1 52.6 47.8 44.4 4.7 4.1 462.5 150.6 34.2 105.0          Sep 
1,796.3 1,268.7 614.8 653.8 527.7 51.3 45.4 42.2 5.8 5.2 476.4 150.8 34.4 122.4          Oct 
1,668.4 1,195.4 572.8 622.6 472.9 47.2 39.7 37.7 7.5 6.8 425.8 136.3 35.0 131.2          Nov 
1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 34.6 8.5 8.0 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2          Dec 
1,539.5 1,099.3 534.7 564.6 440.2 49.7 40.5 37.9 9.1 8.5 390.6 136.0 36.2 105.2 2009          Jan 
1,474.1 1,032.8 530.2 502.6 441.2 48.6 43.2 41.8 5.3 4.7 392.7 138.2 36.2 148.5          Feb 
1,393.5 987.3 515.3 472.0 406.2 51.7 46.8 44.2 4.9 4.3 354.5 141.0 36.2 147.4          Mar 
1,449.1 1,031.9 526.2 505.7 417.2 47.0 42.2 41.5 4.7 4.1 370.3 146.9 36.5 154.3          Apr 
1,393.7 990.9 522.3 468.6 402.8 43.9 39.3 38.5 4.5 4.0 359.0 148.5 35.9 145.6          May
Changes *
+ 359.0 +243.9 +149.2 + 94.7 +115.1 + 1.5 + 2.0 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 +113.6 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 41.7 2007
− 304.0 −139.7 + 6.5 −146.3 −164.3 − 10.3 − 14.7 − 12.9 + 4.4 + 4.1 −153.9 − 59.4 + 6.5 − 2.4 2008
− 23.3 − 4.2 + 2.3 − 6.5 − 19.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 18.7 + 5.6 + 0.2 − 3.5 2008          Aug 
+ 77.4 + 40.7 + 66.3 − 25.7 + 36.7 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 31.9 − 15.0 + 0.1 − 0.2          Sep 
+ 27.6 + 49.1 + 39.2 + 9.9 − 21.5 − 1.3 − 2.4 − 2.2 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 20.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 12.6          Oct 
− 126.3 − 73.1 − 42.0 − 31.1 − 53.3 − 4.1 − 5.7 − 4.5 + 1.6 + 1.7 − 49.2 − 14.6 + 0.6 + 11.3          Nov − 156.0 − 86.3 − 18.5 − 67.8 − 69.7 − 2.2 − 3.2 − 3.1 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 67.5 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 0.2          Dec 
+ 43.2 − 2.1 − 19.5 + 17.5 + 45.3 + 4.7 + 4.1 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 40.6 + 9.4 + 0.6 − 22.5 2009          Jan 
− 70.3 − 68.8 − 4.5 − 64.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 + 2.7 + 3.9 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.0 + 42.4          Feb 
− 49.9 − 28.2 − 14.9 − 13.3 − 21.7 + 3.2 + 3.6 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 24.9 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 10.0          Mar 
+ 51.2 + 42.4 + 10.9 + 31.5 + 8.7 − 4.8 − 4.6 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 13.5 + 6.0 + 0.3 + 4.2          Apr 
− 28.3 − 23.9 − 4.0 − 19.9 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 2.9 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.1          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
557.3 329.4 121.5 207.9 227.9 40.8 33.0 31.6 7.8 7.7 187.1 87.9 40.0 76.0 2006
437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 29.5 6.8 6.7 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4 2007453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 23.6 8.7 8.6 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9 2008
453.6 279.0 125.3 153.7 174.6 32.1 25.3 25.1 6.8 6.8 142.5 67.9 29.7 57.3 2008          Aug 
465.8 275.8 126.8 149.1 190.0 33.3 26.3 25.8 7.0 6.9 156.7 66.8 29.8 56.9          Sep 
469.6 284.8 130.9 153.9 184.8 31.5 22.4 22.2 9.1 9.0 153.3 61.6 29.9 59.1          Oct 
463.8 283.8 134.1 149.6 180.0 32.8 23.7 23.4 9.1 9.0 147.2 61.1 29.8 57.3          Nov 
453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 23.6 8.7 8.6 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9          Dec 
435.9 260.8 128.4 132.4 175.1 33.5 24.8 24.1 8.7 8.6 141.6 58.5 31.1 55.2 2009          Jan 
430.5 259.6 131.0 128.6 170.9 33.5 24.9 24.4 8.6 8.6 137.4 58.7 31.1 53.1          Feb 
423.2 259.3 129.8 129.4 164.0 33.6 25.1 24.7 8.6 8.5 130.3 57.2 29.8 50.5          Mar 
416.5 247.9 124.2 123.6 168.6 33.5 24.9 24.5 8.6 8.5 135.2 56.8 29.0 49.8          Apr 
402.5 242.5 121.6 121.0 160.0 33.3 24.9 24.2 8.4 8.3 126.7 55.2 28.5 47.4          May
Changes *
− 109.3 − 53.9 − 3.4 − 50.5 − 55.4 − 3.7 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 51.7 − 18.3 − 11.4 − 16.7 2007
+ 12.1 + 4.8 + 26.9 − 22.1 + 7.3 − 4.3 − 6.3 − 5.9 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 11.6 − 11.8 + 1.9 − 2.4 2008
− 3.1 − 5.2 − 1.7 − 3.5 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 2008          Aug 
+ 9.0 − 5.0 + 1.5 − 6.5 + 14.0 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 12.8 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.3          Sep 
− 8.0 + 2.9 + 4.1 − 1.2 − 10.9 − 1.9 − 4.0 − 3.6 + 2.1 + 2.1 − 9.0 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.9          Oct 
− 4.6 − 0.3 + 3.3 − 3.6 − 4.3 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.0          Nov − 1.9 − 2.1 + 10.9 − 13.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 3.4 + 0.7 − 1.7          Dec 
− 25.0 − 20.3 − 16.7 − 3.6 − 4.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.4 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.6 2009          Jan 
− 6.1 − 1.5 + 2.6 − 4.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.4          Feb 
− 2.9 + 1.7 − 1.1 + 2.9 − 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.6          Mar 
− 7.5 − 11.8 − 5.6 − 6.2 + 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 1.1          Apr 
− 10.6 − 3.8 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 6.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 6.7 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.8          May
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
 
  
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2008          Dec  8 11,056.0 221.1 0.5 220.6 221.5 1.3 0.0
2009          Jan 11,079.8 221.6 0.5 221.1 222.1 1.0 0.0
         Feb 10,905.5 218.1 0.5 217.6 218.6 1.0 0.0
         Mar 11,066.1 221.3 0.5 220.8 221.6 0.8 0.0
         Apr 11,012.5 220.3 0.5 219.7 220.8 1.1 0.0
         May 10,861.0 217.2 0.5 216.7 217.9 1.2 0.0         June  
p 10,931.5 218.6 0.5 218.1 219.2 1.1 0.0
         July  p,9 10,828.2 216.6 0.6 216.0 216.9 0.9 ...
         Aug  p ... ... ... 215.9 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2008          Dec 2,632,087 52,642 192 52,450 52,830 380 1
2009          Jan 2,655,841 53,117 192 52,925 53,177 252 2
         Feb 2,645,357 52,907 192 52,715 52,929 214 0         Mar 2,670,696 53,414 192 53,222 53,440 218 12
         Apr 2,658,673 53,173 192 52,982 53,272 290 1
         May 2,630,810 52,616 192 52,425 52,771 346 1
         June 2,653,695 53,074 191 52,883 53,161 278 0
         July  
p 2,607,617 52,152 190 51,962 52,185 223 1
         Aug  p 2,608,650 52,173 189 51,984 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the allowance. — 8Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance, including required reserves of Slovakia ( €0.740 billion). Required
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- reserves of the euro area up to 31 December 2008 amounted to €219.9
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the billion. — 9The total number of deficiencies was not available when this
reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central report went to press. 
Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing Base rate
operations operations as per Base
Mar- Mar- Discount rate
ginal ginal Rate as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Applicable Civil Transition
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Act  1 from Code  2 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 − 4.50 2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 1999 Jan                1 2.50 2002 Jan                1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 − 3.25          May                1 1.95          July                1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 − 4.50 2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 − 3.50          June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2000 Jan                1 2.68 2003 Jan                1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 − 4.00          Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                1 3.42          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          Sep                1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 − 4.25          Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 − 4.50 2001 Sep                1 3.62          July                1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 − 4.75 2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 − 5.25          June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2002 Jan                1 2.71 2005 Jan                1 1.21
         June               28 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          to          July                1 1.17
         Sep                  1 3.50 − 4.50 5.50 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Apr                3
         Oct                  6 3.75 − 4.75 5.75          Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95
2001 May               11 3.50 − 4.50 5.50          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Aug                31 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Sep                18 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July               1 3.19
         Nov                  9 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00   
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75   
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         June                 6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00          July               1 0.12
1Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the 2 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable. —  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2009 July               22 88,272 88,272 1.00 − − − 7
         July               29 94,780 94,780 1.00 − − − 7
         Aug                  5 80,785 80,785 1.00 − − − 7
         Aug                12 73,596 73,596 1.00 − − − 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2009 July               30 9,492 9,492 1.00 − − − 91
         Aug                12 30,686 30,686 1.00 − − − 28
         Aug                13 13,024 13,024 1.00 − − − 91
         Aug                13 11,875 11,875 1.00 − − − 182
Source: ECB. — *Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2009 to allotted or collected. 
include Slovakia. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were  
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2009          Feb 1.15 0.95 − 1.40 1.93 1.75 − 2.15 1.26 1.37 1.63 1.94 2.03 2.09 2.14
         Mar 0.95 0.60 − 1.80 1.63 1.40 − 1.85 1.06 1.05 1.27 1.64 1.77 1.84 1.91
         Apr 0.72 0.25 − 1.00 1.41 1.28 − 1.55 0.84 0.90 1.01 1.42 1.61 1.69 1.77
         May 0.63 0.25 − 1.05 1.27 1.15 − 1.42 0.78 0.79 0.88 1.28 1.48 1.57 1.64         June 0.62 0.20 − 1.40 1.21 1.00 − 1.34 0.70 0.82 0.91 1.23 1.44 1.54 1.61
         July 0.27 0.15 − 0.55 0.94 0.77 − 1.12 0.36 0.39 0.61 0.97 1.21 1.33 1.41
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2008          Nov 4.51 3.12 4.44 4.40 5.71 5.01 5.16 9.24 7.48 6.46 6.16 5.81 5.51
         Dec 4.41 3.07 4.01 4.30 5.49 4.90 5.08 9.02 7.38 6.38 5.72 5.42 5.27
2009          Jan  3 4.16 3.10 3.49 4.11 5.22 4.72 4.93 8.72 7.22 6.22 5.11 4.89 4.89
         Feb 3.98 3.17 3.19 4.00 5.14 4.75 4.91 8.61 7.27 6.21 4.77 4.59 4.74
         Mar 3.78 3.06 2.82 3.87 4.92 4.63 4.78 8.43 7.09 6.07 4.41 4.28 4.48
         Apr 3.54 3.11 2.53 3.84 4.70 4.49 4.65 8.19 7.00 5.92 4.12 3.97 4.25
         May 3.38 3.04 2.41 3.70 4.59 4.45 4.56 8.08 6.92 5.84 4.01 3.84 4.12
         June 3.25 3.06 2.20 3.65 4.51 4.41 4.46 7.96 6.93 5.79 3.93 3.72 4.00
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2008          Nov 1.29 4.26 4.67 3.71 3.02 4.20 1.98 3.53 4.58 4.18
         Dec 1.16 3.75 4.35 3.69 2.95 4.17 1.63 2.87 4.23 4.09
2009          Jan  3 1.02 3.28 3.90 3.52 2.88 4.08 1.28 2.25 3.81 3.78
         Feb 0.90 2.62 3.40 3.23 2.49 3.98 1.12 1.61 3.21 3.89
         Mar 0.80 2.24 2.96 3.07 2.31 3.87 0.96 1.36 2.97 3.30
         Apr 0.66 2.01 2.70 2.87 2.22 3.75 0.80 1.15 2.64 3.07
         May 0.61 1.89 2.42 2.71 1.98 3.62 0.76 1.08 2.39 3.12
         June 0.56 1.86 2.39 2.58 1.94 3.52 0.66 1.04 2.19 2.64
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2008          Nov 10.78 8.92 8.98 7.17 8.69 5.58 5.63 5.34 5.22 5.28 5.84 6.15 5.75
         Dec 10.46 8.50 8.22 7.03 8.39 5.30 5.09 5.06 5.10 5.13 4.99 5.75 5.29
2009          Jan  3 10.13 8.67 8.33 7.03 8.63 4.86 4.38 4.77 4.92 5.00 4.41 5.44 5.23
         Feb 10.14 8.39 8.18 6.65 8.49 4.61 3.97 4.54 4.80 4.89 4.08 5.03 5.16
         Mar 9.94 8.07 7.55 6.51 8.31 4.38 3.66 4.33 4.61 4.72 3.83 4.72 5.05
         Apr 9.71 8.05 7.44 6.50 8.27 4.22 3.39 4.19 4.55 4.68 3.54 4.69 4.90
         May 9.62 8.08 7.88 6.44 8.17 4.11 3.22 4.13 4.50 4.58 3.60 4.71 4.90
         June 9.56 7.81 7.27 6.37 8.03 4.09 3.13 4.05 4.51 4.57 3.54 4.75 4.93
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2008          Nov 6.66 6.04 6.10 5.41 4.86 5.02 4.97
         Dec 6.26 5.38 5.78 5.32 4.28 4.50 4.76
2009          Jan  3 5.68 4.73 5.46 5.24 3.51 3.96 4.58
         Feb 5.40 4.32 5.25 4.96 3.10 3.52 4.23
         Mar 5.10 4.03 5.07 4.75 2.83 3.22 3.87
         Apr 4.76 3.82 5.02 4.60 2.54 3.34 4.01
         May 4.67 3.73 5.01 4.52 2.48 3.22 3.96
         June 4.58 3.64 4.86 4.50 2.56 3.08 3.69
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. —
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 2008/48/EC, 3 Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2009 to include Slovakia. 
which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          June 4.23 277,318 2.48 182,724 4.47 118,160 4.38 21,713
         July 4.33 287,196 2.48 181,642 4.56 121,536 4.41 21,919
         Aug 4.40 296,615 2.49 181,577 4.60 121,183 4.44 21,860
         Sep 4.46 301,246 2.45 178,637 4.69 123,174 4.44 23,230
         Oct 4.51 324,343 2.45 177,619 4.63 123,846 4.46 23,132
         Nov 4.42 326,660 2.45 177,052 4.24 123,000 4.51 23,011
         Dec 4.26 326,679 2.45 179,319 3.63 118,097 4.45 22,976
2009          Jan 3.98 307,958 2.46 179,112 2.95 116,231 4.43 23,192
         Feb 3.82 292,932 2.45 179,096 2.57 113,302 4.43 23,084         Mar 3.71 278,398 2.45 179,828 2.15 109,282 4.42 23,274
         Apr 3.56 261,337 2.45 180,758 1.86 110,298 4.39 23,265
         May 3.42 251,435 2.44 182,163 1.72 107,732 4.36 23,269         June 3.32 240,427 2.44 183,013 1.52 101,792 4.25 23,827
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          June 6.22 5,493 4.71 25,544 5.07 923,192 10.43 68,794 5.70 65,599 6.18 313,464
         July 6.21 5,519 4.76 25,308 5.06 924,208 10.47 66,689 5.73 65,200 6.20 313,990
         Aug 6.31 5,477 4.78 25,164 5.06 924,666 10.50 65,485 5.74 65,213 6.21 314,367
         Sep 6.28 5,536 4.82 24,989 5.06 924,467 10.60 69,363 5.79 64,216 6.23 313,147
         Oct 6.31 5,429 4.86 24,654 5.07 923,312 10.64 68,244 5.84 64,177 6.24 313,766
         Nov 6.31 5,430 4.87 24,457 5.06 923,919 10.33 66,351 5.83 64,131 6.24 313,811
         Dec 6.13 5,528 4.84 24,239 5.06 921,188 10.15 70,489 5.77 64,751 6.22 312,381
2009          Jan 5.81 5,418 4.77 23,857 5.03 918,498 9.60 68,437 5.66 64,234 6.16 311,940
         Feb 5.54 5,385 4.73 23,698 5.02 917,848 9.21 68,721 5.63 64,058 6.14 312,266         Mar 5.34 5,628 4.65 25,121 5.01 914,717 9.16 69,930 5.56 65,236 6.10 310,908
         Apr 5.06 5,584 4.57 25,145 4.98 915,839 8.93 68,006 5.58 66,027 6.01 313,261
         May 4.97 5,586 4.54 25,160 4.97 916,289 8.76 67,806 5.54 66,445 5.99 313,661         June 4.86 5,606 4.49 25,260 4.95 916,121 8.97 69,624 5.49 66,936 5.98 313,414
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          June 6.24 188,257 5.47 122,714 5.20 531,783
         July 6.30 184,191 5.58 124,690 5.22 533,931
         Aug 6.34 183,359 5.62 128,090 5.24 537,289
         Sep 6.46 187,397 5.70 130,018 5.26 538,193
         Oct 6.36 185,410 5.78 133,883 5.30 540,775
         Nov 6.00 186,446 5.57 135,699 5.24 541,915
         Dec 5.52 188,252 5.30 138,069 5.04 544,529
2009          Jan 4.94 185,671 4.81 140,169 4.82 545,349
         Feb 4.69 182,528 4.55 140,944 4.70 545,925         Mar 4.51 183,679 4.30 139,786 4.55 543,946
         Apr 4.18 178,062 4.02 142,202 4.40 541,091
         May 4.13 177,190 3.93 142,644 4.36 541,981         June 4.09 174,044 3.87 142,643 4.27 539,830
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates may always be calculated either as annualised agreed intere st
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other relatedhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- balance sheet statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis purchase, including building and home improvements; including loan s
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well assample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name andsional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are for their own account. — 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for
not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. —can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          June 1.91 481,446 4.27 52,717 4.80 2,511 3.17 1,019 2.53 431,428 3.89 102,836
         July 1.95 480,219 4.43 62,011 4.97 3,507 3.24 1,324 2.57 426,345 3.95 102,337
         Aug 1.99 480,303 4.51 50,968 5.00 2,914 3.63 1,292 2.58 423,199 4.00 101,222
         Sep 2.05 476,817 4.48 53,916 4.98 2,022 3.39 1,391 2.59 419,923 4.03 100,148
         Oct 2.09 491,911 4.49 74,919 4.85 2,624 3.66 1,760 2.64 418,584 4.13 103,108
         Nov 2.02 510,118 3.89 50,889 4.88 2,623 3.87 1,873 2.54 417,459 4.22 106,825
         Dec 1.85 508,140 3.21 52,012 4.44 2,583 3.75 2,291 2.42 425,527 4.19 110,599
2009          Jan 1.77 529,633 2.67 48,906 4.08 3,415 3.81 2,143 2.33 429,238 4.11 110,567
         Feb 1.55 550,800 1.94 29,935 3.37 2,015 3.40 1,968 2.24 434,504 4.02 110,493         Mar 1.38 558,216 1.46 30,369 2.97 1,746 3.15 2,911 2.08 437,140 3.91 111,178
         Apr 1.13 576,843 1.32 27,496 2.69 1,611 3.08 3,059 1.98 439,565 3.79 112,039
         May 1.03 587,516 1.34 25,817 2.17 1,663 2.88 2,893 1.85 441,968 3.67 113,497         June 0.94 591,663 1.29 25,435 2.28 1,295 2.74 2,592 1.82 445,518 3.55 114,481
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          June 2.36 173,952 4.30 50,477 5.04 304 5.12 336
         July 2.50 172,252 4.41 53,057 5.15 267 5.22 382
         Aug 2.47 175,575 4.42 46,256 6.08 460 5.27 201
         Sep 2.58 183,927 4.47 52,263 5.39 899 5.27 290
         Oct 2.41 193,441 4.17 60,137 4.87 205 4.88 396
         Nov 2.14 193,041 3.41 54,007 4.61 433 5.04 271
         Dec 1.66 194,621 2.60 65,240 4.02 480 4.24 470
2009          Jan 1.31 202,948 1.91 69,444 3.45 843 4.34 463
         Feb 1.16 197,847 1.39 43,602 2.93 367 3.83 421         Mar 1.03 203,071 1.10 50,263 2.63 480 4.02 1,149
         Apr 0.81 209,654 0.89 50,849 2.57 358 3.68 538
         May 0.81 211,660 0.77 43,357 2.32 412 3.41 395         June 0.61 217,069 0.78 42,875 1.77 279 2.11 917
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          June 7.48 6.25 974 5.52 2,841 8.63 2,412 5.56 6,864 6.09 1,165 5.54 2,628
         July 7.71 6.47 1,090 5.67 2,864 8.78 2,616 5.64 10,020 6.19 1,227 5.68 2,802
         Aug 7.74 6.24 1,218 5.80 2,322 8.79 2,141 5.62 6,914 6.30 883 5.74 2,164
         Sep 7.60 6.08 1,064 5.71 2,555 8.80 2,219 5.72 6,795 6.24 994 5.64 1,934
         Oct 7.66 5.86 1,181 5.76 2,656 8.70 2,285 5.88 7,576 6.05 1,337 5.61 2,171
         Nov 7.55 5.43 922 5.66 2,289 8.63 2,049 5.19 5,288 5.90 972 5.52 1,420
         Dec 7.02 4.76 1,217 5.47 2,086 8.19 1,947 4.39 7,051 5.51 1,360 5.15 1,966
2009          Jan 7.47 5.10 1,202 5.48 2,204 8.74 2,101 3.73 7,060 5.24 1,475 5.19 2,145
         Feb 7.18 5.12 878 5.17 2,649 8.46 2,173 3.15 5,204 5.08 1,155 4.99 1,538         Mar 6.95 4.74 1,171 5.06 3,180 8.19 2,765 3.01 6,416 4.82 1,467 4.90 2,192
         Apr 6.99 4.41 1,510 5.30 3,112 8.28 2,485 2.68 7,353 4.65 1,773 4.79 2,329
         May 6.94 5.10 904 5.08 2,915 8.24 2,247 2.67 5,699 4.78 1,307 4.75 2,020         June 6.79 5.20 1,484 4.99 3,097 8.19 2,347 2.65 6,020 4.66 1,419 4.83 2,407
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 2008/48/EC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          June 11.83 47,209 5.30 6.05 2,173 5.24 2,634 5.06 6,229 5.09 4,703
         July 11.91 44,887 5.47 6.18 2,701 5.43 2,829 5.21 6,747 5.28 5,113
         Aug 11.94 44,184 5.54 6.28 1,998 5.57 1,932 5.27 4,920 5.30 4,213         Sep 11.98 48,076 5.45 6.24 2,129 5.50 1,979 5.17 5,610 5.21 4,418
         Oct 12.01 46,486 5.42 6.34 2,488 5.43 2,431 5.15 6,336 5.12 4,437
         Nov 11.88 43,669 5.27 6.07 1,995 5.20 2,363 5.03 5,064 5.01 4,024
         Dec 11.82 47,477 4.96 5.38 2,476 4.84 2,918 4.83 5,566 4.73 4,200
2009          Jan 11.42 45,056 4.83 4.97 3,251 4.58 3,343 4.73 6,197 4.77 3,970
         Feb 11.19 44,553 4.58 4.38 2,370 4.33 2,749 4.58 5,336 4.60 3,395         Mar 11.16 45,902 4.42 4.19 2,787 4.12 3,343 4.40 6,831 4.49 4,609
         Apr 10.97 43,989 4.34 3.86 3,150 4.01 3,521 4.37 7,455 4.54 4,272
         May 10.87 43,269 4.29 3.80 2,616 3.93 3,031 4.35 6,547 4.47 4,000         June 10.84 45,909 4.31 3.73 2,654 3.88 3,410 4.39 7,491 4.53 4,261
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          June 7.07 85,801 6.34 10,794 5.97 1,280 5.38 1,734
         July 7.12 82,949 6.36 10,066 6.18 1,313 5.50 1,837
         Aug 7.15 82,270 6.35 8,096 6.27 995 5.65 1,298         Sep 7.26 85,079 6.46 10,688 6.12 1,091 5.54 1,557
         Oct 7.01 83,629 6.46 10,578 5.96 1,131 5.36 1,487
         Nov 6.68 85,604 5.95 8,719 5.78 989 5.14 1,435
         Dec 6.35 84,891 5.25 10,536 5.61 1,438 5.08 1,828
2009          Jan 5.77 83,490 4.55 9,429 5.31 1,151 5.07 1,351
         Feb 5.63 84,220 4.15 9,245 5.12 1,036 4.84 1,105         Mar 5.65 84,903 3.83 12,529 4.95 1,198 4.69 1,333
         Apr 5.21 82,312 3.60 11,605 4.85 1,204 4.48 1,488
         May 5.24 81,653 3.52 10,634 4.83 1,078 4.41 1,139         June 5.14 82,602 3.36 11,556 4.82 1,090 4.61 1,392
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          June 5.36 80,148 6.09 3,254 5.82 6,699
         July 5.38 90,571 5.97 3,511 5.66 6,703
         Aug 5.46 73,515 5.91 2,956 5.73 3,836         Sep 5.70 87,137 5.63 3,353 5.73 4,378
         Oct 5.65 87,732 6.10 3,297 5.45 4,254
         Nov 4.91 65,292 5.38 2,289 5.04 3,060
         Dec 4.35 80,446 4.82 4,972 4.92 6,563
2009          Jan 3.63 78,532 5.00 3,051 4.69 3,788
         Feb 3.26 63,830 4.79 1,959 4.53 3,225         Mar 3.09 73,340 4.23 2,283 4.50 3,512
         Apr 2.84 67,171 4.22 2,706 4.47 3,480
         May 2.84 58,465 3.98 2,404 4.47 2,783         June 2.93 69,989 4.33 2,229 4.69 4,190
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Corporate debt debt building marketpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities (non-MFIs) ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,9202003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,1222004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 − 13,723 − 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 32,978 − 157,940
2006 243,496 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 141,117 125,425 68,893 56,532 − 118,0712007 217,249 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 126,979 − 37,503 96,476 − 133,979 − 254,7522008 68,838 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 2,699 − 2,263 68,049 − 70,312 − 71,101
2009          Apr 9,854 3,848 − 15,778 4,479 15,147 6,006 10,446 − 332 10,778 − − 592
         May 51,244 38,001 7,742 1,115 29,145 13,243 14,373 7,366 7,007 − 36,871
         June 10,118 3,537 − 7,727 1,889 9,375 6,581 10,445 20,342 − 9,897 − − 327
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6781998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,9412003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,0162004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 24,077 9,061 15,018 4,757 11,323 − 6,566 19,3222007 − 1,426 10,053 − 11,478 − 46,867 − 6,702 − 40,165 45,4402008 − 20,864 11,326 − 32,190 27,739 − 23,079 50,818 − 48,604
2009          Apr 1,537 613 924 17,629 12,591 5,038 − 16,092
         May 3,536 109 3,427 − 7,596 − 9,467 1,871 11,132
         June 7,564 7,790 − 226 3,162 − 5,474 8,636 4,402
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs) syndicates debt securities debt securities  2 
Gross sales  3 
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,370
1997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,813
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 692007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009          Mar 133,162 88,344 3,428 2,763 31,941 50,213 5,711 39,107 −         Apr 140,278 92,334 2,582 3,300 21,023 65,429 7,285 40,658 −
         May 131,258 83,594 5,065 4,137 30,596 43,797 5,557 42,107 −
         June 133,515 91,241 6,572 5,120 22,117 57,432 8,701 33,573 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  4 
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,582
1997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,413
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −
2009          Mar 34,959 16,496 1,815 1,005 6,526 7,150 5,514 12,949 −         Apr 25,777 13,875 1,611 2,074 5,450 4,740 5,555 6,348 −
         May 32,392 14,512 2,694 1,967 3,950 5,901 3,016 14,864 −
         June 43,303 22,363 2,467 2,795 6,299 10,802 6,353 14,587 −
Net sales  5 
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,951
1997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,181
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,607
2009          Mar 21,308 4,794 1,537 − 10,196 9,126 4,328 3,393 13,120 − 2,094         Apr 9,481 − 9,214 − 3,644 − 6,031 − 3,323 3,784 6,995 11,700 − 601
         May 42,109 8,224 2,164 − 1,032 9,058 − 1,966 3,493 30,392 − 3,850
         June − 143 − 14,659 2,651 − 5,626 − 930 − 10,754 4,190 10,326 − 234
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Treuhand agency. — 3Gross sales means only initial sales of newly issued
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. — 4Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. — 5Gross
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank bonds Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe (non-MFIs) syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,359
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,3732007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,6232008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009          Apr 3,327,512 1,877,262 146,246 337,752 499,052 894,212 206,142 1,244,109 44,951
         May 3,369,621 1,885,485 148,410 336,720 508,110 892,245 209,635 1,274,502 41,101         June 3,369,478 1,870,826 151,062 331,094 507,179 881,491 213,825 1,284,828 40,867
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-June 2009 
1,360,336 873,809 61,171 173,096 213,300 426,243 25,793 460,734 24,403    less than 2
733,296 441,801 55,961 88,146 117,896 179,799 36,741 254,753 4,334 2 to less than 4
419,657 206,690 17,112 32,493 58,437 98,648 34,472 178,496 5,354 4 to less than 6
305,603 168,408 12,179 21,770 30,927 103,531 8,044 129,151 2,969 6 to less than 8
165,020 60,939 3,718 9,437 31,217 16,569 3,615 100,466 278 8 to less than 10
71,473 33,017 804 2,850 21,414 7,951 12,778 25,677 1,764 10 to less than 15
59,176 18,844 119 1,595 12,735 4,395 734 39,598 701 15 to less than 20
254,917 67,316 − 1,706 21,254 44,356 91,649 95,952 1,064 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 1,040,769
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009          Apr 172,486 442 507 37 12 − − 35 − 9 − 71 801,441
         May 170,919 − 1,567 91 112 1 − − 1,733 − 17 − 19 807,298         June 176,166 5,247 5,338 19 7 − − 5 − 36 − 77 802,202
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including ber 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock market segment was closed down on
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises listed on the Open Market.
Market (the introduction of which marked the end of the division of organ- Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the Herausgebergemein-
ised trading segments into an official and a regulated market on 1 Novem- schaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate issued by German German
more than 9 more than 9 bonds German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including (non- managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.69
1998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 3.2 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.0 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 4.6 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 4.9 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009          Apr 3.3 3.1 3.0 3.1 3.8 4.2 6.3 4.5 122.56 100.90 260.30 4,769.45
         May 3.3 3.2 3.1 3.4 3.6 4.2 6.2 4.3 121.12 99.07 263.71 4,940.82         June 3.5 3.3 3.3 3.5 3.8 4.2 6.2 4.3 122.17 99.89 257.73 4,808.64
         July 3.3 3.2 3.1 3.3 3.5 4.0 5.2 4.0 121.69 100.65 283.77 5,332.14
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 43,172 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 23,637 35,094 14,676 5,221 20,418 18,416 8,0782007 55,022 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 41,586 51,083 − 229 4,240 51,312 37,346 3,9392008 697 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 8,608 6,517 − 16,625 − 9,252 23,142 17,860 − 5,820
2009          Apr 27 2,035 2,217 − 272 1,946 555 − 183 − 2,008 − 1,826 − 1,756 − 1,185 − 70 − 823 1,853
         May 1,041 977 2,455 − 371 2,165 709 − 1,478 64 506 3,006 4,435 − 2,500 − 4,371 535         June 644 − 2,689 400 − 504 101 897 − 3,089 3,333 3,060 − 2,012 − 487 5,072 3,820 − 2,416
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  € billion
2007 2008 2009 
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households 1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 42.5 85.9 121.0 22.1 16.5 38.4 6.4 14.6 12.9 87.1 9.4
Money market paper 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.2
Bonds 27.4 − 50.2 − 8.0 − 21.0 − 9.3 − 25.7 13.5 − 0.8 2.4 − 23.2 21.5
Shares − 5.0 − 16.5 − 45.5 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 12.0 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 9.0 − 33.0 − 2.0
Other equity 2.9 2.9 3.0 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7Mutual funds shares − 6.5 24.8 5.6 9.9 − 5.0 8.1 13.2 7.5 1.9 − 17.0 9.1
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 66.1 69.4 41.1 15.6 17.5 18.3 12.3 8.9 10.5 9.4 11.8
Short-term claims 2.1 1.1 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1
Longer-term claims 64.0 68.3 40.8 15.4 17.3 17.9 11.9 9.2 10.4 9.4 11.7
Claims from company
pension commitments 10.3 4.3 5.8 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.5
Other claims  3 − 4.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.2
Total 133.8 116.3 120.1 26.4 18.0 27.6 45.8 29.0 20.3 25.1 51.7
  II Financing
Loans − 5.1 − 18.9 − 15.4 − 2.1 − 3.2 − 3.6 − 9.8 0.9 − 1.1 − 5.4 − 7.5
Short-term loans − 5.4 − 1.2 1.2 0.7 − 0.9 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 0.6 1.4 − 0.4
Longer-term loans 0.3 − 17.7 − 16.6 − 2.8 − 2.3 − 4.6 − 9.1 0.9 − 1.6 − 6.8 − 7.1
Other liabilities − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.2
Total − 5.5 − 19.3 − 15.4 − 1.9 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 9.8 1.0 − 1.1 − 5.4 − 7.3
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 28.3 72.0 20.8 9.1 18.1 30.1 6.1 − 14.8 36.5 − 7.0 13.8
Money market paper 8.9 − 20.3 − 14.3 − 1.8 − 11.5 − 10.4 11.7 − 28.4 − 13.4 15.7 − 6.6
Bonds − 10.4 −109.7 2.2 − 4.3 − 44.2 − 43.0 − 51.4 1.6 10.8 41.3 − 33.3
Financial derivatives 1.4 45.2 14.4 6.2 16.6 16.7 10.5 8.3 0.0 − 4.4 − 1.6
Shares 11.2 56.9 128.8 30.3 14.4 21.4 16.5 69.1 15.8 27.3 18.2
Other equity 55.2 24.1 22.0 1.8 27.6 − 9.1 9.3 16.8 − 8.7 4.7 5.3
Mutual funds shares − 8.1 − 3.2 − 7.8 − 5.3 2.0 1.7 − 3.9 − 2.5 5.9 − 7.3 − 3.3
Loans 17.0 − 1.3 32.1 4.9 15.0 − 26.4 4.1 11.3 7.7 9.0 − 2.4
Short-term loans 11.3 − 5.6 27.7 1.5 7.5 − 20.6 − 1.2 14.3 6.6 8.0 − 2.6
Longer-term loans 5.7 4.3 4.4 3.3 7.5 − 5.8 5.3 − 3.0 1.1 1.0 0.2
Claims on insurancecorporations  
2 1.4 1.0 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Short-term claims 1.4 1.0 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 55.3 96.5 − 74.1 − 1.1 − 5.6 69.9 14.6 − 16.3 − 38.5 − 33.8 − 17.1
Total 160.2 161.3 124.4 39.8 32.5 51.3 17.6 45.1 16.2 45.5 − 27.1
  II Financing
Money market paper 0.8 18.6 3.6 4.5 − 0.2 8.4 9.5 − 6.5 0.4 0.2 − 13.5
Bonds 12.9 − 11.4 6.0 − 3.1 − 2.4 − 3.2 − 2.5 1.6 1.5 5.4 3.5
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 5.7 6.8 3.6 2.7 0.5 1.6 0.9 1.4 0.7 0.5 1.9
Other equity 33.0 26.7 13.6 1.2 10.7 8.9 6.6 3.0 1.0 2.9 3.2
Loans 72.0 46.4 71.4 5.9 5.2 14.9 − 5.9 14.8 23.4 39.2 11.0
Short-term loans 30.9 16.8 19.0 8.1 − 5.1 − 1.1 − 5.8 12.4 2.9 9.5 − 0.6
Longer-term loans 41.1 29.6 52.4 − 2.2 10.3 16.0 − 0.1 2.4 20.4 29.7 11.5
Claims from companypension commitments 8.2 1.3 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
Other liabilities − 2.7 13.6 − 5.5 − 4.2 − 0.7 1.5 9.4 − 1.6 4.1 − 17.4 17.6
Total 129.9 102.0 93.9 7.4 13.5 32.4 18.2 13.2 31.5 31.0 24.1
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2007 2008 2009 
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households 1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,534.8 1,620.8 1,737.5 1,565.8 1,582.4 1,620.8 1,627.2 1,642.0 1,650.6 1,737.5 1,746.8
Money market paper 2.0 1.7 1.6 1.9 1.8 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.4
Bonds 373.4 350.9 302.8 354.4 364.4 350.9 362.9 340.7 306.7 302.8 323.0
Shares 349.3 375.3 165.9 389.7 379.7 375.3 320.6 298.0 255.5 165.9 140.7
Other equity 200.7 171.8 178.2 199.9 197.1 171.8 175.1 177.5 185.0 178.2 180.0Mutual funds shares 515.3 545.6 497.2 544.0 538.8 545.6 535.7 539.9 527.9 497.2 495.6
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 1,118.9 1,187.9 1,228.9 1,152.3 1,169.7 1,187.9 1,200.1 1,209.0 1,219.5 1,228.9 1,240.7
Short-term claims 79.7 80.8 81.1 80.2 80.4 80.8 81.2 81.0 81.1 81.1 81.2
Longer-term claims 1,039.2 1,107.1 1,147.7 1,072.1 1,089.3 1,107.1 1,118.9 1,128.0 1,138.4 1,147.7 1,159.5
Claims from company
pension commitments 250.8 255.1 260.9 252.9 254.0 255.1 256.5 257.9 259.4 260.9 262.4
Other claims  3 46.7 42.6 39.8 44.7 43.7 42.6 41.9 41.2 40.5 39.8 39.6
Total 4,391.9 4,551.7 4,412.9 4,505.7 4,531.7 4,551.7 4,521.6 4,507.7 4,446.5 4,412.9 4,430.2
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,557.0 1,538.5 1,523.2 1,545.5 1,542.1 1,538.5 1,527.3 1,528.2 1,527.2 1,523.2 1,515.9
Short-term loans 80.2 78.9 80.0 79.2 77.9 78.9 78.1 78.1 78.7 80.0 79.6
Longer-term loans 1,476.8 1,459.6 1,443.1 1,466.3 1,464.2 1,459.6 1,449.2 1,450.1 1,448.5 1,443.1 1,436.3
Other liabilities 9.6 8.7 9.2 11.0 10.9 8.7 10.1 9.8 10.1 9.2 10.6
Total 1,566.6 1,547.2 1,532.4 1,556.5 1,553.0 1,547.2 1,537.5 1,538.0 1,537.3 1,532.4 1,526.4
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 411.3 477.0 507.4 433.8 447.3 477.0 474.7 471.9 508.1 507.4 517.4
Money market paper 35.5 29.7 12.4 40.1 27.6 29.7 31.6 9.2 0.2 12.4 3.4
Bonds 132.6 80.1 85.0 109.0 70.7 80.1 28.5 31.3 44.1 85.0 50.2
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 899.3 1,066.1 655.8 1,022.0 1,014.2 1,066.1 940.1 951.5 874.6 655.8 592.3
Other equity 310.4 281.4 309.2 312.6 334.5 281.4 294.7 314.3 317.4 309.2 316.3Mutual funds shares 106.5 109.5 67.9 104.9 107.6 109.5 81.0 81.0 85.3 67.9 60.0
Loans 161.8 176.3 204.8 175.0 186.3 176.3 183.2 195.2 200.7 204.8 206.2
Short-term loans 120.1 130.1 151.4 129.9 133.6 130.1 129.9 142.0 145.4 151.4 149.7
Longer-term loans 41.8 46.2 53.4 45.0 52.6 46.2 53.3 53.3 55.3 53.4 56.6
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 42.8 43.8 44.2 43.2 43.3 43.8 43.9 44.0 44.1 44.2 44.3
Short-term claims 42.8 43.8 44.2 43.2 43.3 43.8 43.9 44.0 44.1 44.2 44.3
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 447.9 500.4 583.1 469.9 489.7 500.4 521.4 538.2 571.4 583.1 595.6
Total 2,548.2 2,764.3 2,469.8 2,710.4 2,721.4 2,764.3 2,599.1 2,636.6 2,645.9 2,469.8 2,385.8
  II Liabilities
Money market paper 17.9 36.5 40.2 28.4 28.2 36.5 46.0 39.6 42.9 40.2 26.7
Bonds 91.1 82.2 96.8 83.8 84.2 82.2 82.3 78.9 81.6 96.8 102.5Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,336.7 1,564.3 963.5 1,545.1 1,544.3 1,564.3 1,322.0 1,266.1 1,154.1 963.5 814.4
Other equity 636.9 663.6 677.2 644.0 654.7 663.6 670.1 673.2 674.2 677.2 680.3
Loans 1,348.3 1,405.9 1,485.2 1,383.4 1,387.8 1,405.9 1,400.7 1,421.5 1,443.9 1,485.2 1,502.9
Short-term loans 370.2 396.5 409.2 394.5 388.3 396.5 384.4 397.4 397.8 409.2 407.5
Longer-term loans 978.1 1,009.4 1,076.0 988.8 999.5 1,009.4 1,016.2 1,024.2 1,046.0 1,076.0 1,095.4
Claims from companypension commitments 214.2 215.5 216.7 214.9 215.2 215.5 215.8 216.1 216.4 216.7 217.1
Other liabilities 388.5 432.6 470.0 412.0 425.9 432.6 439.6 448.8 455.6 470.0 533.4
Total 4,033.6 4,400.5 3,949.5 4,311.6 4,340.3 4,400.5 4,176.5 4,144.1 4,068.7 3,949.5 3,877.2
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2003 − 87.2 − 39.6 − 32.7 − 7.1 − 7.7 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.4
2004 − 83.5 − 52.0 − 27.9 − 2.4 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
2005 p − 74.1 − 47.5 − 22.6 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
2006 p − 35.6 − 34.3 − 10.3 + 4.0 + 5.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2
2007 p − 4.0 − 26.0 + 3.4 + 8.3 + 10.4 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4
2008 pe − 3.1 − 14.4 − 4.3 + 7.3 + 8.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3
2007          H1  p + 4.2 − 10.2 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 6.7 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.6
         H2  p − 8.4 − 16.0 − 0.4 + 4.3 + 3.7 − 0.7 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3
2008          H1  pe + 6.1 − 7.1 + 3.0 + 5.6 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.4
         H2  pe − 9.3 − 7.4 − 7.3 + 1.7 + 3.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2003 1,381.0 845.4 435.3 111.5 5.3 63.8 39.1 20.1 5.2 0.2
2004 1,451.3 887.1 459.7 116.3 4.2 65.6 40.1 20.8 5.3 0.2
2005 1,521.9 933.0 481.9 120.0 2.7 67.8 41.6 21.5 5.4 0.1
2006 1,569.0 968.6 491.6 122.4 1.7 67.6 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.12007 1,576.6 976.9 493.0 120.0 1.6 65.1 40.3 20.3 5.0 0.1
2008
pe 1,641.8 1,004.8 531.7 117.9 1.5 65.9 40.3 21.3 4.7 0.1
2007          Q1 1,573.5 973.0 492.4 121.5 1.4 66.9 41.4 20.9 5.2 0.1
         Q2 1,592.2 995.6 488.6 121.4 1.5 67.0 41.9 20.6 5.1 0.1         Q3 1,573.4 978.0 488.8 119.8 1.6 65.5 40.7 20.4 5.0 0.1         Q4 1,576.6 976.9 493.0 120.0 1.6 65.1 40.3 20.3 5.0 0.1
2008          Q1  
pe 1,595.2 986.9 503.2 118.1 1.6 65.3 40.4 20.6 4.8 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,630.9 995.0 530.3 118.5 1.6 66.0 40.3 21.5 4.8 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,624.9 993.1 526.9 117.4 2.0 65.3 39.9 21.2 4.7 0.1
         Q4  pe 1,641.8 1,004.8 531.7 117.9 1.5 65.9 40.3 21.3 4.7 0.1
2009          Q1  pe 1,673.2 1,026.2 540.7 118.5 1.6 68.0 41.7 22.0 4.8 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined according to the national accounts. — 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2003 961.9 481.8 396.3 83.9 1,049.2 594.2 169.2 64.3 33.9 187.6 − 87.3 889.3
2004 957.7 481.3 396.5 79.9 1,041.2 592.0 169.6 62.4 31.7 185.5 − 83.5 888.0
2005 p 976.2 493.2 396.5 86.6 1,050.5 597.2 168.7 62.3 31.0 191.3 − 74.3 900.5
2006 p 1,016.4 530.5 399.9 86.0 1,052.3 597.9 167.5 65.3 32.6 189.1 − 35.9 941.7
2007 p 1,065.9 576.3 399.9 89.8 1,070.1 596.7 168.0 67.4 35.6 202.5 − 4.2 988.2
2008 pe 1,091.2 593.0 408.1 90.1 1,094.3 606.9 171.5 67.8 38.0 210.2 − 3.2 1,013.8
as a percentage of GDP
2003 44.5 22.3 18.3 3.9 48.5 27.5 7.8 3.0 1.6 8.7 − 4.0 41.1
2004 43.3 21.8 17.9 3.6 47.1 26.8 7.7 2.8 1.4 8.4 − 3.8 40.2
2005 p 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.9 46.8 26.6 7.5 2.8 1.4 8.5 − 3.3 40.1
2006 p 43.8 22.9 17.2 3.7 45.3 25.8 7.2 2.8 1.4 8.1 − 1.5 40.6
2007 p 44.0 23.8 16.5 3.7 44.2 24.6 6.9 2.8 1.5 8.4 − 0.2 40.8
2008 pe 43.8 23.8 16.4 3.6 43.9 24.4 6.9 2.7 1.5 8.4 − 0.1 40.7
Percentage growth rates
2003 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.6 − 6.1 + 2.2 . + 1.1
2004 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 6.4 − 1.1 . − 0.1
2005 p + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 8.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.3 + 3.1 . + 1.4
2006 p + 4.1 + 7.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 4.7 + 5.3 − 1.2 . + 4.6
2007 p + 4.9 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 4.4 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 3.2 + 9.2 + 7.1 . + 4.9
2008 pe + 2.4 + 2.9 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 6.7 + 3.8 . + 2.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2002 p 554.7 441.7 20.5 610.4 173.3 226.8 66.1 38.7 11.3 − 55.8 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 927.7 991.8 − 64.1
2003 pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.2 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.2 467.6 474.4 − 6.8 925.2 999.1 − 73.9
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.5
2008 pe 668.4 561.2 13.0 677.6 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.3 18.6 − 9.2 484.3 477.8 + 6.4 1,056.8 1,059.6 − 2.8
2006          Q1 p 131.4 106.3 3.8 160.4 40.6 65.6 25.1 4.8 2.9 − 29.0 120.5 116.6 + 3.9 229.0 254.1 − 25.1
         Q2 p 144.3 121.8 4.1 139.9 40.7 59.9 9.5 6.4 2.5 + 4.5 122.2 117.1 + 5.0 245.1 235.6 + 9.5
         Q3 p 146.4 121.8 5.9 156.0 40.6 61.2 20.5 8.4 2.6 − 9.5 117.0 115.2 + 1.7 241.4 249.2 − 7.8
         Q4 p 166.0 138.7 4.1 167.8 46.1 64.3 9.0 12.9 3.5 − 1.8 127.2 117.2 + 10.0 271.1 263.0 + 8.1
2007          Q1 p 149.4 122.3 2.8 164.5 42.7 64.9 25.5 5.3 3.4 − 15.1 112.2 115.6 − 3.4 238.4 256.9 − 18.5
         Q2 p 158.5 136.9 3.0 144.5 43.9 58.4 10.0 6.7 2.5 + 14.0 119.0 116.3 + 2.7 253.8 237.0 + 16.7
         Q3 p 155.4 131.6 3.6 160.5 44.2 59.8 21.3 8.6 1.6 − 5.1 116.2 115.6 + 0.6 248.2 252.8 − 4.6
         Q4 p 180.5 147.6 7.9 172.9 49.7 65.1 9.1 12.7 1.9 + 7.5 126.9 117.8 + 9.1 283.9 267.3 + 16.6
2008          Q1 p 160.0 130.8 3.0 164.7 43.7 65.5 24.7 5.3 2.0 − 4.6 114.1 119.4 − 5.3 250.4 260.3 − 10.0
         Q2 p 166.1 143.5 2.1 151.5 44.9 61.4 11.1 7.2 1.7 + 14.6 120.6 120.1 + 0.5 263.0 247.9 + 15.1
         Q3 p 159.7 137.2 1.3 167.1 45.9 62.6 21.2 9.0 1.5 − 7.4 118.6 118.9 − 0.3 254.5 262.2 − 7.7
         Q4 p 180.5 149.3 6.4 192.5 51.2 68.7 10.0 13.5 13.3 − 12.0 130.4 121.7 + 8.7 287.0 290.2 − 3.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- are estimated. — 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets but excluding the Post Office here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrep-
pension funds. Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations ancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local govern-of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include muni- ment. — 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
cipal special purpose associations and various special accounts. — 2The of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Fed-
latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors eral Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Of fice. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2002 240.8 273.5 − 32.7 228.8 258.0 − 29.2 147.0 150.0 − 3.0
2003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 149.9 − 7.82004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006
pe 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 249.8 260.1 − 10.3 161.1 157.4 + 3.7
2007 pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 278.8 278.0 + 0.8 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2006          Q1 52.7 74.1 − 21.4 57.3 64.9 − 7.6 33.8 36.4 − 2.6
         Q2 63.0 61.6 + 1.5 60.6 60.1 + 0.4 37.7 36.8 + 0.9
         Q3 64.6 73.7 − 9.1 60.5 62.5 − 2.1 40.3 38.1 + 2.2
         Q4 p 74.3 73.5 + 0.8 70.5 71.2 − 0.7 46.9 44.5 + 2.5
2007          Q1 p 61.1 74.6 − 13.6 63.5 66.5 − 3.0 35.4 37.6 − 2.1
         Q2 p 69.7 64.4 + 5.3 67.6 61.9 + 5.7 40.4 37.3 + 3.1
         Q3 p 68.3 76.8 − 8.5 66.2 64.1 + 2.1 42.5 39.7 + 2.8
         Q4 p 78.3 76.3 + 2.0 77.9 73.4 + 4.5 51.0 46.1 + 4.9
2008          Q1 p 64.1 75.6 − 11.5 67.7 67.7 − 0.1 37.3 37.4 − 0.1
         Q2 p 73.0 68.3 + 4.7 70.7 64.2 + 6.5 42.7 39.7 + 3.0
         Q3 p 71.2 82.7 − 11.4 67.3 66.3 + 1.0 43.8 41.1 + 2.7
         Q4 pe 83.7 77.3 + 6.4 72.1 78.6 − 6.5 51.0 49.0 + 2.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based
istical Office. — 1The Bundesbank’s profit is included only up to the max- on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly
imum amount of €3.5 billion that is to be assigned to the core budget. Rev- figures do not include various special accounts and municipal special pur-
enue over and above this amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund pose associations. 
for Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including the local authority level of the
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total government  1 government European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 of energy tax
2002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 18,560 52,490 + 51 22,321
2003 442,238 390,438 214,002 155,510 20,926 51,673 + 127 22,0672004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,7422007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,6432008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2007          Q1 122,550 104,537 53,928 43,916 6,693 13,313 + 4,700 5,362
         Q2 136,963 118,090 65,298 49,069 3,724 18,217 + 655 5,408         Q3 131,495 113,712 61,592 46,875 5,246 17,882 − 99 5,524         Q4 147,236 129,215 70,929 51,699 6,587 23,138 − 5,117 5,348
2008          Q1 131,507 111,845 56,179 47,660 8,006 14,148 + 5,513 5,272
         Q2 143,006 122,931 66,952 51,585 4,394 19,614 + 461 5,324         Q3 137,454 117,861 65,380 48,667 3,814 19,715 − 122 5,503         Q4 149,216 131,545 72,178 52,500 6,867 23,712 − 6,042 5,411
2009          Q1 ... 109,674 55,941 46,212 7,521 ... ... 5,154
         Q2 ... 113,442 65,247 46,653 1,541 ... ... 5,140
2008          June . 48,369 26,874 20,367 1,128 . . 1,7752009          June . 44,007 27,394 18,193 −1,580 . . 1,713
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- ment taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 4Difference be-
bank calculations. — 1Before deducting supplementary central government tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received by the state
grants and shares in energy tax revenue remitted to state government. — government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) and the
2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 
the EU from central government tax revenue. — 3Including local govern-
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,4092004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,2632008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,303 21,937 4,002 31,316
2007          Q1 110,577 43,694 30,464 829 5,434 6,966 42,037 32,624 9,413 153 17,377 6,354 962 6,040
         Q2 125,236 55,351 32,244 8,191 6,224 8,693 41,001 30,642 10,359 1,705 20,694 5,493 992 7,145         Q3 120,644 48,742 31,416 7,299 5,571 4,456 42,612 31,724 10,888 1,850 20,750 5,671 1,019 6,932         Q4 137,361 56,912 37,649 8,709 5,700 4,854 43,986 32,532 11,454 3,267 26,868 5,318 1,010 8,146
2008          Q1 118,847 49,649 32,793 3,668 4,727 8,462 44,294 33,488 10,806 297 17,515 6,114 980 7,002
         Q2 130,829 60,000 34,700 10,398 4,821 10,080 41,890 30,645 11,244 1,636 20,700 5,676 927 7,898         Q3 125,510 52,135 34,063 8,878 4,086 5,109 44,339 32,705 11,633 1,690 20,888 5,442 1,017 7,648         Q4 140,312 58,699 40,340 9,741 2,235 6,384 45,468 33,951 11,517 3,161 27,200 4,705 1,080 8,767
2009          Q1 116,731 50,001 33,975 2,971 4,399 8,657 43,087 34,234 8,853 − 36 17,361 5,351 966 7,057
         Q2 120,543 48,503 30,481 9,141 342 8,539 43,424 35,176 8,248 1,499 21,085 5,186 846 7,102
2008          June 51,823 27,967 11,988 8,616 5,188 2,176 14,276 10,614 3,663 15 7,473 1,787 305 3,454
2009          June 47,285 23,205 11,360 7,964 2,395 1,486 14,498 11,911 2,587 10 7,623 1,684 266 3,278
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. — 1This sion plans. — 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equal- non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5The allocation of revenue to central,
isation of burdens levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular interv als, is
to central and state government), real property taxes and other local govern- regulated in section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percen t-
ment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2008:
percentage share of central, state and local government in revenue: wage 54.4:43.6:2. The EU share is deducted from central government’s share. —
tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed 6Respective percentage share of central and state government for 2008:
taxes on earnings 50:50:-, withholding tax on interest income 44:44:12. — 19.9:80.1. — 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
3After deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pen-
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax city tax tax Other tax buildings tax Other  2 Total tax taxes
2002 42,192 13,778 10,403 8,327 5,097 2,149 1,548 7,592 4,763 3,021 3,200 33,447 23,489 9,261
2003 43,188 14,094 10,280 8,870 6,531 2,204 1,442 7,336 4,800 3,373 3,205 34,477 24,139 9,658
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,3992007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,7132008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2007          Q1 4,540 2,916 2,949 4,504 1,647 416 406 2,636 1,828 1,150 740 12,126 9,541 2,408
         Q2 9,230 3,462 3,249 1,912 1,997 493 352 2,206 1,606 1,006 675 13,432 10,457 2,841
         Q3 9,904 3,774 2,875 2,049 1,319 509 322 2,098 1,860 1,043 670 12,701 9,404 3,147
         Q4 15,281 4,103 3,277 1,866 1,392 541 408 1,958 1,659 1,004 698 13,142 10,714 2,317
2008          Q1 4,668 2,547 3,192 4,540 1,547 626 394 2,590 1,676 1,087 761 12,956 10,330 2,444
         Q2 9,570 3,267 3,502 1,950 1,594 479 338 2,290 1,461 1,301 624 13,813 10,850 2,815         Q3 9,807 3,649 3,059 2,078 1,464 488 343 2,050 1,398 1,361 632 13,634 10,281 3,184         Q4 15,203 4,111 3,392 1,911 1,655 533 396 1,912 1,193 1,022 579 12,065 9,577 2,364
2009          Q1 4,777 2,365 3,191 4,502 1,560 594 372 2,284 1,165 1,144 758 ... ... ...
         Q2 10,059 3,560 3,057 1,999 1,569 478 363 2,114 1,131 1,334 608 ... ... ...
2008          June 3,362 1,024 1,596 595 632 170 94 691 426 467 204 . . .2009          June 3,641 1,166 1,334 595 611 162 114 688 386 408 202 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- betting, lottery and beer tax.   
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2Notably
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total payments insurance  3 surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004 7 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,8192008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2007          Q1 56,177 37,771 18,118 58,275 50,369 3,279 − 2,098 7,955 7,585 215 46 108 4,889
         Q2 59,068 40,501 18,180 58,595 50,282 3,432 + 473 8,890 8,573 165 48 103 4,881         Q3 57,996 39,494 18,115 59,054 50,633 3,470 − 1,058 8,025 7,598 265 45 117 4,868         Q4 62,926 44,452 18,136 59,159 50,638 3,475 + 3,767 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008          Q1 57,611 39,028 18,241 58,952 50,795 3,473 − 1,341 10,730 9,459 1,095 46 130 4,792
         Q2 60,574 41,958 18,241 59,346 50,714 3,482 + 1,228 11,923 10,267 1,466 61 128 4,704         Q3 59,525 40,769 18,215 60,124 51,418 3,539 − 599 11,727 10,421 1,128 50 127 4,690         Q4 64,495 45,851 18,231 60,100 51,301 3,548 + 4,395 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009          Q1 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618
         Q2 60,812 42,140 18,384 60,252 51,410 3,626 + 560 15,280 15,082 15 59 124 4,593
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for cash benefits. — 3Including long-term care insurance for pensioners until
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do not 2004 Q1. — 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year
tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. In- or quarter. — 5Including cash. — 6Excluding loans to other social security
cluding financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending funds. — 7 Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loansfrom
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 2,215 − 5,623 5,623
2003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,2152004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 02007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2007          Q1 9,932 7,738 78 10,044 5,321 3,971 1,350 2,032 1,370 662 408 − 113 −
         Q2 10,837 7,910 303 9,383 4,598 3,440 1,157 2,089 1,423 666 259 + 1,454 −         Q3 10,366 7,765 232 8,357 3,910 2,979 931 1,985 1,363 622 160 + 2,010 −         Q4 11,703 8,851 357 8,412 3,528 2,684 843 2,264 1,591 674 122 + 3,292 −
2008          Q1 8,714 5,955 83 11,295 4,299 3,183 1,116 2,088 1,473 615 327 − 2,581 −
         Q2 9,690 6,931 211 10,367 3,739 2,761 978 2,182 1,556 626 255 − 677 −         Q3 9,330 6,317 272 8,648 3,245 2,442 804 2,053 1,462 592 149 + 683 −         Q4 10,555 7,248 409 9,098 3,001 2,267 733 2,389 1,731 657 189 + 1,458 −
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
         Q2 6,490 5,421 261 12,391 5,563 4,376 1,187 2,893 2,193 700 491 − 5,901 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government schemes. 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabili-
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- tation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agen-
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a compen- cies, compensation top-up payments and business start-up grants. —
satory amount or a reintegration payment to central government. — 4Un- 7Promotion of winter construction and insolvency compensation for em-
employment benefit and short-time working benefit. — 5Including contri- ployees. 
butions to the statutory health, pension and long-term care insurance
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Thera- Adminis-
peutical trative
Contri- Federal Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 grant Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  3 and aids benefits iture  4 surplus  5 
2002 139,707 136,208 . 143,026 46,308 23,449 23,407 11,492 9,304 7,561 8,019 − 3,320
2003 141,654 138,383 . 145,095 46,800 24,218 24,301 11,819 9,409 6,973 8,206 − 3,4412004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,260 47,594 21,811 22,955 11,263 8,281 6,367 8,196 + 4,020
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,6322007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,7442008 162,763 156,130 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,889 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,429
2007          Q1 36,437 35,693 − 37,147 12,948 6,687 6,123 2,670 1,918 1,525 1,879 − 710
         Q2 39,316 37,306 1,250 38,299 12,893 6,862 6,163 2,697 2,160 1,510 1,930 + 1,017         Q3 37,939 37,138 − 38,068 12,750 6,897 6,062 2,552 2,199 1,451 1,987 − 129         Q4 41,987 39,829 1,250 40,384 12,363 7,313 6,481 2,797 2,378 1,527 2,618 + 1,602
2008          Q1 37,937 37,136 − 39,010 13,410 7,084 6,409 2,711 2,011 1,643 1,898 − 1,073
         Q2 40,361 38,491 1,250 40,232 13,387 7,339 6,434 2,728 2,292 1,644 2,021 + 129         Q3 39,185 38,338 − 39,733 13,012 7,215 6,415 2,660 2,271 1,602 2,045 − 548         Q4 44,387 41,838 1,250 42,165 12,913 7,588 6,812 2,894 2,461 1,672 2,704 + 2,222
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. In-
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — 2In- cluding administrative expenditure on disease management pro-
cluding contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. — grammes. — 5Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk struc-
3Including dentures. — 4Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex- ture compensation scheme. 
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2002 16,917 16,714 17,346 2,363 8,014 4,151 962 837 − 428
2003 16,844 16,665 17,468 2,361 8,183 4,090 951 853 − 624
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 3152007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 3502008
p 19,768 19,612 19,141 2,602 9,052 4,238 869 939 + 627
2007          Q1 4,301 4,265 4,591 624 2,191 1,014 212 238 − 290
         Q2 4,469 4,432 4,528 595 2,192 993 213 231 − 59         Q3 4,440 4,403 4,617 623 2,226 1,012 216 213 − 177
         Q4 4,813 4,761 4,608 626 2,218 1,015 217 209 + 204
2008          Q1 4,421 4,381 4,681 641 2,229 1,022 210 255 − 261
         Q2 4,597 4,563 4,703 634 2,251 1,025 221 230 − 106         Q3 5,167 5,133 4,872 665 2,280 1,089 218 234 + 295         Q4 5,583 5,535 4,884 662 2,293 1,103 219 220 + 698
2009          Q1 5,110 5,082 4,970 676 2,284 1,104 215 274 + 139
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally 2Since 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — income subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  2 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2002 + 178,203 + 24,327 + 2,221 + 22 2002 1,277,667 4,440 536,900 137 238,390 497,800
2003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 1,236 + 7,218 2003 1,358,137 4,440 530,700 341 301,956 520,700
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,200 430 306,912 574,600
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 312,401 653,200
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,900 480 329,577 702,3002007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 457,000 476 313,065 765,4002008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008
p 1,564,122 4,440 441,200 516 317,966 800,000
2007          Q1 + 68,285 + 4,600 + 12,649 − 11,200 2007          Q1 1,538,621 4,440 513,900 480 321,201 698,600
         Q2 + 54,415 + 22,020 + 5,792 + 27,209          Q2 1,556,684 4,440 504,600 480 320,564 726,600
         Q3 + 51,413 − 20,291 − 4,783 − 27,450          Q3 1,535,253 4,440 489,000 480 308,433 732,900
         Q4 + 40,882 + 667 − 12,571 + 6,541          Q4 1,540,381 4,440 457,000 476 313,065 765,400
2008          Q1 + 69,510 + 10,443 + 12,306 − 705 2008          Q1 p 1,541,759 4,440 467,300 475 306,144 763,400
         Q2 + 52,618 + 7,478 + 4,872 + 10,289          Q2 p 1,554,151 4,440 462,200 506 292,606 794,400
         Q3 + 53,933 − 2,231 − 10,736 − 12,088          Q3 p 1,547,336 4,440 431,900 506 299,190 811,300
         Q4 + 57,296 + 10,519 + 447 + 11,541          Q4 p 1,564,122 4,440 441,200 516 317,966 800,000
2009          Q1 + 66,560 + 20,334 − 2,256 − 7,856 2009          Q1 pe 1,593,973 4,440 425,900 519 348,814 814,300
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  -  Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 Including  Financial  Market  Stabilisa- Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
tion Fund (SoFFin). — 2 After deducting repurchases. as a residual. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isationor quarter Total (Bubills)  
1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2003 1,358,137 36,022 246,414 153,611 12,810 471,115 . 396,832 341 34,163 6,711 119
2004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 . 379,984 430 53,672 5,572 842005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 . 366,978 488 62,765 4,443 88
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 82
2007          Q4 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008          Q1 1,541,759 39,467 325,481 173,295 9,885 579,072 . 336,845 475 72,726 4,443 72
         Q2 1,554,151 39,655 328,980 168,938 9,816 586,050 . 343,931 506 71,761 4,443 72         Q3 1,547,336 42,816 332,792 177,594 9,415 579,969 701 326,582 506 72,445 4,443 74         Q4
p 1,564,122 44,870 337,662 172,037 9,649 584,155 3,174 331,219 516 76,326 4,443 73
2009          Q1 pe 1,593,973 70,315 341,169 177,859 9,436 586,340 3,413 319,911 519 80,494 4,443 74
Central government 7,8,9,10
2003 767,713 35,235 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 . 38,146 223 7,326 6,711 118
2004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 . 34,835 333 10,751 5,572 832005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 . 29,318 408 10,710 4,443 87
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 82
2007          Q4 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008          Q1 950,431 37,774 101,205 173,295 9,885 578,816 . 33,649 408 10,886 4,443 71
         Q2 957,909 37,136 101,932 168,938 9,816 585,794 . 38,496 438 10,845 4,443 71         Q3 955,678 40,316 105,361 177,594 9,415 579,713 701 26,980 438 10,644 4,443 74
         Q4 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009          Q1 986,530 64,653 104,571 177,859 9,436 586,225 3,413 24,804 448 10,605 4,443 74
State government
2003 423,737 787 154,189 .... 244,902 4 23,854 . 1
2004 448,672 1,282 179,620 .... 228,644 3 39,122 . 1
2005 471,375 847 201,146 .... 221,163 3 48,216 . 1
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007          Q4 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008          Q1 477,396 1,693 224,276 .... 193,385 2 58,039 . 1
         Q2 481,875 2,519 227,048 .... 195,189 3 57,116 . 1
         Q3 478,495 2,500 227,430 .... 190,560 3 58,001 . 1
         Q4 p 483,585 4,075 231,978 .... 185,677 3 61,852 . 1
2009          Q1 p 492,771 5,661 236,599 .... 184,415 6 66,090 . 1
Local government 11
2003 107,857 . 77 . . 734 . 104,469 106 2,471 . .
2004 112,538 . − . . 812 . 108,231 86 3,410 . .2005 116,033 . − . . 466 . 111,889 77 3,601 . .
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007          Q4 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008          Q1 113,932 . − . . 256 . 109,811 65 3,800 . .
         Q2 114,367 . − . . 256 . 110,246 65 3,800 . .         Q3 113,163 . − . . 256 . 109,042 65 3,800 . .
         Q4
p 114,341 . − . . 225 . 110,251 65 3,800 . .
2009          Q1 pe 114,672 . − . . 114 . 110,693 65 3,800 . .
Special funds 7,8,9,12
2003 58,830 − 4,610 10,185 . 34,201 . 9,315 8 512 . .
2004 57,250 − 4,538 9,685 . 34,355 . 8,274 8 389 . .2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 . 4,609 − 238 . .
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007          Q4 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical trast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the joi nt issu-
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including ance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. — 8On 1
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term January 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans fund is recorded under central government. — 9On 1 July 2007 central
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Specia l
vestment assistance levy. — 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded
claims. — 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance under central government. — 10From December 2008, including debt of
with the London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing con- the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin). — 11Including debt of
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figure s
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the have been estimated. — 12ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June 2007),
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
their home country; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. — 7In con-
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2007   2008   2009
  2006   2007   2008   2006   2007   2008   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 114.0 119.9 120.3 5.9 5.2 0.4 5.4 4.7 2.8 6.4 1.0 − 8.1 − 20.2
Construction 77.4 79.4 82.1 − 2.3 2.6 3.5 − 1.4 − 1.7 2.4 6.9 3.2 1.3 − 8.9
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 110.5 111.0 113.2 4.2 0.5 2.0 0.6 − 1.1 2.8 4.0 2.1 − 0.9 − 6.4
Financing, renting and business
services  2 108.2 112.2 114.3 2.1 3.6 1.9 3.2 3.0 2.5 2.6 1.8 0.8 − 0.9
Public and private services  3 103.7 105.1 106.0 0.7 1.3 0.9 1.3 1.7 0.8 1.1 1.0 0.5 0.0
Gross value added 107.3 110.4 111.9 2.9 2.9 1.4 2.7 2.3 2.2 3.7 1.6 − 1.9 − 7.1
Gross domestic product  4 106.1 108.7 110.1 3.0 2.5 1.3 2.4 1.6 2.1 3.4 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.7
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 102.5 102.1 102.2 1.0 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 − 1.0 0.2 0.5 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1
Government consumption 102.7 105.0 106.8 0.6 2.2 1.8 2.3 1.8 1.5 2.2 1.9 1.4 0.8
Machinery and equipment 111.0 118.7 125.7 11.1 6.9 5.9 6.5 7.5 6.7 11.8 8.4 − 1.7 − 18.6
Premises 86.5 88.0 90.7 5.0 1.8 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.8 1.8 6.1 3.1 0.7 − 7.8
Other investment  6 126.6 136.7 145.6 8.0 8.0 6.5 9.6 8.8 8.4 5.9 6.2 5.9 10.8
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . 0.0 0.1 0.5 0.0 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 0.3 2.0 0.6
Domestic use 100.0 101.1 103.0 2.1 1.1 1.8 1.0 1.2 1.1 2.2 2.0 1.9 − 1.3Net exports  
8 . . . 1.0 1.4 − 0.4 1.5 0.5 1.0 1.3 − 0.5 − 3.4 − 5.5
Exports 152.2 163.5 167.9 12.7 7.5 2.7 8.3 2.8 5.9 7.4 3.9 − 5.9 − 17.2
Imports 134.4 141.1 147.1 11.9 5.0 4.2 5.5 2.2 4.3 5.4 5.7 1.5 − 7.0
Gross domestic product  4 106.1 108.7 110.1 3.0 2.5 1.3 2.4 1.6 2.1 3.4 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.7
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,355.1 1,373.7 1,404.6 2.3 1.4 2.2 1.9 1.2 2.5 2.9 2.8 0.8 − 0.1
Government consumption 425.4 435.6 451.7 1.3 2.4 3.7 2.6 2.2 3.2 4.6 3.9 3.1 3.8Machinery and equipment 178.1 189.4 199.0 9.8 6.3 5.1 5.9 6.7 5.7 10.6 7.6 − 2.2 − 19.6
Premises 218.6 236.4 251.3 7.5 8.1 6.3 4.9 2.5 4.6 9.2 7.0 3.9 − 5.6
Other investment  
6 26.4 27.7 28.4 3.9 5.1 2.4 5.4 5.3 2.8 3.0 2.7 1.3 − 1.8
Changes in inventories  7 − 13.7 − 10.9 2.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,190.0 2,251.9 2,336.9 3.1 2.8 3.8 2.6 3.4 3.0 4.5 4.3 3.3 − 0.6Net exports 131.5 171.0 154.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,052.7 1,137.2 1,177.0 14.3 8.0 3.5 8.5 2.9 6.4 8.2 5.4 − 5.5 − 19.2Imports 921.2 966.2 1,022.6 14.9 4.9 5.8 4.8 2.6 6.1 8.0 9.4 0.0 − 11.9
Gross domestic product  
4 2,321.5 2,422.9 2,491.4 3.5 4.4 2.8 4.4 3.5 3.4 4.8 2.8 0.5 − 5.1
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 108.9 110.8 113.2 1.3 1.7 2.1 1.8 2.3 2.3 2.4 2.6 1.4 − 0.0Gross domestic product 106.1 108.1 109.8 0.5 1.9 1.5 2.0 1.9 1.3 1.4 1.4 2.2 1.7Terms of trade 99.9 100.5 99.8 − 1.3 0.7 − 0.8 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.6 − 2.0 1.9 3.1
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,149.5 1,183.6 1,224.6 1.7 3.0 3.5 2.6 2.9 3.4 3.4 3.9 3.2 0.9Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 616.1 643.5 660.0 8.7 4.5 2.6 6.8 2.8 5.7 9.7 1.4 − 6.4 − 20.9
National income 1,765.6 1,827.1 1,884.6 4.1 3.5 3.1 4.1 2.9 4.3 5.6 2.9 0.1 − 7.4
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,362.4 2,464.2 2,531.9 4.0 4.3 2.7 4.5 3.5 3.4 4.6 2.9 0.3 − 5.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2009. — 1Includ- ucts). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangi-
ing communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- ble fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment,
ties, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home services. — literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net increase
4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on prod- in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
Motor basic metals electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2004 96.8 105.2 99.7 96.0 96.8 94.9 99.6 95.9 98.2 91.7 94.7 95.7
2005 99.7 99.5 100.1 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.6 99.8 99.5 99.7
2006 105.4 105.8 101.0 105.8 107.1 106.0 107.3 101.7 107.3 112.9 107.5 102.62007 111.6 108.9 98.2 113.1 114.6 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.4 109.72008 111.5 108.2 95.6 113.4 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.9 124.5 104.4
2007          Oct 120.2 126.1 103.2 121.5 121.9 124.1 121.3 113.6 121.5 136.7 127.2 119.2
         Nov 120.8 118.3 107.8 122.4 120.1 128.5 120.8 112.7 121.6 140.7 129.8 122.0
         Dec 107.7 87.8 109.7 108.8 101.8 119.0 99.5 101.6 101.0 123.9 137.0 90.1
2008          Jan 106.5 78.6 104.8 108.4 112.3 107.3 101.8 102.7 111.8 122.7 108.4 104.4
         Feb 109.4 85.2 97.9 112.1 114.1 115.1 107.3 100.2 114.6 125.9 115.5 116.0         Mar 120.9 99.5 105.3 123.9 125.9 128.2 117.5 109.1 127.3 140.5 133.8 124.7
         Apr 114.2 110.2 99.7 115.9 119.0 119.1 107.1 101.5 119.9 127.7 123.9 116.6
         May 111.1 114.5 92.9 112.7 117.2 114.2 97.0 100.7 117.7 126.2 119.4 106.5         June 116.2 120.4 87.1 118.9 120.3 124.8 106.3 102.6 122.7 133.9 134.2 114.8
         July 113.1 122.4 89.0 115.0 119.2 116.7 95.0 104.3 118.5 131.3 126.5 104.9
         Aug 106.0 117.8 85.7 107.3 113.9 103.8 90.0 103.5 112.8 125.8 113.8 84.2         Sep 117.6 125.0 89.6 120.0 119.2 125.8 115.7 107.7 119.9 136.0 129.4 114.0
         Oct 115.7 123.1 98.0 117.1 117.5 119.2 113.2 111.6 117.6 133.1 125.9 104.4
         Nov 112.1 116.6 97.5 113.3 108.7 119.6 111.8 108.7 109.4 133.5 126.5 100.9         Dec 95.5 84.9 99.8 95.7 82.6 107.6 84.7 99.6 80.1 109.7 136.3 61.6
2009          Jan  
+ 86.9 58.8 104.7 87.0 87.5 81.8 84.4 100.1 81.3 97.7 88.3 67.6
         Feb  + 86.1 67.4 92.0 86.7 87.0 83.3 84.2 95.3 80.3 98.5 91.2 66.2
         Mar  + 96.5 103.2 91.4 96.6 93.8 97.5 91.7 102.4 85.4 105.9 104.8 84.6
         Apr  + 88.7 116.3 81.9 87.6 88.2 83.3 82.7 98.4 80.1 93.1 87.4 70.6
         May  + 91.6 116.6 80.5 91.1 91.5 88.8 82.5 97.7 82.7 95.4 88.2 84.7
         June  + p 95.2 121.9 76.5 95.4 95.4 95.2 83.1 98.2 87.3 99.6 94.1 91.6
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2004 + 2.4 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 3.8 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 7.1 + 4.4 + 3.6
2005 + 3.0 − 5.4 + 0.4 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 8.8 + 5.1 + 4.2
2006 + 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.9 + 6.2 + 7.4 + 6.4 + 7.6 + 2.1 + 7.7 + 13.1 + 8.0 + 2.92007 + 5.9 + 2.9 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 7.0 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 11.1 + 6.9
2008 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.3 − 4.8
 
2007          Oct + 6.6 − 1.4 + 5.0 + 7.2 + 5.8 + 10.6 + 0.2 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 10.7 + 13.4 + 9.8
         Nov + 4.1 − 5.8 + 3.8 + 5.0 + 4.8 + 7.1 − 2.3 + 1.5 + 3.4 + 9.2 + 8.3 + 6.3         Dec + 4.5 − 3.5 + 1.7 + 5.2 + 4.8 + 7.2 − 6.0 + 2.9 + 2.3 + 9.1 + 9.6 + 5.8
2008          Jan + 5.9 + 7.4 + 1.7 + 6.2 + 4.7 + 9.2 − 0.9 + 3.9 + 4.5 + 11.2 + 9.8 + 4.3
         Feb + 5.3 + 9.4 + 0.5 + 5.6 + 5.0 + 8.2 − 2.1 + 1.5 + 5.0 + 9.3 + 8.2 + 6.6
         Mar + 3.8 − 4.5 + 2.2 + 4.4 + 4.7 + 5.9 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 6.4 + 9.9 + 7.8 + 2.1
         Apr + 5.2 − 2.4 + 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 9.2 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 7.0 + 10.1 + 10.6 + 6.6
         May + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.6 + 2.6 + 3.2 − 5.5 − 4.0 + 4.3 + 8.2 + 3.7 − 2.7
         June + 2.0 − 0.4 − 4.8 + 2.8 + 2.2 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 7.2 + 9.3 − 2.1
         July − 0.2 − 3.2 − 2.7 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 6.1 − 1.0 + 1.8 + 4.2 + 3.6 − 6.6
         Aug + 1.4 + 1.0 − 5.8 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 3.7 − 2.8 − 2.5 + 3.3 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 0.7         Sep − 1.5 − 1.7 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 5.8 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 6.5
         Oct − 3.7 − 2.4 − 5.0 − 3.6 − 3.6 − 3.9 − 6.7 − 1.8 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 1.0 − 12.4
         Nov − 7.2 − 1.4 − 9.6 − 7.4 − 9.5 − 6.9 − 7.5 − 3.5 − 10.0 − 5.1 − 2.5 − 17.3         Dec − 11.3 − 3.3 − 9.0 − 12.0 − 18.9 − 9.6 − 14.9 − 2.0 − 20.7 − 11.5 − 0.5 − 31.6
2009          Jan  
+ − 18.4 − 25.2 − 0.1 − 19.7 − 22.1 − 23.8 − 17.1 − 2.5 − 27.3 − 20.4 − 18.5 − 35.2
         Feb  + − 21.3 − 20.9 − 6.0 − 22.7 − 23.8 − 27.6 − 21.5 − 4.9 − 29.9 − 21.8 − 21.0 − 42.9
         Mar  + − 20.2 + 3.7 − 13.2 − 22.0 − 25.5 − 23.9 − 22.0 − 6.1 − 32.9 − 24.6 − 21.7 − 32.2
         Apr  + − 22.3 + 5.5 − 17.9 − 24.4 − 25.9 − 30.1 − 22.8 − 3.1 − 33.2 − 27.1 − 29.5 − 39.5
         May  + − 17.6 + 1.8 − 13.3 − 19.2 − 21.9 − 22.2 − 14.9 − 3.0 − 29.7 − 24.4 − 26.1 − 20.5
         June  + p − 18.1 + 1.2 − 12.2 − 19.8 − 20.7 − 23.7 − 21.8 − 4.3 − 28.9 − 25.6 − 29.9 − 20.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- duction sector in the base year 2005. — +Provisional; adjusted in advance
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
statistics", Tables II.9 to II.11. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, Quarterly Production Survey. 
version 0.2.8. — 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the pro-
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
total  
  
2004 93.6 + 6.7 94.4 + 8.5 92.9 + 6.8 94.5 − 0.7 101.2 − 3.3 92.3 + 0.2
2005 99.7 + 6.5 99.7 + 5.6 99.7 + 7.3 99.7 + 5.5 99.7 − 1.5 99.8 + 8.1
2006 110.7 + 11.0 113.9 + 14.2 109.4 + 9.7 105.3 + 5.6 108.4 + 8.7 104.3 + 4.5
2007 123.0 + 11.1 125.2 + 9.9 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.92008 115.5 − 6.1 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.6 − 6.1 109.7 − 2.5
 
2008          June 121.8 − 7.0 130.0 − 0.5 118.9 − 11.5 104.6 − 4.0 107.3 − 2.6 103.7 − 4.4
         July 118.3 − 2.5 128.2 + 3.1 112.9 − 6.0 111.0 − 4.2 98.0 − 9.0 115.5 − 2.7
         Aug 110.8 − 0.6 118.2 + 2.5 106.0 − 2.4 111.0 − 3.0 95.5 − 2.3 116.2 − 3.2
         Sep 113.9 − 7.6 122.0 − 3.4 108.9 − 10.9 112.1 − 3.8 115.0 − 3.8 111.1 − 3.9
         Oct 105.3 − 17.4 114.8 − 9.7 98.5 − 23.4 109.2 − 9.3 110.7 − 22.7 108.7 − 3.5
         Nov 98.4 − 25.6 102.6 − 24.6 94.5 − 28.7 106.5 − 5.5 103.4 − 9.0 107.5 − 4.3         Dec 85.4 − 30.9 83.3 − 29.4 86.0 − 34.4 90.6 − 7.5 82.2 − 12.1 93.4 − 6.1
2009          Jan 81.1 − 35.2 86.0 − 34.5 75.7 − 38.6 95.9 − 13.5 82.9 − 20.7 100.4 − 11.2
         Feb 79.2 − 37.3 78.3 − 38.3 77.3 − 39.2 96.6 − 18.9 78.2 − 23.1 102.8 − 17.8         Mar 89.0 − 34.3 86.5 − 38.0 89.4 − 34.0 98.0 − 16.6 88.2 − 23.9 101.4 − 14.1
         Apr 79.9 − 35.5 82.4 − 35.8 77.1 − 37.8 87.8 − 14.8 80.6 − 24.5 90.3 − 11.4
         May 83.1 − 31.5 84.3 − 34.9 81.4 − 31.6 89.1 − 12.3 82.8 − 18.5 91.2 − 10.3         June  
p 89.4 − 26.6 91.9 − 29.3 87.5 − 26.4 90.8 − 13.2 86.8 − 19.1 92.1 − 11.2
from the domestic market  
  
2004 96.4 + 4.9 95.9 + 7.0 96.9 + 4.8 95.7 − 3.5 103.0 − 6.1 93.4 − 2.6
2005 99.7 + 3.4 99.7 + 4.0 99.6 + 2.8 99.7 + 4.2 99.7 − 3.2 99.7 + 6.7
2006 109.0 + 9.3 113.3 + 13.6 106.4 + 6.8 103.4 + 3.7 111.0 + 11.3 100.9 + 1.22007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 107.0 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.2
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
 
2008          June 119.7 − 2.6 131.3 + 1.9 113.4 − 6.7 100.4 − 1.3 108.1 + 0.0 97.9 − 1.7
         July 117.2 − 2.2 130.4 + 3.7 108.2 − 7.0 105.1 − 4.6 102.4 − 7.9 106.0 − 3.5
         Aug 112.0 + 1.2 122.5 + 3.6 103.8 − 0.9 107.9 − 0.8 95.3 − 2.7 112.0 − 0.3         Sep 114.8 − 3.0 123.3 + 0.3 108.6 − 6.1 109.9 − 2.4 120.7 + 1.0 106.4 − 3.6
         Oct 106.7 − 12.8 114.8 − 9.9 100.0 − 16.8 105.5 − 4.4 114.6 − 1.5 102.5 − 5.4
         Nov 97.0 − 24.3 101.3 − 27.7 92.3 − 23.8 102.7 − 6.9 110.9 − 6.1 100.0 − 7.1         Dec 82.8 − 27.7 81.1 − 30.6 83.3 − 28.7 87.6 − 5.4 85.7 − 9.1 88.2 − 4.1
2009          Jan 85.3 − 28.6 87.1 − 32.9 82.9 − 26.6 89.7 − 15.8 86.3 − 21.6 90.8 − 13.8
         Feb 80.6 − 32.8 77.8 − 39.3 81.5 − 28.8 89.2 − 20.6 80.6 − 23.6 92.0 − 19.7         Mar 89.8 − 31.2 85.9 − 38.6 92.9 − 26.2 91.1 − 19.6 88.8 − 25.4 91.9 − 17.5
         Apr 81.6 − 32.5 82.4 − 36.4 81.1 − 30.9 80.9 − 18.3 79.6 − 27.8 81.3 − 14.7
         May 84.1 − 27.8 83.2 − 35.7 85.2 − 22.0 81.8 − 15.6 83.9 − 18.2 81.1 − 14.7         June  
p 87.3 − 27.1 91.2 − 30.5 84.9 − 25.1 82.4 − 17.9 86.2 − 20.3 81.1 − 17.2
from abroad  
  
2004 91.0 + 8.6 92.6 + 10.4 89.9 + 8.6 93.1 + 2.8 99.3 + 0.1 90.9 + 3.8
2005 99.7 + 9.6 99.7 + 7.7 99.7 + 10.9 99.8 + 7.2 99.7 + 0.4 99.8 + 9.8
2006 112.2 + 12.5 114.6 + 14.9 111.5 + 11.8 107.5 + 7.7 105.7 + 6.0 108.1 + 8.32007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.4 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.5 + 10.5
2008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.7 − 9.1 112.6 − 4.0 100.0 − 9.9 117.1 − 2.0
 
2008          June 123.6 − 10.3 128.6 − 2.9 122.8 − 14.2 109.1 − 6.6 106.4 − 5.3 110.0 − 7.0
         July 119.3 − 2.7 125.6 + 2.4 116.2 − 5.3 117.4 − 3.8 93.6 − 10.2 125.9 − 2.0
         Aug 109.8 − 2.1 113.2 + 1.1 107.5 − 3.4 114.3 − 5.1 95.8 − 1.7 120.9 − 6.0         Sep 113.2 − 11.2 120.6 − 7.3 109.1 − 14.0 114.4 − 5.3 109.2 − 8.6 116.3 − 4.1
         Oct 104.1 − 21.1 114.9 − 9.5 97.4 − 27.6 113.2 − 13.9 106.7 − 37.4 115.5 − 1.7
         Nov 99.6 − 26.6 104.1 − 20.7 96.0 − 31.7 110.6 − 4.0 95.9 − 12.1 115.8 − 1.4         Dec 87.6 − 33.4 85.7 − 28.2 87.9 − 37.7 93.8 − 9.5 78.7 − 15.0 99.2 − 7.9
2009          Jan 77.5 − 40.4 84.7 − 36.2 70.7 − 45.8 102.6 − 11.2 79.5 − 19.5 110.9 − 8.8
         Feb 77.9 − 41.0 78.8 − 37.3 74.3 − 45.4 104.5 − 17.3 75.8 − 22.6 114.8 − 15.9         Mar 88.3 − 36.8 87.2 − 37.4 86.9 − 38.9 105.5 − 13.6 87.6 − 22.3 111.9 − 10.8
         Apr 78.4 − 38.0 82.5 − 35.0 74.3 − 42.2 95.3 − 11.3 81.6 − 20.9 100.2 − 8.2
         May 82.2 − 34.5 85.5 − 34.0 78.7 − 37.4 97.0 − 9.1 81.7 − 18.8 102.4 − 6.1         June  
p 91.2 − 26.2 92.7 − 27.9 89.4 − 27.2 99.8 − 8.5 87.5 − 17.8 104.3 − 5.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- statistics", Tables II.13 to II.15. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business version 0.2.8. 
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2005 99.9 − 0.8 99.9 − 2.3 99.9 − 7.2 99.9 + 2.3 99.9 − 5.2 99.8 + 0.8 99.8 + 2.3 99.9 − 0.9
2006 105.1 + 5.2 106.6 + 6.7 104.3 + 4.4 109.6 + 9.7 101.7 + 1.8 103.6 + 3.8 109.0 + 9.2 101.6 + 1.72007 114.0 + 8.5 112.6 + 5.6 98.5 − 5.6 123.2 + 12.4 108.5 + 6.7 115.4 + 11.4 120.7 + 10.7 113.8 + 12.0
2008 113.4 − 0.5 114.8 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.6 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.5 − 2.0
 
2008          May 118.9 − 1.8 113.1 − 7.3 97.1 − 9.0 123.8 − 6.3 113.8 − 7.2 125.0 + 4.0 123.2 − 1.4 123.9 + 0.5
         June 135.7 + 4.2 137.7 + 7.5 110.8 − 5.1 159.2 + 13.2 126.5 + 12.9 133.7 + 1.0 145.3 + 4.7 136.7 + 7.4         July 133.2 + 5.2 120.2 − 7.8 104.0 − 1.4 128.7 − 14.3 128.4 + 7.4 146.7 + 19.5 130.4 − 5.9 148.4 + 20.1
         Aug 115.9 + 1.8 113.0 + 4.5 93.5 − 9.1 125.7 + 16.1 114.4 − 3.9 119.0 − 0.7 125.1 + 13.4 116.2 − 4.8
         Sep 131.2 + 3.6 136.2 + 16.2 113.5 + 3.5 150.4 + 23.3 139.8 + 18.6 126.1 − 7.7 140.1 + 12.2 129.9 − 4.3         Oct 109.3 − 16.1 110.0 − 10.9 94.0 − 5.5 116.6 − 17.8 123.9 + 7.2 108.6 − 21.0 121.0 − 6.6 104.1 − 27.8         Nov 92.3 − 11.8 95.5 + 3.7 88.5 + 10.5 104.7 + 3.2 80.9 − 7.8 89.0 − 24.4 105.4 − 6.1 80.8 − 24.8         Dec 93.6 − 7.8 99.7 − 5.2 79.5 − 12.3 105.4 − 7.0 126.5 + 14.1 87.2 − 10.7 108.0 − 2.5 85.1 − 12.0
2009          Jan 75.0 − 19.2 72.7 − 26.7 57.6 − 20.8 84.9 − 31.5 66.1 − 13.0 77.5 − 10.0 83.4 − 28.3 74.1 − 4.5
         Feb 76.9 − 13.4 74.8 − 20.6 70.0 − 13.4 74.4 − 28.5 87.3 − 4.4 79.0 − 4.9 78.0 − 22.0 78.7 − 2.7         Mar 113.4 − 11.8 109.2 − 15.3 95.7 − 9.7 114.6 − 15.0 121.7 − 24.2 117.8 − 8.0 111.6 − 13.1 122.8 − 11.1         Apr 113.5 − 5.7 101.7 − 21.4 105.3 + 13.6 98.2 − 37.7 105.5 − 11.0 125.8 + 13.2 101.8 − 25.6 128.8 + 11.3         May 115.8 − 2.6 106.4 − 5.9 96.3 − 0.8 105.6 − 14.7 132.2 + 16.2 125.5 + 0.4 111.1 − 9.8 128.8 + 4.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Excluding housing construction
sive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement orders. 
"Seasonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.20. — oUsing the Census
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2000  3 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age agechange change change change change change change change
Period % % % % % % % %
2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2005 99.8 + 1.7 99.8 + 0.8 100.0 + 3.0 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 7.8 99.9 − 1.9 99.9 + 4.6 99.5 + 1.6
2006 4 101.0 + 1.2 100.1 + 0.3 100.1 + 0.1 102.4 + 2.4 102.3 + 2.3 103.4 + 3.5 102.1 + 2.2 106.8 + 7.3
2007 4 99.4 − 1.6 97.2 − 2.9 99.5 − 0.6 103.6 + 1.2 110.1 + 7.6 98.5 − 4.7 104.2 + 2.1 100.6 − 5.8
2008 5 101.4 + 2.0 96.5 − 0.7 100.7 + 1.2 104.9 + 1.3 116.4 + 5.7 99.4 + 0.9 106.6 + 2.3 96.2 − 4.4
 
2008          June  5 97.2 + 1.7 92.0 − 1.7 98.2 + 0.7 95.5 − 1.1 105.4 + 6.8 95.5 + 0.3 103.5 + 2.7 101.5 − 6.5
         July 99.9 + 1.9 94.5 − 1.8 99.7 + 0.0 100.8 + 1.4 107.2 + 1.5 97.5 + 0.6 107.8 + 0.3 98.2 − 7.6
         Aug 99.4 + 2.8 94.1 − 0.8 99.8 + 3.4 99.1 + 0.3 105.0 + 7.6 96.6 + 0.9 102.3 + 0.4 88.5 − 7.5         Sep 100.9 + 3.0 95.3 − 0.3 97.6 + 2.5 116.8 + 1.7 108.7 + 4.8 98.7 + 0.2 105.3 + 2.8 94.4 − 6.9
         Oct 105.5 + 1.9 99.9 − 0.6 102.8 + 1.6 119.2 + 1.5 121.2 + 5.0 104.3 − 0.3 109.4 + 0.9 98.4 − 8.3
         Nov 105.7 + 1.0 100.9 − 0.1 102.3 + 2.2 109.5 + 3.5 129.9 + 5.5 106.6 + 1.7 110.3 + 1.3 93.6 − 11.9         Dec 119.9 + 2.8 115.4 + 2.1 116.5 + 3.7 129.4 + 2.0 174.8 − 2.1 107.0 + 1.7 123.1 + 6.4 83.5 − 13.0
2009          Jan 91.8 − 1.9 88.2 − 2.1 91.3 − 2.1 87.7 − 1.3 119.8 − 1.2 85.3 − 2.4 105.5 + 1.5 76.0 − 12.5
         Feb 87.6 − 3.0 83.7 − 3.1 89.7 − 2.2 79.2 − 4.2 97.5 − 1.9 85.2 − 3.4 100.3 + 1.0 95.7 + 3.9         Mar 101.2 − 0.8 96.7 − 0.5 101.5 − 1.6 102.0 + 4.6 107.3 − 8.8 106.8 − 0.4 110.0 + 3.9 117.7 + 7.3
         Apr 101.9 + 1.1 96.9 + 1.1 102.5 + 0.7 114.1 + 7.0 95.1 − 12.7 108.2 + 5.4 110.0 + 3.5 110.3 + 4.9
         May 99.6 − 1.9 94.6 − 1.6 103.2 + 1.4 103.9 − 7.8 90.2 − 7.6 101.8 + 0.2 106.8 + 4.3 105.3 + 2.3         June 94.7 − 2.6 89.9 − 2.3 96.3 − 1.9 96.2 + 0.7 97.9 − 7.1 96.7 + 1.3 105.5 + 1.9 105.8 + 4.2
Source of the unadjustded figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding the reporting population to include new entities; in January 2006 and Janu-
value-added tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Sea- ary 2007; statistical breaks in reporting population eliminated by
sonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.23. — oUsing the Census chain-linking. — 5From January 2008 figures are provisional in some cases re-
X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In stores. — 2Including stalls and vised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for
markets. — 3Figures at current prices excluding value-added tax and ad- missing reports. 
justed using retail price indices including value-added tax. — 4Expansion of
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employment  1 r Employees  1 r employment  2 Persons Unemployment  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-
manu- ment pro- going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cational
ing Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  3 6 7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2006 39,074 + 0.6 + 238 34,682 + 0.6 5,249 710 67 52 125 4,487 − 374 10.8 564
2007 39,724 + 1.7 + 650 35,288 + 1.7 5,301 714 68 43 132 3,776 − 711 9.0 9 621
2008 40,277 + 1.4 + 553 35,845 + 1.6 10 . 706 102 40 11 151 3,268 − 508 7.8 569
2008          July 40,293 + 1.5 + 587 5,302 716 43 41 143 3,210 − 506 7.7 588
         Aug 40,348 + 1.3 + 533 35,991 + 1.6 5,324 720 39 43 137 3,196 − 510 7.6 586
         Sep 40,656 + 1.3 + 525 5,336 721 50 44 148 3,081 − 463 7.4 585
         Oct 40,842 + 1.2 + 491 5,319 714 71 46 163 2,997 − 437 7.2 571
         Nov 40,796 + 1.1 + 430 36,329 + 1.3 5,303 710 130 46 169 2,988 − 390 7.1 539         Dec 40,555 + 0.9 + 371 5,271 697 270 44
11 168 3,102 − 304 7.4 503
2009          Jan 39,936 + 0.6 + 245 5,229 671 574 36 11 157 3,489 − 171 8.3 485
         Feb 39,924 + 0.5 + 197 35,548 + 0.6 5,219 666 1,082 31 11 162 3,552 − 66 8.5 506
         Mar 39,963 + 0.2 + 94 5,196 12 676 1,259 25 ... 3,586 + 78 8.6 507
         Apr 40,077 + 0.1 + 27 5,165 12 688 ... 20 ... 3,585 + 171 8.6 495
         May 40,175 − 0.1 − 23 35,730 + 0.0 5,137 12 690 ... 11 17 ... 13 3,458 13 + 175 13 14  8.2 490
         June 15 40,202 15 − 0.2 15 − 92 5,115 ... ... 11 15 ... 3,410 + 250 8.1 484
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 13 ... 3,462 + 252 8.2 484
Western Germany    o  
  
2006 . . . . . 4,650 525 54 10 86 3,007 − 240 9.1 436
2007 . . . . . 4,684 529 52 9 90 2,486 − 521 7.5 9 489
2008 . . . . . 10 . 527 80 7 11 104 2,145 − 341 6.4 455
2008          July . . . . . 4,674 533 35 7 97 2,120 − 330 6.4 478
         Aug . . . . . 4,692 537 33 7 93 2,109 − 335 6.3 474
         Sep . . . . . 4,700 538 42 7 101 2,042 − 293 6.1 471
         Oct . . . . . 4,684 532 59 7 113 1,990 − 275 6.0 460
         Nov . . . . . 4,669 529 110 7 118 1,985 − 239 6.0 432         Dec . . . . . 4,640 521 223 6
11 117 2,059 − 172 6.2 400
2009          Jan . . . . . 4,604 . 462 6 11 110 2,306 − 76 6.9 382
         Feb . . . . . 4,594 . 910 6 11 114 2,348 + 1 7.0 394
         Mar . . . . . 4,571 . 1,064 5 ... 2,379 + 108 7.1 390
         Apr . . . . . 4,543 . ... 5 ... 2,400 + 184 7.2 378
         May . . . . . 4,519 . ... 11 4 ... 13 2,334 13 + 194 13 14  6.9 371
         June . . . . . 4,499 . ... 11 4 ... 2,319 + 245 6.9 370
         July . . . . . ... . ... 11 4 ... 2,368 + 248 7.0 372
Eastern Germany    +  
  
2006 . . . . . 599 185 13 42 39 1,480 − 134 17.3 1292007 . . . . . 617 185 16 33 42 1,291 − 190 15.1
9 133
2008 . . . . . 10 . 179 21 33 11 47 1,123 − 167 13.1 113
2008          July . . . . . 628 183 8 34 46 1,090 − 175 12.8 110
         Aug . . . . . 633 184 7 36 44 1,087 − 175 12.8 112
         Sep . . . . . 636 184 8 38 47 1,039 − 170 12.2 114
         Oct . . . . . 636 182 12 40 50 1,007 − 162 11.8 111
         Nov . . . . . 634 181 20 40 51 1,003 − 151 11.8 107
         Dec . . . . . 631 176 48 37 11 51 1,043 − 133 12.2 103
2009          Jan . . . . . 625 . 105 30 11 47 1,182 − 94 13.9 103
         Feb . . . . . 626 . 158 25 11 48 1,204 − 66 14.1 112
         Mar . . . . . 624 . 177 20 ... 1,207 − 29 14.2 116
         Apr . . . . . 622 . ... 16 ... 1,185 − 13 13.9 117
         May . . . . . 618 . ... 11 13 ... 13 1,124 13 −1 9 13 14  13.3 119
         June . . . . . 616 . ... 11 11 ... 1,091 + 5 12.9 113
         July . . . . . ... . ... 11 9 ... 1,094 + 4 12.9 112
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual 8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — 9From January 2007, vacan-
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- cies for seasonal workers are included only if they are based on non-speci fic
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- employer requirements. — 10From January 2008, based on Nace Rev.2 de-
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Workplace concept; aver- finitions, previously based on Nace Rev.1. — 11Annualised data from the
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — Federal Employment Agency based on information received so far. — 12Pro-
3Enterprises with at least 50 employees. — 4The figures refer to enter- visional up to adjustment to the figures of theency annual overall survey. —
prises from Nace Rev.2 items 41.2, 42, 43.1 and 43.9. — 5Number within a 13From May 2009, unemployed excluding persons formally on the books of
given month; from January 2009, results for Germany contain data from private employment agencies. — 14From May 2009, calculated on the basis
operational reports, which cannot be assigned to a region. — 6Employees in- of new labour force figures. — 15Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal
volved in job creation schemes; up to December 2008 including employees in- Statistical Office. 
volved in structural adjustment measures (SAM). — 7Mid-month level. —
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  3 rents  3 index  2 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1 2 
Period 2005 = 100 2000 = 100 2005 = 100 2000 = 100
Index level  
  
2005 8 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 8 100.0 98.8 100.0 100.0 139.5 105.4
2006 9 101.6 101.9 100.3 108.5 101.0 101.1 102.4 9 105.4 107.1 101.8 104.4 163.9 131.5
2007 10 11  103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 118.2 103.0 105.1 166.6 143.7
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 121.2 104.8 109.9 217.1 150.3
 
2007          Sep 104.2 105.8 101.8 114.0 104.3 102.5 106.8 126.7 103.2 105.3 177.4 142.9
         Oct 11 104.5 108.2 102.2 113.8 104.0 102.6 107.4 129.2 103.2 106.1 186.5 143.9
         Nov 105.0 109.7 102.4 118.2 103.8 102.7 110.3 108.2 130.2 103.2 106.7 202.1 137.5
         Dec 105.6 110.4 102.2 115.8 106.4 102.8 108.1 130.9 103.1 106.6 199.6 138.2
2008          Jan 105.3 112.1 101.9 118.4 104.3 103.0 108.9 130.9 103.8 107.5 201.2 153.3
         Feb 105.8 112.0 102.3 118.8 105.3 103.1 111.5 109.5 131.6 104.2 108.6 210.6 163.1         Mar 106.3 112.6 102.5 121.5 105.7 103.2 110.2 131.5 104.3 108.9 216.5 160.5
         Apr 106.1 113.0 102.6 122.6 104.2 103.3 111.2 126.8 104.5 109.8 225.1 157.7
         May 106.7 113.0 102.4 126.9 105.0 103.4 112.5 112.2 125.5 105.1 112.1 258.8 159.6
         June 107.0 113.1 102.3 129.3 105.3 103.5 113.3 126.4 105.5 113.6 278.3 162.8
         July 107.6 113.4 101.8 131.0 107.1 103.6 115.5 127.0 106.0 114.3 279.8 160.6
         Aug 107.3 112.9 102.2 127.1 107.0 103.7 114.0 114.9 124.1 105.9 113.6 254.8 156.4         Sep 107.2 112.6 102.9 127.9 105.9 103.8 115.2 119.9 105.8 112.7 232.7 150.8
         Oct 107.0 112.8 103.2 124.9 105.6 103.9 115.2 115.3 105.1 109.1 180.2 133.3
         Nov 106.5 112.0 103.1 119.9 105.6 104.0 114.0 113.3 110.8 104.3 106.0 142.7 126.9         Dec 106.8 112.7 103.0 114.8 108.3 104.0 112.4 107.8 103.1 102.2 107.3 114.6
2009          Jan 106.3 113.3 102.7 117.4 106.0 104.1 111.1 105.9 102.9 101.7 112.8 114.9
         Feb 106.9 113.3 103.4 117.4 107.1 104.3 114.4 110.5 106.6 102.9 101.6 112.1 116.2         Mar 106.8 112.8 103.7 116.0 106.7 104.4 109.7 104.5 102.5 101.2 118.8 113.8
         Apr 106.8 112.3 103.9 116.2 106.8 104.5 108.2 103.4 102.4 100.4 125.8 120.1
         May 106.7 111.7 103.7 116.8 106.7 104.5 114.2 108.2 103.0 102.3 100.4 139.6 123.2         June 107.1 112.1 103.9 119.1 106.9 104.6 108.1
p 103.8 102.4 100.8 160.7 125.8
         July 107.1 110.7 103.3 116.0 108.8 104.7 ... ... ... ... 150.1 123.9
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 8 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.1 8 + 4.4 − 0.9 + 0.9 + 3.4 + 37.6 + 9.4
2006 9 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.4 9 + 5.4 + 8.4 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 17.5 + 24.8
2007 10 11  + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 10.4 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 9.3
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 30.3 + 4.6
 
2007          Sep + 2.7 + 3.3 + 1.7 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 16.1 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 14.2 + 6.9
         Oct 11 + 2.8 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 6.1 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 19.7 + 0.8 + 1.4 + 27.0 + 3.5
         Nov + 3.2 + 7.3 + 1.5 + 10.7 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 6.2 + 2.1 + 17.9 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 39.5 − 0.1
         Dec + 3.1 + 7.5 + 1.3 + 8.5 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 1.9 + 18.1 + 0.9 + 2.7 + 34.2 + 1.4
2008          Jan + 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.7 + 9.3 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 18.4 + 1.4 + 4.1 + 51.1 + 10.4
         Feb + 2.8 + 7.8 + 0.9 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 3.0 + 3.2 + 16.9 + 1.6 + 4.8 + 48.1 + 15.0         Mar + 3.1 + 8.6 + 0.8 + 9.8 + 2.8 + 1.4 + 3.9 + 16.7 + 1.6 + 4.6 + 46.6 + 10.3
         Apr + 2.4 + 7.3 + 0.9 + 9.6 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 4.7 + 13.3 + 1.5 + 4.8 + 45.3 + 5.8
         May + 3.0 + 7.9 + 0.8 + 12.8 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 3.1 + 5.3 + 11.5 + 1.9 + 6.9 + 67.3 + 6.0
         June + 3.3 + 7.6 + 0.9 + 14.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 6.2 + 11.7 + 2.2 + 7.9 + 69.4 + 9.6
         July + 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.6 + 15.1 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 8.2 + 7.8 + 2.6 + 8.3 + 62.0 + 9.8
         Aug + 3.1 + 7.4 + 1.1 + 13.0 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 7.7 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 8.3 + 52.8 + 10.5         Sep + 2.9 + 6.4 + 1.1 + 12.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.9 − 5.4 + 2.5 + 7.0 + 31.2 + 5.5
         Oct + 2.4 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 9.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.3 − 10.8 + 1.8 + 2.8 − 3.4 − 7.4
         Nov + 1.4 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 4.7 − 14.9 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 29.4 − 7.7         Dec + 1.1 + 2.1 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 4.0 − 17.6
+ 0.0 − 4.1 − 46.2 − 17.1
2009          Jan + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 − 19.1 − 0.9 − 5.4 − 43.9 − 25.0
         Feb + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.9 − 19.0 − 1.2 − 6.4 − 46.8 − 28.8
         Mar + 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.2 − 4.5 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 20.5 − 1.7 − 7.1 − 45.1 − 29.1
         Apr + 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.7 − 18.5 − 2.0 − 8.6 − 44.1 − 23.8
         May + 0.0 − 1.2 + 1.3 − 8.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.5 − 3.6 − 17.9 − 2.7 − 10.4 − 46.1 − 22.8
         June + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 4.6 p − 17.9 − 2.9 − 11.3 − 42.3 − 22.7
         July − 0.5 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 11.5 + 1.6 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... − 46.4 − 22.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — September 2005, increase in tobacco tax. — 9From October 2006, increase
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data in the prices of tobacco products. — 10From January 2007, increase in the
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Net rents. — 4Excluding standard rate of VAT and in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. —
value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 11 Introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 
7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 8From
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2001 902.0 2.1 590.0 3.6 353.8 4.1 943.9 3.8 1,389.5 3.9 130.9 6.2 9.4
2002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.92003 908.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 378.3 2.9 967.2 0.8 1,431.8 2.1 147.2 5.6 10.3
2004 914.6 0.7 603.3 2.4 378.2 − 0.0 981.5 1.5 1,454.5 1.6 151.4 2.9 10.4
2005 912.3 − 0.2 602.7 − 0.1 378.6 0.1 981.3 − 0.0 1,481.4 1.8 156.7 3.5 10.6
2006 926.7 1.6 605.2 0.4 377.6 − 0.3 982.8 0.2 1,514.1 2.2 159.0 1.5 10.52007 958.2 3.4 623.4 3.0 372.6 − 1.3 996.1 1.4 1,540.9 1.8 167.1 5.1 10.82008 994.5 3.8 641.3 2.9 374.5 0.5 1,015.7 2.0 1,585.4 2.9 180.8 8.2 11.4
2007          Q4 266.5 3.5 172.4 3.5 92.3 − 0.9 264.7 2.0 398.1 1.9 38.2 8.5 9.6
2008          Q1 230.7 3.9 149.3 3.0 94.7 0.4 243.9 2.0 394.9 3.2 59.1 7.5 15.0
         Q2 240.6 3.8 151.8 2.9 93.3 0.3 245.1 1.9 391.4 3.4 41.9 7.7 10.7         Q3 248.1 4.3 164.5 3.7 93.4 0.4 257.8 2.5 394.8 3.4 38.4 9.6 9.7         Q4 275.1 3.2 175.7 1.9 93.2 0.9 268.9 1.6 404.3 1.5 41.4 8.3 10.2
2009          Q1 231.7 0.4 147.4 − 1.3 98.8 4.3 246.1 0.9 396.0 0.3 60.7 2.7 15.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2009. — *House- plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
holds including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Residence surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — 3Social cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state and fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 6In-
local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), private cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2001 102.0 2.0 101.9 1.9 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 101.8 1.8
2002 104.7 2.6 104.5 2.6 104.5 2.2 104.4 2.2 103.2 1.3
2003 106.7 2.0 106.6 2.0 106.8 2.2 106.9 2.4 104.5 1.32004 108.0 1.2 108.0 1.3 108.1 1.3 108.6 1.6 105.1 0.6
2005 108.9 0.9 109.1 1.1 109.1 0.9 109.7 1.0 105.4 0.3
2006 110.0 1.0 110.5 1.2 110.0 0.8 110.7 0.9 106.4 0.92007 111.2 1.2 111.9 1.3 111.6 1.5 112.3 1.5 108.0 1.62008 114.3 2.7 115.1 2.8 114.9 3.0 115.8 3.1 110.4 2.2
2008          Q1 105.0 2.6 105.7 2.6 106.0 2.8 114.7 2.9 103.7 2.0
         Q2 106.1 1.7 106.8 1.8 107.0 3.3 115.6 3.3 107.2 2.1         Q3 117.1 2.9 117.9 3.0 117.4 2.9 116.4 3.2 109.9 2.7         Q4 129.0 3.6 129.9 3.7 129.2 2.9 116.7 3.1 120.6 2.0
2009          Q1 108.2 3.1 109.0 3.1 108.8 2.7 117.8 2.7 103.9 0.3
         Q2 108.9 2.7 109.7 2.8 109.9 2.7 118.8 2.7 . .
2008          Dec 112.6 5.9 113.5 6.0 110.4 3.1 116.8 3.2 . .
2009          Jan 108.8 3.8 109.6 3.8 108.4 2.4 117.4 2.4 . .
         Feb 107.6 2.5 108.4 2.5 108.7 2.7 117.8 2.7 . .         Mar 108.2 2.9 109.0 3.0 109.3 3.0 118.4 3.1 . .
         Apr 108.3 2.6 109.1 2.7 109.4 2.7 118.5 2.8 . .
         May 109.4 2.8 110.2 2.8 110.4 2.8 118.9 2.8 . .         June 109.1 2.7 109.9 2.7 110.0 2.6 119.1 2.6 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13
thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2009. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2008 2009
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May
Current account − 10,457 + 11,085 − 100,992 − 23,142 − 29,451 − 42,385 − 6,957 − 9,375 − 12,951A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,396,798 1,513,718 1,579,533 403,074 378,409 308,301 110,911 104,137 98,906
Imports (fob) 1,384,500 1,467,287 1,585,525 412,086 379,016 318,569 107,562 100,247 96,715
Balance + 12,296 + 46,432 − 5,994 − 9,013 − 608 − 10,266 + 3,350 + 3,889 + 2,191
2 Services
Receipts 440,827 490,310 506,541 136,243 127,271 108,866 37,108 36,669 36,998Expenditure 397,530 441,143 463,789 122,836 121,034 108,115 37,135 34,331 34,061
Balance + 43,297 + 49,165 + 42,756 + 13,408 + 6,238 + 750 − 27 + 2,339 + 2,937
3 Income + 13,607 + 1,391 − 41,313 − 2,965 − 9,815 − 2,618 + 2,584 − 7,209 − 11,843
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 89,812 89,760 89,017 13,534 27,420 25,102 4,449 5,416 5,815
Transfers to non-residents 169,470 175,664 185,459 38,106 52,687 55,352 17,313 13,809 12,051
Balance − 79,654 − 85,904 − 96,440 − 24,572 − 25,267 − 30,250 − 12,864 − 8,394 − 6,236
Capital account + 9,215 + 13,724 + 12,031 + 1,911 + 965 + 1,535 + 854 + 1,987 + 239B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 141,426 + 41,207 + 303,268 + 61,660 + 126,348 + 147,856 + 67,982 − 2,481 + 24,667C)
1 Direct investment − 157,629 − 92,453 − 242,295 − 35,903 − 77,743 − 38,505 − 20,646 − 4,467 + 6,143
By resident units abroad − 417,417 − 474,165 − 348,059 − 88,671 − 47,607 − 79,294 − 33,436 − 59,206 − 11,874By non-resident units in the euro area + 259,790 + 381,714 + 105,764 + 52,769 − 30,137 + 40,789 + 12,790 + 54,739 + 18,017
2 Portfolio investment + 293,737 + 159,731 + 441,520 + 121,522 + 204,171 + 179,376 + 95,684 − 8,958 + 53,768
By resident units abroad − 527,619 − 439,525 + 20,168 + 60,858 + 160,736 + 72,206 + 63,064 + 649 − 10,252
Equity − 153,035 − 79,548 + 113,176 + 51,278 + 49,872 + 34,433 + 18,446 + 2,456 − 3,044Bonds and notes − 307,320 − 282,472 − 88,608 − 19,856 + 62,063 + 57,444 + 38,886 − 6,881 − 1,220Money market instruments − 67,264 − 77,502 − 4,400 + 29,436 + 48,802 − 19,672 + 5,731 + 5,074 − 5,987
By non-resident units in the euro area + 821,355 + 599,255 + 421,352 + 60,664 + 43,435 + 107,171 + 32,621 − 9,607 + 64,020
Equity + 297,071 + 127,637 − 73,491 − 73,631 − 42,367 − 10,915 + 24,323 − 21,926 + 10,993
Bonds and notes + 519,802 + 433,029 + 274,677 + 63,851 − 19,991 + 82,128 + 15,170 − 15,385 + 53,531Money market instruments + 4,480 + 38,591 + 220,166 + 70,444 + 105,793 + 35,958 − 6,873 + 27,703 − 505
3 Financial derivatives + 3,305 − 67,005 − 56,734 − 8,381 − 16,669 + 14,307 + 4,197 + 7,707 + 10,319
4 Other investment + 2,893 + 46,025 + 164,640 − 17,219 + 17,013 − 13,017 − 10,410 + 3,113 − 43,306
Eurosystem + 29,168 + 69,366 + 288,990 + 109,733 + 117,538 − 73,344 + 7,873 − 30,562 − 20,196
General government + 8,903 + 6,756 + 16,098 + 10,185 + 8,966 − 8,519 + 228 + 9,314 − 3,638MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 27,255 + 86,897 − 136,681 − 108,208 − 170,773 + 110,016 − 24,149 − 1,846 − 2,046
Long-term − 52,527 − 109,677 − 227,217 − 74,687 − 47,210 − 23,452 − 13,947 − 6,055 − 12,933Short-term + 25,271 + 196,575 + 90,538 − 33,521 − 123,562 + 133,469 − 10,203 + 4,210 + 10,888
Other sectors − 7,925 − 117,000 − 3,765 − 28,929 + 61,280 − 41,174 + 5,638 + 26,207 − 17,426
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 879 − 5,088 − 3,863 + 1,642 − 423 + 5,694 − 843 + 124 − 2,257
Errors and omissions − 140,186 − 66,016 − 214,306 − 40,429 − 97,860 − 107,007 − 61,879 + 9,870 − 11,956D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  
1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 Omissions
DM million
1995 − 42,363 + 85,303 − 4,294 − 63,985 − 3,975 − 55,413 − 3,845 + 50,117 − 10,355 − 3,909
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 791997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,6131998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,2942001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,775
2001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,7572002 + 42,973 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,517 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,3132003 + 40,931 + 129,921 − 11,142 − 34,497 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,515
2004 + 102,889 + 156,096 − 16,447 − 29,341 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,660
2005 + 114,650 + 158,179 − 14,036 − 25,677 + 24,896 − 28,712 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 16,3542006 + 150,913 + 159,048 − 13,106 − 13,985 + 46,105 − 27,148 − 252 − 174,977 + 2,934 + 24,3162007 + 191,267 + 195,348 − 9,818 − 13,312 + 50,643 − 31,594 + 134 − 237,280 − 953 + 45,8792008 + 165,381 + 178,507 − 12,102 − 12,682 + 44,746 − 33,088 − 90 − 202,898 − 2,008 + 37,607
2006          Q3 + 31,690 + 38,718 − 3,088 − 9,036 + 13,315 − 8,219 − 250 − 26,030 + 844 − 5,410
         Q4 + 54,836 + 45,892 − 3,569 + 1,336 + 14,900 − 3,722 − 115 − 37,493 + 642 − 17,228
2007          Q1 + 47,739 + 48,239 − 2,677 − 1,918 + 15,171 − 11,076 + 145 − 49,877 + 100 + 1,993
         Q2 + 42,110 + 48,183 − 2,276 − 1,739 + 2,957 − 5,015 + 364 − 82,845 − 1,359 + 40,371         Q3 + 43,409 + 50,181 − 2,668 − 9,499 + 14,524 − 9,128 + 306 − 26,896 − 347 − 16,819         Q4 + 58,009 + 48,745 − 2,198 − 156 + 17,992 − 6,374 − 681 − 77,662 + 653 + 20,335
2008          Q1 + 49,708 + 51,167 − 3,274 − 877 + 14,848 − 12,156 + 518 − 60,618 − 1,165 + 10,392
         Q2 + 42,801 + 53,580 − 2,739 − 3,656 + 762 − 5,146 + 324 − 79,466 − 889 + 36,341         Q3 + 34,808 + 39,959 − 2,670 − 7,778 + 14,324 − 9,027 − 289 − 10,565 + 1,630 − 23,954         Q4 + 38,063 + 33,801 − 3,419 − 370 + 14,812 − 6,759 − 643 − 52,248 − 1,584 + 14,827
2009          Q1 + 20,071 + 26,772 − 3,168 − 3,752 + 13,412 − 13,193 + 34 + 2,954 + 321 − 23,059
         Q2  
p + 22,902 + 31,066 − 2,970 − 3,757 + 1,885 − 3,321 + 309 − 49,798 + 41 + 26,587
2007          Jan + 15,216 + 16,177 − 934 − 2,311 + 4,248 − 1,964 + 240 − 3,654 − 458 − 11,801
         Feb + 11,709 + 13,952 − 743 − 131 + 5,264 − 6,633 + 14 − 23,411 + 566 + 11,687
         Mar + 20,815 + 18,110 − 1,000 + 524 + 5,659 − 2,479 − 109 − 22,812 − 8 + 2,107
         Apr + 13,579 + 14,818 − 586 − 302 + 1,650 − 2,000 + 144 − 23,343 − 1,215 + 9,620
         May + 10,156 + 16,889 − 1,208 − 1,243 − 3,464 − 817 + 293 − 30,764 − 657 + 20,315         June + 18,375 + 16,476 − 481 − 194 + 4,771 − 2,197 − 73 − 28,738 + 513 + 10,436
         July + 15,120 + 17,780 − 951 − 3,119 + 4,412 − 3,003 + 373 − 2,283 + 121 − 13,210
         Aug + 10,338 + 14,183 − 813 − 4,681 + 4,669 − 3,020 − 54 − 1,911 − 21 − 8,373         Sep + 17,951 + 18,218 − 905 − 1,699 + 5,442 − 3,105 − 14 − 22,702 − 447 + 4,764
         Oct + 17,766 + 18,851 − 814 − 2,283 + 5,511 − 3,499 − 13 − 31,405 + 309 + 13,652
         Nov + 21,035 + 19,423 − 809 + 184 + 5,828 − 3,591 − 224 − 26,429 + 339 + 5,618         Dec + 19,207 + 10,472 − 574 + 1,943 + 6,652 + 715 − 444 − 19,828 + 5 + 1,064
2008          Jan + 15,637 + 17,308 − 972 − 899 + 4,048 − 3,848 + 447 − 2,085 − 311 − 13,998
         Feb + 16,518 + 17,086 − 1,395 + 487 + 5,412 − 5,072 + 217 − 26,980 − 349 + 10,245         Mar + 17,554 + 16,773 − 906 − 465 + 5,388 − 3,235 − 146 − 31,553 − 504 + 14,145
         Apr + 15,220 + 18,995 − 869 − 327 − 631 − 1,947 − 64 − 16,002 − 1,089 + 846
         May + 8,053 + 14,481 − 1,072 − 2,259 − 2,777 − 321 + 407 − 36,999 + 913 + 28,538         June + 19,528 + 20,104 − 798 − 1,070 + 4,170 − 2,878 − 19 − 26,466 − 713 + 6,957
         July + 11,286 + 13,989 − 908 − 3,340 + 4,500 − 2,955 − 123 + 3,118 + 1,225 − 14,281
         Aug + 8,133 + 10,777 − 1,043 − 2,927 + 4,584 − 3,258 − 47 − 3,021 − 82 − 5,065         Sep + 15,389 + 15,193 − 719 − 1,512 + 5,241 − 2,814 − 120 − 10,662 + 487 − 4,607
         Oct + 14,924 + 16,642 − 972 − 2,146 + 5,208 − 3,808 − 199 − 16,613 − 3,373 + 1,888
         Nov + 9,364 + 9,903 − 1,706 − 53 + 4,993 − 3,772 − 84 − 5,037 − 269 − 4,243         Dec + 13,776 + 7,256 − 741 + 1,829 + 4,611 + 821 − 360 − 30,598 + 2,058 + 17,182
2009          Jan + 2,165 + 6,845 − 1,145 − 2,718 + 3,470 − 4,287 − 48 + 19,505 + 2,245 − 21,622
         Feb + 6,871 + 8,618 − 1,101 − 309 + 4,934 − 5,269 − 83 + 2,594 − 271 − 9,382         Mar + 11,034 + 11,309 − 921 − 725 + 5,008 − 3,637 + 164 − 19,145 − 1,652 + 7,946
         Apr + 5,461 + 9,418 − 691 − 695 − 290 − 2,281 + 317 − 14,761 − 590 + 8,983
         May + 4,181 + 9,475 − 1,224 − 682 − 2,416 − 973 + 99 − 7,901 + 342 + 3,621         June  
p + 13,260 + 12,172 − 1,055 − 2,381 + 4,591 − 67 − 108 − 27,135 + 288 + 13,983
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2009
Country / group of countries  2006  2007  2008 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun  p 
All countries  1 Exports 893,042 965,236 992,539 64,476 64,456 70,048 63,706 60,671 68,465
Imports 733,994 769,887 814,033 57,632 55,838 58,739 54,288 51,195 56,293Balance + 159,048 + 195,348 + 178,507 + 6,845 + 8,618 + 11,309 + 9,418 + 9,475 + 12,172
I Exports 657,325 726,518 743,452 48,359 47,718 52,119 46,793 45,125 ...European countries
Imports 512,568 541,650 582,703 39,644 39,086 41,943 38,741 36,769 ...
Balance + 144,757 + 184,867 + 160,749 + 8,715 + 8,632 + 10,176 + 8,052 + 8,356 ...
Exports 564,864 623,837 632,953 41,886 40,770 44,642 40,364 38,896 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 423,731 449,691 478,050 32,386 32,229 34,309 32,079 30,335 ...
Balance + 141,133 + 174,147 + 154,903 + 9,500 + 8,542 + 10,333 + 8,285 + 8,561 ...
Euro-area (16) Exports 385,273 421,570 427,137 28,959 28,399 30,937 27,737 26,711 ...countries Imports 293,126 307,188 327,207 22,618 22,463 23,567 22,041 20,561 ...
Balance + 92,147 + 114,383 + 99,930 + 6,341 + 5,936 + 7,370 + 5,696 + 6,151 ...
of which
Austria Exports 49,512 52,813 53,841 3,985 3,890 4,207 3,857 3,647 ...
Imports 30,301 32,091 33,148 2,425 2,300 2,396 2,277 2,359 ...Balance + 19,211 + 20,722 + 20,693 + 1,560 + 1,590 + 1,811 + 1,581 + 1,289 ...
Belgium and Exports 51,141 55,397 56,629 3,879 3,884 4,227 3,643 3,501 ...
Luxembourg Imports 36,263 39,455 43,215 2,448 2,684 2,791 2,548 2,494 ...
Balance + 14,878 + 15,942 + 13,414 + 1,432 + 1,200 + 1,435 + 1,095 + 1,008 ...
France Exports 85,006 91,665 96,859 6,842 6,686 7,071 6,562 6,467 ...
Imports 62,102 62,873 66,710 4,780 4,814 4,833 4,805 4,159 ...Balance + 22,904 + 28,792 + 30,149 + 2,063 + 1,872 + 2,238 + 1,757 + 2,307 ...
Italy Exports 59,348 64,499 64,003 4,288 4,048 4,825 4,073 3,928 ...
Imports 41,470 44,694 45,962 3,345 3,390 3,658 3,342 3,192 ...Balance + 17,878 + 19,805 + 18,040 + 943 + 658 + 1,167 + 731 + 736 ...
Netherlands Exports 56,531 62,948 65,644 4,605 4,727 4,826 4,474 4,151 ...
Imports 60,750 61,951 72,083 5,048 4,939 4,883 4,462 4,133 ...Balance − 4,219 + 997 − 6,439 − 443 − 212 − 57 + 12 + 19 ...
Spain Exports 41,775 47,631 43,704 2,474 2,397 2,780 2,436 2,435 ...
Imports 19,832 20,687 21,631 1,551 1,542 1,976 1,675 1,620 ...Balance + 21,943 + 26,944 + 22,073 + 923 + 856 + 804 + 760 + 815 ...
Other EU member Exports 179,591 202,267 205,816 12,927 12,371 13,705 12,626 12,184 ...states Imports 130,605 142,503 150,843 9,767 9,766 10,742 10,038 9,774 ...
Balance + 48,986 + 59,764 + 54,972 + 3,159 + 2,605 + 2,963 + 2,588 + 2,410 ...
of which
United Exports 64,726 69,760 66,788 4,165 3,979 4,567 4,076 3,995 ...Kingdom Imports 40,832 41,966 44,261 2,669 2,630 2,772 2,661 2,815 ...
Balance + 23,895 + 27,794 + 22,527 + 1,497 + 1,349 + 1,794 + 1,415 + 1,180 ...
Exports 92,461 102,680 110,499 6,473 6,948 7,477 6,429 6,229 ... 2 Other European
Imports 88,837 91,960 104,653 7,258 6,858 7,634 6,661 6,434 ... countries
Balance + 3,625 + 10,721 + 5,846 − 785 + 90 − 157 − 233 − 205 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 34,782 36,373 38,990 2,837 2,945 3,190 2,722 2,596 ...
Imports 25,227 29,822 31,161 2,430 2,348 2,582 2,418 2,225 ...
Balance + 9,556 + 6,551 + 7,829 + 406 + 597 + 608 + 304 + 370 ...
II Exports 234,139 237,139 249,568 16,023 16,617 17,820 16,807 15,480 ...Non-European
Imports 220,745 227,569 235,187 17,927 16,700 16,743 15,497 14,380 ... countries
Balance + 13,393 + 9,570 + 14,381 − 1,904 − 83 + 1,078 + 1,310 + 1,100 ...
Exports 16,617 17,575 19,700 1,415 1,442 1,493 1,298 1,270 ... 1 Africa
Imports 16,734 16,457 20,572 1,358 1,274 991 1,038 1,037 ...
Balance − 117 + 1,118 − 872 + 57 + 167 + 502 + 260 + 234 ...
Exports 104,154 100,769 101,952 6,301 6,487 6,845 6,495 5,471 ... 2 America
Imports 72,163 71,276 72,939 5,442 5,218 6,201 4,960 4,842 ...
Balance + 31,991 + 29,493 + 29,013 + 860 + 1,269 + 644 + 1,534 + 629 ...
of which
Exports 77,991 73,327 71,467 4,325 4,635 4,826 4,609 3,829 ... United States
Imports 49,197 45,993 46,060 3,480 3,594 4,390 3,264 3,269 ...Balance + 28,795 + 27,334 + 25,407 + 845 + 1,041 + 436 + 1,345 + 560 ...
Exports 106,991 111,691 120,300 7,819 8,147 8,957 8,501 8,194 ... 3 Asia
Imports 128,942 136,411 138,663 10,876 9,847 9,320 9,301 8,315 ...
Balance − 21,951 − 24,721 − 18,363 − 3,057 − 1,700 − 363 − 800 − 120 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 22,978 23,709 27,591 1,821 1,915 1,977 1,836 1,725 ...
Imports 6,295 6,444 7,957 445 374 320 419 455 ...Balance + 16,682 + 17,265 + 19,634 + 1,376 + 1,540 + 1,658 + 1,417 + 1,270 ...
Japan Exports 13,886 13,022 12,806 817 899 897 780 770 ...
Imports 24,016 24,381 23,087 1,626 1,623 1,664 1,366 1,330 ...Balance − 10,130 − 11,359 − 10,281 − 809 − 724 − 767 − 586 − 560 ...
Exports 27,478 29,902 34,096 2,278 2,408 2,925 2,808 2,748 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 49,958 56,417 59,378 5,194 4,492 3,966 4,123 3,700 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 22,479 − 26,515 − 25,282 − 2,916 − 2,084 − 1,041 − 1,315 − 952 ...
Exports 31,619 32,284 32,609 2,083 1,998 2,128 2,037 2,049 ... Emerging markets
Imports 36,113 35,357 32,783 2,415 2,266 2,162 2,203 1,845 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 4,494 − 3,073 − 175 − 332 − 268 − 34 − 166 + 204 ...
Exports 6,377 7,104 7,616 488 541 525 514 544 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,906 3,425 3,013 251 360 231 198 187 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,471 + 3,679 + 4,603 + 236 + 180 + 295 + 316 + 357 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, region. Excluding repair and maintenance operations from January 200 7 on-
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of wards. — 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indo-
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2004 − 29,341 − 35,302 + 3,870 + 1,328 − 260 + 5,349 − 4,325 − 1,363 + 986 − 989 + 21,420
2005 − 25,677 − 36,317 + 6,356 + 1,622 − 1,203 + 3,688 + 177 − 1,638 + 3,086 − 1,285 + 26,182
2006 − 13,985 − 32,771 + 5,690 + 2,185 − 1,861 + 3,736 + 9,037 − 1,795 + 3,885 − 685 + 46,790
2007 − 13,312 − 34,324 + 6,730 + 2,854 − 2,167 + 3,310 + 10,285 − 1,966 + 2,875 + 449 + 50,1942008 − 12,682 − 34,646 + 7,802 + 3,916 − 2,129 + 2,338 + 10,036 − 1,585 + 2,277 + 654 + 44,092
2007          Q4 − 156 − 5,990 + 1,754 + 769 − 400 + 749 + 2,961 − 718 + 904 + 109 + 17,883
2008          Q1 − 877 − 6,010 + 1,634 + 884 − 704 + 559 + 2,759 − 426 + 538 + 654 + 14,193
         Q2 − 3,656 − 8,686 + 1,849 + 656 − 359 + 595 + 2,288 − 338 + 576 + 132 + 630         Q3 − 7,778 − 14,722 + 2,205 + 804 − 795 + 645 + 4,084 − 319 + 807 − 331 + 14,655         Q4 − 370 − 5,228 + 2,114 + 1,572 − 271 + 539 + 904 − 503 + 357 + 199 + 14,613
2009          Q1 − 3,752 − 5,926 + 2,020 + 837 − 1,167 + 625 − 141 − 361 + 255 + 599 + 12,813
         Q2 − 3,757 − 8,741 + 1,786 + 835 − 245 + 618 + 1,991 − 257 + 377 + 145 + 1,740
2008          Aug − 2,927 − 5,308 + 648 + 267 − 23 + 202 + 1,286 − 78 + 296 − 123 + 4,706
         Sep − 1,512 − 4,666 + 734 + 279 − 78 + 216 + 2,003 − 101 + 261 − 109 + 5,350
         Oct − 2,146 − 3,621 + 701 + 566 − 211 + 183 + 236 − 141 + 34 + 50 + 5,158
         Nov − 53 − 1,146 + 548 + 449 − 21 + 159 − 42 − 145 − 1 + 30 + 4,963
         Dec + 1,829 − 461 + 865 + 557 − 39 + 198 + 709 − 217 + 323 + 119 + 4,492
2009          Jan − 2,718 − 1,495 + 574 + 193 − 1,336 + 146 − 800 − 136 + 15 + 168 + 3,302
         Feb − 309 − 1,768 + 778 + 284 + 143 + 168 + 85 − 109 + 149 + 203 + 4,730
         Mar − 725 − 2,662 + 667 + 359 + 25 + 311 + 574 − 116 + 91 + 228 + 4,781
         Apr − 695 − 2,309 + 713 + 361 − 218 + 215 + 543 − 94 + 167 + 55 − 345
         May − 682 − 2,848 + 580 + 234 + 0 + 200 + 1,151 − 78 − 94 + 45 − 2,461
         June − 2,381 − 3,584 + 493 + 239 − 27 + 202 + 297 − 85 + 305 + 45 + 4,546
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2004 − 27,849 − 16,694 − 14,249 − 12,672 − 2,444 − 11,156 − 3,180 − 7,976 + 435 − 1,095 + 1,529
2005 − 28,712 − 17,588 − 16,264 − 14,687 − 1,324 − 11,124 − 2,926 − 8,198 − 1,369 − 3,419 + 2,050
2006 − 27,148 − 14,512 − 14,900 − 13,356 + 388 − 12,637 − 2,927 − 9,710 − 252 − 1,947 + 1,695
2007 − 31,594 − 16,264 − 18,662 − 16,890 + 2,398 − 15,329 − 3,005 − 12,324 + 134 − 2,036 + 2,1702008 − 33,088 − 16,805 − 19,545 − 17,556 + 2,739 − 16,283 − 3,122 − 13,161 − 90 − 1,784 + 1,694
2007          Q4 − 6,374 − 2,763 − 2,260 − 1,824 − 503 − 3,611 − 751 − 2,860 − 681 − 1,095 + 413
2008          Q1 − 12,156 − 8,480 − 8,306 − 7,650 − 174 − 3,676 − 781 − 2,896 + 518 − 270 + 788
         Q2 − 5,146 − 774 − 4,836 − 4,310 + 4,061 − 4,371 − 781 − 3,591 + 324 − 361 + 685         Q3 − 9,027 − 4,843 − 4,416 − 3,998 − 427 − 4,185 − 781 − 3,404 − 289 − 368 + 79         Q4 − 6,759 − 2,709 − 1,987 − 1,598 − 721 − 4,051 − 781 − 3,270 − 643 − 785 + 142
2009          Q1 − 13,193 − 9,041 − 8,553 − 7,844 − 488 − 4,151 − 762 − 3,390 + 34 − 400 + 434
         Q2 − 3,321 + 500 − 2,100 − 1,645 + 2,600 − 3,821 − 753 − 3,067 + 309 − 296 + 604
2008          Aug − 3,258 − 1,612 − 1,393 − 1,265 − 219 − 1,646 − 260 − 1,386 − 47 − 103 + 57
         Sep − 2,814 − 1,653 − 1,581 − 1,484 − 72 − 1,161 − 260 − 901 − 120 − 116 − 4
         Oct − 3,808 − 2,721 − 2,414 − 2,301 − 306 − 1,087 − 260 − 827 − 199 − 138 − 61
         Nov − 3,772 − 2,608 − 2,230 − 2,096 − 378 − 1,164 − 260 − 904 − 84 − 123 + 40
         Dec + 821 + 2,620 + 2,657 + 2,799 − 37 − 1,800 − 260 − 1,539 − 360 − 524 + 164
2009          Jan − 4,287 − 2,682 − 2,650 − 2,330 − 32 − 1,604 − 255 − 1,349 − 48 − 121 + 73
         Feb − 5,269 − 4,075 − 3,737 − 3,553 − 338 − 1,194 − 255 − 939 − 83 − 121 + 38
         Mar − 3,637 − 2,284 − 2,165 − 1,961 − 119 − 1,353 − 251 − 1,101 + 164 − 159 + 323
         Apr − 2,281 − 950 − 2,053 − 1,920 + 1,103 − 1,331 − 251 − 1,080 + 317 − 102 + 419
         May − 973 + 331 − 1,354 − 1,266 + 1,685 − 1,304 − 251 − 1,053 + 99 − 90 + 190
         June − 67 + 1,118 + 1,307 + 1,541 − 188 − 1,186 − 251 − 935 − 108 − 103 − 4
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2008 2009
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Apr May June
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 472,902 − 695,904 − 241,260 − 72,006 + 124,301 + 46,047 − 76,582 − 41,056 − 3,722 − 31,804
1 Direct investment  1 − 101,409 − 131,177 − 106,813 − 8,995 − 22,532 − 9,387 − 17,994 − 7,420 − 8,365 − 2,209
Equity capital − 73,971 − 49,448 − 60,334 − 7,749 − 13,185 − 18,737 − 13,437 − 9,241 − 2,859 − 1,336
Reinvested earnings  2 − 32,868 − 36,741 − 27,648 − 8,386 − 6,648 − 6,738 − 2,845 − 889 − 1,450 − 507
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors + 5,430 − 44,988 − 18,831 + 7,140 − 2,699 + 16,088 − 1,712 + 2,710 − 4,056 − 366
2 Portfolio investment − 158,251 − 145,507 + 27,871 + 10,038 + 74,375 − 7,073 − 28,477 − 2,790 − 15,125 − 10,562
Shares 3 + 6,505 + 23,056 + 39,177 + 880 + 13,973 + 571 − 1,258 + 1,208 − 1,818 − 649
Mutual fund shares  4 − 23,638 − 41,586 − 8,606 − 2,707 + 13,612 − 136 − 1,389 + 2,008 − 64 − 3,333
Bonds and notes  5 − 133,723 − 105,260 − 20,195 + 9,901 + 20,659 − 13,433 − 28,034 − 4,899 − 15,484 − 7,652
Money market instruments − 7,396 − 21,718 + 17,496 + 1,965 + 26,131 + 5,925 + 2,204 − 1,108 + 2,240 + 1,071
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 6,179 − 85,939 − 25,559 + 186 + 10,204 + 2,912 − 487 − 297 − 4,433 + 4,243
4 Other investment − 209,996 − 332,327 − 134,751 − 74,865 + 63,837 + 59,274 − 29,664 − 29,959 + 23,859 − 23,564
MFIs  7,8 − 207,666 − 224,876 − 73,931 − 64,301 + 67,403 + 104,777 + 1,568 − 35,365 + 13,536 + 23,396
Long-term − 71,625 − 96,840 − 144,313 − 51,310 − 19,313 − 70 − 15,956 + 1,941 − 1,884 − 16,013Short-term − 136,041 − 128,036 + 70,382 − 12,992 + 86,716 + 104,847 + 17,523 − 37,305 + 15,420 + 39,408
Enterprises and households − 27,888 − 50,152 − 19,021 − 17,638 + 13,275 − 15,463 + 3,819 + 3,137 + 4,498 − 3,815
Long-term − 23,810 − 46,973 − 18,697 − 8,550 − 266 − 1,029 + 3,994 − 3,212 − 697 + 7,903
Short-term  
7 − 4,078 − 3,179 − 324 − 9,088 + 13,541 − 14,433 − 174 + 6,349 + 5,195 − 11,718
General government + 1,068 + 8,425 + 2,801 + 11,496 − 1,148 + 4,972 − 15,679 + 2,364 − 6,286 − 11,757
Long-term + 7,497 + 309 − 334 − 77 + 338 − 348 − 389 − 336 − 42 − 11Short-term  
7 − 6,428 + 8,117 + 3,135 + 11,573 − 1,486 + 5,320 − 15,289 + 2,701 − 6,244 − 11,745
Bundesbank + 24,488 − 65,724 − 44,600 − 4,422 − 15,692 − 35,012 − 19,372 − 95 + 12,111 − 31,388
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) + 2,934 − 953 − 2,008 + 1,630 − 1,584 + 321 + 41 − 590 + 342 + 288
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 297,925 + 458,624 + 38,362 + 61,441 − 176,549 − 43,092 + 26,784 + 26,294 − 4,179 + 4,669
1 Direct investment  1 + 45,552 + 41,211 + 17,026 + 3,030 + 4,309 + 1,430 + 9,055 + 998 + 7,283 + 774
Equity capital + 31,044 + 32,101 + 12,406 + 4,141 + 992 + 3,730 − 483 − 153 + 9 − 340
Reinvested earnings  2 + 86 − 305 + 4,336 − 109 + 1,507 + 2,578 + 693 + 596 + 175 − 78
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors + 14,422 + 9,415 + 283 − 1,003 + 1,810 − 4,878 + 8,845 + 555 + 7,099 + 1,191
2 Portfolio investment + 145,974 + 297,880 + 15,997 + 29,208 − 38,001 − 3,300 + 35,421 − 14,840 + 48,603 + 1,659
Shares  3 + 19,824 + 39,189 − 49,282 + 3,315 + 2,919 − 8,210 − 502 − 16,101 + 11,197 + 4,402
Mutual fund shares + 8,079 + 3,939 − 5,822 − 2,118 − 2,699 + 292 − 29 + 1,853 + 535 − 2,416Bonds and notes  
5 + 120,901 + 203,298 + 23,258 + 14,913 − 45,276 − 17,650 + 4,419 − 13,802 + 20,990 − 2,769
Money market instruments − 2,830 + 51,454 + 47,843 + 13,099 + 7,055 + 22,268 + 31,534 + 13,210 + 15,881 + 2,443
3 Other investment + 106,400 + 119,533 + 5,340 + 29,204 − 142,857 − 41,223 − 17,693 + 40,137 − 60,065 + 2,236
MFIs  7,8 + 59,305 + 73,218 − 58,481 + 28,919 − 154,863 − 21,117 − 11,648 + 35,949 − 46,777 − 819
Long-term − 13,092 − 14,195 + 11,592 + 8,965 + 4,911 − 3,539 − 3,816 − 2,643 − 265 − 908Short-term + 72,397 + 87,413 − 70,073 + 19,954 − 159,774 − 17,578 − 7,832 + 38,592 − 46,513 + 89
Enterprises and households + 48,588 + 38,001 + 43,262 − 4,370 + 16,060 − 8,406 − 4,842 − 2,674 − 6,352 + 4,183
Long-term + 29,705 + 18,493 + 23,339 + 4,912 + 6,831 − 3,005 − 167 − 114 + 883 − 937
Short-term  
7 + 18,883 + 19,508 + 19,924 − 9,282 + 9,229 − 5,401 − 4,675 − 2,560 − 7,235 + 5,120
General government − 206 − 3,034 + 6,207 + 1,682 − 7,705 + 11,738 − 3,820 + 5,852 − 7,594 − 2,078
Long-term + 835 − 2,759 − 1,189 − 142 − 15 − 492 − 972 − 183 − 723 − 66Short-term  
7 − 1,040 − 276 + 7,396 + 1,824 − 7,690 + 12,230 − 2,848 + 6,035 − 6,870 − 2,012
Bundesbank − 1,287 + 11,349 + 14,351 + 2,973 + 3,651 − 23,439 + 2,617 + 1,009 + 657 + 951
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 174,977 − 237,280 − 202,898 − 10,565 − 52,248 + 2,954 − 49,798 − 14,761 − 7,901 − 27,135
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2008          Feb 226,761 100,879 70,196 2,378 28,306 350 122,924 2,608 22,382 204,379
         Mar 198,070 95,103 65,126 2,335 27,642 350 100,029 2,588 24,919 173,151
         Apr 198,225 92,633 61,352 2,345 28,935 350 102,683 2,559 25,586 172,639
         May 200,042 92,387 62,311 2,518 27,558 350 104,777 2,528 24,450 175,592
         June 206,618 95,220 64,930 2,495 27,796 350 108,553 2,495 23,498 183,120
         July 203,949 93,722 64,108 2,468 27,146 350 107,259 2,617 25,121 178,827
         Aug 217,137 93,048 62,296 2,539 28,213 350 121,103 2,636 26,641 190,496         Sep 215,889 99,936 68,808 2,623 28,504 350 112,975 2,628 26,756 189,133
         Oct 183,398 97,415 62,655 2,773 31,987 350 83,214 2,419 38,598 144,801
         Nov 213,908 104,612 70,131 3,476 31,005 350 106,395 2,551 33,778 180,130         Dec 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009          Jan 258,620 109,963 78,633 3,462 27,869 350 145,706 2,601 21,988 236,631
         Feb 275,770 113,507 81,893 3,455 28,159 350 159,318 2,594 16,983 258,786         Mar 274,458 107,809 75,726 3,463 28,620 350 163,681 2,618 7,527 266,931
         Apr 272,318 105,577 73,476 3,482 28,619 350 163,774 2,618 8,538 263,781
         May 261,878 107,375 75,646 4,599 27,130 350 151,664 2,490 9,175 252,703         June 290,738 104,691 72,955 4,493 27,243 350 183,052 2,645 10,121 280,617
         July 282,460 104,931 72,586 4,694 27,651 350 173,956 3,222 7,900 274,560
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2005 409,493 97,333 312,160 179,738 132,422 125,497 6,925 548,107 65,557 482,550 375,114 107,436 73,270 34,166
2006 450,228 117,723 332,505 190,300 142,205 134,057 8,148 624,790 95,019 529,771 408,907 120,864 79,900 40,9642007 509,178 162,654 346,524 196,178 150,346 139,842 10,504 650,966 111,543 539,423 404,904 134,519 82,979 51,5402008 552,454 173,255 379,199 226,043 153,156 140,521 12,635 708,806 147,242 561,564 425,311 136,253 79,982 56,271
2009          Jan 549,832 179,713 370,119 224,499 145,620 132,724 12,896 705,543 157,419 548,124 417,469 130,655 72,662 57,993
         Feb 549,066 180,440 368,626 223,008 145,618 132,566 13,052 713,477 154,559 558,918 428,823 130,095 71,651 58,444         Mar 573,077 197,620 375,457 229,204 146,253 133,510 12,743 714,201 152,058 562,143 427,503 134,640 76,321 58,319
         Apr 568,809 199,246 369,563 229,838 139,725 126,864 12,861 713,080 155,242 557,838 431,790 126,048 67,204 58,844
         May 566,067 193,775 372,292 230,487 141,805 128,808 12,997 712,001 149,674 562,327 434,989 127,338 68,567 58,771         June 570,515 193,969 376,546 230,552 145,994 133,025 12,969 719,779 149,007 570,772 434,379 136,393 78,288 58,105
Industrial countries 1
 
2005 362,704 95,847 266,857 167,314 99,543 94,278 5,265 508,106 63,924 444,182 364,680 79,502 60,907 18,5952006 396,649 115,269 281,380 174,784 106,596 100,541 6,055 570,675 93,560 477,115 389,770 87,345 66,210 21,1352007 452,354 160,666 291,688 180,564 111,124 103,104 8,020 590,245 110,291 479,954 384,024 95,930 69,347 26,5832008 488,419 171,387 317,032 206,795 110,237 101,003 9,234 644,754 145,045 499,709 403,120 96,589 68,150 28,439
2009          Jan 488,558 178,250 310,308 205,376 104,932 95,562 9,370 641,433 155,182 486,251 395,788 90,463 61,487 28,976
         Feb 488,288 178,959 309,329 203,638 105,691 96,236 9,455 649,239 152,313 496,926 407,232 89,694 60,578 29,116         Mar 512,968 196,118 316,850 209,584 107,266 97,926 9,340 649,299 149,855 499,444 405,566 93,878 65,141 28,737
         Apr 509,024 197,957 311,067 209,911 101,156 91,838 9,318 648,741 153,231 495,510 409,676 85,834 57,120 28,714
         May 505,824 192,482 313,342 210,288 103,054 93,605 9,449 647,692 147,646 500,046 413,028 87,018 58,097 28,921         June 509,871 192,583 317,288 210,189 107,099 97,723 9,376 655,581 147,087 508,494 412,336 96,158 67,821 28,337
EU member states 1
 
2005 270,808 91,882 178,926 108,523 70,403 66,156 4,247 414,377 60,186 354,191 300,022 54,169 41,305 12,8642006 308,720 108,982 199,738 121,929 77,809 72,902 4,907 479,025 86,343 392,682 332,871 59,811 45,202 14,6092007 364,105 154,644 209,461 127,080 82,381 75,942 6,439 489,234 105,022 384,212 318,769 65,443 46,262 19,1812008 397,821 164,762 233,059 150,379 82,680 75,192 7,488 537,453 137,208 400,245 332,598 67,647 46,190 21,457
2009          Jan 398,641 170,325 228,316 149,555 78,761 71,183 7,578 544,210 146,969 397,241 333,605 63,636 41,660 21,976
         Feb 398,667 171,450 227,217 147,563 79,654 72,053 7,601 552,280 143,023 409,257 345,803 63,454 41,358 22,096         Mar 422,126 188,564 233,562 152,815 80,747 73,268 7,479 554,191 141,039 413,152 344,938 68,214 46,364 21,850
         Apr 418,958 190,009 228,949 153,114 75,835 68,436 7,399 553,671 143,428 410,243 349,689 60,554 38,819 21,735
         May 417,898 185,106 232,792 154,758 78,034 70,551 7,483 555,309 139,329 415,980 354,114 61,866 39,889 21,977         June 420,945 184,967 235,978 154,565 81,413 74,004 7,409 562,586 138,682 423,904 353,908 69,996 48,515 21,481
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2005 175,532 59,160 116,372 69,048 47,324 44,369 2,955 332,261 29,443 302,818 268,483 34,335 25,225 9,1102006 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 369,648 38,878 330,770 292,178 38,592 28,340 10,2522007 251,718 118,112 133,606 79,745 53,861 49,537 4,324 367,318 56,632 310,686 269,095 41,591 28,964 12,6272008 280,544 130,226 150,318 95,994 54,324 49,408 4,916 416,321 81,703 334,618 291,193 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009          Jan 282,186 130,416 151,770 98,626 53,144 48,082 5,062 423,858 86,567 337,291 295,283 42,008 28,070 13,938
         Feb 279,792 131,753 148,039 97,287 50,752 45,648 5,104 435,586 85,847 349,739 308,423 41,316 27,190 14,126         Mar 295,159 142,967 152,192 101,476 50,716 45,673 5,043 436,243 84,311 351,932 308,862 43,070 29,161 13,909
         Apr 292,678 143,294 149,384 100,503 48,881 43,941 4,940 437,912 86,876 351,036 310,963 40,073 26,526 13,547
         May 292,584 142,959 149,625 100,711 48,914 43,961 4,953 440,343 86,121 354,222 314,365 39,857 26,328 13,529         June 292,314 141,657 150,657 100,679 49,978 45,026 4,952 447,207 86,678 360,529 318,350 42,179 28,993 13,186
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2005 46,789 1,486 45,303 12,424 32,879 31,219 1,660 40,001 1,633 38,368 10,434 27,934 12,363 15,5712006 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 54,115 1,459 52,656 19,137 33,519 13,690 19,8292007 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,9572008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009          Jan 61,274 1,463 59,811 19,123 40,688 37,162 3,526 64,110 2,237 61,873 21,681 40,192 11,175 29,017
         Feb 60,778 1,481 59,297 19,370 39,927 36,330 3,597 64,238 2,246 61,992 21,591 40,401 11,073 29,328         Mar 60,109 1,502 58,607 19,620 38,987 35,584 3,403 64,902 2,203 62,699 21,937 40,762 11,180 29,582
         Apr 59,785 1,289 58,496 19,927 38,569 35,026 3,543 64,339 2,011 62,328 22,114 40,214 10,084 30,130
         May 60,243 1,293 58,950 20,199 38,751 35,203 3,548 64,309 2,028 62,281 21,961 40,320 10,470 29,850         June 60,644 1,386 59,258 20,363 38,895 35,302 3,593 64,198 1,920 62,278 22,043 40,235 10,467 29,768
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in January 2007, including Bulgaria and Romania. — 2From January 2007,
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in including Slovenia; from January 2008, including Cyprus and Malta; f rom
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases January 2009, including Slovakia. — 3All countries that are not regarded as
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- industrial countries. 
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. — 1From
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2007          Sep 1.6445 1.4273 10.4533 7.4506 159.82 7.8306 9.2835 1.6475 0.68887 1.3896         Oct 1.5837 1.3891 10.6741 7.4534 164.95 7.6963 9.1735 1.6706 0.69614 1.4227
         Nov 1.6373 1.4163 10.8957 7.4543 162.89 7.9519 9.2889 1.6485 0.70896 1.4684         Dec 1.6703 1.4620 10.7404 7.4599 163.55 8.0117 9.4319 1.6592 0.72064 1.4570
2008          Jan 1.6694 1.4862 10.6568 7.4505 158.68 7.9566 9.4314 1.6203 0.74725 1.4718
         Feb 1.6156 1.4740 10.5682 7.4540 157.97 7.9480 9.3642 1.6080 0.75094 1.4748         Mar 1.6763 1.5519 10.9833 7.4561 156.59 7.9717 9.4020 1.5720 0.77494 1.5527
         Apr 1.6933 1.5965 11.0237 7.4603 161.56 7.9629 9.3699 1.5964 0.79487 1.5751
         May 1.6382 1.5530 10.8462 7.4609 162.31 7.8648 9.3106 1.6247 0.79209 1.5557         June 1.6343 1.5803 10.7287 7.4586 166.26 7.9915 9.3739 1.6139 0.79152 1.5553
         July 1.6386 1.5974 10.7809 7.4599 168.45 8.0487 9.4566 1.6193 0.79308 1.5770
         Aug 1.6961 1.5765 10.2609 7.4595 163.63 7.9723 9.3984 1.6212 0.79279 1.4975         Sep 1.7543 1.5201 9.8252 7.4583 153.20 8.1566 9.5637 1.5942 0.79924 1.4370
         Oct 1.9345 1.5646 9.1071 7.4545 133.52 8.5928 9.8506 1.5194 0.78668 1.3322
         Nov 1.9381 1.5509 8.6950 7.4485 123.28 8.8094 10.1275 1.5162 0.83063 1.2732         Dec 2.0105 1.6600 9.2205 7.4503 122.51 9.4228 10.7538 1.5393 0.90448 1.3449
2009          Jan 1.9633 1.6233 9.0496 7.4519 119.73 9.2164 10.7264 1.4935 0.91819 1.3239
         Feb 1.9723 1.5940 8.7406 7.4514 118.30 8.7838 10.9069 1.4904 0.88691 1.2785         Mar 1.9594 1.6470 8.9210 7.4509 127.65 8.8388 11.1767 1.5083 0.91966 1.3050
         Apr 1.8504 1.6188 9.0110 7.4491 130.25 8.7867 10.8796 1.5147 0.89756 1.3190
         May 1.7831 1.5712 9.3157 7.4468 131.85 8.7943 10.5820 1.5118 0.88445 1.3650         June 1.7463 1.5761 9.5786 7.4457 135.39 8.9388 10.8713 1.5148 0.85670 1.4016
         July 1.7504 1.5824 9.6246 7.4458 133.09 8.9494 10.8262 1.5202 0.86092 1.4088
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from 13 January to
exchange rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference 29 December 2000. 
exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. —
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in Stage III of European Economic and Monetary Union
As of Country Currency ISO currency code Euro 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
August 2009
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-21  1 EER-41  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
23 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
23 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Zeit Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 95.8 96.5 96.4 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.6 97.6 98.1 98.0 97.6
2000 86.8 86.4 85.8 85.5 87.8 85.8 91.5 97.0 85.1 91.0 92.8 91.8 90.8
2001 87.5 87.1 86.6 84.9 90.1 87.0 91.3 95.8 85.9 90.4 92.9 91.3 90.82002 89.9 90.4 89.6 88.0 94.7 91.0 92.0 95.0 88.5 91.0 93.6 92.0 91.92003 100.5 101.6 100.5 99.0 106.7 102.0 95.5 94.0 97.5 94.9 97.3 96.6 96.92004 104.3 105.5 103.6 102.9 111.2 106.0 96.0 93.0 100.1 95.3 98.8 98.2 98.6
2005 103.3 104.6 102.4 101.3 109.7 104.1 94.8 91.5 99.3 93.5 98.9 97.4 97.3
2006 103.7 105.0 102.3 100.9 110.1 103.8 93.9 90.0 99.2 92.3 99.1 97.2 96.82007 107.9 109.0 106.4 104.4 114.3 107.1 95.3 89.2 103.6 93.3 101.7 99.2 98.72008 113.0 113.6 111.5 109.9 120.0 111.1 95.9 87.9 107.3
p 93.6 103.5 100.1 99.6
2005          Nov 101.1 102.4 100.4 98.9 107.0 101.2 93.5 90.8 97.2 92.2 98.2 96.4 95.8
         Dec 101.1 102.4 107.0 101.2 98.4 96.5 95.9
2006          Jan 101.8 103.1 107.7 101.8 98.4 96.5 95.9
         Feb 101.1 102.5 100.4 99.2 106.8 100.9 93.4 90.3 97.6 91.8 98.2 96.1 95.4         Mar 101.9 103.4 107.6 101.7 98.4 96.4 95.7
         Apr 103.0 104.6 108.8 102.9 98.9 97.0 96.3
         May 104.0 105.5 102.6 101.2 110.5 104.5 94.1 90.1 99.4 92.6 99.2 97.4 97.1         June 104.2 105.7 111.1 105.0 99.2 97.6 97.5
         July 104.5 106.1 111.3 105.2 99.3 97.7 97.5
         Aug 104.6 106.0 103.0 101.6 111.3 105.0 94.0 89.8 99.7 92.6 99.2 97.4 97.2         Sep 104.4 105.7 111.1 104.7 99.0 97.2 96.9
         Oct 103.9 105.2 110.5 104.1 99.2 97.2 96.9
         Nov 104.6 105.8 103.0 100.7 111.2 104.6 94.1 89.7 100.2 92.4 99.7 97.6 97.3         Dec 105.7 106.7 112.5 105.6 100.3 98.1 97.8
2007          Jan 105.0 106.2 111.6 104.9 100.3 98.1 97.7
         Feb 105.5 106.7 103.7 101.4 112.0 105.2 94.7 89.8 101.5 92.9 100.5 98.3 97.8         Mar 106.3 107.3 112.9 105.9 100.7 98.4 98.0
         Apr 107.3 108.6 113.9 107.0 101.4 99.0 98.5
         May 107.5 108.7 105.3 103.4 113.8 106.8 95.3 89.4 103.3 93.3 101.6 99.1 98.5         June 107.1 108.3 113.3 106.3 101.4 98.8 98.2
         July 107.8 109.0 114.1 107.1 101.8 99.1 98.5
         Aug 107.3 108.4 105.7 103.7 113.9 106.7 95.2 89.0 103.7 93.2 101.4 98.8 98.3         Sep 108.4 109.5 114.9 107.6 102.0 99.4 98.9
         Oct 109.6 110.6 116.0 108.4 102.6 99.8 99.2
         Nov 111.2 112.2 108.2 106.5 117.8 110.1 95.9 88.6 106.1 93.7 103.6 100.8 100.3         Dec 111.5 112.2 117.8 109.8 103.5 100.5 100.0
2008          Jan 112.2 112.9 118.5 110.4 103.6 100.5 99.9
         Feb 112.0 112.5 110.2 108.5 118.4 109.9 96.3 88.3 107.6 94.1 103.5 100.2 99.6         Mar 114.8 115.6 121.8 113.4 104.6 101.5 101.2
         Apr 116.3 117.0 123.4 114.5 105.0 101.6 101.3
         May 115.8 116.6 113.2 112.1 122.7 113.9 97.4 88.0 110.9 94.9 105.0 101.5 101.1         June 115.8 116.5 122.7 113.8 104.9 101.2 100.8
         July 116.2 116.7 123.2 114.1 105.2 101.2 100.8
         Aug 113.9 114.1 111.3 109.9 120.3 111.1 96.4 87.5 109.1
p 93.7 104.0 100.1 99.4
         Sep 112.0 112.1 118.7 109.4 102.9 99.2 98.5
         Oct 107.9 108.2 115.4 106.4 100.5 97.3 96.8
         Nov 107.1 107.5 106.3 105.5 114.5 105.6 93.5 87.7 101.6 p 91.7 100.3 97.1 96.7
         Dec 112.4 112.9 120.3 111.0 102.6 99.6 99.4
2009          Jan 111.9 112.3 119.9 110.4 102.2 99.4 99.2
         Feb 110.4 110.7 108.5 109.3 118.6 109.1 p 94.0 p 87.8 102.6 p 92.8 101.1 98.9 98.8
         Mar 113.3 113.5 121.6 111.7 102.4 99.9 99.8
         Apr 112.5 112.8 120.5 110.7 102.3 99.5 99.2
         May 113.0 113.2 ... ... 120.9 110.9 ... ... ... ... 102.5 99.7 99.3
         June 114.0 114.2 122.0 111.9 102.8 100.2 99.8
         July 113.8 114.0 121.9 111.8 102.8 99.9 99.6
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of based on the trade in manufactured goods between 1999 and 2001 and
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the reflect third-market effects. Where price and wage indices were not
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure available, estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations. This group includes
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see not only the countries belonging to the EER-21 group (see footnote 1) butMonthly Report, November 2001, pp  51-65, May 2007, pp  32-37 and May also Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia,2008, p  40). For details of the methodology see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, RussianSeptember 2004, pp  69-72 as well as the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2, Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. —which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website (www.ecb.int). A decline 3Annual and quarterly averages. — 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. — 1ECB calculations including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus
are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral and Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia) as well as the non-euro-area
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: countries (Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Unit ed
Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kingdom and United States). — 5Euro-area countries and countries
Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, belonging to the EER-21 group. — 6Owing to missing data for the deflator
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United of total sales, China is not included in this calculation. — 7Euro-area
States. The weights used in these calculations during the period shown are countries and countries belonging to the EER-41 group (see footn ote 2). 
76*XI  External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic and
statistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are available
in both English and German, in printed
form and on the Bundesbank’s web-
site.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a
file which is updated monthly and
contains approximately 40,000 time
series published by the Bundesbank
can be obtained on magnetic tape cas-
sette or CD-ROM from the Division
Statistical data processing, math-
ematical methods. Orders should be
sent, in writing, to one of the ad-
dresses listed on the reverse of the title
page. Selected time series can also be
downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2008 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2009 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009

Monthly Report articles
September 2008
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2007
– Monetary growth and its determinants in re-
cent years
– Liquidity risk management at credit institutions
October 2008
– Germany’s international investment position
since the beginning of monetary union: devel-
opments and structure
– Development of tax revenue in Germany and
current tax policy issues
– Financing constraints and capital accumula-
tion: microeconometric evidence
November 2008
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2008
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2009 and 2010
– The euro ten years on – the German economy
in monetary union
January 2009
– Bank Lending Survey: an interim assessment
and current developments
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2007
– The Basel Framework in practice – implement-
ing the Basel advanced approaches in Ger-
manyFebruary 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2009
– German balance of payments in 2008
– Price convergence in the euro area
– Cashless payments in Germany and the role of
the Deutsche Bundesbank
April 2009
– Wage setting in Germany – new empirical find-
ings
– Short-term forecasting methods as instruments
of business cycle analysis
May 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2009
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2009 and 2010
– Growth effects of permanently high energy
prices: recent evidence for Germany
– The development and determinants of euro
currency in circulation in Germany
July 2009
– Corporate earnings and share prices
– Demographic change and the long-term
sustainability of public finances in Germany
– Recent developments in German and European
retail payments
August 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)
5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19962
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 19972
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19992
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20032
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-
rungsunion, April 20052
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20062
European economic and monetary union,
April 2008
Special Statistical Publications*o
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200832 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, June 20092, 4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
July 20082, 4
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2008,
June 20094
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
20064
6 Ratios from financial statements of German
enterprises 2004 to 2005, February 20084
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, March 20092
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics,
April 20091, 4
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2009
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20082
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2009
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available in German only.
3Solely available on the website, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Preliminary remarks“,
“Monthly balance sheet statistics”, “Borrowers’ statis-
tics“, “External positions report” and “Customer classifi-
cation” are available in English.
4Available on the website only.*Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail-
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng-
lish.
oNot available on the website.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
August 2009
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
12/2009
Opting out of the great inflation: German monet-
ary policy after the breakdown of Bretton Woods
13/2009
Financial Intermediation and the role of price
discrimination in a two-tier market
14/2009
Changes in import pricing behaviour: the case of
Germany
15/2009
Firm-specific productivity risk over the business
cycle: facts and aggregate implications
16/2009
The effects of knowledge management on innova-
tive success – an empirical analysis of German
firms
17/2009
The cross-section of firms over the business cycle:
new facts and a DSGE exploration
18/2009
Money and monetary policy transmission in the
euro area: evidence from FAVAR- and VAR ap-
proaches
19/2009
Does lowering dividend tax rates increase divi-
dends repatriated? Evidence of intra-firm cross-
border dividend repatriation policies by German
multinational enterprises
20/2009
Export-supporting FDI
21/2009
Transmission of nominal exchange rate changes to
export prices and trade flows and implications for
exchange rate policySeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
04/2009
Shocks at large banks and banking sector distress:
the Banking Granual Residual
05/2009
Why do savings banks transform sight deposits
into illiquid assets less intensively than the regula-
tion allows?
06/2009
Does banks’ size distort market prices? Evidence
for too-big-to-fail in the CDS market
07/2009
Time dynamic and hierarchical dependence model-
ling of an aggregated portfolio of trading books –
a multivariate nonparametric approach
08/2009
Financial markets’ appetite for risk – and the chal-
lenge of assessing its evolution by risk appetite
indicators
09/2009
Income diversification in the German banking in-
dustry
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20092
2a Solvabilit/C228ts- und Liquidit/C228tsverordnung, Feb-
ruary 20082
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the website.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

