MONTHLY REPORT
MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER
2009
Vol 61
No 5

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -0Fax +49 69 9566 3077Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 4:30 pm on 18 May 2009.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on thewebsite.
The Monthly Report is published by the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,by virtue of section 18 of the BundesbankAct. It is available to interested parties free ofcharge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
ContentsThe current economic situation
in Germany 5
Overview 6Global and European setting 11
Financial market shock and downturnin industrial output in advancedeconomies 14
Fiscal developments in the euro area 22
Monetary policy and banking business 25
Money market management andliquidity needs 28
Short-term bank lending rates sincethe autumn of 2008 36
Financial markets 44
The German government’s“bad bank” model 54
Economic conditions in Germany 58Public finances 71
The reform of the borrowing limitsfor central and state government 78
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 5*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
Interest rates 43*
Capital market 48*Financial accounts 52*Public finances in Germany 54*Economic conditions in Germany 61*External sector 68*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*
Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
5The current economic
situation in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
6OverviewHeightened recessionary pressure
at start of year
The steep slump that had gripped the world
economy in the fourth quarter of 2008 con-tinued in the first quarter of 2009. The de-cline in global production is already signifi-cantly worse than in any of the cyclical down-turns since the middle of the last century. Anadditional feature of this recession is the pro-nounced synchronicity of slackening tenden-cies worldwide. Manufacturing remainedhardest hit by the economic weakness in thefirst quarter, with output in most developedeconomies and many emerging market econ-omies shrinking at double-digit rates on theyear.
However, the pace at which the economy is
contracting has recently begun to slow, andseveral expectation indicators – in particularin some surveys conducted among enter-prises and consumers – have improved visibly.This is consistent with the recovery in com-modity prices since the beginning of the year.However, one reason a quick cyclical recoveryis unlikely is that the global shock to confi-dence triggered by the financial crisis has notyet been overcome; another is that banks’balance sheets, which had hitherto been im-pacted mainly by the need for write-downson securitised instruments, are now being in-creasingly strained because the recession istaking its toll on credit quality. Moreover, itwill be some time before the fiscal stimulusprogrammes that have been put in place aswell as the very expansionary stance of mon-etary policy and the extensive financial mar-ket stabilisation measures take full effect.Global
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
7During most of the first quarter of 2009, the
international financial markets were buffetedby ongoing turmoil, an increasing downwardpressure on economic activity and large lossessuffered by financial institutions in the finalquarter of 2008. This prompted investors’ riskappetite to drop sharply again at the start ofthe year. This, in turn, further pushed upcredit risk premiums for financial borrowersinto the first half of March; at the same time,share prices tumbled across a broad front.
Faced with tensions in the financial sector,
governments reinforced their efforts to relievebanks’ balance sheets of problematic assets.Moreover, central banks increasingly inter-vened directly in the financial markets inorder to ease tight financing conditions.
Signs of a slight easing of tensions were evi-
dent from mid-March. For example, pressureon the stock and bond market valuations offinancial institutions lessened. As a result,funds that had previously been moved to safeand liquid bonds were re-invested. This alsoreduced the perceived credit risks of borrow-ers in other sectors, although they were stillat high levels as this report went to press. Im-proved sentiment indicators likewise helpedcreate a more benign climate in the stockmarkets. In the foreign exchange markets,the euro depreciated slightly since the begin-ning of the year.
Given the pronounced downward pressure
on the economy and the more favourablemedium-term outlook for price stability thisentailed, the Governing Council of the ECBcontinued to ease its monetary policy stance.The interest rate for weekly main refinancing
operations in the Eurosystem was lowered to1% by May. Furthermore, a decision wastaken to conduct both main and longer-termrefinancing operations as fixed-rate tenderswith full allotment until beyond the end of2009 and to offer additional long-term refi-nancing transactions with a maturity of12 months as of June.
The Governing Council also agreed in prin-
ciple to purchase covered bonds in future.This measure is intended to further improvefinancing conditions in the banking sectorand therefore represents a continuation ofthe monetary policy measures taken to date,which take due account of the key role whichthe banking system plays in monetary trans-mission in the euro area.
Money market rates have clearly tracked the
Governing Council’s reduction in key policyrates since October 2008. The EONIA over-night index, in particular, has traded belowthe main refinancing rate virtually constantlysince the Eurosystem’s refinancing operationswere switched to the full allotment regime inOctober 2008. Longer-term money marketrates also responded to monetary policy-makers’ guidance. Against the backdrop ofthe extensive monetary policy and fiscalmeasures of recent months and buoyed bypositive news from the US and Europeanbanking sectors, the main risk premiums alsonarrowed.
The slowing in monetary dynamics in the
euro area continued sharply in the first quar-ter of 2009. For the first time since the launch
Financial
market setting
Monetary
policy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
8of EMU, the M3 measure of money supply
shrank over a reporting quarter. This corres-pondingly reduced the year-on-year rate ofchange based on the moving three-monthaverage, which recorded its lowest figure insome five years. The weak underlying monet-ary momentum during the reporting periodmust be seen in connection with continuedmuted loan growth, in particular. As in theprevious quarter, new lending to the domes-tic private sector in the euro area was lowerthan redemptions.
The stark cooling of the global economy sub-
stantially increased the recessionary pressureon the German economy during the wintermonths. According to a flash estimate by theFederal Statistical Office, real gross domesticproduct dropped by 3.8% on the quarter inseasonally and calendar-adjusted terms in thefirst quarter of 2009, having already shrunkby 2.2% in the fourth quarter of 2008. In ayear-on-year comparison, calendar-adjustedeconomic output was down 6.9% in the firstquarter of 2009.
The German economy’s sharp cyclical down-
turn was triggered by a particularly hefty ex-port shock after the escalation of the globalfinancial and confidence crisis very rapidlyspilled over to the real economy in many re-gions of the world in September 2008.Whereas German exporters had previouslymainly witnessed a decline in new ordersfrom trading partners based in countriesstruggling with adjustments in their domesticreal estate and banking sectors, they havemore recently seen orders plummet in allmajor external markets.However, in the first three months of the
year, Germany had to contend not only withanother severe setback to export business inthe manufacturing sector; other sectors alsofaced severe deteriorations. As a conse-quence, the slump in exports has left a clearmark on other areas of Germany’s corporatesector. A clear knock-on effect was apparenton business-related services, in particular inthe transport and logistics industries. Grow-ing inventories of unsold finished goods arealso likely to have prompted enterprises tocut production further. Taken together, thesenegative factors further increased the degreeof macroeconomic underutilisation signifi-cantly in the first quarter. Against this back-ground, enterprises have revised their invest-ment plans. Large swathes of the economywill presumably not need to expand or mod-ernise their existing stock of machines andequipment in the foreseeable future. In thefirst quarter of 2009, the muted investmentactivity was also reflected in a decline in de-mand for loans from trade and industry.
In contrast to the constrained developments
in exports and investment, private consump-tion bolstered aggregate demand somewhatin the first quarter of the year. The environ-mental premium for scrapping old cars intro-duced with the German government’s secondeconomic stimulus package has been instru-mental in this. Under this scheme, drivers re-ceive a cash premium if they scrap their oldcars and buy new ones. As a result, the num-ber of new registrations by private owners vir-tually doubled from January to February 2009in seasonally adjusted terms and rose again inMarch and April. The principal beneficiaries
German
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
9of this have been foreign car manufacturers.
Moreover, these figures are not indicative ofan improvement in households’ overall pro-pensity to consume. Rather, they point to atemporary reaction to targeted incentives topurchase that, moreover, may to some extenthave crowded out purchasing demand inother retail sectors. Further, there is likely tohave been significant frontloading of de-mand, which will have a countervailing nega-tive impact on automobile sales in the future.
In clear contrast to the marked drop in
macroeconomic value added, the decrease inemployment and increase in unemploymenthave been relatively limited so far. On theother hand, working hours have been adjust-ed considerably by reducing overtime andrunning down working time accounts as wellas through the use of flexible working timecorridors and special leave. Above all, use ofgovernment-subsidised short-time workinghas been stepped up. Given a continuingcontraction of aggregate output and possiblydwindling hopes of a rapid recovery of theglobal economy, enterprises will, however, in-creasingly resort to layoffs. This process hasalready started.
On the positive side, the adjustment process
on the labour market is not being hamperedby any additional burdens on the wage policyfront. Although overall negotiated rates ofpay again rose markedly in the first quarter,the quarter-on-quarter rate of increase wassmaller, and the new collective wage in-creases agreed in the first months of this yearwere, in some cases, distinctly lower than lastyear.On the price front, the overall favourable
trend was maintained at all levels of the econ-omy. Import prices continued to drop at thebeginning of the year, albeit somewhat moreslowly; at the industrial producer level, how-ever, the quarter-on-quarter decline in pricesaccelerated at the start of the year. One fac-tor here was that there were, in some cases,delays in passing through adjustments in theprices of crude oil and other imported goods.
After consumer prices had experienced a fair-
ly sharp drop of 0.3% in the final quarter of2008 in seasonally adjusted terms, they fellby the much smaller margin of 0.1% in thefirst quarter of 2009. Energy prices were con-siderably lower again overall, with decreasesin fuel and heating oil prices partly offset byhigher electricity prices. By contrast, commer-cial goods and services and residential rentsbecame more expensive. On a quarterly aver-age, the year-on-year increase in the nationalConsumer Price Index declined from 1.7% to0.9% – partly as a result of a base effect forservices given the early Easter in 2008. InApril, consumer prices picked up again some-what after seasonal adjustment. There willprobably be some markedly negative year-on-year rates over the next few months, how-ever, mainly owing to the sharp increase inprices for energy and food up until the middleof 2008 and the subsequent price correc-tions. These primarily reflect the fluctuationsin the international commodity markets ra-ther than general deflationary tendencies.
Last year, the incipient economic downturn
had not yet led to a deterioration in public fi-nances, and at the general government level,
Public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
10the budget was virtually balanced, as it had
been a year earlier. Given the escalating eco-nomic crisis and the extremely unfavourableoutlook, the German government adoptedlarge-scale measures to stimulate the econ-omy in November 2008 and January 2009.This, in conjunction with the effect of theautomatic stabilisers, meant it was evident asearly as the beginning of the year that thedeficit and debt ratios would rise perceptiblyin 2009 and 2010. In its updated stability pro-gramme of January, for example, the Germangovernment envisaged a temporary breach ofthe 3% threshold in 2010.
Since then, the macroeconomic outlook has
worsened sharply, however. The deficit ratiois therefore likely to distinctly exceed 3% asearly as this year and could even climb toaround 6% in 2010. In 2009, governmentspending is likely to grow at a pace not seensince the mid-1990s. The debt ratio will riserapidly and could reach a magnitude of 80%in 2010. In view of this dramatic deteriorationand the fact that most of the economicstimulus measures will take time to take ef-fect and that an excessive deficit procedure
will probably be initiated against Germanyunder the Stability and Growth Pact, furtherdebt-financed tax cuts or higher spendingcannot be justified. In the medium term, con-siderable efforts will be necessary to correctthe dislocations being created in public fi-nances.
As measured by the speed of output contrac-
tion, the German economic slowdown ap-pears to have peaked in the first quarter of2009. Of late, there have increasingly beeneconomic signals which, read in conjunctionwith the gradual easing of tensions on theinternational financial markets and the antici-pated stabilising influence of the large-scalemonetary and fiscal policy measures, point toa lessening of the downward pressure in theglobal economy. Part of the lost confidenceappears to be gradually returning. Despitediscernible signs of an easing of tension, itwould nevertheless be premature to discountthe direct and indirect negative consequencesof the financial crisis for the real economy.
Macro-
economic
outlook

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
11Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
In the first quarter, the world economy con-
tinued the tailspin that had begun in thefourth quarter of 2008. However, the econ-omy seems to have recently been contractingmore slowly. In addition, the expectationcomponents, in particular, have seen a visibleimprovement among firms and consumers insome surveys. This has coincided with the re-surgence of commodity prices since the be-ginning of the year and the perceptible recov-ery of equity market prices in the past twomonths. However, one reason why a rapidand radical cyclical recovery is unlikely is thatthe global shock to confidence triggered bythe financial crisis has not yet been overcome;another is that banks’ balance sheets, whichhad hitherto reflected, in particular, the needfor value adjustments on securitised instru-ments, are now being increasingly batteredby a recession-induced deterioration in creditquality. Moreover, it will take some time be-fore the economic stimulus programmeslaunched thus far, along with the very expan-sionary monetary policy and the extensive fi-nancial market stabilisation measures, canunleash their full effects.
The decline in global production is already
significantly worse than in any of the cyclicaldownturns since the middle of the last cen-tury. An additional feature of this recession isthe highly synchronised nature of the down-ward trend across the individual countriesand regions. Manufacturing continued to bethe sector most severely affected by the eco-nomic slump in the first quarter, with indus-trial output in most advanced economies andWorld economy
still in recession
Highly
synchronised
nature of
downturn in
industrial
countries...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
12many emerging market economies shrinking
at double-digit year-on-year rates. This wasdue mainly to the sharp fall in demand fordurable and internationally tradable goods,especially automobiles, and the attendant ad-justment in inventories (see also box on pages14-15). The economies that were most se-verely affected by the collapse of globalmanufacturing activity were those economieswith a large manufacturing share and whichare simultaneously extremely export-oriented.These are chiefly the east Asian emergingmarket economies and, among the industrialcountries, Japan and Germany. Moreover,countries suffering from crises in the real-estate markets, predominantly the UnitedStates but also the United Kingdom, Spain,Ireland and the Baltic nations, are undergoinga process of sharp contraction. In the firstquarter of 2009, real GDP in the industrialcountries is likely to have fallen somewhatmore steeply than in the preceding period, inwhich it had declined by 1
3/C254%.
Among the major emerging market econ-
omies, Russia was hit hardest by the crisis. Inthe first quarter, its macroeconomic perform-ance was down by 9
1/C252% on the year. At the
same time, the situation in the labour markethas deteriorated considerably; Russia’s stand-ardised unemployment rate hit an eight-yearhigh of 10% in March. Owing in some meas-ure to the sharp depreciation of the rouble,consumer price inflation averaged 13.8% inthe first three months of the year, which wasno lower than in the fourth quarter of 2008;this also put a strain on households. Follow-ing its fourth-quarter collapse, industrial out-put in Brazil has rallied somewhat; however,Industrial output *
in selected countries
Source:  national  statistics,  Eurostat  and 
Bundesbank calculations. — * Including min-
ing  and  energy,  excluding  construction. — 1 Besides euro area and other countries lis-
ted:  Denmark,  Norway,  Sweden,  Switzer-land  and  Canada;  weighted  with  the  re-spective share of gross value added created by these countries’ manufacturing industry in 2005.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009889296100104108
96100104108112
9296100104108112
889296100104
727680848892961001041081122005 = 100, seasonally adjusted,
quarterly, log scale
JapanUnited KingdomEuro areaUSASelected
countries 1
of which
April
... and in the
EMEs

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
13it was still down 10% on the year in March. It
was the Chinese economy that fared best inthe winter months. Although published year-on-year GDP growth fell from 6.8% in thefourth quarter to 6.1%, rough estimatesshow that this implies a perceptible increasein the growth rate on the period. This is likelyto be due mainly to initial stimuli from China’seconomic recovery program, which willamount to 6% of the cumulative GDP fore-cast for the years 2009 and 2010. In addition,private consumer demand received a boostfrom robust wage growth and a continuous,perceptible decline in consumer prices. Ultim-ately, however, China does not yet carry suffi-cient economic weight to give the worldeconomy a meaningful boost in order toovercome the recession.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) once
again revised its spring forecast downwards,predicting that global output will contract byan annual average of 1
1/C254% for 2009 and
then grow again by 2% in 2010. This is predi-cated on a 2
1/C252% rise over the course of 2010
following a contraction of1/C252% in 2009. The
IMF predicts that it is mainly the emergingmarket economies that will contribute, albeitto varying degrees, to the recovery of theworld economy that will ensue next year. Itexpects the south and east Asian emergingmarket economies, especially China andIndia, to grow at an accelerated pace, withLatin America returning to positive growthand central and eastern Europe (including theCommonwealth of Independent States) over-coming the current severe recession. RealGDP in the advanced economies will merelystagnate in 2010 following a 3
3/C254% contrac-tion in 2009. The pattern of growth predicted
by the IMF looks somewhat better insofar asoverall output in this group of countries willbe down by 2
1/C252% on the year at the end of
2009 before then showing 1% year-on-yeargrowth in the fourth quarter of 2010. Theforecast average annual rates of GDP growthfor the G7 for 2009 range from -2
3/C254% (USA)
to -61/C254% (Japan); the euro area is predicted
to see GDP fall by 41/C254%. The range of fore-
casts for 2010 stretches from -1% in Ger-many, -
1/C252% in the euro area and 0% in the
USA to as much as +11/C254% in Canada. The
risks to this outlook are, on balance, still onthe downside.
The contraction of world trade, which the
IMF forecasts will reach 11% in 2009, is, byhistorical standards, far out of proportion toIMF forecast for 2009 and 2010
Item 2007 2008 2009 2010
Real gross domestic
product Year-on-year percentage change
Advanced economies 1 + 2.7 + 0.9 – 3.8 0.0
of which
United States + 2.0 + 1.1 – 2.8 0.0Japan + 2.4 – 0.6 – 6.2 + 0.5Euro area + 2.7 + 0.9 – 4.2 – 0.4
Consumer prices
2
Advanced economies 1 + 2.2 + 3.4 – 0.2 + 0.3
of which
United States + 2.9 + 3.8 – 0.9 – 0.1Japan 0.0 + 1.4 – 1.0 – 0.6Euro area + 2.1 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.6
Unemployment Number of unemployed persons
as a percentage of the labour force
Advanced economies
1 5.4 5.8 8.1 9.2
of which
United States 4.6 5.8 8.9 10.1Japan 3.8 4.0 4.6 5.6Euro area 7.5 7.6 10.1 11.5
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2009. — 1Including
Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore. — 2Consumer
price index; for the euro area, HICP.
Deutsche Bundesbank
IMF forecast
once again
revised
downward
Exceptionally
sharp
contraction of
world trade

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
14Deuts che Bun desbankFinan cial market sho ck an d downturn in in dustrial output in a dvan ced economies
The global e conomy is un dergoin g a very severe down-
turn, whi ch is bein g driven parti cularly by a decline in 
industrial output an d in international tra de in goo ds. 
The global re cession is seen as bein g closely tie d to the 
international ﬁ  nan cial market crisis, whi ch peake d in early 
autumn 2008. A ccording to a stu dy by the IMF, re cessions 
asso ciate d with ﬁ  nan cial crises ten d to last lon g, to hit the 
advan ced economies relatively har d, an d to be followe d 
by only a weak re covery.1 Unlike other ma croe conomi c 
varia bles, in dustrial output development is not spe ciﬁ cally 
discusse d in this stu dy.
If one avera ges the in dustrial output of the e conomies in 
question a cross those perio ds identiﬁ  ed by the IMF stu dy 
as bein g re cessions asso ciate d with ﬁ  nan cial crises, an d 
then examines the decline of this series between the start 
of the re cession an d its trou gh, one can see a very weak fall 
in pro duction of 3%.2 This can be partly explaine d by the 
differin g patterns of ea ch re cession. Their asyn chroni city 
means that the ﬂ  uctuations over in dividual time series are smoothe d out when formin g an avera ge. To start with, 
if one i dentiﬁ  es the maximum output loss for ea ch time 
series compare d to the beginnin g of the re cession (within 
the ﬁ  rst ei ght quarters), one o btains mean declines of 
aroun d 5½% (me dians at just over 4%). By contrast, the 
total in dustrial output of OE CD countries in the se con d 
half of 2008 a ctually fell by 8%.4 In January-Fe bruary 2009, 
it was even down by 15% from its level of the ﬁ  rst quarter 
of 2008. Of the 15 re cessions asso ciate d with ﬁ  nan cial 
crises, a maximum decline in in dustrial output o ccurre d 
in only four of these cases, an d with falls of aroun d 10%, 
they barely come close to the ma gnitu de of the current 
contra ction.5 Such a massive drop in in dustrial output is 
therefore in no way typi cal of a re cession asso ciate d with 
a ﬁ nan cial crisis.
Another reason why the latest contra ction in in dustrial 
output in OE CD countries has been so comparatively severe 
is that it is by an d lar ge globally syn chronise d. Re gard-
less of the common tren d, however, the mean hi des the 
truly lar ge differen ces in the stren gth of the downturn. 
What is noteworthy is the poor performan ce of several 
countries whi ch themselves are not at the heart of the 
ﬁ nan cial market upheaval. U S manufa cturin g output in 
Mar ch 2009 was a seasonally a djuste d 15 ½% down on its 
level at the beginnin g of 2008. However, over the same 
perio d, Germany ’s manufa cturin g output fell by 23%, 
while Japan ’s contra cted by as mu ch as 35 ½%.
These drops can be partly explaine d by Germany an d 
Japan ’s greater relian ce on forei gn tra de, as well as the 
dramati c worl d tra de slump. The co-movement between 
industrial output an d forei gn tra de in a dvan ced econo-
mies is strikin g, but says nothin g about the causes or its 
dire ction. However, there is goo d reason to believe that 
factors that hamper forei gn tra de in parti cular, su ch as 
ﬁ nan cing constraints or prote ctionist measures, are not 
the main reasons in this case – at least not for the in dus-
trial countries. Otherwise, one woul d expe ct an in crease d 
1 See IMF, From Re cession to Re covery: How Soon an d How Stron g?, 
Worl d Economi c Outlook, April 2009, p. 103 ff. — 2 Seasonally a djuste d 
quarterly data from the OE CD’s Main E conomi c In dicators were use d 
for the in dustrial output (in cluding minin g an d ener gy pro duction). 
Only 13 of the 15 re cessions i dentiﬁ  ed in the IMF stu dy were in cluded: 
althou gh the OE CD data for New Zealan d (198 6 Q4 to 1987 Q4) an d 
Norway (1982 Q2 to 1988 Q4) showe d a clear rise in in dustrial out-
put durin g the re cession, this was not reﬂ  ected in the manufa cturin g 
output ﬁ  gures an d woul d have thus distorte d the avera ge. — 3 OE CD 
countries ex cluding Turkey, Czech Repu blic, Hun gary, Polan d, Slovakia, 
Mexi co an d South Korea. — 4 The in dustrial output of OE CD countries also represents an avera ge (al beit a wei ghte d avera ge). Similar results 
are o btaine d by usin g an (unwei ghte d) avera ge of in dustrial output 
for those countries whose histori cal re cessions asso ciate d with ﬁ  nan-
cial crises are also bein g examine d here to depi ct the current tren d. 
Althou gh in dustrial output in OE CD countries peake d in 2008 Q1, 
aggregate output peake d in the followin g quarter, whi ch is why the 
secon d quarter was sele cted as a referen ce point here. — 5 These four 
cases are the Unite d Kin gdom (1973 Q3 to 1974 Q1), Denmark (1987 
Q1 to 1988 Q2), Finlan d (1990 Q2 to 1993 Q2) an d Japan (1997 Q2 to 
1999 Q1). While the drop in in dustrial output was limite d to a sin gle 
quarter in Denmark, it ﬁ  rst began in the Unite d Kin gdom aroun d the Industrial output of OECD countries 
compared to recessions connected to financial crises
80859095100Beginning of recession/2008 Q2= 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
-2 0 12 10 8 6 4 2 -4 -6 -8
Quarters before/after beginning of recession/2008 Q2Jan-Feb 2009Average of 13 
recessions connected to financial crisesMemo item:
industrialised countries’ export volumes
 3OECD countries, total
Sources: OECD, CPB and Bundesbank calculations.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
15substitution of importe d goo ds by domesti c pro ducts 
an d conse quently a noti ceably ﬂ atter curve in in dustrial 
output overall for OE CD countries.
A disa ggregate d analysis shows that the steeper fall in 
German an d Japanese manufa cturin g output compare d 
to the U SA can be greatly a ccredite d to differen ces in 
the stru cture of these countries ’ in dustrial se ctors. U S 
automo bile pro duction has seen consi dera bly more severe 
cutbacks than in many other in dustrial se ctors. However 
its wei ght in the U S manufa cturin g output in dex is only 
aroun d half that of the same se ctor in Germany an d 
Japan. The gap between Germany an d the U SA in terms of 
the drop in manufa cturin g output over the January 2008 
to Mar ch 2009 perio d is 7 ½ per centa ge points, with 2 ½ 
per centa ge points stemmin g from the greater importan ce 
of car manufa cturin g in Germany. Germany an d Japan ’s 
prominent position in the manufa cture of ma chinery 
an d equipment also provi des an explanation.6 Generally 
speakin g, the manufa cture of capital goo ds – an d in this 
context also of interme diate inputs – has, on a global 
scale, been cut back mu ch more greatly over the past few 
months than the pro duction of non- dura bles. The German 
economy has been disproportionately affe cted by this 
global sho ck owin g to the pattern of its spe cialisation.
Overall, the globally syn chronise d slump in output, with 
its fo cus on capital goo ds (in cluding passen ger cars), in di-
cates that househol ds an d enterprises a cross the worl d 
greatly revise d their expen diture plans re garding con-
sumer an d capital goo ds in the fourth quarter of last year. 
The pattern over time su ggests that this is the reﬂ  ection 
of a general loss of conﬁ den ce as a result of the greatly 
increase d un certainty followin g the severe ﬁ  nan cial 
market upheavals of Septem ber 2008.7 Given the global 
scale of the deman d response, however, the imme diate 
real e conomi c effe cts of stri cter len ding terms are likely 
to have been little more than a footnote.8 Enterprises 
respon ded to the su dden fall in deman d an d the resultin g involuntary buil d-up of inventories by consi dera bly cut-
tin g back their a ctivities. The slow down in the desto ckin g 
of inventories is expe cted to generate short-term positive 
stimuli in the comin g months.
en d of 1974 – in syn c with the other a dvan ced economies, but after 
the en d of the re cession as date d by the IMF. In the case of Finlan d 
an d Japan, it coin cided with several major tra ding partners un dergo-
ing a severe e conomi c crisis. — 6 The manufa cturin g of information 
pro cessin g equipment an d ele ctroni c pro ducts has decline d mu ch more 
stron gly in Japan than in the U SA, an d has there by ma de a si gniﬁ cant 
contri bution to the poorer performan ce of Japanese in dustrial out-
put, despite the differen ce in wei ghtin g. A dmitte dly, this analysis still 
takes pla ce on a comparatively hi gh a ggregate d level, whi ch means 
that the “remainin g contri bution“ may contain a composition effe ct 
because of stru ctural differen ces within ea ch in dustrial se ctor. Differ-en ces between in dividual countries ’ national statisti cs with re gard to 
deﬁ nin g cate gories shoul d also be taken into consi deration. — 7 See 
ECB, The re cent sharp contra ction in worl d tra de from a histori cal 
perspe ctive, Monthly Bulletin, Mar ch 2009, p 11 ff. — 8 Survey results 
in the U SA show that manufa cturin g enterprises attri bute the cur-
rent re duced level of deman d mu ch more stron gly to the generally 
weak e conomy an d un certainty a bout the future than their custom-
ers ’ in crease d credit constraints. See Fe deral Reserve Bank of New 
York, Empire State Manufa cturin g Survey: Supplemental Report, April 
2009. — 9 Base d on the decline in manufa cturin g output between 
January 2008 an d Mar ch 2009.Manufacturing output and contributions 
from important economic sectors in Germany, Japan and the USA
2008 200965707580859095100105
–8–6–4–20+2JapanGermanyUSAManufacturing outputJanuary 2008 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
Sources:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System, 
METI and Bundesbank calculations.Japan
Remaining contributionStructural contributionGermany
Electrical 
equipmentComputers and 
electronic
goodsMachinery Motor vehicles 
and motor 
vehicle partsPer-
centage points Contributions from important economic sectors 
to the spread compared to the USA 9

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
16the decline in global GDP . However, it does
correspond to a large extent to the drastic de-cline in industrial output. In the second andthird quarters of 2008, owing, not least, tomajor losses in purchasing power in the oilimporting countries caused by high energyprices, a global economic slump had alreadybeen in the offing; however, this contractionappeared to be more on the moderate sideand largely confined to the industrial nations.This changed drastically, though, followingthe collapse of US investment bank LehmanBrothers in September 2008; apart from itsdirect impact, it indirectly triggered a globalconfidence shock, high net wealth losses andan abrupt termination of capital flows toemerging market economies, especially thosewith large external debts. Demand fordurable goods, which make up the majorityof internationally traded goods, subsequently
plummeted; automobile exports were affect-ed particularly severely. At all events, theresults of an IMF survey of major banks fromindustrial countries and emerging marketeconomies
1appear to implicate not only in-
creased exchange rate risks but also growingexport financing constraints caused by theupheaval in the international financial mar-kets and owing to the economic slump-induced increase in default risk among firmsengaged in foreign trade.
The excesses in the commodity markets,
which had put a severe strain on the globalprice climate as late as the first half of 2008,subsided rapidly because of the recessionaryslump in demand. Brent crude oil reboundedfrom its December 2008 low (US$37
1/C254)u pt o
US$571/C252by mid-May, especially owing to a
brighter economic outlook; however, it wasstill down by just over one-half from its pricea year earlier. The year-on-year decline was alittle smaller (-47%) for euro-denominated oilprices owing to depreciation. The yield curve,which is distinctly pointed upwards, suggeststhat crude oil is likely to become more expen-sive over the short and medium term. Therelatively slow progress in opening up newsupplies of oil, especially among non-OPECcountries, could also have a price-driving im-pact. US dollar-denominated prices for indus-trial raw materials, after having been at a lowlevel in the winter months, have likewise risenperceptibly since April. In early May, however,they were still down by 34
1/C252% on the year.World market prices for
crude oil and industrialraw materials as well as food, beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  — 
 = 8 May or 15 May 2009 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 200980100125150175200250300400500US dollar basis, 2000 = 100, log scale
Crude oil 
(Brent)
Industrial raw materialsFood, beverages 
and tobacco
1See International Monetary Fund, Survey of Private Sec-
tor Trade Credit Developments, Policy Paper, February
2009.Commodity
prices up
slightly yet still
at low level

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
17The prices for food, beverages and tobacco
already halted their tailspin in early Decemberand have been increasing incrementally sincethen. At last report, their year-on-yeargrowth stood at -18%.
The moderate rise in commodity prices since
the beginning of the year has had virtually noimpact on consumer prices in the industrialcountries. On average over the first fourmonths, they were even down from thefourth quarter, by 0.5% after seasonal adjust-ment. Year-on-year inflation fell from its peakin July 2008 (+4.6%) to +0.2% in April. Coreinflation (excluding energy and food), at1.7%, was 0.3 percentage point lower thanin the fourth quarter. The IMF’s spring fore-cast assumes that consumer prices in the ad-vanced economies will fall this year by 0.2%and rise only slightly in 2010 (+0.3%). TheIMF staff now assesses the risk of deflation asbeing distinctly higher than in the years 2002and 2003.
In the United States, the sharp cyclical con-
traction that had begun in the autumn con-tinued at an unabated pace in the first quar-ter of 2009. According to initial estimates,overall economic output fell by a seasonallyadjusted 1
1/C252%, thus coming in at 21/C252%
lower than a year earlier. This has also en-tailed considerable employment losses affect-ing nearly all sectors. On the whole, the num-ber of non-farm jobs fell by 2% in the Januaryto April period. This translates to a 3
1/C254%
year-on-year decline. The unemployment ratewas a seasonally adjusted 8.9% in April, alevel not witnessed since the third quarter of1983.Declining investment was the largest drag on
real GDP , with commercial gross fixed capitalformation and real housing expenditure11
1/C254% lower than in the fourth quarter of
2008. In addition, inventory depletion posteda negative contribution to growth of
3/C254per-
centage point, and general government de-mand declined by 1%. By contrast, privateconsumption rose by
1/C252%, with purchases of
durables, which had fallen by just over one-tenth over the course of 2008, making themost notable recovery. Household consump-tion was promoted by an increase in transferpayments at the beginning of the year, whichwas relatively large owing to a precedingsharp rise in prices as well as a reduction intax deductions. This more than offset the re-duction in gross wages and salaries associ-ated with the recessionary output trends. An-other factor boosting household consump-tion was the positive purchasing power effectassociated with the continued energy price-related decline in consumer prices by a sea-sonally adjusted 0.6% from the fourth quar-ter. However, the continued increase in thesaving ratio, which at 4.2% hit its highestmark since the third quarter of 1998, had adampening effect. Foreign trade likewisemade a positive contribution of
1/C252percentage
point to growth. This was based on a consid-erable 10% decline in real imports, whicheven exceeded the fall in exports (-8
1/C252%).
It must also be borne in mind, however, that
a variety of economic indicators have beenpointing to a slowdown in the recessionarydevelopments over the past few months,with new orders for durable goods in Febru-ary-March having tended slightly upwardLow inflation
rate in industrial
countries
United States

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
18over time. The Purchasing Managers’ Index
for the manufacturing sector improved per-ceptibly in April, although it remains in con-tractionary territory. Consumer confidencehas also recovered perceptibly. Although thesecond quarter of 2009 is expected to see afurther decrease in total output, this decline islikely to be considerably smaller than in thetwo preceding periods given the level of in-ventory depletion now achieved.
The Japanese economy remained in the grip
of the global recession in the first few monthsof the year. In the first quarter of the year,seasonally adjusted real GDP is likely to havefallen sharply once again after having alreadycontracted by 3
1/C254% in the fourth quarter of
2008. The manufacturing industry, whichsaw its output fall in the first quarter by a sea-sonally adjusted 21
1/C254% on the period and
331/C252% on the year, was hit particularly hard.
The main cause was the sharp contraction ofreal exports, which amounted to a seasonallyadjusted 29% compared with the final quar-ter of 2008. According to estimates by theBank of Japan, it was exports to the USA(-36
1/C252%) and the smaller south-east Asian
emerging market economies (-32%) whichplummeted the furthest, whereas the de-clines in exports to the EU (26%) and toChina (20
1/C252%) were somewhat more moder-
ate. Broken down by sector, exports of auto-mobiles and auto parts showed by far theworst performance (-48
1/C254%). What the un-
favourable quarterly figures do not show,however, is that in March Japanese industrialoutput rallied (after the factoring-out of sea-sonal fluctuations) and that exports did notslide any further. This may be regarded as an
initial sign of a bottoming-out.
Private domestic final demand in the first
quarter of 2009 was once again unable toform a counterweight to the negative exter-nal stimuli. In January-February, retail saleswere 1
1/C252% down on the fourth quarter. The
decline was probably not quite that strong inreal terms since, on an average of the firstthree months of 2009, consumer prices were0.8% below their fourth-quarter level. Pricesremained virtually unchanged on the year.
In the first quarter of the year, aggregate UK
output shrank by a seasonally adjusted 2%on the period and thus by 4% on the year.The quarter-on-quarter decline is due mainlyto the sharp drop – of 5
1/C252% – in real value
added in the manufacturing sector (excludingconstruction). Construction dipped by 2
1/C252%
and the performance of services, which weresupported by growth in the public sector, by1
1/C254%. On the demand side, however, the UK
economy benefited from households’ in-creased retail purchasing activity (excludingcars), which in the first quarter was up by aseasonally adjusted 1%. The 19% decline innew car registrations tempers this picture,however. The unemployment rate averaged7.1% over the January to March period, itshighest level since mid-1997. Over the De-cember to March stretch, consumer price in-flation shrank by only 0.2 percentage point to2.9%. This rate, which is high compared withother industrial countries, is related to the attimes sharp rises in import prices caused bythe depreciation of the pound sterling. Al-though the decline in house prices deceler-Japan
United
Kingdom

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
19ated somewhat after seasonal adjustment in
the March-April period, they were still no lessthan 17
3/C254% down on the year.
The new EU member states were likewise hit
hard by the global financial crisis and world-wide recession. This was due mainly to theirpronounced economic dependence on thestruggling euro-area economy and high out-flows of capital, particularly from countrieswith chronic current account deficits and lowlevels of foreign reserves. In the new EUmember states (excluding Malta, Cyprus, Slo-venia and Slovakia, which are all members ofthe euro area), industrial output fell by a sea-sonally adjusted 5% on the fourth quarter of2008, in which it had shrunk by 7
1/C252%. The
year-on-year decrease was 143/C254%. Output
fell particularly sharply in Estonia (-29%) andLatvia (-23
1/C254%), whereas the cyclical setback
was less pronounced in, for instance, Poland(-11
3/C254%). The number of unemployed per-
sons throughout this group of countries roseby a seasonally adjusted 606,000 from Sep-tember 2008, when it hit its trough, to March2009, with the rate rising by 1
1/C254percentage
points to 7.5%. Consumer price inflationpicked up in the January-April period to 1.3%compared with the fourth quarter of 2008, inwhich it had stood at 0.5%. This is associ-ated, in particular, with the depreciation-related increase in import prices and highercrude oil prices. However, year-on-year infla-tion, at 4.0% in April, was lower than at anytime since the second quarter of 2007.Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
In the first-quarter months, aggregate euro-
area output, according to initial estimates,was down once again after seasonal adjust-ment; according to Eurostat’s flash estimate,at 2
1/C252%, the decline was distinctly greater
than in the final quarter of 2008 (-11/C252%). It
was down 41/C252% on the year. Of the ten
member states that have already publishedinformation, nine of them, including the fourmajor members, reported negative quarter-on-quarter growth rates. However, the dis-parity in the pace of downward growth hasgrown larger compared with the fourth quar-ter of 2008. Whereas GDP contraction accel-erated, at times considerably, in Germany,Italy and Spain, it weakened somewhat inFrance. According to the European Commis-sion’s spring forecast, euro-area activity is ex-pected to bottom out in the final quarter of2009 and the first quarter of 2010. Aggre-gate output will subsequently undergo only avery flat recovery until the end of 2010. Thismeans that real GDP will fall by 4% on aver-age over 2009 and stabilise at its depressedlevel in 2010.
Industry was clearly front and centre of reces-
sionary developments in the euro area, withoutput falling in the first quarter by 8% onthe period and by 18
3/C254% on the year. The
sectors hit hardest by sagging output wereintermediate inputs and capital goods pro-duction, with year-on-year growth of -25%and -23
3/C254% respectively. By contrast, con-
sumer goods (-81/C254%) and energy production
(-41/C252%) did not fare nearly as badly. The
sharp drop in output caused capacity utilisa-New EU
member statesGDP down
more sharply in
first quarter
Industry
particularly
affected ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
20tion to fall distinctly. According to the Euro-
pean Commission’s survey results, capacityutilisation in manufacturing in April was 4
1/C252
percentage points lower than three monthspreviously and no less than 11
1/C252percentage
points below its long-term average. Industrialorders received continued to shrink after theturn of the year, yet the pace of the declinehas slowed perceptibly, with orders in Januaryand February down by an average of 1
1/C254%
from December, as compared with a month-on-month rate of -6
1/C252% in the August to De-
cember period. The industrial confidence indi-cator rebounded in April for the first timesince going into a tailspin in August 2008;this is due in large part to the distinct rise inproduction expectations. The aggregate Pur-chasing Managers’ Index also picked up per-ceptibly, though remaining in contractionaryterritory.
The continued decline in industrial output is
attributable largely to the collapse in exportsto non-euro-area countries, which continuedafter the turn of 2008-09. Nominal exportscontracted in January-February by a seasonal-ly adjusted 10
1/C252% from their level in the
fourth quarter of 2008, in which they had al-ready fallen by 9
1/C254%. The year-on-year de-
cline was 22%. Imports fell at the same time,by a seasonally adjusted one-tenth from thefourth quarter and one-fifth on the year. Thesharp contraction of capital goods productionindicates that expenditure on new machineryand equipment in the euro-area countries haslikewise decreased considerably. The declineis likely to have been more moderate in thecase of construction investment; at all events,construction output in January-February wasGrowth trends
in the euro area
Sources: national statistics, Eurostat and the 
ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 200932101
–––+
–4–3–2–10+1+2
2101
––+
–3–2–10+1
2101
––+Euro area
Germany
France
Italy
SpainSeasonally adjusted,
quarter-on-quarter percentage change
... owing
especially to
collapse in
exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
21down only 1% on the final quarter of 2008,
with relatively inclement weather additionallyhampering activity in the more northerlyeuro-area countries. Consumer demand forretail goods likewise tended to sag, with sales(excluding cars) in the first quarter of the yeardown
3/C254% from the fourth quarter of 2008.
Account must be taken here, however, of thefact that orders for new cars were revived bygovernment incentives, which may have ledto a rerouting of purchasing power. This isnot inconsistent, however, with a renewed re-duction in new car registrations throughoutthe euro area in the first quarter, by 1% afterseasonal adjustment. These figures also con-tain registrations by other groups of owners,which, in Germany, have been sharply tend-ing downwards. It also stands to reason thatconsumers have been saving more for newlyordered cars. Starting from a very low level,consumer confidence rallied in April.
The situation in the euro-area labour market
grew even worse in the first quarter of 2009.The unemployment rate went up from 8.0%in the final quarter of 2008 to 8.7%. It roseparticularly sharply in Ireland (1.8 percentagepoints) and Spain (2.6 percentage points).The number of employed persons fell in thefourth quarter of 2008 – more recent infor-mation is not yet available – by a seasonallyadjusted 0.3% from the third quarter andthus back to its level of a year earlier. Despitethe gloomy situation in the labour market, la-bour costs still went up perceptibly in thefourth quarter of 2008. Much like in the pre-ceding quarter, they rose by 0.9%. Theiryear-on-year growth (calculated from theindex level after seasonal and calendar adjust-
ment) increased slightly to 3.8%.
On average over the first three months of the
year, euro-area consumer prices, after exclud-ing seasonal variations, declined by 0.3%after having fallen 0.6% a quarter previously.This was due in large part to the continueddecline in energy prices, which more thanmade up for the increase in the prices of un-processed food and services, with industrialgoods prices remaining virtually unchanged.Year-on-year HICP inflation went down from2.3% to 1.0%. In some European countries,the aforementioned rates were even lower,with four countries posting negative inflationrates in March. The sharp decline in the year-on-year rates – which had averaged 3.8% asrecently as the third quarter of 2008 – wasConsumer prices
in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly
EMU ES IT FR DE00.51.01.52.02.53.0% HICP
(excluding energy and food)HICP
2009 Q12008 Q3%
Further
deterioration in
labour market
situationConsumer
prices affected
by previous
year’s
developments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
22Deutsche BundesbankFiscal developments in the euro area
Substantial increases in euro-area deficit and debt in 2008
At the end of April, Eurostat, the European Commission’s statis-
tical office, published the general government deficit and debtfigures of the EU member states that had reported these fig-ures as part of the European budgetary surveillance process.According to these reports, the euro-area deficit rose percep-tibly last year from 0.6% of GDP to 1.9%. The European Com-mission’s calculations show that this deterioration is only to alesser extent attributable to the economic downturn whichbegan in 2008. Instead, the structural deficit ratio (ie the deficitratio adjusted for cyclical influences and temporary measures)alone rose by 1 percentage point (pp) to 2.8%.
1In part, this
reflected a sharp counterswing to the extraordinary revenueboom seen during the previous years and, in some countries,the incipient budgetary consequence of fiscal stimulus meas-ures. Owing to only moderate revenue growth (+1.6%), therevenue ratio fell by 0.7 pp to 44.7%. By contrast, at 4.4%, ex-penditure increased more strongly than nominal GDP, whichpushed up the expenditure ratio by 0.6 pp to 46.6%. The debtratio also increased significantly from 66.0% to 69.3%. This risewas largely due to government support measures for financialinstitutions, which, for the most part, are not reflected in thedeficit (for example, bank recapitalisations). According to theEuropean Commission, overall, such measures amounted to3.4% of GDP in 2008.
Drastic deterioration in public finances expected in the period
ahead
Given the sharp recession and the fact that many countries
have adopted expansionary fiscal policies, in its spring forecast,the European Commission expects the euro-area deficit ratio toincrease further by 3.4 pp to 5.3% in 2009 – by far the highestlevel since the start of monetary union. The dramatic rise in thedeficit level can mainly be attributed to the severe economicdownturn, which, via the automatic stabilisers, leads to declin-ing revenue and rising social expenditure (particularly un-employment benefits). According to the European Commis-sion’s calculation, these direct cyclical influences account fortwo-thirds of the increase in the deficit. The rise in the struc-tural deficit ratio by around 1 pp is due, first, to the continueddecline in revenue over and above the calculated cyclical influ-ence and, second, to the numerous fiscal stimulus measures.Most member states – in accordance with the European Eco-nomic Recovery Plan (EERP) initiated by the European Commis-sion – adopted large fiscal stimulus packages to bolster aggre-gate demand. As a result, revenue is expected to fall by 2.5%,with a sharper decline being prevented by the – relative toother lower revenue-bearing GDP components – ongoing ro-bust development of private consumption and wages and sal-aries. The revenue ratio consequently remains largely un-changed (+0.1 pp). The forecast estimates that total expend-
iture will climb by 4.6%. Given a decline in nominal GDP, theexpenditure ratio is expected to rise steeply by 3.5 pp.
The European Commission forecasts a further substantial de-
terioration in the fiscal balance in 2010. The deficit could reach6.5% of GDP, with one-third of the increase caused by less un-favourable but nonetheless weak cyclical development. Thelargely structurally induced deterioration is mainly due to thesame factors as in 2008. According to the forecast, revenue willhardly grow overall (+0.3%) and will fall in relation to GDP (byaround
1/C252pp). Expenditure is expected to increase by 2.8%,
which means that the expenditure ratio will rise by almost 1 pp.
According to the Commission’s forecast, between the end of
2008 and the end of 2010, general government debt in theeuro area in relation to GDP will shoot up by 14
1/C252pp to 83.8%.
This dramatic rise is above all due to a combination of excep-tionally high deficits and very weak GDP development. In add-ition, where sufficiently robust data were available, the Com-mission also included debt-increasing measures to support thefinancial sector (which are not reflected in the deficit). How-ever, at 1
1/C252pp, these operations account for only a small part of
the forecast steep increase in the debt ratio.
13 out of 16 countries will exceed the 3% limitFor 2008, five euro-area countries recorded a deficit ratio that
exceeded the 3% reference value (France, Greece, Ireland,Malta and Spain) and are currently in the excessive deficit pro-cedure (in the case of Malta, the existence of an excessive def-icit has not yet been decided). In Greece, the tendency to makeextensive revisions to the statistical data, which has alreadybeen evident in the past, continued, and these revised figuresretrospectively show a significantly worse financial situation.The ECOFIN Council asked Greece to correct its overstepping ofthe reference value, which it reported retroactively in autumn2008 for 2007 – the year in which Greece was released from itslast excessive deficit procedure – in 2010. The correctionperiods granted to France and Spain extend up to 2012, whileIreland has been granted until 2013 to correct its excessive def-icit. As a rule, an excessive deficit should be corrected duringthe year after its identification. But, given the exceptionallystrong economic downturn, in these instances, the Councilmade use of the flexibility provided by the Stability andGrowth Pact. However, countries in the excessive deficit pro-cedure no longer have any room for manoeuvre to increasetheir expansionary fiscal policy, for example, by means of fur-ther economic stimulus programmes. Rather, the EU budgetaryrules stipulate an annual structural consolidation of at least0.5% of GDP as a benchmark. Yet, since it is permissible to relaxthis rule during exceptionally unfavourable economic periods,
1At 2.8%, the structural deficit ratio changed significantly vis-/C224-vis
the previous autumn forecast (1.6%). According to European Com-mission data, half of this deterioration can be explained by a down-ward revision of potential output on which the calculation was
based.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
23a case-by-case examination would have to be made to ascertain
whether automatic stabilisers should be allowed to operatelargely unhindered for the time being. However, in countrieswhere the soundness of the public finances and confidence inthem is acutely threatened, rapid perceptible consolidationmeasures are required, even amid an unfavourable economicdevelopment.
According to the Commission’s estimate, in 2009 only three
euro-area countries will comply with the 3% deficit limit(Cyprus, Finland and Luxembourg). At over 12%, Ireland willrecord the highest deficit ratio, followed by Spain with almost9%. France, Portugal, Slovenia and Greece are expected to re-cord deficits of between 5% and 7% of GDP. Although the 3%limit may be exceeded temporarily during a period of severeeconomic downturn, as long as the deficit ratio remains closeto the reference value, in most euro-area countries the deficitis likely neither to be close to the reference value nor to exceedthe reference value only temporarily. Therefore, according tothe Stability and Growth Pact, an excessive deficit procedureshould be launched in these cases.
Sustainability of public finances increasingly at riskAccording to the Commission’s forecast, the debt ratios will in-
crease in all euro-area countries (with the exception of Cyprus)between 2008 and 2010. In some cases, this increase will be dra-matic. It is estimated at +36 pp in Ireland and +23 pp in Spain,followed by France with +18 pp. In a further eight countries,the ratio is expected to go up by more than 10 pp. AlongsideAustria, Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Malta andPortugal, in 2009 Ireland is likely to become the ninth country
not to comply with the reference value for the debt level of60% of GDP. In 2010, the debt levels of the Netherlands andSpain are also expected to exceed the threshold value.
Particularly given that fiscal burdens will increase considerably
in future in connection with ageing populations, the high debtlevels are a cause for concern. Furthermore, the long-term sus-tainability of public finances is threatened in a large number ofcountries by in part high contingent liabilities from suretiesand guarantees provided in connection with the financial crisiswhich, in most cases, will probably only be reflected in theMaastricht ratios after they are called. Unfortunately, Eurostatdid not make a fundamental decision on this matter prior tothe notifications, and a decision is currently still pending.
Since the start of the crisis, some countries have recorded
marked increases in their risk premiums on government bonds.Calls have been made in this context from various quarters forthe joint issuance of government bonds by the EU or euro-areastates – Eurobonds. The associated common sharing of liabilitywould mean that countries with high premiums on their na-tional government bonds would benefit from lower financingcosts, while countries with low risk premiums would effectivelybe penalised. As well as impeding the desirable disciplining offiscal policy by the capital market, such Eurobonds would alsohave the character of an assumption of liability and would thusinfringe the EC Treaty, which explicitly excludes this in order tostrengthen the national member states’ own responsibility fortheir fiscal policy.
Budget balance (as % of GDP) Structural budget balance (as % of GDP) Debt (as % of GDP)
Country 2007 2008 2009 2010 2007 2008 2009 2010 2007 2008 2009 2010Austria – 0.5 – 0.4 – 4.2 – 5.3 – 1.8 – 1.8 – 3.2 – 3.8 59.5 62.5 70.4 75.2
Belgium – 0.2 – 1.2 – 4.5 – 6.1 – 1.5 – 2.2 – 3.2 – 4.1 84.0 89.6 95.8 100.9Cyprus 3.5 0.9 – 1.9 – 2.6 2.7 0.1 – 2.1 – 2.1 59.4 49.1 47.5 47.9Finland 5.2 4.2 – 0.8 – 2.9 3.2 2.8 0.8 – 0.7 35.1 33.4 39.7 45.7France – 2.7 – 3.4 – 6.6 – 7.0 – 3.9 – 4.3 – 5.6 – 5.5 63.8 68.0 79.8 86.0Germany – 0.2 – 0.1 – 3.9 – 5.9 – 1.2 – 1.2 – 2.4 – 3.9 65.1 65.9 73.4 78.7Greece – 3.6 – 5.0 – 5.1 – 5.7 – 4.5 – 6.5 – 5.7 – 4.7 94.8 97.6 103.4 108.0Ireland 0.2 – 7.1 – 12.1 – 15.7 – 1.8 – 7.5 – 9.8 – 12.2 25.0 43.2 61.2 79.7Italy – 1.5 – 2.7 – 4.5 – 4.8 – 2.9 – 3.4 – 2.6 – 2.8 103.5 105.8 113.0 116.1Luxembourg 3.6 2.6 – 1.5 – 2.8 0.9 2.0 0.6 0.1 6.9 14.7 16.0 16.4Malta – 2.2 – 4.7 – 3.6 – 3.2 – 3.3 – 4.9 – 3.6 – 2.8 62.1 64.1 67.0 68.9Netherlands 0.4 1.0 – 3.4 – 6.1 – 1.0 – 0.5 – 2.6 – 4.3 45.6 58.2 57.0 63.1Portugal – 2.6 – 2.6 – 6.5 – 6.7 – 3.3 – 3.8 – 5.5 – 5.1 63.6 66.4 75.4 81.5Slovakia – 1.9 – 2.2 – 4.7 – 5.4 – 3.8 – 4.7 – 5.0 – 4.7 29.4 27.6 32.2 36.4Slovenia 0.5 – 0.9 – 5.5 – 6.5 – 1.7 – 2.5 – 4.9 – 5.2 23.4 22.8 29.3 35.0Spain 2.2 – 3.8 – 8.6 – 9.8 1.6 – 4.0 – 6.8 – 8.2 36.2 39.5 50.9 62.3EU 16 – 0.6 – 1.9 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 1.8 – 2.8 – 3.9 – 4.7 66.0 69.3 77.7 83.8
Source: European Commission, Economic Forecast Spring 2009.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
24largely the result of the correction following
the exceptionally strong rise in energy andfood prices in the first half of 2008. Eliminat-ing these two volatile components from theHICP results in inflation rates of 2% or morefor half of the countries. In the euro area as awhole, core inflation (excluding energy andunprocessed food) rose by 0.6 percentagepoint to 1.6%. A base effect resulting from
the early Easter date, which dampened theyear-on-year growth of the services compon-ent, also played a role. Euro-area consumerprices also rose slightly in April 2009. As inMarch, the year-on-year increase in the HICPstood at 0.6%.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
25Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the money
market
In the light of growing downward cyclical
pressure and a brighter outlook for price sta-bility, the Governing Council of the ECB con-tinued easing its interest rate policy in 2009.By May, the interest rate for the weekly mainrefinancing operations of the Eurosystem hadbeen lowered to 1%. Furthermore, the Gov-erning Council decided to offer both themain and longer-term refinancing operationsas fixed-rate tenders with full allotment ofall tenders submitted beyond the end of2009 and to offer additional longer-term re-financing transactions with a maturity of12 months from June. The Governing Councilalso agreed, in principle, to purchase coveredbonds in future. This measure is intended tohelp further improve financing conditions inthe banking sector and is therefore a logicalcontinuation of the monetary policy measuresintroduced to date, which take account of thebanking system’s key role in monetary trans-mission in the euro area. In order not to placean additional strain on the incipient recoveryin the money market, even in a setting of lowshort-term interest rates, the GoverningCouncil decided to leave the interest rate onthe deposit facility of banks’ account holdingson hold at
1/C254%. By contrast, it lowered the
interest rate charged by the Eurosystem foruse of the marginal lending facility to 1
3/C254%
in order to maintain the symmetry of theinterest rate corridor around the main refi-nancing rate.
Money market rates have clearly been track-
ing the Governing Council’s reduction in keyFurther interest
rate cuts by
ECB Governing
Council

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
26policy rates since October 2008. The EONIA
overnight index, in particular, has been trad-ing below the main refinancing rate virtuallywithout exception since the Eurosystem’s refi-nancing operations were switched to the fullallotment regime in October 2008. At thesame time, there has been a trend rise in thetrading volumes used to determine theEONIA compared with the fourth quarter of2008, which was supported by the renewedexpansion of the interest rate corridor around
the main refinancing rate in February. Despitetrading volumes not yet having reached thelevel they were at prior to the financial mar-ket crisis, this can be seen as a sign of thesituation in the euro money market having re-laxed significantly compared with the autumnof last year.
Longer-term money market rates also re-
sponded to monetary policymakers’ guid-ance. Given the extensive monetary policyand fiscal measures in recent months andbuoyed by the positive news from the US andEuropean banking sectors, the main risk pre-miums have also continued to narrow. Sincethe start of February, the yield spread be-tween the interest rate for uncollateralisedthree-month money (three-month Euribor)and its collateralised three-month counterpart(Eurepo) has fallen by around 0.3 percentagepoint to almost 0.6 percentage point. Thisrisk premium has therefore returned to a levelwhich was last seen before the marked escal-ation of the financial market turbulence inthe final quarter of 2008.
Monetary developments in the euro area
The slowdown in the pace of monetary
growth in the euro area continued sharply inthe first quarter of 2009. The M3 monetaryaggregate shrank for the first time since thelaunch of monetary union. In seasonally ad-justed and annualised terms, its growth ratewas almost -2
1/C252%, compared with an in-
crease of just under 7% in the fourth quarterof 2008. The three-month average of its an-Money market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly averages. — 2 Only on 8 October 
2008 2.75%. — 3 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month  Eurepo. —   = Average  from 
1-15 May 2009.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 200900.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
050100150200Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or fixed
interest rate for mainrefinancing operations
Difference between 
uncollateralised and collateralised three-month interbank deposit rates
 1, 32
Basis
points%
Deposit rate
Slight easing in
the overnight
money marketLonger-term
money market
rates respond
to monetary
policymakers’
guidance
Significant drop
in M3 in the
first quarter

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
27nual rate for the period from January to
March fell accordingly to 51/C252%, thus reaching
its lowest level for around five years.
Of the individual components of M3, there
was a sharp decline, above all, in marketableinstruments. They shrank at a seasonally ad-justed annual rate of over 16
1/C252% on the back
of weak growth in the previous quarter. Thisdecrease was caused mainly by the sharp dropin short-term debt securities (with a maturity
of up to two years) owing to the persistentfinancial market turmoil. The seasonally ad-justed and annualised decline amounted to69
1/C252%, which was not offset by the higher
uptake of money market fund shares/units.However, it was not only marketable paperthat declined; other short-term deposits fell,too, at a seasonally adjusted and annualisedrate of 9
1/C252% on balance. Although short-Open market operations of the Eurosystem*
Value
dateType of
transaction 1Maturityin daysActual
allotmentin5billionDeviation
from thebenchmark
2
in5billionMarginal
rate/fixedrate%Allotment
ratio%Weighted
rate%Cover
ratio
3Numberof bidders
21.01.09 S-LTRO (MT) 21 113.4 – 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 139
21.01.09 MRO (MT) 7 251.5 119.5 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 66828.01.09 MRO (MT) 7 214.2 183.7 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 54429.01.09 LTRO (MT) 91 43.2 – 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 13304.02.09 MRO (MT) 7 207.1 213.6 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 50110.02.09 FTO (–) 1 – 129.1 – 1.80 100.00 1.36 1.01 11911.02.09 S-LTRO (MT) 28 104.7 – 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 9311.02.09 MRO (MT) 7 197.7 – 26.8 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 51112.02.09 S-LTRO (MT) 91 18.5 – 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 3912.02.09 S-LTRO (MT) 182 10.7 – 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 3918.02.09 MRO (MT) 7 215.3 140.8 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 52725.02.09 MRO (MT) 7 237.8 126.3 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 50426.02.09 LTRO (MT) 91 21.6 – 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 5704.03.09 MRO (MT) 7 244.1 146.6 2.00 100.00 – 1.00 48110.03.09 FTO (–) 1 – 110.8 – 1.80 100.00 1.52 1.01 11911.03.09 MRO (MT) 7 227.7 – 67.8 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 50311.03.09 S-LTRO (MT) 28 120.2 – 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 9712.03.09 S-LTRO (MT) 91 30.2 – 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 7112.03.09 S-LTRO (MT) 182 10.8 – 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 6018.03.09 MRO (MT) 7 226.1 101.6 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 53725.03.09 MRO (MT) 7 230.0 62.5 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 53826.03.09 LTRO (MT) 91 28.8 – 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 8701.04.09 MRO (MT) 7 238.1 89.6 1.50 100.00 – 1.00 52207.04.09 FTO (–) 1 – 103.9 – 1.30 100.00 1.12 1.02 114
*For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations
from 8 October 2008 to 20 January 2009, see DeutscheBundesbank, Monthly Report, February 2009, p 25. —1MRO: main refinancing operation, LTRO: longer-term
refinancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-term refinancing operation, FTO: fine-tuning operation(+: liquidity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing
operation). MT: fixed-rate tender. — 2Excluding (S-)LTROs
allotted in the same week and various foreign exchangeswap operations. — 3Ratio of total bids to the allotment
amount.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Marketable
instruments
and other
short-term
deposits decline
on balance

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
28Deutsche BundesbankMoney market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods from
21 January to 7 April 2009, euro-area credit institu-
tions’ need for central bank money determined by au-
tonomous liquidity factors increased by 519.3 billion
in net terms. This was attributable to the sharp rise in
general government deposits, which increased by a
total of 539.1 billion in the period under review. By
contrast, the demand for liquidity from banknotes in
circulation declined by 55.8 billion owing to the dis-
tinct fall in demand for banknotes in the January-Feb-
ruary 2009 maintenance period (by 512.9 billion). This
is usual for the time of year following the sharp rise
over the Christmas period. Moreover, if the net for-
eign reserves and the other factors are taken to-
gether, a move which eliminates valuation effects
with no impact on liquidity, there was also a decline
in liquidity demand over the three periods ( 514.0 bil-
lion in total). Factors such as the disbursements of cen-
tral bank profits, which have an effect on liquidity, in-
cluding the Bundesbank profit of 56.3 billion paid on
10 March, contributed to this development. The de-
mand for central bank liquidity resulting from the
minimum reserve requirement increased only slightly
in net terms by 50.6 billion.
In the period under review, the Eurosystem continued
to pursue its policy of generous liquidity provision in
order to support the functioning of the money mar-
ket. All main refinancing operations and longer-term
refinancing operations were still conducted as fixed-
rate tenders with full allotment. Thus, in the three
maintenance periods under review, liquidity provision
was based solely on demand from credit institutions.
However, credit institutions’ demand for liquidity
dropped steadily during the period under review
meaning that, in net terms, the volume of Eurosystem
open market operations decreased by almost 5160 bil-
lion and recourse to the deposit facility fell by 5180
billion. The longer-term refinancing operations con-
tinued to be carried out with the same maturity struc-
ture and frequency used since November 2008 follow-
ing the intensification of the money market turmoil.
These included special tenders with a maturity of one
reserve maintenance period as well as monthly paral-lel allotments of three-month and six-month tenders
(see the table on page 27). However, the share of the
main refinancing operations in total refinancing in-
creased from 30% to 36% overall during the period
under review. On the last day of the respective main-
tenance periods, the ECB carried out fine-tuning oper-
ations to absorb excess liquidity as usual.
In the January-February 2009 reserve maintenance
period, which lasted only 21 days, the new fixed rate
of 2.00% was used for the first time in the main refi-
nancing operations after the ECB Governing Council
had agreed a further cut in the interest rate of 50
basis points at its meeting on 15 January. This period
was also marked by the reinstatement of the 200-
basis-points corridor for the standing facilities as of
21 January; it had been symmetrically narrowed to
100 basis points in October 2008. Although credit in-
stitutions’ demand for central bank liquidity remained
strong, it declined noticeably in comparison with the
previous weeks measured against the above-bench-
mark surplus in liquidity. On a daily average, this ex-
cess liquidity decreased to just over 5220 billion,
whereas it had stood at over 5300 billion per day
throughout most of the December-January mainten-
ance period. As a result of this reduction in liquidity,
recourse to the Eurosystem’s deposit facility fell to an
average of 5175 billion compared with almost 5240
billion in the previous period. Against the background
of the full allotment regime, the widening of the
standing facilities corridor was evidenced particularly
clearly in the development of EONIA fixings, which
were significantly lower (by 76 basis points on aver-
age over the period) than the fixed rate for the mainrefinancing operations.
The developments observed in the previous period
continued in the February-March reserve maintenance
period. Thus, credit institutions’ demand for central
bank liquidity declined further, which – owing to mar-
ket participants’ expectations of interest rate cuts –
was especially apparent in the rather modest bidding
volumes in the longer-term refinancing operations.
The excess liquidity, which had decreased to just over

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
295130 billion on average, was reflected in the lower
levels of recourse to the deposit facility ( 595 billion on
average). The noticeable decline in liquidity had only
a minor impact on the spread between the EONIA and
the main refinancing rate: in this maintenance period
too, the overnight reference rate was, on average,
72 basis points lower than the key interest rate of
2.00% and was thus clearly guided by the deposit
facility rate.
In the March-April reserve maintenance period, the
main refinancing operations were carried out with
the new fixed rate of 1.50%. At its meeting on
5 March, the ECB Governing Council, besides approv-
ing a cut of 50 basis points in the key interest rate,
agreed to continue conducting the main refinancing
operations and longer-term refinancing operations as
fixed-rate tenders with full allotment until at least the
end of 2009, a measure which had initially been limit-
ed to the end of March 2009. The regime of carrying
out additional longer-term tenders, which had been
in place in the previous months, was also extended
beyond the end of 2009. In view of this greater plan-
ning certainty for the coming months, credit institu-
tions’ demand for central bank money decreased fur-
ther in the March-April maintenance period. Al-
though the respective allotment volumes for the main
refinancing operations remained fairly steady – as in
the previous period – at 5230 billion, daily excess li-
quidity fell noticeably to just over 590 billion on aver-
age. Besides the persistently lower level of interest in
longer-term refinancing operations, the degree of li-
quidity absorption through autonomous factors –
which was higher than in the previous period – con-
tributed to the reduced liquidity surplus. This conse-
quently led to a renewed decline in recourse to the
deposit facility ( 558 billion on a daily average). During
the March-April maintenance period, the EONIA was
once again almost always well below the main refi-
nancing rate, albeit to a lesser extent than in the pre-
vious period. It did not completely mirror the 50-basis-
point cut in the main refinancing rate, meaning that
the average spread between the two rates decreased
to 56 basis points. The higher EONIA of 1.64% at theend of the quarter also had an impact here as it was
above the respective key interest rate again for the
first time since 8 October 2008. Broad trading margins
continued to be a significant feature of the overnight
interest rate.
Following a further cut of 25 basis points in the key
interest rate agreed by the ECB Governing Council at
its meeting on 2 April, the main refinancing oper-
ations in the subsequent April-May reserve mainten-
ance period were carried out with an interest rate of
1.25%.Factors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
2009
Item21 Jan
to10 Feb11 Feb
to10 Mar11 Mar
to7 Apr
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due to changesin autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) + 12.9 – 1.3 – 5.8
2 General government deposits with
the Eurosystem (increase: –) – 2.8 – 7.4 – 28.9
3 Net foreign reserves
2– 33.9 – 34.7 – 4.7
4 Other factors2+ 21.3 + 37.9 + 28.1
Total – 2.5 – 5.5 – 11.3
II Monetary policy operations of the
Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing operations + 5.7 – 0.6 + 6.2(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations – 62.2 – 79.0 – 29.3
(c) Other operations – 2.8 + 2.1 + 0.3
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 0.8 – 0.5 – 0.5(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 63.1 + 79.9 + 37.7
Total + 3.0 + 1.9 + 14.4
III Change in credit institutions’ current
accounts (I + II) + 0.6 – 3.5 + 3.0
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) – 0.8 + 3.5 – 3.3
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribu-
tion, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of this MonthlyReport. — 2Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments with no
impact on liquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
30term savings deposits (with an agreed period
of notice of up to three months) were ex-tremely popular, there were outflows fromshort-term fixed-term deposits (with anagreed maturity of up to two years) owing tothe flat yield curve. This more than offset theincrease.
This decline in short-term fixed-term deposits
did not contribute to the reduction in M3 tothe same extent, however, as overnight de-posits benefited from it, growing at an ex-tremely strong seasonally adjusted and annu-alised rate of 11
1/C252% between January and
March. By contrast, currency in circulationrose no more than just under 9
1/C252% in the
same period, after an increase of 311/C252%i n
the last three months of 2008, primarilyowing to uncertainty. Overall, the narrowmoney aggregate M1 grew at a seasonallyadjusted and annualised rate of over 11%,which was even more than in the fourthquarter of 2008.
The weak underlying monetary momentum
during the reporting period has to be seen, inparticular, in connection with a continuingmuted growth in lending. As in the previousquarter, the volume of new lending to the do-mestic private sector in the euro area waslower than that of redemptions. The season-ally adjusted and annualised growth rate ofloans was again -
1/C252% between January and
March. It should be noted in this regard, how-ever, that lending was influenced by securi-tisation and loan sales transactions, as a resultof which the loans in question, under certaincircumstances, no longer appear as unsecuri-tised lending in the credit institutions’ balanceComponents and counterparts
of the money stockin the euro area
1 Calculated  from  the  cumulative  changes 
over 12 months. —  2 Taken in isolation, an 
increase curbs M3 growth. — 3 Not season-
ally adjusted. — 4 Increase: –.
Deutsche Bundesbank2001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 20090481216202428
+++++++
–12–8–40+4+8+12+16+20+24
80060040020002004006008001,0001,200
––––++++++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
of which
Net external asset position 1, 3
External
assets 1Net externalasset position
External
liabilities 
1, 4Growth rate of M3 and
the contributions to growth in ...
Remaining balance
sheet items 1, 2Net externalasset position
 1
Longer-term financial
liabilities to othernon-MFIs
 1, 2Loans to the
private sector 1M2 – M1 1
M3 – M2 1M1 1
€ bn%%
M3
M3Sharp growth
in M1
Lending to
private sector
markedly
subdued

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
31sheets. The statistical data on loans therefore
tend to understate funding by banks. Adjust-ed for this effect, loans increased by a season-ally adjusted and annualised
1/C252% in the first
quarter, compared with 3% in the final quar-ter of last year. Most loans securitised bybanks are, statistically speaking, included insecuritised loans to private issuers, whichgrew at a correspondingly vigorous rate inthe reporting period. In total, funds providedto the private sector nonetheless rose by nomore than 1% in seasonally adjusted and an-nualised terms in the first quarter and weretherefore again down on the previous quar-ter.
Lending was weak in all sectors. Loans to
non-financial corporations rose only by a sea-sonally adjusted and annualised rate of 1% inthe first quarter.
1the pace of growth slowed
over the quarter, in fact. The increase was pri-marily driven by strong growth in January,whereas loans were cut back in February andMarch. Weak lending growth also reflectedthe fall in corporate demand for loans. Facedwith declining capacity utilisation, demandfor short-term debt capital, among otherthings, was also tending to fall as runningcosts were covered by the existing liquiditybuffer from enterprises’ bank deposits.
Loans to financial corporations declined in
the first quarter of 2009, in some cases sig-nificantly. In seasonally adjusted and annual-ised terms, outstanding unsecuritised creditto insurers and pension funds fell by almost17%, while loans to other financial inter-mediaries decreased at a rate of just over4%. The development of loans to householdswas also weak in the first quarter even
though the downward movement from theprevious quarter was less intense in somesub-segments. The seasonally adjusted andannualised growth rate of consumer creditthus rose from -4% to 1
1/C252%, and the down-
ward movement in loans for house purchasealso slowed during the reporting quarter. Bycontrast, other credit to households fell at arate of 1%.
While loans to public sector entities rose only
slightly in the reporting period, banks addedlarger amounts of public sector securities totheir portfolios. Overall, this primarily reflectsthe increased demand for funding from thepublic sector. Taking into account securitisedlending to both public and private sectordebtors, securitised lending was, in terms ofits overall quantity, the most significant in-strument for the provision of funds by banksin the euro area. For banks, securitisation isan attractive option because, among otherthings, it improves their capacity to raisefunds through collateralised transactions.
Net external assets in the MFI sector, which
shows non-banks’ transactions with non-residents, fell by almost 391 billion in season-
ally adjusted terms in the first quarter of2009, thus playing a part in the slowdown inmonetary growth in the euro area. Taken inisolation, the increase in central govern-ments’ deposits at credit institutions, whichare not part of the monetary aggregate M3,also had a dampening effect on M3 growthin the first quarter.
1Credit data by sector are not adjusted for securitisation
and loan sales transactions.Weak lending,
especially to
non-financial
corporations ...
... and financial
corporationsStrong
provision of
securitised
funds
Other
counterparts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
32Monetary growth in the reporting period also
tended to be dented by the sharp increase inmonetary capital. After a slight decrease inlonger-term investment in the euro area by aseasonally adjusted and annualised
1/C252%i n
the fourth quarter of 2008, there was percep-tible growth of 9% in the first quarter of2009. All components of monetary capitalcontributed to this expansion. Growth inlonger-term fixed-term deposits (with anagreed maturity of more than two years) wasparticularly dynamic at 16
1/C252%. Furthermore,
banks continued to top up their “capital andreserves” substantially, mainly on account ofthe central government rescue measures tostabilise the financial sector. By contrast,long-term savings deposits (with an agreedmaturity of more than three months) andlong-term debt securities (with a maturity ofmore than two years) were considerably less
popular. Although the latter increased verysharply in January and February, the monthswith the largest issues of government-guaranteed bank debt securities to date, thisgrowth only partially offset the sharp de-crease in the previous quarter. Moreover,non-banks offloaded much of these securitiesagain in March. As a result, growth in the re-porting period was just 3% in seasonally ad-justed and annualised terms.
After recording what were still comparatively
high M3 growth rates between October andDecember 2008, the underlying monetary dy-namics – in other words, the monetarygrowth relevant to inflation – slowed consid-erably in the reporting quarter. The longer-term inflation risks associated with monetaryexpansion therefore fell sharply in the courseof the first quarter. This is also reflected in theresults of the monetary-based inflation pro-jections, which now place the most probablemedium-term inflation growth at below the2% mark. However, the high degree of un-certainty associated with such inflation fore-casts at present should not be overlooked.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
Domestic investors’ deposits at German
banks rose at an annualised rate of 5
1/C252%i n
the first quarter. Growth was thus significant-ly down on the quarter. As in the euro area asa whole, however, there were distinct shifts inthe various types of short-term deposit. Whileshort-term fixed-term deposits plummeted byLending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2009 2008
ItemJan to
MarJan to
Mar
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 68.6 + 1.0
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 83.5 + 14.8of over 2 years + 12.1 + 3.2
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months + 11.8 – 8.5of over 3 months + 0.8 – 3.1
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Loans + 25.2 + 32.2Securities + 7.4 + 11.3
to domestic government
Loans – 4.8 – 9.7Securities + 5.4 + 6.8
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report. — 1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Rise in
longer-term
investment
at banksMedium-term
price risks
down
considerably
from monetary
perspective
Sharp increase
in overnight
deposits with
massive
cutback in
short-term
fixed-term
deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
33almost 311/C252% in seasonally adjusted and an-
nualised terms, domestic investors topped uptheir overnight deposits extremely sharply ata rate of 35
1/C252%. This is undoubtedly also to
be seen in connection with the fact that,given declining interest rates, the yield advan-tage of short-term overnight money remu-nerated at market rates has narrowed. As inthe fourth quarter of 2008, it was mainlyhouseholds and – albeit to a lesser extent –non-financial corporations which made theseportfolio adjustments in the first threemonths of 2009.
Longer-term bank deposits of domestic in-
vestors grew noticeably in the period fromJanuary to March. Long-term fixed-term de-posits (with an agreed maturity of more thantwo years) were in particular demand. At justover 6%, however, the seasonally adjustedannual rate was well below that of the previ-ous quarter. These deposits were made,above all, by insurers and other financialintermediaries, which are traditionally themost important investor group in this seg-ment. As in the previous quarter, the increasein long-term fixed-term deposits also includessome securitisation transactions by Germanbanks, in which the securitised paper of theirspecial purpose vehicles is taken on to theirown balance sheet against long-term fixed-term deposits.
At the same time, the seasonally adjusted
and annualised growth rate of longer-termsavings deposits (with an agreed period ofnotice of more than three months) fell to just2% after totalling 36% in the fourth quarterof 2008 as a result of the extremely high de-mand for these products, especially from
households.
In the first quarter of 2009, the total provision
of funds by domestic institutions was consid-erably down on the quarter. The seasonallyadjusted and annualised growth rate was just1%, compared with 6% in the final quarterof 2008. The corresponding growth rate ofloans to the domestic private sector was alsowell below that of the previous quarter. Itshould be noted that this growth was almostexclusively attributable to strong lending to fi-nancial corporations, with reverse repo trans-actions playing a major role. These transac-tions arose mostly in connection with inter-bank lending, however, which is recordedstatistically under loans to financial corpor-ations as it is settled via a domestic non-bank.
Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1 End  of  month;  adjusted  for  statistical 
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20092,2502,2802,3102,3402,3702,4002,4302,460
01234Seasonally adjusted
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1€ bn
Marked
increase in
longer-term
fixed-term
deposits ...
... and
extremely
subdued
growth in
longer-term
savings depositRise in loans to
financial
corporations ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
34Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference 
between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the re-sponses given. — 3 Expectations for 2009 Q2. — 4 Reduced scale.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 20083.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.510.0
–40–200+20+40
–40–200+20+40
–60–300+30+60
–60–300+30+60
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 20083.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
6040200204060
–––+++
9060300306090
–––+++
2002 09 2009 02Loans to non-financial corporations Loans to households
% pa
%% pa
%
%
%Changes in credit standards 2
Average loans Riskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
Riskier loansLoans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 years... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 5 years and up to 10 yearsConsumer credit ...
Consumer creditConsumer credit
Housing loansHousing loansLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation ofover 5 years and up to 10 years
Loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...Loans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate fixation    of up to 1 year ...
... over €1 million... over €1 million
... up to €1 million... up to €1 millionBank interest rates (new business) 1
Changes in loan margins 2, 43
333.54.04.55.05.5

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
35They are not, however, directly associated
with the provision of funds by banks to thedomestic non-banking sector.
The decrease in unsecuritised lending from
German banks to foreign non-financial cor-porations was the principle contributory fac-tor in the weak loan development in the re-porting quarter. This was mainly due to a de-cline in demand for funds owing to weakermacroeconomic activity and muted fixed in-vestment. Furthermore, the volume of out-standing loans for house purchase accountedfor by households continued to decline, asdid other loans to households. In seasonallyadjusted terms, German credit institutionsalso disposed of some of their securities fromprivate issuers, albeit to a small extent. Bycontrast, holdings of securities of govern-ment issuers were increased very slightly,whereas unsecuritised credit to general gov-ernment fell noticeably.
Banks’ more restrictive lending policy also
had a dampening effect on the developmentof domestic loans to the private sector. TheGerman banks taking part in the Bank Lend-ing Survey (BLS) stated that they had tight-ened their lending conditions in all businessareas in the first quarter of 2009. This time,the adjustments of credit standards and mar-gins in Germany – in contrast to the previousquarters – were no longer less pronouncedthan those in the euro area as a whole; forthe first time, changes were made to a simi-larly marked extent.
Specifically, the tightened lending conditions
were reflected, above all, in a sharp expan-Funding options and lending 
of German BLS banks during the financial market crisis
 *
* Banks which reported significant or insig-
nificant  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  on their credit standards as a percentage of all banks claiming to be active in the relevant market and to have been adversely attected in their wholesale funding. — 1 Banks claim-
ing to be active in the relevant market and to  have  been  adversely  attected  in  their wholesale  funding  as  a  percentage  of  all German BLS banks; average from 2007 Q4 to 2009 Q1.
Deutsche BundesbankQ4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
2008 2009020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100Money markets, debt securities or 
other markets
Volume
VolumeMargin
Margin
07Securitisation or use of instruments 
for credit risk transfer%%
%
%Average percentage of 
respondent banks 1Expectations for 2009 Q2... decline in
loans to non-
financial
corporations
and ...
... further
decline in loans
to households
Lending
conditions
tightened
across the
board

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
36Deuts che Bun desbankShort-term bank len ding rates sin ce the autumn of 2008
Banks passin g throu gh interest rates in their len ding 
business with the private se ctor plays a key role for the 
impa ct of monetary interest rate measures on the real 
economy. This is espe cially true of e conomies with a 
bank-oriente d ﬁ nan cial system, as is the case in Germany. 
In the current situation of a severe ﬁ  nan cial crisis an d a 
worsenin g un derlyin g re cessionary tren d, the extent to 
whi ch banks pass throu gh their lower reﬁ  nan cing costs 
to their borrowers is of parti cular interest. Below, more 
light will be she d on German banks’ interest rate pass-
throu gh in their short-term enterprise an d housin g loan 
business. The analysis ex cludes lon g-term loans, as there 
is likely to have been a marke d chan ge in German ﬁ  nan-
cial institutions’ lon g-term wholesale fun ding behaviour 
durin g the ﬁ  nan cial market crisis. For example, there has 
pro bably been a decline in the importan ce of the capital 
market for banks’ reﬁ  nan cing an d, therefore, in the rele-
van ce of the yiel d on bank bon ds, whi ch typi cally repre-
sent the startin g point for stu dies on the pass-thou gh of 
interest rates.
Between the en d of Septem ber 2008 an d the begin-
nin g of May 2009, the Eurosystem lowere d the interest 
rate on its main reﬁ  nan cing operations from 4.25 % to 
1.00 % – a total of 325 basis points. Comparin g three-
month money market rates (Euri bor) for the perio d from 
the en d of Septem ber 2008 to the en d of Mar ch 2009 
(latest data availa ble from EMU interest rate statisti cs) 
with the chan ges in the short-term bank len ding rates 
shown in the interest rate statisti cs (with a ﬂ  oatin g rate 
or an initial rate ﬁ  xation of up to one year), it becomes 
apparent that, in their len ding to enterprises, German 
banks passe d on just un der 80 % of the wholesale fun d-
ing advanta ge to borrowers, while the correspon ding 
ﬁ gure for housin g loans was aroun d 60%.
Econometri c estimates on German banks’ interest rate 
pass-throu gh prior to the ﬁ  nan cial crisis show that chan ges in reﬁ  nan cing costs in the money market are 
passe d throu gh to a varyin g extent depen ding on the 
credit a ggregate o bserve d. This happene d most quickly 
in short-term len ding to enterprises, while interest rates 
for short-term housin g loans to househol ds, for instan ce, 
were chan ged somewhat more slowly.1 A ccordingly, 
certain mar gin in creases alon g with fallin g reﬁ nan cing 
costs were quite usual, at least temporarily, even before 
the ﬁ  nan cial crisis. This can also be o bserve d in the 
perio d consi dere d here. A ccording to the Bank Len ding 
Survey (BL S), the (net) balan ce of the institutions report-
ing increase d mar gins in their len ding to enterprises an d 
for housin g loans in the perio d un der o bservation here 
noti ceably ex ceeded that of the pre ceding quarters.2
A comparison of (the chan ge in) bank len ding rates 
with the proje cted values of an e conometri c mo del for 
interest rate pass-throu gh can provi de possi ble in dica-
tions as to whether the o bserve d in crease in German 
banks’ mar gins sin ce the autumn of 2008 were sharper 
than before the ﬁ  nan cial crisis in terms of their response 
pattern. To do this, usin g a mo del estimate d up to the 
autumn of 2007, ie shortly after the onset of the ﬁ  nan-
cial market tur bulen ce, the path of the short-term bank 
len ding rates un der consi deration here is fore cast base d 
on the development of the three-month rate an d then 
compare d with the len ding rates a ctually o bserve d (see 
charts). This shows that the a ctual decreases in short-term 
bank len ding rates in corporate business were greater 
than those proje cted usin g the mo del. The interest rates 
for short-term loans for house pur chases are not noti ce-
ably hi gher than their fore cast values either. Compare d 
with the interest rate pass-throu gh behaviour from the 
perio d before the crisis, as expresse d by the estimate d 
equation, this in dicates that German banks’ interest rate 
pass-throu gh in their short-term len ding sin ce the begin-
nin g of monetary poli cy easin g has not been ex ception-
ally slow.3
1 See J von Borstel (2008), Interest rate pass-throu gh in Germany 
and the euro area, ROME discussion paper No 08-05. In the interest 
rate pass-throu gh mo del, the banks’ reﬁ  nan cing costs for short-term 
len ding, as consi dere d here, are approximate d usin g the EURIBOR 
(three-month rate) an d, for lon ger-term loans, by bank bon ds with 
a mat chin g maturity. — 2 The a ggregate survey results for Ger-
many can be foun d at http://www. bun desbank. de/volkswirts chaft/vo_veroeffentli chun gen.php. — 3 Mo del-base d fore casts on inter-
est rate pass-throu gh are to be interprete d with  parti cular caution 
in the current settin g, however. The dislo cations in the money an d 
capital markets are likely to have ha d an impa ct on banks’ reﬁ  nan-
cing behaviour. Insofar as this affe cts not only the lon ger maturities, 
but also short-term reﬁ  nan cing behaviour, a mo del analysis that does 
not take a ccount of these near-time chan ges loses some explanatory 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
37Another possi bility to investi gate the question as to 
whether the German banks’ were extremely slow in 
lowerin g len ding rates is to compare German interest 
rates for short-term loans to enterprises an d for hous-
ing loans with the correspon ding interest rates in the 
euro area (ex cluding Germany). Here, too, it is evi dent 
that the decline in bank interest rates in the cate gories consi dere d here was more or less as stron gly marke d in 
both referen ce areas (see charts). Therefore, neither the 
mo del-base d analysis nor a comparison with euro-area 
interest rates provi des any in dication of German banks 
bein g too slow in passin g throu gh lower reﬁ  nan cing 
costs.
power. Finally, it cannot be rule d out either that the bank interest 
rates shown in the statisti cs overstate the a ctual interest rate pass-
throu gh, as the interest rate statisti cs show volume-wei ghte d aver-
ages for ea ch current bank interest rate. If, say, a stron ger-than-usual 
shift in deman d towar ds banks with comparatively favoura ble con-
ditions is takin g pla ce at present, the quantity-wei ghte d statisti caldata woul d overstate the pure pri ce effe ct an d, therefore, the banks‘ 
interest rate pass-throu gh. — 4 With initial interest rate ﬁ  xation vari-
able or up to one year. — 5 Proje cted values a ccording to the interest 
rate pass-throu gh mo del. See J von Borstel (2008), op cit. — 6 According 
to the harmonise d euro-area interest rate statisti cs. — 7 Unwei ghte d 
avera ge.Selected short-term bank lending rates (new business) 4
2007 2008 2009345678
2007 2008 2009 2007 2008 2009345678345678
345678
Comparison of German and European interest rates 6Comparison of German interest rates with their projected values
Small-volume loans to enterprises
(up to and incl. €1 million)Large-volume loans to 
enterprises(over €1 million)Housing loans
Housing loans Large-volume loans to enterprises 
(over €1 million)Small-volume loans to enterprises 
(up to and incl. €1 million)% %
% %
Euro area
(excluding Germany)Euro area
(excluding Germany)
Euro area
(excluding Germany)Germany
GermanyGermanyprojected 5 projected 5projected 5
observed 7observed 6observed 6

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
38sion of margins for all types of credit. On bal-
ance, the surveyed German institutions alsoapplied significantly stricter credit standardsto corporate lending business, in particular.According to the surveyed banks, the adverseimpact of the general outlook for the econ-omy as well as industry and firm-specific fac-tors played a crucial role, in addition to in-creased wholesale funding and balance sheetconstraints. Credit standards for loans tohouseholds for house purchase or for con-sumption purposes were tightened less thanthose for loans to enterprises, but were stilltightened significantly. Conversely, GermanBLS banks observed increased demand fromhouseholds for loans for house purchase andconsumer credit. The latter should be seen inconnection with the “environmental bonus”for buying cars. Surveyed institutions alsoreported a slight increase in non-financialcorporations’ demand for loans in the report-ing period; this was mainly for short-termfunding, however. There was, by contrast, anoticeable decline in demand for long-termfinancing, especially for investment purposes.Given the obviously increasing number ofmultiple loan requests from enterprises, it iscurrently difficult to gauge how far the add-itional short-term demand for funds reportedby BLS banks actually reflects stronger de-mand in the economy as a whole.
As has been the case for some time, the sur-
vey round in the first quarter of 2009 alsocontained a set of ad hoc questions on the
impact of the financial market crisis on thesurveyed institutions’ lending policy. Accord-ing to the surveyed banks, refinancing prob-lems are no longer quite as severe in somemarkets and affected lending conditions less
strongly than in the previous quarter.
As well as the considerable expansion of mar-
gins reported in the BLS, German credit insti-tutions also passed on part of their sharply re-duced refinancing costs in the short-term seg-ment to domestic private customers in the re-porting quarter:
2According to the interest
rate statistics, there was a marked fall in thecost of short-term loans to non-financial cor-porations, in particular, in the wake of theEurosystem’s interest rate moves. At the endof the period under review, the figures were3.8% for small-scale loans and 3.1% forlarger-scale loans. Long-term bank loans todomestic non-financial corporations were,however, also cheaper at the end of Marchcompared with three months earlier; depend-ing on volume, the conditions were either4.5% or 4.7%. Finally, at 4.2% with short-term interest fixation, German banks wereasking much less for loans for house purchasequarter-on-quarter, and the cost of loanswith an interest fixation of more than five upto ten years also fell somewhat to 4.4%.
The impact of the financial crisis on the
financial accounts
The global financial crisis caused serious dis-
ruptions in the money and capital marketslast year and had a severe impact on banks’balance sheets. The real economy was also in-creasingly affected during 2008. Using the2008 financial accounts figures, which are
2See explanatory notes on page 36.Bank lending
rates continue
to decline
Financial flows
in 2008

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
39now available in full, the extent to which
these developments have been reflected inthe financing flows and the assets and liabil-ities positions of individual domestic sectorsare investigated below, as are the conclusionsto be drawn from this.
3
Increase in financial flows due to generalgovernment transactions
According to the financial accounts figures,
the financial flows of the domestic non-financial sectors as a whole, ie of households,enterprises and general government, in-creased sharply in 2008. In a longer-termcomparison, this is rather unusual as finan-cing flows tend to decrease during periods offinancial market turmoil. In 2008, non-financial sectors’ acquisition of financialassets rose by 325 billion to almost 3310 bil-
lion and demand for funds, in fact, increasedby around 350 billion to 3145 billion.
The breakdown by sector shows that this de-
velopment was primarily attributable to gen-eral government operations, which is, in turn,largely a reflection of the financial crisis. Netexternal financing of the government sectoramounted to 366 billion in 2008, which was
over 350 billion more than in 2007. There
was, however, a direct correlation betweenthis considerable increase and the topping-upof financial assets by the government, which,at363 billion, was extremely high. Govern-
ment financial investment was shaped, aboveall, by the substantial acquisition of securitiesand equity in connection with governmentmeasures to stabilise the financial system. Theincrease of almost 340 billion in bonds, whichprimarily occurred in the first half of 2008,
was due to support measures for Landesban-ken. This involved the transfer of banks’ debtsecurities to special purpose vehicles whichare counted as part of the public sector. Fur-thermore, the increase in equity ( 313
1/C252bil-
lion) was due mainly to the recapitalisation ofcredit institutions, especially towards the endof the year. Even though the government fis-cal deficit, at 33 billion, was relatively low in
2008 – compared with previous years – therescue measures for the banking sector havehad a significant impact on public financesover the course of the financial crisis. As a re-sult, the government debt ratio (pursuant tothe Maastricht criteria) had risen to almost66% of GDP by the end of 2008, which con-trasted with the trend in recent years, and islikely to increase further in the near future.
Major valuation losses for householdsHouseholds also increased their financial in-
vestment in 2008 – in conjunction with a risein the saving ratio – albeit only slightly toaround 3120 billion. These transactions were
partially offset by major negative valuation ef-fects, especially in the case of direct and indir-ect investments in shares. Although these ef-fects were spread across the entire year, theywere particularly strong in the final quarterwhen there was a significant escalation of thefinancial crisis. The valuation losses amountedto a total of some 3260 billion. At roughly
34.4 trillion at the end of 2008, financial
assets were thus around 3140 billion, or just
3For the most recent financial accounts figures, see
Table VIII in the statistical section at the back of this
Monthly Report.Marked
increase in
financial flows
Sharp rise in
government
external funds
and financial
assets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
40over 3%, lower than in 2007. The scale of
this “calculated” value adjustment becomesclear by comparing it with 2002, the onlyyear since 1950 in Germany when house-holds’ nominal monetary assets decreased onthe back of valuation adjustments. At thattime, the decline in financial assets amountedto around 335 billion, with concurrent finan-
cial investment of just under 3120 billion.
There were also major shifts in households’
financial investment in the reporting year.Inflows to the “currency and bank deposits”item, which were especially pronounced inthe final quarter of 2008, attained their high-est value (just over 3120 billion) since the be-
ginning of the time series in 1950. Across allquarters, this mainly benefited short-termtime deposits, the remuneration of whichwas still relatively attractive up to the end of
last year. An additional factor was that house-holds increasingly opted for overnight moneyin the final quarter of 2008 in view of the es-calating financial crisis.
These inflows to bank deposits were partially
offset by a broad reduction in securities, par-ticularly towards the end of 2008. Equityownership was affected most of all, falling bya transaction-related 345 billion (ie adjusted
for valuation losses). Households also soldlarge quantities of bonds in the fourth quar-ter, after buying such paper on balance in thefirst nine months of the year. This develop-ment also affected the certificates issued bybanks, which, for statistical purposes, are re-corded under debt securities. Depending ontheir characteristics, their value has taken anosedive as a result of the turbulence in thefinancial markets. Investment fund shareswere purchased on a sizeable scale in the firstthree quarters of 2008, at a net figure ofmore than 320 billion. By the end of 2008, by
contrast, households had sold almost 317
billion-worth of such shares on balance. InOctober, in particular, domestic mutual fundswere forced to take back shares. Money mar-ket and real estate funds were especially af-fected.
In terms of loans, households continued the
trend of debt reduction which has been evi-dent for some years. At just over 315 billion,
however, net repayments were down some-what on 2007 and were made mainly at thebeginning of the year and in the final quarter.As in the previous year, this affected loans forcommercial purposes and for house pur-Financial assets of households 
and valuation changes
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 200225020015010050050100150200250
–––––+++++
–250–200–150–100–500+50+100+150+200+250€ bn € bn
Change in financial assets
as a result of ...
... “valuation”... “savings”
Extensive
portfolio shifts
Continued
decline in debt

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
41chase. By contrast, loans for consumption
purposes, which make up around 15% of alldebt, increased slightly. Overall, households’debt ratio was 97% of disposable income atthe end of 2008, ie 16 percentage pointslower than at the beginning of this decadewhen debt was at its all-time high. This devel-opment essentially mirrors households’ con-struction activity, which has been subdued forsome time and is therefore not a result of thefinancial crisis. The reduction in liabilitiesslowed the decline in net financial assetssomewhat, which fell by 3125 billion to al-
most 32.9 trillion in 2008. Disposable income,
at just over 180%, was 13 percentage pointslower than at the end of 2007. All in all, theasset position of households worsened con-siderably as a result of the financial crisis not-withstanding the reduction in debt.
Stable financing situation for enterprisesWhile the financial investment of non-
financial corporations was, at 3125 billion in
2008, lower than one year earlier, theirspending on real investment increased. At3400 billion in total, investment was relatively
high and therefore showed no signs of havingbeen affected directly by the financial crisis.
Financial transactions were mainly shaped by
an extremely high level of equity acquisition(3150 billion). These chiefly took the form of
share purchases resulting from a number ofmajor corporate takeovers across all quartersof last year. Bank deposits were also toppedup; at just over 320 billion, inflows were not
exceptionally high, however. Conversely, en-terprises again offloaded a large volume ofmoney market paper. One likely reason for
this was uncertainty following events in thefinancial markets. Lending, especially to non-residents, was fairly substantial at just over330 billion, and took place mostly in the first
three quarters of 2008.
External financing of producing enterprises
fell to 394 billion in 2008 compared with just
over 3100 billion in the 2007. This was due
partly to the fact that own funds, ie retainedearnings and “earned” depreciation, weresomewhat higher than in 2007. Overall, two-thirds of investment was covered internally asa result. In a long-term comparison, this is arelatively high internal financing ratio. Withinexternal funds, financial credit continued tobe by far the most important source. Demandfor bank loans, in particular, was extremelybuoyant. On balance, enterprises raised loansworth 344 billion – almost exactly as much as
in 2007 – at domestic and foreign banks,mainly in the second half of 2008. Thesewere mostly longer-term loans.
Unlike in previous years, other financial
credits from non-residents, which are mainlyissued to group affiliates, played a moreminor role in the reporting year. This wasprobably also due to the fact that the finan-cial crisis has increased the difficulty of bondissues by foreign financing subsidiaries, whichoften underlie such intra-group and tax-motivated transactions. Borrowing was rela-tively low overall in the domestic capital mar-ket, too. At 33
1/C252billion, sales of shares, in
particular, were not very productive. By issu-ing debt securities, the producing enterprisesstill procured funds amounting to almost 310Investment
unchanged at a
high level
Share
acquisition
extremely highInternal
financing again
accounts for a
large share ...
... with buoyant
demand for
bank loans
Capital market
funding
relatively low

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
42billion in 2008, which was slightly more than
in 2007. Even in the fourth quarter, whenenterprises had to offer investors relativelyattractive conditions, inflows were fairly high,at35
1/C252billion net.
As a result of the great demand for borrowed
funds in the form of bank loans and debt se-curities, the financial debt of producing enter-prises had risen to just over 31.6 trillion bythe end of 2008 and was thus 6
1/C252%u po n
the year. This caused the debt ratio to in-crease from 110% to 114% of gross valueadded. Furthermore, negative valuation ef-fects on equity capital led to a serious deteri-oration in the balance sheet ratios based onmarket prices.
4The debt/capital ratio (lever-
age ratio), which is often used internationally,had thus fallen to 100% by the end of 2008,compared with 70% in 2007. It should benoted, however, that German enterpriseswere able to significantly improve this ratio inrecent years owing to restrained borrowingand a high level of internal financing – withsimultaneous valuation gains in equitycapital – and had therefore established a cer-tain buffer on their balances sheets.
Portfolio shifts of institutional financial
investors
In addition to households and producing en-
terprises, domestic institutional financial in-vestors also increased their bank deposits bya relatively large amount in 2008. Other fi-nancial institutions, which essentially includeinvestment funds, also topped up their liquid-ity buffer in the form of bank deposits by justover 390 billion, which was considerably
more than usual. This was done mostly at thebeginning and towards the end of the year.By contrast, financial institutions, as in previ-ous years, sold stock certificates to the tuneof310 billion. At the end of the year, debt se-
curities were also returned on balance ( 338Balance sheet growth and 
internal funding of the corporate sector
1 Transaction-related increase in the assets 
of  non-financial  corporations. —  2 Gross 
fixed  capital  formation  and  changes  in inventories  plus  acquisition  less  disposals of non-financial  non-produced  assets.  — 3 Net retained income, net capital transfers 
received and depreciation allowances as a percentage of the total use of funds.
Deutsche Bundesbank1998 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 2008175200250300350400450500550600650
020406080100120Acquisition of non-financial assets 2
Lin scale
Internal financing ratio 3Log scale
Balance sheet growth 1
%€ bn
Total
Acquisition of
financial assets
4According to international standards, the individual
items of the financial accounts data, ie in the sectoral
balance sheets, are shown at market prices, where pos-
sible.Slight increase
in debt ratioInflows to bank
deposits
exceptionally
high

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
43billion), not least because of the altered risk
assessment of such paper.
Insurance companies and pension funds con-
tinued to pursue the same investment policyas in the previous year. Bank deposits weretopped up again by almost 317 billion. As
usual, a preference was shown for longer-term time deposits. These are often registereddebt securities or Pfandbriefe underwrittenby banks, which, for statistical purposes, arereported under bank deposits owing to theirlimited tradability. Mutual fund shares, which– after bank deposits – are the largest item inthe portfolio of the insurance sector, wereacquired slightly more compared with 2007(322 billion). Insurers also increased their
bond holdings again. By contrast, 312 billion
in share investments were sold by insurers onbalance, twice as much as in 2007. Almosthalf of this amount was sold in the fourthquarter when market prices fell very sharply.
SummaryOverall, the financial accounts figures for
2008 reflect the considerable adjustmentsmade by various domestic sectors in thecourse of the financial crisis, which primarilyaffected the investment structure, but also af-fected investment itself. Borrowing does notseem to be have been impaired, however.This is revealed, in particular, by producing
enterprises’ high take-up of bank credit, andalso in the high level of government borrow-ing. Thus, the financial crisis had hardly anyidentifiable dampening impact on the acquisi-tion of new machinery and equipment. Des-pite the worsening of the economic situationoverall in the final quarter of 2008, this mayultimately be seen as reflecting the goodshape of German enterprises overall, whichhave improved their balance sheet structuressignificantly in recent years and consequentlyhad a large volume of own funds available tothem.
Nevertheless, there has been an unmistakable
deterioration in the investment position ofhouseholds and enterprises as a result of thesharp decline in share prices over the courseof 2008. This development can only be pre-vented from continuing by a resolution of theturmoil in the money and capital markets andan improvement in the economic outlook.There are some faint initial signs of hope atthe current end. The global efforts of centralbanks and governments are making a majorcontribution in this respect. In the longerterm, however, it will essentially come downto whether confidence among financial mar-ket players can be restored and financialflows return to normal as a result.
Insurance
sector’s
investment
behaviour
stable
Financing
barely affected
by financial
crisis, ...... but decline
in balance
sheet positions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
44Financial marketsFinancial market trends
In the first quarter of 2009, the international
financial markets were buffeted by ongoingturmoil and an increasing downward pressureon economic activity. In this setting, the in-tensive efforts of policymakers to contain thecrisis also influenced the developments in themoney and capital markets. In view of the in-tensifying underlying recessionary trends inthe world economy and high losses of finan-cial institutions in the final quarter of 2008,investors’ risk appetite diminished again sig-nificantly at the start of the year. This, in turn,further pushed up credit risk premiums for fi-nancial borrowers into the first half of March;at the same time, share prices tumbled acrossa broad front. Faced with tensions in the fi-nancial sector, governments reinforced theirefforts to relieve banks’ balance sheets ofproblematic assets. Moreover, central banksintervened directly in the financial markets inorder to ease tight financing conditions. Signsof a slight easing of tensions were evidentfrom mid-March. For example, pressure onthe stock and bond market valuations of fi-nancial institutions lessened. As a result,funds that had previously been moved to safeand liquid bonds were reinvested. This alsoreduced the perceived credit risks of borrow-ers in other sectors, although they were stillat high levels as this report went to press. Im-proved sentiment indicators likewise helpedcreate a more benign climate in the stockmarkets. In the foreign exchange markets,the euro depreciated slightly since the begin-ning of the year on balance; gains againstcentral and eastern European currencies weremore than offset by losses against the US dol-Financial
market setting

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
45lar, the pound sterling and some commodity
currencies.
Exchange rates
Against the backdrop of the narrowing inter-
est rate differential between short-term in-vestments in the euro area and in the UnitedStates, the euro-dollar exchange rate initiallydropped at the beginning of the year. Thedownward trend of the US trade deficit,which was caused by a fall in oil prices, de-clining investment and a rise in US house-holds’ propensity to save, had a detrimentaleffect. Moreover, market players saw the dol-lar area as a “safe investment haven” at atime when the crisis in the international fi-nancial markets had significantly increasedrisk aversion. This also affected the creditmarkets in central and eastern Europe, whichtended to have a negative impact on the eurogiven the euro area’s close financial and tradeties with this region. However, the noticeablerise in confidence that started in the secondhalf of March led to short-term exchange rategains for the euro against the US dollar. TheFederal Reserve’s announcement that itwould significantly increase its purchases ofsecurities and also buy government bondscontributed to this development. As a result,the yield on US Treasuries temporarilydropped markedly. However, as expectationsof a further Eurosystem interest rate cut sub-sequently became more entrenched in theforeign exchange markets, the euro tempor-arily depreciated again somewhat against theUS dollar. At the end of the period under re-view, the euro stood at US$1.35, which isabout 3% below its level at the beginning of
the year, while short-term exchange ratevolatility was on a downward trend but stillraised by historical standards.
By contrast, the euro appreciated somewhat
against the yen on balance in the reportingperiod – despite in some cases strong ex-change rate volatility. However, the euro-yenrate also initially eased markedly in the firstExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange  rate  at  the  start  of  monetary 
union on 4 January 1999. — 2 As calculated 
by  the  ECB  against  the  currencies  of 21 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J
2008 20091.201.301.401.501.60
115120130140150160170
0.700.750.800.850.900.951.00
100105110115120125Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.03 1Exchange rate
development
of the euro
against the
US dollar...
... against the
yen ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
46few weeks of the year to about ¥114 per
euro in an environment characterised byhigher short-term exchange rate volatility anddecreasing interest rate differentials betweeneuro and yen assets. In the subsequentperiod, however, the euro more than com-pensated for these losses, as the real eco-nomic effects of the international financialmarket crisis were reflected in a dramaticdownturn in Japanese economic growth andthe marked decline in global trade pointed toongoing and significant burdens on the Jap-anese trade balance. As this report went topress, the euro stood at ¥129 and thus 2
1/C252%
above its level at the start of the year, butabout 24% below its level of mid-July 2008.
After reaching an historic high at the end of
2008, the euro relinquished some of its ex-change rate gains against the pound sterling
at the start of the new year. It then mostlytraded in a range around £0.90 with strongexchange rate volatility. Bad news from theUnited Kingdom regarding the crisis in theBritish banking sector and more clearly appar-ent concerns about the economy had onlytemporary effects on the exchange rate re-gime, as did the purchases of governmentbonds by the Bank of England. The mostlyparallel decline of short-term interest rates inthe United Kingdom and in the euro area ap-parently prevented major shifts in the cur-rency patterns between the euro and thepound sterling. At the end of the reportingperiod, the euro stood at about £0.88; thisconstitutes a decline of just under 7
1/C252% since
the beginning of the year.
On an average against the 21 currencies in-
cluded in the index of the effective exchangerate, the euro has depreciated somewhat innet terms since the start of the year. Ex-change rate losses against the US dollar, thepound sterling and some commodity curren-cies were mitigated by exchange rate gainsagainst the Japanese yen and central andeastern European currencies. In the case ofthe latter, the fact that international investorswithdrew from emerging market economieslooking for safe and liquid investments mayhave played a part. A foreign exchange inter-vention by the Swiss National Bank meant theeuro also appreciated somewhat against theSwiss franc. As this article went to press, theeffective euro exchange rate was, overall,2
1/C252% below its level at the beginning of the
year and about 9% higher than at the start ofmonetary union. In real terms – ie taking dueAppreciation/depreciation
of the euro againstselected currencies
1 Nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  the 
euro against the currencies of 21 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank– 9 – 6 – 3 0 + 3 + 6 + 9Zloty (Poland)
Forint (Hungary)YenSwiss francCzech koruna
Swedish krona
EER-21 1
US dollar ¥uan renminbi (China)
Canadian dollar
Pound sterlingWon (Republic of Korea)31 December 2008 to 18 May 2009
%... and against
the pound
sterling
Effective euro
exchange rate

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
47account of inflation differentials between the
euro area and its major trading partners – itwas thus well above its longer-term average.However, in view of the moderate price andcost development in recent years, the pricecompetitiveness of the German economyshould be rated more favourably.
Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
Long-term government bond yields in large
industrial countries rose moderately on bal-ance since the start of the year. The GDP-weighted average yield of debt securitieswith a ten-year maturity issued by the euro-area member states increased by
1/C254percent-
age point compared with the end of 2008 tojust under 4% despite intensifying recession-ary developments in the economy and declin-ing key interest rates. Corresponding paperfrom the USA and Japan had lower yieldlevels but showed a comparatively sharperrise. Ten-year US paper gained almost 1 per-centage point despite the Federal Reserve’sbuyback programme for Treasuries, which ledonly to a short-term – albeit marked – declinein yields.
Higher yields were the result both of in-
creased government borrowing requirementsto finance extensive financial market stimuluspackages and real economic support meas-ures and the easing of tensions in the stockmarkets, which led to funds that had previ-ously been shifted into safe haven assetsbeing reinvested. As a result, the term pre-miums of ten-year Federal bonds also in-creased again in the first quarter of 2009.
1
Just last year, these had declined significantly
owing to increased demand for safe assets.Hopes of less turbulent capital market interestrate developments were evident in the de-cline in the implied volatility of options on fu-tures on long-term government bonds.Nevertheless, this uncertainty indicator,which is still clearly above its long-term aver-age, continues to signal that market playersremain wary of (negative) surprises.
At the same time, the yield curve steepened
in the reporting period. In the case of Federalsecurities, the spread between ten and two-year yields rose to just under 2
1/C252percentage
points. While shorter-term interest rates de-clined since the beginning of the year in linewith the – partly already priced-in – key inter-est rate cuts in the Eurosystem, the yields forlonger-term paper were (as already men-tioned) somewhat higher. Yields on Federalbonds ultimately rose more than those onother euro-area government bonds, whichmeant that yield differentials within the euroarea narrowed somewhat compared withtheir levels at the start of the year, when anenvironment of great uncertainty had led to apronounced widening.
As a result of the slight signs of a recovery in
the financial markets, the spreads of Euro-pean corporate bonds of the lowest invest-ment grade category, BBB, over governmentbonds declined by about 160 basis points
1On estimating term premiums, see Deutsche Bundes-
bank, Determinants of the term structure of interest rates
– approaches to combining arbitrage-free models and
monetary macroeconomics, Monthly Report, April 2006,
pp 15-28.Rise in capital
market interest
ratesSteep German
yield curve
Stabilisation
in financing
conditions for
enterprises

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
48since the start of the year. The absolute yield
level in this segment also fell again after thesharp rise in the fourth quarter of 2008. De-clining credit risk premiums, as reflected inthe iTraxx Europe Index, were a contributoryfactor.
However, with regard to indications for a last-
ing stabilisation in the financial markets, it isnoteworthy that the signs of a recoveryamong the non-financial corporations are notmirrored in the area of non-banks that shouldin effect be included in the financial sector.As this report went to press, the interest ratespreads of financial corporations (excludingbanks) were again at the high level seen atthe beginning of the year, having temporarilywidened significantly in March. This indicatesthat the fundamental risk assessment forplayers with close ties to the financial markets
remains fragile.
In the first quarter of 2009, domestic debt se-
curities worth 3463 billion (gross) were issued
in the German bond market. However, thisvalue – which is only slightly lower than in theprevious quarter – was more than compen-sated for by redemptions and changes in is-suers’ holdings of their own bonds, whichmeant that, overall, bonds amounting to34
1/C252billion were taken out of the market. By
contrast, foreign debt securities worth 36 bil-
lion were sold in Germany in the reportingperiod, while a significant volume of foreignbonds had been sold in the final quarter of2008 ( 347 billion). As a result, the overall vol-
ume of domestic and foreign debt securitiesin circulation in Germany increased by 31
1/C252
billion.
In the first quarter of 2009, the public sector
tapped the capital market for a substantialamount of 332 billion (net). Central govern-
ment accounted for 326 billion of this, ie
about three times as much as in the fourthquarter of 2008 ( 38
1/C252billion). The record issu-
ance of Treasury discount paper (Bubills)amounting to 324 billion, whose maturity
spectrum was extended from previously justsix months to include additional three, nineand twelve-month paper, was particularlystriking. In addition, the German governmentsold five-year Federal notes ( 35 billion) and
thirty-year Federal bonds ( 31
1/C252billion) in net
terms in the first quarter of 2009. By contrast,it redeemed ten-year Federal bonds and two-year Treasury discount paper in net terms(33
1/C252billion and 31 billion, respectively). TheYield curve in the
German bond market *
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-cou-
pon  bonds  (Svensson  method),  based  on listed Federal securities — 1 Prior to the ECB 
Governing Council’s last interest rate cut by 25 basis points.
Deutsche Bundesbank00123456789 1 00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
Residual maturity in years%
18 May 20096 May 2009 130 December 2008Net
redemptions
in the bond
market
High borrowing
by central
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
49strongly disproportionately high borrowing in
the short maturity spectrum served mainly tofinance the Special Fund Financial MarketStabilisation – Financial Market StabilisationAgency (SoFFin). The federal states also ex-tended their capital market debt ( 36 billion)
as budgetary burdens became heavier.
From January to March 2009, financial cor-
porations (excluding banks) and non-financialcorporations issued debt securities amount-ing to 36
1/C252billion (net) and thus much less
than in the previous quarter ( 344 billion). As
at the end of 2008, a large part of this paperwas the result of securitisations by specialpurpose vehicles, which are based on bankloans and which were absorbed by the bank-ing sector. All in all, the maturity pattern ofcorporate bonds was extended, since, as inthe previous quarter, mainly longer-term se-curities were issued on balance ( 319
1/C252bil-
lion), while there were net redemptions ofcommercial paper.
Against the backdrop of the difficult market
environment and at times exceptionally highyield spreads over government bonds, creditinstitutions reduced their capital market debtsignificantly further ( 342
1/C252billion), having al-
ready redeemed the same amount of bondsin the previous three-month period. Theybought back mainly public Pfandbriefe ( 334
1/C252
billion) and – despite record levels of gross is-
suance again – other bank debt securities(319 billion). Excluding tradable bonds issued
with a government guarantee, the declinewould even have been 319 billion higher.
2
Specialised credit institutions, which include
the public promotional banks, issued bondsworth 312 billion (net). By contrast, the out-
standing volume of mortgage Pfandbriefe fellby31 billion.
German debt securities were purchased
mainly by domestic credit institutions. Theseacquired, on balance, 310 billion worth of
debt securities in the first quarter; in doingFinancing conditions on the 
European capital market
Sources: Bloomberg, Markit IIC and Thom-
son Reuters. — 1 Yield spread of seven to 
ten-year  euro-denominated  BBB-rated  cor-porate  bonds  over  euro-area  government bonds  of  similar  maturity. —  2 Credit  de-
fault risk premiums for 125 European com-panies with an investment grade rating. — 3 Credit  default  risk  premiums  for  senior 
debt securities of European financial enter-prises.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 20090100200300400500600
0100200Daily values
Basis
points
iTraxx Europe 125 2Interest rate spread 
of BBB bonds 1Basis
points
Corporations
(excluding banks)
iTraxx Europe Senior Financial 3of which:
non-financial
corporations
Credit default risk premiums
2See SoFFin list of 29 March 2009 at http://www.sof-
fin.de/leistungen_garantien.en.php?sub=3.Issues
by non-banks
Significant net
redemptions
by credit
institutions
Purchases of
debt securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
50so, they substituted foreign (- 3251/C252billion)
with domestic ( 3351/C252billion) paper. Of the
latter, they purchased, in particular, debt se-curities issued by other banks ( 318 billion) as
well as corporate bonds ( 312
1/C252billion), of
which mainly paper securitised by financialspecial purpose vehicles based on credit port-folios outsourced by banks. Non-residentspurchased domestic paper worth 33 billion
(net). They switched out of paper issued byprivate borrowers (- 325
1/C252billion) and into
public sector bonds ( 328 billion). Domestic
non-banks surrendered domestic and foreigndebt securities worth 311
1/C252billion.
In the reporting period, the international
stock markets were caught between con-cerns about the condition of the financial sec-tor and the real economy, on the one hand,and hopes that the government rescue pack-
ages and key interest rate cuts would have astabilising effect, on the other. The tensionsin certain financial market segments and therecession-induced decline in earnings expect-ations lowered stock prices on both sides ofthe Atlantic by mid-March to around 80% oftheir level at the end of 2008. This was pre-dominantly driven by bank and insuranceshares, which initially declined by up to 40%in value after reporting high losses in thespring months. At the same time, uncertaintyabout further share price developments, asmeasured by the implied volatility of stockoptions, increased further in January and Feb-ruary. However, the announcement of theGeithner plan for relieving US banks of toxicsecurities (“Public-Private Investment Pro-gram”) led to a certain stabilisation and a no-ticeable upswing in the stock markets in thesecond half of March, at first mainly for bank-ing stock. Largely determined by the develop-ment of bank and insurance stocks, both theDow Jones EuroStoxx and S&P 500 recoupedmost of their previous share price losses. Fi-nancials alone rose by just over 70% in theeuro area and just over 80% in the USA, fromtheir low in March. Positive earnings reportsfor the first quarter of 2009 by individual fi-nancial institutions also likely contributed tothis shift in sentiment.
Viewed as a whole, however, the earnings
prospects of European enterprises for thenext twelve months deteriorated further ac-cording to analyst surveys until the end ofApril. Both developments – the rise in shareprices and the downward revisions of earn-ings – helped lift the price-earnings ratio ofInvestment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2008 2009
Item Q1 Q4 Q1Debt securities
Residents 9.2 7.7 – 1.2
Credit institutions 19.8 10.5 10.1of which
Foreign debt securities 14.5 – 46.9 – 25.5
Non-banks – 10.6 – 2.9 – 11.3of which
Domestic debt securities – 27.7 – 3.0 – 42.8
Non-residents 34.6 – 38.2 2.8
Shares
Residents 4.4 – 16.3 14.9
Credit institutions 0.9 – 12.3 – 5.1of which
Domestic shares 9.0 – 7.8 – 3.6
Non-banks 3.5 – 4.0 20.0of which
Domestic shares 3.3 8.7 16.0
Non-residents – 11.2 2.4 – 4.1
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds – 4.0 0.3 5.9
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public – 1.4 – 11.3 1.8of which: Share-based funds – 3.4 0.5 0.7
Deutsche Bundesbank
Signs of
recovery in the
international
stock marketsFurther
deterioration
of earnings
prospects over
the next
12 months

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
51the broad-based Dow Jones EuroStoxx Index
sharply from 8.1 at the start of the year to10.1 at the end of the period under review.Unlike short-term earnings forecasts, how-ever, analysts recently revised their expect-ations for medium to longer-term earningsgrowth upwards by just over 1 percentagepoint to 5.5%. The increase in the corres-ponding figure for financial sector enterpriseswas especially high – it went up 3 percentagepoints to 7.9%. Such a growth rate had notbeen expected for financial assets since Sep-tember 2008.
The implied risk premium on equity invest-
ments – which can be calculated, for ex-ample, using a dividend discount model –clearly declined as share prices rose in recentweeks. The slight return of confidence this re-flects can likely be attributed primarily to asomewhat higher “risk appetite” on the partof market players as share price uncertaintywaned and given some improved sentimentindicators for the real economy. This can alsobe seen in declining risk premiums on themarkets for credit derivatives (CDS). Never-theless, these “crisis indicators” are still wellabove their levels of the fourth quarter of2008.
The slight reduction in uncertainty on the
stock markets meant issuing activity on thedomestic stock market revived in the firstquarter of 2009. At 38
1/C252billion, domestic en-
terprises issued a greater amount of newstock than in the previous quarter ( 33
1/C252bil-
lion). Just over 35 billion of this was account-
ed for by listed equities. A major role wasplayed by – partly government-supported –capital increases by financial and automobile
enterprises. In the reporting period, as in thelast three months of 2008, German shareswere purchased on balance solely by residentnon-banks ( 316 billion). By contrast, non-
resident investors and domestic credit institu-tions reduced their holdings of Germanshares by 34 billion and 33
1/C252billion, respect-
ively. The outstanding amount of foreignequities in the German market increasedShare prices and earnings 
expectations for listed European companies
1 31 December 1991 = 100;  source:  Handels-
blatt, as of May 2005 Thomson Reuters. — 2 On the basis of analyst estimates accord-
ing to I / B / E / S 12 months forward (earnings before goodwill). Source: Thomson Reuters.
Deutsche Bundesbank2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 2009175200250300350400450
691215182124
16192225283134Monthly values
Lin scaleLog scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx
index 1
Price-earnings ratio with referenceto the Dow Jones EuroStoxx index
 2
Expected earnings per share12 months forward
 2Index
pointsReduced risk
premiums
on equity
investments
Stock market
funding and
stock purchases

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
52slightly on the whole by 321/C252billion. On bal-
ance, it was again only domestic non-banksthat purchased this paper ( 34 billion), while
credit institutions sold foreign shares amount-ing to 31
1/C252billion.
Domestic investment companies recorded an
inflow of 371/C252billion in the reporting period,
following an outflow of 311 billion in the pre-
vious quarter. Funds open to the general pub-lic sold certificates worth 32 billion from
January to March 2009, while specialisedfunds reserved for institutional investorsachieved an inflow of funds of 36 billion. Of
the funds open to the general public, open-end real estate funds and bond funds, in par-ticular, were able to sell own shares ( 31 billion
in each case); equity funds were also able todo so to a lesser degree ( 3
1/C252billion). However,
against the backdrop of sharply reducedshort-term interest rates, money marketfunds once again suffered outflows of funds(31
1/C252billion). The holdings of shares in the
other fund categories hardly changed overallin the first quarter. However, funds operatedby foreign companies and traded on the Ger-man market had to buy back certificatesworth 3
1/C252billion net. Domestic and foreign
fund shares were overwhelmingly bought byresident non-banks and only to a very smalldegree by foreign investors ( 318 billion and
3
1/C252billion, respectively). This indicates that
non-banks reinvested the funds they had pre-viously shifted into government-guaranteedbank deposits and public debt securities inresponse to the financial crisis in investmentcertificates. By contrast, German credit insti-tutions sold fund shares worth 311 billion on
balance.Major items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2008 2009
Item Q1 Q4 Q1
I Current account 1,2 + 49.6 + 37.2 + 19.3
Foreign trade 1,3 + 51.2 + 33.8 + 26.9
Services 1 – 0.9 – 0.9 – 4.2
Income 1 + 14.8 + 14.8 + 12.8
Current transfers 1 – 12.2 – 6.8 – 13.1
II Capital transfers 1,4 + 0.5 – 0.6 + 0.0
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 60.6 – 47.5 – 1.8
1 Direct investment – 37.3 – 18.2 – 11.8
German investment
abroad – 43.1 – 22.5 – 13.7
Foreign investment in
Germany + 5.8 + 4.3 + 2.0
2 Portfolio investment – 10.8 + 36.4 – 9.5
German investment
abroad – 32.4 + 74.4 – 5.0
Shares + 12.0 + 14.0 + 0.6
Mutual fund shares – 12.7 + 13.6 + 0.4
Debt securities – 31.6 + 46.8 – 6.0
Bonds and notes 5 – 23.3 + 20.7 – 11.5
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes – 5.9 + 13.6 – 15.4
Money market
instruments – 8.4 + 26.1 + 5.5
Foreign investment
in Germany + 21.5 – 38.0 – 4.5
Shares – 11.5 + 2.9 – 7.7
Mutual fund shares – 1.5 – 2.7 + 0.4
Debt securities + 34.6 – 38.2 + 2.8
Bonds and notes 5 + 17.2 – 45.3 – 15.5
of which
Public bonds and
notes – 1.0 – 7.4 + 8.8
Money market
instruments + 17.4 + 7.1 + 18.3
3 Financial derivatives 6 – 19.6 + 10.2 + 2.9
4 Other investment 7 + 8.2 – 74.3 + 16.3
Monetary financial
institutions 8 + 18.2 – 87.5 + 83.7
of which: short-term + 46.4 – 73.1 + 87.3
Enterprises and
households – 9.4 + 34.1 – 25.6
of which: short-term – 14.2 + 27.5 – 22.4
General government + 6.2 – 8.9 + 16.7
of which: short-term + 7.4 – 9.2 + 17.5
Bundesbank – 6.8 – 12.0 – 58.5
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 – 1.2 – 1.6 + 0.3
IV Errors and omissions + 10.5 + 11.0 – 17.5
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankSales and
purchases
of mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
53Direct investment
If the cross-border securities transactions are
aggregated, this yields net capital exports of39
1/C252billion in the months January to March
2009, following capital imports of 3361/C252bil-
lion in the previous three-month period. Dir-ect investment also resulted in outflows offunds abroad since the beginning of the year.These outflows amounted to 312 billion,
compared with 318 billion in the final quarter
of 2008.
This was due largely to the fact that domestic
proprietors provided their affiliates abroadwith 313
1/C252billion worth of funds. They main-
ly increased their equity capital abroad ( 3191/C252
billion), with the financial sector accounting
for the largest share ( 3111/C252billion). The most
important recipient countries were Luxem-bourg ( 310 billion) and the United Kingdom
(331/C252billion). There were further capital out-
flows as earnings were reinvested ( 361/C252bil-
lion). Conversely, German firms experiencedinflows of funds from intra-group credit rela-tionships ( 312
1/C252billion). These mainly origin-
ated from financing subsidiaries in the Neth-erlands, which had tapped the capital marketfor funds.
Foreign firms provided their branches in Ger-
many with merely a small amount of add-itional funds ( 32 billion). While they provided
them with 37 billion through the injection of
equity capital and through reinvested earn-ings, they simultaneously withdrew 35 billion
in credit transactions – in particular by with-drawing previously granted financial andtrade credits.German direct
investment
abroadForeign direct
investment
in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
54Deutsche BundesbankThe German government’s “bad bank” model
Additional element in the government’s
financial market stabilisation framework
The severe financial market crisis and the resulting
high degree of uncertainty continue to endangeroverall economic activity. The Financial Market Stabil-isation Act ( Finanzmarktstabilisierungsgesetz ),
1which
was passed in October 2008, has undeniably made animportant contribution to stabilising the situationthrough the measures the Financial Market Stabilisa-tion Fund (Special Fund Financial Market Stabilisation(Sonderfonds Finanzmarktstabilisierung or SoFFin))
has undertaken to date. However, the developmentsof the past few months have shown that these meas-ures have not been sufficient to eliminate the uncer-tainty regarding the financial system and the realeconomy arising from questions concerning theunderlying value of problematic assets, especially onbanks’ balance sheets. The German governmenttherefore passed the Draft Act to Develop FinancialMarket Stability ( Gesetzentwurf zur Fortentwicklung
der Finanzmarktstabilisierung ) on 13 May 2009, based
not least on the lessons learned from previous finan-cial crises which indicate that the “detoxification” ofbalance sheets is a key condition for restoring confi-dence in the financial sector. The draft act focuses onfreeing up balance sheets by hiving off financial assetssubject to a severe impairment risk to special purposevehicles (“bad banks”). The legislation is currentlygoing through the parliamentary process.
Objectives and key criteria
The underlying objective of the government initiativeis to stabilise the banking system and the financialmarket. As with any government assistance, however,fundamental principles of a market economy shouldbe observed, and the financial risk to the general pub-lic should be minimised. A “bad bank” solution must
therefore meet certain key criteria.
Freeing up balance sheets and restoring confidence in
financial sector enterprises
Financial sector enterprises that are relevant to finan-
cial market stability should be freed of high uncer-tainty and risk by ensuring that risky assets are effect-ively removed from banks’ balance sheets. Providersof new equity and debt capital should be shieldedfrom risks arising from the revaluation of problematicassets.
Ensuring losses are borne by those who caused them:
relief for enterprises, but not for risk capital providers
In a market economy, the providers of equity and risk
capital bear the risks arising from entrepreneurial ac-tivities and benefit from the opportunities. On theother hand, the government must, in the public inter-est, provide protection especially for systemically rele-vant enterprises where their existence is threatened inorder to maintain the stability of the financial system.However, this does not apply to the net worth of theshareholders who provided the risk capital.
Subordinated liability of government and minimised
burden on government coffers
It is one of the government’s tasks to ensure the on-
going functional viability of the financial system in acrisis. However, where possible the government’s legalresponsibility should be subordinated to that of therisk capital providers. The risks and opportunities aris-ing from enterprises’ transactions should, therefore,remain with the old owners wherever possible – aswould, incidentally, also be the case if the “bad bank”model were not deployed.
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, November 2008, pp 30-
31 for an outline of the Financial Market Stabilisation Act as at 17 Oc-tober 2008. — 2Below we provide a rough outline of the “bad bank”
model according to the government’s draft legislation. The detailswill, in some cases, need to be clarified, and further changes and ad-justments are possible during the legislative process. Alongside themodel presented here, the German government is also working on amore comprehensive model for transferring further risk positions andbusiness units. — 3These include, in particular, far-reaching disclos-ure requirements in terms of the impaired assets, adequate capital
levels, a sound business policy and solid business model. In addition,the transferring enterprises must comply with the same managementremuneration requirements as for the recapitalisation instrument. —4Cut-off date 31 March 2009 or later; otherwise, the book value as at
31 March 2009 shall apply as determined according to the applicablerules for the annual accounts. — 5According to the European Com-
mission, the real economic value is the transfer value reflecting theunderlying long-term economic value of the assets on the basis of

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
55Risk offload conditional on a sustainable business
concept and sufficient capital levels
Financial sector enterprises that benefit from offload-
ing their risks should have both a sustainable businessconcept and sufficient capital levels, both at thepresent juncture and going forward. The governmentinitiative is intended neither to compensate enter-prises for currently foreseeable losses nor to keep un-profitable institutions or business units afloat. Ratherthe intention is to dispel the uncertainty surroundingthe future development of the underlying value ofilliquid and complex bank assets that is aggravatingthe crisis.
Limiting impact of valuation problems
on distribution of losses
It is currently very difficult to reliably determine the
real economic value of the problem assets. Neverthe-less, the decision on large-scale financial risks for thestate will have to be delegated to (expert) third par-ties. The consequences of misvaluations should there-fore be minimised when it comes to the final distribu-tion of losses between the government and the equitycapital providers.
The “bad bank” model – an outline2
Voluntary participation of systemically relevant banks,in particular
The Financial Market Stabilisation Agency ( Finanz-
marktstabilisierungsanstalt ) decides on institutions’
application to participate in the government “badbank” model, giving special consideration to their sys-temic relevance, the urgency of their situation andthe principle of the most effective and economical de-ployment of resources. In comparison with the other
stabilisation instruments according to the FinancialMarket Stabilisation Act, the range of potential appli-cants is more narrowly defined and includes onlycredit institutions, financial holding companies andtheir subsidiaries (hereinafter referred to as transfer-ring enterprises) domiciled in Germany as at 31 De-cember 2008. An application to participate must bemade within six months of the Act to Develop Finan-cial Market Stability being promulgated and is condi-tional on various requirements
3being met. There is
no legal entitlement to participate; however, neithercan enterprises be obliged to participate.
Offloading of problem financial assets to a special
purpose vehicle at reduced book value
To offload impaired financial assets, a special purpose
vehicle (SPV) is set up, which does not require author-isation to conduct banking business. The problematicfinancial assets are then transferred to the SPV at thereduced book value. This is the higher of 90% of thebook value as stated in the last audited annual ac-counts
4or the real economic value.5The latter must
be calculated by the transferring enterprise, and thisvaluation must be checked by an expert third partynominated by SoFFin and confirmed by the bankingsupervision authorities. The flat-rate haircut on thebook value is subject to the proviso that the transfer-ring enterprise retains a core capital ratio of at least7%.
The range of impaired financial assets that can be
transferred to the SPV includes structured securities.
6
Plain vanilla loans, for instance, are not included. Inaddition, the SPV may only take over impaired finan-cial assets that the transferring enterprise acquiredprior to 31 December 2008.
underlying cash flows and broader time horizons. See also European
Commission, Communication from the Commission on the treatmentof impaired assets in the Community banking sector of 25 February2009. — 6Including the associated hedging transactions. Examples
are asset backed securities (ABS), residential or commercial mortgagebacked securities (RMBS, CMBS) and collateralised debt obligations(CDO). — 7The haircut will be determined by SoFFin on a case-by-
case basis. — 8The constant percentage is calculated by dividing the
difference (reduced book value minus fundamental value) by thenumber of full years in the term of the guarantee. As compensation
payments are limited to a maximum of 20 years, the annual percent-age is at least a twentieth of the difference. — 9In the original draft
of the Act, problematic assets were to have been transferred to theSPV at book value, with a compensation payment equal to the differ-ence between the book value and the fundamental value to be paidin instalments. The 10% flat-rate haircut on the book value now en-visaged in the legislation means that the transfer of assets to an SPVresults in an immediate write-down on equity and consequently to a

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
56Deutsche BundesbankThe German government’s “bad bank” model (con’d)
Funding through government-guaranteed debt
securities issued by the SPV
The transfer of the impaired financial assets at the re-
duced book value is financed through the issue of acorresponding volume of interest-paying debt secur-ities by the SPV to the transferring enterprise. Thedebt securities issued by the SPV are guaranteed bySoFFin in return for remuneration at market rates.This remuneration is based, inter alia , on an institu-
tion-specific percentage of the maximum guaranteeprovided to cover default risk plus a margin. The guar-antee may not run for longer than the contractualmaturity of the longest-dated structured security.
Balance sheet relief for transferring enterpriseFrom the perspective of the transferring enterprise,
exchanging impaired risky financial assets for safe,interest-paying bonds guaranteed by SoFFin gives ef-fective balance sheet relief. These guaranteed bondsmay be used as collateral in refinancing transactionswithin the Eurosystem and may reduce capitalrequirements as they have a lower risk weight. Bothfactors should encourage lending.
Repayment of the difference between the reduced
book value and the fundamental value over a periodof up to 20 years, capped at amount of incomedistributable to shareholders
To ensure that the SPV does not end up with a loss
from today’s perspective and therefore that the guar-antee does not mean the government has to inter-vene, the transferring enterprise must pay a compen-sation sum spread over a specific period. To set thecompensation payment, the fundamental value of thepaper must first be determined. This is calculated asthe real economic value minus a risk haircut.
7The dif-ference between the reduced book value and the fun-
damental value determines the expected loss andtherefore the compensation payment, which thetransferring enterprise must pay to the SPV in equalannual instalments
8spread over the life of the guar-
antee, although at most 20 years. This annual instal-ment is capped by the amount that would otherwisebe paid out to shareholders in the respective businessyear.
9The interest rate advantage arising from the de-
ferred payment of the difference between the re-duced book value and the fundamental value must beremunerated in the form of a market-based fee forSoFFin’s guarantee (the guarantee fee).
10If, in any
one business year, the sum to be disbursed to theshareholders is lower than the annual compensationpayment to be made to the SPV, the latter will be in-creased in subsequent years until it reaches the sum tobe disbursed to the shareholders.
Transferring enterprises shielded from further risksThe transferring enterprises therefore incur no more
risks from the problematic securities once they havebeen written down to the reduced book value. Theyare protected against any additional write-downs onthe impaired assets and thus from any further deteri-oration in their solvency situation this could entail.
Old owners continue to participate in all
opportunities and, to a large extent, in all risks,government has only a subordinated liability, newinvestors shielded from risks
To ensure that the government’s liability for any losses
is, at most, subordinated and that the current pro-viders of risk capital remain responsible to as great anextent as possible for the opportunities and risks aris-ing from the problematic assets, as is appropriateunder a market-based regulatory policy (and as would
reduction in the bank’s lending base. Moreover, the additional hair-
cut to be applied by SoFFin when calculating the fundamental valueremains in place. Furthermore, institutions would be subject to great-er uncertainty if the European Commission were to monitor not onlythe legislation and its proper implementation, but also each individ-ual case for compliance with state-aid regulations. — 10 While thispayment is deferred, interest-bearing debt securities in the amountof the reduced book value are transferred immediately for the entireterm of the guarantee. Consequently, the transferring enterprises re-ceive interest payments on a loss that has yet to be repaid amounting
to the difference between the reduced book value and the funda-mental value. To prevent this subsidy, the guarantee fee should takedue account of this interest-rate advantage. — 11In this case, the
losses exceed the difference between the reduced book value andthe fundamental value. — 12Where transferring enterprises do not
operate as public limited companies, SoFFin must stipulate this ex-tended liability in the terms of the guarantee. — 13A more consist-

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
57be the case if the “bad bank” model were not de-
ployed), both extended liability and extended profitparticipation are envisaged. This perceptibly eases thevaluation problem, as potential errors have only alimited impact on the ultimate distribution of profitsand/or losses.
In terms of the distribution of potential profits, the
SPV’s profits are, in the event of a positive balance forthe SPV after full disposal of the impaired financialassets, to be given to the transferring enterprise fordistribution to its shareholders. Consequently, SoFFinwould receive compensation for the assumption ofthe risk of a loss in the form of the guarantee fee, butwould not participate in any further profits.
If the compensation payments paid over the term of
the guarantee do not cover losses compared to the re-duced book value,
11the shareholders in the transfer-
ring enterprise must make up the shortfall from theincome distributable to them (the dividends) after dis-posal of the relevant structured securities. Their liabil-ity therefore extends beyond the term of the guaran-tee. This additional loss compensation may also be ef-fected by issuing shares to SoFFin. There is no time baron SoFFin’s claims.
12However, risk capital providers’ li-
ability is perceptibly limited under the current plans inthat the final disposal of the structured paper andthus the final calculation of losses are, in some cases,far off in the future, and any dividends paid out in themeantime are not included in the liability.
13
In order to render the transferring enterprises attract-ive for new capital and shield this new capital fromthe risks associated with the problematic securities,preferential shares can be issued (which may alsohave voting rights).
14Unlike the stock of other share-
holders, these are given preferential treatment overSoFFin’s claims in the event of extended liability. Thetransferring enterprise is therefore attractive for new
investors, as they are not burdened with incalculablerisks from problematic assets (although they do notbenefit from potential profits from the realisation ofthe problematic assets either). It should, however, beensured that the preferential shareholders’ claims ondistributable profits are no greater than their percent-age share in the equity capital to prevent the govern-ment’s claim to senior liability of the current equitycapital from being diluted.
All in all, the government consequently does not
benefit from potential profits from the realisation ofproblematic assets, but at the same time only has sub-ordinated liability after the risk capital providers.Nevertheless, it does assume the risk that future divi-dends will not cover losses (and the interest paymentsincurred thereafter).
15This should constitute the gov-
ernment’s only contribution to stabilisation. Assump-tion of this risk is inevitable if the government wishesto rule out the possibility of a systemic bank becominginsolvent and if providers of debt capital and futureproviders of equity capital are to be shielded fromrisk. Nevertheless, it must be ensured that the oldowners cannot escape their liability by carrying outdividend payments, capital reductions or the likeahead of the liability event.
16
However, by taking part in the “bad bank” model, thecurrent shareholders continue to participate in theopportunities and risks of the relevant financial secur-ities – just as they would if the securities were to re-main with the transferring enterprise. Credit institu-tions are shielded from future risks arising from prob-lematic securities by participating in the “bad bank”scheme, rendering them attractive for new investors.This may mitigate the uncertainty in the financial mar-kets.
ent implementation of subordinated liability on the part of the gov-
ernment as part of the “bad bank” model could, for instance, be tohave all dividends (with the exception of those paid to new preferen-tial shareholders) flow into the SPV and to issue the shareholderswith tradable participation certificates on the SPV’s profits in return.That would indeed mean that all opportunities and risks remain withthe current risk capital providers. The tradable participation certifi-cates would allow the anticipated profits (including the dividends“saved up” in the SPV) to be realised at any time. — 14Up to a max-
imum of 50% of the equity capital as at the day the Act enters intoforce. — 15In other words (to simplify), if the present value of the
losses incurred on problematic securities exceeds the present value ofthe current equity capital of the transferring enterprise. — 16If the
accruing loss looks likely to exceed the return on capital (dividends),measures should be put in place to prevent the transferring enter-prise from attempting to compensate for this by incurring large risks.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
58Economic conditions
in GermanyMacroeconomic situation
In the first quarter of the year, there was a
further marked increase in recessionary pres-sure in the German economy. According tothe flash estimate of the Federal StatisticalOffice, gross domestic product (GDP) fell3.8% on the quarter in seasonally andcalendar-adjusted terms, following a declineof 2.2% in the final quarter of 2008. Incalendar-adjusted terms, economic output inthe first three months of 2009 was 6.9%down on the year. The large cutback in out-put was due to the sharp and broad-baseddecline in German enterprises’ demand forgoods and services in the winter half-year of2008-09 after the escalation of the inter-national financial and economic crisis. How-ever, in the first quarter of this year, Germanynot only suffered a further severe setback inexport business, but also experienced signifi-cant strains on the domestic side. There wasa marked increase in the degree of underutil-isation in the economy as a whole.
The decidedly sharp downturn in the German
economy was triggered by an unusually se-vere export shock in the wake of the globalcrisis that affected financial markets and con-fidence following the collapse of the invest-ment bank Lehman Brothers in Septemberlast year. Through various transmission chan-nels, this crisis spilled over very quickly to thereal economy in many regions of the worldeconomy. Up to that point, there had been adecline mainly in orders from trading partnersin countries facing domestic problems of ad-justment in the real estate and banking sec-tors. Now, German enterprises had to con-Further increase
in recessionary
pressure
in 2009 Q1
Continued
export shock

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
59tend with major losses of orders in all of its
key export markets. Simultaneously with afurther slowdown in the economies of the in-dustrial countries, the redirection of inter-national capital flows had perceptible effectson the real economy in some central and eastEuropean countries as well as in most otheremerging markets. The reason why this hadsuch a major impact on large sections ofexport-oriented industry was that it affecteda number of customer countries where thebroad range of capital and intermediategoods “made in Germany” has enjoyed agood reputation and a high level of demand.The available indicators show that there wasa further acceleration of the downward slidein exports on an average of the first quarterof 2009. This followed what was already aseasonally and calendar-adjusted 7
1/C252% de-
cline in the export volume of goods and ser-vices in the final quarter of last year.
With regard to imports, during the period
under review the impact of sharply decliningdomestic output outweighed the special fac-tor of higher imports of energy and raw ma-terials, which had been at a relatively highlevel up to and including the final quarter of2008 on account of their favourable purchaseprices. In view of the perceptible increasingpressure on inventories, enterprises cut backtheir imports of inputs and intermediary prod-ucts. By contrast, given the temporary boostto demand owing to the “wreckage pre-mium” for scrapping old cars, car importspicked up markedly.
Since the beginning of the year, the slump in
exports has had a perceptible impact on thedomestic economy. Inventories of unsold fin-
ished goods are likely to have prompted en-terprises to make further cutbacks in produc-tion. There are two main reasons for this.First, an involuntary growth in inventories hastaken place as a result of the unexpectedlysharp fall in demand. Second, it can be as-sumed that firms’ usual inventory manage-ment has been adjusted in line with the lesspositive outlook for sales. Given considerablecapacity underutilisation, enterprises havealso revised their investment plans. Large sec-tions of the economy probably see no needto expand the existing stock of machineryand plant in the foreseeable future. In season-ally and calendar-adjusted terms, there is like-ly to have been a very sharp fall in private in-vestment in machinery during the reportingperiod. This came on top of a decline of justOverall output
1 Price-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009100102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+42000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP 1
Year-on-year change%
Lin scale
Imports
affected by
slower
domestic
outputInvestment
accelerator and
inventory
adjustment in
full swing

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
60over 5% on the quarter in the last three
months of 2008.
The poor economic environment did not gen-
erally make itself felt in terms of constructioninvestment in the first quarter of 2009, al-though there were hold-ups in January andFebruary owing to the weather. With regardto the individual subsectors, the first quarterwas characterised by industrial constructionalready feeling the impact of investors’ loss of
confidence, while public sector infrastructuremeasures, which were to be implemented asa result of the economic stimulus packages,were not yet making any major contributionto stabilising the situation. Despite low inter-est rates on mortgage loans, a strain is likelyto have been placed on housing construction,not least, by the fact that households willingto engage in construction had suffered in thewake of the dramatic fall in prices on theinternational capital markets last year. Addedto this was the increased job risk.
By contrast, private consumption buoyed up
demand to some extent in the first quarter of2009. In this context, a particular role wasplayed by the environmental bonus grantedfor the scrapping of old cars since the adop-tion of the Federal government’s second eco-nomic stimulus package. The number of newregistrations for private owners nearlydoubled between January and February inseasonally adjusted terms and showed a fur-ther increase in March and April. On an aver-age of the first three months of this year, thenumber of newly registered passenger carswas 80% up on the quarter. However, mainlysince the number of small and mid-range carsthat were bought was far higher than usualand firms have not benefited from the pre-mium, this sharp increase has not boostedsales to the same extent; in the first quarterof 2009, turnover was 14% up on the finalquarter of 2008 after seasonal adjustment.Although savings were used, resulting inmore free funds becoming available in theshort term, new cars were probably pur-chased to the detriment of other consumerSelected indicators of 
households’ consumption behaviour
Sources of unadjusted figures: Federal Stat-
istical Office and Federal Motor Transport Authority. —  1 Excluding  heavy  goods 
vehicles. —  2 Excluding  the  motor  vehicle 
trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 200980859095100105110115120125130
80100120140160180200220Seasonally adjusted, log scale
... of the retail
    trade 2Turnover...
(2005 = 100, price-adjusted)
... of the motor    vehicle trade
 1
Reduced scale
New car registrations by households
(Number in thousands )
Construction
investment
quite robustSelective
incentives to
buy give
temporary
boost to private
consumption

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
61goods. In line with the overall economic situ-
ation, households’ propensity to consume didnot improve fundamentally in the early partof the year. Rather, it picked up temporarily inresponse to selective incentives to buy andshifted in structure.
Sectoral trends
In the first quarter of 2009, there was a fur-
ther discernible acceleration in the downturnin industrial output, which had already as-sumed a very rapid pace towards the end oflast year. Industrial enterprises cut back theirproduction by a seasonally adjusted 14% onthe quarter. The decline in February was notas sharp following the very large-scale adjust-ments in production around the turn of theyear, where exceptional measures – such as
temporary plant closures – were a major fac-tor. In March, too, the low level of activitywas largely maintained. In view of the con-tinuing marked weakness of orders in the re-porting period, industrial activity is unlikely tohave bottomed out yet, however. In March2009, industrial output was around one-fifthdown on the year in calendar-adjusted terms.
According to the Ifo Institute surveys, indus-
trial capacity utilisation in April fell to its low-est level since 1992 when the survey for Ger-many as a whole began. At only 71% of nor-mal full capacity, industrial enterprises report-ed an average degree of utilisation of ma-chinery and equipment that was even lowerthan in western Germany during the cyclicaldownturns of the mid-1970s and earlyCyclical position of industry in the output demand scheme *
* Order-based industry. Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office and Ifo Institute data. — 1 Percent-
age deviation from normal capacity utilisation.
Deutsche Bundesbank– 14 – 12 – 10 – 8 – 6 – 4 – 2 0 2 4 62015105051015
––––2000 Q2
2003 Q2Order capacity
index
Capacity utilisation 12008 Q32007 Q4
2009 Q12008 Q41993 Q41993 Q1for comparison
Rapid slide
in industrial
outputExtremely low
industrial
capacity
utilisation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
621980s. It is already becoming apparent that
the current cycle in industrial output has beencharacterised by a very pronounced fluctu-ation. That is true not only of the currentdownturn, but also of the preceding up-swing. Large sections of industry, despite ex-panding their production potential, had beenworking at full capacity virtually withoutinterruption for more than two years up tomid-2008.Construction output in the first three months
of 2009 fell by 0.2% on the quarter in sea-sonally adjusted terms. While constructionwork was adversely affected mainly by rela-tively unfavourable weather conditions inJanuary and February, there was a catching-up effect in March. All things considered,construction activity was still quite robust dur-ing the reporting period. Apart from the ef-fects of the weather, capacity utilisation inthe construction sector showed scarcely anydecline up to the end of the period under re-view according to Ifo Institute data. Further-more, in the less cyclically sensitive finishingtrades, there was a further trend increase inthe total number of hours worked up to thefourth quarter of 2008, the current end ofthe surveys.
The economic situation in services has shown
a further overall deterioration in the wake ofthe downturn in the production sector. Themost severely affected in relative terms werethose subsectors active in export business orproviding services primarily for export-oriented firms and the banking industry. Bycontrast, those service providers whose activ-ities are geared either directly or indirectly tothe domestic markets performed better, notleast in view of the government measures tosupport domestic demand. In line with thispattern, opposing trends are discernible intrade. Whereas sales of passenger cars tohouseholds has picked up noticeably sinceFebruary owing to the “wreckage premium”,and traditional retail sales have suffered ra-ther moderate losses, the wholesale tradeand exports have shrunk severely in the wakeof the global economic slowdown. The slumpOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20099095100105110115120
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10
95100105110115120
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+302005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Log scale
Industry
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Log scale
Construction
Lin Scale
Year-on-year change%%Construction
output affected
by cold winter
weather
Mixed picture
in the services
sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
63in world trade has also left a deep mark in
the transport and logistics sector. Hotels andrestaurants also performed poorly. Further-more, the spare capacity and staffing sur-pluses that exist in the production sector atpresent have probably had an adverse impacton the business of leasing firms and tempor-ary employment agencies.
Employment and unemployment
In marked contrast to the sharp decline in ag-
gregate value added, the fall in the numberof persons in work and the rise in unemploy-ment have been relatively limited so far. Inthe period from the cyclical low in October2008 up to April 2009, roughly 48,000 add-itional persons were registered as un-employed on a monthly average in seasonallyadjusted terms. The year-on-year increasewas relatively small at 171,000. Given un-changed hourly productivity and weeklyworking hours and all other things beingequal, the year-on-year decline in real GDP ofalmost 7% would have had a negative em-ployment effect of 2
3/C254million. However,
there has been a considerable adjustment ofworking hours by reducing overtime andlowering working hours accounts as well asthe use of flexible working arrangements andspecial leave of absence. Furthermore, in-creasing use has been made of government-assisted short-time work. Although there isno precise information available on the extentof short-time work and the average numberof hours worked since the beginning of2009, the number of registrations has shotup and amounted to a total of 2.20 million inthe first four months of the year. According
to estimates by the Federal EmploymentAgency, the scale of short-time work imple-mented for economic reasons may have in-creased from 201,000 persons in December2008 to 1.4 million in April 2009. Despite thecutback in working hours, the decline in thetotal number of hours worked fell well shortof the fall in output. This led to a considerabledrop in labour productivity per hour workedand a sharp increase in unit labour costs, ashourly wages also continued to rise. Giventhe cyclically limited opportunities for passingon costs, this is placing a considerable strainon enterprises’ profitability.
For hours not worked – in December 2008,
more than 36% of normal working hours –short-time workers receive payments equiva-lent to the rates of unemployment benefit(67% of standardised net earnings or 60% ifthere are no children). There is provision for afurther extension of the maximum period ofentitlement from 18 to 24 months and for so-cial security contributions being paid in full bythe Federal Employment Agency from theseventh month. Moreover, the payments areoften topped up on the basis of collectivewage settlements or by in-house agreementso that employees’ purchasing power is large-ly maintained. In addition, part-time un-employment in the form of short-time workmaintains hope in the possibility of a returnto full-time employment in the same job.From a fiscal policy perspective, however, thisis offset by the fact that short-time workingbenefits followed by unemployment de facto
extends the right to insurance benefits be-cause short-time working benefits do not
Adjustment
initially largely
by means of
shorter working
hours
Aspects of
short-time
work

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
64shorten the period of entitlement to un-
employment benefit (maximum of 24months). Added to this is the fact that short-time benefits being granted for a very longperiod of time may have macroeconomicallyundesirable effects on structural adjustmentswhich are needed as quickly as possible.
Should the contraction of aggregate output
continue and hope of a rapid and strong re-covery in the global economy recede, enter-prises will, however, increasingly resort to lay-ing off staff. At least, however, new (replace-ment) staff are unlikely to be recruited. Thisprocess is already under way. There has beena marked trend rise in unemployment recent-ly. During the past three months, the season-ally adjusted number of persons out of workincreased by 181,000 following a rise of108,000 in the period from October 2008 toJanuary 2009. The seasonally adjusted un-employment rate was 8.3% in April, com-pared with 8.0% on an average of the firstquarter and 7.6% in the final quarter of2008.
As those made redundant are, as a rule, ini-
tially entitled to claim unemployment benefitabove the level of the basic allowance, three-quarters of the increase was concentrated onthe statutory insurance scheme. However, fol-lowing an almost continuous three-year de-cline, the number of unemployed personsdrawing the basic allowance also went upagain during the period under review. Onereason for this is the increased difficulty inmoving from unemployment into paid em-ployment in the current economic setting.Second, this group includes jobseekers whoseLabour market
1 Not seasonally adjusted. — 2 Introduction 
of seasonal short-time working benefits at the  end  of  2006. —  3 From  January  2005, 
unemployed including persons formerly re-ceiving social assistance but able to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 200838.539.039.540.040.5
0200400600
3.03.54.04.55.0
1,00050005001,000
––++
681012Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
0Thou-
sandThou-
sand
Thou-
sand
%
3
2009Employed
2Short-time workers1
UnemployedYear-on-year change
Year-on-year change
Unemployment rateApril
April
April
April–5000+500+1,000
Advance notification of 
short-time-work1Faster rise in
unemployment
recently...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
65claim to benefits does not reach the level of
the basic allowance or who have not been in-sured for a sufficiently long period of timeand are needy.
According to estimates by the Federal Statis-
tical Office, the number of persons in work(which is likely to be revised downwards), fellby 133,000, or 0.3%, during the first quarter,compared with a decline of no more than27,000, or 0.1%, in the final quarter of lastyear. Initial provisional data allow the conclu-sion that the fall was especially marked in thecase of temporary employment, with the fig-ure, according to the available data, beingmore than 15% down on the year in Febru-ary.
According to the Ifo Institute, the outlook for
employment has continued to deterioratesince the beginning of the year. Especially inindustry, there has been a further downwardadjustment in personnel planning. The sea-sonally adjusted number of job vacancies re-ported to the Federal Employment Agencywent down by more than 10% in the periodfrom December 2008 to April 2009. The de-cline in non-assisted job vacancies subject toregular social security contributions amount-ed to more than 15%. According to surveysby the Institute for Employment Research(IAB), the number of vacancies in the econ-omy as a whole in the first quarter of 2009was one-quarter down on the year.Wages and prices
The first few months of 2009 saw the conclu-
sion of a number of new collective pay agree-ments with lower growth rates of pay insome cases than in the previous year but withlump-sum and one-off payments playing agreater role. At the same time, longer dur-ations and liberalisation clauses were agreedin many cases. Especially in manufacturing,the pay negotiations were influenced by themassive deterioration in the economic situ-ation. The new pay settlements in the textileindustry and in the iron and steel industryalso contain arrangements for safeguardingjobs. The agreements in the services sectorswere shaped more by firm and sector-specificspecial factors, however, and were scarcelyweaker than in 2008. The quite generous paysettlement of Deutsche Bahn has to be seenagainst the backdrop of last year’s disputes.Much the same applies to Deutsche Telekom;a marked increase in pay was agreed follow-ing a general freeze as well as pay cuts andlonger working hours in 2007-08. A com-paratively moderate rise in wages and salarieswas agreed for the employees of the crisis-stricken private and public banking industry.The gap with the negotiated rates of pay forcentral and local government was closed inthe public sector of the federal states.
According to the Bundesbank’s pay rate stat-
istics, negotiated rates of employee compen-sation in the first quarter of 2009, at +3.1%,rose less sharply on the year than in the finalthree months of 2008 (+3.7%), in which theone-off payment in the metal-working andelectrical engineering industries had been
... and growing
decline in
employment
Further
deterioration in
the outlook for
employment2009 wage
round with
lower
negotiated
rates so far
Slower rise in
negotiated
rates of pay

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
66booked. The year-on-year increase in the
basic negotiated rates of pay, which do notinclude the one-off payments, went up by2.7%, compared with +3.1% in the fourthquarter of 2008.
The favourable overall trend in prices was
maintained at all levels of the economy. Thedecline in import prices continued at the be-ginning of the year at a somewhat slowerpace. The costs of imports was 3.9% downon the quarter in seasonally adjusted terms,compared with -6.0% in the final quarter oflast year.
1While the downward correction in
the case of energy, at roughly 15%, wasweaker than in the last three months of2008, it was stronger in the case of inter-mediate goods at 5.3%. The prices of capitalgoods remained broadly unchanged. Despitepersistent falls in food prices, the cost of con-
sumer goods went up almost as sharply as inthe preceding quarter. The year-on-year de-cline in import prices widened from 0.7% inthe final quarter of 2008 to 6.3% in the firstquarter of 2009. However, this was also dueto a baseline effect as prices rose sharply atthe beginning of 2008. Excluding the price-lowering impact of energy, intermediategoods and food, however, the year-on-yearrate went up from 0.6% to 1.5%. As theyear-on-year decline in the prices of exportswas noticeably smaller, at 1.2%, the terms oftrade improved by 5.4%.
In contrast to the import side, the seasonally
adjusted quarter-on-quarter decline in indus-trial producer prices at the beginning of theyear accelerated from 0.8% to 3.2%. Onefactor in this was that, in some cases, therehad been a time lag in passing on price ad-justments for crude oil and other imports.Once again, lower price demands from thefood industry led to consumer goods continu-ing to become cheaper. Agricultural producerprices also eased in the first quarter of 2009by a seasonally adjusted 5.2%. The year-on-year increase in producer prices went downfrom 5.3% to 0.8%, with a base effect dueto the sharp rise in early 2008 likewise beinga factor. Excluding the impact of energy,intermediate goods and food, domestic pro-ducer prices remained unchanged comparedwith the final quarter of 2008, however, andNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-
sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 200900.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay total
Basic pay 1%
Q1
1With the reporting month of January 2009, both the
foreign trade and industrial producer price indices were
rebased on 2005. The weights were updated in the new
base year in line with the foreign trade and industrial do-
mestic sales structures and the index results were back-
calculated up to then.Continuing
decline in
import prices...... and price
reductions
continuing at
the domestic
producer level,
too

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
67the year-on-year rate fell only marginally on
the quarter to 1.4%. Construction priceswent up by 0.4% on the quarter. Owing to abase effect, the year-on-year increase wentdown from 3.4% to 2.6%, however.
Following the fairly sharp seasonally adjusted
fall in consumer prices of 0.3% in the finalquarter of 2008, the decline in the first quar-ter of 2009 was modest at 0.1%. Energyprices were obviously lower again overall,with further reductions in the case of fuelsand heating oil being counteracted by higherelectricity prices. Food prices also continuedto be adjusted to the lower commodityprices. While this had previously been thecase for dairy products and for edible oils andfats, it now applied increasingly to cerealproducts as well. By contrast, industrial goodsand services were both 0.3% more expen-sive. Housing rents continued their steadymoderate rise as well. The year-on-year in-crease in the national Consumer Price Index(CPI) – partly as a result of a base effect forservices owing to the early date of Easter in2008 – declined from 1.1% in December2008 to 0.5% in March 2009 and on a quar-terly average from 1.7% to 0.9%.
2Con-
sumer prices for fuel were 15% down on theyear. The figure for heating oil was nearly-30%, in fact. The increase in the price offood fell from 2.8% in the preceding quarterto 0.8%. Excluding energy and food, theyear-on-year rise in consumer prices wasnevertheless unchanged at 1.3% because in-dustrial goods had become markedly moreImport, producer and
consumer prices
1 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly.  — 
2 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 200895100105110115
9095100105110 110115120
95100105 105110115120125130135
95100105 105110115
95100105110
01.02.03.0
+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted
2009Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Consumer prices 2Construction prices 1Producer prices of
agricultural productsProducer pricesof industrialproductsImport pricesLog scale
%
April
2The corresponding figure for the Harmonised Index of
Consumer Prices (HICP) was 0.8% in the first quarter of
2009, compared with 1.6%.Further easing
of consumer
prices at the
beginning of
the year...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
68expensive, thus offsetting the base effect in
the case of services.
In April, consumer prices accelerated again
somewhat in seasonally adjusted terms at0.1%. Energy prices were declining sincesharp price reductions for gas more than off-set the higher cost of fuel and heating oil.Lower prices of fruit and vegetables meantthat consumers also paid less for food. Therewas a sharp seasonally adjusted increase inthe prices of industrial goods, however. Ser-vices likewise became more expensive in sea-sonally adjusted terms owing to marked priceincreases for package holidays. The year-on-year CPI rate went up from 0.5% to 0.7%and the HICP rate from 0.4% to 0.8%. Thefact that Easter in 2008 fell early in Marchplayed a part here, too. The round of pricecuts in the retail trade that started in thesecond half of April is likely to impact fully onthe consumer price index in May. Additional-ly, further gas suppliers have announced pricereductions. There will be some markedlynegative year-on-year rates in the comingmonths, mainly as a result of the sharp in-crease in energy and food prices up to themiddle of 2008 and the subsequent price cor-rections. However, these reflect the ups anddowns in the international commodity mar-kets rather than any general deflationary ten-dencies.
Orders received and outlook
The strains placed on the German economy
by the continuing massive export shock andthe increasing occurrence of secondary ef-fects on the domestic side are likely to have
peaked in the first quarter of 2009. Alongwith the gradual easing of tensions in theinternational financial markets and the ex-pected stabilising impact of large-scale mon-etary and fiscal policy measures, there haverecently been growing signs of an easing ofthe downward pressure in the global econ-omy. It seems that the confidence which hadbeen lost is gradually returning.
Despite some identifiable signs of an easing,
consideration still has to be given to the fac-tors that are acting as a brake on the realeconomy, which result from the reorientationin the international financial and banking sys-tem directly or through tighter credit stand-ards, higher interest rate spreads in themoney and capital markets, and the redirec-tion of financial flows. In the coming months,the external retarding effects for the Germaneconomy are unlikely to be as severe as theywere in the winter half-year of 2008-09,however. At the same time, the downturn ininvestment activity will continue and the de-pletion of inventories could go on a while fur-ther. From the second quarter onwards, how-ever, the domestic economy will probablybenefit perceptibly from a sharp rise in publicsector construction investment. Moreover, afurther contribution to stabilisation will prob-ably be made by the ongoing favourableprice climate, fiscal policy relief in taxes andsocial security contributions, increased socialbenefit payments as well as, with some quali-fication, the hitherto moderate reaction ofthe labour market.
... but went up
slightly in AprilGradual easing
of cyclical
strains from the
second quarter
onwards

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
69In the second quarter, contractionary effects
will probably continue to have the upperhand on balance. This is suggested, in par-ticular, by the extremely poor orders situationin industry. Seasonally adjusted orders in thefirst quarter of this year were 14
1/C252% lower
than in the final quarter of 2008, when thedecline was already 17%. In the reportingperiod, orders received for intermediate, cap-ital and consumer goods fell at a similarlyrapid pace, while it was mainly demand forcapital and intermediate goods that hadslumped in the second half of 2008. The re-gional shift in the contraction in demandafter the turn of 2008-09 is explained by thefact that German industry’s major export mar-kets in central and eastern Europe as well asthe east Asian emerging market countrieswere affected by the global economic and fi-nancial crisis later than the euro-area partnercountries. Another contributory factor is that,in the euro area, the member states’ econom-ic stimulus programmes, which are fairly ex-tensive overall, are likely to have had an initialpositive impact during the period underreview.
The very poor quarterly figure for incoming
industrial orders nevertheless partially con-ceals the fact that, following an uninterrupt-ed sharp six-month slump, there was per se a
sizeable increase in orders in March after sea-sonally adjustment. Given the continuing verylow volume of orders, the importance of thisinitial rise should not be exaggerated in cyclic-al terms. Even so, there is now also an initialray of hope from a “hard” economic indica-tor. According to the Ifo Institute, the busi-ness climate in manufacturing recoveredDemand for industrial goods 
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20098090100110120130
01020
++
–40–30–20–100
90100110120130
758090
90100110120
8090
90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total industrial 
orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction orders%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
% Jan-
Feb
Jan-
FebStill continuing
heavy
downward
pressure in
industry...
... but
unmistakable
first signs of
improvement

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
70somewhat in April from its earlier extremely
pessimistic ratings in the first quarter. Whilethe assessment of the business situation wasnot much brighter, business expectations forthe next six months improved for the fourthtime in succession. What is also striking aboutthe survey results is that, following their ab-rupt slump in the second half of 2008, exportexpectations were likewise trending upwardslightly. This is consistent with the fact thatthe growth in orders in March was due pre-dominantly to an increase in export contracts.The increase remained quite modest on thedomestic side and was confined essentially tocar manufacturing and its ancillary industries.
Demand for construction work at the begin-
ning of 2009 was characterised not only bymarked reluctance on the part of private sec-tor customers but also by a considerable in-crease in new public sector orders. In the firsttwo months of the year – more recent infor-mation is unavailable at present – demand forindustrial construction, following the slumpin February, was down by an average of11
1/C252% on the final quarter of 2008 in sea-
sonally adjusted terms. There was also a verysharp deterioration in the orders situation inhousing construction during this period. By
contrast, the volume of public sector ordersin construction output in January and Febru-ary combined was 12% larger than in thefourth quarter of 2008.
Besides public construction investment, pri-
vate consumption will remain a factor stabilis-ing the economy in the immediate future.Given the decidedly unfavourable economicsituation, consumer sentiment has been re-markably robust. Although expectations re-garding general economic activity are stillonly at a very low level following the markedsetbacks last year, the favourable price cli-mate, above all, has led to a steady improve-ment since January in the outlook for real in-comes. The propensity to purchase is also ob-viously greater at present than might be ex-pected in view of the sharp economic down-turn. The measures to boost purchasingpower and the temporary incentives to buycontained in the economic stimulus packagesare undoubtedly playing a part in this. Anadditional likely factor is that the perceptionof the risk of becoming unemployed hasbeen reduced so far by the extended possibil-ities of introducing short-time working.
Expected
stabilising
effect of public
construction
investment...... and private
consumption

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
71Public finances* General government budget
Last year, the incipient economic downturn
had not yet led to a deterioration in public fi-nances, and at the general government level,the budget was virtually balanced, as it hadbeen a year earlier. Given the escalating eco-nomic crisis and the extremely unfavourableoutlook, the German government adoptedlarge-scale measures to stimulate the econ-omy in November 2008 and January 2009.This, in conjunction with the effect of theautomatic stabilisers, meant it was evident asearly as the beginning of the year that thedeficit and debt ratios would rise perceptiblyin 2009 and 2010. In its updated stability pro-gramme of January, for example, the Germangovernment envisaged a temporary breach ofthe 3% threshold in 2010. Since then, themacroeconomic outlook has worsened sharp-ly, however. The deficit ratio is therefore likelyto distinctly exceed 3% as early as this yearand could even climb to around 6% in 2010.The debt ratio will rise rapidly and couldreach a magnitude of 80% in 2010. In viewof this dramatic deterioration and the factthat most of the stimulus measures will taketime to take effect and that an excessive def-icit procedure will probably be initiatedagainst Germany under the Stability andGrowth Pact, further debt-financed tax cutsor higher spending cannot be justified. In themedium term, considerable efforts will be ne-
*The “General government budget” section starts with
an analysis based on data contained in the national ac-
counts and on the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent re-
porting on budgets of the various levels of government
and social security schemes is based on the budgetary
figures as defined in the government’ s budgetary finan-
cial statistics.Fiscal policy in
times of crisis

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
72cessary to correct the dislocations being cre-
ated in public finances.
The public finances situation will deteriorate
dramatically in 2009 and the deficit ratio islikely to rise to over 3%. The effect of theautomatic stabilisers accounts for approxi-mately two-fifths of this rise. However, thekey macroeconomic aggregates involved,such as gross wages and salaries as well asprivate consumption, will initially not be as se-verely affected by the sharp recession as grossdomestic product (GDP).
1But the cyclically
adjusted budget balance will also deteriorateconsiderably. This is due to deficit-increasingmeasures, especially the fiscal stimulus pack-ages, the total volume of which is likely toreach around 1
1/C254% of GDP in 2009. More-
over, revenue from profit-related taxes is likelyto fall noticeably after having reached an ex-ceptionally high level in 2008. Owing to theexpected high deficit, a forecast drop in nom-inal GDP and the measures to support finan-cial institutions,
2the debt ratio is likely to soar
and clearly exceed 70% for the first time. Theoverall course of development is currentlyfraught with major uncertainty.
Government revenue will fall sharply in 2009
due to a number of factors. In addition toweak macroeconomic growth and the coun-terswing in profit-related taxes mentionedabove, legislative changes are also likely tohave an effect. These mainly relate to the de-cisions to lower income tax rates and to grantfirms more favourable depreciation condi-tions contained in the stimulus packages. Inthe area of social contributions, the cut in thecontribution rate to the Federal EmploymentAgency is to be offset by higher average an-
nual contribution rates to the statutory healthand public long-term care insurance schemes.However, the revenue ratio, which sets rev-enue in relation to GDP , is still likely to rise ap-preciably. While key macroeconomic assess-ment bases for government revenue will de-velop weakly, they are still proving muchmore robust than the sharply declining GDP .
In 2009, government spending is likely to
accelerate at a pace not seen since the mid-1990s. For one thing, cyclically sensitive labourmarket-related expenditure will grow rapidlydue to the worsening labour market situation,whereas this item had dampened overallspending growth significantly in the past twoyears. For another, the underlying expendituredynamic, which increased in 2008, is also like-ly to accelerate again. On the whole, addition-al expenditure incurred as a result of politicaldecisions will make a major contribution tothe sharp rise (with the stimulus packagesalone weighing in at 0.6% of GDP). For ex-ample, government investment is to be ex-panded greatly. Additional factors are the im-pact of the car scrapping incentive, which inthe meantime has been topped up to 35b i l -
lion, the one-off child bonus and the expan-sion of active labour market policy. Higher ex-penditure on healthcare and a permanent
1Cyclical adjustment procedures that do not take such
structural effects into consideration but are calculated in-
stead based on overall GDP (such as the European Com-
mission’s procedure) thus estimate the negative cyclical
influence for 2009 to be far higher.
2The bulk of these measures are not likely to be reflected
in the national accounts deficit. The European statistical
office, Eurostat, has not yet reached a definitive conclu-
sion on how support measures for financial institutions
should be recorded. See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The
impact of the financial market crisis on public finances,
Monthly Report, November 2008, pp 64-65.Public finances
to deteriorate
dramatically
in 2009
Revenue
likely to fall
noticeably...... while
expenditure
rises rapidly

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
73topping-up of child benefit had been resolved
beforehand. Overall, expenditure will increaserapidly in relation to a clearly contracting GDP .The peak level that the expenditure ratioreached during the last downturn (48
1/C252%i n
2003) could be matched within one year afterthe ratio had previously fallen steadily.
The public finance situation is likely to take
another sharp turn for the worse next year.The deficit and debt ratios are likely to soaragain. Even if economic prospects brightenslightly, the cyclical impact on public financesis still likely to lead to a further noticeable in-crease in the deficits especially as, in contrastto 2009, the overall growth profile is likely tobe detrimental to public finances. Further-more, fiscal policy measures, in particulargreater tax deductibility of contributions tohealth and long-term care insuranceschemes, will place a discernible burden ongeneral government budgets. In addition,revenue from profit-related taxes might wellcontinue to develop very poorly.
Overall, public finances are making a clear
contribution to stabilisation in the current re-cession. In 2010, the fiscal stimulus comparedwith 2008, measured by the change in theprimary balance (deficit excluding interest ex-penditure), could well reach around 5 to 6%of GDP , or 3120 to 3150 billion. Approxi-
mately three-fifths of this could be attribut-able to the automatic stabilisers and theextraordinary decrease in profit-related taxes,and the remaining two-fifths to discretionarymeasures and other structural changes. Thisis supplemented by extensive measures tostabilise the financial sector.It is generally better to rely on the effect of
the automatic stabilisers to smooth ordinarycyclical fluctuations. Attempts by governmentto steer demand give rise to substantial prob-lems and, based on past experience, hold lit-tle promise of success. In the unusual situ-ation of a very severe global recession com-bined with a financial market crisis, however,it was justifiable – given the relatively favour-able fiscal situation – to adopt fiscal stimulusmeasures in order to avert the danger of aneven steeper downward slide. Having saidthat, the fiscal stimulus could have been fo-cused more strongly on 2009. This would notonly make better economic sense, it wouldalso limit the 2010 deficit. Pursuant to theStability and Growth Pact, the deficit ratiomay exceed the 3% ceiling in exceptional cir-cumstances. However, this infringement mustbe temporary and the deficit ratio must re-main close to the ceiling. This is no longer thecase, in particular owing to the latest down-ward revision of the macroeconomic outlook.As soon as the ongoing perceptible expansionin the deficit is quantifiable next year, it istherefore likely that an excessive deficit pro-cedure will be initiated against Germany.
The European fiscal rules are sufficiently flex-
ible to provide a framework for fiscal policy inmonetary union which is also appropriate inthe present circumstances. Especially in thecurrent difficult financial situation of manymember states, these rules can help to ensureconfidence in the sustainability of publicfinances. If their soundness is called intoquestion, then prompt consolidation meas-ures are necessary – also to avoid negativespillover effects on other euro-area countries.
In 2010 public
finances likely
to take another
sharp turn for
the worse
Public finances
having clear
stabilising
effectExcessive deficit
procedure
expected
Deficit ratios
should be
rapidly reduced
as soon as
macroeconomic
situation
stabilises

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
74If a deficit is formally judged to be excessive,
the structural deficit then has to be reduced.In an exceptionally unfavourable economicsituation, the fiscal rules permit an adjust-ment that is initially lower than the bench-mark of at least 0.5% of GDP per year so asnot to stifle the impact of the automatic sta-bilisers. However, Germany, as well as otherEU member states, is obliged to rapidly elim-inate the very high deficit ratios (see box“Fiscal developments in the euro area” onpages 22 and 23) as soon as the macroeco-nomic situation stabilises. In this way, therapid and, in the long term, unsustainable in-crease in the debt-to-GDP ratios can be halt-ed and ultimately reversed. This will, in turn,make it easier to shoulder the looming demo-graphic burdens of an ageing population andpossible future payments arising from guar-antees to support financial institutions. Thereform of the German budgetary rules agreedby the Federal Reform Commission II, whichare to be adopted by the third quarter, consti-tutes an important signal in this respect.
Budgetary development of central,
state and local government
Tax revenueTax revenue
3fell in the first quarter of this
year by 2% compared with the same quarterin 2008 (see chart and table on pages 75 and76). A noticeable decline in consumption-related tax revenue (-2
1/C252%) was accompan-
ied by a slight increase in receipts fromincome-related taxes. Wage tax receipts didrise, but at a distinctly slower pace than lastyear owing to lower growth in gross wages
and salaries. By contrast, revenue from profit-related taxes fell markedly (-5%). This waschiefly attributable to a drop in corporateprofits and, in the case of assessed incometax, also to refunds necessitated by the Fed-eral Constitutional Court’s overturning of thecurtailment of commuting allowances, whichclearly outweighed the fall in payments ofgrants to home buyers, which are deductedfrom the revenue total. Revenue from turn-over taxes went down significantly. However,this item swings erratically on a quarterlybasis and the decrease may overstate theunderlying price dynamic.
Pursuant to the latest official tax estimate, tax
revenue (including local government taxes) isexpected to decline sharply over the year as awhole (-6% or - 334 billion).
4Almost half of
this fall is due to legislative changes (especial-ly stimulus packages and the rise in childbenefit) and tax refunds after the curtailing ofcommuting allowances was ruled unconstitu-tional. Moreover, it is assumed that revenuefrom profit-related taxes will tumble from theexceptionally high level reached in 2008. Bycontrast, the fact that wage tax and turnovertax are being bolstered by the more favour-able development of their assessment basescompared with that of GDP will have a stabil-ising effect.
3Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the last quarter recorded.
4The estimate is based on central government’s current
macroeconomic prognosis. It forecasts a decline in real
GDP of -6% (November 2008: +0.2%) and in nominal
GDP of -5.3% (November 2008: +2%). In 2010, real
growth is expected to be +0.5% and nominal growth
+1.2%. In the medium term (up to 2013), nominal GDP
is envisaged to increase by 3.3% per year.Tax revenue
down in Q1Clear fall
in revenue
expected
for 2009

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
75Revenue is expected to fall further in 2010
(by 3%). Overall, additional tax relief meas-ures (in particular, increased tax allowancesfor contributions to health and long-termcare insurance schemes, growing tax short-falls owing to stimulus packages) will be on asimilar scale to those in 2009. While the rela-tively stable development of consumption willcontinue to support turnover tax receipts, theaccelerated decline in employment will placea heavier strain on revenue from wage taxesin 2010. Moreover, receipts from profit-related taxes are expected to fall further.Average revenue growth of 4% is subse-quently forecast for the period from 2011 to2013. On balance, fiscal drag (positive rev-enue effect of the progressive structure of theincome tax schedule, negative revenue effectowing to the extensive price inelasticity of ex-cise duties) will lead to additional revenue. Asa whole, legislative changes will also increaserevenue, in particular as more favourable de-preciation rules from the first economicstimulus package are being phased out.
The projected growth path of revenue is
mainly based on political decisions on tax re-lief measures and the underlying macroeco-nomic benchmarks. However, uncertainty iscurrently at extremely high levels. As well asthe fundamental difficulties involved in esti-mating the financial effect of legislativechanges, this predominantly concerns thelikely course of economic development. Thisis further complicated by great uncertaintywith regard to the volume of revenue fromprofit-related taxes, the volatility and trendlevel of which is very hard to estimate.
5The high forecasting risk ultimately meansthat some tax estimates have to be revisedextensively. While in the past two years theforecast figures were, in part, revised sub-stantially upwards, a massive downward revi-sion was necessary vis-/C224-vis the last tax esti-mates from May and November 2008. Ad-justed for the effects of legislative changesadopted in the meantime,
6the shortfalls
compared with the May 2008 estimate haveincreased from 330
1/C252billion in the current
year to 365 billion in 2012, although, for theTax revenue *
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local gov-ernment taxes, which are not yet known for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 200920246810121416
–++++++++Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
5See Deutsche Bundesbank, Development of tax rev-
enue in Germany and current tax policy issues, Monthly
Report, October 2008, pp 33-57.
6These figures have also been adjusted for estimated
shortfalls in connection with the Meilicke case between
May and November 2008 and tax refunds owed for the
2007 and 2008 assessment years due to the court ruling
that the curtailment of commuting allowances was un-
constitutional.Stabilisation
only in medium
term
High forecast-
ing uncertainty
and...... extensive
revisions to
forecasts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
76most part, these corrections are a result of
lower macroeconomic benchmarks. The needfor revision arose primarily only in recentmonths (revision for 2009 compared withNovember 2008 forecast: - 328
1/C252billion). In
addition to the forecasting errors, tax cutsmade in the meantime have also caused con-siderable revenue shortfalls. Compared withthe estimate from May 2008, these amountto328 billion for 2012, which is also due to
the fact that not all measures to stimulate theeconomy are of limited duration but may be-come a persistent burden on governmentbudgets.
Central government budgetAt311 billion, central government’s deficit in
the first quarter was slightly down on theyear. Tax revenue as well as the reintegration
payment received from the Federal Employ-ment Agency – on the basis of the settled ac-counts for 2008 – declined slightly. However,central government received exceptionalfunds of almost 33 billion from the Redemp-
tion Fund for Inherited Liabilities as the shareof the Bundesbank’s profit transferred to thisspecial fund was no longer used by it to re-deem maturing debts.
7Net spending growth
was still relatively weak, not least thanks tomarkedly lower interest expenditure. Pre-miums from the issuance of securities, whichare deducted from the interest cost, a sharpfall in short-term borrowing rates and a latercoupon date for new five-year Federal notes(Bobls) all played a role in this.
The supplementary budget adopted by cen-
tral government in February already identifieda sharp rise in the full-year deficit from 312
billion in 2008 to 337 billion. In the mean-
time, the assumptions for the likely course ofmacroeconomic development have worsenedsubstantially and now indicate that this fore-cast will be considerably overshot, despite thefact that one-off proceeds from the Bundes-bank’s profit have eased budgetary strains.According to the latest tax estimate, currentestimates fall short by 37
1/C252billion. Further-
more, there will also be additional expend-iture of billions of euro vis-/C224-vis the supple-mentary budget for liquidity assistance to thehealth insurance fund and quite probably alsofor unemployment benefit II because theTax revenue
Q1
2008 2009Estimate
for2009
1, 2
Type of tax 5billionYear-
on-yearpercent-agechangeYear-
on-yearpercent-agechange
Tax revenue,
total
2 118.8 116.7 – 1.8 – 5.8
of which
Wage tax 32.8 34.0 + 3.6 – 4.2Profit-relatedtaxes
3 16.9 16.0 – 4.9 – 23.1
Assessedincome tax 3.7 3.0 – 19.0 – 30.1Investmentincome tax
4 8.5 8.7 + 2.3 – 11.2
Corporationtax 4.7 4.4 – 6.9 – 31.2
Turnover taxes
5 44.3 43.1 – 2.7 + 0.3
Energy tax 4.7 4.8 + 2.3 – 2.9Tobacco tax 2.5 2.4 – 7.1 – 1.4
1According to official tax estimate of May 2009. — 2Includ-
ing EU shares in German tax revenue, but excluding receiptsfrom local government taxes, which are not yet known forthe quarter recorded. — 3Employee refunds, grants paid to
home owners and investors deducted from revenue. —4Withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5Turnover tax and im-
port turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
7From 2010, the Bundesbank’ s profit distributions that
exceed legally stipulated thresholds will generally be
transferred to the Investment and Repayment Fund
which has been set up for measures resolved in the
second economic stimulus package.Deficit down
slightly in Q1
thanks to
Bundesbank’s
profit
Full-year deficit
far above
target,
additional
supplementary
budget
necessary

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
77budget as yet makes hardly any provision for
a growing number of recipients. The FederalEmployment Agency is likely to require tem-porary liquidity assistance in the course of2009 which will not affect the final outturnand for which the budget already contains anappropriation authorisation of 37 billion.
Since central government’s extensive residualborrowing authorisations carried forwardfrom the years up to and including 2007 havenow expired, a further supplementary budgetwill be necessary to cover the increased bor-rowing requirements.
It is already foreseeable that central govern-
ment’s deficit will continue to increase dras-tically in 2010; as things currently stand, itcould amount to up to 390 billion. Tax rev-
enue will continue to fall significantly. More-over, there will be no repetition of the one-offproceeds from the Bundesbank’s profit distri-bution. Furthermore, expenditure on un-employment benefit II is expected to rise sig-nificantly owing to the deteriorating labourmarket situation. Payments to offset the Fed-eral Employment Agency’s deficit once its fi-nancial reserves have been used up are likelyto present an even greater strain. The bor-rowing limit laid down in Article 115 of theGerman Basic Law may again be overshot onthe grounds of averting a disruption of themacroeconomic equilibrium. The new debtrules that are currently being planned (seethe box on pages 78 and 79) provide extend-ed scope for borrowing in exceptional circum-stances such as the current situation. The ex-tensive cyclically adjusted deficit for 2010 isto be gradually reduced, however, in the tran-sitional phase from 2011 to 2016. The largepayment to offset the Federal Employment
Agency’s deficit should be strictly an excep-tion, as insurance benefits should, as a matterof principle, be financed from contributions.As soon as the macroeconomic situation sta-bilises, appreciable additional consolidationefforts will nonetheless be required to achievethe stipulated budgetary targets. Thus on thiscount, too, there is currently no scope for anyfurther structural relief measures.
Although the financial situation of central
government’s non-core budget entities at thebeginning of 2009 was almost balanced,large deficits look likely to accrue during theremainder of the year. The Investment andRepayment Fund set up as part of the secondeconomic stimulus package is likely to have aborrowing requirement in the order of
Central government fiscal 
deficit / surplus since 2007
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q415105051015
–––+++
–20–15–10–5€ bn Cumulative
20092009
20082008
20072007Quarterly results€ bn
Further steep
rise in central
government
deficit in 2010
High full-year
deficits for non-
core budget
entities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
78Deutsche BundesbankThe reform of the borrowing limits for central and state government
The Federal Reform Commission II, established in De-
cember 2006, agreed on reforms in March 2009 whichhave now been presented as draft laws in both housesof parliament (Bundestag and Bundesrat) and are tobe adopted before the summer recess. The main focusis on reforming the constitutional borrowing limits,which were last adjusted at the end of the 1960s andhave failed to sufficiently curb the increase in centraland state government debt over the past few dec-ades. This failure was due, among other things, to thefact that net borrowing was capped at the level ofbudgeted investment expenditure rather than the ac-tual (sometimes lower) level. In addition, the borrow-ing ceiling was not adjusted for the consumption offixed capital, asset disposals or for investment expend-iture which does not augment government assets.Furthermore, significant exceptions for the specialfunds (non-core government budgets) and for avert-ing a disruption of the macroeconomic equilibrium aswell as a lack of adjustment mechanisms during morebuoyant economic phases, have persistently impairedthe effectiveness of the borrowing limit. Against thisbackdrop, in its ruling given in July 2007 on the consti-tutionality of the 2004 Federal budget, the FederalConstitutional Court urged that the borrowing ceilingbe revised, not least in order to safeguard fiscal pol-icymakers’ future radius of action by limiting debt ser-vice burdens.
1
The guiding principle of the planned reform is to in-corporate the basic elements of the European Stabilityand Growth Pact into national constitutional law. Thepact stipulates government budget positions whichare close to balance or in surplus over the mediumterm in order to ensure fiscal sustainability. On thisbasis, net annual central government borrowing is tobe generally restricted to a maximum of 0.35% ofgross domestic product (GDP). At least new borrowingauthorisations appear to be prohibited for the specialfunds and, in principle, new borrowing will not bepermitted in state government budgets.
2No individualconstitutional borrowing limit for local government
and the social security funds is to be set in the GermanBasic Law. The preamble to the legislation justifies thison the grounds that central and state government areresponsible for ensuring that European fiscal stand-ards are met by those government entities, too.
As at EU level, the automatic stabilisers are to be
allowed to take effect, and cyclically induced budget-ary deteriorations and improvements will not be re-stricted by the aforementioned borrowing limit. Thepurpose of this symmetric approach is to ensure thatsurpluses during upswings compensate for deficitsduring downturns. Additional borrowing is possiblein exceptional circumstances (eg natural disasters orthe current extreme financial market and economiccrisis). The obligation – above and beyond the Euro-pean rules – to repay such debts within an appropri-ate period of time (possibly still to be stipulated moreprecisely) should ensure that this option is exercisedonly in cases of genuine hardship and will not lead toa sustained rise in debt over time. Moreover, the re-form stipulates that, within the framework of supple-mentary budgets, the cyclically adjusted borrowinglimit may be exceeded by up to 3% of the budgetedtax revenue if an unexpectedly unfavourable develop-ment (eg in tax receipts) emerges during the year.However, this gap must be closed in the following fis-cal year unless recourse is made to the exemptionclause. To prevent systematic infringements of theborrowing limit during budget implementation, dis-crepancies between the actual figures and the bor-rowing limit are to be recorded on a “control ac-count” with a maximum credit facility of 1.5% of GDP.If the debt recorded there exceeds a threshold of 1%of GDP, it must be reduced in opportune cyclical con-ditions.
Under these new fiscal rules, the task of estimating
the cyclically adjusted budgetary position assumes keyimportance. In this respect, however, there is signifi-
1See Federal Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht), 2 BvF
of 9 July 2007, sections 133-135. — 2To enable those federal states
with particular budget difficulties, too, to commit to this objective,the other members of the German federation agreed to grant annualaid of 50.8 billion from 2011 to 2019 which, however, the recipient
states will not receive unless their existing deficits are actuallyeliminated. — 3Alternatively, it would be conceivable to allow ad-
justment over an extended period of time. In the event of generallyunforeseen tax shortfalls, for example, a transitional period of threeyears could be allowed in which the borrowing limit could be degres-sively exceeded by the amount of the shortfall. In order to ensure

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
79cant estimation uncertainty. For example, under the
cyclical adjustment procedures used in the EU surveil-lance of budgetary positions, the very substantial andsometimes seemingly erratic fluctuations in revenuefrom profit-related taxes are classified as being cyclic-ally induced only in some cases. Furthermore, if thereare unforeseen macroeconomic developments, trendgrowth and thus also the level of potential output areoften revised, which in turn leads to revisions of thecyclically adjusted fiscal balance. Consequently, ifthere were an unexpectedly unfavourable develop-ment, central and local government budgets mightfairly quickly face substantial and, in many cases, pro-cyclical consolidation requirements. This would beparticularly true if – as in the past under the old bor-rowing rule – the cyclically adjusted scope for incur-ring debt were to be largely exhausted on a regularbasis at the time the budget is drawn up. By contrast,automatic stabilisation of economic activity throughpublic finances is able to take full effect if the aim ofmaintaining an adequate safety margin below theborrowing limit – which requires, at the least, that thecyclically adjusted scope for incurring debt is not util-ised – is set and is generally also achieved.
3Enshrining
this in the legislation implementing the central gov-ernment borrowing limit might be an option worthconsidering.
In line with the European fiscal framework, financial
transactions will be disregarded when calculating thedeficit and the borrowing limit. The privatisation pro-ceeds and loan repayments often used in the past toplug budgetary gaps can therefore no longer be em-ployed as a means of keeping to the borrowing limit.However, attempts could be made to exploit the lee-way on the expenditure side. For example, paymentsto enterprises or other institutions could be recordedin the budget as loans or capital injections even whereno associated market-based returns may be expected.Under the European fiscal framework, such paymentsare usually reclassified as capital transfers and thushave a negative impact on the fiscal balance, as do
non-cash debt relief and debt assumption. For theplanned new budgetary rules, too, a comparable pro-cedure for such transactions – including them whencalculating the distance from the borrowing limit –would also be appropriate in order to ensure compati-bility with the EU regulations as expressly stipulatedin the constitutional text.
The new rules, which enter into force as early as 2011,
will only be fully applicable following a relatively ex-tensive transitional phase during which the existingstructural deficits – which partly result from the meas-ures taken to combat the current crisis – must be re-duced in stages. The central government budget mayexceed the new limit up to and including 2015. How-ever, the necessary consolidation is to commence in2011 and will be implemented in even stages. Giventhe particularly pressing need for consolidation main-ly in Bremen and Saarland, a longer period of adjust-ment up to and including 2019 was agreed for thefederal states. It is particularly important that the con-stitutional limits in the Basic Law are adhered toequally in all federal states and are implementedstringently to prevent their fiscal positions from dif-fering so widely in future and to ensure that thebudgets of all federal states are sustainable in thelong term.
4
Overall, the reform and its objectives are to be thor-oughly welcomed, especially given the current sharprise in budget deficits. By anchoring the commitmentsmade in the European Stability and Growth Pact morefirmly in national law, this key pillar of monetaryunion will be strengthened and a major step towardssustainable public finances will be taken. If the rulesare applied consistently, the debt-to-GDP ratio will falland an ensuing significant decline in interest expend-iture relative to total government spending will pro-vide relief for future generations and help to ease theburdens resulting from demographic developments.
that the longer-term effect of this rule on the debt level is neutral,
the adjustment rules would need to be designed to operate symmet-rically and infringements of the borrowing limit booked to the “con-trol account”. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Reform of German budget-ary rules, Monthly Report, October 2007, pp 48-68 and J Kremer undD Stegarescu (2008), Eine strenge und mittelfristig stabilisierende
Haushaltsregel, in Wirtschaftsdienst, Vol 88, pp 181 ff — 4For infor-
mation on the need for such implementation, see Deutsche Bundes-bank, Can Bremen, Saarland and Schleswig-Holstein also balancetheir budgets? Monthly Report, June 2008, pp 10-11.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
80310 billion as a result of the car scrapping in-
centive, which has since been topped up to35 billion, and also outflows connected with
investment programmes. Furthermore, thecapital injections announced to date by thegovernment stabilisation fund SoFFin alonehave generated borrowing requirements inexcess of 315 billion.
8
State government9
In the first quarter, state government report-
ed a deficit of just under 3101/C252billion, after
31/C252billion a year earlier. Revenue fell by 31/C252%
owing to declining tax receipts and the drop-out of windfall gains from asset realisations inBerlin. Expenditure increased by just under11%. This can be attributed primarily to thesecond tranche of recapitalisation for theBavarian Landesbank Bayern LB ( 37 billion)
which, although included in the 2008 supple-mentary budget, did not affect cash flowsuntil the first quarter of 2009.
A severe worsening of state government fi-
nances is expected for 2009 as a whole com-pared with 2008. Additional personnel ex-penditure totalling 33 billion will result from
the pay settlement for salaried staff con-cluded in March and its probable extension topublic sector employees with civil servant sta-tus as well as retired civil servants in all states.According to the latest tax estimate, shortfallsof317 billion are expected compared with
the last estimate from November, whichwould mean a decrease of 313
1/C252billion on
2008. Further bank recapitalisations are ap-parently to be conducted outside of the corebudgets. Thus Hamburg and Schleswig-Hostein have set up an agency mandated to
raise 33 billion on the capital market and
transfer this to HSH Nordbank. Measures torecapitalise Baden W/C252rttemberg’s Landes-bank LBBW are likewise to be taken by an en-tity that is not integrated in the state govern-ment budget accounts. Pursuant to the debtbrake enshrined in Baden-W/C252rttemberg’sstate budgetary rules, the incurrence of newdebt would otherwise only have been permis-sible in narrowly defined extraordinary cir-cumstances. State governments’ budgets,which appear to make allowance for barelyhalf of the tax revenue shortfalls that havebecome evident since the November esti-mate, envisage a deficit of 317 billion in
2009. If the recapitalisations of the statebanks (Landesbanken) that have either beenformally spun off from the core budget or al-located to the 2008 budgetary accounts arefactored into the deficit, then it may even sur-pass the highest level recorded so far ( 330 bil-
lion in 2003). Given the growing volume oftax revenue shortfalls, no significant declinein this deficit can be expected for 2010 evenassuming that no further capital injectionsinto state banks will be necessary. State gov-ernments, therefore, will likewise have totake extensive consolidation measures assoon as the macroeconomic situation stabil-ises.
8In its outlook for the year, the German Finance Agency
envisaged financial requirements of no less than 360 bil-
lion for SoFFin.
9The development of local government finances was
analysed in greater detail in the short articles in the Bun-
desbank Monthly Report of April 2009.Clear rise in
deficit at start
of year mainly
due to bank
recapitalisations
Growing strains
as year
progresses

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
81Social security funds10
Statutory pension insurance scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re-
corded a deficit of 311/C252billion in the first
quarter of 2009, which was barely largerthan in the first three months of last year.While both total revenue and employees’compulsory contributions generated 2%more than in the first quarter of 2008, thisrepresents a noticeable slowing in the pace ofgrowth compared with previous quarters. Ex-penditure, too, rose by 2%. Pension pay-ments played a key role in this. They in-creased by 1
1/C252% on the back of the 1.1% rise
in pensions on 1 July 2008 and a rise of justunder
1/C252% in the number of pensions. Sub-
stantial spending increases ensued from therise in contribution rates to the statutoryhealth insurance institutions in respect ofcontributions attributable to the statutorypension insurance scheme and from rehabili-tation measures.
The statutory pension insurance scheme
could conclude the year with a deficit. Onereason for this is that pensions will be raisedcomparatively sharply, by 2.41% in westernGermany and 3.38%
11in eastern Germany,
as from 1 July 2009. This reflects the markedgrowth in wages and salaries in 2008. An-other important element is the suspension ofthe “Riester factor” in the pension adjust-ment formula, which is designed to curb pen-sion increases by the amount set aside by em-ployees for supplementary private pensionprovision. Moreover, the positive overall em-ployment situation in 2008 helped to lowerthe pensioner ratio, which allowed for a high-
er pension adjustment due to the correspond-ingly reduced sustainability factor. Theplanned cut in the contribution rate to thehealth insurance fund in mid-2009 to 14.9%will generate some financial relief in thesecond half of the year.Finances of the
German statutorypension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009545658606264
–20+2+4Quarterly
€ bn€ bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
10The financial development of the statutory health and
public long-term care insurance schemes in the final
quarter of 2008 was analysed in the short articles of the
Monthly Report of March and April 2009. These are the
most recent data available.
11Pensions will be increased by a larger margin in east-
ern Germany because earnings data there in the past few
years have been revised upwards. The justification for this
was that adjustments which were essentially too low in
previous years should now be compensated for by a
more generous adjustment. However, downward adjust-
ments have been very limited in eastern Germany be-
cause safeguard clauses both prevented any pension cuts
and (in 2007 and 2008) ensured that adjustments in east-
ern Germany matched those in western Germany.Deficit in Q1,
revenue still
stable at 2008
level
Financial
deterioration
due to macro-
economic
slowdown this
year...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
82Next year, the macroeconomic slowdown is
likely to have a larger negative effect on thelabour market and weaken the revenue basefor the statutory pension insurance scheme.Due to the fact that dampening factors are tobe used again in the pension adjustment for-mula, this would not lead to a rise in pensionseven if per capita earnings were to increase
slightly in 2009. Pension cuts as a result offalling per capita earnings are to be generallyprevented by law. This ad hoc intervention
will increase the risk of permanently higherburdens on contribution payers unlesspreviously waived pension cuts are later offsetby larger adjustment curbs. Overall, it cannotbe ruled out that if contribution rates remainunchanged at 19.9%, the lower interventionthreshold for the pension reserves of 0.2 ofmonthly expenditure may be undershot in2011. As things currently stand, the putativelowering of the contribution rate, which hasbeen factored into the projections to date, nolonger appears likely.
Federal Employment AgencyIn the first quarter of 2009, the Federal Em-
ployment Agency recorded a deficit of 34 bil-
lion, whereas one year previously, in terms ofthe operating result (ie excluding the one-offtransfers to the Agency’s dedicated civil ser-vant pension reserves), the shortfall hadamounted to only 31 billion. Revenue plum-
meted by 28% which, however, was largelydue to the fact that, as from 2009, the Fed-eral grant is no longer paid in equal monthlyinstalments but instead in one lump sum atthe end of the year. Furthermore, the contri-bution rate was cut again from 3.3% to2.8% at the beginning of the year. Expend-iture of the Federal Employment Agency for-mally recorded a total decrease of 8%. In op-erating terms, however, ie excluding the one-off transfer to the civil servant pension re-serve fund last year, it actually went up by7%. It should also be noted that the reinte-gration payment to be paid to central govern-ment was particularly low because at the be-ginning of the year it was offset against ex-Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1 Excluding central government liquidity as-
sistance. — 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants’ pension fund set up in 2008.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009681012141618
1.82.43.03.64.24.85.46.06.67.27.8
–4–20+2+4+6Quarterly
€ bn€ bnLog scale
Expenditure, 
total 2Revenue 1
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment
    benefit and short-time    working benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)€ bn
... and in
coming yearsFinancial
situation
already much
worse at start
of 2009

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
83cess payments from last year. While, at 3%,
expenditure on unemployment benefitshowed a relatively moderate increase,growth in short-time working benefits
12
(which almost tripled) and in active labourmarket policy measures (+11%) had a fargreater impact.
The Federal Employment Agency’s supple-
mentary budget foresees a full-year deficit ofnearly 311 billion. However, this is still based
on the more favourable macroeconomic as-sumptions from central government’s AnnualEconomic Report. The economic outlook hassince deteriorated, and this will have a par-ticularly severe effect on the Federal Employ-ment Agency’s finances because not only isexpenditure on wage substitutes and otherbenefits increasing at a faster pace but itscontribution receipts are already contract-ing.
13Therefore, in 2009, the Federal Employ-
ment Agency’s deficit is likely to distinctly ex-ceed the target figure. Over the year as awhole, the reserves should be sufficient tocover the deficit. However, during the year, li-quidity shortages are to be expected becausecontributions from Christmas bonus pay-ments and, above all, the Federal grant willnot be received until the end of the year.Liquidity assistance from central government
is envisaged for this purpose.
The expected further rise in unemployment
will not only completely exhaust the FederalEmployment Agency’s reserves in the comingyear but will also give rise to a high deficit tobe covered by central government. Hencewhile a contribution rate of approximately3% just about sufficed to finance the verylow number of recipients of unemploymentbenefit in 2008, it is too low to cover the Fed-eral Employment Agency’s structural expend-iture over the entire business cycle. Theplanned contribution rate of 3% from 2011onwards can therefore only be maintained ifhigh Federal transfers are made regularlyfrom tax revenue or if the Federal Employ-ment Agency significantly reduces its rangeof benefits.
12Short-time working benefits payable for cyclical, sea-
sonal and restructuring reasons are paid retrospectively,
ie expenditure in the first quarter reflects growth in short-
time working from December 2008 to February 2009.
13By contrast, the statutory pension, statutory health
and public long-term care insurance schemes receive
contributions for unemployed recipients of wage substi-
tutes (generally based on 80% of previous gross remu-
neration), meaning that initially they are not as greatly
affected by a fall in unemployment.Extremely
negative
financial
outlook
in downturn...... may
necessitate
higher Federal
grants next year

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
84

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 5*
2 External transactions and positions 5*
3 General economic indicators 6*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors of
economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*
5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financialsectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
individual taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*
6 Labour market 65*
7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in
Stage III of European Economic and
Monetary Union 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and indicators of the Germaneconomy’s price competitiveness 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
 I Key economic data for the euro area  
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2007          July 7.1 10.6 11.9 11.5 8.7 11.6 9.2 4.06 4.22 4.6
         Aug 6.8 10.6 11.7 11.7 8.8 11.8 9.2 4.05 4.54 4.4         Sep 6.2 10.3 11.4 11.9 8.7 11.7 8.8 4.03 4.74 4.3
         Oct 6.6 11.3 12.5 12.1 9.3 12.3 8.7 3.94 4.69 4.4
         Nov 6.3 11.0 12.4 12.2 9.1 12.1 8.0 4.02 4.64 4.2         Dec 4.0 10.2 11.6 11.9 10.1 12.8 8.5 3.88 4.85 4.3
2008          Jan 4.4 10.5 11.7 11.6 10.0 12.8 8.6 4.02 4.48 4.2
         Feb 3.6 10.8 11.5 11.1 9.9 12.7 7.4 4.03 4.36 4.1         Mar 2.8 9.9 10.1 10.7 9.8 12.4 6.2 4.09 4.60 4.1
         Apr 2.5 10.5 10.5 10.3 10.0 12.2 6.1 3.99 4.78 4.3
         May 2.3 10.3 10.2 10.1 9.5 12.0 6.1 4.01 4.86 4.4         June 1.5 9.7 9.7 9.7 9.1 11.2 5.2 4.01 4.94 4.8
         July 0.4 9.3 9.3 9.3 9.2 11.0 4.9 4.19 4.96 4.7
         Aug 0.3 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.3 10.9 4.9 4.30 4.97 4.5         Sep 1.2 9.0 8.7 8.8 8.6 10.2 5.0 4.27 5.02 4.4
         Oct 3.7 9.3 8.7 8.4 7.5 8.9 3.3 3.82 5.11 4.3
         Nov 2.1 8.7 7.7 8.0 7.4 8.4 3.6 3.15 4.24 4.1         Dec 3.3 8.3 7.5 7.1 6.3 7.0 2.6 2.49 3.29 3.7
2009          Jan 5.1 7.5 6.0 6.4 6.1 6.3 3.5 1.81 2.46 3.9
         Feb 6.3 7.0 5.8 5.6 5.9 5.7 4.5 1.26 1.94 4.0         Mar 5.9 6.2 5.1 ... 5.2 4.7 4.3 1.06 1.64 3.9
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.84 1.42 3.9
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2007          July + 5,044 + 7,193 + 50,115 − 1,534 + 8,190 + 46,499 − 3,040 1.3716 107.8 108.9
         Aug − 593 + 3,485 + 60,690 + 803 − 13,598 + 72,511 + 973 1.3622 107.3 108.4
         Sep + 3,663 + 4,284 + 3,168 − 27,333 + 36,260 − 3,427 − 2,333 1.3896 108.4 109.5
         Oct + 4,067 + 6,291 − 48,441 + 31,023 − 52,796 − 26,674 + 7 1.4227 109.6 110.7
         Nov − 48 + 4,689 − 2,984 + 7,833 − 16,371 + 5,352 + 202 1.4684 111.2 112.3         Dec + 3,221 − 2,977 − 41,135 − 26,289 − 31,813 + 12,463 + 4,504 1.4570 111.5 112.2
2008          Jan − 18,189 − 8,302 + 45,317 − 32,392 + 38,169 + 45,946 − 6,407 1.4718 112.2 113.0
         Feb + 7,277 + 4,396 − 17,774 − 20,152 + 9,135 − 11,306 + 4,548 1.4748 112.0 112.5         Mar − 6,345 + 1,441 + 7,978 − 22,684 + 18,508 + 15,368 − 3,215 1.5527 114.8 115.7
         Apr − 7,480 + 5,112 + 25,706 − 23,010 − 21,035 + 73,010 − 3,258 1.5751 116.3 117.0
         May − 24,029 − 1,586 + 39,088 − 5,351 − 9,148 + 50,861 + 2,726 1.5557 115.8 116.5         June + 367 + 2,566 + 14,945 − 25,060 + 48,514 − 9,033 + 524 1.5553 115.8 116.4
         July − 4,127 + 389 + 48,527 − 1,555 + 28,977 + 23,374 − 2,268 1.5770 116.2 116.6
         Aug − 11,468 − 7,125 + 359 − 11,849 + 11,033 − 1,115 + 2,290 1.4975 113.9 114.1         Sep − 7,547 − 2,277 + 12,774 − 22,499 + 73,131 − 39,478 + 1,620 1.4370 112.0 112.1
         Oct − 5,083 + 3,659 + 97,336 − 10,936 + 153,045 − 36,808 − 7,966 1.3322 107.9 108.3
         Nov − 13,670 − 3,981 + 19,632 − 53,283 + 54,487 + 18,795 − 367 1.2732 107.1 107.6         Dec − 3,296 − 364 + 19,732 − 22,523 + 3,508 + 30,838 + 7,909 1.3449 112.4 112.8
2009          Jan − 19,902 − 10,097 + 51,211 − 15,919 − 1,570 + 63,316 + 5,384 1.3239 111.9 112.3
         Feb − 2,305 + 1,471 − 5,369 − 13,192 + 64,085 − 57,392 + 1,131 1.2785 110.4 110.7         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3050 113.3 113.5
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3190 112.5 112.7
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-21 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
5* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1
 
2006 2.9 3.0 3.0 4.9 2.2 4.5 5.7 2.0
2007 2.7 2.8 2.5 4.2 2.2 4.0 6.0 1.62008 0.8 1.1 1.3 0.9 0.8 2.9 − 2.3 − 1.0
2007          Q4 2.2 2.8 1.6 3.8 2.5 3.3 5.5 0.5
2008          Q1 2.2 1.9 2.1 2.4 1.7 3.4 − 1.2 0.3
         Q2 1.5 2.0 3.4 2.4 1.5 3.3 − 0.7 − 0.4
         Q3 0.6 1.5 1.4 1.5 0.8 2.9 0.3 − 1.1         Q4 − 1.4 − 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.4 − 0.9 2.2 − 7.5 − 3.0
2009          Q1 − 4.6 ... − 6.7 ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,2
 
2006 4.3 4.3 5.7 9.9 1.4 0.8 5.1 3.6
2007 3.8 3.0 6.0 4.3 1.4 2.6 7.1 2.12008 − 1.7 − 0.1
9p 0.0 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 4.3 − 1.0 − 3.3
2007          Q4 3.3 1.7 5.6 6.2 2.3 2.9 9.5 − 0.9
2008          Q1 2.8 1.9 5.0 3.9 1.7 − 3.6 2.4 0.9
         Q2 1.1 2.7 3.1 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.3 1.7 0.2         Q3 − 1.5 2.4 0.0 0.6 − 2.2 − 3.1 0.0 − 4.1         Q4 − 9.0 − 7.2
9p − 7.6 − 8.2 − 9.2 − 8.1 − 7.7 − 10.2
2009          Q1 e − 18.7 ... 9p − 20.4 − 20.6 − 15.7 − 7.5 ... − 21.0
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 
2006 82.8 82.7 85.5 86.0 85.0 75.7 75.7 77.6
2007 84.2 83.2 87.5 87.3 86.6 76.9 76.6 78.22008 83.0 82.9 86.5 84.4 85.8 76.4 ... 75.9
2008          Q1 83.8 83.8 87.2 86.3 86.8 76.7 79.4 76.7
         Q2 83.7 83.4 87.6 85.2 86.2 77.3 75.3 76.2         Q3 82.8 82.1 86.2 84.3 85.9 76.2 ... 75.6         Q4 81.5 82.4 84.8 81.9 84.1 75.4 ... 75.2
2009          Q1 74.7 75.4 76.2 72.0 76.0 73.4 ... 70.4
         Q2 70.5 70.4 71.8 66.5 72.0 70.3 ... 66.2
 
Unemployment rate 4
 
2006 8.3 8.3 9.8 7.7 9.2 8.9 4.5 6.8
2007 7.5 7.5 8.4 6.9 8.3 8.3 4.6 6.12008 7.5 7.0 7.3 6.4 7.8 7.7 6.3 6.8
2008          Oct 7.8 7.1 7.1 6.6 8.0 7.8 7.6 6.9
         Nov 8.0 6.9 7.1 6.6 8.2 7.8 8.2 6.9         Dec 8.2 6.9 7.2 6.7 8.3 7.8 8.7 6.9
2009          Jan 8.4 7.1 7.3 6.9 8.4 ... 9.4 ...
         Feb 8.7 7.2 7.4 7.1 8.6 ... 10.0 ...         Mar 8.9 7.3 7.6 7.4 8.8 ... 10.6 ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2006 2.2 2.3 1.8 1.3 1.9 3.3 2.7 2.2
2007 5 2.1 1.8 2.3 1.6 1.6 3.0 2.9 2.0
2008 6 3.3 4.5 2.8 3.9 3.2 4.2 3.1 3.5
2008          Nov 2.1 3.2 1.4 3.5 1.9 3.0 2.1 2.7
         Dec 1.6 2.7 1.1 3.4 1.2 2.2 1.3 2.4
2009          Jan 7 1.1 2.1 0.9 2.5 0.8 2.0 1.1 1.4
         Feb 1.2 1.9 1.0 2.7 1.0 1.8 0.1 1.5
         Mar 0.6 0.6 0.4 2.0 0.4 1.5 − 0.7 1.1
         Apr p 0.6 0.7 0.8 2.1 0.1 1.1 ... ...
 
General government financial balance 8
 
2006 − 1.3 0.3 − 1.5 4.0 − 2.3 − 2.8 3.0 − 3.3
2007 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 5.2 − 2.7 − 3.6 0.2 − 1.52008 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.1 4.2 − 3.4 − 5.0 − 7.1 − 2.7
 
General government debt 8
 
2006 68.2 87.9 67.6 39.2 63.7 95.9 24.9 106.52007 66.0 84.0 65.1 35.1 63.8 94.8 25.0 103.52008 69.4 89.6 65.9 33.4 68.0 97.6 43.2 105.8
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central working-day variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — are collected in January, April, July and October. — 4  Standardised, as a
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of the euro area calculated from seaso- percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. — 5  Including
nally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for
6*I. Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
I.  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1
 
6.4 3.3 3.4 3.4 1.4 8.5 5.9 3.9 4.1 2006
5.2 3.9 3.5 3.1 1.9 10.4 6.8 3.7 4.4 2007
− 0.9 2.7 2.1 1.8 0.0 6.4 3.5 1.2 3.7 2008
3.9 3.3 4.1 2.6 1.8 14.4 5.4 3.6 4.6 2007          Q4
0.9 3.2 3.7 2.9 0.8 9.3 5.7 2.9 4.3 2008          Q1
1.5 3.8 3.5 2.4 0.6 7.9 5.5 2.3 3.9          Q2
− 0.7 3.1 2.0 1.6 0.4 6.6 3.9 0.4 3.5          Q3
− 5.2 0.7 − 0.6 0.3 − 1.7 2.5 − 0.8 − 0.8 2.9          Q4
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2009          Q1
 
Industrial production1,2
 
2.1 − 1.5 7.8 3.1 12.2 6.1 3.9 0.0 2006
− 0.3 − 2.3 5.8 0.1 16.1 7.2 2.0 5.3 2007
− 5.5 − 1.5 0.8 − 4.1 4.6 − 1.7 − 7.3 3.3 2008
− 2.9 − 7.7 3.8 − 3.1 15.4 4.5 0.2 9.6 2007          Q4
− 4.4 − 6.8 3.5 − 3.5 13.1 3.3 − 0.8 5.7 2008          Q1
− 1.7 − 5.2 3.1 − 3.6 12.0 2.7 − 5.4 6.9          Q2
2.5 − 0.5 1.7 − 2.3 5.7 − 1.1 − 6.3 2.7          Q3
− 17.9 − − 6.0 − 4.5 − 7.0 − 11.1 − 11.2 − 16.6 − 2.4          Q4
p − 24.1 − − 8.5 ... − 13.2 ... − 19.5 − 22.8 ... 2009          Q1
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 
85.2 81.6 82.0 83.4 78.4 75.4 83.9 80.5 69.9 2006
87.3 80.8 83.6 85.2 81.8 73.6 85.9 81.0 70.0 200785.1 79.0 83.4 83.0 79.8 72.0 84.1 79.2 72.0 2008
86.0 79.5 83.5 83.6 78.1 75.0 84.8 81.1 72.5 2008          Q1
84.5 82.4 83.4 84.0 82.3 72.7 85.3 80.2 73.2          Q2
85.9 78.2 83.6 82.4 79.7 71.5 83.8 79.0 72.3          Q383.9 75.9 82.9 81.9 79.0 68.9 82.6 76.4 70.1          Q4
72.6 69.0 77.5 77.2 76.4 53.3 75.2 73.5 69.5 2009          Q1
65.2 65.9 74.6 73.2 70.6 50.9 69.1 69.8 66.7          Q2
 
Unemployment rate 4
 
4.6 7.1 3.9 4.8 7.8 13.4 6.0 8.5 4.6 2006
4.2 6.4 3.2 4.4 8.1 11.1 4.9 8.3 4.0 20074.9 5.9 2.8 3.8 7.7 9.5 4.4 11.3 3.8 2008
5.1 5.9 2.7 4.0 7.8 9.1 4.2 13.2 3.8 2008          Oct 
5.3 6.1 2.7 4.0 7.9 9.2 4.2 13.9 4.0          Nov 
5.5 6.0 2.7 4.2 8.0 9.3 4.1 14.7 4.3          Dec 
5.7 6.3 2.7 4.3 8.2 9.6 4.3 15.7 4.4 2009          Jan 
5.9 6.5 2.7 4.5 8.4 10.0 4.6 16.5 4.6          Feb 
6.1 6.7 2.8 4.5 8.5 10.5 5.0 17.4 4.9          Mar 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.0 2.6 1.7 1.7 3.0 4.3 2.5 3.6 2.2 2006
2.7 0.7 1.6 2.2 2.4 1.9 3.8 2.8 2.2 20074.1 4.7 2.2 3.2 2.7 3.9 5.5 4.1 4.4 2008
2.0 4.9 1.9 2.3 1.4 3.9 2.9 2.4 3.1 2008          Nov 
0.7 5.0 1.7 1.5 0.8 3.5 1.8 1.5 1.8          Dec 
0.0 3.1 1.7 1.2 0.1 2.7 1.4 0.8 0.9 2009          Jan 
0.7 3.5 1.9 1.4 0.1 2.4 2.1 0.7 0.6          Feb 
− 0.3 3.9 1.8
p 0.7 − 0.6 1.8 1.6 − 0.1 0.9          Mar 
− 0.3 4.0 p 1.8 ... − 0.6 1.4 1.1 − 0.2 0.6          Apr 
 
General government financial balance 8
 
1.4 − 2.6 0.6 − 1.6 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 1.3 2.0 − 1.2 2006
3.6 − 2.2 0.3 − 0.5 − 2.6 − 1.9 0.5 2.2 3.4 20072.6 − 4.7 1.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 3.8 0.9 2008
 
General government debt 8
 
6.7 63.7 47.4 62.0 64.7 30.4 26.7 39.6 64.6 20066.9 62.1 45.6 59.4 63.5 29.4 23.4 36.2 59.4 2007
14.7 64.1 58.2 62.5 66.4 27.6 22.8 39.5 49.1 2008
Slovenia from 2007 onwards. — 6  Including Malta and Cyprus from 2008 states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). —
onwards. — 7  Including Slovakia from 2009 onwards. — 8  As a percentage 9  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way of
of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey. 
7*I.  Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2007          Aug − 4.2 33.9 − 5.2 − 38.1 − 32.7 − 49.4 − 8.3 41.1 2.1 − 6.8 0.2 9.6 − 0.8
         Sep 123.9 136.0 22.9 − 12.1 − 12.0 − 25.9 28.9 54.7 9.1 − 3.0 1.2 0.2 10.6
         Oct 161.4 162.0 82.2 − 0.6 3.0 4.9 144.3 139.5 51.4 16.9 1.1 − 1.6 35.1
         Nov 95.1 97.1 12.0 − 2.0 − 2.8 28.8 79.3 50.5 − 4.9 2.5 0.8 − 13.4 5.2         Dec 121.3 123.3 64.7 − 2.0 − 12.6 − 48.1 − 136.1 − 88.0 83.7 48.9 0.4 1.6 32.9
2008          Jan 127.6 110.6 19.0 17.1 13.6 − 19.4 234.6 254.0 19.0 − 3.4 1.8 11.8 8.8
         Feb 57.9 65.1 3.5 − 7.2 2.5 − 18.2 80.1 98.3 − 10.3 − 8.9 − 1.1 − 4.3 4.0         Mar 153.4 139.2 28.0 14.2 7.5 − 48.1 − 55.0 − 6.9 29.2 5.5 − 2.3 14.7 11.4
         Apr 189.9 166.3 87.4 23.6 11.4 − 73.9 80.1 154.0 17.2 3.9 − 1.5 10.8 4.1
         May 84.9 83.2 16.3 1.8 9.4 − 69.6 − 20.3 49.4 18.9 13.2 − 1.7 15.9 − 8.5         June 53.4 44.7 − 24.4 8.7 − 3.6 16.3 − 131.2 − 147.5 35.8 8.4 − 0.9 16.1 12.1
         July 102.1 97.8 37.7 4.3 3.0 − 11.9 22.4 34.3 29.9 − 1.2 − 0.7 17.1 14.7
         Aug 17.1 24.4 27.2 − 7.2 − 0.1 − 7.8 19.7 27.5 7.0 − 4.3 − 1.3 − 0.2 12.8         Sep 38.8 66.5 − 20.9 − 27.7 − 38.0 23.3 18.8 − 4.6 11.6 − 14.8 − 1.3 − 10.3 38.1
         Oct 17.4 25.0 7.6 − 7.5 − 7.1 41.7 − 57.2 − 98.9 − 45.8 − 2.0 2.6 − 65.7 19.3
         Nov 88.2 49.8 31.3 38.4 40.7 14.0 − 83.1 − 97.1 16.0 − 0.9 3.4 − 10.9 24.4         Dec − 23.8 − 35.7 35.7 11.9 18.9 16.1 − 183.3 − 199.4 26.7 23.4 3.7 − 0.4 0.1
2009          Jan 113.6 42.4 17.4 71.2 56.6 − 118.3 − 43.1 75.2 76.3 34.4 2.0 15.7 24.2
         Feb 24.1 − 9.6 12.7 33.7 37.0 32.2 − 114.7 − 146.9 47.5 14.4 − 0.3 24.7 8.7         Mar 61.1 20.5 15.5 40.6 49.7 − 31.6 − 156.6 − 125.0 18.8 21.1 0.4 − 8.7 6.1
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2007          Aug − 3.9 13.9 − 3.8 − 17.8 − 11.9 − 10.1 5.6 15.7 − 10.7 − 0.0 0.2 − 9.0 − 1.8
         Sep 10.3 19.7 5.7 − 9.4 − 3.2 24.7 48.7 24.0 − 0.3 3.6 0.6 − 3.0 − 1.4
         Oct 5.7 8.9 2.5 − 3.2 − 1.9 12.0 4.1 − 7.9 4.2 − 2.8 1.1 5.9 0.0
         Nov − 1.9 4.5 1.4 − 6.4 − 5.2 17.3 28.1 10.7 − 15.0 − 0.7 1.0 − 12.0 − 3.2         Dec 5.8 11.7 − 0.9 − 5.9 − 4.4 21.0 − 0.9 − 21.9 − 2.1 5.1 1.0 − 10.0 1.8
2008          Jan 35.9 36.4 16.0 − 0.5 3.2 − 41.6 − 12.1 29.6 2.3 1.1 − 0.1 1.0 0.4
         Feb − 7.9 − 13.2 − 18.2 5.3 8.7 7.1 29.0 21.9 − 8.3 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 6.5 − 0.1         Mar 44.0 43.5 26.5 0.5 2.7 − 7.9 21.4 29.3 4.2 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.9 7.7
         Apr 49.9 40.4 29.4 9.4 4.9 − 3.2 17.7 20.9 0.2 0.3 − 1.4 1.6 − 0.3
         May − 12.8 − 7.1 − 14.3 − 5.8 − 0.6 5.8 − 6.7 − 12.5 − 12.3 0.1 − 1.4 − 4.3 − 6.8         June − 16.9 − 4.1 − 24.2 − 12.8 − 11.8 − 1.1 − 32.5 − 31.4 3.6 − 0.3 − 0.8 0.7 4.0
         July 10.1 13.9 2.7 − 3.8 − 3.8 0.1 − 6.8 − 6.9 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 6.9
         Aug 25.7 30.3 25.8 − 4.6 − 4.2 − 10.2 − 5.1 5.1 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.7 2.3         Sep 1.3 18.6 2.2 − 17.3 − 14.8 34.7 71.4 36.7 − 7.4 − 3.0 − 1.1 − 6.3 2.9
         Oct − 9.9 − 12.8 − 10.7 3.0 1.2 23.2 − 2.8 − 26.0 − 14.2 − 3.1 3.0 − 16.8 2.8
         Nov 7.4 12.0 1.2 − 4.6 − 2.5 − 38.2 − 76.5 − 38.3 − 5.6 0.8 3.7 − 9.9 − 0.3         Dec 13.7 15.4 30.8 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 31.1 − 24.7 27.3 29.8 3.8 − 18.0 11.7
2009          Jan 36.2 29.7 7.1 6.5 6.9 − 58.9 − 53.5 5.4 1.0 3.7 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.2
         Feb − 9.0 − 6.6 6.7 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 24.7 − 23.0 − 13.6 6.8 − 0.0 − 9.7 − 10.7         Mar 9.1 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 31.9 − 36.2 − 4.4 − 3.1 2.6 0.8 − 6.8 0.4
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 6.3 − 57.6 − 8.2 − 19.6 − 82.2 − 2.3 − 79.9 70.5 − 7.9 10.5 − 6.9 24.2 2007          Aug 
22.1 − 34.3 − 101.1 102.3 76.1 − 0.2 76.2 32.5 − 6.4 1.1 − 24.5 22.3          Sep 
− 16.4 46.2 − 85.0 60.2 − 30.3 3.1 − 33.3 105.4 − 14.9 − 1.8 12.1 14.4          Oct 
15.4 17.3 − 96.2 61.9 41.1 5.1 36.0 27.3 − 6.5 8.3 11.7 14.3          Nov 
− 48.9 − 73.6 − 112.0 159.9 70.3 19.9 50.4 68.5 21.0 − 18.8 − 36.5 7.4          Dec 
15.4 44.6 − 29.2 − 30.6 − 62.2 − 16.5 − 45.8 30.8 0.9 24.2 43.8 − 8.3 2008          Jan 
20.1 5.0 − 24.9 27.5 − 47.1 5.6 − 52.6 77.1 − 2.6 7.1 11.6 − 21.2          Feb 
11.2 − 7.7 − 72.6 81.2 54.6 4.1 50.4 20.8 5.9 − 0.5 − 1.8 − 6.3          Mar 
− 2.4 5.6 − 95.5 80.3 − 14.7 8.5 − 23.2 95.8 − 0.8 14.9 9.3 − 9.0          Apr − 24.0 − 66.1 − 86.5 62.1 27.9 4.3 23.6 37.8 − 3.6 4.4 4.7 15.2          May
37.3 − 27.2 − 23.8 48.5 47.8 6.3 41.5 4.1 − 3.4 − 3.0 − 23.2 1.5          June
− 30.4 62.6 − 28.0 11.5 − 77.2 6.7 − 84.0 98.6 − 9.9 2.9 8.8 4.8          July
5.9 − 18.6 − 15.0 − 1.7 − 52.8 − 2.7 − 50.1 53.7 − 2.5 9.8 14.6 − 7.7          Aug 4.5 − 9.8 − 55.8 70.3 83.0 1.1 81.9 − 2.6 − 10.1 2.4 − 27.6 10.8          Sep 
65.1 − 62.2 − 102.1 105.1 56.6 41.7 14.9 53.1 − 4.6 5.0 − 1.3 − 6.7          Oct 69.9 − 27.9 − 44.3 49.5 25.5 4.8 20.7 19.5 4.4 − 12.6 10.1 − 2.6          Nov 
− 66.6 − 39.7 − 71.9 104.9 75.4 19.3 56.1 − 14.7 44.2 − 6.3 − 19.2 − 7.5          Dec 
62.5 − 58.8 − − 84.7 − 68.2 18.2 − 12.1 30.4 − 135.5 49.2 − 4.9 32.7 − 44.4 2009          Jan 
14.0 − 22.3 − 17.0 − 3.9 11.2 3.6 7.6 − 38.3 23.2 3.2 19.6 − 2.0          Feb 12.7 2.2 − − 4.2 5.1 28.8 4.0 24.8 − 44.3 20.6 11.2 1.4 − 21.9          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 0.3 − 19.9 2.3 − 0.9 16.9 − 7.5 26.9 − 3.9 2.7 − 3.8 2.6 2007          Aug 
− 1.3 8.3 1.8 − 0.5 28.2 13.0 16.2 − 3.6 7.9 − 3.7 − 1.6          Sep 
− 0.4 17.8 1.4 1.2 − 4.0 − 11.1 15.6 − 4.8 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.0          Oct 
5.7 − 22.6 1.1 1.5 47.3 30.9 10.7 − 4.1 5.1 − 0.0 4.6          Nov 
− 6.5 10.5 0.9 4.7 24.9 − 15.4 51.1 6.4 − 13.1 − 0.4 − 3.7          Dec 
− 0.1 − 21.3 0.7 − 4.1 13.4 2.6 − 5.1 − 4.8 15.4 − 0.0 5.2 2008          Jan 
− 1.3 − 7.3 2.1 1.5 16.1 − 4.2 19.7 − 2.1 3.9 0.5 − 1.7          Feb 
2.3 23.9 1.4 1.4 5.7 8.8 0.7 − 1.6 0.8 − 1.5 − 1.4          Mar 
− 3.3 29.7 0.4 2.8 20.1 − 13.3 25.2 − 2.7 9.0 − 1.5 3.4          Apr 
2.2 − 7.5 2.1 0.4 10.6 2.8 17.4 − 2.1 0.2 − 0.6 − 7.1          May
− 0.3 − 27.2 0.9 2.2 5.8 8.4 − 4.3 − 2.1 7.9 − 0.1 − 3.9          June
− 2.2 5.1 0.2 2.0 1.6 − 22.4 35.6 − 5.1 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 0.7          July
0.1 2.1 2.4 − 1.0 14.9 1.4 14.1 − 3.2 5.0 − 0.3 − 2.1          Aug 
0.7 24.9 2.1 0.5 17.9 16.3 − 0.8 − 3.3 7.8 − 0.4 − 1.7          Sep 
− 1.4 − 8.6 7.5 10.6 37.5 28.2 13.9 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 3.9 1.8          Oct 
0.2 − 59.5 1.3 1.3 34.2 9.2 9.9 − 1.1 2.8 − 0.8 14.1          Nov 
− 0.0 − 17.3 1.1 5.6 − 2.7 1.5 − 2.2 8.1 − 9.9 − 0.8 0.6          Dec 
0.6 − 31.0 17.5 − 18.2 6.7 57.9 − 47.7 3.8 6.3 − 0.3 − 13.2 2009          Jan 
8.1 − 14.2 1.5 0.7 8.9 17.2 − 23.0 5.3 6.6 0.8 1.9          Feb 3.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 1.3 − 22.4 − 1.8 − 19.4 2.8 13.7 − 0.6 − 17.1          Mar 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2007          Feb 20,241.0 13,108.7 10,785.0 9,312.6 660.9 811.5 2,323.7 821.4 1,502.3 4,942.2 2,190.1
         Mar 20,600.6 13,250.6 10,937.5 9,415.1 688.1 834.2 2,313.2 819.7 1,493.5 5,036.7 2,313.3
         Apr 20,858.9 13,393.3 11,096.7 9,497.2 709.1 890.4 2,296.6 820.1 1,476.5 5,146.0 2,319.6
         May 21,154.0 13,529.8 11,196.2 9,573.3 735.4 887.6 2,333.6 814.5 1,519.0 5,244.5 2,379.8
         June 21,359.0 13,618.2 11,303.8 9,684.6 768.0 851.1 2,314.4 814.6 1,499.8 5,239.6 2,501.2
         July 21,417.0 13,699.9 11,406.3 9,784.0 784.4 837.8 2,293.6 816.0 1,477.6 5,287.6 2,429.5
         Aug 21,411.9 13,697.9 11,438.9 9,822.7 788.2 828.0 2,259.0 810.6 1,448.4 5,283.3 2,430.7         Sep 21,633.8 13,807.9 11,561.9 9,923.8 811.3 826.9 2,246.0 810.3 1,435.7 5,251.7 2,574.2
         Oct 22,176.4 14,161.1 11,763.5 10,001.8 885.2 876.5 2,397.6 960.8 1,436.8 5,371.5 2,643.8
         Nov 22,376.3 14,250.3 11,852.4 10,082.5 899.1 870.8 2,397.9 961.6 1,436.3 5,395.6 2,730.4         Dec 22,317.5 14,370.9 11,976.7 10,139.6 954.9 882.2 2,394.2 972.3 1,422.0 5,259.8 2,686.8
2008          Jan 22,822.5 14,571.4 12,139.1 10,280.7 967.2 891.2 2,432.2 978.7 1,453.5 5,502.6 2,748.5
         Feb 22,957.9 14,620.1 12,195.4 10,336.8 988.1 870.5 2,424.8 969.0 1,455.8 5,537.2 2,800.6
         Mar 22,989.9 14,745.6 12,315.6 10,437.2 1,009.5 868.9 2,430.0 975.6 1,454.5 5,368.8 2,875.4
         Apr 23,175.3 14,929.3 12,479.4 10,512.0 1,042.9 924.4 2,449.9 988.0 1,462.0 5,460.1 2,785.9
         May 23,368.2 15,008.6 12,561.6 10,576.9 1,067.2 917.5 2,447.0 980.3 1,466.7 5,446.2 2,913.4         June 23,311.9 15,039.3 12,589.6 10,640.4 1,090.5 858.7 2,449.6 992.5 1,457.2 5,287.6 2,985.0
         July 23,307.1 15,140.7 12,682.7 10,697.8 1,107.8 877.1 2,458.1 993.8 1,464.3 5,329.4 2,836.9
         Aug 23,514.4 15,176.1 12,720.9 10,705.6 1,137.1 878.1 2,455.1 986.9 1,468.3 5,506.9 2,831.4         Sep 23,777.8 15,214.3 12,784.2 10,801.3 1,108.7 874.3 2,430.1 997.2 1,432.9 5,608.1 2,955.4
         Oct 24,457.5 15,268.7 12,840.9 10,857.5 1,148.4 835.0 2,427.8 997.6 1,430.2 5,777.2 3,411.5
         Nov 24,589.0 15,347.5 12,873.2 10,866.6 1,182.0 824.6 2,474.2 995.2 1,479.1 5,662.1 3,579.5         Dec 24,112.3 15,494.8 12,955.7 10,770.1 1,398.0 787.5 2,539.1 987.1 1,552.1 5,243.0 3,374.5
2009          Jan 24,505.1 15,683.4 13,056.8 10,857.6 1,410.0 789.2 2,626.6 1,003.1 1,623.5 5,395.3 3,426.4
         Feb 24,445.1 15,702.2 13,041.9 10,834.2 1,430.6 777.1 2,660.3 999.7 1,660.6 5,310.5 3,432.5
         Mar 24,141.3 15,737.2 13,038.0 10,816.4 1,447.3 774.2 2,699.2 988.8 1,710.4 5,020.4 3,383.7
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2007          Feb 4,987.2 3,491.8 2,786.6 2,349.6 120.5 316.5 705.2 415.0 290.2 1,300.8 194.5
         Mar 5,010.4 3,500.9 2,800.3 2,357.3 123.5 319.5 700.6 408.3 292.4 1,316.2 193.3
         Apr 5,064.5 3,530.4 2,830.8 2,353.3 130.1 347.4 699.6 410.1 289.5 1,333.0 201.1
         May 5,076.7 3,516.3 2,814.6 2,352.1 131.6 330.9 701.7 407.3 294.5 1,346.5 213.9         June 5,070.7 3,488.8 2,801.2 2,364.9 133.7 302.6 687.6 402.2 285.3 1,368.3 213.5
         July 5,084.0 3,494.2 2,806.6 2,365.9 139.8 300.9 687.6 407.6 280.0 1,377.5 212.4
         Aug 5,097.5 3,490.3 2,820.4 2,383.6 141.2 295.6 669.8 401.7 268.1 1,387.0 220.3
         Sep 5,152.6 3,497.4 2,837.2 2,394.9 145.2 297.1 660.2 395.5 264.7 1,423.6 231.6
         Oct 5,138.6 3,490.1 2,836.5 2,399.8 150.4 286.2 653.6 394.0 259.7 1,416.2 232.3
         Nov 5,155.4 3,486.8 2,839.6 2,401.8 151.5 286.3 647.1 392.7 254.4 1,434.8 233.8         Dec 5,159.0 3,491.7 2,850.6 2,413.7 148.7 288.2 641.1 391.2 249.9 1,432.7 234.6
2008          Jan 5,167.5 3,535.3 2,894.6 2,438.5 145.8 310.3 640.7 387.4 253.3 1,407.0 225.2
         Feb 5,186.3 3,525.7 2,879.9 2,442.3 144.4 293.3 645.8 383.9 261.9 1,427.6 233.0         Mar 5,222.7 3,565.8 2,919.8 2,456.6 163.7 299.5 646.0 381.6 264.4 1,422.9 234.1
         Apr 5,300.6 3,614.0 2,958.7 2,466.4 161.4 330.8 655.4 386.3 269.0 1,441.3 245.3
         May 5,283.0 3,600.6 2,951.1 2,473.1 162.5 315.5 649.5 381.1 268.4 1,436.0 246.5         June 5,230.1 3,581.4 2,944.7 2,491.9 162.8 290.0 636.6 380.1 256.6 1,399.5 249.2
         July 5,239.5 3,592.2 2,959.4 2,503.6 162.1 293.7 632.9 380.0 252.9 1,394.5 252.8
         Aug 5,284.5 3,623.9 2,995.2 2,511.9 187.2 296.1 628.8 379.8 249.0 1,410.0 250.6         Sep 5,383.1 3,627.7 3,016.0 2,530.7 188.4 296.9 611.7 377.3 234.4 1,501.9 253.5
         Oct 5,457.7 3,632.1 3,016.4 2,540.2 186.7 289.5 615.7 379.4 236.3 1,554.5 271.1
         Nov 5,385.6 3,637.4 3,026.4 2,549.0 191.6 285.8 611.1 377.3 233.8 1,463.2 285.0         Dec 5,310.8 3,642.6 3,035.0 2,529.4 224.5 281.1 607.6 374.9 232.8 1,379.1 289.1
2009          Jan 5,343.8 3,682.0 3,065.9 2,557.6 219.9 288.4 616.1 374.8 241.3 1,367.2 294.6
         Feb 5,315.0 3,672.2 3,058.5 2,544.1 235.8 278.6 613.8 372.8 241.0 1,348.2 294.6
         Mar 5,282.0 3,674.0 3,065.2 2,555.9 235.1 274.3 608.8 368.1 240.7 1,278.5 329.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
578.8 7,853.6 7,377.2 7,453.8 2,904.4 1,257.0 136.2 1,653.2 1,395.7 107.2 2007          Feb 
588.6 7,993.3 7,508.5 7,601.7 2,960.0 1,309.8 145.9 1,684.6 1,393.2 108.2          Mar 
594.8 8,032.3 7,555.3 7,645.8 2,967.9 1,340.1 147.8 1,695.9 1,385.8 108.4          Apr 
597.7 8,128.2 7,616.3 7,704.5 2,983.3 1,364.5 152.4 1,712.5 1,383.6 108.3          May
605.0 8,253.8 7,724.2 7,807.1 3,042.5 1,389.6 156.6 1,731.7 1,377.7 108.9          June
613.0 8,258.1 7,752.9 7,845.3 3,012.0 1,445.9 162.6 1,746.4 1,368.7 109.8          July
610.7 8,229.9 7,735.9 7,824.5 2,939.5 1,506.8 167.9 1,739.8 1,360.6 109.9          Aug 610.5 8,343.9 7,816.0 7,907.6 3,007.5 1,530.6 169.6 1,734.3 1,354.4 111.2          Sep 
613.6 8,564.2 8,051.9 8,130.7 2,974.5 1,627.8 181.4 1,748.7 1,486.1 112.3          Oct 
618.7 8,633.4 8,110.4 8,174.4 3,004.6 1,633.7 193.2 1,749.7 1,479.9 113.3          Nov 638.6 8,772.4 8,301.5 8,363.6 3,056.0 1,696.7 198.2 1,797.4 1,501.4 113.9          Dec 
623.2 8,829.5 8,325.2 8,408.0 3,032.0 1,751.6 204.5 1,796.2 1,508.5 115.2 2008          Jan 
628.8 8,859.4 8,341.0 8,413.9 2,981.2 1,821.6 205.0 1,785.5 1,506.2 114.4          Feb 
632.9 8,941.1 8,418.7 8,491.2 3,032.0 1,842.8 203.2 1,788.7 1,512.2 112.3          Mar 
641.4 9,018.4 8,495.6 8,567.2 3,011.1 1,931.2 208.1 1,794.1 1,511.8 111.0          Apr 
645.8 9,066.5 8,561.9 8,628.1 3,034.6 1,959.2 208.6 1,807.5 1,508.6 109.6          May652.1 9,148.6 8,603.7 8,666.2 3,070.3 1,950.3 215.5 1,815.6 1,505.5 108.9          June
658.8 9,127.2 8,605.9 8,679.6 2,993.9 2,040.9 225.1 1,814.8 1,496.6 108.3          July
656.1 9,142.2 8,606.0 8,687.5 2,949.6 2,090.0 233.3 1,812.7 1,494.7 107.2          Aug 657.2 9,210.9 8,667.1 8,748.6 3,032.3 2,089.3 236.5 1,799.4 1,484.9 106.1          Sep 
698.9 9,375.5 8,763.7 8,849.3 3,056.9 2,160.2 237.7 1,802.6 1,483.0 109.0          Oct 
703.7 9,482.7 8,816.0 8,878.1 3,067.1 2,172.9 239.5 1,798.4 1,487.7 112.6          Nov 723.0 9,655.7 9,093.3 9,132.4 3,113.7 2,161.3 235.5 1,973.5 1,531.8 116.5          Dec 
712.3 9,779.3 9,132.3 9,189.0 3,188.5 2,046.2 241.2 2,014.5 1,581.5 117.3 2009          Jan 
716.0 9,798.7 9,144.3 9,192.2 3,190.7 2,001.6 248.8 2,029.3 1,604.6 117.2          Feb 
720.0 9,823.6 9,168.4 9,207.8 3,207.4 1,959.7 249.4 2,048.5 1,624.9 117.8          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
156.4 2,447.5 2,373.6 2,314.3 735.9 255.1 25.4 717.3 477.6 102.9 2007          Feb 
158.9 2,456.2 2,381.8 2,323.9 740.7 261.0 26.6 716.7 474.4 104.4          Mar 
161.1 2,470.3 2,398.3 2,336.5 737.5 276.8 27.7 719.5 470.3 104.6          Apr 
161.1 2,485.8 2,408.2 2,340.0 744.1 277.2 28.7 719.4 466.2 104.4          May163.7 2,507.3 2,427.9 2,359.0 755.7 284.4 30.2 721.5 462.2 105.0          June
166.0 2,508.5 2,434.9 2,365.2 756.8 291.7 31.7 722.9 456.5 105.6          July
165.1 2,524.3 2,451.3 2,377.6 751.4 311.8 32.7 723.2 452.7 105.8          Aug 
164.6 2,551.8 2,476.1 2,400.8 761.4 323.9 33.7 726.2 449.1 106.4          Sep 
165.8 2,549.0 2,474.8 2,400.1 748.5 340.1 36.2 723.3 444.4 107.5          Oct 
167.3 2,592.5 2,509.1 2,430.6 779.5 340.4 39.4 722.4 440.4 108.5          Nov 172.0 2,634.0 2,554.6 2,473.5 763.6 384.6 42.7 726.2 446.8 109.5          Dec 
167.9 2,628.9 2,548.6 2,476.2 769.4 383.1 45.0 727.3 442.1 109.4 2008          Jan 
169.4 2,638.9 2,559.5 2,487.6 764.9 402.2 45.8 726.2 440.0 108.5          Feb 
170.8 2,645.3 2,564.1 2,492.0 773.5 402.6 45.5 725.5 438.4 106.5          Mar 
173.6 2,650.1 2,574.0 2,498.9 760.6 425.8 46.0 725.6 435.7 105.1          Apr 
174.0 2,671.0 2,591.1 2,508.4 763.8 435.1 46.3 725.8 433.7 103.7          May176.2 2,671.2 2,589.5 2,502.9 770.0 425.7 47.4 725.3 431.6 102.9          June
178.2 2,676.3 2,596.5 2,512.2 750.5 458.7 49.2 724.8 426.5 102.5          July
177.2 2,688.5 2,608.0 2,522.6 751.6 472.1 50.3 724.0 423.4 101.3          Aug 177.7 2,698.7 2,618.7 2,532.2 768.0 471.5 51.5 720.9 420.1 100.3          Sep 
188.3 2,742.6 2,664.9 2,580.8 798.6 489.4 52.8 718.1 418.8 103.2          Oct 
189.6 2,760.1 2,685.4 2,592.5 804.1 492.9 54.6 716.3 417.6 106.9          Nov 195.2 2,799.3 2,728.0 2,632.6 800.8 493.7 54.4 747.3 425.7 110.7          Dec 
177.0 2,819.7 2,748.0 2,657.0 859.6 452.3 53.7 751.4 429.4 110.7 2009          Jan 
177.7 2,834.1 2,754.4 2,660.1 872.0 432.0 52.8 758.1 434.7 110.6          Feb 
179.0 2,821.3 2,740.2 2,650.6 870.1 418.5 52.7 760.7 437.3 111.3          Mar 
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2007          Feb 189.4 210.4 111.3 70.7 2.4 22.9 2.6 0.4 268.8 264.1 651.9 2,652.7 2,015.2
         Mar 183.8 207.7 107.4 72.3 2.5 22.6 2.5 0.4 282.0 277.3 666.2 2,685.7 2,043.4
         Apr 174.0 212.6 111.3 73.4 2.5 22.5 2.5 0.4 281.6 276.6 681.7 2,693.5 2,047.5
         May 199.9 223.8 116.9 79.0 2.6 22.6 2.3 0.4 285.2 280.3 702.3 2,731.9 2,069.7         June 221.0 225.8 116.1 81.1 3.5 22.5 2.2 0.5 282.2 277.9 698.9 2,753.9 2,075.4
         July 180.2 232.6 121.7 82.3 3.6 22.4 2.1 0.5 287.1 282.5 712.4 2,754.7 2,076.0
         Aug 173.8 231.6 116.1 86.9 3.7 22.5 2.0 0.5 297.6 292.9 705.9 2,789.3 2,109.1         Sep 195.9 240.5 121.6 89.9 3.7 22.9 1.9 0.5 295.3 290.4 682.2 2,793.8 2,134.0
         Oct 184.3 249.3 127.1 86.5 3.7 23.0 1.8 7.1 293.5 288.5 684.0 2,848.7 2,193.9
         Nov 199.7 259.4 129.8 93.8 4.0 23.0 1.8 6.9 301.8 297.0 696.7 2,841.9 2,197.0         Dec 150.8 258.0 125.2 95.7 4.5 24.2 1.8 6.7 282.9 278.7 660.4 2,849.6 2,212.5
2008          Jan 168.8 252.6 123.1 91.0 3.9 24.3 1.8 8.7 307.3 303.5 737.2 2,837.6 2,199.6
         Feb 189.0 256.5 122.1 95.6 4.1 24.7 1.7 8.3 314.3 309.9 749.6 2,803.5 2,178.6         Mar 199.9 250.0 118.5 92.1 5.1 24.4 1.7 8.1 314.0 309.9 742.5 2,809.5 2,200.6
         Apr 197.5 253.6 119.0 95.2 5.2 24.6 1.7 7.9 328.9 322.8 751.3 2,812.7 2,197.3
         May 173.9 264.6 120.9 104.5 5.4 24.6 1.6 7.6 333.3 327.3 755.8 2,844.9 2,227.0         June 211.2 271.2 124.0 107.9 5.9 24.5 1.6 7.4 330.3 324.5 733.0 2,856.6 2,242.0
         July 180.8 266.7 118.8 108.8 5.9 24.4 1.6 7.2 333.1 329.0 743.2 2,878.1 2,260.7
         Aug 186.7 268.0 117.7 111.2 6.0 24.5 1.6 7.1 343.1 338.3 757.9 2,888.7 2,261.2         Sep 191.2 271.1 121.1 111.0 5.9 24.7 1.5 6.8 345.6 341.0 731.1 2,907.2 2,268.2
         Oct 256.3 269.8 122.9 108.2 5.9 24.8 1.5 6.6 351.0 347.4 729.8 2,890.9 2,209.9
         Nov 326.1 278.4 129.3 110.9 5.8 24.6 1.5 6.4 336.6 333.4 739.7 2,871.3 2,208.0         Dec 259.6 263.8 124.2 102.1 5.0 24.7 1.6 6.1 330.1 327.4 726.3 2,817.8 2,217.3
2009          Jan 325.1 265.2 125.7 99.7 5.0 24.6 1.9 8.2 325.5 322.9 757.9 2,822.9 2,194.6
         Feb 339.1 267.5 130.1 97.3 5.3 24.6 2.1 8.0 328.7 326.0 777.3 2,848.3 2,215.2         Mar 351.7 264.1 134.7 89.4 4.6 25.0 2.4 7.9 339.8 336.8 778.7 2,790.7 2,190.1
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2007          Feb 43.8 89.4 22.4 43.9 1.9 19.2 1.6 0.4 29.7 29.7 28.3 901.1 655.8         Mar 43.4 88.9 21.3 44.8 1.9 18.9 1.6 0.4 29.8 29.8 29.5 899.9 659.5
         Apr 43.6 90.1 22.1 45.3 1.8 18.9 1.5 0.4 29.4 29.4 28.5 898.9 663.0
         May 48.9 97.0 23.9 50.3 1.9 19.0 1.4 0.4 28.0 28.0 28.8 907.9 667.6         June 49.7 98.5 22.1 52.9 2.8 18.9 1.3 0.5 32.7 32.7 30.3 902.7 658.2
         July 43.0 100.4 23.6 53.3 2.9 18.9 1.2 0.5 25.7 25.7 29.9 906.0 665.5
         Aug 42.6 104.1 21.6 59.0 2.9 18.9 1.2 0.5 28.4 28.4 26.0 900.4 662.5         Sep 41.3 109.7 24.1 61.8 2.9 19.3 1.1 0.5 36.3 36.3 22.4 889.3 655.7
         Oct 40.9 108.1 25.7 58.7 2.9 19.3 1.1 0.4 34.6 34.6 21.4 891.6 658.3
         Nov 46.7 115.2 25.4 65.9 3.1 19.3 1.0 0.4 39.7 39.7 21.4 881.2 655.5         Dec 40.1 120.3 26.1 69.1 3.5 20.3 1.0 0.4 26.6 26.6 21.1 866.9 646.7
2008          Jan 40.0 112.7 23.4 64.5 3.0 20.4 0.9 0.4 42.1 42.1 21.0 873.7 652.8
         Feb 38.7 112.6 23.5 63.9 3.2 20.6 0.9 0.4 45.9 45.9 21.5 862.3 642.2         Mar 40.8 112.4 23.1 63.2 4.2 20.7 0.9 0.4 46.7 46.7 20.0 854.3 648.3
         Apr 37.5 113.7 22.8 64.5 4.2 20.9 0.9 0.4 55.7 55.7 18.4 859.7 644.1
         May 39.7 122.9 24.3 72.2 4.3 20.8 0.9 0.4 56.0 56.0 17.8 848.4 630.4         June 39.4 128.8 26.3 75.5 4.8 21.0 0.9 0.4 63.9 63.9 17.7 842.9 626.2
         July 37.3 126.9 23.4 76.7 4.5 21.1 0.8 0.3 58.1 58.1 17.7 842.4 619.3
         Aug 37.3 128.6 24.6 77.1 4.6 21.1 0.8 0.3 63.1 63.1 17.3 846.5 619.4         Sep 38.0 128.4 25.0 76.4 4.6 21.3 0.8 0.3 70.9 70.9 16.9 845.5 607.4
         Oct 36.6 125.1 25.0 73.2 4.5 21.3 0.8 0.3 69.8 69.8 13.0 853.5 600.2
         Nov 36.7 130.8 28.7 75.7 4.4 21.0 0.8 0.3 71.0 71.0 12.3 854.6 607.1         Dec 36.7 129.9 32.0 72.0 3.6 21.2 0.8 0.3 61.1 61.1 11.5 819.1 596.4
2009          Jan 37.3 125.4 32.2 67.2 3.6 21.1 1.0 0.4 67.4 67.4 11.1 822.0 575.4
         Feb 45.4 128.6 37.1 65.0 3.9 21.1 1.0 0.4 74.0 74.0 12.0 814.7 563.9         Mar 48.6 122.2 36.3 59.5 3.4 21.4 1.1 0.5 87.7 87.7 11.4 779.4 542.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
170.5 58.3 2,424.0 4,270.8 1,306.9 26.2 2,631.1 − 3,678.0 6,700.9 7,850.2 5,514.7 241.7 2007          Feb 
176.7 60.0 2,449.0 4,295.2 1,352.8 10.5 2,726.1 − 3,738.9 6,823.5 8,008.3 5,617.6 241.2          Mar 
171.6 67.0 2,454.9 4,447.2 1,354.0 − 7.7 2,781.2 − 3,758.4 6,868.4 8,070.1 5,636.1 242.4          Apr 
177.2 74.1 2,480.7 4,556.9 1,331.2 13.3 2,807.1 − 3,780.3 6,922.0 8,160.4 5,655.7 239.9          May164.3 74.7 2,514.9 4,498.1 1,357.9 − 12.2 2,921.2 − 3,849.4 7,016.7 8,236.1 5,736.4 242.4          June
151.2 84.9 2,518.6 4,538.4 1,382.8 − 4.2 2,874.6 − 3,836.1 7,057.3 8,292.1 5,780.4 245.4          July
170.7 86.3 2,532.3 4,582.8 1,382.4 − 31.0 2,844.0 − 3,754.3 7,038.4 8,298.2 5,787.3 244.2          Aug 190.1 88.9 2,514.8 4,572.0 1,399.2 − 37.7 2,974.4 − 3,827.5 7,133.3 8,389.2 5,782.9 243.7          Sep 
208.4 86.4 2,554.0 4,681.6 1,464.2 − 28.7 3,055.0 − 3,795.9 7,223.1 8,494.5 5,909.3 120.6          Oct 
217.5 90.9 2,533.5 4,692.3 1,462.3 − 19.6 3,148.5 − 3,835.9 7,281.8 8,587.7 5,888.9 122.3          Nov 219.6 96.4 2,533.6 4,599.4 1,492.4 − 56.5 3,077.9 − 3,908.6 7,445.9 8,704.1 5,968.2 127.8          Dec 
198.4 97.9 2,541.3 4,866.5 1,519.9 − 45.1 3,146.2 − 3,858.5 7,458.5 8,798.3 6,005.5 118.9 2008          Jan 
175.7 98.9 2,528.8 4,925.7 1,519.5 − 38.2 3,195.0 − 3,807.9 7,480.5 8,818.2 5,981.2 114.2          Feb 
168.1 111.7 2,529.7 4,834.8 1,506.5 − 27.0 3,235.3 − 3,859.3 7,554.4 8,889.9 5,969.7 113.8          Mar 
158.1 112.9 2,541.7 5,009.6 1,499.8 − 40.8 3,153.8 − 3,845.3 7,636.2 8,986.4 5,979.1 111.5          Apr 
161.9 125.5 2,557.4 5,062.3 1,487.8 − 49.6 3,221.1 − 3,874.9 7,700.1 9,075.6 5,994.4 110.9          May154.2 131.6 2,570.9 4,889.7 1,494.2 − 66.3 3,273.5 − 3,921.5 7,745.1 9,092.8 6,021.4 112.0          June
151.3 137.7 2,589.1 4,931.7 1,517.3 − 62.8 3,180.1 − 3,846.0 7,761.5 9,125.5 6,061.1 111.0          July
142.7 137.4 2,608.7 5,118.8 1,528.5 − 54.4 3,133.1 − 3,797.2 7,770.0 9,149.7 6,088.6 109.9          Aug 149.1 140.3 2,617.8 5,178.6 1,563.6 − 68.7 3,252.0 − 3,883.4 7,848.7 9,213.5 6,118.4 108.8          Sep 
142.6 136.4 2,611.8 5,291.2 1,570.1 − 74.8 3,624.6 − 3,951.1 7,981.4 9,340.3 6,124.8 106.3          Oct 
139.1 138.0 2,594.1 5,166.4 1,610.8 − 77.7 3,755.2 − 3,976.2 8,027.8 9,380.7 6,146.9 109.5          Nov 140.3 128.3 2,549.2 4,787.3 1,614.5 − 114.0 3,571.1 − 4,043.2 8,113.4 9,437.7 6,284.6 115.1          Dec 
95.8 123.5 2,603.6 5,007.9 1,660.3 − 141.6 3,580.4 − 4,099.9 8,108.6 9,410.7 6,428.5 106.6 2009          Jan 
90.8 126.6 2,630.9 4,873.6 1,672.3 − 118.8 3,548.8 − 4,111.2 8,103.7 9,426.7 6,482.3 107.3          Feb 76.5 120.6 2,593.6 4,650.3 1,667.3 − 98.1 3,468.9 − 4,135.3 8,098.6 9,413.5 6,460.1 106.0          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
20.2 44.5 836.4 745.5 353.5 − 134.7 616.3 86.5 758.3 1,563.8 1,686.6 2,029.7 − 2007          Feb 
22.2 47.4 830.2 748.7 350.3 − 131.7 627.7 87.5 762.0 1,572.3 1,701.4 2,021.0 −          Mar 
19.6 49.6 829.7 780.5 352.6 − 131.8 636.2 87.5 759.7 1,583.2 1,710.3 2,025.7 −          Apr 
17.2 52.9 837.7 796.4 342.6 − 149.7 636.9 90.4 768.0 1,593.7 1,720.6 2,023.6 −          May14.7 54.7 833.4 761.0 352.3 − 162.7 647.1 91.6 777.8 1,611.6 1,744.0 2,031.6 −          June
14.4 60.4 831.2 753.5 361.7 − 148.8 647.6 92.1 780.4 1,617.7 1,748.0 2,040.8 −          July
15.5 59.9 824.9 772.0 360.3 − 170.4 656.6 94.4 773.0 1,633.3 1,763.2 2,033.5 −          Aug 16.8 57.0 815.5 785.8 362.4 − 172.4 676.9 96.1 785.5 1,658.1 1,790.7 2,030.3 −          Sep 
22.8 48.0 820.7 772.9 366.1 − 167.7 670.8 97.5 774.2 1,657.5 1,784.4 2,037.4 −          Oct 
27.4 48.4 805.5 777.4 363.0 − 200.2 680.4 98.6 804.9 1,695.2 1,832.1 2,019.1 −          Nov 27.0 45.1 794.8 754.6 368.0 − 194.9 682.8 99.5 789.7 1,737.4 1,857.2 2,019.3 −          Dec 
30.2 46.9 796.6 779.2 374.4 − 220.0 668.2 100.2 792.9 1,731.4 1,871.6 2,028.4 − 2008          Jan 
27.2 48.2 787.0 794.7 377.0 − 228.9 674.8 102.4 788.4 1,744.4 1,887.1 2,019.8 −          Feb 
25.0 48.8 780.6 813.3 379.8 − 212.8 676.2 103.7 796.6 1,751.3 1,891.8 2,013.5 −          Mar 
24.7 52.5 782.5 837.1 375.4 − 187.9 692.0 104.1 783.4 1,760.6 1,911.9 2,009.9 −          Apr 
19.6 51.6 777.3 824.7 369.6 − 197.6 693.0 106.3 788.1 1,780.6 1,925.6 1,997.6 −          May13.3 53.9 775.8 789.2 375.0 − 228.6 698.8 107.2 796.3 1,782.2 1,931.0 2,000.4 −          June
12.2 54.3 775.9 783.7 381.7 − 223.0 702.7 107.4 773.9 1,790.4 1,932.6 2,006.2 −          July
13.7 50.9 782.0 803.1 382.3 − 241.0 724.7 109.8 776.2 1,804.4 1,949.4 2,011.0 −          Aug 13.5 49.5 782.5 850.4 391.3 − 238.3 747.6 111.8 793.1 1,817.9 1,968.8 2,016.5 −          Sep 
19.2 45.6 788.7 862.4 388.3 − 248.6 776.8 119.3 823.6 1,863.0 2,010.7 2,019.9 −          Oct 
33.2 45.7 775.7 815.4 395.6 − 309.6 786.2 120.6 832.8 1,878.8 2,040.9 2,015.9 −          Nov 41.9 37.5 739.8 762.8 406.3 − 334.6 785.4 121.8 832.8 1,883.0 2,034.9 2,025.6 −          Dec 
32.7 33.5 755.8 791.6 414.8 − 353.2 770.3 139.2 891.8 1,898.9 2,043.7 2,054.1 − 2009          Jan 
34.5 33.5 746.8 770.8 407.4 − 376.1 778.2 140.7 909.1 1,898.4 2,052.3 2,044.4 −          Feb 
19.3 31.4 728.8 751.2 400.0 − 382.6 813.6 140.4 906.4 1,878.9 2,028.6 2,022.7 −          Mar 
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2006          Oct 326.7 308.7 120.0 0.1 0.3 0.2 − 588.5 59.1 − 59.1 167.0 755.7
         Nov 327.4 311.9 120.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 592.8 60.2 − 60.6 167.0 759.8
         Dec 327.0 313.1 120.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 − 598.6 54.9 − 66.4 173.2 771.8
2007          Jan 325.8 322.3 120.0 0.1 − 0.2 1.0 619.5 45.0 − 72.7 175.3 794.9
         Feb 322.1 300.5 124.6 0.1 0.1 0.1 1.5 604.6 47.9 − 83.1 176.5 781.2         Mar 321.6 288.7 134.6 0.0 − 0.5 0.8 606.2 47.1 − 90.0 180.6 787.2
         Apr 323.6 281.7 145.7 0.5 − 0.3 0.9 614.8 48.2 − 95.2 182.6 797.7
         May 326.1 281.6 150.0 0.3 − 0.5 0.1 620.0 51.3 − 97.2 183.2 803.8
         June 326.4 284.9 150.0 0.3 − 0.2 0.2 625.2 49.1 − 99.4 186.2 811.7
         July 323.0 295.4 150.0 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 631.3 53.9 − 106.4 189.6 821.2
         Aug 316.7 301.7 150.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 639.7 52.3 − 115.8 192.0 832.1
         Sep 317.3 268.7 171.7 0.2 10.7 0.4 1.7 639.2 52.3 − 117.8 192.7 832.4
         Oct 321.9 194.3 262.3 0.3 − 1.6 0.9 637.3 63.7 − 118.0 193.4 832.3
         Nov 327.6 180.2 265.0 0.1 − 0.6 5.1 640.1 55.9 − 123.3 194.4 835.1         Dec 327.5 173.0 278.6 0.3 − 0.4 2.2 644.6 61.9 − 126.6 196.8 841.9
2008          Jan 343.8 255.7 268.8 0.3 − 1.1 68.4 668.2 46.4 − 116.4 200.9 870.2
         Feb 353.6 173.8 268.5 0.2 − 0.4 0.6 651.7 51.7 − 110.7 202.4 854.5         Mar 343.3 181.3 268.5 0.1 0.3 0.3 − 653.2 59.7 − 125.0 205.3 858.7
         Apr 349.4 181.5 278.6 0.1 2.6 0.6 0.4 662.1 66.4 − 124.8 207.5 870.3
         May 364.5 174.4 295.0 0.1 − 0.3 0.8 667.6 68.8 − 112.2 208.6 876.6         June 375.0 172.8 287.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.5 671.4 67.3 − 111.5 208.1 879.7
         July 376.4 185.4 275.4 0.1 − 0.4 0.5 677.2 64.9 − 118.3 212.7 890.3
         Aug 374.5 166.3 299.3 0.1 − 0.3 0.6 686.1 61.3 − 123.0 214.8 901.2
         Sep 376.6 163.5 300.0 0.1 − 0.6 0.7 685.0 61.1 − 121.2 214.0 899.5
         Oct 417.3 174.1 334.3 7.5 5.9 19.9 45.5 684.3 55.2 − 82.6 216.8 921.0
         Nov 549.0 301.6 452.5 12.7 4.2 213.7 2.3 722.1 85.0 78.2 218.6 1 154.4
         Dec 580.5 337.3 457.2 2.7 − 200.9 4.9 731.1 107.8 114.3 218.7 1 150.7
2009          Jan 581.3 219.2 613.6 2.9 − 238.5 3.3 753.1 99.9 100.6 221.5 1 213.1
         Feb 547.4 224.9 551.4 2.1 − 175.4 6.1 740.2 102.7 79.3 222.1 1 137.7
         Mar 512.7 224.3 472.4 1.6 − 95.5 4.0 741.5 110.1 41.4 218.6 1 055.5
         Apr 508.0 230.5 443.1 1.1 − 57.8 3.7 747.3 139.0 13.3 221.6 1 026.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2006          Oct 82.6 155.6 76.7 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 160.5 0.1 113.7 40.9 201.5
         Nov 82.8 162.6 78.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 161.1 0.1 122.4 40.8 202.0         Dec 82.7 155.3 78.4 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 162.4 0.1 112.6 41.4 203.8
2007          Jan 82.5 165.0 81.0 0.0 − 0.0 − 167.8 0.1 119.4 41.4 209.2
         Feb 82.2 153.7 86.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 164.8 0.1 115.7 41.9 206.7
         Mar 82.0 135.0 95.7 0.0 − 0.2 − 165.3 0.1 104.5 42.8 208.2
         Apr 82.7 128.2 103.9 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 167.1 0.1 104.2 43.2 210.4
         May 83.4 130.6 107.1 0.2 − 0.1 0.0 168.3 0.1 109.2 43.5 212.0
         June 83.6 124.0 108.7 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 170.6 0.1 101.4 44.1 214.8
         July 82.7 125.1 108.8 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 171.8 0.1 99.7 45.0 216.8
         Aug 81.1 135.4 104.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 173.9 0.1 102.6 44.9 218.8         Sep 81.1 125.0 114.2 0.2 4.1 0.3 0.6 174.1 0.1 104.4 45.2 219.6
         Oct 82.4 93.2 142.9 0.2 − 0.9 0.2 173.5 0.1 98.8 45.2 219.6
         Nov 84.6 78.3 139.0 0.0 − 0.4 1.5 174.1 0.0 80.0 45.9 220.5         Dec 84.6 73.2 133.6 0.3 − 0.3 0.7 175.2 0.1 68.7 46.7 222.1
2008          Jan 91.5 102.1 134.6 0.1 − 0.6 26.4 180.6 0.1 73.7 46.9 228.1
         Feb 96.0 60.8 130.6 0.0 − 0.2 0.1 176.2 0.0 63.3 47.7 224.1         Mar 90.8 59.8 122.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 − 177.5 0.1 46.9 48.6 226.3
         Apr 92.9 76.7 109.9 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 179.7 0.0 52.4 48.6 228.7
         May 99.6 75.7 112.7 0.0 − 0.2 0.2 181.0 0.0 57.9 48.6 229.8
         June 104.4 73.5 112.8 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 182.7 0.1 58.9 49.1 231.8
         July 102.8 79.4 107.2 0.0 − 0.1 0.1 183.6 0.1 55.9 49.5 233.2
         Aug 99.6 70.8 111.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 185.5 0.0 46.5 50.1 235.7
         Sep 100.6 76.7 105.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 185.7 0.1 46.2 50.2 236.2
         Oct 114.4 74.8 118.6 0.9 3.6 10.1 8.6 186.2 0.2 55.9 51.2 247.5
         Nov 138.6 103.6 163.2 2.7 2.0 88.8 1.1 198.9 0.3 68.7 52.3 339.9         Dec 146.9 105.1 158.5 2.0 − 84.2 1.1 197.9 0.2 77.2 52.0 334.0
2009          Jan 141.2 72.4 198.1 2.4 − 91.5 1.2 195.8 4.1 68.5 52.8 340.2
         Feb 132.9 79.4 178.5 1.3 − 77.9 2.2 185.0 2.5 71.4 53.2 316.1
         Mar 135.3 72.9 147.8 1.2 − 51.9 1.7 185.3 9.6 55.7 52.9 290.1
         Apr 142.9 74.7 122.8 0.7 − 38.9 1.6 186.3 14.6 46.2 53.4 278.7
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. — 3From
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulat ion. In
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem forof the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
nance period ending in the month indicated. Owing to the changeover to circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart ofthe new operational framework for monetary policy, there is no reserve this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92%
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 0.6 − 5.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.5 2006          Oct 
+ 0.7 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − + 4.3 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 4.1          Nov 
− 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 5.8 − 5.3 − 5.8 + 6.2 + 12.0          Dec 
− 1.2 + 9.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 20.9 − 9.9 − 6.3 + 2.1 + 23.1 2007          Jan 
− 3.7 − 21.8 + 4.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 14.9 + 2.9 − 10.4 + 1.2 − 13.7          Feb 
− 0.5 − 11.8 + 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.6 − 0.8 − 6.9 + 4.1 + 6.0          Mar 
+ 2.0 − 7.0 + 11.1 + 0.5 − − 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 5.2 + 2.0 + 10.5          Apr 
+ 2.5 − 0.1 + 4.3 − 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.2 + 3.1 − 2.0 + 0.6 + 6.1          May
+ 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 5.2 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 3.0 + 7.9          June
− 3.4 + 10.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 6.1 + 4.8 − 7.0 + 3.4 + 9.5          July
− 6.3 + 6.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − + 8.4 − 1.6 − 9.4 + 2.4 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 0.6 − 33.0 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.3          Sep 
+ 4.6 − 74.4 + 90.6 + 0.1 − 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 11.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 5.7 − 14.1 + 2.7 − 0.2 − − 1.0 + 4.2 + 2.8 − 7.8 − 5.3 + 1.0 + 2.8          Nov 
− 0.1 − 7.2 + 13.6 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − 2.9 + 4.5 + 6.0 − 3.3 + 2.4 + 6.8          Dec 
+ 16.3 + 82.7 − 9.8 − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 66.2 + 23.6 − 15.5 + 10.2 + 4.1 + 28.3 2008          Jan 
+ 9.8 − 81.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − − 0.7 − 67.8 − 16.5 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 1.5 − 15.7          Feb 
− 10.3 + 7.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 1.5 + 8.0 − 14.3 + 2.9 + 4.2          Mar 
+ 6.1 + 0.2 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 8.9 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 11.6          Apr 
+ 15.1 − 7.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.4 + 12.6 + 1.1 + 6.3          May+ 10.5 − 1.6 − 7.1 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 3.1          June
+ 1.4 + 12.6 − 12.5 − 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.0 + 5.8 − 2.4 − 6.8 + 4.6 + 10.6          July
− 1.9 − 19.1 + 23.9 − 0.0 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 8.9 − 3.6 − 4.7 + 2.1 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 2.1 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 1.7          Sep 
+ 40.7 + 10.6 + 34.3 + 7.4 + 5.9 + 19.3 + 44.8 − 0.7 − 5.9 + 38.6 + 2.8 + 21.5          Oct 
+ 131.7 + 127.5 + 118.2 + 5.2 − 1.7 +193.8 − 43.2 + 37.8 + 29.8 +160.8 + 1.8 + 233.4          Nov 
+ 31.5 + 35.7 + 4.7 − 10.0 − 4.2 − 12.8 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 22.8 + 36.1 + 0.1 − 3.7          Dec 
+ 0.8 − 118.1 + 156.4 + 0.2 − + 37.6 − 1.6 + 22.0 − 7.9 − 13.7 + 2.8 + 62.4 2009          Jan 
− 33.9 + 5.7 − 62.2 − 0.8 − − 63.1 + 2.8 − 12.9 + 2.8 − 21.3 + 0.6 − 75.4          Feb 
− 34.7 − 0.6 − 79.0 − 0.5 − − 79.9 − 2.1 + 1.3 + 7.4 − 37.9 − 3.5 − 82.2          Mar 
− 4.7 + 6.2 − 29.3 − 0.5 − − 37.7 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 28.9 − 28.1 + 3.0 − 28.9          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.3 − 1.2 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 2006          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 7.0 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 8.7 − 0.1 + 0.5          Nov 
− 0.1 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.3 − 0.0 − 9.7 + 0.5 + 1.9          Dec 
− 0.2 + 9.8 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − + 5.3 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.0 + 5.3 2007          Jan 
− 0.4 − 11.4 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 2.9 − 0.0 − 3.7 + 0.5 − 2.4          Feb 
− 0.1 − 18.7 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.0 − 11.2 + 0.9 + 1.5          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 6.8 + 8.2 + 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.2          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.6          May
+ 0.1 − 6.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 7.8 + 0.6 + 2.8          June
− 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 2.0          July
− 1.6 + 10.3 − 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 2.0          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 10.4 + 9.3 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.7          Sep 
+ 1.3 − 31.9 + 28.7 + 0.1 − 4.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 2.2 − 14.9 − 3.8 − 0.2 − − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 18.8 + 0.7 + 0.9          Nov − 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.5 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 11.3 + 0.8 + 1.6          Dec 
+ 6.9 + 28.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.4 + 25.6 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.2 + 6.0 2008          Jan 
+ 4.5 − 41.3 − 4.0 − 0.1 − − 0.4 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.8 − 4.0          Feb 
− 5.2 − 1.0 − 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 0.9 + 2.2          Mar 
+ 2.1 + 16.9 − 12.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 6.7 − 1.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 1.1          May
+ 4.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 1.7 + 5.9 − 5.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 1.4          July
− 3.2 − 8.6 + 4.7 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 9.4 + 0.6 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 1.0 + 5.9 − 6.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4          Sep 
+ 13.8 − 1.9 + 13.5 + 0.8 + 3.6 + 10.0 + 8.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.7 + 0.9 + 11.4          Oct 
+ 24.2 + 28.8 + 44.6 + 1.9 − 1.6 + 78.6 − 7.5 + 12.7 + 0.1 + 12.8 + 1.1 + 92.4          Nov + 8.3 + 1.5 − 4.6 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 − 0.3 − 5.9          Dec 
− 5.7 − 32.7 + 39.5 + 0.4 − + 7.3 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 4.0 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 6.1 2009          Jan 
− 8.3 + 7.0 − 19.5 − 1.0 − − 13.6 + 0.9 − 10.8 − 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.3 − 24.0          Feb 
+ 2.3 − 6.4 − 30.7 − 0.2 − − 26.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 7.2 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 26.0          Mar 
+ 7.6 + 1.8 − 25.1 − 0.5 − − 12.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 5.0 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 11.4          Apr 
of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 4Remaining items in the
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the difference between the
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbingeuro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes factors. — 6Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2008 Aug                29 1,449.1 208.3 135.4 9.3 126.1 55.1 15.4 15.4 −
         Sep                  5 1,441.0 208.2 135.2 9.3 125.9 55.5 15.0 15.0 −
                              12 1,457.7 208.2 134.7 9.2 125.6 55.6 15.5 15.5 −
                              19 1,460.6 208.1 131.2 9.2 122.0 85.5 16.1 16.1 −
                              26 1,518.5 208.1 134.4 9.2 125.2 103.2 15.0 15.0 −
         Oct                  3 3 1,758.7 3 220.4 3 148.6 3 9.8 3 138.8 3 132.2 13.9 13.9 −
                              10 1,881.9 220.2 147.0 9.8 137.2 165.1 14.2 14.2 −
                              17 1,973.1 220.2 146.6 9.8 136.8 223.2 13.7 13.7 −
                              24 1,958.2 220.2 153.9 9.8 144.1 198.9 13.0 13.0 −
                              31 2,031.4 220.2 155.2 9.8 145.4 205.8 11.2 11.2 −
         Nov                  7 1,940.4 220.2 155.8 10.1 145.7 226.5 11.4 11.4 −
                              14 1,998.7 220.2 160.2 11.8 148.5 227.5 11.6 11.6 −
                              21 1,974.0 220.1 163.0 11.7 151.3 198.4 10.7 10.7 −
                              28 1,979.1 220.0 159.7 12.6 147.1 208.2 10.3 10.3 −
         Dec                  5 2,036.5 220.0 162.2 12.5 149.6 248.9 10.1 10.1 −
                              12 2,053.8 219.9 156.5 12.5 144.0 238.4 9.5 9.5 −
                              19 2,021.5 219.8 152.8 12.5 140.2 221.4 8.9 8.9 −
                              26 2,043.5 219.7 149.7 12.5 137.1 229.5 9.2 9.2 −
2009 Jan                  2 3 2,088.9 3 218.4 162.1 13.2 148.8 3 225.8 19.7 19.7 −
                                9 2,045.6 218.4 159.5 13.2 146.3 218.0 20.5 20.5 −
                              16 2,010.7 218.4 159.1 13.2 145.9 204.8 21.5 21.5 −
                              23 2,039.8 218.3 161.7 13.2 148.5 205.9 22.8 22.8 −
                              30 1,907.0 218.3 159.2 13.2 146.0 171.2 22.5 22.5 −
         Feb                  6 1,893.8 218.3 159.7 13.2 146.5 170.9 22.3 22.3 −
                              13 1,834.1 218.2 159.2 13.1 146.1 168.3 21.3 21.3 −
                              20 1,858.4 218.0 159.3 13.1 146.2 166.9 21.7 21.7 −
                              27 1,820.3 217.8 155.7 13.1 142.6 134.7 21.6 21.6 −
         Mar                  6 1,840.8 217.7 156.8 13.1 143.7 136.0 21.0 21.0 −
                              13 1,829.4 217.6 155.3 13.2 142.0 144.1 20.3 20.3 −
                              20 1,822.5 217.6 154.3 13.2 141.1 143.6 17.4 17.4 −
                              27 1,803.1 217.5 152.4 13.2 139.1 140.8 17.0 17.0 −
         Apr                  3 3 1,836.4 3 241.7 3 158.6 14.4 3 144.2 3 151.3 17.2 17.2 −
                                9 1,827.8 241.7 158.1 14.4 143.7 142.1 17.9 17.9 −
                              17 1,840.1 241.7 157.0 14.4 142.7 139.4 19.4 19.4 −
                              24 1,824.0 240.8 157.9 14.4 143.6 125.3 20.4 20.4 −
         May                 1 1,799.2 240.8 157.1 14.3 142.8 125.3 20.5 20.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2007          June 3 373.5 3 52.8 3 32.0 2.7 3 29.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 382.1 52.8 31.9 2.6 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 369.6 52.8 31.9 2.6 29.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 394.0 3 57.2 3 31.4 2.5 3 28.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 394.6 57.2 31.1 2.5 28.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 410.3 57.2 30.8 2.5 28.3 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 483.7 3 62.4 3 30.1 2.4 3 27.7 7.1 0.3 0.3 −
2008          Jan 415.5 62.4 30.4 2.4 28.0 6.9 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 432.2 62.4 30.8 2.4 28.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 453.4 3 65.1 3 30.0 2.3 3 27.6 4.5 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 439.6 65.1 31.1 2.3 28.7 8.1 0.3 0.3 −
         May 439.2 65.1 30.2 2.5 27.6 14.5 0.3 0.3 −         June 447.2 64.9
3 30.3 2.5 3 27.8 12.2 0.3 0.3 −
         July 435.9 64.9 29.1 2.5 26.6 9.4 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 449.0 64.9 29.1 2.5 26.7 10.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 519.7 3 68.8 3 31.1 2.6 3 28.5 3 39.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 591.6 68.8 34.5 2.6 31.9 50.5 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 577.1 68.8 34.8 3.3 31.5 61.1 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 612.9 3 68.2 3 31.0 3.3 3 27.7 63.3 0.3 0.3 −
2009          Jan 560.5 68.2 28.7 3.3 25.5 46.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 547.5 68.2 29.0 3.3 25.7 45.3 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 539.7 3 75.7 3 32.1 3.5 3 28.6 3 50.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 540.5 75.7 32.7 3.5 29.2 42.0 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other
 claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
467.0 167.0 300.0 − − 0.0 0.0 38.2 111.1 37.5 381.2 2008 Aug                29
460.0 160.0 300.0 − − 0.0 0.0 37.6 109.7 37.5 382.2          Sep                  5
476.5 176.5 300.0 − − − 0.0 40.6 110.0 37.5 379.2                               12
450.3 150.0 299.0 − − 1.3 0.0 43.5 110.3 37.5 378.2                               19
487.3 180.0 300.5 − − 6.8 0.0 46.4 111.3 37.5 375.4                               26
635.1 190.0 420.5 − − 24.6 0.0 75.5 3 113.1 37.4 3 382.3          Oct                  3
739.4 250.9 447.2 24.7 − 16.6 0.0 66.1 113.6 37.4 378.9                               10
773.2 312.0 447.2 − − 14.0 0.0 61.2 114.8 37.4 382.8                               17
767.2 306.0 447.2 − − 14.1 0.0 64.0 116.3 37.4 387.2                               24
839.6 326.6 501.8 − − 11.2 0.0 63.6 116.9 37.4 381.5                               31
723.4 312.8 402.2 − − 8.4 0.0 67.4 118.7 37.4 379.6          Nov                  7
800.7 335.2 462.8 − − 2.7 0.0 43.6 118.8 37.4 378.7                               14
803.5 338.7 462.8 − − 1.9 0.0 44.1 119.3 37.5 377.2                               21
794.9 335.2 455.3 − − 4.4 0.1 49.5 120.5 37.5 378.5                               28
797.6 340.2 455.3 − − 2.0 0.1 58.0 121.0 37.5 381.4          Dec                  5
837.4 218.6 616.1 − − 2.7 0.0 57.1 121.4 37.5 376.1                               12
829.6 210.4 616.9 − − 2.2 0.1 54.8 120.8 37.5 375.9                               19
843.2 224.4 616.9 − − 1.8 0.1 58.4 121.3 37.5 375.0                               26
857.5 239.6 616.9 − − 0.9 0.1 58.1 3 282.7 37.5 3 227.1 2009 Jan                  2
828.5 216.8 610.2 − − 1.5 0.1 58.9 280.2 37.4 226.1                                 9
821.9 204.5 610.2 − − 7.1 0.1 37.3 279.8 37.4 230.5                               16
842.4 252.2 588.5 − − 1.6 0.1 34.9 282.0 37.4 234.2                               23
748.3 214.9 528.6 − − 4.8 0.0 33.5 283.0 37.4 233.5                               30
737.2 207.8 528.6 − − 0.8 0.0 30.2 281.4 37.4 236.4          Feb                  6
681.3 198.4 482.3 − − 0.6 0.0 27.7 283.7 37.4 237.0                               13
699.7 215.9 482.3 − − 1.4 0.1 30.7 285.1 37.4 239.4                               20
700.9 238.4 461.8 − − 0.7 0.0 27.5 285.3 37.4 239.5                               27
696.8 244.1 452.2 − − 0.5 0.0 29.1 286.2 37.4 259.7          Mar                  6
680.8 227.7 452.8 − − 0.3 0.0 28.8 288.2 37.4 256.9                               13
680.1 226.1 452.8 − − 1.2 0.1 29.5 289.5 37.4 253.0                               20
661.9 230.0 430.7 − − 1.1 0.0 32.0 290.6 37.4 253.4                               27
669.6 238.1 430.7 − − 0.8 0.0 33.1 3 291.9 37.4 3 235.6          Apr                  3
667.9 237.6 428.5 − − 1.8 0.0 33.6 293.9 37.4 235.2                                 9
681.7 249.4 432.2 − − 0.1 0.0 32.0 292.8 37.4 238.7                               17
676.4 244.1 432.2 − − 0.1 0.0 31.4 294.0 37.4 240.3                               24
655.0 233.2 419.1 − − 2.8 0.0 27.9 294.1 36.8 241.6          May                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
243.4 136.2 107.0 − − 0.2 − 3.2 − 4.4 37.3 2007          June
248.5 146.0 102.4 − − − − 3.3 − 4.4 41.0          July
210.4 89.9 120.5 − − 0.0 − 3.3 − 4.4 66.5          Aug 
223.3 83.8 139.3 − − 0.2 − 4.3 − 4.4 3 73.1          Sep 
202.2 62.9 139.3 − − 0.0 − 7.0 − 4.4 92.4          Oct 
207.2 77.3 129.9 − − 0.0 − 10.1 − 4.4 100.3          Nov 268.0 133.1 134.8 − − 0.1 − 13.1 − 4.4
3 98.4          Dec 
172.7 47.0 125.7 − − 0.0 − 17.3 − 4.4 120.9 2008          Jan 
178.7 59.0 119.7 − − − − 18.5 − 4.4 137.1          Feb 
213.1 98.4 103.5 11.2 − 0.0 − 20.6 − 4.4 3 115.4          Mar 
192.5 80.1 112.4 − − 0.0 − 19.9 − 4.4 118.1          Apr 
184.5 71.2 113.2 − − 0.1 − 19.9 − 4.4 120.2          May192.4 86.5 105.9 − − 0.0 − 18.4 − 4.4 124.3          June
184.5 75.5 109.0 − − 0.0 − 20.3 − 4.4 122.9          July
180.4 76.6 103.8 − − 0.0 − 22.9 − 4.4 136.8          Aug 223.5 69.2 153.5 − − 0.8 − 25.2 − 4.4
3 127.2          Sep 
297.1 107.2 186.4 − − 3.5 − 38.5 − 4.4 97.4          Oct 263.3 101.4 159.7 − − 2.2 − 23.5 − 4.4 120.9          Nov 277.7 75.3 201.6 − − 0.8 − 22.0 − 4.4
3 146.0          Dec 
245.4 74.4 169.2 − − 1.8 − 3.9 − 4.4 162.9 2009          Jan 
219.4 75.4 143.4 − − 0.6 − 4.4 − 4.4 176.4          Feb 
186.7 71.6 114.6 − − 0.6 − 5.0 − 4.4 3 184.6          Mar 
194.6 83.6 110.6 − − 0.4 − 6.0 − 4.4 184.8          Apr 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2008 Aug                29 1,449.1 683.5 204.3 204.1 0.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 85.0 78.0 7.1
         Sep                  5 1,441.0 684.6 210.8 210.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 68.5 61.5 7.0
                              12 1,457.7 682.7 229.8 229.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 − 67.5 60.5 7.0
                              19 1,460.6 681.3 215.1 213.3 1.8 − − 0.0 0.1 − 54.4 46.4 8.0
                              26 1,518.5 681.7 243.5 215.4 28.1 − − 0.0 0.3 − 62.3 55.4 6.9
         Oct                  3 5 1,758.7 693.2 386.1 153.4 38.9 193.8 − 0.1 0.2 − 79.0 71.4 7.6
                              10 1,881.9 712.1 450.6 295.8 154.7 − − 0.1 0.1 − 85.7 64.9 20.8
                              17 1,973.1 721.8 470.3 230.5 239.6 − − 0.2 0.1 − 91.9 80.0 11.9
                              24 1,958.2 723.1 383.8 181.2 202.6 − − 0.1 0.2 − 137.7 120.3 17.5
                              31 2,031.4 727.7 458.9 179.4 279.4 − − 0.1 0.2 − 109.4 95.4 14.1
         Nov                  7 1,940.4 729.3 377.9 152.4 225.5 − − 0.0 0.3 − 86.9 75.7 11.1
                              14 1,998.7 728.6 444.0 280.2 163.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 89.4 77.7 11.7
                              21 1,974.0 726.7 429.1 204.9 224.2 − − 0.0 0.1 − 120.1 106.6 13.4
                              28 1,979.1 731.5 401.2 197.2 203.9 − − 0.1 0.2 − 142.1 132.4 9.7
         Dec                  5 2,036.5 740.5 427.3 176.7 250.5 − − 0.2 0.2 − 125.8 116.3 9.6
                              12 2,053.8 743.5 457.8 298.5 159.2 − − 0.1 5.2 − 123.8 112.9 10.9
                              19 2,021.5 753.3 436.4 205.7 230.7 − − 0.1 0.2 − 129.7 119.5 10.2
                              26 2,043.5 765.4 455.8 225.9 229.8 − − 0.1 0.2 − 116.1 107.9 8.2
2009 Jan                  2 5 2,088.9 763.7 504.3 213.3 281.7 − 9.2 0.1 0.3 1.0 93.8 85.4 8.5
                                9 2,045.6 751.1 475.3 157.5 315.3 − 2.3 0.2 0.3 1.0 98.7 90.8 7.9
                              16 2,010.7 743.3 450.8 169.2 281.4 − − 0.1 0.3 1.0 106.6 97.9 8.7
                              23 2,039.8 740.0 450.5 251.7 198.7 − − 0.1 0.4 − 130.6 121.9 8.7
                              30 1,907.0 740.3 365.6 200.5 164.9 − − 0.1 0.4 − 127.8 120.3 7.4
         Feb                  6 1,893.8 741.9 376.3 195.0 180.7 − − 0.6 0.6 − 89.2 80.9 8.3
                              13 1,834.1 740.7 323.6 247.5 75.9 − − 0.1 0.3 − 90.9 82.6 8.3
                              20 1,858.4 739.3 324.3 243.4 80.0 − − 0.9 0.3 − 114.1 105.7 8.4
                              27 1,820.3 742.1 297.2 191.7 104.9 − − 0.6 0.3 − 136.9 128.9 8.0
         Mar                  6 1,840.8 746.0 315.6 179.4 135.6 − − 0.6 0.3 − 130.4 122.2 8.2
                              13 1,829.4 746.3 306.6 244.2 61.8 − − 0.6 0.3 − 132.7 124.4 8.3
                              20 1,822.5 745.8 293.0 228.6 63.9 − − 0.5 0.3 − 145.2 136.9 8.4
                              27 1,803.1 745.8 263.8 218.5 45.1 − − 0.2 0.2 − 155.6 147.4 8.2
         Apr                  3 5 1,836.4 752.8 268.4 189.6 78.5 − − 0.2 0.2 − 151.3 143.1 8.2
                                9 1,827.8 762.1 253.9 232.1 21.5 − − 0.2 0.3 − 155.8 147.2 8.6
                              17 1,840.1 756.6 278.4 256.3 21.9 − − 0.2 0.3 − 149.8 141.3 8.5
                              24 1,824.0 752.7 280.4 249.1 31.1 − − 0.2 0.4 − 152.3 143.9 8.4
         May                 1 1,799.2 759.2 241.7 173.9 67.8 − − 0.0 0.4 − 164.9 156.7 8.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2007          June 5 373.5 171.9 39.8 39.6 0.3 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         July 382.1 173.9 46.6 46.5 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Aug 369.6 173.1 31.8 31.5 0.2 − − − − − 0.3 0.0 0.3
         Sep 5 394.0 173.1 47.0 42.2 4.8 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Oct 394.6 174.3 43.3 43.1 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.3
         Nov 410.3 175.4 52.9 52.7 0.2 − − − − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Dec 5 483.7 183.8 109.5 64.0 4.9 40.6 − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2008          Jan 415.5 176.2 42.6 42.4 0.2 − − − − − 0.8 0.0 0.8
         Feb 432.2 177.1 54.3 54.2 0.2 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Mar 5 453.4 179.0 70.1 69.3 0.8 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 439.6 181.4 53.4 53.3 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.0 0.7
         May 439.2 182.0 50.5 50.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         June 447.2 183.8 56.0 55.1 0.9 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         July 435.9 186.0 41.2 40.9 0.4 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Aug 449.0 185.1 50.6 50.5 0.1 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.3         Sep 
5 519.7 185.3 111.5 65.8 45.7 − − − − − 0.7 0.1 0.6
         Oct 591.6 197.1 146.4 48.4 98.0 − − − − − 7.9 0.2 7.7
         Nov 577.1 198.1 138.3 52.5 85.7 − − − − − 2.9 0.1 2.8
         Dec 5 612.9 206.6 166.9 100.7 66.3 − − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
2009          Jan 560.5 184.7 127.2 49.3 77.8 − − − − − 2.6 2.2 0.5
         Feb 547.5 185.2 106.6 54.2 52.4 − − − − − 12.5 11.9 0.6
         Mar 5 539.7 186.5 100.0 53.1 46.9 − − − − − 15.7 15.4 0.3
         Apr 540.5 189.5 80.0 48.3 31.7 − − − − − 30.8 30.2 0.6
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-
ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
80.1 0.9 17.3 17.3 − 5.1 148.7 − 152.4 71.7 2008 Aug                29
79.0 1.3 17.3 17.3 − 5.1 150.2 − 152.4 71.7          Sep                  5
78.3 1.0 17.2 17.2 − 5.1 151.9 − 152.4 71.7                               12
108.4 1.5 15.3 15.3 − 5.1 155.3 − 152.4 71.7                               19
127.5 2.1 16.1 16.1 − 5.1 156.0 − 152.4 71.7                               26
161.6 1.3 5 25.0 5 25.0 − 5.4 5 166.5 − 5 168.7 71.7          Oct                  3
195.0 1.0 26.7 26.7 − 5.4 164.9 − 168.7 71.7                               10
255.0 1.3 19.8 19.8 − 5.4 167.1 − 168.7 71.7                               17
283.6 0.1 16.4 16.4 − 5.4 167.5 − 168.7 71.7                               24
303.4 0.7 16.7 16.7 − 5.4 168.7 − 168.7 71.7                               31
315.9 − 0.9 16.7 16.7 − 5.4 168.6 − 168.7 71.7          Nov                  7
306.2 − 1.4 17.0 17.0 − 5.4 169.0 − 168.7 71.7                               14
268.9 − 1.6 16.8 16.8 − 5.4 168.2 − 168.7 71.7                               21
278.4 − 1.5 14.5 14.5 − 5.4 167.1 − 168.7 71.7                               28
315.1 0.5 15.8 15.8 − 5.4 165.5 − 168.7 71.7          Dec                  5
300.8 2.3 13.1 13.1 − 5.4 161.6 − 168.7 71.7                               12
279.0 2.8 13.1 13.1 − 5.4 161.2 − 168.7 71.7                               19
286.0 2.9 10.2 10.2 − 5.4 161.2 − 168.7 71.7                               26
286.8 5 4.5 5 11.3 5 11.3 − 5.4 5 169.2 − 5 176.6 72.0 2009 Jan                  2
282.1 1.8 11.5 11.5 − 5.4 170.6 − 176.6 71.1                                 9
271.0 2.4 7.9 7.9 − 5.4 174.2 − 176.6 71.1                               16
280.2 1.4 7.8 7.8 − 5.4 175.9 − 176.6 71.1                               23
232.2 1.8 8.1 8.1 − 5.4 177.6 − 176.6 71.1                               30
244.5 0.8 9.4 9.4 − 5.4 177.9 − 176.6 71.1          Feb                  6
238.9 − 0.1 10.5 10.5 − 5.4 175.8 − 176.6 71.4                               13
236.4 − 0.3 10.7 10.7 − 5.4 179.8 − 176.6 71.7                               20
202.6 − 0.3 9.8 9.8 − 5.4 177.9 − 176.6 71.7                               27
204.7 − 0.2 10.1 10.1 − 5.4 180.1 − 176.6 71.7          Mar                  6
211.5 0.2 10.3 10.3 − 5.4 167.5 − 176.6 72.0                               13
208.0 2.6 8.9 8.9 − 5.4 164.6 − 176.6 72.0                               20
207.2 2.6 8.5 8.5 − 5.4 165.1 − 176.6 72.2                               27
209.2 5 3.1 5 10.4 5 10.4 − 5.6 5 159.9 − 5 203.0 72.6          Apr                  3
200.0 2.9 11.3 11.3 − 5.6 160.0 − 203.0 73.1                                 9
197.4 1.4 12.2 12.2 − 5.6 162.7 − 203.0 72.9                               17
184.2 1.7 10.6 10.6 − 5.6 160.4 − 203.0 72.8                               24
179.9 2.9 9.1 9.1 − 5.6 159.8 − 203.0 72.8          May                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
3.8 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.4 12.4 91.6 5 44.9 5.0 2007          June
4.1 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.4 11.6 92.1 44.9 5.0          July
4.1 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.4 12.6 94.4 44.9 5.0          Aug 
5.4 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.3 13.6 96.1 5 49.5 5.0          Sep 
7.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.3 13.0 97.5 49.5 5.0          Oct 
11.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.3 14.1 98.6 49.5 5.0          Nov 
14.0 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.3 5 13.1 99.5 5 55.0 5.0          Dec 
18.4 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.3 13.3 100.2 55.0 5.0 2008          Jan 
19.4 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 14.1 102.4 55.0 5.0          Feb 
21.7 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.3 10.7 103.7 5 58.1 5.0          Mar 
21.2 0.0 4.3 4.3 − 1.3 10.2 104.1 58.1 5.0          Apr 
21.2 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.3 11.3 106.3 58.1 5.0          May
19.6 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.3 12.5 107.2 5 57.4 5.0          June
22.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 12.2 107.4 57.4 5.0          July
24.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.3 13.1 109.8 57.4 5.0          Aug 
24.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.3 5 15.1 111.8 5 62.2 5.0          Sep 
21.7 11.9 3.8 3.8 − 1.3 14.8 119.3 62.2 5.0          Oct 
16.1 13.5 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 15.9 120.6 62.2 5.0          Nov 
9.2 18.4 2.5 2.5 − 1.3 16.9 121.8 5 63.1 5.0          Dec 
6.9 13.4 0.1 0.1 − 1.3 17.0 139.2 63.1 5.0 2009          Jan 
7.5 7.6 0.2 0.2 − 1.3 17.7 140.7 63.1 5.0          Feb 
7 . 5 0 . 0−−− 1 . 4 5 11.6 140.4 5 71.5 5.0          Mar 
8.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 1.4 12.1 141.8 71.5 5.0          Apr 
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.22004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.92007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.82008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2007          June 7,381.7 14.2 2,396.3 1,724.1 1,156.2 567.9 672.3 423.8 248.5 3,484.4 3,071.9 2,538.0 2,261.7
         July 7,371.2 13.9 2,373.0 1,708.4 1,146.0 562.5 664.6 415.4 249.2 3,489.7 3,080.8 2,541.9 2,265.9
         Aug 7,417.4 14.1 2,405.9 1,735.3 1,178.1 557.2 670.5 419.3 251.2 3,485.8 3,071.6 2,544.4 2,271.6
         Sep 7,500.9 14.4 2,438.4 1,756.8 1,201.2 555.6 681.5 429.9 251.7 3,493.0 3,074.0 2,552.6 2,278.5
         Oct 7,500.5 14.5 2,453.6 1,770.9 1,208.5 562.4 682.7 430.2 252.5 3,485.7 3,058.5 2,543.7 2,278.4
         Nov 7,553.6 14.1 2,489.4 1,791.5 1,226.5 565.1 697.9 443.9 253.9 3,482.3 3,057.5 2,544.1 2,279.6         Dec 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008          Jan 7,574.1 14.1 2,506.6 1,798.8 1,240.4 558.5 707.8 454.1 253.7 3,530.9 3,084.8 2,585.0 2,297.3
         Feb 7,596.6 13.6 2,512.7 1,806.7 1,250.0 556.7 706.0 450.6 255.5 3,521.3 3,079.8 2,577.1 2,306.5         Mar 7,641.7 14.2 2,516.2 1,818.8 1,262.4 556.4 697.4 442.9 254.5 3,561.3 3,095.9 2,593.5 2,316.4
         Apr 7,725.9 13.9 2,520.4 1,824.8 1,264.1 560.7 695.6 445.9 249.7 3,609.6 3,145.8 2,632.0 2,323.2
         May 7,729.1 14.1 2,540.8 1,844.9 1,274.1 570.9 695.8 436.6 259.3 3,596.2 3,130.8 2,620.8 2,326.7         June 7,688.7 13.8 2,556.9 1,855.1 1,281.7 573.3 701.8 436.9 265.0 3,576.9 3,098.7 2,604.6 2,333.7
         July 7,675.4 14.2 2,532.5 1,833.9 1,263.1 570.8 698.6 430.6 268.1 3,587.8 3,110.1 2,616.3 2,341.6
         Aug 7,744.7 14.2 2,556.0 1,860.3 1,284.2 576.2 695.7 427.4 268.3 3,619.5 3,137.0 2,645.3 2,344.2         Sep 7,896.2 13.7 2,614.7 1,918.3 1,351.8 566.6 696.3 431.1 265.2 3,623.3 3,134.6 2,657.2 2,354.8
         Oct 8,030.2 15.4 2,670.4 1,962.1 1,399.6 562.5 708.3 453.2 255.1 3,627.7 3,135.2 2,653.3 2,357.7
         Nov 7,985.4 15.1 2,705.1 1,995.0 1,408.3 586.8 710.1 462.5 247.6 3,633.0 3,134.5 2,657.2 2,362.4         Dec 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009          Jan 7,906.4 14.0 2,676.9 1,975.0 1,382.5 592.5 701.9 465.2 236.7 3,677.6 3,189.7 2,706.2 2,375.7
         Feb 7,846.4 13.9 2,649.2 1,950.8 1,357.1 593.7 698.4 466.0 232.4 3,667.8 3,183.1 2,702.3 2,368.3         Mar 7,777.8 13.9 2,611.7 1,924.3 1,312.9 611.4 687.4 458.5 228.9 3,669.6 3,193.6 2,716.4 2,383.4
 Changes 1
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.4
2004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2005 197.2 0.1 101.8 13.2 25.7 − 12.5 88.6 50.5 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 349.0 1.1 76.2 − 2.4 25.2 − 27.6 78.6 17.3 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.32007 509.7 1.5 210.1 132.5 153.3 − 20.8 77.6 41.6 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.12008 322.2 − 0.1 187.8 167.0 130.1 36.9 20.8 35.1 − 14.4 140.5 102.8 131.1 65.7
2007          July − 4.4 − 0.3 − 23.3 − 15.0 − 9.5 − 5.4 − 8.3 − 8.8 0.5 7.2 10.4 5.5 4.4
         Aug 42.1 0.2 32.8 26.9 32.2 − 5.3 5.9 3.9 2.0 − 3.9 − 9.3 2.4 5.8         Sep 101.2 0.3 32.9 21.7 23.1 − 1.4 11.2 10.5 0.7 10.3 4.6 10.3 8.9
         Oct 26.7 0.2 16.8 14.7 7.2 7.5 2.1 0.4 1.8 5.7 − 5.9 − 2.6 1.0
         Nov 63.1 − 0.4 35.9 20.7 18.0 2.7 15.3 13.7 1.6 − 1.9 − 0.2 1.2 1.9
         Dec 39.4 3.7 34.3 56.7 64.0 − 7.3 − 22.4 − 22.5 0.2 5.8 4.9 12.5 9.6
2008          Jan − 31.3 − 3.7 − 33.0 − 63.9 − 65.9 2.0 30.9 31.6 − 0.7 35.9 26.2 32.1 10.5
         Feb 33.0 − 0.5 6.4 8.0 9.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 3.5 1.9 − 7.9 − 4.1 − 6.9 10.1         Mar 66.1 0.6 3.9 12.3 12.5 − 0.1 − 8.4 − 7.7 − 0.7 44.0 18.4 18.3 11.7
         Apr 81.6 − 0.3 5.4 8.0 2.8 5.2 − 2.6 2.2 − 4.8 49.9 50.6 39.1 7.3
         May 5.2 0.2 22.9 20.5 10.2 10.2 2.5 − 7.1 9.6 − 12.8 − 14.3 − 10.6 4.0         June − 25.4 − 0.4 23.5 14.5 7.6 6.8 9.0 3.3 5.8 − 16.9 − 30.6 − 14.8 7.8
         July − 1.1 0.4 − 8.5 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 6.3 3.2 10.1 11.4 11.7 7.8
         Aug 52.5 − 0.0 29.2 32.1 27.0 5.1 − 2.9 − 3.2 0.2 25.7 24.2 26.4 0.4         Sep 132.4 − 0.5 58.4 57.9 67.6 − 9.7 0.5 3.7 − 3.2 1.3 − 3.5 10.7 9.2
         Oct 59.4 1.7 54.7 43.3 47.9 − 4.6 11.5 22.1 − 10.6 − 9.9 − 6.9 − 11.0 − 4.6
         Nov − 10.3 − 0.4 44.8 42.6 18.3 24.3 2.2 9.6 − 7.4 7.4 0.9 5.6 6.4         Dec − 39.8 2.7 − 20.0 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 17.2 − 9.6 − 7.6 13.7 30.6 30.4 − 4.8
2009          Jan − 33.5 − 3.8 − 5.1 − 15.4 − 21.8 6.4 10.3 12.1 − 1.8 36.2 27.8 20.9 16.5
         Feb − 74.5 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 24.2 − 25.4 1.2 − 2.9 0.8 − 3.7 − 9.0 − 5.1 − 2.5 − 6.7         Mar − 87.3 0.1 − 37.3 − 26.5 − 44.1 17.6 − 10.7 − 7.3 − 3.5 2.5 10.6 14.3 15.4
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008
276.3 533.9 372.3 161.6 412.5 263.2 103.1 149.2 25.5 123.8 1,282.6 996.3 204.3 2007          June
276.1 538.9 378.0 160.9 408.9 264.6 100.0 144.3 25.2 119.1 1,291.5 1,004.7 203.1          July
272.8 527.2 371.6 155.6 414.3 276.0 112.0 138.2 25.7 112.5 1,300.5 1,005.8 211.0          Aug 274.0 521.4 366.1 155.3 419.0 284.7 116.4 134.3 24.9 109.5 1,334.3 1,039.6 220.9          Sep 
265.3 514.8 364.6 150.3 427.1 292.8 121.4 134.4 24.9 109.4 1,325.3 1,022.3 221.5          Oct 
264.5 513.4 362.9 150.5 424.8 295.5 122.2 129.3 25.4 103.9 1,344.7 1,031.3 223.1          Nov 267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4          Dec 
287.6 499.9 357.1 142.8 446.1 309.7 141.2 136.4 25.9 110.5 1,307.3 1,006.0 215.2 2008          Jan 
270.6 502.7 353.4 149.3 441.5 302.8 135.7 138.7 26.1 112.7 1,326.0 1,022.5 223.1          Feb 
277.1 502.5 350.9 151.5 465.4 326.3 140.3 139.1 26.2 112.9 1,327.0 1,035.8 223.0          Mar 
308.7 513.8 355.9 158.0 463.8 326.7 143.2 137.1 26.0 111.1 1,347.9 1,061.0 234.1          Apr 
294.2 509.9 350.7 159.3 465.4 330.3 146.5 135.1 26.0 109.1 1,342.9 1,054.7 235.2          May270.9 494.1 349.4 144.7 478.3 340.1 158.3 138.1 26.2 111.9 1,303.5 1,013.6 237.6          June
274.7 493.8 349.6 144.2 477.7 343.1 161.9 134.6 26.0 108.7 1,299.8 1,011.4 241.2          July
301.1 491.7 349.0 142.8 482.4 349.9 167.7 132.6 26.4 106.2 1,316.1 1,027.0 239.0          Aug 302.4 477.5 344.8 132.7 488.7 358.9 175.9 129.8 28.0 101.8 1,401.2 1,106.2 243.3          Sep 
295.6 481.9 346.7 135.2 492.5 363.1 182.5 129.3 28.3 101.1 1,455.9 1,166.6 260.8          Oct 
294.8 477.2 344.2 133.0 498.5 369.2 186.6 129.4 28.6 100.8 1,357.6 1,078.6 274.7          Nov 329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7          Dec 
330.5 483.5 344.3 139.2 487.9 359.7 182.0 128.3 26.1 102.1 1,256.5 991.4 281.4 2009          Jan 
334.1 480.8 342.4 138.3 484.7 356.1 175.8 128.5 25.9 102.7 1,233.9 974.1 281.6          Feb 
333.0 477.1 338.1 139.0 476.0 348.8 172.5 127.2 25.5 101.7 1,169.8 916.9 312.7          Mar 
Changes 1
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.1 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.7 31.6 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.9 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.9 136.8 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.8 − 11.5 37.7 42.3 40.4 − 4.6 1.6 − 6.1 − 35.6 − 3.7 29.7 2008
1.1 4.9 5.6 − 0.7 − 3.2 1.7 − 2.9 − 5.0 − 0.2 − 4.8 13.3 12.4 − 1.3 2007          July
− 3.4 − 11.7 − 6.4 − 5.3 5.4 11.5 12.0 − 6.2 0.5 − 6.6 5.4 − 2.5 7.5          Aug 
1.4 − 5.7 − 5.4 − 0.3 5.7 9.4 5.1 − 3.7 − 0.7 − 2.9 48.4 47.0 9.3          Sep 
− 3.6 − 3.3 − 1.5 − 1.8 11.5 11.5 5.4 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 4.3 − 9.7 − 0.3          Oct − 0.7 − 1.4 − 1.7 0.3 − 1.7 3.3 1.2 − 5.0 0.5 − 5.5 28.3 16.7 1.1          Nov 
2.9 − 7.6 − 2.1 − 5.4 0.9 − 0.8 3.0 1.7 0.6 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 3.7          Dec 
21.6 − 5.8 − 3.6 − 2.2 9.7 4.4 9.9 5.3 − 0.1 5.4 − 12.6 − 10.3 − 17.9 2008          Jan 
− 17.0 2.8 − 3.7 6.5 − 3.8 − 6.2 − 5.0 2.4 0.2 2.2 28.6 24.6 6.4          Feb 
6.7 0.1 − 2.4 2.5 25.6 25.2 5.4 0.4 0.2 0.2 21.5 30.8 − 3.9          Mar 
31.8 11.5 4.7 6.8 − 0.7 1.3 3.8 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.8 16.5 20.9 10.2          Apr 
− 14.6 − 3.8 − 5.2 1.4 1.5 3.5 3.2 − 2.0 0.0 − 2.0 − 5.6 − 6.8 0.4          May− 22.6 − 15.8 − 1.3 − 14.6 13.7 10.7 12.3 3.0 0.2 2.8 − 33.2 − 34.6 1.6          June
3.9 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 2.2 3.4 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 − 6.0 − 4.1 2.8          July
26.0 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 1.5 3.9 4.0 − 2.3 0.3 − 2.6 − 4.4 − 3.1 1.9          Aug 
1.6 − 14.2 − 4.1 − 10.1 4.8 7.8 7.2 − 3.1 1.6 − 4.7 71.0 66.2 2.1          Sep 
− 6.4 4.0 1.8 2.3 − 2.9 − 1.9 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 7.4 15.8          Oct − 0.8 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 2.2 6.5 6.4 4.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 75.4 − 65.3 13.2          Nov 
35.2 0.2 − 0.2 0.3 − 16.9 − 15.0 − 10.7 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 33.1 − 29.2 − 3.1          Dec 
4.4 7.0 1.3 5.6 8.3 8.8 6.1 − 0.5 − 1.7 1.2 − 51.7 − 47.8 − 9.1 2009          Jan 
4.2 − 2.7 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 3.9 − 4.1 − 6.7 0.3 − 0.3 0.5 − 24.6 − 20.6 − 13.7          Feb 
− 1.1 − 3.6 − 4.3 0.6 − 8.2 − 6.8 − 3.1 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 61.8 − 56.5 9.3          Mar 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.92007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.62008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2007          June 7,381.7 1,653.4 1,357.7 295.7 2,506.8 2,394.5 760.0 1,067.8 360.3 566.7 461.7 62.6 17.4
         July 7,371.2 1,650.1 1,351.7 298.5 2,508.2 2,401.0 764.7 1,074.7 366.9 561.6 456.0 64.2 15.4
         Aug 7,417.4 1,665.0 1,359.9 305.1 2,523.9 2,418.3 759.1 1,101.4 393.4 557.8 452.1 63.0 13.6         Sep 7,500.9 1,698.6 1,380.9 317.7 2,551.3 2,441.3 768.5 1,117.9 405.7 554.8 448.5 68.6 16.6
         Oct 7,500.5 1,714.2 1,377.3 336.9 2,548.5 2,438.7 757.6 1,129.9 420.3 551.2 443.8 68.9 16.1
         Nov 7,553.6 1,719.0 1,393.4 325.7 2,592.0 2,474.9 785.8 1,141.0 430.8 548.1 439.7 70.5 18.6         Dec 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008          Jan 7,574.1 1,734.4 1,393.6 340.7 2,628.1 2,514.1 770.0 1,193.6 476.6 550.5 441.2 74.1 22.1
         Feb 7,596.6 1,736.2 1,395.6 340.6 2,638.4 2,525.9 768.8 1,209.6 491.5 547.6 439.2 73.7 19.1         Mar 7,641.7 1,759.3 1,432.8 326.5 2,644.7 2,524.5 769.7 1,211.0 492.4 543.8 437.5 79.3 26.3
         Apr 7,725.9 1,790.8 1,439.8 351.1 2,649.4 2,535.5 758.9 1,236.8 517.2 539.8 434.8 76.4 23.7
         May 7,729.1 1,785.2 1,443.6 341.6 2,670.6 2,550.5 761.5 1,252.7 533.4 536.3 432.8 80.4 26.1         June 7,688.7 1,764.2 1,448.9 315.3 2,670.8 2,551.5 768.8 1,249.3 530.1 533.4 430.7 79.8 27.1
         July 7,675.4 1,749.7 1,439.1 310.6 2,675.9 2,557.0 746.2 1,283.0 563.6 527.9 425.6 81.7 27.3
         Aug 7,744.7 1,753.3 1,446.9 306.3 2,688.1 2,569.2 748.7 1,296.8 577.6 523.6 422.5 81.6 27.1         Sep 7,896.2 1,832.7 1,529.1 303.5 2,698.0 2,573.6 758.0 1,296.4 578.4 519.2 419.2 86.4 34.4
         Oct 8,030.2 1,913.9 1,642.3 271.6 2,734.7 2,620.5 786.9 1,312.8 598.0 520.8 417.8 77.6 28.8
         Nov 7,985.4 1,862.4 1,595.7 266.7 2,757.2 2,645.5 804.3 1,317.8 603.6 523.4 416.7 75.0 25.6         Dec 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009          Jan 7,906.4 1,794.4 1,533.3 261.1 2,817.1 2,701.2 857.7 1,304.6 557.0 539.0 428.6 80.7 33.6
         Feb 7,846.4 1,760.2 1,509.8 250.4 2,821.6 2,714.6 882.6 1,287.7 534.4 544.3 433.9 73.4 25.7         Mar 7,777.8 1,693.9 1,456.2 237.6 2,805.6 2,699.1 879.3 1,272.1 515.8 547.8 436.6 73.2 26.8
 Changes 1
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.4
2002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.42004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 197.2 32.8 26.9 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 349.0 105.5 81.5 24.0 123.0 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.42007 509.7 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.2 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.7 5.62008 322.2 66.4 121.8 − 55.3 162.4 173.2 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2007          July − 4.4 − 2.7 − 5.8 3.1 1.0 6.7 4.8 7.0 6.6 − 5.1 − 5.7 1.6 − 2.0
         Aug 42.1 14.7 8.1 6.5 15.3 16.9 − 5.7 26.3 26.4 − 3.7 − 3.9 − 1.3 − 1.8         Sep 101.2 35.8 21.9 13.9 28.3 23.7 9.8 16.9 12.6 − 3.0 − 3.6 5.9 3.1
         Oct 26.7 16.8 − 3.1 20.0 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 10.7 11.9 14.5 − 3.6 − 4.7 0.4 − 0.4
         Nov 63.1 5.9 16.5 − 10.6 43.6 36.3 28.4 11.0 10.2 − 3.1 − 4.1 1.6 2.5         Dec 39.4 58.9 85.7 − 26.8 41.7 43.4 − 16.2 52.3 47.1 7.3 6.3 4.8 0.8
2008          Jan − 31.3 − 61.6 −101.1 39.5 − 6.8 − 4.2 0.4 0.4 − 1.3 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 2.5 1.9
         Feb 33.0 3.0 2.4 0.6 10.8 12.2 − 0.9 16.1 14.9 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 3.0         Mar 66.1 26.4 38.4 − 12.0 7.6 − 0.7 1.5 1.6 1.2 − 3.7 − 1.6 5.9 7.3
         Apr 81.6 32.6 7.9 24.8 4.7 10.6 − 11.1 25.8 24.7 − 4.1 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 2.3
         May 5.2 − 1.2 4.0 − 5.2 19.2 15.0 2.6 15.9 16.3 − 3.5 − 2.1 2.1 0.5         June − 25.4 − 18.0 5.9 − 23.9 0.6 1.3 7.4 − 3.3 − 3.2 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.4 1.0
         July − 1.1 − 1.7 3.0 − 4.7 5.1 5.4 − 22.7 33.6 33.5 − 5.6 − 5.1 1.9 0.3
         Aug 52.5 5.4 11.4 − 6.0 10.3 11.2 1.9 13.6 13.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 0.4         Sep 132.4 76.2 80.5 − 4.2 8.4 3.7 8.8 − 0.7 0.6 − 4.4 − 3.3 4.0 7.2
         Oct 59.4 67.6 103.9 − 36.3 32.0 44.4 27.1 15.7 18.9 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.0 − 6.2
         Nov − 10.3 − 36.2 − 29.9 − 6.3 27.7 29.9 17.5 9.8 7.8 2.6 − 1.1 − 2.3 − 3.3         Dec − 39.8 − 26.1 − 4.6 − 21.5 42.7 44.4 6.4 26.2 − 3.5 11.8 8.1 − 1.6 − 3.0
2009          Jan − 33.5 − 42.8 − 57.3 14.5 16.7 12.4 47.1 − 38.5 − 42.1 3.8 3.8 5.8 11.2
         Feb − 74.5 − 35.2 − 24.4 − 10.8 4.6 13.2 24.8 − 16.9 − 22.7 5.3 5.3 − 7.1 − 7.8         Mar − 87.3 − 66.4 − 53.6 − 12.8 − 16.6 − 15.8 − 3.3 − 16.0 − 18.8 3.5 2.8 − 0.4 1.0
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008
42.9 10.0 2.3 1.8 49.7 46.6 32.7 35.3 1,670.4 162.2 685.8 417.8 379.5 2007          June
46.6 12.6 2.3 1.8 43.0 41.8 25.7 34.9 1,673.2 168.2 675.2 426.0 378.0          July
47.1 13.1 2.3 1.8 42.6 41.1 28.4 32.3 1,665.5 169.2 694.4 423.3 384.6          Aug 49.8 16.5 2.3 1.7 41.3 39.6 36.3 30.3 1,651.5 170.7 703.6 426.5 402.7          Sep 
50.5 17.5 2.3 1.7 40.9 38.2 34.6 29.2 1,664.4 179.3 687.5 427.7 394.5          Oct 
49.6 18.1 2.3 1.7 46.6 41.9 39.7 29.1 1,658.9 188.3 687.0 427.5 400.4          Nov 53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2          Dec 
49.6 18.9 2.3 1.8 40.0 37.4 42.1 28.8 1,644.1 190.6 679.2 430.8 386.7 2008          Jan 
52.3 23.6 2.3 1.8 38.7 37.1 45.9 29.0 1,631.9 189.7 694.5 431.8 389.0          Feb 
50.7 23.0 2.3 1.8 40.8 37.6 46.7 27.2 1,622.3 188.1 703.1 447.5 390.9          Mar 
50.4 23.5 2.3 1.8 37.5 35.3 55.7 25.4 1,628.2 195.8 729.3 442.8 404.2          Apr 
52.0 24.6 2.3 1.8 39.7 36.7 56.0 24.6 1,629.9 201.4 716.8 444.5 401.5          May50.5 23.4 2.3 1.8 39.4 37.8 63.9 23.8 1,641.4 217.1 679.2 442.6 402.9          June
52.0 25.5 2.3 1.7 37.2 35.2 58.1 23.5 1,644.8 222.2 674.8 443.6 405.0          July
52.3 26.4 2.3 1.7 37.3 36.3 63.1 23.2 1,655.8 224.7 687.9 448.7 424.6          Aug 49.7 25.5 2.3 1.7 38.0 37.5 70.9 22.4 1,642.2 219.9 741.6 445.3 443.0          Sep 
46.5 21.8 2.3 1.7 36.6 35.5 69.8 18.6 1,637.0 214.5 747.9 453.9 454.4          Oct 
47.1 23.9 2.3 1.7 36.7 34.4 71.0 17.5 1,655.9 242.5 713.2 448.2 460.1          Nov 49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5          Dec 
44.6 19.7 2.4 1.8 35.2 33.0 67.4 15.9 1,614.6 215.8 697.5 462.3 437.1 2009          Jan 
45.2 19.3 2.5 1.8 33.6 32.7 74.0 15.4 1,604.9 211.4 686.7 441.5 442.1          Feb 
44.0 18.2 2.5 1.8 33.2 32.0 87.7 14.8 1,580.8 201.5 664.6 447.9 482.5          Mar 
Changes 1
− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001
− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.3 − 9.4 22.4 14.4 18.5 2005
− 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.2 0.3 34.3 21.7 32.1 27.9 29.2 2006
8.1 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.4 48.7 49.1 42.9 59.1 2007
− 7.5 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.3 − 32.4 50.7 1.7 39.2 61.1 2008
3.7 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 5.3 − 7.0 − 0.4 3.4 5.2 − 7.7 8.4 0.6 2007          July
0.5 0.4 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 2.7 − 2.7 − 8.6 2.8 16.4 − 2.9 7.1          Aug 2.9 3.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 7.9 − 1.9 − 7.2 1.6 18.1 4.4 15.7          Sep 
0.9 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 1.1 16.0 10.5 − 11.9 1.7 9.2          Oct 
− 1.0 0.5 0.0 − 0.0 5.7 3.7 5.1 − 0.1 − 2.5 8.7 5.0 0.3 5.8          Nov 
3.9 4.0 0.1 0.0 − 6.5 − 3.7 − 13.1 − 0.5 − 20.2 − 5.9 − 25.2 1.0 − 3.2          Dec 
− 4.4 − 3.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.9 15.4 0.2 6.7 8.3 22.8 2.6 − 10.6 2008          Jan 
2.9 4.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.3 3.9 0.2 − 8.9 − 0.7 21.1 1.0 1.8          Feb 
− 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 0.0 2.3 0.7 0.8 − 1.8 − 3.5 − 1.5 17.9 16.9 1.9          Mar 
− 0.3 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 9.0 − 1.8 5.5 7.7 23.5 − 3.9 12.0          Apr 
1.6 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 1.4 0.2 − 0.8 1.6 4.5 − 12.8 1.8 − 2.9          May
− 1.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 1.1 7.9 − 0.8 14.0 15.8 − 34.1 4.1 0.9          June
1.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 5.8 − 0.3 4.5 5.7 − 5.8 1.5 1.4          July
− 0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 1.1 5.0 − 0.3 2.9 2.3 0.6 3.3 25.1          Aug 
− 3.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.7 1.3 7.8 − 0.8 − 20.8 − 5.0 44.7 − 4.9 21.6          Sep 
− 4.9 − 5.0 0.1 0.0 − 1.4 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 29.2 − 5.5 − 26.6 3.8 16.8          Oct 
0.9 2.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 1.1 2.8 − 1.1 21.6 28.1 − 26.6 − 4.3 5.7          Nov 
1.3 1.3 0.1 0.0 − 0.1 0.4 − 9.9 − 1.1 − 26.9 − 9.0 − 23.1 17.3 − 12.8          Dec 
− 5.5 − 5.7 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.8 6.3 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 17.7 11.9 − 3.2 − 9.5 2009          Jan 
0.7 − 0.3 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.3 6.6 − 0.5 − 9.5 − 4.7 − 13.0 − 20.8 − 6.5          Feb 
− 1.4 − 1.3 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 13.7 − 0.6 − 26.4 − 12.4 − 22.2 8.9 22.3          Mar 
2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2008          Oct 1,988 8,093.2 66.9 3,455.7 2,576.2 812.7 4,035.2 579.5 2,720.9 1.3 714.1 157.9 377.6
         Nov 1,980 8,049.6 69.8 3,424.1 2,530.5 814.3 4,006.2 556.2 2,723.3 1.4 710.5 157.5 392.0         Dec 1,981 7,956.4 120.4 3,308.2 2,429.5 807.3 3,979.5 519.7 2,707.7 1.5 734.4 156.3 392.0
2009          Jan 1,976 7,970.4 65.8 3,327.2 2,449.9 807.9 4,012.7 544.6 2,715.0 1.4 736.4 166.5 398.2
         Feb 1,977 7,910.9 68.3 3,281.8 2,410.6 806.6 3,996.7 523.5 2,715.5 1.2 741.9 165.7 398.3
         Mar 1,977 7,840.3 68.1 3,193.4 2,313.8 833.7 3,982.4 541.0 2,693.7 1.2 732.9 169.0 427.4
Commercial banks 5
2009          Feb 272 2,426.8 27.3 1,015.1 868.1 129.2 1,118.4 264.5 625.5 0.6 223.2 82.5 183.5
         Mar 272 2,406.9 33.2 956.0 799.9 148.3 1,115.3 271.6 618.8 0.6 221.2 85.9 216.5
   Big banks 6
2009          Feb 5 1,447.0 17.2 629.2 537.5 76.7 574.5 144.3 291.1 0.5 133.2 75.7 150.4         Mar 5 1,441.1 21.0 591.9 490.8 95.3 564.4 143.2 283.8 0.5 132.9 79.1 184.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2009          Feb 164 779.9 8.8 274.7 220.5 51.4 462.8 87.6 288.9 0.1 87.5 6.5 27.1         Mar 164 763.9 10.5 248.2 194.4 51.8 472.9 97.6 290.6 0.1 85.7 6.5 25.8
   Branches of foreign banks
2009          Feb 103 199.9 1.3 111.2 110.2 1.1 81.0 32.7 45.6 0.0 2.6 0.3 6.0         Mar 103 201.9 1.7 115.9 114.7 1.2 78.1 30.8 44.4 0.0 2.6 0.3 6.1
Landesbanken
2009          Feb 10 1,558.9 3.5 769.9 583.1 170.5 687.8 99.6 457.1 0.1 122.4 28.9 68.7         Mar 10 1,539.3 2.3 755.5 571.1 173.5 685.3 104.1 450.5 0.1 121.7 28.9 67.4
Savings banks
2009          Feb 434 1,056.8 21.5 273.7 117.6 143.1 722.5 65.8 565.5 0.3 90.4 19.3 19.8         Mar 434 1,050.5 17.4 271.9 112.3 147.3 722.9 66.8 564.7 0.3 90.6 19.2 19.0
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2009          Feb 2 271.9 0.6 172.9 119.4 49.5 69.9 18.7 20.6 0.0 30.5 15.1 13.3         Mar 2 268.9 0.9 172.5 120.8 48.9 67.8 17.8 20.1 0.0 29.5 15.1 12.6
Credit cooperatives
2009          Feb 1,197 665.4 13.7 193.5 89.1 96.9 427.0 35.4 340.8 0.2 50.4 11.0 20.2         Mar 1,197 664.9 13.0 192.3 84.7 100.1 428.9 36.3 341.1 0.2 51.0 11.0 19.9
Mortgage banks
2009          Feb 19 834.9 0.8 298.7 193.7 102.8 516.2 15.0 372.7 − 128.2 1.3 17.9         Mar 19 824.1 0.6 296.4 191.7 102.2 507.0 15.4 367.3 − 124.1 1.3 18.7
Building and loan associations
2009          Feb 25 188.2 0.1 53.5 39.0 14.4 121.3 1.4 108.5 . 11.4 0.3 13.0         Mar 25 189.1 0.1 54.3 39.8 14.5 121.5 1.4 108.6 . 11.6 0.3 12.8
Special purpose banks
2009          Feb 18 908.0 0.8 504.6 400.7 100.2 333.6 23.1 224.9 − 85.3 7.3 61.7         Mar 18 896.6 0.7 494.5 393.4 98.8 333.6 27.6 222.6 − 83.2 7.3 60.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2009          Feb 150 888.9 9.1 379.5 311.4 61.7 455.1 86.7 281.7 0.2 84.7 6.6 38.6         Mar 150 859.6 8.9 357.9 291.9 63.4 449.9 85.2 278.7 0.2 83.9 6.6 36.3
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2009          Feb 47 689.1 7.8 268.3 201.2 60.6 374.0 54.0 236.2 0.2 82.2 6.3 32.6         Mar 47 657.6 7.2 242.1 177.3 62.2 371.8 54.4 234.3 0.1 81.3 6.3 30.2
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,421.9 405.5 2,016.3 3,044.5 916.4 645.6 804.0 140.9 529.3 423.9 149.2 1,723.7 366.4 536.8 2008          Oct 
2,347.2 410.3 1,936.9 3,056.6 936.5 634.7 802.6 132.4 532.0 422.8 150.7 1,736.7 366.5 542.5          Nov 
2,285.8 356.6 1,929.1 3,067.4 926.8 618.5 827.2 113.3 544.1 431.1 150.8 1,692.6 378.2 532.3          Dec 
2,269.8 408.1 1,861.7 3,106.7 1,008.2 569.0 831.9 120.0 548.0 434.9 149.6 1,699.5 376.7 517.7 2009          Jan 
2,242.5 410.7 1,831.8 3,099.9 1,012.6 548.2 838.1 116.8 553.4 440.4 147.6 1,679.2 366.5 522.7          Feb 
2,161.4 405.1 1,756.3 3,090.4 1,017.7 533.0 838.0 123.5 557.0 443.2 144.6 1,657.2 370.2 561.1          Mar 
Commercial banks 5
823.4 257.5 565.9 1,036.3 497.6 225.1 171.8 60.9 117.2 85.2 24.7 232.9 114.2 219.9 2009          Feb 
781.9 259.2 522.8 1,027.7 494.3 217.2 174.1 56.1 117.6 86.3 24.4 228.5 116.2 252.5          Mar 
Big banks 6
497.2 167.4 329.8 566.6 252.9 127.4 112.2 53.9 65.3 59.5 8.8 186.7 71.9 124.7 2009          Feb 
466.9 162.2 304.7 555.6 247.1 120.8 112.5 49.7 66.6 60.8 8.6 183.9 73.3 161.3          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
184.9 54.2 130.7 423.5 216.5 89.2 50.4 7.0 51.8 25.6 15.6 46.2 36.5 88.7 2009          Feb 
169.2 48.3 120.9 427.9 225.2 83.6 52.4 6.4 51.0 25.4 15.7 44.6 37.1 85.1          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
141.4 36.0 105.4 46.2 28.2 8.5 9.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 5.8 6.4 2009          Feb 
145.8 48.6 97.2 44.3 21.9 12.9 9.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 5.8 6.1          Mar 
Landesbanken
506.3 60.4 445.9 430.7 74.9 126.6 212.2 52.1 14.5 14.3 2.5 466.9 69.2 85.8 2009          Feb 
490.9 71.1 419.8 432.5 77.1 127.8 210.8 62.0 14.4 14.2 2.5 460.1 73.3 82.6          Mar 
Savings banks
203.7 22.8 180.9 710.4 254.8 81.9 14.5 − 268.5 208.1 90.7 39.5 56.8 46.3 2009          Feb 
200.5 24.6 175.9 707.7 258.8 76.1 14.3 − 269.9 209.1 88.6 38.5 56.6 47.2          Mar 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
145.5 31.0 114.6 43.9 11.8 13.2 17.1 3.8 − − 1.8 52.3 11.4 18.9 2009          Feb 
142.4 30.0 112.3 44.8 12.1 14.0 16.9 5.2 − − 1.8 52.7 11.4 17.7          Mar 
Credit cooperatives
101.0 3.9 97.0 461.3 164.2 89.3 28.2 − 152.5 132.1 27.2 36.4 38.8 28.0 2009          Feb 
100.9 4.3 96.6 460.6 166.7 85.2 27.9 − 154.3 132.8 26.5 35.5 38.9 29.0          Mar 
Mortgage banks
230.3 17.8 212.5 189.2 4.2 7.6 176.9 − 0.5 0.5 0.0 369.4 21.4 24.6 2009          Feb 
231.4 5.9 225.5 188.4 3.6 7.7 176.6 − 0.5 0.5 0.0 360.4 21.2 22.7          Mar 
Building and loan associations
25.6 1.6 24.0 126.0 0.3 2.0 122.8 − 0.3 0.3 0.6 7.5 7.3 21.8 2009          Feb 
25.5 2.0 23.5 126.1 0.3 2.0 122.9 − 0.3 0.3 0.6 8.4 7.3 21.8          Mar 
Special purpose banks
206.6 15.6 191.0 102.2 4.8 2.6 94.6 0.0 − − 0.2 474.2 47.4 77.5 2009          Feb 
188.0 8.0 180.0 102.6 4.8 3.1 94.5 0.1 − − 0.2 473.2 45.3 87.5          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
318.2 106.4 211.8 377.7 187.4 81.3 81.0 25.0 17.8 17.6 10.1 90.0 44.4 58.7 2009          Feb 
297.0 109.3 187.8 374.6 185.7 79.0 81.3 24.5 18.6 18.3 10.0 85.3 42.1 60.5          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
176.8 70.4 106.4 331.4 159.1 72.8 71.7 24.9 17.8 17.5 10.0 90.0 38.6 52.2 2009          Feb 
151.3 60.7 90.6 330.3 163.8 66.2 72.0 24.5 18.5 18.3 9.8 85.3 36.3 54.4          Mar 
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
1999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.62004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.52007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.72008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2007          Oct 14.1 44.1 1,696.3 1,162.1 0.0 23.9 510.3 1.8 2,973.3 2,641.5 1.5 2.2 328.1
         Nov 13.6 52.0 1,708.7 1,171.8 0.0 26.0 511.0 1.7 2,971.5 2,641.0 1.5 2.2 326.9
         Dec 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008          Jan 13.8 43.6 1,723.3 1,194.0 0.0 29.2 500.2 1.9 2,998.5 2,652.9 1.5 2.2 341.9
         Feb 13.2 52.1 1,722.2 1,194.4 − 29.3 498.5 1.9 2,993.2 2,658.6 1.3 2.1 331.1         Mar 13.8 69.6 1,716.3 1,189.6 − 29.7 497.0 1.9 3,009.0 2,666.0 1.3 2.5 339.3
         Apr 13.5 53.9 1,739.3 1,207.2 − 31.3 500.8 1.9 3,058.8 2,677.9 1.2 2.0 377.7
         May 13.7 50.2 1,763.7 1,220.9 0.0 33.2 509.5 1.9 3,043.7 2,676.2 1.2 3.2 363.2         June 13.3 54.7 1,773.8 1,224.3 0.0 37.2 512.3 1.9 3,011.5 2,681.9 1.1 3.6 324.8
         July 13.6 41.2 1,766.2 1,218.9 − 37.5 509.8 1.9 3,018.8 2,690.2 1.1 2.8 324.8
         Aug 13.7 48.2 1,785.7 1,232.3 − 38.9 514.6 1.9 3,045.3 2,692.1 1.1 2.9 349.3         Sep 13.4 68.5 1,823.5 1,279.2 0.0 38.0 506.3 1.9 3,044.8 2,698.6 1.0 2.5 342.7
         Oct 14.6 51.4 1,884.6 1,343.9 0.0 39.3 501.4 1.9 3,045.1 2,703.4 1.0 2.3 338.4
         Nov 14.4 54.7 1,914.5 1,349.3 0.0 57.6 507.6 1.9 3,044.6 2,705.5 1.1 2.0 336.1
         Dec 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009          Jan 13.5 51.8 1,893.6 1,327.3 0.0 54.5 511.8 1.9 3,097.3 2,718.9 1.1 3.1 374.3
         Feb 13.4 54.4 1,865.5 1,299.3 0.0 52.2 514.0 1.9 3,091.2 2,709.8 0.9 3.2 377.2         Mar 13.5 54.1 1,835.8 1,255.7 0.0 35.8 544.2 1.7 3,101.5 2,720.6 0.9 3.7 376.2
Changes *
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.32004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.82007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1
+ 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2007          Oct + 0.1 + 1.9 + 13.4 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 6.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 4.4 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 3.1
         Nov − 0.5 + 7.9 + 12.4 + 9.7 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2
         Dec + 3.8 + 12.7 + 43.1 + 50.7 − − 0.6 − 7.0 + 0.6 + 3.4 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.1
2008          Jan − 3.7 − 21.0 − 44.3 − 44.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 3.8 − 0.8 + 22.7 + 5.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 17.1
         Feb − 0.6 + 8.5 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 5.3 + 5.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 10.8         Mar + 0.6 + 17.5 − 5.9 − 4.8 − + 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 15.9 + 7.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 8.2
         Apr − 0.3 − 15.7 + 24.0 + 18.7 − + 1.6 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 49.8 + 11.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 38.4
         May + 0.2 − 3.6 + 24.6 + 13.9 + 0.0 + 1.9 + 8.8 − 0.0 − 15.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 14.5
         June − 0.4 + 4.5 + 10.0 + 3.3 − + 4.0 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 32.1 + 5.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 38.1
         July + 0.3 − 13.6 + 7.6 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.8 + 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0
         Aug + 0.1 + 7.1 + 25.4 + 19.3 − + 1.3 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 26.6 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 24.5
         Sep − 0.3 + 20.2 + 37.8 + 46.9 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 8.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 6.5
         Oct + 1.3 − 17.1 + 61.1 + 64.7 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 4.9 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.3
         Nov − 0.2 + 4.8 + 38.0 + 13.6 − + 18.3 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.4         Dec + 3.0 + 47.8 − 51.3 − 49.7 − − 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 23.2 − 9.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 31.7
2009          Jan − 3.9 − 50.8 + 31.9 + 29.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 26.2 + 20.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 6.4
         Feb − 0.1 + 2.6 − 28.1 − 28.0 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 9.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9         Mar + 0.0 − 0.3 − 29.8 − 43.6 − − 16.4 + 30.2 − 0.2 + 9.3 + 9.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  
8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
37.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 20031.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008
− 51.7 108.0 1,376.9 133.1 1,243.8 0.0 19.8 2,506.9 770.4 1,071.5 551.2 113.8 36.5 2007          Oct 
− 51.4 108.9 1,393.0 141.6 1,251.4 0.0 19.7 2,551.3 800.8 1,085.7 548.1 116.7 36.4          Nov 
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4          Dec 
− 51.9 110.5 1,393.3 136.9 1,256.4 0.0 44.0 2,587.3 785.1 1,130.6 550.5 121.1 33.6 2008          Jan 
− 51.4 110.5 1,394.9 139.2 1,255.7 0.0 43.6 2,601.7 784.9 1,147.5 547.6 121.7 33.6          Feb 
− 50.8 111.9 1,432.6 142.8 1,289.7 0.0 42.8 2,601.9 786.3 1,150.0 543.8 121.8 33.2          Mar 
− 50.4 111.0 1,439.6 132.6 1,306.9 0.0 42.7 2,620.8 779.4 1,178.8 539.8 122.8 33.1          Apr 
− 50.2 110.8 1,443.2 133.5 1,309.6 0.0 42.5 2,636.4 782.6 1,193.5 536.3 124.0 33.1          May− 49.2 106.7 1,448.6 134.8 1,313.8 0.0 41.6 2,646.4 793.1 1,194.4 533.5 125.4 32.9          June
− 49.7 110.5 1,438.6 122.5 1,316.1 0.0 41.9 2,644.7 768.2 1,221.5 527.9 127.1 32.5          July
− 49.3 110.2 1,446.4 124.6 1,321.8 0.0 42.3 2,660.4 771.9 1,236.7 523.6 128.1 32.5          Aug − 48.4 108.2 1,528.8 151.4 1,377.4 0.0 42.0 2,676.0 784.7 1,242.4 519.3 129.6 32.3          Sep 
− 48.1 108.8 1,641.8 162.0 1,479.7 0.0 43.2 2,719.2 812.8 1,252.5 520.8 133.1 32.3          Oct 
− 47.8 108.4 1,595.2 155.9 1,439.3 0.0 43.2 2,748.8 832.8 1,257.9 523.4 134.7 32.2          Nov 
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3          Dec 
− 46.9 115.6 1,532.6 155.0 1,377.6 0.0 41.9 2,799.9 884.4 1,242.7 539.0 133.8 31.9 2009          Jan 
− 46.5 116.4 1,509.5 159.0 1,350.4 0.0 42.0 2,820.0 912.1 1,231.8 544.3 131.9 31.8          Feb 
− 46.4 119.5 1,455.9 138.3 1,317.6 0.0 40.6 2,817.3 914.0 1,226.4 547.8 129.1 30.9          Mar 
Changes *
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007
− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008
− − 0.1 − 2.3 − 3.7 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 3.2 − 11.7 + 9.9 − 3.6 + 2.3 + 0.1 2007          Oct 
− − 0.2 + 0.9 + 16.1 + 8.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 44.1 + 30.4 + 14.2 − 3.1 + 2.6 − 0.1          Nov 
− − 0.3 + 0.6 + 85.6 − 19.5 + 105.1 − + 0.3 + 27.9 − 20.9 + 39.7 + 7.3 + 1.7 + 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.7 + 1.1 − 101.0 + 14.9 − 115.9 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 8.0 + 5.0 + 5.2 − 4.9 + 2.7 − 0.1 2008          Jan 
− − 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 14.5 − 0.1 + 16.9 − 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.0          Feb 
− − 0.5 + 1.4 + 37.7 + 3.7 + 34.0 − − 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 0.4          Mar 
− − 0.5 + 0.1 + 8.0 − 9.7 + 17.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 18.7 − 7.2 + 28.8 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 15.6 + 3.1 + 14.7 − 3.5 + 1.2 − 0.0          May− − 1.0 + 0.3 + 5.5 + 1.3 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 9.9 + 10.5 + 0.9 − 2.9 + 1.4 − 0.2          June
− + 0.5 + 4.4 + 3.0 − 9.7 + 12.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 24.9 + 27.1 − 5.6 + 1.7 − 0.5          July
− − 0.4 − 0.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 + 11.6 − + 0.4 + 15.7 + 3.8 + 15.2 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.0          Aug − − 1.0 − 2.0 + 82.3 + 26.8 + 55.5 − − 0.3 + 15.5 + 12.8 + 5.7 − 4.4 + 1.4 − 0.2          Sep 
− − 0.3 + 0.5 + 113.0 + 11.1 + 101.9 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 43.2 + 28.1 + 10.1 + 1.5 + 3.5 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 30.7 − 3.3 − 27.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 34.3 + 20.0 + 10.1 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.6 + 2.8 − 12.7 − 17.4 + 4.7 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 33.5 + 1.8 + 19.2 + 11.8 + 0.6 + 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.3 + 4.4 − 49.9 + 16.5 − 66.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 18.5 + 49.7 − 33.5 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 2009          Jan 
− − 0.3 + 0.7 − 23.1 + 4.0 − 27.1 − + 0.1 + 20.2 + 27.7 − 10.9 + 5.3 − 2.0 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 0.6 + 3.2 − 53.6 − 20.7 − 32.8 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 3.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 + 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9          Mar 
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.42004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.92007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.92008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2007          Oct 0.4 1,437.2 1,112.6 811.4 301.2 15.4 309.3 0.5 897.8 486.1 196.3 289.8 22.3 389.3
         Nov 0.5 1,448.2 1,119.1 817.3 301.7 15.2 313.9 0.6 919.6 503.4 212.1 291.3 27.0 389.3         Dec 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008          Jan 0.3 1,438.2 1,113.1 814.1 298.9 11.7 313.4 2.1 921.4 513.3 215.3 298.0 24.4 383.7
         Feb 0.4 1,436.6 1,107.9 803.7 304.3 15.8 312.9 2.0 934.3 526.3 225.5 300.8 25.2 382.8         Mar 0.4 1,446.0 1,116.7 810.0 306.7 18.2 311.1 2.0 940.1 527.5 226.7 300.7 19.6 393.1
         Apr 0.4 1,466.2 1,140.2 829.7 310.6 16.7 309.3 2.0 939.4 535.3 226.2 309.1 17.7 386.5
         May 0.4 1,457.7 1,118.4 805.0 313.5 21.5 317.8 2.1 945.1 544.8 229.9 314.8 18.5 381.8         June 0.5 1,453.6 1,108.0 790.9 317.1 28.3 317.2 1.9 929.1 526.2 194.2 332.0 19.3 383.6
         July 0.6 1,445.9 1,096.0 766.6 329.5 32.2 317.7 1.9 929.5 533.3 196.0 337.3 18.2 378.0
         Aug 0.5 1,444.6 1,093.5 754.7 338.8 32.5 318.6 2.0 949.7 554.6 203.1 351.5 17.3 377.8         Sep 0.4 1,521.0 1,171.1 814.7 356.4 32.1 317.8 2.0 967.1 569.7 203.4 366.3 18.5 378.9
         Oct 0.8 1,571.1 1,232.6 859.9 372.7 27.3 311.3 2.0 990.1 597.4 208.6 388.8 17.0 375.6
         Nov 0.7 1,509.6 1,181.4 807.5 373.9 21.5 306.7 2.0 961.6 574.4 183.8 390.5 12.8 374.4         Dec 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009          Jan 0.4 1,433.6 1,122.7 743.9 378.8 14.8 296.1 1.9 915.4 541.1 153.8 387.3 12.2 362.1
         Feb 0.4 1,416.2 1,111.4 733.1 378.3 12.2 292.6 1.9 905.6 529.5 141.1 388.4 11.3 364.7         Mar 0.5 1,357.6 1,058.1 686.2 371.9 10.0 289.5 1.9 880.9 514.4 135.4 379.1 9.8 356.6
Changes *
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.22001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.92004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.52007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.32008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2007          Oct + 0.0 − 0.5 − 5.7 − 14.8 + 9.1 + 4.0 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 16.5 + 1.4 − 2.5 + 3.9 + 8.2 + 6.9
         Nov + 0.1 + 16.2 + 11.5 + 9.2 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.0 + 27.2 + 21.3 + 17.4 + 3.9 + 4.9 + 1.0         Dec − 0.1 − 14.0 − 12.6 − 13.4 + 0.8 − 1.8 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 10.7 − 10.1 − 14.5 + 4.4 + 0.6 − 1.1
2008          Jan − 0.0 + 6.6 + 9.1 + 11.9 − 2.8 − 1.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 15.6 + 21.9 + 18.5 + 3.4 − 2.9 − 3.4
         Feb + 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.2 − 7.2 + 7.0 + 4.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 17.9 + 16.5 + 11.6 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.3
         Mar + 0.1 + 19.8 + 18.7 + 12.8 + 5.8 + 2.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 8.7 + 3.9 + 4.8 − 5.1 + 12.2
         Apr − 0.0 + 17.7 + 20.7 + 16.9 + 3.8 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 6.6 − 0.3 + 6.8 − 2.0 − 7.4
         May + 0.1 − 6.8 − 20.0 − 25.0 + 5.0 + 4.8 + 8.4 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 9.2 + 3.6 + 5.5 + 0.8 − 4.6         June + 0.0 + 2.8 − 3.5 − 10.7 + 7.2 + 6.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 12.4 − 14.9 − 34.8 + 20.0 + 0.9 + 1.5
         July + 0.2 − 9.2 − 13.5 − 25.2 + 11.7 + 3.9 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 4.3 − 1.1 − 6.0
         Aug − 0.1 − 15.5 − 16.4 − 20.7 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 11.5 + 4.7 + 6.9 − 1.1 − 3.4         Sep − 0.1 + 65.8 + 67.5 + 53.7 + 13.7 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 9.2 + 8.9 − 1.5 + 10.3 + 1.1 − 0.7
         Oct + 0.4 + 9.5 + 21.6 + 19.2 + 2.5 − 5.0 − 7.2 + 0.0 − 10.3 + 3.6 − 1.1 + 4.7 − 2.0 − 11.8
         Nov − 0.2 − 53.9 − 43.8 − 46.5 + 2.8 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 12.5 − 7.4 − 10.3 + 2.9 − 4.2 − 0.9         Dec − 0.3 − 31.8 − 19.9 − 22.1 + 2.2 − 5.9 − 6.0 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 25.2 − 27.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 − 2.0
2009          Jan + 0.1 − 39.9 − 34.8 − 39.1 + 4.2 − 0.8 − 4.2 + 0.1 − 15.8 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.9 − 0.7 − 9.7
         Feb − 0.0 − 19.3 − 13.5 − 12.0 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 13.6 − 13.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.8         Mar + 0.1 − 42.5 − 37.8 − 38.2 + 0.4 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 9.8 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills a nd bills
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
13.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 2008
5.8 48.3 794.6 207.8 586.8 466.9 119.9 0.2 306.3 90.6 215.7 106.4 109.3 3.4 2007          Oct 
5.7 48.0 766.8 207.0 559.8 445.8 113.9 0.2 326.6 97.5 229.1 123.1 106.0 3.2          Nov 
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1          Dec 
25.0 50.9 784.6 205.1 579.5 465.6 113.9 0.2 318.5 100.2 218.3 115.7 102.6 3.1 2008          Jan 
25.0 50.2 787.8 200.4 587.4 473.8 113.6 0.2 330.5 94.1 236.4 135.7 100.7 3.0          Feb 
24.2 49.8 791.6 229.5 562.1 449.4 112.7 0.3 327.6 100.5 227.2 129.6 97.5 2.8          Mar 
24.5 49.7 830.8 216.1 614.7 501.7 113.1 0.3 334.1 98.2 236.0 139.0 97.0 2.8          Apr 
24.4 49.8 823.2 230.4 592.7 481.1 111.6 0.3 326.0 94.4 231.6 131.7 99.9 2.8          May24.4 49.7 769.2 230.7 538.5 431.6 106.9 0.3 313.9 101.2 212.7 114.2 98.5 2.7          June
23.7 49.8 746.6 198.8 547.7 439.8 107.9 0.3 328.7 100.7 228.0 130.9 97.2 2.6          July
24.4 49.9 748.0 171.6 576.5 465.4 111.1 0.3 337.6 103.8 233.8 136.4 97.4 2.6          Aug 24.7 48.6 815.2 258.3 556.9 436.1 120.8 0.3 323.3 101.1 222.2 125.6 96.6 2.5          Sep 
26.3 49.2 780.1 243.5 536.6 415.1 121.5 0.3 325.3 103.6 221.7 117.9 103.8 2.7          Oct 
26.5 49.0 752.0 254.4 497.6 369.7 127.9 0.3 307.8 103.7 204.1 101.4 102.7 2.6          Nov 
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5          Dec 
25.9 50.9 737.2 253.1 484.1 359.6 124.6 0.3 306.8 123.8 183.0 82.4 100.7 2.6 2009          Jan 
26.1 49.4 733.1 251.7 481.4 356.7 124.6 0.3 279.9 100.5 179.4 78.5 100.9 2.5          Feb 
24.1 49.5 705.4 266.8 438.7 315.7 122.9 0.3 273.0 103.7 169.3 71.3 98.0 2.5          Mar 
Changes *
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008
+ 0.1 + 2.9 + 12.7 − 11.4 + 24.1 + 26.1 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 5.8 − 3.7 − 2.0 − 1.6 − 0.5 + 0.3 2007          Oct 
− 0.1 − − 23.6 + 0.3 − 23.9 − 18.7 − 5.2 − + 22.4 + 7.3 + 15.1 + 17.3 − 2.2 − 0.2          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 28.2 − 42.3 + 14.1 + 14.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 23.0 − 21.7 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.1 + 2.2 + 46.6 + 40.7 + 5.9 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 + 24.3 − 8.3 − 6.5 − 1.8 − 0.0 2008          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 7.4 − 3.4 + 10.7 + 10.7 + 0.0 − + 13.9 − 5.7 + 19.5 + 20.7 − 1.2 − 0.1          Feb 
− 0.7 + 0.7 + 11.5 + 31.0 − 19.6 − 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 7.3 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 1.6 − 0.2          Mar 
+ 0.2 − 0.2 + 38.2 − 14.2 + 52.4 + 51.3 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 2.8 + 8.6 + 9.6 − 0.9 − 0.0          Apr 
− 0.1 + 0.0 − 3.7 + 16.2 − 19.9 − 20.7 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 10.3 − 5.7 − 4.5 − 7.2 + 2.7 − 0.0          May+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 48.9 + 1.0 − 49.9 − 47.8 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 17.9 − 17.0 − 0.9 − 0.1          June
− 0.7 − 0.1 − 23.6 − 32.2 + 8.5 + 7.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 14.4 − 0.6 + 15.0 + 16.6 − 1.6 − 0.0          July
+ 0.7 − 0.4 − 11.1 − 29.7 + 18.6 + 16.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 6.4 + 2.1 + 4.2 + 5.4 − 1.1 − 0.0          Aug + 0.4 − 1.7 + 59.5 + 85.7 − 26.2 − 35.3 + 9.1 − 0.0 − 17.7 − 3.1 − 14.6 − 12.7 − 1.9 − 0.1          Sep 
+ 1.6 − 0.8 − 61.4 − 22.2 − 39.2 − 40.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 13.0 + 0.1 − 13.2 − 13.3 + 0.1 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 0.1 − 26.4 + 11.0 − 37.3 − 44.0 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 10.4 + 2.9 − 13.3 − 13.5 + 0.2 − 0.1          Nov − 1.0 − 2.6 − 38.1 − 31.8 − 6.3 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 7.6 − 9.8 + 2.2 + 3.4 − 1.2 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.3 + 4.6 + 18.3 + 32.1 − 13.8 − 12.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 14.2 + 30.4 − 16.3 − 14.8 − 1.4 + 0.1 2009          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 27.4 − 23.4 − 4.0 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 0.1          Feb 
− 1.6 + 0.8 − 17.5 + 17.9 − 35.4 − 35.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 4.0 − 7.1 − 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1          Mar 
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, € billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.12004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.82007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.32008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2007          Oct 2,973.3 2,643.0 334.5 301.9 301.4 0.6 32.5 30.9 1.6 2,638.8 2,156.7
         Nov 2,971.5 2,642.5 329.1 296.7 296.1 0.6 32.4 30.8 1.6 2,642.4 2,161.6         Dec 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008          Jan 2,998.5 2,654.4 341.7 310.0 309.1 0.9 31.8 30.5 1.3 2,656.7 2,188.9
         Feb 2,993.2 2,659.9 348.3 317.6 316.7 0.9 30.7 29.4 1.2 2,644.9 2,173.1         Mar 3,009.0 2,667.3 359.5 329.7 328.8 0.8 29.8 28.2 1.6 2,649.5 2,177.1
         Apr 3,058.8 2,679.1 366.6 332.5 331.7 0.8 34.1 32.8 1.2 2,692.3 2,212.7
         May 3,043.7 2,677.4 363.1 332.6 331.5 1.1 30.5 28.4 2.1 2,680.7 2,201.4         June 3,011.5 2,683.0 371.0 338.9 337.8 1.1 32.1 29.6 2.5 2,640.5 2,178.7
         July 3,018.8 2,691.2 374.4 340.5 339.9 0.6 34.0 31.8 2.1 2,644.3 2,184.7
         Aug 3,045.3 2,693.2 369.9 335.0 334.3 0.7 34.9 32.8 2.1 2,675.4 2,218.7         Sep 3,044.8 2,699.6 378.5 345.9 345.0 0.9 32.6 31.1 1.6 2,666.2 2,221.6
         Oct 3,045.1 2,704.4 374.5 337.9 337.5 0.4 36.7 34.8 1.9 2,670.6 2,225.5
         Nov 3,044.6 2,706.6 375.8 341.3 340.9 0.4 34.5 32.9 1.6 2,668.8 2,226.4         Dec 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009          Jan 3,097.3 2,719.9 395.2 353.9 353.2 0.7 41.4 39.0 2.4 2,702.0 2,260.4
         Feb 3,091.2 2,710.7 386.9 344.0 343.6 0.5 42.8 40.1 2.8 2,704.3 2,266.9         Mar 3,101.5 2,721.5 410.5 368.3 367.9 0.4 42.2 39.0 3.3 2,690.9 2,256.7
Changes *
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.62007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.12008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2007          Oct − 4.4 − 1.7 + 5.7 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 − 10.2 − 2.7
         Nov − 1.7 − 0.5 − 5.4 − 5.3 − 5.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 4.9         Dec + 3.4 + 6.2 + 2.1 + 5.1 + 5.4 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 5.9
2008          Jan + 22.7 + 4.9 + 10.6 + 8.2 + 7.6 + 0.5 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 12.2 + 20.5
         Feb − 5.3 + 5.5 + 6.8 + 7.9 + 7.9 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 12.1 − 16.0
         Mar + 15.9 + 7.4 + 11.2 + 12.0 + 12.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.4 + 4.6 + 4.0
         Apr + 49.8 + 11.6 + 7.3 + 2.8 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 4.4 + 4.6 − 0.2 + 42.5 + 35.6
         May − 15.1 − 1.8 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 4.5 + 0.8 − 11.5 − 11.3         June − 32.1 + 5.6 + 7.9 + 6.2 + 6.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 40.0 − 22.6
         July + 6.8 + 7.7 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.2 − 0.4 + 3.4 + 5.6
         Aug + 26.6 + 2.1 − 4.6 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 31.2 + 34.1         Sep − 0.5 + 6.4 + 8.7 + 10.9 + 10.7 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 9.2 + 2.8
         Oct + 0.4 + 4.8 − 3.1 − 7.1 − 6.6 − 0.5 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 + 3.0
         Nov − 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.9         Dec + 23.2 − 9.6 − 2.8 − 3.8 − 5.6 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.6 + 26.0 + 26.9
2009          Jan + 26.2 + 19.8 + 21.0 + 15.1 + 16.7 − 1.5 + 5.8 + 4.4 + 1.4 + 5.2 + 3.9
         Feb − 6.1 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 9.8 − 9.6 − 0.2 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3 + 6.5         Mar + 9.3 + 9.8 + 23.7 + 24.3 + 24.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 14.4 − 11.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfoli os
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
1,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 20031,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
1,977.0 200.5 1,776.5 179.7 47.1 482.1 333.7 32.0 301.6 148.4 − 4.6 2007          Oct 
1,983.5 203.1 1,780.4 178.1 46.9 480.8 332.0 32.0 300.0 148.7 − 4.6          Nov 
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7          Dec 
1,988.3 209.5 1,778.8 200.6 47.4 467.9 326.6 31.5 295.1 141.3 − 4.5 2008          Jan 
1,989.8 210.5 1,779.4 183.3 46.9 471.8 324.0 32.9 291.1 147.8 − 4.5          Feb 
1,987.5 211.5 1,776.1 189.6 46.3 472.4 322.7 33.6 289.1 149.7 − 4.5          Mar 
1,991.6 211.9 1,779.7 221.1 45.9 479.6 323.0 34.0 289.0 156.6 − 4.5          Apr 
1,995.2 212.1 1,783.2 206.2 45.7 479.3 322.3 33.5 288.8 157.0 − 4.5          May1,995.9 213.3 1,782.6 182.8 44.7 461.8 319.8 32.4 287.3 142.0 − 4.5          June
2,001.8 213.3 1,788.4 182.9 45.2 459.7 317.8 32.1 285.7 141.9 − 4.5          July
2,009.9 215.6 1,794.3 208.8 44.9 456.7 316.2 31.7 284.6 140.5 − 4.4          Aug 2,009.8 215.4 1,794.4 211.9 44.0 444.6 313.7 31.0 282.8 130.9 − 4.4          Sep 
2,020.3 218.1 1,802.1 205.3 43.6 445.0 311.9 29.8 282.1 133.2 − 4.5          Oct 
2,021.5 218.7 1,802.8 204.9 43.3 442.4 311.3 29.9 281.4 131.2 − 4.5          Nov 2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5          Dec 
2,022.5 222.9 1,799.5 238.0 42.5 441.6 305.3 29.7 275.6 136.3 − 4.4 2009          Jan 
2,024.7 225.8 1,799.0 242.2 42.2 437.4 302.4 29.2 273.2 135.0 − 4.4          Feb 
2,015.5 224.4 1,791.1 241.1 42.0 434.3 299.2 28.8 270.4 135.1 − 4.4          Mar 
Changes *
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
− 1.7 − 2.7 + 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 7.4 − 5.4 − 1.3 − 4.1 − 2.0 − + 0.0 2007          Oct 
+ 6.5 + 3.1 + 3.4 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Nov 
+ 3.0 + 4.5 − 1.5 + 2.9 − 0.4 − 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 5.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.9 + 19.5 − 0.6 − 8.4 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 5.6 − 2.4 − − 0.1 2008          Jan 
+ 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 17.3 − 0.5 + 3.9 − 2.6 + 1.4 − 4.1 + 6.6 − + 0.0          Feb 
− 2.3 + 1.0 − 3.3 + 6.3 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 1.9 + 1.9 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 4.0 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 31.6 − 0.5 + 7.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 6.9 − + 0.0          Apr 
+ 3.7 + 0.2 + 3.5 − 14.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 − − 0.0          May+ 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 23.3 − 1.0 − 17.4 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.5 − 14.8 − − 0.0          June
+ 5.5 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 1.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 8.3 + 2.4 + 5.8 + 25.9 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − − 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.1 − 0.9 − 12.0 − 2.4 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 9.6 − − 0.1          Sep 
+ 9.6 + 1.8 + 7.8 − 6.6 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 2.3 − + 0.1          Oct 
+ 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.0 − + 0.0          Nov − 3.8 + 2.3 − 6.1 + 30.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 1.0 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.5 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 4.2 − − 0.0 2009          Jan 
+ 2.3 + 2.8 − 0.6 + 4.2 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 10.2 − 3.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.1 − − 0.0          Mar 
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *x
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2007 2,289.0 1,166.7 1,101.3 914.4 186.8 1,259.7 306.2 145.4 41.3 47.0 135.7 33.2 65.4 101.4
2008          Mar 2,316.5 1,158.3 1,095.0 908.0 187.0 1,293.1 303.5 152.9 41.7 47.9 134.4 33.5 65.8 126.3
         June 2,333.8 1,160.3 1,096.0 910.3 185.7 1,309.3 304.4 158.2 43.0 47.6 134.5 34.2 68.5 129.7         Sep 2,355.0 1,161.4 1,097.1 911.0 186.1 1,329.2 304.3 158.6 43.8 47.8 134.7 35.1 71.5 138.9         Dec 2,357.5 1,157.4 1,093.4 907.1 186.3 1,332.6 302.8 157.4 56.1 52.1 138.9 34.6 74.0 127.6
2009          Mar 2,383.6 1,150.9 1,087.5 901.6 185.9 1,363.2 301.2 160.9 61.7 62.8 131.1 34.0 74.5 160.4
 Short-term lending
2007 301.7 − 8.6 − 8.6 261.6 4.6 46.2 4.4 8.5 52.0 3.1 7.2 52.1
2008          Mar 329.0 − 8.6 − 8.6 289.8 4.6 51.1 4.4 9.5 50.9 3.3 6.7 75.4
         June 338.0 − 8.6 − 8.6 299.0 4.8 54.9 4.8 9.3 50.6 3.8 7.9 77.2         Sep 345.2 − 8.6 − 8.6 305.3 4.7 53.2 5.0 9.1 50.4 3.8 6.9 85.5         Dec 335.5 − 8.4 − 8.4 294.8 4.5 51.4 5.4 10.4 54.7 3.1 7.4 70.9
2009          Mar 368.1 − 8.7 − 8.7 328.1 4.8 54.6 6.5 15.2 49.0 3.4 7.6 105.0
 Medium-term lending
2007 207.7 − 32.2 − 32.2 141.5 10.4 22.3 2.2 5.6 13.1 2.9 12.5 17.4
2008          Mar 211.5 − 31.4 − 31.4 147.0 10.3 24.1 2.0 5.6 13.2 2.9 12.7 18.9
         June 213.3 − 31.2 − 31.2 148.7 10.5 24.1 1.9 5.7 13.5 3.0 12.8 18.9         Sep 215.4 − 30.8 − 30.8 152.5 10.7 25.4 1.8 5.9 13.7 3.1 14.0 17.5         Dec 222.0 − 30.3 − 30.3 159.1 10.9 27.1 2.7 6.6 13.8 3.1 14.5 18.0
2009          Mar 224.4 − 31.4 − 31.4 160.0 11.3 29.0 3.4 8.2 13.2 2.9 14.5 16.9
 Long-term lending
2007 1,779.6 1,166.7 1,060.5 914.4 146.0 856.5 291.2 76.9 34.7 33.0 70.6 27.2 45.7 31.9
2008          Mar 1,776.1 1,158.3 1,055.1 908.0 147.1 856.2 288.6 77.6 35.3 32.8 70.3 27.2 46.4 32.1
         June 1,782.6 1,160.3 1,056.2 910.3 146.0 861.6 289.1 79.2 36.3 32.6 70.3 27.5 47.8 33.6         Sep 1,794.4 1,161.4 1,057.7 911.0 146.7 871.3 288.8 80.1 37.0 32.9 70.5 28.1 50.7 35.9         Dec 1,800.0 1,157.4 1,054.6 907.1 147.5 878.7 287.5 78.9 48.0 35.2 70.4 28.4 52.1 38.6
2009          Mar 1,791.1 1,150.9 1,047.3 901.6 145.8 875.1 285.1 77.2 51.8 39.4 69.0 27.7 52.4 38.5
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2008          Q1 + 27.6 − 6.6 − 6.2 − 5.2 − 1.1 + 33.3 − 2.6 + 7.5 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 24.7
         Q2 + 17.3 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 16.2 + 0.9 + 5.3 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 2.7 + 3.3         Q3 + 20.6 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 19.2 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 3.0 + 10.8         Q4 − 1.7 − 3.2 − 3.5 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 4.2 + 0.7 + 4.4 − 0.5 + 2.5 − 12.8
2009          Q1 + 25.0 − 5.3 − 5.9 − 4.3 − 1.6 + 29.6 − 1.6 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 2.0 − 7.5 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 32.7
 Short-term lending
2008          Q1 + 27.6 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 28.5 + 0.0 + 4.9 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 23.3
         Q2 + 8.9 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 9.1 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.8         Q3 + 7.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 6.3 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 8.5         Q4 − 8.7 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 9.5 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 4.5 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 14.6
2009          Q1 + 31.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 32.1 + 0.3 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 5.8 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 32.9
 Medium-term lending
2008          Q1 + 3.5 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 + 5.2 − 0.1 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.2
         Q2 + 1.8 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0         Q3 + 2.0 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.7         Q4 + 4.6 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 + 5.5 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.5
2009          Q1 + 1.9 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0
 Long-term lending
2008          Q1 − 3.6 − 6.6 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.5 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.2
         Q2 + 6.5 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 5.4 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.5         Q3 + 11.5 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 3.0         Q4 + 2.4 − 3.2 − 2.8 − 3.5 + 0.7 + 4.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.2
2009          Q1 − 8.2 − 5.3 − 5.9 − 4.3 − 1.5 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations 1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. —
always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
690.3 165.0 46.2 197.5 386.6 58.2 1,015.2 791.6 223.7 129.3 17.2 14.0 3.5 2007
690.5 165.5 47.4 195.9 384.2 58.6 1,009.6 788.1 221.6 128.9 17.0 13.9 3.5 2008          Mar 
693.5 166.1 48.5 197.2 383.9 58.9 1,010.8 788.1 222.6 130.6 17.1 13.8 3.5          June
698.8 167.1 49.0 198.4 382.4 58.6 1,012.3 789.5 222.8 130.4 17.9 13.5 3.3          Sep 691.9 169.4 51.7 190.2 381.4 58.2 1,011.4 787.3 224.0 132.1 17.1 13.5 3.3          Dec 
677.8 183.9 51.8 167.9 378.3 58.2 1,007.2 783.0 224.2 134.7 16.2 13.2 3.2 2009          Mar 
Short-term lending
88.0 13.0 13.0 23.3 35.7 9.4 39.2 4.0 35.2 2.5 17.2 0.8 0.0 2007
88.4 13.1 14.3 22.3 35.5 10.1 38.3 3.9 34.4 2.5 17.0 0.9 0.0 2008          Mar 
90.5 13.5 15.4 22.5 35.3 10.2 38.2 3.9 34.4 2.5 17.1 0.8 0.0          June
91.4 13.6 14.7 23.7 35.0 9.9 39.2 3.9 35.3 2.4 17.9 0.7 0.0          Sep 91.4 13.4 17.0 19.3 35.4 9.4 39.7 3.9 35.8 2.8 17.1 1.0 0.0          Dec 
86.7 12.9 16.6 16.2 35.8 10.0 39.1 3.9 35.2 3.0 16.2 0.8 0.0 2009          Mar 
Medium-term lending
65.7 7.4 7.5 17.7 27.4 3.7 65.4 21.7 43.6 35.8 − 0.7 0.0 2007
67.7 7.9 7.5 18.6 27.0 3.7 63.8 21.0 42.7 34.8 − 0.7 0.0 2008          Mar 
68.8 8.4 7.8 19.3 27.1 3.8 63.9 20.6 43.3 35.5 − 0.6 0.0          June
71.2 8.7 8.5 19.5 26.8 3.9 62.3 20.1 42.2 34.4 − 0.6 0.0          Sep 73.3 8.2 9.2 21.3 26.7 4.0 62.3 19.5 42.8 35.1 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
71.9 8.3 9.8 20.0 26.5 4.1 63.9 20.1 43.8 36.7 − 0.5 0.0 2009          Mar 
Long-term lending
536.6 144.7 25.7 156.5 323.5 45.1 910.6 765.8 144.8 90.9 − 12.5 3.4 2007
534.4 144.5 25.6 155.0 321.8 44.8 907.5 763.1 144.4 91.6 − 12.3 3.4 2008          Mar 
534.2 144.3 25.2 155.3 321.5 44.9 908.6 763.7 144.9 92.7 − 12.4 3.4          June
536.2 144.7 25.8 155.1 320.6 44.8 910.9 765.5 145.3 93.6 − 12.2 3.3          Sep 527.2 147.8 25.6 149.7 319.3 44.8 909.4 763.9 145.4 94.2 − 11.9 3.2          Dec 
519.1 162.7 25.5 131.8 316.0 44.1 904.3 759.0 145.2 95.0 − 11.8 3.2 2009          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 1.5 − 2.4 + 0.4 − 5.6 − 3.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 2008          Q1
+ 3.0 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
+ 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 1.0 − 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1          Q3+ 2.0 + 0.5 + 2.4 − 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 5.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 2.4 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 2009          Q1
Short-term lending
+ 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2008          Q1
+ 2.1 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          Q2
+ 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 2.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
− 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 2009          Q1
Medium-term lending
+ 2.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2008          Q1
+ 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 1.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 1.6 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2009          Q1
Long-term lending
− 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 0.2 + 0.6 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2008          Q1
− 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.1 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.1          Q3− 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.3 − − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
− 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 − − 0.1 − 0.1 2009          Q1
loans, even in the form of instalment credit. — x As of December 2008, the individual sectors. As the resulting breaks could only be statistically adjusted
data are collected according to the Federal Statistical Office’s "Classification in part, the data from 2008 Q4 onwards are not fully comparable with those
of Economic Activities", Edition 2008 (WZ 2008). The changeover from the from preceding quarters. 
"old" to the "new" classification resulted in many changes within the
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2006 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 289.5 673.3 11.7 661.6 586.5 97.5 37.8 30.4 11.2
2007 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 418.9 706.5 22.8 683.7 555.4 118.4 36.4 35.0 22.62008 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2008          Apr 2,620.8 779.4 1,178.8 462.5 716.3 26.5 689.8 539.8 122.8 33.1 35.6 50.1
         May 2,636.4 782.6 1,193.5 476.5 717.0 27.0 690.0 536.3 124.0 33.1 35.4 49.2         June 2,646.4 793.1 1,194.4 475.9 718.5 28.4 690.1 533.5 125.4 32.9 35.6 57.1
         July 2,644.7 768.2 1,221.5 501.6 719.9 29.6 690.4 527.9 127.1 32.5 35.7 52.6
         Aug 2,660.4 771.9 1,236.7 515.4 721.3 30.8 690.5 523.6 128.1 32.5 35.7 55.1         Sep 2,676.0 784.7 1,242.4 521.6 720.8 32.2 688.6 519.3 129.6 32.3 35.7 64.9
         Oct 2,719.2 812.8 1,252.5 534.6 717.9 32.8 685.1 520.8 133.1 32.3 35.6 63.3
         Nov 2,748.8 832.8 1,257.9 540.2 717.6 33.5 684.1 523.4 134.7 32.2 34.8 68.9         Dec 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2009          Jan 2,799.9 884.4 1,242.7 493.9 748.8 32.7 716.1 539.0 133.8 31.9 34.2 65.7
         Feb 2,820.0 912.1 1,231.8 477.0 754.8 32.7 722.1 544.3 131.9 31.8 34.1 73.0         Mar 2,817.3 914.0 1,226.4 469.1 757.3 32.4 724.9 547.8 129.1 30.9 34.1 86.4
Changes *
2007 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 + 127.5 + 33.0 + 11.0 + 22.0 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 + 3.3 + 9.92008 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 + 114.5 + 42.1 + 10.0 + 32.0 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 36.7
2008          Apr + 18.7 − 7.2 + 28.8 + 26.7 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.7 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 10.2
         May + 15.6 + 3.1 + 14.7 + 14.0 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 3.5 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.8         June + 9.9 + 10.5 + 0.9 − 0.7 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 2.9 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 7.9
         July − 1.7 − 24.9 + 27.1 + 25.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 5.6 + 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 4.5
         Aug + 15.7 + 3.8 + 15.2 + 13.8 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5
         Sep + 15.5 + 12.8 + 5.7 + 6.3 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 2.0 − 4.4 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.8
         Oct + 43.2 + 28.1 + 10.1 + 13.0 − 2.9 + 0.6 − 3.5 + 1.5 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6
         Nov + 34.3 + 20.0 + 10.1 + 7.6 + 2.5 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 5.7         Dec + 33.5 + 1.8 + 19.2 − 8.8 + 27.9 − 0.9 + 28.9 + 11.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.7
2009          Jan + 18.5 + 49.7 − 33.5 − 36.7 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.4
         Feb + 20.2 + 27.7 − 10.9 − 16.9 + 6.0 + 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 7.4         Mar − 3.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 − 7.9 + 1.8 − 0.3 + 2.1 + 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 13.4
Domestic government End of year or month *
2006 134.4 26.7 104.0 51.1 52.9 2.1 50.8 2.1 1.6 28.2 0.8 −2007 158.5 28.0 127.7 71.9 55.8 3.7 52.1 1.4 1.5 27.6 4.5 −2008 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
2008          Apr 149.0 24.1 122.1 66.2 55.9 4.1 51.8 1.3 1.4 24.7 4.6 −
         May 159.5 26.4 130.5 74.5 56.0 4.2 51.8 1.2 1.4 24.7 4.4 −         June 166.6 28.6 135.4 79.0 56.4 4.6 51.8 1.2 1.4 24.6 4.4 −
         July 162.0 25.4 134.0 77.9 56.1 4.4 51.8 1.2 1.4 24.3 4.4 −
         Aug 164.8 26.9 135.3 78.9 56.3 4.5 51.8 1.2 1.4 24.3 4.4 −
         Sep 165.8 27.0 136.3 80.4 55.9 4.6 51.3 1.2 1.4 24.2 4.4 −
         Oct 160.4 27.2 130.7 75.2 55.5 4.5 51.0 1.1 1.4 24.3 4.4 −
         Nov 164.9 30.5 131.9 77.4 54.5 4.3 50.2 1.1 1.5 24.2 3.9 −         Dec 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
2009          Jan 158.4 33.3 122.3 69.8 52.5 3.7 48.8 1.3 1.4 24.1 3.9 −
         Feb 161.1 38.0 120.2 67.4 52.8 3.9 48.9 1.5 1.5 24.0 3.9 0.2         Mar 154.1 37.2 113.7 61.9 51.9 3.4 48.5 1.7 1.5 24.1 3.9 0.1
Changes *
2007 + 23.5 + 1.2 + 23.0 + 20.8 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 2.6 −2008 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.5 + 5.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.6
+ 0.0
2008          Apr − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         May + 10.6 + 2.2 + 8.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 −         June + 7.0 + 2.2 + 4.8 + 4.4 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         July − 4.5 − 3.1 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Aug + 2.7 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Sep + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Oct − 5.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 5.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Nov + 6.9 + 3.3 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 −         Dec − 0.3 + 3.7 − 4.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
2009          Jan − 6.3 − 0.9 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 2.8 + 4.7 − 2.1 − 2.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2         Mar − 7.0 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 5.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2006 2,260.2 721.0 858.8 238.4 620.4 9.6 610.8 584.5 95.9 9.6 29.5 11.2
2007 2,420.6 752.0 997.7 347.0 650.7 19.0 631.7 554.0 116.9 8.8 30.5 22.62008 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2008          Apr 2,471.9 755.3 1,056.7 396.3 660.4 22.4 637.9 538.5 121.4 8.4 31.1 50.1
         May 2,476.8 756.2 1,063.0 402.0 660.9 22.8 638.2 535.1 122.6 8.4 31.0 49.2         June 2,479.8 764.5 1,059.0 396.9 662.1 23.8 638.4 532.2 124.0 8.4 31.2 57.1
         July 2,482.7 742.7 1,087.5 423.7 663.8 25.2 638.6 526.7 125.7 8.2 31.3 52.6
         Aug 2,495.7 745.0 1,101.5 436.5 665.0 26.3 638.7 522.4 126.7 8.2 31.3 55.1         Sep 2,510.1 757.7 1,106.2 441.3 664.9 27.7 637.3 518.1 128.1 8.1 31.2 64.9
         Oct 2,558.8 785.6 1,121.8 459.5 662.4 28.4 634.0 519.7 131.6 8.0 31.2 63.3
         Nov 2,583.8 802.3 1,126.0 462.9 663.1 29.2 633.9 522.2 133.3 8.0 30.9 68.9         Dec 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2009          Jan 2,641.5 851.1 1,120.4 424.0 696.3 29.0 667.3 537.7 132.4 7.8 30.3 65.7
         Feb 2,658.9 874.1 1,111.6 409.6 702.0 28.8 673.2 542.8 130.4 7.8 30.2 72.8         Mar 2,663.2 876.8 1,112.7 407.2 705.5 29.0 676.4 546.2 127.6 6.8 30.2 86.3
Changes *
2007 + 157.7 + 30.3 + 137.6 + 106.8 + 30.8 + 9.4 + 21.4 − 30.5 + 20.2 − 0.7 + 0.7 + 9.92008 + 199.1 + 48.1 + 154.0 + 109.4 + 44.6 + 10.0 + 34.6 − 20.0 + 17.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 36.7
2008          Apr + 19.7 − 6.7 + 29.4 + 27.2 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 4.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 10.2
         May + 5.0 + 0.9 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 3.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8         June + 2.9 + 8.3 − 3.9 − 5.1 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 2.8 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 7.9
         July + 2.9 − 21.8 + 28.5 + 26.8 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 5.5 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 4.5
         Aug + 13.0 + 2.3 + 13.9 + 12.7 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 4.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5
         Sep + 14.7 + 12.7 + 4.9 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 1.3 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 9.8
         Oct + 48.7 + 27.9 + 15.7 + 18.2 − 2.5 + 0.7 − 3.2 + 1.6 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6
         Nov + 27.4 + 16.7 + 6.5 + 3.8 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 1.8 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.7         Dec + 33.8 − 1.9 + 23.2 − 6.8 + 30.0 − 0.2 + 30.2 + 11.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.7
2009          Jan + 24.8 + 50.6 − 27.9 − 31.1 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.4
         Feb + 17.4 + 23.0 − 8.8 − 14.4 + 5.7 − 0.2 + 5.9 + 5.2 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.2         Mar + 4.0 + 2.7 + 0.4 − 2.4 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.4
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2006 874.9 256.1 594.1 122.8 471.3 3.2 468.1 4.5 20.2 9.1 20.0 11.22007 961.9 264.9 672.9 178.6 494.3 5.5 488.8 3.9 20.1 8.3 21.5 22.62008 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.3
2008          Apr 1,005.0 270.4 710.8 208.3 502.5 6.1 496.4 3.9 19.9 8.2 22.3 50.1
         May 1,005.7 270.7 711.5 208.1 503.3 6.3 497.0 3.8 19.8 8.1 22.3 49.2         June 1,010.6 283.4 703.7 199.1 504.6 6.9 497.7 3.8 19.8 8.1 22.5 57.1
         July 1,011.5 262.8 725.2 219.0 506.2 7.3 498.9 3.8 19.7 7.9 22.6 52.6
         Aug 1,018.6 264.5 731.0 224.2 506.7 7.6 499.2 3.8 19.3 7.9 22.6 55.1
         Sep 1,039.2 280.7 735.3 226.3 509.1 8.4 500.6 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.4 64.9
         Oct 1,049.5 293.9 732.4 225.5 506.9 8.4 498.5 3.8 19.4 7.8 22.5 63.3
         Nov 1,052.3 292.4 736.6 229.6 507.0 8.2 498.9 3.8 19.4 7.8 22.3 68.9         Dec 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.3
2009          Jan 1,091.9 321.5 747.2 208.8 538.4 8.2 530.1 3.9 19.3 7.5 21.8 65.7
         Feb 1,098.3 323.5 751.5 207.1 544.3 8.4 536.0 4.1 19.3 7.5 21.8 72.8         Mar 1,106.1 318.9 763.6 217.1 546.6 8.6 538.0 4.3 19.2 6.7 21.7 86.3
Changes *
2007 + 84.8 + 8.1 + 77.6 + 53.9 + 23.7 + 2.3 + 21.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 9.92008 + 110.4 + 27.0 + 84.4 + 45.0 + 39.3 + 2.1 + 37.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 36.7
2008          Apr + 14.9 − 8.4 + 23.3 + 20.7 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 10.2
         May + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8         June + 4.8 + 12.6 − 7.8 − 9.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 7.9
         July + 0.9 − 20.6 + 21.5 + 19.9 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 4.5
         Aug + 7.1 + 1.8 + 5.8 + 5.2 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.5
         Sep + 16.5 + 15.6 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 9.8
         Oct + 10.4 + 13.2 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.6
         Nov + 5.0 − 1.5 + 6.5 + 4.4 + 2.0 − 0.2 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.7         Dec + 22.1 + 0.2 + 22.0 − 5.0 + 26.9 − 0.5 + 27.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.7
2009          Jan + 18.4 + 28.8 − 10.5 − 14.9 + 4.4 + 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 6.4
         Feb + 6.5 + 2.0 + 4.3 − 1.7 + 6.0 + 0.2 + 5.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.2         Mar + 7.4 − 4.5 + 11.8 + 9.9 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.4
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2006 1,385.3 464.9 450.3 81.7 307.4 61.1 14.6 264.7 245.7 30.1 198.6 16.9
2007 1,458.7 487.1 472.1 83.9 320.9 67.2 15.0 324.8 300.7 41.7 234.3 24.72008 1,543.2 507.8 491.8 85.1 336.5 70.3 16.0 390.6 367.2 50.4 281.0 35.8
2008          Oct 1,509.3 491.7 476.7 84.5 323.9 68.3 15.0 389.4 365.4 52.9 276.6 35.8
         Nov 1,531.5 509.9 495.0 85.2 339.2 70.6 14.9 389.4 365.9 52.2 277.7 36.0         Dec 1,543.2 507.8 491.8 85.1 336.5 70.3 16.0 390.6 367.2 50.4 281.0 35.8
2009          Jan 1,549.6 529.6 513.1 91.3 348.3 73.5 16.5 373.2 350.6 45.0 272.3 33.2
         Feb 1,560.6 550.6 532.6 94.1 361.5 77.0 18.0 360.1 338.2 41.3 265.4 31.5
         Mar 1,557.1 557.8 539.5 93.6 368.1 77.9 18.3 349.0 327.5 37.6 260.0 29.9
Changes *
2007 + 72.9 + 22.2 + 21.8 + 2.2 + 16.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 60.0 + 54.9 + 11.6 + 35.6 + 7.8
2008 + 88.7 + 21.1 + 19.5 + 1.2 + 15.2 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 69.7 + 66.6 + 9.4 + 46.1 + 11.1
2008          Oct + 38.3 + 14.7 + 14.2 + 5.2 + 7.5 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 18.6 + 18.3 + 4.3 + 11.3 + 2.7
         Nov + 22.4 + 18.2 + 18.4 + 0.7 + 15.3 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.2         Dec + 11.7 − 2.1 − 3.2 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 1.1 + 2.6 − 0.2
2009          Jan + 6.4 + 21.8 + 21.3 + 6.2 + 11.8 + 3.2 + 0.5 − 17.5 − 16.6 − 5.4 − 8.7 − 2.6
         Feb + 10.9 + 21.0 + 19.5 + 2.8 + 13.1 + 3.5 + 1.5 − 13.0 − 12.4 − 3.7 − 6.9 − 1.8         Mar − 3.4 + 7.2 + 7.0 − 0.6 + 6.6 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 11.4 − 11.0 − 3.7 − 5.6 − 1.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2006 134.4 41.9 2.1 6.2 33.6 0.0 9.5 18.0 5.4 2.5 10.0 0.1 18.5
2007 158.5 38.3 1.9 3.1 33.2 0.0 8.2 27.9 6.0 11.2 10.6 0.1 19.12008 164.7 34.8 2.3 3.7 28.9 0.0 6.6 28.2 6.9 9.9 11.3 0.1 17.3
2008          Oct 160.4 35.5 2.4 2.3 30.8 0.0 6.7 31.7 6.4 13.4 11.8 0.1 17.3
         Nov 164.9 34.4 1.9 2.2 30.3 0.0 6.7 28.0 4.7 11.4 11.8 0.1 17.3         Dec 164.7 34.8 2.3 3.7 28.9 0.0 6.6 28.2 6.9 9.9 11.3 0.1 17.3
2009          Jan 158.4 33.0 1.1 2.9 28.9 0.0 6.6 29.2 6.2 11.7 11.2 0.1 17.2
         Feb 161.1 32.7 1.0 2.7 29.0 0.0 6.6 29.6 6.4 11.7 11.3 0.1 17.2
         Mar 154.1 32.0 0.9 2.7 28.3 0.0 6.6 28.4 7.1 10.6 10.6 0.1 17.1
Changes *
2007 + 23.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.6 + 8.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8
2008 + 8.5 − 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6
2008          Oct − 5.4 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov + 6.9 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − + 0.0 − 3.5 − 1.7 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0         Dec − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 1.5 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0
2009          Jan − 6.3 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 − − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb + 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1         Mar − 7.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
19.1 115.6 149.2 6.4 142.7 580.0 571.1 8.9 75.7 0.5 9.5 − 2006
24.1 168.4 156.4 13.5 142.8 550.1 542.4 7.7 96.8 0.5 9.0 − 200723.4 231.5 159.2 21.3 137.9 530.2 523.1 7.1 114.6 0.3 8.5 − 2008
24.1 233.9 155.5 20.0 135.6 515.9 508.7 7.2 112.2 0.3 8.8 − 2008          Oct 
23.4 233.3 156.1 21.0 135.1 518.4 511.5 7.0 113.9 0.3 8.7 −          Nov 
23.4 231.5 159.2 21.3 137.9 530.2 523.1 7.1 114.6 0.3 8.5 −          Dec 
22.6 215.2 158.0 20.8 137.1 533.8 526.6 7.2 113.1 0.3 8.5 − 2009          Jan 
22.0 202.5 157.6 20.4 137.2 538.7 531.4 7.3 111.1 0.3 8.4 −          Feb 
21.5 190.1 158.9 20.5 138.4 541.9 534.3 7.6 108.4 0.1 8.4 −          Mar 
Changes *
+ 5.0 + 52.9 + 7.1 + 7.1 + 0.0 − 29.9 − 28.7 − 1.2 + 20.6 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 2007
+ 3.1 + 64.4 + 5.3 + 7.9 − 2.6 − 19.9 − 19.3 − 0.6 + 17.8 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2008
+ 0.3 + 18.9 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2008          Oct 
− 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.6 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 2.6 + 2.8 − 0.2 + 1.6 − − 0.1 −          Nov 
− 0.0 − 1.8 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 11.8 + 11.6 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Dec 
− 0.8 − 16.3 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 3.6 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2009          Jan 
− 0.6 − 12.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.8 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Feb 
− 0.4 − 12.3 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 3.2 + 2.9 + 0.3 − 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Mar 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
 
  
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
30.5 11.5 12.7 3.4 3.0 0.3 44.0 7.8 29.7 6.0 0.6 0.0 2006
37.8 12.3 19.5 3.6 2.5 0.3 54.5 7.7 38.1 8.4 0.3 0.0 200742.5 14.3 22.0 3.9 2.2 0.2 59.2 10.7 39.8 8.4 0.3 0.0 2008
40.2 10.7 23.2 4.1 2.2 0.2 53.0 7.7 36.2 8.9 0.3 0.0 2008          Oct 
42.1 11.8 24.2 4.0 2.2 0.2 60.4 12.1 39.5 8.5 0.3 0.0          Nov 
42.5 14.3 22.0 3.9 2.2 0.2 59.2 10.7 39.8 8.4 0.3 0.0          Dec 
38.8 12.7 19.9 3.9 2.3 0.2 57.3 13.2 35.3 8.5 0.3 0.0 2009          Jan 
41.8 16.2 19.2 3.9 2.5 0.2 57.0 14.4 33.7 8.6 0.3 0.0          Feb 
40.2 16.1 17.5 4.0 2.6 0.4 53.5 13.1 31.1 8.9 0.4 0.0          Mar 
Changes *
+ 7.4 + 0.9 + 6.8 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 10.5 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 2007
+ 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2008
− 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − + 0.8 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − − 2008          Oct 
+ 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 8.7 + 4.4 + 4.0 + 0.3 − −          Nov 
+ 0.3 + 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          Dec 
− 3.6 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 2.5 − 4.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2009          Jan 
+ 3.0 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 − − 0.3 + 1.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0          Feb 
− 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 1.3 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 −          Mar 
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2006 594.9 586.5 487.4 384.4 99.1 89.8 8.3 6.4 13.2 107.6 97.5 70.5 10.0
2007 563.8 555.4 446.0 354.6 109.4 101.4 8.4 6.1 14.2 130.7 118.4 64.5 12.3
2008 544.1 535.2 424.8 344.0 110.4 103.2 8.9 6.3 14.9 150.8 135.4 59.6 15.4
2008          Nov 532.0 523.4 416.7 336.9 106.7 99.5 8.6 6.1 0.5 150.7 134.7 60.3 16.0
         Dec 544.1 535.2 424.8 344.0 110.4 103.2 8.9 6.3 9.9 150.8 135.4 59.6 15.4
2009          Jan 548.0 539.0 428.6 346.5 110.4 103.7 9.0 6.3 0.7 149.6 133.8 60.2 15.8
         Feb 553.4 544.3 433.9 350.4 110.4 103.7 9.1 6.5 0.4 147.6 131.9 60.1 15.7         Mar 557.0 547.8 436.7 352.6 111.2 104.4 9.2 6.5 0.4 144.6 129.1 59.5 15.5
Changes *
2007 − 31.0 − 31.1 − 41.4 − 28.8 + 10.3 + 11.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 . + 22.4 + 20.1 − 6.7 + 2.2
2008 − 19.7 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 . + 20.1 + 17.0 − 4.9 + 3.2
2008          Nov + 2.7 + 2.6 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 3.7 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 . + 1.6 + 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Dec + 12.1 + 11.8 + 8.1 + 7.0 + 3.7 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 . + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.5
2009          Jan + 3.9 + 3.8 + 3.8 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 1.2 − 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.4
         Feb + 5.4 + 5.3 + 5.3 + 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 2.0 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.1         Mar + 3.6 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 1.9 − 2.4 − 0.0 + 0.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
  
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2006 1,636.2 392.5 41.1 301.5 30.9 68.3 118.3 1,449.5 1.8 0.2 0.8 0.7 51.4 1.2
2007 1,659.1 375.7 54.2 305.1 51.2 109.6 147.5 1,402.0 1.9 0.1 1.1 0.7 53.6 1.4
2008 1,640.1 395.9 50.7 314.1 64.0 162.6 153.3 1,324.2 2.3 0.2 1.3 0.8 52.5 1.6
2008          Nov 1,683.5 400.5 53.0 337.9 60.3 154.8 168.5 1,360.1 2.3 0.2 1.3 0.8 53.3 1.6
         Dec 1,640.1 395.9 50.7 314.1 64.0 162.6 153.3 1,324.2 2.3 0.2 1.3 0.8 52.5 1.6
2009          Jan 1,647.0 397.8 50.0 340.8 66.0 153.9 146.9 1,346.2 2.1 0.2 1.2 0.8 52.5 1.6
         Feb 1,627.8 396.9 49.3 334.7 61.5 147.9 137.8 1,342.1 2.0 0.2 1.1 0.8 51.4 1.6         Mar 1,607.6 389.6 48.3 322.4 65.0 117.0 161.4 1,329.2 1.9 0.1 1.0 0.7 49.5 1.6
Changes *
2007 + 21.7 − 17.5 + 12.9 + 3.6 + 20.2 + 40.7 + 32.3 − 51.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.0
2008 − 17.0 + 18.2 − 3.7 + 9.0 + 12.8 + 53.1 + 5.8 − 75.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.1
2008          Nov + 13.5 + 31.0 − 1.1 − 11.1 − 6.1 + 22.6 − 0.4 − 8.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.5 − 0.0
         Dec − 43.0 − 4.6 − 2.3 − 23.9 + 3.7 + 7.8 − 15.2 − 35.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1
2009          Jan + 6.9 + 2.0 − 0.7 + 28.1 + 1.9 − 8.7 − 6.4 + 22.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Feb − 19.2 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 6.1 − 4.5 − 6.1 − 9.3 − 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.0         Mar − 19.9 − 7.3 − 1.0 − 12.3 + 3.5 − 30.9 + 23.6 − 12.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2008 25 188.4 39.8 0.1 13.4 29.4 68.9 11.9 11.0 0.2 25.2 120.0 6.5 7.5 7.3 97.6
2009          Jan 25 188.8 39.8 0.1 14.3 29.6 68.7 11.9 11.1 0.2 25.3 119.6 6.5 8.4 7.3 8.0
         Feb 25 188.2 39.0 0.1 14.5 29.6 68.5 11.9 11.4 0.2 25.5 119.4 6.6 7.5 7.3 7.4
         Mar 25 189.1 39.8 0.1 14.5 29.6 68.6 11.7 11.6 0.2 25.3 119.5 6.6 8.4 7.3 7.5
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Jan 15 137.4 25.0 0.0 9.8 18.9 53.6 10.9 6.5 0.1 20.8 78.6 6.3 8.4 4.7 5.3
         Feb 15 136.9 24.1 0.0 10.0 18.9 53.5 10.9 6.8 0.1 21.1 78.5 6.4 7.5 4.7 4.7
         Mar 15 137.8 24.9 0.0 10.0 18.9 53.7 10.8 7.0 0.1 21.0 78.6 6.4 8.4 4.7 4.8
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Jan 10 51.4 14.8 0.0 4.5 10.7 15.1 1.0 4.6 0.1 4.5 41.0 0.2 − 2.6 2.7
         Feb 10 51.3 14.9 0.0 4.5 10.7 15.0 1.0 4.6 0.1 4.4 40.9 0.2 − 2.6 2.6
         Mar 10 51.3 14.9 0.0 4.5 10.7 14.9 0.9 4.6 0.1 4.3 41.0 0.2 − 2.6 2.7
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2008 24.2 2.7 6.6 50.7 38.2 48.1 24.3 4.2 9.9 3.9 14.0 10.1 7.6 10.2 8.4 0.5
2009          Jan 1.9 0.0 0.5 3.6 2.9 3.7 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.3 1.2 10.0 7.6 0.8 0.0
         Feb 1.9 0.0 0.5 3.7 2.8 2.9 1.5 0.3 0.7 0.3 0.7 10.3 7.9 0.8 0.0
         Mar 2.5 0.0 0.6 4.2 3.0 3.7 1.8 0.3 0.8 0.3 1.0 10.4 7.7 1.1 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Jan 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.9 2.9 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.0 6.1 4.0 0.5 0.0
         Feb 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.3 1.6 2.0 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.6 6.2 4.1 0.6 0.0
         Mar 1.6 0.0 0.3 3.1 2.0 2.7 1.3 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.8 6.3 4.1 0.8 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          Jan 0.7 − 0.2 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 3.9 3.6 0.3 0.0
         Feb 0.7 − 0.2 1.4 1.2 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.1 4.1 3.8 0.3 0.0
         Mar 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 1.0 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.0 3.7 0.3 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
with
foreign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to market
foreign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2006 53 213 1,743.7 711.6 635.5 194.1 441.4 76.1 897.7 671.8 18.5 17.9 653.3 226.0 134.3
2007 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 20.7 789.8 255.3 161.82008 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 19.2 610.3 194.9 159.5
2008          May 53 221 2,006.1 822.1 755.3 273.4 481.9 66.8 1,031.1 777.3 23.4 22.1 753.9 253.8 152.9
         June 55 224 1,893.5 804.7 738.8 244.4 494.5 65.9 959.9 719.8 22.0 20.6 697.9 240.1 128.9
         July 54 224 1,858.5 768.1 703.2 235.9 467.3 64.8 960.2 719.9 22.7 21.3 697.1 240.4 130.2
         Aug 54 225 1,882.8 774.3 708.1 235.0 473.1 66.2 980.2 739.5 21.3 19.9 718.1 240.8 128.2
         Sep 54 224 1,976.4 825.2 761.1 281.5 479.6 64.1 1,027.2 788.1 21.2 19.8 766.9 239.1 124.0
         Oct 55 228 2,103.9 868.2 804.7 274.3 530.4 63.6 1,043.8 797.6 23.1 22.1 774.5 246.1 191.9
         Nov 54 226 1,970.8 810.0 748.3 253.6 494.7 61.7 983.3 758.8 23.2 22.2 735.6 224.5 177.5         Dec 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 19.2 610.3 194.9 159.5
2009          Jan 56 231 1,816.9 759.6 701.4 257.6 443.8 58.2 880.2 678.9 22.8 21.8 656.0 201.3 177.1
         Feb 56 231 1,797.0 725.5 668.8 252.6 416.2 56.8 855.8 659.1 25.1 24.0 634.0 196.7 215.7
Changes *
2007 − 1 + 5 +406.5 +132.8 +136.4 + 44.5 + 91.9 − 3.6 +240.6 +196.1 + 3.1 + 2.9 +192.9 + 44.5 + 33.1
2008 + 4 + 8 −359.4 − 98.5 − 89.3 + 6.3 − 95.5 − 9.2 −256.8 −190.7 − 1.5 − 1.6 −189.3 − 66.1 − 4.1
2008          May − − + 18.1 + 17.5 + 16.7 + 7.6 + 9.1 + 0.8 + 5.9 + 5.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.5 + 0.5 − 5.4
         June + 2 + 3 − 97.0 − 12.3 − 11.6 − 29.0 + 17.4 − 0.7 − 61.4 − 50.0 − 1.4 − 1.5 − 48.5 − 11.4 − 23.3
         July − 1 − − 41.4 − 39.0 − 37.8 − 8.5 − 29.4 − 1.1 − 3.7 − 3.0 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 3.7 − 0.7 + 1.2
         Aug − + 1 − 21.0 − 10.0 − 10.8 − 0.9 − 9.8 + 0.8 − 7.2 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 6.5 − 3.8         Sep − − 1 + 62.2 + 40.1 + 42.7 + 46.5 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 28.0 + 34.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 34.1 − 6.0 − 5.9
         Oct + 1 + 4 + 15.3 + 4.5 + 6.6 − 7.2 + 13.8 − 2.0 − 52.7 − 44.8 + 2.0 + 2.3 − 46.7 − 7.9 + 63.4
         Nov − 1 − 2 −129.0 − 57.9 − 56.3 − 20.7 − 35.6 − 1.7 − 56.9 − 35.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 35.6 − 21.3 − 14.2         Dec + 2 − −165.3 − 48.6 − 49.9 − 8.7 − 41.2 + 1.3 −101.6 − 83.6 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 80.5 − 18.0 − 15.0
2009          Jan − + 5 + 30.8 + 3.0 + 7.5 + 12.8 − 5.3 − 4.5 + 11.8 + 15.2 + 2.7 + 2.6 + 12.5 − 3.3 + 16.0
         Feb − − − 25.7 − 35.9 − 34.4 − 5.0 − 29.4 − 1.5 − 28.3 − 22.9 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 25.1 − 5.4 + 38.6
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2006 40 142 761.2 341.9 262.8 124.1 138.7 79.1 347.3 218.7 38.0 36.4 180.7 128.6 72.1
2007 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 36.8 138.1 87.9 59.02008 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 41.6 154.3 71.3 82.2
2008          May 39 121 610.9 280.2 214.2 115.2 99.0 65.9 267.8 185.7 40.4 39.5 145.3 82.1 63.0
         June 39 121 611.5 279.2 213.2 110.8 102.4 66.1 269.0 187.6 39.6 38.7 148.0 81.4 63.3
         July 39 121 602.8 268.8 203.1 98.4 104.7 65.7 271.0 190.0 40.2 39.3 149.8 81.0 63.1
         Aug 39 121 608.6 270.4 204.9 99.5 105.4 65.5 273.8 192.2 40.3 39.5 151.9 81.7 64.3
         Sep 39 121 619.4 275.6 211.4 105.3 106.0 64.3 277.4 199.7 39.8 39.0 159.9 77.7 66.4
         Oct 39 119 620.2 267.2 204.1 90.5 113.6 63.1 280.6 201.8 42.3 41.7 159.5 78.7 72.4
         Nov 39 118 611.9 255.9 193.0 87.4 105.6 62.9 280.6 204.4 43.8 43.2 160.6 76.2 75.4         Dec 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 41.6 154.3 71.3 82.2
2009          Jan 38 115 580.6 244.3 184.1 78.6 105.5 60.2 272.4 199.6 43.5 43.0 156.1 72.7 64.0
         Feb 38 115 573.5 241.0 180.0 77.2 102.9 60.9 270.4 199.4 43.5 43.0 155.9 71.0 62.1
Changes *
2007 − 1 − 22 −155.7 − 64.1 − 55.8 − 19.3 − 36.5 − 8.3 − 79.1 − 38.8 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 38.6 − 40.4 − 12.5
2008 − 1 − 4 − 0.2 − 24.2 − 19.8 − 19.3 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 1.1 + 17.5 + 4.4 + 4.8 + 13.2 − 16.4 + 22.9
2008          May − − + 1.9 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 4.5 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 1.1 + 2.4 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.6
         June − − + 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 4.5 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 3.1 − 0.7 + 0.3
         July − − − 9.1 − 10.8 − 10.3 − 12.4 + 2.1 − 0.6 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.2
         Aug − − + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.0         Sep − − + 6.7 + 2.9 + 5.1 + 5.8 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 1.9 + 5.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 6.4 − 4.0 + 1.9
         Oct − − 2 − 14.0 − 16.4 − 11.7 − 14.8 + 3.1 − 4.7 − 3.1 − 4.1 + 2.5 + 2.6 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 5.5
         Nov − − 1 − 6.3 − 10.5 − 10.3 − 3.2 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 3.7 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 2.5 + 3.0         Dec − 1 − 2 − 6.3 − 4.3 − 6.0 − 1.9 − 4.1 + 1.6 − 9.1 − 4.2 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 4.9 + 7.1
2009          Jan − − 1 − 24.3 − 6.6 − 2.6 − 6.9 + 4.3 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 18.5
         Feb − − − 8.2 − 3.9 − 4.5 − 1.5 − 3.0 + 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.7 − 2.0
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report , are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,442.7 984.9 398.5 586.4 457.8 53.8 49.3 46.2 4.6 4.1 403.9 181.5 27.8 91.7 2006
1,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 47.5 4.1 3.9 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5 20071,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 34.6 8.5 8.0 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2 2008
1,709.6 1,158.9 517.1 641.8 550.8 53.9 49.7 46.8 4.2 3.9 496.9 168.0 34.0 94.6 2008          May
1,609.5 1,113.9 518.7 595.2 495.6 49.7 45.6 42.2 4.1 3.8 446.0 155.3 34.1 94.7          June
1,574.7 1,099.8 507.0 592.7 474.9 48.1 43.7 40.9 4.4 3.9 426.8 160.0 34.0 89.8          July
1,585.4 1,116.1 509.3 606.8 469.3 47.8 43.2 41.0 4.6 4.0 421.5 165.7 34.2 97.6          Aug 
1,686.5 1,171.4 575.6 595.8 515.1 52.6 47.8 44.4 4.7 4.1 462.5 150.6 34.2 105.0          Sep 
1,796.3 1,268.7 614.8 653.8 527.7 51.3 45.4 42.2 5.8 5.2 476.4 150.8 34.4 122.4          Oct 
1,668.4 1,195.4 572.8 622.6 472.9 47.2 39.7 37.7 7.5 6.8 425.8 136.3 35.0 131.2          Nov 1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 34.6 8.5 8.0 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2          Dec 
1,539.5 1,099.3 534.7 564.6 440.2 49.7 40.5 37.9 9.1 8.5 390.6 136.0 36.2 105.2 2009          Jan 
1,474.1 1,032.8 530.2 502.6 441.2 48.6 43.2 41.8 5.3 4.7 392.7 138.2 36.2 148.5          Feb 
Changes *
+ 359.0 +243.9 +149.2 + 94.7 +115.1 + 1.5 + 2.0 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 +113.6 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 41.7 2007
− 304.0 −139.7 + 6.5 −146.3 −164.3 − 10.3 − 14.7 − 12.9 + 4.4 + 4.1 −153.9 − 59.4 + 6.5 − 2.4 2008
+ 8.9 + 11.1 + 4.6 + 6.5 − 2.3 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 3.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 11.0 + 0.6 − 2.4 2008          May
− 88.5 − 38.5 + 1.6 − 40.1 − 50.1 − 4.2 − 4.2 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 45.8 − 12.7 + 0.1 + 4.1          June
− 39.7 − 16.8 − 11.7 − 5.1 − 22.9 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 21.3 + 4.7 − 0.1 − 6.4          July
− 23.3 − 4.2 + 2.3 − 6.5 − 19.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 18.7 + 5.6 + 0.2 − 3.5          Aug + 77.4 + 40.7 + 66.3 − 25.7 + 36.7 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 31.9 − 15.0 + 0.1 − 0.2          Sep 
+ 27.6 + 49.1 + 39.2 + 9.9 − 21.5 − 1.3 − 2.4 − 2.2 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 20.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 12.6          Oct 
− 126.3 − 73.1 − 42.0 − 31.1 − 53.3 − 4.1 − 5.7 − 4.5 + 1.6 + 1.7 − 49.2 − 14.6 + 0.6 + 11.3          Nov − 156.0 − 86.3 − 18.5 − 67.8 − 69.7 − 2.2 − 3.2 − 3.1 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 67.5 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 0.2          Dec 
+ 43.2 − 2.1 − 19.5 + 17.5 + 45.3 + 4.7 + 4.1 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 40.6 + 9.4 + 0.6 − 22.5 2009          Jan 
− 70.3 − 68.8 − 4.5 − 64.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 + 2.7 + 3.9 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.0 + 42.4          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
557.3 329.4 121.5 207.9 227.9 40.8 33.0 31.6 7.8 7.7 187.1 87.9 40.0 76.0 2006
437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 29.5 6.8 6.7 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4 2007453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 23.6 8.7 8.6 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9 2008
459.2 290.5 129.7 160.8 168.8 34.7 27.5 27.1 7.2 7.1 134.1 66.6 29.3 55.9 2008          May
461.8 286.8 125.6 161.1 175.0 33.0 26.1 25.3 6.9 6.8 142.1 66.4 29.3 54.1          June
452.4 281.9 127.0 154.9 170.5 31.9 25.1 24.9 6.8 6.7 138.6 65.5 29.5 55.4          July
453.6 279.0 125.3 153.7 174.6 32.1 25.3 25.1 6.8 6.8 142.5 67.9 29.7 57.3          Aug 
465.8 275.8 126.8 149.1 190.0 33.3 26.3 25.8 7.0 6.9 156.7 66.8 29.8 56.9          Sep 
469.6 284.8 130.9 153.9 184.8 31.5 22.4 22.2 9.1 9.0 153.3 61.6 29.9 59.1          Oct 
463.8 283.8 134.1 149.6 180.0 32.8 23.7 23.4 9.1 9.0 147.2 61.1 29.8 57.3          Nov 453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 23.6 8.7 8.6 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9          Dec 
435.9 260.8 128.4 132.4 175.1 33.5 24.8 24.1 8.7 8.6 141.6 58.5 31.1 55.2 2009          Jan 
430.5 259.6 131.0 128.6 170.9 33.5 24.9 24.4 8.6 8.6 137.4 58.7 31.1 53.1          Feb 
Changes *
− 109.3 − 53.9 − 3.4 − 50.5 − 55.4 − 3.7 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 51.7 − 18.3 − 11.4 − 16.7 2007
+ 12.1 + 4.8 + 26.9 − 22.1 + 7.3 − 4.3 − 6.3 − 5.9 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 11.6 − 11.8 + 1.9 − 2.4 2008
+ 1.1 + 7.1 + 2.1 + 5.0 − 6.0 − 3.2 − 3.4 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 1.2 2008          May
+ 3.6 − 3.2 − 4.1 + 0.9 + 6.8 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 1.6          June
− 9.8 − 5.0 + 1.4 − 6.3 − 4.8 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.3          July
− 3.1 − 5.2 − 1.7 − 3.5 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.7          Aug + 9.0 − 5.0 + 1.5 − 6.5 + 14.0 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 12.8 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.3          Sep 
− 8.0 + 2.9 + 4.1 − 1.2 − 10.9 − 1.9 − 4.0 − 3.6 + 2.1 + 2.1 − 9.0 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.9          Oct 
− 4.6 − 0.3 + 3.3 − 3.6 − 4.3 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.0          Nov − 1.9 − 2.1 + 10.9 − 13.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 3.4 + 0.7 − 1.7          Dec 
− 25.0 − 20.3 − 16.7 − 3.6 − 4.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.4 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.6 2009          Jan 
− 6.1 − 1.5 + 2.6 − 4.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.4          Feb 
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
 
  
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2008          Sep 10,763.4 215.3 0.5 214.8 216.8 2.0 0.0
         Oct 10,828.5 216.6 0.5 216.1 218.6 2.5 0.0
         Nov 10,886.0 217.7 0.5 217.2 218.7 1.5 0.0         Dec  
8 11,056.0 221.1 0.5 220.6 221.5 1.3 0.0
2009          Jan 11,079.8 221.6 0.5 221.1 222.1 1.0 0.0         Feb 10,905.5 218.1 0.5 217.6 218.6 1.0 0.0         Mar  
p,9 11,068.1 221.4 0.5 220.8 221.6 0.7 ...
         Apr  p ... ... ... 219.7 220.8 1.1 ...
         May ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2008          Sep 2,516,227 50,325 193 50,131 51,179 1,048 3
         Oct 2,540,390 50,808 192 50,615 52,271 1,656 29
         Nov 2,594,481 51,890 192 51,697 51,978 281 39         Dec 2,632,087 52,642 192 52,450 52,830 380 1
2009          Jan 2,655,841 53,117 192 52,925 53,177 252 2
         Feb 2,645,357 52,907 192 52,715 52,929 214 0         Mar 2,670,696 53,414 192 53,222 53,440 218 12
         Apr  
p 2,658,673 53,173 192 52,982 53,272 290 1
         May  p 2,630,810 52,616 192 52,425 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the allowance. — 8Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance, including required reserves of Slovakia ( €0.740 billion). Required
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- reserves of the euro area up to 31 December 2008 amounted to €219.9
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the billion. — 9The total number of deficiencies was not available when this
reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central report went to press. 
Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing Base rate
operations operations as per Base
Mar- Mar- Discount rateginal ginal Rate as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Applicable Civil Transition
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Act  1 from Code  2 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 − 4.50 2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 1999 Jan                1 2.50 2002 Jan                1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 − 3.25          May                1 1.95          July                1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 − 4.50 2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 − 3.50          June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2000 Jan                1 2.68 2003 Jan                1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 − 4.00          Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                1 3.42          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          Sep                1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 − 4.25          Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 − 4.50 2001 Sep                1 3.62          July                1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 − 4.75 2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 − 5.25          June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2002 Jan                1 2.71 2005 Jan                1 1.21
         June               28 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          to          July                1 1.17
         Sep                  1 3.50 − 4.50 5.50 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Apr                3
         Oct                  6 3.75 − 4.75 5.75          Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95
2001 May               11 3.50 − 4.50 5.50          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Aug                31 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Sep                18 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July               1 3.19
         Nov                  9 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00   
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75   
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         June                 6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00
1Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the 2 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable. —  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2009 Apr                15 249,411 249,411 1.25 − − − 7
         Apr                22 244,126 244,126 1.25 − − − 7
         Apr                29 233,157 233,157 1.25 − − − 7
         May                 6 234,197 234,197 1.25 − − − 7
         May               13 229,565 229,565 1.00 − − − 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2009 Apr                  8 131,839 131,839 1.25 − − − 35
         Apr                  9 36,087 36,087 1.25 − − − 182
         Apr                16 13,152 13,152 1.25 − − − 84
         Apr                30 30,170 30,170 1.25 − − − 91
         May               13 116,063 116,063 1.00 − − − 28
Source: ECB. — *Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2009 to allotted or collected. 
include Slovakia. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were  
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2008          Oct 3.67 3.17 − 5.00 5.13 4.74 − 5.43 3.82 4.29 4.83 5.11 5.18 5.21 5.25
         Nov 3.04 2.70 − 3.99 4.29 3.90 − 4.83 3.15 3.35 3.84 4.24 4.29 4.33 4.35         Dec 2.394 1.95 − 3.05 3.36 2.80 − 4.00 2.49 2.57 2.99 3.29 3.37 3.42 3.45
2009          Jan 1.67 0.90 − 2.25 2.43 1.97 − 2.95 1.81 1.90 2.14 2.46 2.54 2.59 2.62         Feb 1.15 0.95 − 1.40 1.93 1.75 − 2.15 1.26 1.37 1.63 1.94 2.03 2.09 2.14         Mar 0.95 0.60 − 1.80 1.63 1.40 − 1.85 1.06 1.05 1.27 1.64 1.77 1.84 1.91
         Apr 0.72 0.25 − 1.00 1.41 1.28 − 1.55 0.84 0.90 1.01 1.42 1.61 1.69 1.77
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. — 4 At end-December, 1.95% to 2.20%. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2008          Aug 4.38 3.09 4.65 4.39 5.78 4.95 5.11 9.26 7.38 6.41 6.28 5.79 5.46
         Sep 4.45 3.11 4.73 4.45 5.77 5.03 5.14 9.38 7.47 6.47 6.39 5.90 5.54
         Oct 4.54 3.08 4.68 4.45 5.78 5.06 5.17 9.45 7.48 6.48 6.43 5.99 5.58
         Nov 4.51 3.12 4.44 4.40 5.71 5.01 5.16 9.24 7.48 6.46 6.16 5.81 5.51         Dec 4.40 3.07 4.02 4.30 5.49 4.90 5.08 9.01 7.38 6.38 5.72 5.42 5.27
2009          Jan  
3 4.16 3.10 3.50 4.11 5.22 4.72 4.93 8.72 7.22 6.22 5.11 4.89 4.89
         Feb 3.98 3.17 3.19 4.00 5.14 4.75 4.91 8.61 7.27 6.21 4.77 4.59 4.74
         Mar 3.79 3.05 2.84 3.88 4.90 4.58 4.78 8.43 7.07 6.06 4.42 4.27 4.47
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2008          Aug 1.29 4.59 4.87 3.45 2.87 3.98 2.17 4.46 5.34 4.55
         Sep 1.32 4.65 4.85 3.36 2.97 4.01 2.20 4.52 5.19 4.69
         Oct 1.34 4.77 4.85 3.57 3.01 4.12 2.20 4.26 5.12 4.57
         Nov 1.29 4.26 4.67 3.71 3.02 4.20 1.98 3.53 4.58 4.18         Dec 1.16 3.75 4.35 3.69 2.95 4.17 1.63 2.87 4.23 4.10
2009          Jan  
3 1.02 3.27 3.90 3.52 2.88 4.08 1.28 2.25 3.81 3.78
         Feb 0.90 2.62 3.40 3.23 2.49 3.98 1.12 1.61 3.21 3.89
         Mar 0.80 2.24 2.97 3.12 2.33 3.87 0.95 1.39 2.98 2.94
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2008          Aug 10.77 8.95 8.85 7.22 8.69 5.69 5.77 5.36 5.29 5.27 6.05 6.28 5.70
         Sep 10.80 8.85 8.77 7.20 8.70 5.71 5.80 5.43 5.28 5.37 6.24 6.36 5.77
         Oct 10.83 8.92 8.88 7.22 8.69 5.70 5.84 5.42 5.28 5.37 6.37 6.26 5.80
         Nov 10.78 8.92 8.98 7.17 8.69 5.58 5.62 5.34 5.22 5.28 5.84 6.15 5.75         Dec 10.45 8.50 8.22 7.03 8.39 5.30 5.09 5.06 5.10 5.13 4.98 5.75 5.29
2009          Jan  
3 10.12 8.67 8.33 7.03 8.63 4.86 4.38 4.77 4.92 5.00 4.41 5.44 5.23
         Feb 10.13 8.39 8.19 6.65 8.49 4.61 3.97 4.54 4.80 4.89 4.08 5.03 5.16
         Mar 9.93 8.12 7.73 6.51 8.29 4.39 3.66 4.34 4.61 4.74 3.83 4.73 5.04
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2008          Aug 6.76 6.27 6.33 5.49 5.44 5.60 5.56
         Sep 6.91 6.34 6.37 5.64 5.62 5.83 5.64
         Oct 6.89 6.52 6.35 5.57 5.59 5.75 5.08
         Nov 6.66 6.04 6.10 5.41 4.86 5.02 4.97         Dec 6.26 5.38 5.78 5.32 4.29 4.50 4.77
2009          Jan  
3 5.67 4.73 5.46 5.24 3.51 3.96 4.58
         Feb 5.40 4.32 5.25 4.96 3.10 3.52 4.23
         Mar 5.12 4.03 5.07 4.75 2.83 3.25 3.87
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. —
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, 3 Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2009 to include Slovakia. 
which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Mar 4.03 255,183 2.50 185,527 4.26 116,191 4.32 21,716
         Apr 4.11 263,482 2.49 184,344 4.32 121,637 4.34 21,730
         May 4.17 271,299 2.49 183,531 4.40 122,362 4.34 21,803
         June 4.23 277,318 2.48 182,724 4.47 118,160 4.38 21,713
         July 4.33 287,196 2.48 181,642 4.56 121,536 4.41 21,919
         Aug 4.40 296,615 2.49 181,577 4.60 121,183 4.44 21,860
         Sep 4.46 301,246 2.45 178,637 4.69 123,174 4.44 23,230
         Oct 4.51 324,343 2.45 177,619 4.63 123,846 4.46 23,132
         Nov 4.42 326,660 2.45 177,052 4.24 123,000 4.51 23,011         Dec 4.26 326,679 2.45 179,319 3.63 118,097 4.45 22,976
2009          Jan 3.98 307,958 2.46 179,112 2.95 116,231 4.43 23,192
         Feb 3.82 292,932 2.45 179,096 2.57 113,302 4.43 23,084         Mar 3.71 278,398 2.45 179,828 2.15 109,275 4.41 23,274
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          Mar 6.18 5,643 4.66 26,002 5.08 922,828 10.39 68,853 5.69 64,918 6.16 312,385
         Apr 6.12 5,625 4.67 25,743 5.07 922,724 10.32 66,962 5.68 65,354 6.16 313,135
         May 6.18 5,397 4.69 25,587 5.07 923,312 10.33 66,248 5.70 65,268 6.16 313,410
         June 6.22 5,493 4.71 25,544 5.07 923,192 10.43 68,794 5.70 65,599 6.18 313,464
         July 6.21 5,519 4.76 25,308 5.06 924,208 10.47 66,689 5.73 65,200 6.20 313,990
         Aug 6.31 5,477 4.78 25,164 5.06 924,666 10.50 65,485 5.74 65,213 6.21 314,367
         Sep 6.28 5,536 4.82 24,989 5.06 924,467 10.60 69,363 5.79 64,216 6.23 313,147
         Oct 6.31 5,429 4.86 24,654 5.07 923,312 10.64 68,244 5.84 64,177 6.24 313,766
         Nov 6.31 5,430 4.87 24,457 5.06 923,919 10.33 66,351 5.83 64,131 6.24 313,811         Dec 6.13 5,528 4.84 24,239 5.06 921,188 10.15 70,489 5.77 64,751 6.22 312,381
2009          Jan 5.81 5,418 4.77 23,857 5.03 918,498 9.60 68,437 5.66 64,234 6.16 311,940
         Feb 5.54 5,385 4.73 23,698 5.02 917,848 9.21 68,721 5.63 64,058 6.14 312,266         Mar 5.34 5,628 4.65 25,122 5.01 914,721 9.16 69,930 5.56 65,235 6.10 310,904
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Mar 6.17 185,006 5.32 116,463 5.14 523,232
         Apr 6.18 183,319 5.37 119,193 5.15 526,831
         May 6.20 183,855 5.42 120,527 5.16 530,746
         June 6.24 188,257 5.47 122,714 5.20 531,783
         July 6.30 184,191 5.58 124,690 5.22 533,931
         Aug 6.34 183,359 5.62 128,090 5.24 537,289
         Sep 6.46 187,397 5.70 130,018 5.26 538,193
         Oct 6.36 185,410 5.78 133,883 5.30 540,775
         Nov 6.00 186,446 5.57 135,699 5.24 541,915         Dec 5.52 188,252 5.30 138,069 5.04 544,529
2009          Jan 4.94 185,671 4.81 140,169 4.82 545,349
         Feb 4.69 182,528 4.55 140,944 4.70 545,925         Mar 4.51 183,679 4.30 139,786 4.55 543,946
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates may always be calculated either as annualised agreed intere st
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other relatedhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- balance sheet statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis purchase, including building and home improvements; including loan s
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well assample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name andsional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are for their own account. — 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for
not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. —can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          Mar 1.90 483,442 4.01 49,509 4.18 1,308 2.85 1,033 2.44 438,185 3.79 106,376
         Apr 1.91 485,248 4.13 59,292 4.27 1,456 3.02 1,226 2.52 435,524 3.82 105,021
         May 1.90 485,688 4.18 50,180 4.37 1,359 2.83 845 2.51 433,505 3.85 103,615
         June 1.91 481,446 4.27 52,717 4.80 2,511 3.17 1,019 2.53 431,428 3.89 102,836
         July 1.95 480,219 4.43 62,011 4.97 3,507 3.24 1,324 2.57 426,345 3.95 102,337
         Aug 1.99 480,303 4.51 50,968 5.00 2,914 3.63 1,292 2.58 423,199 4.00 101,222
         Sep 2.05 476,817 4.48 53,916 4.98 2,022 3.39 1,391 2.59 419,923 4.03 100,148
         Oct 2.09 491,911 4.49 74,919 4.85 2,624 3.66 1,760 2.64 418,584 4.13 103,108
         Nov 2.02 510,118 3.89 50,889 4.88 2,623 3.87 1,873 2.54 417,459 4.22 106,825         Dec 1.85 508,140 3.21 52,012 4.44 2,583 3.75 2,291 2.42 425,527 4.19 110,599
2009          Jan 1.77 529,633 2.67 48,906 4.08 3,415 3.81 2,143 2.33 429,238 4.11 110,567
         Feb 1.55 550,800 1.94 29,935 3.37 2,015 3.40 1,968 2.24 434,504 4.02 110,493         Mar 1.38 558,216 1.46 30,369 2.97 1,746 3.15 2,906 2.08 437,140 3.91 111,178
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Mar 2.41 173,778 4.13 66,136 4.51 161 4.57 181
         Apr 2.41 172,497 4.20 55,504 4.66 306 5.20 404
         May 2.42 171,111 4.21 46,331 4.91 288 5.00 234
         June 2.36 173,952 4.30 50,477 5.04 304 5.12 336
         July 2.50 172,252 4.41 53,057 5.15 267 5.22 382
         Aug 2.47 175,575 4.42 46,256 6.08 460 5.27 201
         Sep 2.58 183,927 4.47 52,263 5.39 899 5.27 290
         Oct 2.41 193,441 4.17 60,137 4.87 205 4.88 396
         Nov 2.14 193,041 3.41 54,007 4.61 433 5.04 271         Dec 1.66 194,621 2.60 65,240 4.02 480 4.24 470
2009          Jan 1.31 202,948 1.91 69,444 3.45 843 4.34 463
         Feb 1.16 197,847 1.39 43,602 2.93 367 3.83 421         Mar 1.03 203,078 1.10 50,263 2.63 480 4.02 1,147
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          Mar 7.58 6.17 1,005 5.69 2,523 8.59 2,167 5.26 11,416 5.68 1,041 5.30 1,838
         Apr 7.56 5.70 1,087 5.68 2,933 8.66 2,657 5.39 8,433 5.71 1,274 5.25 2,565
         May 7.53 6.33 843 5.66 2,634 8.61 2,237 5.41 6,766 5.77 1,081 5.39 1,850
         June 7.48 6.25 974 5.52 2,841 8.63 2,412 5.56 6,864 6.09 1,165 5.54 2,628
         July 7.71 6.47 1,090 5.67 2,864 8.78 2,616 5.64 10,020 6.19 1,227 5.68 2,802
         Aug 7.74 6.24 1,218 5.80 2,322 8.79 2,141 5.62 6,914 6.30 883 5.74 2,164
         Sep 7.60 6.08 1,064 5.71 2,555 8.80 2,219 5.72 6,795 6.24 994 5.64 1,934
         Oct 7.66 5.86 1,181 5.76 2,656 8.70 2,285 5.88 7,576 6.05 1,337 5.61 2,171
         Nov 7.55 5.43 922 5.66 2,289 8.63 2,049 5.19 5,288 5.90 972 5.52 1,420         Dec 7.02 4.76 1,217 5.47 2,086 8.19 1,947 4.39 7,051 5.51 1,360 5.15 1,966
2009          Jan 7.47 5.10 1,202 5.48 2,204 8.74 2,101 3.73 7,060 5.24 1,475 5.19 2,145
         Feb 7.18 5.12 878 5.17 2,649 8.46 2,173 3.15 5,204 5.08 1,155 4.99 1,538         Mar 6.95 4.74 1,171 5.06 3,180 8.19 2,765 3.01 6,416 4.82 1,467 4.90 2,192
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Mar 11.84 46,975 5.09 5.73 1,647 5.01 2,181 4.89 4,701 4.88 3,915
         Apr 11.81 45,118 5.13 5.86 2,388 4.99 2,966 4.90 6,576 4.97 4,787
         May 11.82 44,544 5.19 6.00 1,946 5.06 2,510 4.96 5,480 4.97 4,197         June 11.83 47,209 5.30 6.05 2,173 5.24 2,634 5.06 6,229 5.09 4,703
         July 11.91 44,887 5.47 6.18 2,701 5.43 2,829 5.21 6,747 5.28 5,113
         Aug 11.94 44,184 5.54 6.28 1,998 5.57 1,932 5.27 4,920 5.30 4,213
         Sep 11.98 48,076 5.45 6.24 2,129 5.50 1,979 5.17 5,610 5.21 4,418
         Oct 12.01 46,486 5.42 6.34 2,488 5.43 2,431 5.15 6,336 5.12 4,437
         Nov 11.88 43,669 5.27 6.07 1,995 5.20 2,363 5.03 5,064 5.01 4,024         Dec 11.82 47,477 4.96 5.38 2,476 4.84 2,918 4.83 5,566 4.73 4,200
2009          Jan 11.42 45,056 4.83 4.97 3,251 4.58 3,343 4.73 6,197 4.77 3,970
         Feb 11.19 44,553 4.58 4.38 2,370 4.33 2,749 4.58 5,336 4.60 3,395         Mar 11.16 45,901 4.42 4.19 2,787 4.12 3,343 4.40 6,831 4.49 4,609
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Mar 7.11 80,965 6.24 9,491 5.65 1,079 5.11 1,354
         Apr 6.97 80,182 6.26 9,762 5.65 1,297 5.10 1,673
         May 6.98 80,154 6.26 9,173 5.81 1,051 5.15 1,444         June 7.07 85,801 6.34 10,794 5.97 1,280 5.38 1,734
         July 7.12 82,949 6.36 10,066 6.18 1,313 5.50 1,837
         Aug 7.15 82,270 6.35 8,096 6.27 995 5.65 1,298
         Sep 7.26 85,079 6.46 10,688 6.12 1,091 5.54 1,557
         Oct 7.01 83,629 6.46 10,578 5.96 1,131 5.36 1,487
         Nov 6.68 85,604 5.95 8,719 5.78 989 5.14 1,435         Dec 6.35 84,891 5.25 10,536 5.61 1,438 5.08 1,828
2009          Jan 5.77 83,490 4.55 9,429 5.31 1,151 5.07 1,351
         Feb 5.63 84,220 4.15 9,245 5.12 1,036 4.84 1,105         Mar 5.65 84,911 3.83 12,473 4.95 1,197 4.69 1,333
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Mar 5.36 67,678 5.58 3,106 5.43 4,907
         Apr 5.44 68,988 5.59 3,842 5.40 6,057
         May 5.25 66,639 5.74 3,571 5.53 4,224         June 5.36 80,148 6.09 3,254 5.82 6,699
         July 5.38 90,571 5.97 3,511 5.66 6,703
         Aug 5.46 73,515 5.91 2,956 5.73 3,836
         Sep 5.70 87,137 5.63 3,353 5.73 4,378
         Oct 5.65 87,732 6.10 3,297 5.45 4,254
         Nov 4.91 65,292 5.38 2,289 5.04 3,060         Dec 4.35 80,446 4.82 4,972 4.92 6,563
2009          Jan 3.63 78,532 5.00 3,051 4.69 3,788
         Feb 3.26 63,830 4.79 1,959 4.53 3,225         Mar 3.09 73,347 4.23 2,284 4.50 3,512
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Corporate debt debt building marketpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities (non-MFIs) ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,9202003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,1222004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 − 13,723 − 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 32,978 − 157,940
2006 243,496 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 141,117 125,425 68,893 56,532 − 118,0712007 217,249 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 126,979 − 37,503 96,476 − 133,979 − 254,7522008 68,838 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 2,699 − 2,263 68,049 − 70,312 − 71,101
2009          Jan − 2,975 − 3,018 − 9,548 − 6,462 12,991 43 − 4,603 − 6,715 2,112 − 1,628
         Feb 3,821 150 − 22,484 12,584 10,050 3,671 5,142 9,709 − 4,567 − − 1,321
         Mar 786 − 1,465 − 10,373 150 8,758 2,251 − 1,729 7,125 − 8,854 − 2,515
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6781998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,9412003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,0162004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 24,077 9,061 15,018 4,757 11,323 − 6,566 19,3222007 − 1,426 10,053 − 11,478 − 46,867 − 6,702 − 40,165 45,4402008 − 20,864 11,326 − 32,190 27,739 − 23,079 50,818 − 48,604
2009          Jan 6,398 4,079 2,319 20,544 1,909 18,635 − 14,146
         Feb − 1,016 79 − 1,095 − 7,833 − 7,034 − 799 6,817
         Mar 5,486 4,137 1,349 2,212 18 2,194 3,274
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs) syndicates debt securities debt securities  2 
Gross sales  3 
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,370
1997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,813
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,8502004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 692007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2008          Dec 142,298 82,192 4,781 2,720 24,954 49,737 42,201 17,905 −2009          Jan 165,731 122,992 1,296 2,104 37,108 82,484 4,461 38,277 −
         Feb 119,466 76,455 2,474 4,408 30,025 39,548 16,985 26,026 −
         Mar 133,162 88,344 3,428 2,763 31,941 50,213 5,711 39,107 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  4 
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,582
1997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,413
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −
2008          Dec 53,303 13,254 1,783 1,201 1,573 8,697 37,940 2,109 −2009          Jan 27,827 14,052 265 737 5,775 7,275 3,460 10,315 −
         Feb 36,861 20,041 1,456 1,720 7,649 9,218 9,924 6,896 −
         Mar 34,959 16,496 1,815 1,005 6,526 7,150 5,514 12,949 −
Net sales  5 
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,951
1997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,181
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,607
2008          Dec 2,869 − 32,392 949 − 10,735 − 6,708 − 15,899 39,196 − 3,935 − 2,0532009          Jan 19,951 8,621 − 1,617 − 10,693 2,107 18,824 1,143 10,186 − 3,794
         Feb 26,578 − 3,523 − 331 − 12,419 500 8,727 16,095 14,006 − 2,576
         Mar 21,308 4,794 1,537 − 10,196 9,126 4,328 3,393 13,120 − 2,094
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Treuhand agency. — 3Gross sales means only initial sales of newly issued
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. — 4Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. — 5Gross
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank bonds Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe (non-MFIs) syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,359
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,3732007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,6232008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009          Jan 3,270,146 1,885,205 148,684 366,398 492,749 877,374 179,658 1,205,283 50,222
         Feb 3,296,724 1,881,681 148,353 353,979 493,249 886,100 195,753 1,219,289 47,646         Mar 3,318,031 1,886,476 149,890 343,783 502,375 890,427 199,146 1,232,409 45,552
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-March 2009 
1,355,102 894,544 62,693 179,197 219,561 433,092 24,969 435,589 27,931    less than 2
690,969 427,183 53,863 91,069 104,577 177,671 31,230 232,556 5,185 2 to less than 4
434,255 217,559 18,827 33,765 68,557 96,411 30,744 185,952 5,661 4 to less than 6
310,848 174,168 10,340 22,170 29,113 112,545 8,419 128,262 1,954 6 to less than 8
161,284 57,433 3,351 9,989 27,991 16,102 3,232 100,618 1,292 8 to less than 10
57,314 31,829 797 3,978 19,435 7,620 8,177 17,307 1,764 10 to less than 15
59,367 18,860 19 1,827 12,732 4,282 893 39,613 681 15 to less than 20
248,893 64,899 − 1,787 20,409 42,701 91,482 92,512 1,084 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 1,040,769
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009          Jan 170,063 1,362 1,726 0 − − − 258 − 54 − 53 757,894
         Feb 169,987 − 76 69 14 4 − − 36 − 7 − 120 660,435         Mar 172,044 2,057 2,239 5 14 − 25 − 47 − 178 697,247
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including ber 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock market segment was closed down on
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises listed on the Open Market.
Market (the introduction of which marked the end of the division of organ- Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the Herausgebergemein-
ised trading segments into an official and a regulated market on 1 Novem- schaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate issued by German German
more than 9 more than 9 bonds German- bond iBoxx CDAX shareand including and including (non- managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.69
1998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 3.2 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.0 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 4.6 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 4.9 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009          Jan 3.3 3.1 3.0 3.1 3.8 4.3 6.5 4.3 120.77 100.67 239.60 4,338.35
         Feb 3.2 3.0 2.9 3.1 3.8 4.3 6.2 4.3 122.22 101.56 212.81 3,843.74         Mar 3.2 3.0 2.9 3.0 3.8 4.2 6.5 4.4 123.41 101.72 224.85 4,084.76
         Apr 3.3 3.1 3.0 3.1 3.8 4.2 6.3 4.5 122.56 100.90 260.30 4,769.45
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 9512002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 6802003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 43,172 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 23,637 35,094 14,676 5,221 20,418 18,416 8,0782007 55,022 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 41,586 51,083 − 229 4,240 51,312 37,346 3,9392008 697 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 8,608 6,517 − 16,625 − 9,252 23,142 17,860 − 5,820
2009          Jan 13,853 11,215 5,750 − 407 4,865 789 5,465 2,638 13,471 − 1,646 − 1,759 15,117 4,397 382
         Feb − 4,212 − 3,426 − 1,362 − 470 − 642 − 35 − 2,064 − 786 − 5,100 − 4,569 − 1,218 − 531 432 888         Mar − 2,336 − 117 − 2,579 − 402 − 2,321 286 2,462 − 2,219 − 1,428 − 4,671 − 1,241 3,243 − 978 − 908
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  € billion
2007 2008 
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households 1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 42.5 85.9 121.0 8.9 22.1 16.5 38.4 6.4 14.6 12.9 87.1
Money market paper 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.1
Bonds 27.4 − 50.2 − 8.0 5.9 − 21.0 − 9.3 − 25.7 13.5 − 0.8 2.4 − 23.2
Shares − 5.0 − 16.5 − 45.5 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 12.0 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 9.0 − 33.0
Other equity 2.9 2.9 3.0 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8Mutual funds shares − 6.5 24.8 5.6 11.8 9.9 − 5.0 8.1 13.2 7.5 1.9 − 17.0
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 66.1 69.4 41.1 18.0 15.6 17.5 18.3 12.3 8.9 10.5 9.4
Short-term claims 2.1 1.1 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 0.1
Longer-term claims 64.0 68.3 40.8 17.8 15.4 17.3 17.9 11.9 9.2 10.4 9.4
Claims from company
pension commitments 10.3 4.3 5.8 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.5
Other claims  3 − 4.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.7
Total 133.8 116.3 120.1 44.4 26.4 18.0 27.6 45.8 29.0 20.3 25.1
  II Financing
Loans − 5.1 − 18.9 − 15.4 − 10.0 − 2.1 − 3.2 − 3.6 − 9.8 0.9 − 1.1 − 5.4
Short-term loans − 5.4 − 1.2 1.2 − 2.0 0.7 − 0.9 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 0.6 1.4
Longer-term loans 0.3 − 17.7 − 16.6 − 8.0 − 2.8 − 2.3 − 4.6 − 9.1 0.9 − 1.6 − 6.8
Other liabilities − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 0.4 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
Total − 5.5 − 19.3 − 15.4 − 9.6 − 1.9 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 9.8 1.0 − 1.1 − 5.4
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 28.3 72.0 20.8 14.8 9.1 18.1 30.1 6.1 − 14.8 36.5 − 7.0
Money market paper 8.9 − 20.3 − 14.3 3.5 − 1.8 − 11.5 − 10.4 11.7 − 28.4 − 13.4 15.7
Bonds − 10.4 −109.7 2.2 − 18.1 − 4.3 − 44.2 − 43.0 − 51.4 1.6 10.8 41.3
Financial derivatives 1.4 45.2 14.4 5.7 6.2 16.6 16.7 10.5 8.3 0.0 − 4.4
Shares 11.2 56.9 128.8 − 9.1 30.3 14.4 21.4 16.5 69.1 15.8 27.3
Other equity 55.2 24.1 22.0 3.9 1.8 27.6 − 9.1 9.3 16.8 − 8.7 4.7
Mutual funds shares − 8.1 − 3.2 − 7.8 − 1.5 − 5.3 2.0 1.7 − 3.9 − 2.5 5.9 − 7.3
Loans 17.0 − 1.3 32.1 5.3 4.9 15.0 − 26.4 4.1 11.3 7.7 9.0
Short-term loans 11.3 − 5.6 27.7 5.9 1.5 7.5 − 20.6 − 1.2 14.3 6.6 8.0
Longer-term loans 5.7 4.3 4.4 − 0.6 3.3 7.5 − 5.8 5.3 − 3.0 1.1 1.0
Claims on insurancecorporations  
2 1.4 1.0 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Short-term claims 1.4 1.0 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 55.3 96.5 − 74.1 33.3 − 1.1 − 5.6 69.9 14.6 − 16.3 − 38.5 − 33.8
Total 160.2 161.3 124.4 37.8 39.8 32.5 51.3 17.6 45.1 16.2 45.5
  II Financing
Money market paper 0.8 18.6 3.6 6.0 4.5 − 0.2 8.4 9.5 − 6.5 0.4 0.2
Bonds 12.9 − 11.4 6.0 − 2.6 − 3.1 − 2.4 − 3.2 − 2.5 1.6 1.5 5.4
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 5.7 6.8 3.6 1.9 2.7 0.5 1.6 0.9 1.4 0.7 0.5
Other equity 33.0 26.7 13.6 5.9 1.2 10.7 8.9 6.6 3.0 1.0 2.9
Loans 72.0 46.4 71.4 20.4 5.9 5.2 14.9 − 5.9 14.8 23.4 39.2
Short-term loans 30.9 16.8 19.0 15.0 8.1 − 5.1 − 1.1 − 5.8 12.4 2.9 9.5
Longer-term loans 41.1 29.6 52.4 5.4 − 2.2 10.3 16.0 − 0.1 2.4 20.4 29.7
Claims from companypension commitments 8.2 1.3 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
Other liabilities − 2.7 13.6 − 5.5 17.0 − 4.2 − 0.7 1.5 9.4 − 1.6 4.1 − 17.4
Total 129.9 102.0 93.9 48.8 7.4 13.5 32.4 18.2 13.2 31.5 31.0
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2007 2008 
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households 1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,534.8 1,620.8 1,737.5 1,543.7 1,565.8 1,582.4 1,620.8 1,627.2 1,642.0 1,650.6 1,737.5
Money market paper 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.0 1.9 1.8 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.6
Bonds 373.4 350.9 302.8 379.1 354.4 364.4 350.9 362.9 340.7 306.7 302.8
Shares 349.3 375.3 165.9 377.1 389.7 379.7 375.3 320.6 298.0 255.5 165.9
Other equity 200.7 171.8 178.2 201.6 199.9 197.1 171.8 175.1 177.5 185.0 178.2Mutual funds shares 515.3 545.6 497.2 525.3 544.0 538.8 545.6 535.7 539.9 527.9 497.2
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 1,118.9 1,187.9 1,228.9 1,136.7 1,152.3 1,169.7 1,187.9 1,200.1 1,209.0 1,219.5 1,228.9
Short-term claims 79.7 80.8 81.1 79.9 80.2 80.4 80.8 81.2 81.0 81.1 81.1
Longer-term claims 1,039.2 1,107.1 1,147.7 1,056.8 1,072.1 1,089.3 1,107.1 1,118.9 1,128.0 1,138.4 1,147.7
Claims from company
pension commitments 250.8 255.1 260.9 251.8 252.9 254.0 255.1 256.5 257.9 259.4 260.9
Other claims  3 46.7 42.6 39.8 45.7 44.7 43.7 42.6 41.9 41.2 40.5 39.8
Total 4,391.9 4,551.7 4,412.9 4,463.0 4,505.7 4,531.7 4,551.7 4,521.6 4,507.7 4,446.5 4,412.9
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,557.0 1,538.5 1,523.2 1,547.6 1,545.5 1,542.1 1,538.5 1,527.3 1,528.2 1,527.2 1,523.2
Short-term loans 80.2 78.9 80.0 78.5 79.2 77.9 78.9 78.1 78.1 78.7 80.0
Longer-term loans 1,476.8 1,459.6 1,443.1 1,469.1 1,466.3 1,464.2 1,459.6 1,449.2 1,450.1 1,448.5 1,443.1
Other liabilities 9.6 8.7 9.2 11.1 11.0 10.9 8.7 10.1 9.8 10.1 9.2
Total 1,566.6 1,547.2 1,532.4 1,558.7 1,556.5 1,553.0 1,547.2 1,537.5 1,538.0 1,537.3 1,532.4
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 411.3 477.0 507.4 432.1 433.8 447.3 477.0 474.7 471.9 508.1 507.4
Money market paper 35.5 29.7 12.4 39.7 40.1 27.6 29.7 31.6 9.2 0.2 12.4
Bonds 132.6 80.1 85.0 114.4 109.0 70.7 80.1 28.5 31.3 44.1 85.0
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 899.3 1,066.1 655.8 970.9 1,022.0 1,014.2 1,066.1 940.1 951.5 874.6 655.8
Other equity 310.4 281.4 309.2 314.6 312.6 334.5 281.4 294.7 314.3 317.4 309.2Mutual funds shares 106.5 109.5 67.9 108.2 104.9 107.6 109.5 81.0 81.0 85.3 67.9
Loans 161.8 176.3 204.8 169.1 175.0 186.3 176.3 183.2 195.2 200.7 204.8
Short-term loans 120.1 130.1 151.4 127.5 129.9 133.6 130.1 129.9 142.0 145.4 151.4
Longer-term loans 41.8 46.2 53.4 41.6 45.0 52.6 46.2 53.3 53.3 55.3 53.4
Claims on insurance
corporations  
2 42.8 43.8 44.2 43.0 43.2 43.3 43.8 43.9 44.0 44.1 44.2
Short-term claims 42.8 43.8 44.2 43.0 43.2 43.3 43.8 43.9 44.0 44.1 44.2
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 447.9 500.4 583.1 464.7 469.9 489.7 500.4 521.4 538.2 571.4 583.1
Total 2,548.2 2,764.3 2,469.8 2,656.6 2,710.4 2,721.4 2,764.3 2,599.1 2,636.6 2,645.9 2,469.8
  II Liabilities
Money market paper 17.9 36.5 40.2 23.9 28.4 28.2 36.5 46.0 39.6 42.9 40.2
Bonds 91.1 82.2 96.8 89.0 83.8 84.2 82.2 82.3 78.9 81.6 96.8Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,336.7 1,564.3 963.5 1,414.5 1,545.1 1,544.3 1,564.3 1,322.0 1,266.1 1,154.1 963.5
Other equity 636.9 663.6 677.2 642.8 644.0 654.7 663.6 670.1 673.2 674.2 677.2
Loans 1,348.3 1,405.9 1,485.2 1,365.4 1,383.4 1,387.8 1,405.9 1,400.7 1,421.5 1,443.9 1,485.2
Short-term loans 370.2 396.5 409.2 381.9 394.5 388.3 396.5 384.4 397.4 397.8 409.2
Longer-term loans 978.1 1,009.4 1,076.0 983.5 988.8 999.5 1,009.4 1,016.2 1,024.2 1,046.0 1,076.0
Claims from companypension commitments 214.2 215.5 216.7 214.5 214.9 215.2 215.5 215.8 216.1 216.4 216.7
Other liabilities 388.5 432.6 470.0 401.1 412.0 425.9 432.6 439.6 448.8 455.6 470.0
Total 4,033.6 4,400.5 3,949.5 4,151.2 4,311.6 4,340.3 4,400.5 4,176.5 4,144.1 4,068.7 3,949.5
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2002 − 78.3 − 36.0 − 30.6 − 5.0 − 6.8 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 0.3
2003 − 87.2 − 39.6 − 32.7 − 7.1 − 7.7 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.42004 − 83.5 − 52.0 − 27.9 − 2.4 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
2005p − 74.1 − 47.5 − 22.6 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
2006 p − 35.6 − 34.3 − 10.3 + 4.0 + 5.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2
2007 p − 4.0 − 26.0 + 3.4 + 8.3 + 10.4 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4
2008 pe − 3.3 − 15.8 − 3.6 + 8.4 + 7.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3
2007          H1  p + 4.2 − 10.2 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 6.7 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.6
         H2  p − 8.4 − 16.0 − 0.4 + 4.3 + 3.7 − 0.7 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3
2008          H1  pe + 6.7 − 7.4 + 3.9 + 5.7 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.4
         H2  pe − 10.0 − 8.4 − 7.4 + 2.7 + 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.2
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2002 1,293.0 798.1 404.1 104.3 3.0 60.3 37.2 18.9 4.9 0.1
2003 1,381.0 845.4 435.3 111.5 5.3 63.8 39.1 20.1 5.2 0.22004 1,451.3 887.1 459.7 116.3 4.2 65.6 40.1 20.8 5.3 0.2
2005 1,521.9 933.0 481.9 120.0 2.7 67.8 41.6 21.5 5.4 0.1
2006 1,569.0 968.6 491.6 122.4 1.7 67.6 41.7 21.2 5.3 0.12007 1,576.6 976.9 493.0 120.0 1.6 65.1 40.3 20.3 5.0 0.12008
pe 1,641.8 1,004.8 531.7 117.9 1.5 65.9 40.3 21.3 4.7 0.1
2007          Q1 1,573.5 973.0 492.4 121.5 1.4 66.9 41.4 20.9 5.2 0.1         Q2 1,592.2 995.6 488.6 121.4 1.5 67.0 41.9 20.6 5.1 0.1         Q3 1,573.4 978.0 488.8 119.8 1.6 65.5 40.7 20.4 5.0 0.1         Q4 1,576.6 976.9 493.0 120.0 1.6 65.1 40.3 20.3 5.0 0.1
2008          Q1  
pe 1,595.2 986.9 503.2 118.1 1.6 65.3 40.4 20.6 4.8 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,630.9 995.0 530.3 118.5 1.6 66.0 40.3 21.5 4.8 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,624.9 993.1 526.9 117.4 2.0 65.3 39.9 21.2 4.7 0.1
         Q4  pe 1,641.8 1,004.8 531.7 117.9 1.5 65.9 40.3 21.3 4.7 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined according to the national accounts. — 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2002 952.5 477.5 390.7 84.3 1,030.8 579.8 168.7 62.7 36.1 183.6 − 78.3 879.2
2003 961.9 481.8 396.3 83.9 1,049.2 594.2 169.2 64.3 33.9 187.6 − 87.3 889.32004 957.7 481.3 396.5 79.9 1,041.2 592.0 169.6 62.4 31.7 185.5 − 83.5 888.0
2005p 976.2 493.2 396.5 86.6 1,050.5 597.2 168.7 62.3 31.0 191.3 − 74.3 900.5
2006 p 1,016.4 530.5 399.9 86.0 1,052.3 597.9 167.5 65.3 32.6 189.1 − 35.9 941.7
2007 p 1,065.9 576.3 399.9 89.8 1,070.1 596.7 168.0 67.4 35.6 202.5 − 4.2 988.2
2008 pe 1,091.1 593.2 407.8 90.0 1,094.4 606.9 171.5 69.0 38.0 209.0 − 3.3 1,013.7
as a percentage of GDP
2002 44.4 22.3 18.2 3.9 48.1 27.1 7.9 2.9 1.7 8.6 − 3.7 41.0
2003 44.5 22.3 18.3 3.9 48.5 27.5 7.8 3.0 1.6 8.7 − 4.0 41.12004 43.3 21.8 17.9 3.6 47.1 26.8 7.7 2.8 1.4 8.4 − 3.8 40.2
2005p 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.9 46.8 26.6 7.5 2.8 1.4 8.5 − 3.3 40.1
2006 p 43.8 22.9 17.2 3.7 45.3 25.8 7.2 2.8 1.4 8.1 − 1.5 40.6
2007 p 44.0 23.8 16.5 3.7 44.2 24.6 6.9 2.8 1.5 8.4 − 0.2 40.8
2008 pe 43.8 23.8 16.4 3.6 43.9 24.4 6.9 2.8 1.5 8.4 − 0.1 40.7
Percentage growth rates
2002 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 5.2 + 1.5 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 1.5 . + 0.5
2003 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.6 − 6.1 + 2.2 . + 1.12004 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 6.4 − 1.1 . − 0.1
2005p + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 8.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.3 + 3.1 . + 1.4
2006 p + 4.1 + 7.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 4.7 + 5.3 − 1.2 . + 4.6
2007 p + 4.9 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 4.4 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 3.2 + 9.2 + 7.1 . + 4.9
2008 pe + 2.4 + 2.9 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 2.1 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 3.2 . + 2.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2001 555.5 446.2 23.5 599.6 169.9 213.9 66.6 40.1 16.7 − 44.2 445.1 449.1 − 4.0 923.3 971.5 − 48.2
2002 p 554.7 441.7 20.5 610.9 173.3 226.8 66.1 38.7 11.3 − 56.2 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 927.7 992.2 − 64.5
2003 pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.3 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.3 467.6 474.4 − 6.8 925.2 999.3 − 74.1
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.7 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.8 469.7 468.5 + 1.2 926.8 990.4 − 63.6
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 621.1 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 52.2 467.8 471.0 − 3.2 947.4 1,002.7 − 55.3
2006 pe 589.1 488.4 18.1 625.1 169.4 252.1 64.4 33.5 11.7 − 36.1 486.3 466.3 + 20.0 986.3 1,002.4 − 16.0
2007 pe 644.6 538.2 17.7 643.5 181.4 250.7 66.1 34.1 9.6 + 1.1 474.9 465.7 + 9.2 1,025.1 1,014.8 + 10.2
2006          Q1 p 131.4 106.3 3.8 160.4 40.6 65.6 25.1 4.8 2.9 − 29.0 120.5 116.6 + 3.9 229.0 254.1 − 25.1
         Q2 p 144.3 121.8 4.1 139.9 40.7 59.9 9.5 6.4 2.5 + 4.5 122.2 117.1 + 5.0 245.1 235.6 + 9.5
         Q3 p 146.4 121.8 5.9 156.0 40.6 61.2 20.5 8.4 2.6 − 9.5 117.0 115.2 + 1.7 241.4 249.2 − 7.8
         Q4 p 166.0 138.7 4.0 167.8 46.1 64.1 9.0 12.9 3.5 − 1.8 127.2 117.2 + 10.0 271.1 263.0 + 8.1
2007          Q1 p 149.4 122.3 2.8 164.5 42.7 64.9 25.5 5.3 3.4 − 15.1 112.2 115.6 − 3.4 238.4 256.9 − 18.5
         Q2 p 158.5 136.9 3.0 144.5 43.9 58.4 10.0 6.7 2.5 + 14.0 119.0 116.3 + 2.7 253.8 237.0 + 16.7
         Q3 p 155.4 131.6 3.6 160.5 44.2 59.8 21.3 8.6 1.6 − 5.1 116.2 115.6 + 0.6 248.2 252.8 − 4.6
         Q4 p 180.5 147.6 7.9 172.9 49.2 66.1 9.2 12.5 1.9 + 7.5 126.9 117.8 + 9.1 283.9 267.3 + 16.6
2008          Q1 p 160.0 130.9 3.0 164.7 43.7 65.5 24.7 5.3 2.0 − 4.6 114.1 119.4 − 5.3 250.4 260.3 − 10.0
         Q2 p 166.1 143.5 2.1 151.5 44.9 61.4 11.1 7.2 1.7 + 14.6 120.6 120.1 + 0.5 263.0 247.9 + 15.1
         Q3 p 159.7 131.3 1.3 167.1 45.9 62.6 21.2 9.0 1.5 − 7.4 118.6 118.9 − 0.3 254.5 262.2 − 7.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- are estimated. — 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets but excluding the Post Office here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrep-
pension funds. Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations ancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local govern-
of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include muni- ment. — 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
cipal special purpose associations and various special accounts. — 2The of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Fed-
latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors eral Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Of fice. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2001 240.6 261.3 − 20.7 230.9 255.5 − 24.6 144.2 148.3 − 4.1
2002 240.8 273.5 − 32.7 228.8 258.0 − 29.2 147.0 150.4 − 3.52003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 150.1 − 8.0
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.4 − 3.4
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.5 − 22.1 151.2 153.7 − 2.4
2006
pe 254.7 282.9 − 28.2 249.1 259.5 − 10.4 158.8 156.2 + 2.6
2007 pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 276.0 266.7 + 9.3 169.0 161.2 + 7.8
2008 pe 291.9 303.8 − 11.9 278.6 277.7 + 0.9 174.9 167.5 + 7.4
2006          Q1 52.7 74.1 − 21.4 57.3 64.9 − 7.6 33.8 36.4 − 2.6
         Q2 63.0 61.6 + 1.5 60.6 60.1 + 0.4 37.7 36.8 + 0.9
         Q3 64.6 73.7 − 9.1 60.5 62.5 − 2.1 40.3 38.1 + 2.2         Q4
p 74.3 73.5 + 0.8 70.5 71.2 − 0.7 46.9 44.5 + 2.5
2007          Q1 p 61.1 74.6 − 13.6 63.5 66.5 − 3.0 35.4 37.6 − 2.1
         Q2 p 69.7 64.4 + 5.3 67.6 61.9 + 5.7 40.4 37.3 + 3.1
         Q3 p 68.3 76.8 − 8.5 66.2 64.1 + 2.1 42.5 39.7 + 2.8
         Q4 p 78.3 76.3 + 2.0 77.9 73.4 + 4.5 50.5 46.1 + 4.4
2008          Q1 p 64.1 75.6 − 11.5 67.7 67.7 − 0.1 37.3 37.4 − 0.1
         Q2 p 73.0 68.3 + 4.7 70.7 64.2 + 6.5 42.7 39.7 + 3.0
         Q3 p 71.2 82.7 − 11.4 67.3 66.3 + 1.0 43.8 41.1 + 2.7
         Q4 pe 83.7 77.3 + 6.4 72.1 78.6 − 6.5 51.0 49.2 + 1.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based
istical Office. — 1The Bundesbank’s profit is included only up to the max- on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly
imum amount of €3.5 billion that is to be assigned to the core budget. Rev- figures do not include various special accounts and municipal special pur-
enue over and above this amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund pose associations. 
for Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including the local authority level of the
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total government  1 government European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 of energy tax
2002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 18,560 52,490 + 51 22,321
2003 442,238 390,438 214,002 155,510 20,926 51,673 + 127 22,0672004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,7422007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 ... 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 ... ... 21,510
2007          Q1 122,550 104,537 53,928 43,916 6,693 13,313 + 4,700 5,362
         Q2 136,963 118,090 65,298 49,069 3,724 18,217 + 655 5,408         Q3 131,495 113,712 61,592 46,875 5,246 17,882 − 99 5,524         Q4 147,236 129,215 70,929 51,699 6,587 23,138 − 5,117 5,348
2008          Q1 131,507 111,845 56,179 47,660 8,006 14,148 + 5,513 5,272
         Q2 143,006 122,931 66,952 51,585 4,394 19,614 + 461 5,324
         Q3 137,454 117,861 65,380 48,667 3,814 19,715 − 122 5,503         Q4 ... 131,545 72,178 52,500 6,867 ... ... 5,411
2009          Q1 ... 109,626 55,893 46,212 7,521 ... ... 5,154
2008          Mar . 39,362 20,794 16,588 1,980 . . 1,7572009          Mar . 38,154 20,468 15,784 1,903 . . 1,718
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- ment taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 4Difference be-
bank calculations. — 1Before deducting supplementary central government tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received by the state
grants and shares in energy tax revenue remitted to state government. — government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) and the
2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 
the EU from central government tax revenue. — 3Including local govern-
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,409
2004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,303 21,937 4,002 31,316
2007          Q1 110,577 43,694 30,464 829 5,434 6,966 42,037 32,624 9,413 153 17,377 6,354 962 6,040
         Q2 125,236 55,351 32,244 8,191 6,224 8,693 41,001 30,642 10,359 1,705 20,694 5,493 992 7,145         Q3 120,644 48,742 31,416 7,299 5,571 4,456 42,612 31,724 10,888 1,850 20,750 5,671 1,019 6,932         Q4 137,361 56,912 37,649 8,709 5,700 4,854 43,986 32,532 11,454 3,267 26,868 5,318 1,010 8,146
2008          Q1 118,847 49,649 32,793 3,668 4,727 8,462 44,294 33,488 10,806 297 17,515 6,114 980 7,002
         Q2 130,829 60,000 34,700 10,398 4,822 10,081 41,890 30,645 11,244 1,636 20,700 5,677 927 7,898         Q3 125,510 52,135 34,063 8,878 4,086 5,109 44,339 32,705 11,633 1,690 20,888 5,442 1,017 7,648         Q4 140,312 58,699 40,340 9,741 2,235 6,384 45,468 33,951 11,517 3,161 27,200 4,705 1,080 8,767
2009          Q1 116,683 50,001 33,975 2,971 4,399 8,657 43,087 34,234 8,853 − 36 17,313 5,351 966 7,057
2008          Mar 41,682 19,731 10,256 2,870 5,056 1,548 12,655 9,097 3,558 9 7,065 1,884 338 2,3202009          Mar 40,612 19,502 10,319 3,848 4,343 992 12,216 9,444 2,772 27 6,823 1,730 315 2,458
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. — 1This sion plans. — 4Withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equal- non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5The allocation of revenue to central,
isation of burdens levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular interv als, is
to central and state government), real property taxes and other local govern- regulated in section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percen t-
ment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2008:
percentage share of central, state and local government in revenue: wage 54.4:43.6:2. The EU share is deducted from central government’s share. —
tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed 6Respective percentage share of central and state government for 2008:
taxes on earnings 50:50:-, withholding tax on interest income 44:44:12. — 19.9:80.1. — 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
3After deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pen-
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax city tax tax Other tax buildings tax Other  2 Total tax taxes
2002 42,192 13,778 10,403 8,327 5,097 2,149 1,548 7,592 4,763 3,021 3,200 33,447 23,489 9,261
2003 43,188 14,094 10,280 8,870 6,531 2,204 1,442 7,336 4,800 3,373 3,205 34,477 24,139 9,658
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,7132008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 ... ... ...
2007          Q1 4,540 2,916 2,949 4,504 1,647 416 406 2,636 1,828 1,150 740 12,126 9,541 2,408
         Q2 9,230 3,462 3,249 1,912 1,997 493 352 2,206 1,606 1,006 675 13,432 10,457 2,841         Q3 9,904 3,774 2,875 2,049 1,319 509 322 2,098 1,860 1,043 670 12,701 9,404 3,147         Q4 15,281 4,103 3,277 1,866 1,392 541 408 1,958 1,659 1,004 698 13,142 10,714 2,317
2008          Q1 4,668 2,547 3,192 4,540 1,547 626 394 2,590 1,676 1,087 761 12,956 10,330 2,444
         Q2 9,570 3,267 3,502 1,950 1,594 479 338 2,290 1,461 1,301 625 13,813 10,850 2,815         Q3 9,807 3,649 3,059 2,078 1,464 488 343 2,050 1,398 1,361 632 13,634 10,281 3,184         Q4 15,203 4,111 3,392 1,911 1,655 533 396 1,912 1,193 1,022 579 ... ... ...
2009          Q1 4,777 2,365 3,143 4,502 1,560 594 372 2,284 1,165 1,144 758 ... ... ...
2008          Mar 3,041 1,126 1,434 679 519 166 100 748 578 364 194 . . .2009          Mar 2,982 1,046 1,382 645 538 139 91 738 399 393 200 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- betting, lottery and beer tax.   
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2Notably
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total payments insurance  3 surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004 7 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008 p 242,204 167,606 72,928 238,522 204,228 14,043 + 3,682 16,912 16,399 336 50 126 4,677
2007          Q1 56,177 37,771 18,118 58,275 50,369 3,279 − 2,098 7,955 7,585 215 46 108 4,889
         Q2 59,068 40,501 18,180 58,595 50,282 3,432 + 473 8,890 8,573 165 48 103 4,881         Q3 57,996 39,494 18,115 59,054 50,633 3,470 − 1,058 8,025 7,598 265 45 117 4,868
         Q4 62,926 44,452 18,136 59,159 50,638 3,475 + 3,767 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008          Q1 57,611 39,028 18,241 58,952 50,795 3,473 − 1,341 10,730 9,459 1,095 46 130 4,792
         Q2 60,574 41,958 18,241 59,346 50,714 3,482 + 1,228 11,923 10,267 1,466 61 128 4,704         Q3 59,525 40,769 18,215 60,124 51,418 3,539 − 599 11,727 10,421 1,128 50 127 4,690         Q4
p 64,495 45,851 18,231 60,100 51,301 3,548 + 4,395 16,912 16,399 336 50 126 4,677
2009          Q1 p 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for cash benefits. — 3Including long-term care insurance for pensioners until
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do not 2004 Q1. — 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year
tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. In- or quarter. — 5Including cash. — 6Excluding loans to other social security
cluding financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending funds. — 7 Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loansfrom
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 2,215 − 5,623 5,623
2003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,2152004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 02007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2006          Q1 14,041 13,057 42 12,320 7,155 5,260 1,894 2,306 1,526 780 388 + 1,721 538
         Q2 13,827 12,848 275 11,742 6,362 4,691 1,670 2,266 1,505 761 300 + 2,084 − 538         Q3 12,860 11,950 302 10,142 5,117 3,879 1,239 2,232 1,486 746 183 + 2,718 −         Q4 14,656 13,321 504 9,958 4,616 3,518 1,098 2,455 1,669 787 218 + 4,698 −
2007          Q1 9,932 7,738 78 10,044 5,321 3,971 1,350 2,032 1,370 662 408 − 113 −
         Q2 10,837 7,910 303 9,383 4,598 3,440 1,157 2,089 1,423 666 259 + 1,454 −         Q3 10,366 7,765 232 8,357 3,910 2,979 931 1,985 1,363 622 160 + 2,010 −         Q4 11,703 8,851 357 8,412 3,528 2,684 843 2,264 1,591 674 122 + 3,292 −
2008          Q1 8,714 5,955 83 11,295 4,299 3,183 1,116 2,088 1,473 615 327 − 2,581 −
         Q2 9,690 6,931 211 10,367 3,739 2,761 978 2,182 1,556 626 255 − 677 −         Q3 9,330 6,317 272 8,648 3,245 2,442 804 2,053 1,462 592 149 + 683 −         Q4 10,555 7,248 409 9,098 3,001 2,267 733 2,389 1,731 657 189 + 1,458 −
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government schemes. 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabili-
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- tation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agen-
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a compen- cies, compensation top-up payments and business start-up grants. —
satory amount or a reintegration payment to central government. — 4Un- 7Promotion of winter construction and insolvency compensation for em-
employment benefit and short-time working benefit. — 5Including contri- ployees. 
butions to the statutory health, pension and long-term care insurance
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Thera- Adminis-
peutical trative
Contri- Federal Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 grant Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  3 and aids benefits iture  4 surplus  5 
2002 139,707 136,208 . 143,026 46,308 23,449 23,407 11,492 9,304 7,561 8,019 − 3,320
2003 141,654 138,383 . 145,095 46,800 24,218 24,301 11,819 9,409 6,973 8,206 − 3,4412004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,260 47,594 21,811 22,955 11,263 8,281 6,367 8,196 + 4,020
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008
p 161,869 155,804 2,500 161,140 52,722 29,225 26,070 10,992 9,035 6,561 8,669 + 729
2006          Q1 34,744 34,034 − 35,968 12,834 6,384 5,937 2,547 1,881 1,477 1,836 − 1,224
         Q2 38,004 35,279 2,100 36,830 12,658 6,450 5,904 2,685 2,071 1,439 1,910 + 1,174
         Q3 36,001 35,156 − 36,226 12,551 6,301 5,822 2,432 2,048 1,363 1,931 − 225
         Q4 40,770 37,745 2,100 38,749 12,332 6,739 6,189 2,699 2,290 1,412 2,595 + 2,021
2007          Q1 36,437 35,693 − 37,147 12,948 6,687 6,123 2,670 1,918 1,525 1,879 − 710
         Q2 39,316 37,306 1,250 38,299 12,893 6,862 6,163 2,697 2,160 1,510 1,930 + 1,017         Q3 37,939 37,138 − 38,068 12,750 6,897 6,062 2,552 2,199 1,451 1,987 − 129         Q4 41,987 39,829 1,250 40,384 12,363 7,313 6,481 2,797 2,378 1,527 2,618 + 1,602
2008          Q1 37,937 37,136 − 39,010 13,410 7,084 6,409 2,711 2,011 1,643 1,898 − 1,073
         Q2 40,361 38,491 1,250 40,232 13,387 7,339 6,434 2,728 2,292 1,644 2,021 + 129         Q3 39,185 38,338 − 39,733 13,012 7,215 6,415 2,660 2,271 1,602 2,045 − 548
         Q4 44,387 41,838 1,250 42,165 12,913 7,588 6,812 2,894 2,461 1,672 2,704 + 2,222
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. In-
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — 2In- cluding administrative expenditure on disease management pro-
cluding contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. — grammes. — 5Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk struc-
3Including dentures. — 4Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex- ture compensation scheme. 
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2002 16,917 16,714 17,346 2,363 8,014 4,151 962 837 − 428
2003 16,844 16,665 17,468 2,361 8,183 4,090 951 853 − 6242004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 3502008
p 19,768 19,612 19,141 2,602 9,052 4,238 869 939 + 627
2006          Q1 4,660 4,631 4,511 611 2,152 998 213 246 + 150
         Q2 4,655 4,629 4,447 582 2,158 994 214 222 + 208         Q3 4,471 4,441 4,551 617 2,171 1,014 213 222 − 80
         Q4 4,699 4,657 4,526 611 2,191 1,009 218 200 + 173
2007          Q1 4,301 4,265 4,591 624 2,191 1,014 212 238 − 290
         Q2 4,469 4,432 4,528 595 2,192 993 213 231 − 59         Q3 4,440 4,403 4,617 623 2,226 1,012 216 213 − 177         Q4 4,813 4,761 4,608 626 2,218 1,015 217 209 + 204
2008          Q1 4,421 4,381 4,681 641 2,229 1,022 210 255 − 261
         Q2 4,597 4,563 4,703 634 2,251 1,025 221 230 − 106         Q3 5,167 5,133 4,872 665 2,280 1,089 218 234 + 295         Q4 5,583 5,535 4,884 662 2,293 1,103 219 220 + 698
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally 2Since 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — income subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  2 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2002 + 178,203 + 24,327 + 2,221 + 22 2002 1,277,667 4,440 536,900 137 238,390 497,800
2003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 1,236 + 7,218 2003 1,358,137 4,440 530,700 341 301,956 520,7002004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,200 430 306,912 574,600
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 312,401 653,200
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,900 480 329,577 702,3002007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 457,000 476 313,065 765,4002008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008
p 1,563,837 4,440 440,900 516 317,981 800,000
2006          Q1 + 75,788 + 12,526 + 8,174 − 7,296 2006          Q1 1,508,932 4,440 522,400 486 308,906 672,700
         Q2 + 56,445 + 14,238 + 8,228 + 14,649          Q2 1,525,012 4,440 528,500 485 320,887 670,700
         Q3 + 66,689 + 16,579 + 4,181 + 8,913          Q3 1,540,523 4,440 519,300 485 331,598 684,700
         Q4 + 22,952 − 10,686 − 17,326 − 9,958          Q4 1,533,697 4,440 496,900 480 329,577 702,300
2007          Q1 + 68,285 + 4,600 + 12,649 − 11,200 2007          Q1 1,538,621 4,440 513,900 480 321,201 698,600
         Q2 + 54,415 + 22,020 + 5,792 + 27,209          Q2 1,556,684 4,440 504,600 480 320,564 726,600
         Q3 + 51,413 − 20,291 − 4,783 − 27,450          Q3 1,535,253 4,440 489,000 480 308,433 732,900         Q4 + 40,882 + 667 − 12,571 + 6,541          Q4 1,540,381 4,440 457,000 476 313,065 765,400
2008          Q1 + 69,510 + 10,443 + 12,306 − 705 2008          Q1
p 1,541,759 4,440 467,300 475 306,144 763,400
         Q2 + 52,618 + 7,478 + 4,872 + 10,289          Q2 p 1,554,151 4,440 462,200 506 292,606 794,400
         Q3 + 53,933 − 2,231 − 10,736 − 12,088          Q3 p 1,547,336 4,440 431,900 506 299,190 811,300
         Q4 + 57,296 + 10,519 + 447 + 11,541          Q4 p 1,563,837 4,440 440,900 516 317,981 800,000
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  -  Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 Including  Financial  Market  Stabilisa- Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
tion Fund (SoFFin). — 2 After deducting repurchases. as a residual. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isationor quarter Total (Bubills)  
1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2003 1,358,137 36,022 246,414 153,611 12,810 471,115 . 396,832 341 34,163 6,711 119
2004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 . 379,984 430 53,672 5,572 842005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 . 366,978 488 62,765 4,443 88
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 82
2007          Q3 1,535,253 39,550 324,981 162,292 10,344 569,273 . 354,554 480 69,258 4,443 79
         Q4 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008          Q1 1,541,759 39,467 325,481 173,295 9,885 579,072 . 336,845 475 72,726 4,443 72
         Q2 1,554,151 39,655 328,980 168,938 9,816 586,050 . 343,931 506 71,761 4,443 72
         Q3 1,547,336 42,816 332,792 177,594 9,415 579,969 701 326,582 506 72,445 4,443 74         Q4
p 1,563,837 44,870 337,662 172,037 9,649 584,155 3,174 330,933 516 76,326 4,443 73
Central government 7,8,9,10
2003 767,713 35,235 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 . 38,146 223 7,326 6,711 118
2004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 . 34,835 333 10,751 5,572 832005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 . 29,318 408 10,710 4,443 87
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 82
2007          Q3 939,321 37,725 102,103 162,292 10,344 568,917 . 41,833 408 11,177 4,443 78
         Q4 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008          Q1 950,431 37,774 101,205 173,295 9,885 578,816 . 33,649 408 10,886 4,443 71
         Q2 957,909 37,136 101,932 168,938 9,816 585,794 . 38,496 438 10,845 4,443 71
         Q3 955,678 40,316 105,361 177,594 9,415 579,713 701 26,980 438 10,644 4,443 74         Q4 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
State government
2003 423,737 787 154,189 .... 244,902 4 23,854 . 1
2004 448,672 1,282 179,620 .... 228,644 3 39,122 . 1
2005 471,375 847 201,146 .... 221,163 3 48,216 . 1
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007          Q3 480,050 1,825 222,879 .... 202,054 2 53,290 . 1
         Q4 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008          Q1 477,396 1,693 224,276 .... 193,385 2 58,039 . 1
         Q2 481,875 2,519 227,048 .... 195,189 3 57,116 . 1
         Q3 478,495 2,500 227,430 .... 190,560 3 58,001 . 1
         Q4 p 483,585 4,075 231,978 .... 185,677 3 61,852 . 1
Local government 11
2003 107,857 . 77 . . 734 . 104,469 106 2,471 . .
2004 112,538 . − . . 812 . 108,231 86 3,410 . .2005 116,033 . − . . 466 . 111,889 77 3,601 . .
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007          Q3 115,782 . − . . 256 . 110,666 70 4,790 . .
         Q4 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008          Q1 113,932 . − . . 256 . 109,811 65 3,800 . .
         Q2 114,367 . − . . 256 . 110,246 65 3,800 . .
         Q3 113,163 . − . . 256 . 109,042 65 3,800 . .         Q4
p 114,055 . − . . 225 . 109,965 65 3,800 . .
Special funds 7,8,9,12
2003 58,830 − 4,610 10,185 . 34,201 . 9,315 8 512 . .
2004 57,250 − 4,538 9,685 . 34,355 . 8,274 8 389 . .2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 . 4,609 − 238 . .
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007          Q3 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
         Q4 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical trast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the joi nt issu-
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including ance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. — 8On 1
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term January 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans fund is recorded under central government. — 9On 1 July 2007 central
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Specia l
vestment assistance levy. — 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded
claims. — 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance under central government. — 10From December 2008, including debt of
with the London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing con- the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin). — 11Including debt of
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figure s
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the have been estimated. — 12ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June 2007),
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
their home country; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. — 7In con-
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2007   2008
  2006   2007   2008   2006   2007   2008   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 114.0 119.9 120.4 5.9 5.2 0.4 5.4 5.4 4.7 2.8 6.4 0.9 − 8.0
Construction 77.4 79.4 82.2 − 2.3 2.6 3.5 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.7 2.3 6.9 3.5 1.2
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 110.5 111.0 113.3 4.2 0.5 2.1 0.8 0.6 − 1.1 2.8 4.0 2.1 − 0.6
Financing, renting and business
services  2 108.2 112.2 114.2 2.1 3.6 1.8 4.1 3.2 3.0 2.4 2.5 1.6 0.7
Public and private services  3 103.7 105.1 106.2 0.7 1.3 1.0 1.3 1.3 1.7 0.8 1.2 1.2 0.9
Gross value added 107.3 110.4 111.9 2.9 2.9 1.4 3.1 2.7 2.3 2.2 3.7 1.6 − 1.8
Gross domestic product  4 106.1 108.7 110.1 3.0 2.5 1.3 2.5 2.4 1.6 2.1 3.4 1.4 − 1.6
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 102.5 102.1 102.0 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 1.0 0.1 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6
Government consumption 102.7 105.0 107.1 0.6 2.2 2.0 2.5 2.3 1.8 1.5 2.3 2.1 2.0
Machinery and equipment 111.0 118.7 125.7 11.1 6.9 5.9 5.3 6.5 7.5 6.7 11.8 8.4 − 1.7
Premises 86.5 88.0 90.7 5.0 1.8 3.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 2.8 1.8 6.1 3.1 0.7
Other investment  6 126.6 136.7 145.8 8.0 8.0 6.6 8.9 9.6 8.8 8.4 6.0 6.3 6.0
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . 0.0 0.1 0.5 − 0.5 0.0 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.3 1.8
Domestic use 100.0 101.1 102.9 2.1 1.1 1.7 0.4 1.0 1.2 0.9 2.2 1.9 1.8Net exports  
8 . . . 1.0 1.4 − 0.3 2.1 1.5 0.5 1.2 1.3 − 0.4 − 3.3
Exports 152.2 163.5 168.0 12.7 7.5 2.7 9.3 8.3 2.8 5.6 7.1 3.8 − 5.2
Imports 134.4 141.1 146.7 11.9 5.0 4.0 5.2 5.5 2.2 3.6 5.1 5.5 1.8
Gross domestic product  4 106.1 108.7 110.1 3.0 2.5 1.3 2.5 2.4 1.6 2.1 3.4 1.4 − 1.6
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,355.1 1,373.7 1,402.3 2.3 1.4 2.1 1.4 1.9 1.2 2.3 2.6 2.6 0.8
Government consumption 425.4 435.6 452.0 1.3 2.4 3.8 2.6 2.6 2.2 3.1 4.5 3.9 3.6Machinery and equipment 178.1 189.4 199.0 9.8 6.3 5.1 4.9 5.9 6.7 5.7 10.6 7.6 − 2.2
Premises 218.6 236.4 251.3 7.5 8.1 6.3 7.0 4.9 2.5 4.6 9.2 7.0 3.9
Other investment  
6 26.4 27.7 28.4 3.9 5.1 2.6 5.3 5.4 5.3 2.8 3.0 3.0 1.6
Changes in inventories  7 − 13.7 − 10.9 2.0 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,190.0 2,251.9 2,334.9 3.1 2.8 3.7 2.1 2.6 3.4 2.8 4.5 4.3 3.2Net exports 131.5 171.0 157.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,052.7 1,137.2 1,177.1 14.3 8.0 3.5 9.9 8.5 2.9 6.2 7.9 5.2 − 4.7Imports 921.2 966.2 1,020.1 14.9 4.9 5.6 5.1 4.8 2.6 5.3 7.6 9.2 0.3
Gross domestic product  
4 2,321.5 2,422.9 2,492.0 3.5 4.4 2.9 4.4 4.4 3.5 3.4 4.8 2.8 0.6
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 108.9 110.8 113.2 1.3 1.7 2.2 1.6 1.8 2.3 2.3 2.4 2.6 1.4Gross domestic product 106.1 108.1 109.7 0.5 1.9 1.5 1.9 2.0 1.9 1.3 1.4 1.4 2.1Terms of trade 99.9 100.5 99.8 − 1.3 0.7 − 0.8 0.6 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.6 − 2.1 2.0
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,149.5 1,183.6 1,225.8 1.7 3.0 3.6 3.3 2.6 2.9 3.5 3.4 3.9 3.5Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 616.1 643.5 654.3 8.7 4.5 1.7 0.3 6.8 2.8 4.3 9.4 1.4 − 8.1
National income 1,765.6 1,827.1 1,880.2 4.1 3.5 2.9 2.2 4.1 2.9 3.8 5.5 2.9 − 0.3
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,362.4 2,464.2 2,528.6 4.0 4.3 2.6 3.6 4.5 3.5 3.1 4.4 2.8 0.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2009. — 1In- products). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6In-
cluding communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate tangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertain-
activities, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home servi- ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net in-
ces. — 4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on crease in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
Motor basic metals electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2004 96.8 105.2 99.7 96.0 96.8 94.9 99.6 95.9 98.2 91.7 94.7 95.7
2005 99.7 99.5 100.1 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.6 99.8 99.5 99.7
2006 105.4 105.8 101.0 105.8 107.1 106.0 107.3 101.7 107.3 112.9 107.5 102.62007 111.6 108.9 98.2 113.1 114.6 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.4 109.72008 111.5 108.2 95.6 113.4 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.9 124.5 104.4
2007          July 113.3 126.4 91.5 114.6 117.7 116.3 101.2 105.4 116.4 126.0 122.1 112.3
         Aug 104.5 116.6 91.0 105.1 110.9 100.1 92.6 106.2 109.2 118.4 107.7 83.6         Sep 119.4 127.2 93.7 121.5 121.3 125.2 122.8 112.1 120.5 136.4 129.7 121.9
         Oct 120.2 126.1 103.2 121.5 121.9 124.1 121.3 113.6 121.5 136.7 127.2 119.2
         Nov 120.8 118.3 107.8 122.4 120.1 128.5 120.8 112.7 121.6 140.7 129.8 122.0         Dec 107.7 87.8 109.7 108.8 101.8 119.0 99.5 101.6 101.0 123.9 137.0 90.1
2008          Jan 106.5 78.6 104.8 108.4 112.3 107.3 101.8 102.7 111.8 122.7 108.4 104.4
         Feb 109.4 85.2 97.9 112.1 114.1 115.1 107.3 100.2 114.6 125.9 115.5 116.0         Mar 120.9 99.5 105.3 123.9 125.9 128.2 117.5 109.1 127.3 140.5 133.8 124.7
         Apr 114.2 110.2 99.7 115.9 119.0 119.1 107.1 101.5 119.9 127.7 123.9 116.6
         May 111.1 114.5 92.9 112.7 117.2 114.2 97.0 100.7 117.7 126.2 119.4 106.5         June 116.2 120.4 87.1 118.9 120.3 124.8 106.3 102.6 122.7 133.9 134.2 114.8
         July 113.1 122.4 89.0 115.0 119.2 116.7 95.0 104.3 118.5 131.3 126.5 104.9
         Aug 106.0 117.8 85.7 107.3 113.9 103.8 90.0 103.5 112.8 125.8 113.8 84.2         Sep 117.6 125.0 89.6 120.0 119.2 125.8 115.7 107.7 119.9 136.0 129.4 114.0
         Oct  
+ 115.7 123.1 98.0 117.1 117.5 119.2 113.2 111.6 117.6 133.1 125.9 104.4
         Nov  + 112.1 116.6 97.5 113.3 108.7 119.6 111.8 108.7 109.4 133.5 126.5 100.9
         Dec  + 95.5 84.9 99.8 95.7 82.6 107.6 84.7 99.6 80.1 109.7 136.3 61.6
2009          Jan  + r 86.9 58.8 104.7 r 87.0 r 87.5 r 81.8 84.4 100.1 81.3 r 97.7 r 88.3 67.6
         Feb  + r 86.1 67.4 92.0 86.7 87.0 83.3 84.2 95.3 80.3 98.5 91.2 66.2
         Mar  + p 96.2 104.8 96.9 95.6 93.0 96.4 90.8 101.3 84.5 104.4 102.5 83.9
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2004 + 2.4 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 3.8 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 7.1 + 4.4 + 3.6
2005 + 3.0 − 5.4 + 0.4 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 8.8 + 5.1 + 4.2
2006 + 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.9 + 6.2 + 7.4 + 6.4 + 7.6 + 2.1 + 7.7 + 13.1 + 8.0 + 2.9
2007 + 5.9 + 2.9 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 7.0 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 11.1 + 6.92008 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.3 − 4.8
 
2007          July + 5.0 − 2.5 − 3.1 + 6.3 + 6.8 + 7.8 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 5.8 + 12.6 + 12.1 + 3.1
         Aug + 4.9 − 1.9 + 0.2 + 5.8 + 4.8 + 7.6 + 0.9 + 5.4 + 6.6 + 7.1 + 8.8 + 8.2         Sep + 5.9 − 1.6 + 3.3 + 6.7 + 5.8 + 8.0 + 1.0 + 6.7 + 5.0 + 12.9 + 11.4 + 7.6
         Oct + 6.6 − 1.4 + 5.0 + 7.2 + 5.8 + 10.6 + 0.2 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 10.7 + 13.4 + 9.8
         Nov + 4.1 − 5.8 + 3.8 + 5.0 + 4.8 + 7.1 − 2.3 + 1.5 + 3.4 + 9.2 + 8.3 + 6.3         Dec + 4.5 − 3.5 + 1.7 + 5.2 + 4.8 + 7.2 − 6.0 + 2.9 + 2.3 + 9.1 + 9.6 + 5.8
2008          Jan + 5.9 + 7.4 + 1.7 + 6.2 + 4.7 + 9.2 − 0.9 + 3.9 + 4.5 + 11.2 + 9.8 + 4.3
         Feb + 5.3 + 9.4 + 0.5 + 5.6 + 5.0 + 8.2 − 2.1 + 1.5 + 5.0 + 9.3 + 8.2 + 6.6         Mar + 3.8 − 4.5 + 2.2 + 4.4 + 4.7 + 5.9 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 6.4 + 9.9 + 7.8 + 2.1
         Apr + 5.2 − 2.4 + 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 9.2 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 7.0 + 10.1 + 10.6 + 6.6
         May + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.6 + 2.6 + 3.2 − 5.5 − 4.0 + 4.3 + 8.2 + 3.7 − 2.7         June + 2.0 − 0.4 − 4.8 + 2.8 + 2.2 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 7.2 + 9.3 − 2.1
         July − 0.2 − 3.2 − 2.7 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 6.1 − 1.0 + 1.8 + 4.2 + 3.6 − 6.6
         Aug + 1.4 + 1.0 − 5.8 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 3.7 − 2.8 − 2.5 + 3.3 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 0.7         Sep − 1.5 − 1.7 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 5.8 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 6.5
         Oct  
+ − 3.7 − 2.4 − 5.0 − 3.6 − 3.6 − 3.9 − 6.7 − 1.8 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 1.0 − 12.4
         Nov  + − 7.2 − 1.4 − 9.6 − 7.4 − 9.5 − 6.9 − 7.5 − 3.5 − 10.0 − 5.1 − 2.5 − 17.3
         Dec  + − 11.3 − 3.3 − 9.0 − 12.0 − 18.9 − 9.6 − 14.9 − 2.0 − 20.7 − 11.5 − 0.5 − 31.6
2009          Jan  + r − 18.4 − 25.2 − 0.1 r − 19.7 r − 22.1 r − 23.8 − 17.1 − 2.5 − 27.3 r − 20.4 r − 18.5 − 35.2
         Feb  + r − 21.3 − 20.9 − 6.0 − 22.7 − 23.8 − 27.6 − 21.5 − 4.9 − 29.9 − 21.8 − 21.0 − 42.9
         Mar  + p − 20.4 + 5.3 − 8.0 − 22.8 − 26.1 − 24.8 − 22.7 − 7.1 − 33.6 − 25.7 − 23.4 − 32.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- duction sector in the base year 2005. — +Provisional; adjusted in advance
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
statistics", Tables II.9 to II.11. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, Quarterly Production Survey. 
version 0.2.8. — 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the pro-
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
total  
  
2004 93.6 + 6.7 94.4 + 8.5 92.9 + 6.8 94.5 − 0.7 101.2 − 3.3 92.3 + 0.2
2005 99.7 + 6.5 99.7 + 5.6 99.7 + 7.3 99.7 + 5.5 99.7 − 1.5 99.8 + 8.1
2006 110.7 + 11.0 113.9 + 14.2 109.4 + 9.7 105.3 + 5.6 108.4 + 8.7 104.3 + 4.52007 123.0 + 11.1 125.2 + 9.9 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.92008 115.5 − 6.1 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.6 − 6.1 109.7 − 2.5
 
2008          Mar 135.5 + 3.6 139.6 + 3.1 135.5 + 4.6 117.5 − 1.7 115.9 − 0.6 118.1 − 2.0
         Apr 123.8 + 5.5 128.3 + 5.9 123.9 + 6.0 103.1 − 1.1 106.8 + 0.6 101.9 − 1.5
         May 121.3 + 0.2 129.4 + 4.2 119.0 − 2.0 101.6 − 3.6 101.6 − 4.1 101.7 − 3.4         June 121.8 − 7.0 130.0 − 0.5 118.9 − 11.5 104.6 − 4.0 107.3 − 2.6 103.7 − 4.4
         July 118.3 − 2.5 128.2 + 3.1 112.9 − 6.0 111.0 − 4.2 98.0 − 9.0 115.5 − 2.7
         Aug 110.8 − 0.6 118.2 + 2.5 106.0 − 2.4 111.0 − 3.0 95.5 − 2.3 116.2 − 3.2         Sep 113.9 − 7.6 122.0 − 3.4 108.9 − 10.9 112.1 − 3.8 115.0 − 3.8 111.1 − 3.9
         Oct 105.3 − 17.4 114.8 − 9.7 98.5 − 23.4 109.2 − 9.3 110.7 − 22.7 108.7 − 3.5
         Nov 98.4 − 25.6 102.6 − 24.6 94.5 − 28.7 106.5 − 5.5 103.4 − 9.0 107.5 − 4.3         Dec 85.4 − 30.9 83.3 − 29.4 86.0 − 34.4 90.6 − 7.5 82.2 − 12.1 93.4 − 6.1
2009          Jan 81.1 − 35.2 86.0 − 34.5 75.7 − 38.6 95.9 − 13.5 82.9 − 20.7 100.4 − 11.2
         Feb 79.2 − 37.3 78.3 − 38.3 77.3 − 39.2 96.6 − 18.9 78.2 − 23.1 102.8 − 17.8         Mar  
p 88.8 − 34.5 86.6 − 38.0 89.0 − 34.3 97.4 − 17.1 87.7 − 24.3 100.8 − 14.6
from the domestic market  
  
2004 96.4 + 4.9 95.9 + 7.0 96.9 + 4.8 95.7 − 3.5 103.0 − 6.1 93.4 − 2.6
2005 99.7 + 3.4 99.7 + 4.0 99.6 + 2.8 99.7 + 4.2 99.7 − 3.2 99.7 + 6.7
2006 109.0 + 9.3 113.3 + 13.6 106.4 + 6.8 103.4 + 3.7 111.0 + 11.3 100.9 + 1.22007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 107.0 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.22008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
 
2008          Mar 130.6 + 2.9 139.9 + 7.7 125.9 − 0.3 113.3 − 2.7 119.1 − 0.6 111.4 − 3.4
         Apr 120.8 + 4.9 129.5 + 7.3 117.4 + 4.0 99.0 − 3.2 110.3 + 1.8 95.3 − 5.0
         May 116.5 − 0.4 129.3 + 4.0 109.3 − 4.0 96.9 − 4.0 102.6 − 3.8 95.1 − 4.0         June 119.7 − 2.6 131.3 + 1.9 113.4 − 6.7 100.4 − 1.3 108.1
+ 0.0 97.9 − 1.7
         July 117.2 − 2.2 130.4 + 3.7 108.2 − 7.0 105.1 − 4.6 102.4 − 7.9 106.0 − 3.5         Aug 112.0 + 1.2 122.5 + 3.6 103.8 − 0.9 107.9 − 0.8 95.3 − 2.7 112.0 − 0.3         Sep 114.8 − 3.0 123.3 + 0.3 108.6 − 6.1 109.9 − 2.4 120.7 + 1.0 106.4 − 3.6
         Oct 106.7 − 12.8 114.8 − 9.9 100.0 − 16.8 105.5 − 4.4 114.6 − 1.5 102.5 − 5.4
         Nov 97.0 − 24.3 101.3 − 27.7 92.3 − 23.8 102.7 − 6.9 110.9 − 6.1 100.0 − 7.1         Dec 82.8 − 27.7 81.1 − 30.6 83.3 − 28.7 87.6 − 5.4 85.7 − 9.1 88.2 − 4.1
2009          Jan 85.3 − 28.6 87.1 − 32.9 82.9 − 26.6 89.7 − 15.8 86.3 − 21.6 90.8 − 13.8
         Feb 80.6 − 32.8 77.8 − 39.3 81.5 − 28.8 89.2 − 20.6 80.6 − 23.6 92.0 − 19.7         Mar  
p 89.1 − 31.8 85.5 − 38.9 91.9 − 27.0 90.6 − 20.0 88.3 − 25.9 91.4 − 18.0
from abroad  
  
2004 91.0 + 8.6 92.6 + 10.4 89.9 + 8.6 93.1 + 2.8 99.3 + 0.1 90.9 + 3.8
2005 99.7 + 9.6 99.7 + 7.7 99.7 + 10.9 99.8 + 7.2 99.7 + 0.4 99.8 + 9.8
2006 112.2 + 12.5 114.6 + 14.9 111.5 + 11.8 107.5 + 7.7 105.7 + 6.0 108.1 + 8.32007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.4 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.5 + 10.52008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.7 − 9.1 112.6 − 4.0 100.0 − 9.9 117.1 − 2.0
 
2008          Mar 139.8 + 4.2 139.2 − 1.7 142.3 + 8.0 122.1 − 0.7 112.7 − 0.5 125.5 − 0.6
         Apr 126.5 + 5.9 127.0 + 4.3 128.5 + 7.4 107.5 + 1.2 103.2 − 0.9 109.1 + 2.0
         May 125.5 + 0.6 129.5 + 4.4 125.8 − 0.8 106.7 − 3.3 100.6 − 4.4 109.0 − 2.8         June 123.6 − 10.3 128.6 − 2.9 122.8 − 14.2 109.1 − 6.6 106.4 − 5.3 110.0 − 7.0
         July 119.3 − 2.7 125.6 + 2.4 116.2 − 5.3 117.4 − 3.8 93.6 − 10.2 125.9 − 2.0
         Aug 109.8 − 2.1 113.2 + 1.1 107.5 − 3.4 114.3 − 5.1 95.8 − 1.7 120.9 − 6.0         Sep 113.2 − 11.2 120.6 − 7.3 109.1 − 14.0 114.4 − 5.3 109.2 − 8.6 116.3 − 4.1
         Oct 104.1 − 21.1 114.9 − 9.5 97.4 − 27.6 113.2 − 13.9 106.7 − 37.4 115.5 − 1.7
         Nov 99.6 − 26.6 104.1 − 20.7 96.0 − 31.7 110.6 − 4.0 95.9 − 12.1 115.8 − 1.4         Dec 87.6 − 33.4 85.7 − 28.2 87.9 − 37.7 93.8 − 9.5 78.7 − 15.0 99.2 − 7.9
2009          Jan 77.5 − 40.4 84.7 − 36.2 70.7 − 45.8 102.6 − 11.2 79.5 − 19.5 110.9 − 8.8
         Feb 77.9 − 41.0 78.8 − 37.3 74.3 − 45.4 104.5 − 17.3 75.8 − 22.6 114.8 − 15.9         Mar  
p 88.5 − 36.7 87.9 − 36.9 86.9 − 38.9 104.8 − 14.2 87.1 − 22.7 111.1 − 11.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- statistics", Tables II.13 to II.15. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business version 0.2.8. 
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2005 99.9 − 0.8 99.9 − 2.3 99.9 − 7.2 99.9 + 2.3 99.9 − 5.2 99.8 + 0.8 99.8 + 2.3 99.9 − 0.9
2006 105.1 + 5.2 106.6 + 6.7 104.3 + 4.4 109.6 + 9.7 101.7 + 1.8 103.6 + 3.8 109.0 + 9.2 101.6 + 1.72007 114.0 + 8.5 112.6 + 5.6 98.5 − 5.6 123.2 + 12.4 108.5 + 6.7 115.4 + 11.4 120.7 + 10.7 113.8 + 12.0
2008 113.4 − 0.5 114.8 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.6 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.5 − 2.0
 
2008          Feb 88.8 + 2.3 94.2 + 4.2 80.8 + 0.7 104.1 + 1.3 91.3 + 26.5 83.1 + 0.1 100.0 − 3.7 80.9 + 11.6
         Mar 128.5 + 1.7 128.9 − 2.3 106.0 + 0.1 134.9 − 3.7 160.6 − 1.6 128.0 + 6.3 128.4 − 5.9 138.1 + 10.8         Apr 120.4 + 1.4 129.4 + 9.8 92.7 − 14.6 157.5 + 21.0 118.5 + 22.3 111.1 − 7.3 136.9 + 9.7 115.7 − 1.1
         May 118.9 − 1.8 113.1 − 7.3 97.1 − 9.0 123.8 − 6.3 113.8 − 7.2 125.0 + 4.0 123.2 − 1.4 123.9 + 0.5
         June 135.7 + 4.2 137.7 + 7.5 110.8 − 5.1 159.2 + 13.2 126.5 + 12.9 133.7 + 1.0 145.3 + 4.7 136.7 + 7.4         July 133.2 + 5.2 120.2 − 7.8 104.0 − 1.4 128.7 − 14.3 128.4 + 7.4 146.7 + 19.5 130.4 − 5.9 148.4 + 20.1         Aug 115.9 + 1.8 113.0 + 4.5 93.5 − 9.1 125.7 + 16.1 114.4 − 3.9 119.0 − 0.7 125.1 + 13.4 116.2 − 4.8         Sep 131.2 + 3.6 136.2 + 16.2 113.5 + 3.5 150.4 + 23.3 139.8 + 18.6 126.1 − 7.7 140.1 + 12.2 129.9 − 4.3
         Oct 109.3 − 16.1 110.0 − 10.9 94.0 − 5.5 116.6 − 17.8 123.9 + 7.2 108.6 − 21.0 121.0 − 6.6 104.1 − 27.8
         Nov 92.3 − 11.8 95.5 + 3.7 88.5 + 10.5 104.7 + 3.2 80.9 − 7.8 89.0 − 24.4 105.4 − 6.1 80.8 − 24.8         Dec 93.6 − 7.8 99.7 − 5.2 79.5 − 12.3 105.4 − 7.0 126.5 + 14.1 87.2 − 10.7 108.0 − 2.5 85.1 − 12.0
2009          Jan 75.0 − 19.2 72.7 − 26.7 57.6 − 20.8 84.9 − 31.5 66.1 − 13.0 77.5 − 10.0 83.4 − 28.3 74.1 − 4.5
         Feb 76.9 − 13.4 74.8 − 20.6 70.0 − 13.4 74.4 − 28.5 87.3 − 4.4 79.0 − 4.9 78.0 − 22.0 78.7 − 2.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- "Seasonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.20. — oUsing the Census
sive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2000  3 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age agechange change change change change change change change
Period % % % % % % % %
2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2005 99.9 + 1.9 99.9 + 1.0 99.9 + 2.9 100.1 + 2.2 100.0 + 7.9 100.0 − 1.6 99.9 + 4.5 99.5 + 1.6
2006 4 101.0 + 1.1 100.1 + 0.2 100.1 + 0.2 102.5 + 2.4 102.3 + 2.3 103.5 + 3.5 102.1 + 2.2 106.8 + 7.3
2007 4 99.4 − 1.6 97.2 − 2.9 99.5 − 0.6 103.7 + 1.2 110.2 + 7.7 98.6 − 4.7 104.2 + 2.1 100.6 − 5.8
2008 5 101.3 + 1.9 96.4 − 0.8 100.6 + 1.1 104.7 + 1.0 115.7 + 5.0 99.4 + 0.8 106.7 + 2.4 96.3 − 4.3
 
2008          Mar  5 102.0 + 0.0 97.1 − 3.2 103.1 + 0.7 97.4 − 7.1 116.9 + 9.0 107.5 − 0.7 106.0 + 1.0 109.7 − 0.8
         Apr 100.8 − 1.6 95.8 − 4.4 101.7 − 1.5 106.5 − 11.0 108.6 + 12.7 102.5 − 1.6 106.3 + 1.6 105.1 − 1.3
         May 101.5 + 3.8 96.1 + 0.4 101.8 + 1.0 112.8 + 14.4 97.1 + 7.9 101.8 + 3.9 102.4 − 1.0 102.9 − 4.9         June 97.2 + 1.6 92.0 − 1.8 98.2 + 0.6 95.3 − 1.4 104.8 + 6.2 95.5 + 0.2 103.6 + 2.8 101.5 − 6.5
         July 99.9 + 1.9 94.5 − 1.8 99.6 − 0.1 100.8 + 1.6 106.7 + 1.0 97.7 + 1.0 107.8 + 0.3 98.3 − 7.5
         Aug 99.3 + 2.7 94.0 − 0.9 99.7 + 3.2 98.9
+ 0.0 104.5 + 7.1 96.5 + 0.7 102.3 + 0.4 88.5 − 7.5
         Sep 101.0 + 3.2 95.3 − 0.2 97.4 + 2.3 116.7 + 1.8 108.1 + 4.2 99.0 + 0.7 105.2 + 2.7 94.5 − 6.8
         Oct 105.6 + 2.0 99.9 − 0.6 102.7 + 1.6 119.2 + 1.4 120.7 + 4.5 104.6 − 0.1 109.3 + 0.8 98.4 − 8.3
         Nov 105.7 + 1.0 100.9 − 0.1 102.2 + 2.0 109.1 + 3.0 129.2 + 5.0 106.6 + 1.6 110.3 + 1.3 93.7 − 11.9         Dec 119.9 + 2.8 115.4 + 2.1 116.4 + 3.7 129.4 + 2.0 173.9 − 2.6 107.2 + 1.9 122.9 + 6.2 83.5 − 13.0
2009          Jan 91.8 − 1.9 88.1 − 2.2 91.2 − 2.1 87.7 − 1.3 119.4 − 1.1 85.4 − 2.6 105.4 + 1.4 76.0 − 12.5
         Feb 88.0 − 1.7 84.1 − 1.8 89.8 − 1.4 79.9 − 1.1 96.8 − 0.7 86.2 + 0.2 100.1 + 0.2 95.0 + 3.1         Mar 100.4 − 1.6 95.9 − 1.2 101.4 − 1.6 101.1 + 3.8 104.7 − 10.4 106.4 − 1.0 107.0 + 0.9 112.1 + 2.2
Source of the unadjustded figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding the reporting population to include new entities; in January 2006 and Janu-
value-added tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Sea- ary 2007; statistical breaks in reporting population eliminated by
sonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.23. — oUsing the Census chain-linking. — 5From January 2008 figures are provisional in some cases re-
X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In stores. — 2Including stalls and vised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for
markets. — 3Figures at current prices excluding value-added tax and ad- missing reports. 
justed using retail price indices including value-added tax. — 4Expansion of
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employment  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployment  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-
manu- ment pro- going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cational
ing Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  3 6,7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2005 38,850 − 0.1 − 30 34,490 − 0.5 5,931 719 126 61 114 4,861 + 480 11.7 413
2006 39,095 + 0.6 + 245 34,703 + 0.6 5,249 710 67 52 125 4,487 − 374 10.8 5642007 39,766 + 1.7 + 671 35,317 + 1.8 5,301 714 68 43 132 3,776 − 711 9.0
9 621
2008 40,330 + 1.4 + 564 35,866 + 1.6 10 . 706 102 40 12 151 3,268 − 508 7.8 569
2008          Apr 40,111 + 1.6 + 627 5,254 705 59 36 152 3,414 − 563 8.1 592         May 40,261 + 1.5 + 596 35,748 + 1.7 5,260 709 51 37 150 3,283 − 529
11 7.8 579
         June 40,358 + 1.5 + 598 5,273 715 50 39 150 3,160 − 528 7.5 596
         July 40,360 + 1.5 + 614 5,302 716 43 41 143 3,210 − 505 7.7 588
         Aug 40,418 + 1.4 + 563 36,018 + 1.6 5,324 720 39 43 137 3,196 − 510 7.6 586         Sep 40,708 + 1.3 + 536 5,336 721 50 44 148 3,081 − 463 7.4 585
         Oct 40,874 + 1.2 + 480 5,319 714 71 46 163 2,997 − 437 7.2 571
         Nov 40,837 + 1.1 + 427 36,325 + 1.2 5,303 710 130 46 169 2,988 − 390 7.1 539
         Dec 40,583 + 0.9 + 353 5,271 697 270 44
12 168 3,102 − 304 7.4 503
2009          Jan 39,873 + 0.3 + 133 5,229 671 ... 36 12 157 3,489 − 170 8.3 485
         Feb 39,839 + 0.2 + 60 35,440 + 0.2 5,219 666 ... 12 3112 162 3,552 − 66 8.5 506
         Mar 13 39,876 13 − 0.1 13 − 50 5,196 ... ... 12 25 ... 3,586 + 78 8.6 507
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 20 ... 3,585 + 171 8.6 495
Western Germany    o  
  
2005 . . . . . 5,214 529 101 12 76 3,247 + 464 9.9 325
2006 . . . . . 4,650 525 54 10 86 3,007 − 240 9.1 4362007 . . . . . 4,684 529 52 9 90 2,486 − 521 7.5
9 489
2008 . . . . . 10 . 527 80 7 12 104 2,145 − 341 6.4 455
2008          Apr . . . . . 4,632 527 47 7 105 2,216 − 395 6.6 465         May . . . . . 4,637 530 41 7 104 2,140 − 364
11 6.4 462
         June . . . . . 4,648 534 40 7 103 2,074 − 354 6.2 481
         July . . . . . 4,674 533 35 7 97 2,120 − 330 6.4 478
         Aug . . . . . 4,692 537 33 7 93 2,109 − 335 6.3 474         Sep . . . . . 4,700 538 42 7 101 2,042 − 293 6.1 471
         Oct . . . . . 4,684 532 59 7 113 1,990 − 275 6.0 460
         Nov . . . . . 4,669 529 110 7 118 1,985 − 239 6.0 432
         Dec . . . . . 4,640 521 223 6
12 117 2,059 − 172 6.2 400
2009          Jan . . . . . 4,604 . ... 6 12 110 2,306 − 76 6.9 382
         Feb . . . . . 4,594 . ... 12 612 114 2,348 + 1 7.0 394
         Mar . . . . . 4,571 . ... 12 5 ... 2,379 + 108 7.1 390
         Apr . . . . . ... . ... 12 5 ... 2,400 + 184 7.2 378
Eastern Germany    +  
  
2005 . . . . . 717 189 25 49 38 1,614 + 16 18.7 88
2006 . . . . . 599 185 13 42 39 1,480 − 134 17.3 1292007 . . . . . 617 185 16 33 42 1,291 − 190 15.1
9 133
2008 . . . . . 10 . 179 21 33 12 47 1,123 − 167 13.1 113
2008          Apr . . . . . 622 178 12 28 47 1,198 − 167 13.9 127         May . . . . . 623 179 10 29 47 1,143 − 165
11 13.4 117
         June . . . . . 625 181 10 32 47 1,086 − 174 12.7 115
         July . . . . . 628 183 8 34 46 1,090 − 175 12.8 110
         Aug . . . . . 633 184 7 36 44 1,087 − 175 12.8 112         Sep . . . . . 636 184 8 38 47 1,039 − 170 12.2 114
         Oct . . . . . 636 182 12 40 50 1,007 − 162 11.8 111
         Nov . . . . . 634 181 20 40 51 1,003 − 151 11.8 107
         Dec . . . . . 631 176 48 37
12 51 1,043 − 133 12.2 103
2009          Jan . . . . . 625 . ... 30 12 47 1,182 − 94 13.9 103
         Feb . . . . . 626 . ... 12 2512 48 1,204 − 66 14.1 112
         Mar . . . . . 624 . ... 12 20 ... 1,207 − 29 14.2 116
         Apr . . . . . ... . ... 12 16 ... 1,185 − 13 13.9 117
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual (SAM). — 7Mid-month level. — 8Relative to the total civilian labour
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- force. — 9From January 2007, vacancies for seasonal workers are included
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- only if they are based on non-specific employer requirements. — 10From
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Workplace concept; aver- January 2008, based on Nace Rev.2 definitions, previously based on Nace
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — Rev.1. — 11From May 2008, calculated on the basis of new labour force fig-
3Enterprises with at least 50 employees. — 4The figures refer to enter- ures. — 12Annualised data from the Federal Employment Agency based on
prises from Nace Rev.2 items 41.2, 42, 43.1 and 43.9. — 5Number within a information received so far. — 13Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal
given month. — 6Employees involved in job creation schemes; up to Decem- Statistical Office. 
ber 2008 including employees involved in structural adjustment measures
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  3 rents  3 index  2 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1 2 
Period 2005 = 100 2000 = 100 2005 = 100 2000 = 100
Index level  
  
2005 8 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 8 100.0 98.8 100.0 100.0 139.5 105.4
2006 9 101.6 101.9 100.3 108.5 101.0 101.1 102.4 9 105.4 107.1 101.8 104.4 163.9 131.5
2007 10 11  103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 118.2 103.0 105.1 166.6 143.7
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 121.2 104.8 109.9 217.1 150.3
 
2007          June 103.6 105.1 101.4 112.8 103.5 102.2 106.7 113.2 103.2 105.3 164.3 148.5
         July 104.2 105.0 101.2 113.8 105.2 102.3 106.7 117.8 103.3 105.5 172.7 146.2
         Aug 104.1 105.1 101.1 112.5 105.2 102.5 109.6 106.7 121.8 103.2 104.9 166.8 141.5
         Sep 104.2 105.8 101.8 114.0 104.3 102.5 106.8 126.7 103.2 105.3 177.4 142.9
         Oct 11 104.5 108.2 102.2 113.8 104.0 102.6 107.4 129.2 103.2 106.1 186.5 143.9
         Nov 105.0 109.7 102.4 118.2 103.8 102.7 110.3 108.2 130.2 103.2 106.7 202.1 137.5
         Dec 105.6 110.4 102.2 115.8 106.4 102.8 108.1 130.9 103.1 106.6 199.6 138.2
2008          Jan 105.3 112.1 101.9 118.4 104.3 103.0 108.9 130.9 103.8 107.5 201.2 153.3
         Feb 105.8 112.0 102.3 118.8 105.3 103.1 111.5 109.5 131.6 104.2 108.6 210.6 163.1         Mar 106.3 112.6 102.5 121.5 105.7 103.2 110.2 131.5 104.3 108.9 216.5 160.5
         Apr 106.1 113.0 102.6 122.6 104.2 103.3 111.2 126.8 104.5 109.8 225.1 157.7
         May 106.7 113.0 102.4 126.9 105.0 103.4 112.5 112.2 125.5 105.1 112.1 258.8 159.6         June 107.0 113.1 102.3 129.3 105.3 103.5 113.3 126.4 105.5 113.6 278.3 162.8
         July 107.6 113.4 101.8 131.0 107.1 103.6 115.5 127.0 106.0 114.3 279.8 160.6
         Aug 107.3 112.9 102.2 127.1 107.0 103.7 114.0 114.9 124.1 105.9 113.6 254.8 156.4         Sep 107.2 112.6 102.9 127.9 105.9 103.8 115.2 119.9 105.8 112.7 232.7 150.8
         Oct 107.0 112.8 103.2 124.9 105.6 103.9 115.2 115.3 105.1 109.1 180.2 133.3
         Nov 106.5 112.0 103.1 119.9 105.6 104.0 114.0 113.3 110.8 104.3 106.0 142.7 126.9         Dec 106.8 112.7 103.0 114.8 108.3 104.0 112.4 107.8 103.1 102.2 107.3 114.6
2009          Jan 106.3 113.3 102.7 117.4 106.0 104.1 111.1
p 106.0 102.9 101.7 112.8 121.6
         Feb 106.9 113.3 103.4 117.4 107.1 104.3 114.4 110.5 p 106.3 102.9 101.6 112.1 123.2
         Mar 106.8 112.8 103.7 116.0 106.7 104.4 109.7 p 104.8 102.5 101.2 118.8 120.6
         Apr 106.8 112.3 103.9 116.2 106.8 104.5 ... ... ... ... 125.8 126.9
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 8 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.1 8 + 4.4 − 0.9 + 0.9 + 3.4 + 37.6 + 9.4
2006 9 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.4 9 + 5.4 + 8.4 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 17.5 + 24.8
2007 10 11  + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 10.4 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 9.3
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 30.3 + 4.6
 
2007          June + 1.9 + 2.6 + 1.3 + 1.8 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 1.4 + 0.6 − 4.9 + 14.2
         July + 2.1 + 3.0 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 11.2 + 1.2 − 0.3 − 5.2 + 7.8
         Aug + 2.2 + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 6.4 + 0.2 + 10.9 + 1.1 − 0.9 − 6.6 + 5.4
         Sep + 2.7 + 3.3 + 1.7 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 16.1 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 14.2 + 6.9
         Oct 11 + 2.8 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 6.1 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 19.7 + 0.8 + 1.4 + 27.0 + 3.5
         Nov + 3.2 + 7.3 + 1.5 + 10.7 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 6.2 + 2.1 + 17.9 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 39.5 − 0.1
         Dec + 3.1 + 7.5 + 1.3 + 8.5 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 1.9 + 18.1 + 0.9 + 2.7 + 34.2 + 1.4
2008          Jan + 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.7 + 9.3 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 18.4 + 1.4 + 4.1 + 51.1 + 10.4
         Feb + 2.8 + 7.8 + 0.9 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 3.0 + 3.2 + 16.9 + 1.6 + 4.8 + 48.1 + 15.0         Mar + 3.1 + 8.6 + 0.8 + 9.8 + 2.8 + 1.4 + 3.9 + 16.7 + 1.6 + 4.6 + 46.6 + 10.3
         Apr + 2.4 + 7.3 + 0.9 + 9.6 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 4.7 + 13.3 + 1.5 + 4.8 + 45.3 + 5.8
         May + 3.0 + 7.9 + 0.8 + 12.8 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 3.1 + 5.3 + 11.5 + 1.9 + 6.9 + 67.3 + 6.0         June + 3.3 + 7.6 + 0.9 + 14.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 6.2 + 11.7 + 2.2 + 7.9 + 69.4 + 9.6
         July + 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.6 + 15.1 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 8.2 + 7.8 + 2.6 + 8.3 + 62.0 + 9.8
         Aug + 3.1 + 7.4 + 1.1 + 13.0 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 7.7 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 8.3 + 52.8 + 10.5         Sep + 2.9 + 6.4 + 1.1 + 12.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.9 − 5.4 + 2.5 + 7.0 + 31.2 + 5.5
         Oct + 2.4 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 9.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.3 − 10.8 + 1.8 + 2.8 − 3.4 − 7.4
         Nov + 1.4 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 4.7 − 14.9 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 29.4 − 7.7         Dec + 1.1 + 2.1 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 4.0 − 17.6
+ 0.0 − 4.1 − 46.2 − 17.1
2009          Jan + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 p − 19.0 − 0.9 − 5.4 − 43.9 − 20.7
         Feb + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.9 p − 19.2 − 1.2 − 6.4 − 46.8 − 24.5
         Mar + 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.2 − 4.5 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 p − 20.3 − 1.7 − 7.1 − 45.1 − 24.9
         Apr + 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... − 44.1 − 19.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — September 2005, increase in tobacco tax. — 9From October 2006, increase
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data in the prices of tobacco products. — 10From January 2007, increase in the
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Net rents. — 4Excluding standard rate of VAT and in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. —
value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 11 Introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 
7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 8From
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2001 902.0 2.1 590.0 3.6 353.8 4.1 943.9 3.8 1,389.5 3.9 130.9 6.2 9.4
2002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.92003 908.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 378.3 2.9 967.2 0.8 1,431.8 2.1 147.2 5.6 10.3
2004 914.6 0.7 603.3 2.4 378.2 − 0.0 981.5 1.5 1,454.5 1.6 151.4 2.9 10.4
2005 912.3 − 0.2 602.7 − 0.1 378.6 0.1 981.3 − 0.0 1,481.4 1.8 156.7 3.5 10.6
2006 926.7 1.6 605.2 0.4 377.6 − 0.3 982.8 0.2 1,514.1 2.2 159.0 1.5 10.52007 958.2 3.4 623.4 3.0 372.6 − 1.3 996.1 1.4 1,540.9 1.8 167.1 5.1 10.82008 995.8 3.9 642.5 3.1 374.9 0.6 1,017.4 2.1 1,583.8 2.8 181.5 8.6 11.5
2007          Q3 237.9 3.0 158.6 2.5 93.0 − 0.9 251.6 1.2 381.6 2.0 35.0 3.7 9.2
         Q4 266.5 3.5 172.4 3.5 92.3 − 0.9 264.7 2.0 398.1 1.9 38.2 8.5 9.6
2008          Q1 230.9 4.0 149.4 3.1 94.7 0.4 244.1 2.0 394.3 3.1 59.2 7.6 15.0
         Q2 240.5 3.8 151.7 2.8 93.3 0.3 245.0 1.8 390.7 3.2 42.1 8.1 10.8         Q3 248.2 4.3 164.5 3.7 93.6 0.6 258.0 2.6 394.2 3.3 38.5 10.0 9.8         Q4 276.2 3.6 177.0 2.7 93.3 1.1 270.3 2.1 404.6 1.6 41.8 9.3 10.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2009. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2001 102.0 2.0 101.9 1.9 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 101.8 1.8
2002 104.6 2.6 104.5 2.6 104.5 2.2 104.4 2.2 103.2 1.3
2003 106.7 2.0 106.6 2.0 106.8 2.2 106.9 2.4 104.5 1.32004 108.0 1.2 108.0 1.3 108.1 1.3 108.6 1.6 105.1 0.6
2005 108.9 0.9 109.1 1.0 109.1 0.9 109.8 1.0 105.4 0.3
2006 110.0 1.0 110.5 1.2 110.0 0.8 110.7 0.9 106.4 0.92007 111.2 1.2 111.9 1.3 111.6 1.5 112.3 1.5 108.0 1.62008 114.3 2.7 115.1 2.8 114.9 3.0 115.8 3.1 110.5 2.3
2007          Q4 124.5 1.0 125.3 1.0 125.5 1.6 113.1 1.7 118.2 1.7
2008          Q1 105.0 2.6 105.7 2.6 106.0 2.8 114.7 2.9 103.8 2.1
         Q2 106.0 1.7 106.8 1.8 107.0 3.3 115.6 3.3 107.2 2.1         Q3 117.1 2.9 117.9 3.0 117.4 2.8 116.4 3.2 109.9 2.7         Q4 129.0 3.6 129.9 3.7 129.2 2.9 116.7 3.1 121.1 2.4
2009          Q1 108.2 3.0 109.0 3.1 108.8 2.7 117.8 2.7 . .
2008          Sep 106.9 2.6 107.7 2.7 107.6 3.1 116.5 3.2 . .
         Oct 106.6 2.8 107.4 2.9 107.6 2.9 116.5 3.0 . .
         Nov 167.8 2.6 169.0 2.7 169.5 2.8 116.7 3.2 . .         Dec 112.6 5.9 113.4 6.0 110.4 3.1 116.7 3.2 . .
2009          Jan 108.8 3.7 109.6 3.8 108.4 2.4 117.4 2.4 . .
         Feb 107.6 2.4 108.4 2.5 108.7 2.7 117.7 2.7 . .         Mar 108.2 2.9 109.0 3.0 109.3 3.0 118.4 3.0 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13
thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2009. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2008 2009
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb
Current account − 10,457 + 11,085 − 93,590 − 31,142 − 23,142 − 22,049 − 3,296 − 19,902 − 2,305A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,396,798 1,513,718 1,579,321 407,767 403,074 378,197 113,838 98,459 103,086
Imports (fob) 1,384,500 1,467,287 1,585,391 401,675 412,086 378,882 114,202 108,555 101,615
Balance + 12,296 + 46,432 − 6,072 + 6,092 − 9,013 − 686 − 364 − 10,097 + 1,471
2 Services
Receipts 440,827 490,310 504,014 126,083 136,243 124,744 41,767 37,022 34,736Expenditure 397,530 441,143 462,275 113,021 122,836 119,520 38,979 35,407 32,917
Balance + 43,297 + 49,165 + 41,741 + 13,063 + 13,408 + 5,223 + 2,787 + 1,615 + 1,819
3 Income + 13,607 + 1,391 − 32,427 − 31,956 − 2,965 − 929 − 118 − 1,685 − 536
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 89,812 89,760 88,167 22,004 13,534 26,570 16,008 5,749 15,991
Transfers to non-residents 169,470 175,664 184,999 40,345 38,106 52,227 21,609 15,484 21,050
Balance − 79,654 − 85,904 − 96,830 − 18,340 − 24,572 − 25,657 − 5,601 − 9,734 − 5,059
Capital account + 9,215 + 13,724 + 12,404 + 3,132 + 1,911 + 1,338 − 152 + 689 + 908B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 141,426 + 41,207 + 313,620 + 79,739 + 61,660 + 136,700 + 19,732 + 51,211 − 5,369C)
1 Direct investment − 157,629 − 92,453 − 251,294 − 53,421 − 35,903 − 86,742 − 22,523 − 15,919 − 13,192
By resident units abroad − 417,417 − 474,165 − 350,979 − 45,003 − 88,671 − 50,527 − 8,026 − 27,171 − 20,599By non-resident units in the euro area + 259,790 + 381,714 + 99,686 − 8,419 + 52,769 − 36,215 − 14,497 + 11,252 + 7,407
2 Portfolio investment + 293,737 + 159,731 + 439,198 + 27,260 + 121,522 + 201,849 + 6,384 − 7,357 + 61,169
By resident units abroad − 527,619 − 439,525 + 14,736 − 134,473 + 60,858 + 155,304 + 22,090 − 20,837 + 25,209
Equity − 153,035 − 79,548 + 112,965 − 32,341 + 51,278 + 49,661 + 5,016 − 7,782 + 8,010Bonds and notes − 307,320 − 282,472 − 91,100 − 93,803 − 19,856 + 59,571 + 23,289 − 10,885 + 12,523Money market instruments − 67,264 − 77,502 − 7,131 − 8,330 + 29,436 + 46,071 − 6,214 − 2,170 + 4,676
By non-resident units in the euro area + 821,355 + 599,255 + 424,462 + 161,733 + 60,664 + 46,545 − 15,706 + 13,479 + 35,959
Equity + 297,071 + 127,637 − 77,073 − 17,746 − 73,631 − 45,949 − 6,071 − 44,505 − 5,719
Bonds and notes + 519,802 + 433,029 + 281,633 + 155,467 + 63,851 − 13,035 − 28,956 + 27,791 + 35,739Money market instruments + 4,480 + 38,591 + 219,902 + 24,011 + 70,444 + 105,529 + 19,321 + 30,194 + 5,940
3 Financial derivatives + 3,305 − 67,005 − 30,874 − 8,929 − 8,381 + 9,191 − 2,876 + 5,787 + 2,916
4 Other investment + 2,893 + 46,025 + 160,452 + 114,838 − 17,219 + 12,825 + 30,838 + 63,316 − 57,392
Eurosystem + 29,168 + 69,366 + 284,274 + 51,313 + 109,733 + 112,822 + 13,704 − 56,766 − 24,330
General government + 8,903 + 6,756 + 16,360 − 7,447 + 10,185 + 9,228 + 6,729 − 11,368 + 2,858MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 27,255 + 86,897 − 142,309 + 77,025 − 108,208 − 176,401 − 12,011 + 151,766 − 16,195
Long-term − 52,527 − 109,677 − 233,949 − 59,559 − 74,687 − 53,942 − 11,989 + 3,477 − 21,824Short-term + 25,271 + 196,575 + 91,641 + 136,586 − 33,521 − 122,459 − 22 + 148,289 + 5,628
Other sectors − 7,925 − 117,000 + 2,131 − 6,054 − 28,929 + 67,176 + 22,416 − 20,316 − 19,725
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 879 − 5,088 − 3,864 − 8 + 1,642 − 424 + 7,909 + 5,384 + 1,131
Errors and omissions − 140,186 − 66,016 − 232,435 − 51,731 − 40,429 − 115,989 − 16,284 − 31,998 + 6,766D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  
1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 Omissions
DM million
1995 − 42,363 + 85,303 − 4,294 − 63,985 − 3,975 − 55,413 − 3,845 + 50,117 − 10,355 − 3,909
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 791997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,6131998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,2942001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,7752001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,7572002 + 42,973 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,517 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,3132003 + 40,931 + 129,921 − 11,142 − 34,497 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,515
2004 + 102,889 + 156,096 − 16,447 − 29,341 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,660
2005 + 114,650 + 158,179 − 14,036 − 25,677 + 24,896 − 28,712 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 16,3542006 + 150,913 + 159,048 − 13,106 − 13,985 + 46,105 − 27,148 − 252 − 174,977 + 2,934 + 24,3162007 + 191,267 + 195,348 − 9,818 − 13,312 + 50,643 − 31,594 + 134 − 237,280 − 953 + 45,8792008 + 164,868 + 178,507 − 12,475 − 12,822 + 44,746 − 33,088 − 90 − 203,364 − 2,008 + 38,585
2006          Q2 + 32,148 + 34,873 − 2,616 − 1,428 + 6,298 − 4,979 − 25 − 67,740 + 367 + 35,617
         Q3 + 31,690 + 38,718 − 3,088 − 9,036 + 13,315 − 8,219 − 250 − 26,030 + 844 − 5,410         Q4 + 54,836 + 45,892 − 3,569 + 1,336 + 14,900 − 3,722 − 115 − 37,493 + 642 − 17,228
2007          Q1 + 47,739 + 48,239 − 2,677 − 1,918 + 15,171 − 11,076 + 145 − 49,877 + 100 + 1,993
         Q2 + 42,110 + 48,183 − 2,276 − 1,739 + 2,957 − 5,015 + 364 − 82,845 − 1,359 + 40,371         Q3 + 43,409 + 50,181 − 2,668 − 9,499 + 14,524 − 9,128 + 306 − 26,896 − 347 − 16,819         Q4 + 58,009 + 48,745 − 2,198 − 156 + 17,992 − 6,374 − 681 − 77,662 + 653 + 20,335
2008          Q1 + 49,650 + 51,167 − 3,274 − 936 + 14,848 − 12,156 + 518 − 60,618 − 1,165 + 10,450
         Q2 + 43,129 + 53,580 − 2,739 − 3,328 + 762 − 5,146 + 324 − 82,333 − 889 + 38,880         Q3 + 34,934 + 39,959 − 2,670 − 7,653 + 14,324 − 9,027 − 289 − 12,930 + 1,630 − 21,714         Q4 + 37,156 + 33,801 − 3,792 − 905 + 14,812 − 6,759 − 643 − 47,482 − 1,584 + 10,969
2009          Q1  
p + 19,268 + 26,893 − 3,044 − 4,237 + 12,800 − 13,144 + 37 − 1,844 + 321 − 17,461
2006          Oct + 16,026 + 16,962 − 1,200 − 1,136 + 4,667 − 3,266 + 1 − 1,439 + 401 − 14,588
         Nov + 18,767 + 18,133 − 1,282 − 316 + 4,975 − 2,743 − 80 − 19,030 − 102 + 343         Dec + 20,043 + 10,798 − 1,087 + 2,788 + 5,258 + 2,287 − 36 − 17,024 + 342 − 2,982
2007          Jan + 15,216 + 16,177 − 934 − 2,311 + 4,248 − 1,964 + 240 − 3,654 − 458 − 11,801
         Feb + 11,709 + 13,952 − 743 − 131 + 5,264 − 6,633 + 14 − 23,411 + 566 + 11,687         Mar + 20,815 + 18,110 − 1,000 + 524 + 5,659 − 2,479 − 109 − 22,812 − 8 + 2,107
         Apr + 13,579 + 14,818 − 586 − 302 + 1,650 − 2,000 + 144 − 23,343 − 1,215 + 9,620
         May + 10,156 + 16,889 − 1,208 − 1,243 − 3,464 − 817 + 293 − 30,764 − 657 + 20,315         June + 18,375 + 16,476 − 481 − 194 + 4,771 − 2,197 − 73 − 28,738 + 513 + 10,436
         July + 15,120 + 17,780 − 951 − 3,119 + 4,412 − 3,003 + 373 − 2,283 + 121 − 13,210
         Aug + 10,338 + 14,183 − 813 − 4,681 + 4,669 − 3,020 − 54 − 1,911 − 21 − 8,373         Sep + 17,951 + 18,218 − 905 − 1,699 + 5,442 − 3,105 − 14 − 22,702 − 447 + 4,764
         Oct + 17,766 + 18,851 − 814 − 2,283 + 5,511 − 3,499 − 13 − 31,405 + 309 + 13,652
         Nov + 21,035 + 19,423 − 809 + 184 + 5,828 − 3,591 − 224 − 26,429 + 339 + 5,618         Dec + 19,207 + 10,472 − 574 + 1,943 + 6,652 + 715 − 444 − 19,828 + 5 + 1,064
2008          Jan + 15,598 + 17,308 − 972 − 938 + 4,048 − 3,848 + 447 − 2,085 − 311 − 13,959
         Feb + 16,478 + 17,086 − 1,395 + 448 + 5,412 − 5,072 + 217 − 26,980 − 349 + 10,284         Mar + 17,573 + 16,773 − 906 − 446 + 5,388 − 3,235 − 146 − 31,553 − 504 + 14,125
         Apr + 15,351 + 18,995 − 869 − 197 − 631 − 1,947 − 64 − 15,558 − 1,089 + 271
         May + 8,169 + 14,481 − 1,072 − 2,142 − 2,777 − 321 + 407 − 36,554 + 913 + 27,978         June + 19,609 + 20,104 − 798 − 989 + 4,170 − 2,878 − 19 − 30,221 − 713 + 10,632
         July + 11,163 + 13,989 − 908 − 3,462 + 4,500 − 2,955 − 123 + 7,596 + 1,225 − 18,637
         Aug + 8,083 + 10,777 − 1,043 − 2,977 + 4,584 − 3,258 − 47 + 457 − 82 − 8,493         Sep + 15,688 + 15,193 − 719 − 1,213 + 5,241 − 2,814 − 120 − 20,984 + 487 + 5,416
         Oct + 15,368 + 16,642 − 972 − 1,702 + 5,208 − 3,808 − 199 − 22,825 − 3,373 + 7,656
         Nov + 9,112 + 9,903 − 1,706 − 305 + 4,993 − 3,772 − 84 + 7,151 − 269 − 16,179         Dec + 12,676 + 7,256 − 1,113 + 1,102 + 4,611 + 821 − 360 − 31,807 + 2,058 + 19,491
2009          Jan + 2,260 + 6,986 − 1,110 − 2,798 + 3,470 − 4,288 − 48 + 19,505 + 2,245 − 21,717
         Feb + 6,838 + 8,629 − 1,051 − 396 + 4,934 − 5,278 − 83 + 2,594 − 271 − 9,349         Mar  
p + 10,169 + 11,278 − 884 − 1,043 + 4,396 − 3,578 + 168 − 23,943 − 1,652 + 13,605
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2008  2009
Country / group of countries  2006  2007  2008 Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar  p 
All countries  1 Exports 893,042 965,236 992,539 89,435 76,764 67,222 64,540 64,456 70,325
Imports 733,994 769,887 814,033 72,793 66,861 59,967 57,554 55,827 59,047Balance + 159,048 + 195,348 + 178,507 + 16,642 + 9,903 + 7,256 + 6,986 + 8,629 + 11,278
I Exports 657,325 726,518 743,452 67,028 56,701 48,149 ... ... ...European countries
Imports 512,568 541,650 582,703 51,896 46,764 40,622 ... ... ...
Balance + 144,757 + 184,867 + 160,749 + 15,132 + 9,937 + 7,526 ... ... ...
Exports 564,864 623,837 632,953 56,740 48,223 40,382 ... ... ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 423,731 449,691 478,050 43,060 37,586 33,294 ... ... ...
Balance + 141,133 + 174,147 + 154,903 + 13,681 + 10,636 + 7,088 ... ... ...
Euro-area (16) Exports 385,273 421,570 427,137 38,490 32,895 28,105 ... ... ...countries Imports 293,126 307,188 327,207 29,522 25,222 22,783 ... ... ...
Balance + 92,147 + 114,383 + 99,930 + 8,968 + 7,673 + 5,322 ... ... ...
of which
Austria Exports 49,512 52,813 53,841 5,062 4,339 3,747 ... ... ...
Imports 30,301 32,091 33,148 3,010 2,650 2,159 ... ... ...Balance + 19,211 + 20,722 + 20,693 + 2,053 + 1,688 + 1,588 ... ... ...
Belgium and Exports 51,141 55,397 56,629 5,043 4,289 3,739 ... ... ...
Luxembourg Imports 36,263 39,455 43,215 3,774 3,045 2,857 ... ... ...
Balance + 14,878 + 15,942 + 13,414 + 1,270 + 1,244 + 882 ... ... ...
France Exports 85,006 91,665 96,859 8,893 7,508 6,970 ... ... ...
Imports 62,102 62,873 66,710 5,968 5,156 4,835 ... ... ...Balance + 22,904 + 28,792 + 30,149 + 2,924 + 2,352 + 2,135 ... ... ...
Italy Exports 59,348 64,499 64,003 5,905 5,001 3,945 ... ... ...
Imports 41,470 44,694 45,962 4,122 3,501 3,093 ... ... ...Balance + 17,878 + 19,805 + 18,040 + 1,783 + 1,500 + 852 ... ... ...
Netherlands Exports 56,531 62,948 65,644 5,957 5,150 4,485 ... ... ...
Imports 60,750 61,951 72,083 7,008 5,658 5,280 ... ... ...Balance − 4,219 + 997 − 6,439 − 1,051 − 508 − 795 ... ... ...
Spain Exports 41,775 47,631 43,704 3,618 2,964 2,342 ... ... ...
Imports 19,832 20,687 21,631 1,820 1,675 1,462 ... ... ...Balance + 21,943 + 26,944 + 22,073 + 1,798 + 1,289 + 880 ... ... ...
Other EU member Exports 179,591 202,267 205,816 18,250 15,328 12,277 ... ... ...states Imports 130,605 142,503 150,843 13,538 12,365 10,511 ... ... ...
Balance + 48,986 + 59,764 + 54,972 + 4,712 + 2,963 + 1,766 ... ... ...
of which
United Exports 64,726 69,760 66,788 5,771 4,681 3,925 ... ... ...Kingdom Imports 40,832 41,966 44,261 3,982 3,641 3,265 ... ... ...
Balance + 23,895 + 27,794 + 22,527 + 1,790 + 1,039 + 660 ... ... ...
Exports 92,461 102,680 110,499 10,288 8,479 7,767 ... ... ... 2 Other European
Imports 88,837 91,960 104,653 8,836 9,178 7,329 ... ... ... countries
Balance + 3,625 + 10,721 + 5,846 + 1,452 − 699 + 438 ... ... ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 34,782 36,373 38,990 3,696 3,188 2,913 ... ... ...
Imports 25,227 29,822 31,161 2,950 2,785 2,169 ... ... ...
Balance + 9,556 + 6,551 + 7,829 + 746 + 403 + 745 ... ... ...
II Exports 234,139 237,139 249,568 22,514 20,066 18,943 ... ... ...Non-European
Imports 220,745 227,569 235,187 21,277 20,423 19,287 ... ... ... countries
Balance + 13,393 + 9,570 + 14,381 + 1,237 − 357 − 345 ... ... ...
Exports 16,617 17,575 19,700 1,873 1,530 1,530 ... ... ... 1 Africa
Imports 16,734 16,457 20,572 1,678 1,407 1,247 ... ... ...
Balance − 117 + 1,118 − 872 + 195 + 123 + 283 ... ... ...
Exports 104,154 100,769 101,952 9,261 8,130 6,966 ... ... ... 2 America
Imports 72,163 71,276 72,939 6,263 6,074 6,387 ... ... ...
Balance + 31,991 + 29,493 + 29,013 + 2,999 + 2,056 + 580 ... ... ...
of which
Exports 77,991 73,327 71,467 6,314 5,827 4,810 ... ... ... United States
Imports 49,197 45,993 46,060 3,799 3,971 4,154 ... ... ...Balance + 28,795 + 27,334 + 25,407 + 2,514 + 1,856 + 656 ... ... ...
Exports 106,991 111,691 120,300 10,714 9,822 9,789 ... ... ... 3 Asia
Imports 128,942 136,411 138,663 13,105 12,699 11,253 ... ... ...
Balance − 21,951 − 24,721 − 18,363 − 2,391 − 2,878 − 1,465 ... ... ...
of which
Middle East Exports 22,978 23,709 27,591 2,646 2,770 2,696 ... ... ...
Imports 6,295 6,444 7,957 739 603 479 ... ... ...Balance + 16,682 + 17,265 + 19,634 + 1,908 + 2,167 + 2,217 ... ... ...
Japan Exports 13,886 13,022 12,806 1,087 997 973 ... ... ...
Imports 24,016 24,381 23,087 1,940 2,075 1,748 ... ... ...Balance − 10,130 − 11,359 − 10,281 − 853 − 1,078 − 775 ... ... ...
Exports 27,478 29,902 34,096 3,096 2,787 2,781 ... ... ... People‘s Republic
Imports 49,958 56,417 59,378 5,916 5,929 5,056 ... ... ... of China  
2 
Balance − 22,479 − 26,515 − 25,282 − 2,820 − 3,142 − 2,275 ... ... ...
Exports 31,619 32,284 32,609 2,748 2,349 2,170 ... ... ... Emerging markets
Imports 36,113 35,357 32,783 2,879 2,903 2,844 ... ... ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 4,494 − 3,073 − 175 − 130 − 554 − 674 ... ... ...
Exports 6,377 7,104 7,616 666 585 658 ... ... ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,906 3,425 3,013 231 242 401 ... ... ... polar regions
Balance + 3,471 + 3,679 + 4,603 + 434 + 343 + 257 ... ... ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, region. Excluding repair and maintenance operations from January 200 7 on-
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of wards. — 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indo-
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2004 − 29,341 − 35,302 + 3,870 + 1,328 − 260 + 5,349 − 4,325 − 1,363 + 986 − 989 + 21,420
2005 − 25,677 − 36,317 + 6,356 + 1,622 − 1,203 + 3,688 + 177 − 1,638 + 3,086 − 1,285 + 26,182
2006 − 13,985 − 32,771 + 5,690 + 2,185 − 1,861 + 3,736 + 9,037 − 1,795 + 3,885 − 685 + 46,7902007 − 13,312 − 34,324 + 6,730 + 2,854 − 2,167 + 3,310 + 10,285 − 1,966 + 2,875 + 449 + 50,1942008 − 12,822 − 34,785 + 7,802 + 3,916 − 2,129 + 2,338 + 10,036 − 1,585 + 2,277 + 654 + 44,092
2007          Q3 − 9,499 − 14,633 + 1,737 + 642 − 519 + 850 + 2,424 − 444 + 792 − 395 + 14,919
         Q4 − 156 − 5,990 + 1,754 + 769 − 400 + 749 + 2,961 − 718 + 904 + 109 + 17,883
2008          Q1 − 936 − 6,069 + 1,634 + 884 − 704 + 559 + 2,759 − 426 + 538 + 654 + 14,193
         Q2 − 3,328 − 8,358 + 1,849 + 656 − 359 + 595 + 2,288 − 338 + 576 + 132 + 630         Q3 − 7,653 − 14,596 + 2,205 + 804 − 795 + 645 + 4,084 − 319 + 807 − 331 + 14,655         Q4 − 905 − 5,763 + 2,114 + 1,572 − 271 + 539 + 904 − 503 + 357 + 199 + 14,613
2009          Q1 − 4,237 − 5,895 + 1,787 + 834 − 1,258 + 628 − 333 − 378 + 189 + 601 + 12,198
2008          May − 2,142 − 3,305 + 537 + 209 + 25 + 215 + 177 − 104 + 66 + 65 − 2,842
         June − 989 − 3,202 + 642 + 183 + 50 + 159 + 1,179 − 114 + 349 + 33 + 4,137
         July − 3,462 − 4,871 + 822 + 258 − 694 + 227 + 796 − 140 + 250 − 99 + 4,599
         Aug − 2,977 − 5,358 + 648 + 267 − 23 + 202 + 1,286 − 78 + 296 − 123 + 4,706         Sep − 1,213 − 4,367 + 734 + 279 − 78 + 216 + 2,003 − 101 + 261 − 109 + 5,350
         Oct − 1,702 − 3,177 + 701 + 566 − 211 + 183 + 236 − 141 + 34 + 50 + 5,158
         Nov − 305 − 1,398 + 548 + 449 − 21 + 159 − 42 − 145 − 1 + 30 + 4,963         Dec + 1,102 − 1,188 + 865 + 557 − 39 + 198 + 709 − 217 + 323 + 119 + 4,492
2009          Jan − 2,798 − 1,495 + 495 + 193 − 1,336 + 146 − 801 − 136 + 15 + 168 + 3,302
         Feb − 396 − 1,768 + 693 + 284 + 143 + 168 + 84 − 109 + 149 + 203 + 4,730         Mar − 1,043 − 2,631 + 599 + 356 − 65 + 314 + 385 − 134 + 25 + 230 + 4,166
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2004 − 27,849 − 16,694 − 14,249 − 12,672 − 2,444 − 11,156 − 3,180 − 7,976 + 435 − 1,095 + 1,529
2005 − 28,712 − 17,588 − 16,264 − 14,687 − 1,324 − 11,124 − 2,926 − 8,198 − 1,369 − 3,419 + 2,050
2006 − 27,148 − 14,512 − 14,900 − 13,356 + 388 − 12,637 − 2,927 − 9,710 − 252 − 1,947 + 1,6952007 − 31,594 − 16,264 − 18,662 − 16,890 + 2,398 − 15,329 − 3,005 − 12,324 + 134 − 2,036 + 2,1702008 − 33,088 − 16,805 − 19,545 − 17,556 + 2,739 − 16,283 − 3,122 − 13,161 − 90 − 1,784 + 1,694
2007          Q3 − 9,128 − 5,695 − 5,476 − 5,180 − 219 − 3,433 − 751 − 2,682 + 306 − 322 + 628
         Q4 − 6,374 − 2,763 − 2,260 − 1,824 − 503 − 3,611 − 751 − 2,860 − 681 − 1,095 + 413
2008          Q1 − 12,156 − 8,480 − 8,306 − 7,650 − 174 − 3,676 − 781 − 2,896 + 518 − 270 + 788
         Q2 − 5,146 − 774 − 4,836 − 4,310 + 4,061 − 4,371 − 781 − 3,591 + 324 − 361 + 685         Q3 − 9,027 − 4,843 − 4,416 − 3,998 − 427 − 4,185 − 781 − 3,404 − 289 − 368 + 79         Q4 − 6,759 − 2,709 − 1,987 − 1,598 − 721 − 4,051 − 781 − 3,270 − 643 − 785 + 142
2009          Q1 − 13,144 − 9,034 − 8,553 − 7,844 − 481 − 4,109 − 762 − 3,348 + 37 − 401 + 438
2008          May − 321 + 979 − 1,211 − 1,173 + 2,190 − 1,299 − 260 − 1,039 + 407 − 111 + 518
         June − 2,878 − 1,088 − 1,411 − 1,097 + 323 − 1,790 − 260 − 1,530 − 19 − 129 + 109
         July − 2,955 − 1,578 − 1,442 − 1,250 − 136 − 1,377 − 260 − 1,117 − 123 − 148 + 26
         Aug − 3,258 − 1,612 − 1,393 − 1,265 − 219 − 1,646 − 260 − 1,386 − 47 − 103 + 57         Sep − 2,814 − 1,653 − 1,581 − 1,484 − 72 − 1,161 − 260 − 901 − 120 − 116 − 4
         Oct − 3,808 − 2,721 − 2,414 − 2,301 − 306 − 1,087 − 260 − 827 − 199 − 138 − 61
         Nov − 3,772 − 2,608 − 2,230 − 2,096 − 378 − 1,164 − 260 − 904 − 84 − 123 + 40         Dec + 821 + 2,620 + 2,657 + 2,799 − 37 − 1,800 − 260 − 1,539 − 360 − 524 + 164
2009          Jan − 4,288 − 2,682 − 2,650 − 2,330 − 32 − 1,606 − 255 − 1,351 − 48 − 121 + 73
         Feb − 5,278 − 4,075 − 3,737 − 3,553 − 338 − 1,203 − 255 − 948 − 83 − 121 + 38         Mar − 3,578 − 2,277 − 2,166 − 1,961 − 111 − 1,301 − 251 − 1,050 + 168 − 159 + 327
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2008 2009
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Jan Feb Mar
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 472,902 − 695,904 − 241,575 − 67,793 − 74,771 + 127,318 + 40,937 + 9,611 + 27,955 + 3,371
1 Direct investment  1 − 101,409 − 131,177 − 106,813 − 32,181 − 8,995 − 22,532 − 13,749 − 11,634 + 12,508 − 14,623
Equity capital − 73,971 − 49,448 − 60,334 − 21,382 − 7,749 − 13,185 − 19,506 − 13,035 − 1,849 − 4,622
Reinvested earnings  2 − 32,868 − 36,741 − 27,648 − 3,981 − 8,386 − 6,648 − 6,740 − 3,023 − 2,231 − 1,486
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors + 5,430 − 44,988 − 18,831 − 6,818 + 7,140 − 2,699 + 12,496 + 4,424 + 16,588 − 8,516
2 Portfolio investment − 158,251 − 145,507 + 27,871 − 24,150 + 10,038 + 74,375 − 5,033 − 4,452 − 1,305 + 723
Shares 3 + 6,505 + 23,056 + 39,177 + 12,371 + 880 + 13,973 + 564 − 1,771 + 1,581 + 755
Mutual fund shares  4 − 23,638 − 41,586 − 8,606 − 6,807 − 2,707 + 13,612 + 367 − 2,638 + 786 + 2,219
Bonds and notes  5 − 133,723 − 105,260 − 20,195 − 27,481 + 9,901 + 20,659 − 11,501 − 420 − 8,174 − 2,906
Money market instruments − 7,396 − 21,718 + 17,496 − 2,234 + 1,965 + 26,131 + 5,536 + 377 + 4,504 + 655
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 6,179 − 85,939 − 25,559 − 16,375 + 186 + 10,204 + 2,860 + 217 − 1,292 + 3,935
4 Other investment − 209,996 − 332,327 − 135,066 + 5,802 − 77,630 + 66,855 + 56,539 + 23,235 + 18,315 + 14,989
MFIs  7,8 − 207,666 − 224,876 − 73,940 + 2,521 − 64,301 + 67,394 + 104,777 + 37,238 + 26,981 + 40,558
Long-term − 71,625 − 96,840 − 144,313 − 48,413 − 51,310 − 19,313 − 69 − 1,361 + 1,651 − 359Short-term − 136,041 − 128,036 + 70,373 + 50,934 − 12,992 + 86,707 + 104,847 + 38,599 + 25,331 + 40,917
Enterprises and households − 27,888 − 50,152 − 19,327 + 18,038 − 20,403 + 16,301 − 18,198 − 276 + 1,236 − 19,158
Long-term − 23,810 − 46,973 − 18,697 − 4,275 − 8,550 − 266 − 1,035 + 87 − 907 − 214
Short-term  
7 − 4,078 − 3,179 − 630 + 22,313 − 11,853 + 16,567 − 17,163 − 363 + 2,143 − 18,944
General government + 1,068 + 8,425 + 2,801 − 6,235 + 11,496 − 1,148 + 4,972 + 3,311 + 3,710 − 2,050
Long-term + 7,497 + 309 − 334 − 237 − 77 + 338 − 348 − 314 − 32 − 3Short-term  
7 − 6,428 + 8,117 + 3,135 − 5,997 + 11,573 − 1,486 + 5,320 + 3,626 + 3,742 − 2,048
Bundesbank + 24,488 − 65,724 − 44,600 − 8,523 − 4,422 − 15,692 − 35,012 − 17,038 − 13,613 − 4,361
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) + 2,934 − 953 − 2,008 − 889 + 1,630 − 1,584 + 321 + 2,245 − 271 − 1,652
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 297,925 + 458,624 + 38,211 − 14,540 + 61,841 − 174,800 − 42,781 + 9,894 − 25,361 − 27,313
1 Direct investment  1 + 45,552 + 41,211 + 17,026 + 3,854 + 3,030 + 4,309 + 1,959 + 920 − 163 + 1,202
Equity capital + 31,044 + 32,101 + 12,406 + 2,064 + 4,141 + 992 + 4,469 + 3,411 + 86 + 972
Reinvested earnings  2 + 86 − 305 + 4,336 − 752 − 109 + 1,507 + 2,578 + 1,403 + 1,252 − 76
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors + 14,422 + 9,415 + 283 + 2,542 − 1,003 + 1,810 − 5,088 − 3,894 − 1,501 + 306
2 Portfolio investment + 145,974 + 297,880 + 15,997 + 3,241 + 29,208 − 38,001 − 4,496 − 14,807 + 6,384 + 3,926
Shares  3 + 19,824 + 39,189 − 49,282 − 44,018 + 3,315 + 2,919 − 7,682 − 16,817 + 6,816 + 2,319
Mutual fund shares + 8,079 + 3,939 − 5,822 + 509 − 2,118 − 2,699 + 363 + 382 + 888 − 908Bonds and notes  
5 + 120,901 + 203,298 + 23,258 + 36,426 + 14,913 − 45,276 − 15,502 − 4,000 − 3,794 − 7,708
Money market instruments − 2,830 + 51,454 + 47,843 + 10,323 + 13,099 + 7,055 + 18,324 + 5,628 + 2,473 + 10,223
3 Other investment + 106,400 + 119,533 + 5,188 − 21,636 + 29,604 − 141,109 − 40,244 + 23,780 − 31,582 − 32,442
MFIs  7,8 + 59,305 + 73,218 − 58,477 − 30,290 + 28,919 − 154,859 − 21,117 + 32,159 − 32,748 − 20,527
Long-term − 13,092 − 14,195 + 11,592 + 598 + 8,965 + 4,911 − 3,539 − 2,126 − 325 − 1,088Short-term + 72,397 + 87,413 − 70,069 − 30,888 + 19,954 − 159,770 − 17,578 + 34,284 − 32,423 − 19,440
Enterprises and households + 48,588 + 38,001 + 43,107 + 5,385 − 3,970 + 17,804 − 7,426 − 2,960 − 3,656 − 810
Long-term + 29,705 + 18,493 + 23,339 + 1,117 + 4,912 + 6,831 − 2,144 + 1,406 + 1,443 − 4,993
Short-term  
7 + 18,883 + 19,508 + 19,768 + 4,269 − 8,882 + 10,974 − 5,282 − 4,365 − 5,099 + 4,182
General government − 206 − 3,034 + 6,207 + 4,675 + 1,682 − 7,705 + 11,738 + 4,345 + 9,947 − 2,554
Long-term + 835 − 2,759 − 1,189 − 218 − 142 − 15 − 492 − 152 − 145 − 195Short-term  
7 − 1,040 − 276 + 7,396 + 4,893 + 1,824 − 7,690 + 12,230 + 4,497 + 10,092 − 2,359
Bundesbank − 1,287 + 11,349 + 14,351 − 1,406 + 2,973 + 3,651 − 23,439 − 9,764 − 5,125 − 8,550
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 174,977 − 237,280 − 203,364 − 82,333 − 12,930 − 47,482 − 1,844 + 19,505 + 2,594 − 23,943
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residentsFund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2007          Nov 177,674 89,233 59,157 2,426 27,651 350 85,625 2,466 13,068 164,606
         Dec 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008          Jan 208,663 99,028 68,255 2,398 28,376 350 106,706 2,580 21,032 187,632
         Feb 226,761 100,879 70,196 2,378 28,306 350 122,924 2,608 22,382 204,379         Mar 198,070 95,103 65,126 2,335 27,642 350 100,029 2,588 24,919 173,151
         Apr 198,225 92,633 61,352 2,345 28,935 350 102,683 2,559 25,586 172,639
         May 200,042 92,387 62,311 2,518 27,558 350 104,777 2,528 24,450 175,592         June 206,618 95,220 64,930 2,495 27,796 350 108,553 2,495 23,498 183,120
         July 203,949 93,722 64,108 2,468 27,146 350 107,259 2,617 25,121 178,827
         Aug 217,137 93,048 62,296 2,539 28,213 350 121,103 2,636 26,641 190,496
         Sep 215,889 99,936 68,808 2,623 28,504 350 112,975 2,628 26,756 189,133
         Oct 183,398 97,415 62,655 2,773 31,987 350 83,214 2,419 38,598 144,801
         Nov 213,908 104,612 70,131 3,476 31,005 350 106,395 2,551 33,778 180,130         Dec 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009          Jan 258,620 109,963 78,633 3,462 27,869 350 145,706 2,601 21,988 236,631
         Feb 275,770 113,507 81,893 3,455 28,159 350 159,318 2,594 16,983 258,786
         Mar 274,458 107,809 75,726 3,463 28,620 350 163,681 2,618 7,527 266,931
         Apr 272,318 105,577 73,476 3,482 28,619 350 163,774 2,618 8,538 263,781
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2005 409,493 97,333 312,160 179,738 132,422 125,497 6,925 548,107 65,557 482,550 375,114 107,436 73,270 34,166
2006 450,228 117,723 332,505 190,300 142,205 134,057 8,148 624,790 95,019 529,771 408,907 120,864 79,900 40,964
2007 509,178 162,654 346,524 196,178 150,346 139,842 10,504 650,966 111,543 539,423 404,904 134,519 82,979 51,540
2008 552,446 173,255 379,191 226,035 153,156 140,521 12,635 708,806 147,242 561,564 425,311 136,253 79,982 56,271
2008          Oct  r 570,316 182,124 388,192 225,635 162,557 149,469 13,088 710,442 145,140 565,302 422,103 143,199 83,611 59,588
         Nov 570,787 178,788 391,999 229,969 162,030 148,879 13,151 711,037 143,740 567,297 425,190 142,107 83,134 58,973
         Dec 552,446 173,255 379,191 226,035 153,156 140,521 12,635 708,806 147,242 561,564 425,311 136,253 79,982 56,271
2009          Jan 549,824 179,713 370,111 224,491 145,620 132,724 12,896 705,543 157,419 548,124 417,469 130,655 72,662 57,993
         Feb 542,586 177,710 364,876 219,258 145,618 132,566 13,052 712,027 154,359 557,668 427,573 130,095 71,651 58,444         Mar 572,567 197,620 374,947 228,694 146,253 133,510 12,743 714,201 152,058 562,143 427,503 134,640 76,321 58,319
Industrial countries 1
 
2005 362,704 95,847 266,857 167,314 99,543 94,278 5,265 508,106 63,924 444,182 364,680 79,502 60,907 18,595
2006 396,649 115,269 281,380 174,784 106,596 100,541 6,055 570,675 93,560 477,115 389,770 87,345 66,210 21,135
2007 452,354 160,666 291,688 180,564 111,124 103,104 8,020 590,245 110,291 479,954 384,024 95,930 69,347 26,583
2008 488,411 171,387 317,024 206,787 110,237 101,003 9,234 644,754 145,045 499,709 403,120 96,589 68,150 28,439
2008          Oct  r 504,710 179,864 324,846 206,865 117,981 108,555 9,426 642,243 143,004 499,239 398,483 100,756 70,680 30,076
         Nov 504,795 176,705 328,090 211,065 117,025 107,474 9,551 643,099 141,473 501,626 401,579 100,047 70,068 29,979
         Dec 488,411 171,387 317,024 206,787 110,237 101,003 9,234 644,754 145,045 499,709 403,120 96,589 68,150 28,439
2009          Jan 488,550 178,250 310,300 205,368 104,932 95,562 9,370 641,433 155,182 486,251 395,788 90,463 61,487 28,976
         Feb 481,938 176,229 305,709 200,018 105,691 96,236 9,455 647,789 152,113 495,676 405,982 89,694 60,578 29,116         Mar 512,458 196,118 316,340 209,074 107,266 97,926 9,340 649,299 149,855 499,444 405,566 93,878 65,141 28,737
EU member states 1
 
2005 270,808 91,882 178,926 108,523 70,403 66,156 4,247 414,377 60,186 354,191 300,022 54,169 41,305 12,864
2006 308,720 108,982 199,738 121,929 77,809 72,902 4,907 479,025 86,343 392,682 332,871 59,811 45,202 14,609
2007 364,105 154,644 209,461 127,080 82,381 75,942 6,439 489,234 105,022 384,212 318,769 65,443 46,262 19,181
2008 397,813 164,762 233,051 150,371 82,680 75,192 7,488 537,453 137,208 400,245 332,598 67,647 46,190 21,457
2008          Oct  r 410,967 172,160 238,807 149,559 89,248 81,579 7,669 532,729 135,014 397,715 326,385 71,330 48,708 22,622
         Nov 409,078 168,749 240,329 152,259 88,070 80,346 7,724 535,176 132,347 402,829 332,238 70,591 48,038 22,553
         Dec 397,813 164,762 233,051 150,371 82,680 75,192 7,488 537,453 137,208 400,245 332,598 67,647 46,190 21,457
2009          Jan 398,633 170,325 228,308 149,547 78,761 71,183 7,578 544,210 146,969 397,241 333,605 63,636 41,660 21,976
         Feb 393,917 168,720 225,197 145,543 79,654 72,053 7,601 551,830 142,823 409,007 345,553 63,454 41,358 22,096         Mar 421,616 188,564 233,052 152,305 80,747 73,268 7,479 554,191 141,039 413,152 344,938 68,214 46,364 21,850
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2005 175,532 59,160 116,372 69,048 47,324 44,369 2,955 332,261 29,443 302,818 268,483 34,335 25,225 9,110
2006 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 369,648 38,878 330,770 292,178 38,592 28,340 10,252
2007 251,718 118,112 133,606 79,745 53,861 49,537 4,324 367,318 56,632 310,686 269,095 41,591 28,964 12,627
2008 280,536 130,226 150,310 95,986 54,324 49,408 4,916 416,321 81,703 334,618 291,193 43,425 29,768 13,657
2008          Oct  r 291,077 135,416 155,661 97,681 57,980 52,954 5,026 404,773 74,980 329,793 284,290 45,503 30,819 14,684
         Nov 291,193 132,792 158,401 100,717 57,684 52,589 5,095 410,273 75,005 335,268 290,121 45,147 30,669 14,478
         Dec 280,536 130,226 150,310 95,986 54,324 49,408 4,916 416,321 81,703 334,618 291,193 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009          Jan 282,178 130,416 151,762 98,618 53,144 48,082 5,062 423,858 86,567 337,291 295,283 42,008 28,070 13,938
         Feb 277,182 130,683 146,499 95,747 50,752 45,648 5,104 435,136 85,647 349,489 308,173 41,316 27,190 14,126         Mar 294,649 142,967 151,682 100,966 50,716 45,673 5,043 436,243 84,311 351,932 308,862 43,070 29,161 13,909
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2005 46,789 1,486 45,303 12,424 32,879 31,219 1,660 40,001 1,633 38,368 10,434 27,934 12,363 15,571
2006 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 54,115 1,459 52,656 19,137 33,519 13,690 19,829
2007 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,957
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2008          Oct 65,606 2,260 63,346 18,770 44,576 40,914 3,662 68,199 2,136 66,063 23,620 42,443 12,931 29,512
         Nov 65,992 2,083 63,909 18,904 45,005 41,405 3,600 67,938 2,267 65,671 23,611 42,060 13,066 28,994         Dec 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009          Jan 61,274 1,463 59,811 19,123 40,688 37,162 3,526 64,110 2,237 61,873 21,681 40,192 11,175 29,017
         Feb 60,648 1,481 59,167 19,240 39,927 36,330 3,597 64,238 2,246 61,992 21,591 40,401 11,073 29,328         Mar 60,109 1,502 58,607 19,620 38,987 35,584 3,403 64,902 2,203 62,699 21,937 40,762 11,180 29,582
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in January 2007, including Bulgaria and Romania. — 2From January 2007,
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in including Slovenia; from January 2008, including Cyprus and Malta; f rom
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases January 2009, including Slovakia. — 3All countries that are not regarded as
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- industrial countries. 
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. — 1From
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2007          June 1.5930 1.4293 10.2415 7.4452 164.55 8.0590 9.3290 1.6543 0.67562 1.3419         July 1.5809 1.4417 10.3899 7.4410 166.76 7.9380 9.1842 1.6567 0.67440 1.3716
         Aug 1.6442 1.4420 10.3162 7.4429 159.05 7.9735 9.3231 1.6383 0.67766 1.3622         Sep 1.6445 1.4273 10.4533 7.4506 159.82 7.8306 9.2835 1.6475 0.68887 1.3896
         Oct 1.5837 1.3891 10.6741 7.4534 164.95 7.6963 9.1735 1.6706 0.69614 1.4227
         Nov 1.6373 1.4163 10.8957 7.4543 162.89 7.9519 9.2889 1.6485 0.70896 1.4684         Dec 1.6703 1.4620 10.7404 7.4599 163.55 8.0117 9.4319 1.6592 0.72064 1.4570
2008          Jan 1.6694 1.4862 10.6568 7.4505 158.68 7.9566 9.4314 1.6203 0.74725 1.4718
         Feb 1.6156 1.4740 10.5682 7.4540 157.97 7.9480 9.3642 1.6080 0.75094 1.4748         Mar 1.6763 1.5519 10.9833 7.4561 156.59 7.9717 9.4020 1.5720 0.77494 1.5527
         Apr 1.6933 1.5965 11.0237 7.4603 161.56 7.9629 9.3699 1.5964 0.79487 1.5751
         May 1.6382 1.5530 10.8462 7.4609 162.31 7.8648 9.3106 1.6247 0.79209 1.5557         June 1.6343 1.5803 10.7287 7.4586 166.26 7.9915 9.3739 1.6139 0.79152 1.5553
         July 1.6386 1.5974 10.7809 7.4599 168.45 8.0487 9.4566 1.6193 0.79308 1.5770
         Aug 1.6961 1.5765 10.2609 7.4595 163.63 7.9723 9.3984 1.6212 0.79279 1.4975         Sep 1.7543 1.5201 9.8252 7.4583 153.20 8.1566 9.5637 1.5942 0.79924 1.4370
         Oct 1.9345 1.5646 9.1071 7.4545 133.52 8.5928 9.8506 1.5194 0.78668 1.3322
         Nov 1.9381 1.5509 8.6950 7.4485 123.28 8.8094 10.1275 1.5162 0.83063 1.2732         Dec 2.0105 1.6600 9.2205 7.4503 122.51 9.4228 10.7538 1.5393 0.90448 1.3449
2009          Jan 1.9633 1.6233 9.0496 7.4519 119.73 9.2164 10.7264 1.4935 0.91819 1.3239
         Feb 1.9723 1.5940 8.7406 7.4514 118.30 8.7838 10.9069 1.4904 0.88691 1.2785         Mar 1.9594 1.6470 8.9210 7.4509 127.65 8.8388 11.1767 1.5083 0.91966 1.3050
         Apr 1.8504 1.6188 9.0110 7.4491 130.25 8.7867 10.8796 1.5147 0.89756 1.3190
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from 13 January to
exchange rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference 29 December 2000. 
exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. —
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in Stage III of European Economic and Monetary Union
As of Country Currency ISO currency code Euro 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
May 2009
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-21  1 EER-41  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
23 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
23 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Zeit Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 95.8 96.5 96.4 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.6 97.7 98.1 98.0 97.6
2000 86.8 86.4 85.8 85.5 87.8 85.8 91.5 97.0 85.1 91.0 92.8 91.8 90.8
2001 87.5 87.1 86.6 84.9 90.1 87.0 91.2 95.8 85.8 90.4 92.9 91.3 90.82002 89.9 90.4 89.6 88.0 94.7 91.0 92.0 95.0 88.4 91.0 93.6 92.0 91.92003 100.5 101.6 100.5 99.0 106.7 102.0 95.5 94.0 97.4 94.8 97.3 96.6 96.92004 104.3 105.5 103.6 102.9 111.2 106.0 96.0 92.9 100.0 95.3 98.8 98.2 98.6
2005 103.3 104.6 102.4 101.3 109.7 104.1 94.8 91.5 99.2 93.5 98.9 97.4 97.3
2006 103.7 105.0 102.3 100.9 110.1 103.9 93.9 90.0 99.2 92.4 99.1 97.2 96.82007 107.9 109.0 106.4 104.4 114.3 107.2 95.3 89.2 103.7 93.4 101.7 99.2 98.72008 113.0 113.6 111.5 109.9 120.0 111.1
p 96.0 87.9 p 107.4 p 93.7 103.5 100.1 99.6
2005          Aug 102.6 104.1 101.3 100.0 108.9 103.4 94.2 91.3 98.2 93.0 98.7 97.1 96.9
         Sep 102.1 103.5 108.4 102.9 98.6 97.0 96.8
         Oct 101.8 103.1 107.9 102.3 98.4 96.7 96.4
         Nov 101.1 102.4 100.4 99.1 107.0 101.3 93.5 90.8 97.1 92.2 98.2 96.4 95.9         Dec 101.1 102.4 107.0 101.2 98.4 96.5 95.9
2006          Jan 101.8 103.1 107.7 101.8 98.4 96.5 95.9
         Feb 101.1 102.5 100.4 99.5 106.8 100.9 93.4 90.2 97.5 91.9 98.2 96.2 95.4         Mar 101.9 103.4 107.6 101.8 98.4 96.5 95.7
         Apr 103.0 104.6 108.8 102.9 98.9 97.0 96.3
         May 104.0 105.4 102.6 101.5 110.5 104.4 94.1 90.1 99.4 92.6 99.1 97.3 97.0         June 104.2 105.7 111.1 105.0 99.2 97.5 97.4
         July 104.5 106.0 111.3 105.1 99.3 97.7 97.5
         Aug 104.6 106.0 103.0 101.9 111.3 105.1 94.0 89.8 99.6 92.6 99.2 97.4 97.2         Sep 104.4 105.7 111.1 104.7 99.0 97.2 97.0
         Oct 103.9 105.3 110.5 104.1 99.2 97.2 96.8
         Nov 104.6 105.9 103.2 100.8 111.2 104.7 94.1 89.6 100.1 92.4 99.8 97.6 97.3         Dec 105.7 106.7 112.5 105.6 100.3 98.1 97.8
2007          Jan 105.0 106.2 111.6 104.9 100.3 98.1 97.7
         Feb 105.5 106.7 104.2 102.0 112.0 105.2 94.8 89.8 101.6 93.0 100.5 98.3 97.8         Mar 106.3 107.4 112.9 105.9 100.8 98.4 98.1
         Apr 107.3 108.6 113.9 107.0 101.4 99.0 98.6
         May 107.5 108.6 105.9 104.0 113.8 106.7 95.3 89.5 103.3 93.4 101.5 99.0 98.4         June 107.1 108.3 113.3 106.3 101.3 98.8 98.2
         July 107.8 108.9 114.1 107.0 101.8 99.1 98.5
         Aug 107.3 108.4 106.4 104.3 113.9 106.7 95.2 89.0 103.6 93.3 101.3 98.7 98.3         Sep 108.4 109.5 114.9 107.6 102.1 99.4 98.9
         Oct 109.6 110.7 116.0 108.5 102.6 99.8 99.2
         Nov 111.2 112.3 109.1 107.1 117.8 110.1 95.9 88.5 106.1 93.8 103.6 100.9 100.4         Dec 111.5 112.2 117.8 109.8 103.5 100.5 100.0
2008          Jan 112.2 113.0 118.5 110.5 103.6 100.6 100.0
         Feb 112.0 112.5 111.4 109.2 118.4 110.0 96.4 88.3 107.9 94.3 103.5 100.3 99.7         Mar 114.8 115.7 121.8 113.4 104.7 101.6 101.3
         Apr 116.3 117.0 123.4 114.6 105.0 101.7 101.3
         May 115.8 116.5 114.4 112.7 122.7 113.8 97.5 88.0 111.0 95.0 104.9 101.4 101.0         June 115.8 116.4 122.7 113.7 104.8 101.2 100.7
         July 116.2 116.6 123.2 113.9 105.1 101.2 100.7
         Aug 113.9 114.1 112.5 110.5 120.3 111.1 96.4 87.6 109.0
p 93.8 104.0 100.1 99.3
         Sep 112.0 112.1 118.7 109.4 102.9 99.2 98.5
         Oct 107.9 108.3 115.4 106.4 100.5 97.3 96.8
         Nov 107.1 107.6 107.8 107.0 114.5 105.6 p 93.6 87.7 p 101.6 p 91.8 100.4 97.2 96.7
         Dec 112.4 112.8 120.3 110.9 102.5 99.6 99.4
2009          Jan 111.9 112.3 119.9 110.4 102.1 99.4 99.2
         Feb 110.4 110.7 ... ... 118.6 109.1 p 94.4 p 88.1 p 103.2 p 93.2 101.1 98.9 98.8
         Mar 113.3 113.5 121.6 111.8 102.4 100.0 99.9
         Apr 112.5 112.7 120.5 110.6 102.5 99.7 99.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of based on the trade in manufactured goods between 1999 and 2001 and
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the reflect third-market effects. Where price and wage indices were not
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure available, estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations. This group includes
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see not only the countries belonging to the EER-21 group (see footnote 1) but
Monthly Report, November 2001, pp  51-65, May 2007, pp  32-37 and May also Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
2008, p  40). For details of the methodology see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, RussianSeptember 2004, pp  69-72 as well as the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2, Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. —which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website (www.ecb.int). A decline 3Annual and quarterly averages. — 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. — 1ECB calculations including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus
are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral and Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia) as well as the non-euro-areaexchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: countries (Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Unit ed
Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kingdom and United States). — 5Euro-area countries and countries
Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, belonging to the EER-21 group. — 6Owing to missing data for the deflator
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United of total sales, China is not included in this calculation. — 7Euro-area
States. The weights used in these calculations during the period shown are countries and countries belonging to the EER-41 group (see footn ote 2). 
76*XI  External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printed
form and on the Bundesbank’s web-site.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-ision. For a small fee to cover costs, afile which is updated monthly andcontains approximately 40,000 timeseries published by the Bundesbankcan be obtained on magnetic tape cas-sette or CD-ROM from the DivisionStatistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2008 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2009 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009

Monthly Report articles
June 2008
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2008 and 2009
– The market for federal state bonds
July 2008
– Recent developments in the international
financial system
– Development and application of DSGE models
for the German economy
August 2008
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2008
September 2008
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2007
– Monetary growth and its determinants in re-
cent years
– Liquidity risk management at credit institutions
October 2008
– Germany’s international investment position
since the beginning of monetary union: devel-
opments and structure
– Development of tax revenue in Germany and
current tax policy issues
– Financing constraints and capital accumula-
tion: microeconometric evidence
November 2008
– The current economic situation in GermanyDecember 2008
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2009 and 2010
– The euro ten years on – the German economy
in monetary union
January 2009
– Bank Lending Survey: an interim assessment
and current developments
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2007
– The Basel Framework in practice – implement-
ing the Basel advanced approaches in Ger-
many
February 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2009
– German balance of payments in 2008
– Price convergence in the euro area– Cashless payments in Germany and the role of
the Deutsche Bundesbank
April 2009
– Wage setting in Germany – new empirical find-
ings
– Short-term forecasting methods as instruments
of business cycle analysis
May 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)
5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19962
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
2
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
2
The market for German Federal securities,May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, February 2009Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 2003
2
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-rungsunion, April 2005
2
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20062
European economic and monetary union,
April 2008
Special Statistical Publications*o
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 200832 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, March 20092, 4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
July 20082, 4
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2007,
June 20084
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
20064
6 Ratios from financial statements of German
enterprises 2004 to 2005, February 20084
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, February 20052
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics,
April 20081, 4
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2008
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20082
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2009
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available in German only.
3Solely available on the website, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Stat-
istics”, “External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
4Available on the website only.*Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail-
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng-
lish.
oNot available on the website.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
May 2009
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
03/2009
Pooling versus model selections for nowcastingwith many predictors: an application to GermanGDP
04/2009
Fiscal sustainability and policy implications for the
euro area
05/2009
Testing for structural breaks in dynamic factormodels
06/2009
Price convergence in the EMU? Evidence frommicro data
07/2009
MIDAS versus mixed-frequency VAR: nowcasting
GDP in the euro area
08/2009
Time-dependent pricing and New Keynesian Phil-
lips curve
09/2009
Knowledge sourcing: legitimacy deficits for MNCsubsidiaries?
10/2009
Factor forecasting using international targetedpredictors: the case of German GDP
11/2009
Forecasting national activity using lots of inter-
national predictors: an application to New Zealand
12/2009
Opting out of the great inflation: German monet-ary policy after the breakdown of Bretton WoodsSeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
20/2008
Sturm und Drang in money market funds: when
money market funds cease to be narrow
01/2009
Dominating estimators for the global minimumvariance portfolio
02/2009
Stress testing German banks in a downturn in theautomobile industry
03/2009
The effects of privatization and consolidation on
bank productivity: comparative evidence from Italyand Germany
04/2009
Shocks at large banks and banking sector distress:
the Banking Granual Residual
05/2009
Why do savings banks transform sight deposits
into illiquid assets less intensively than the regula-
tion allows?
06/2009
Does banks’ size distort market prices? Evidencefor too-big-to-fail in the CDS market
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, January 20082
2a Solvabilit/C228ts- und Liquidit/C228tsverordnung, Feb-
ruary 20082
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the website.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

