MONTHLY REPORT
NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH
2009
Vol 61
No 1 1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 -0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418 -8292 (print edition)
ISSN 1862 -1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 3 pm on 17 November 2009.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
bank can be downloaded from our website.
The statistical data are also published on the
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,
by virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank
Act. It is available to interested parties free of
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-
tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
ContentsThe current economic situation
in Germany 5
Overview 6
Global and European setting 12
Labour market in the global recession 20
Monetary policy and banking business 24
Money market management
and liquidity needs 26
Financial markets 38
Economic conditions in Germany 48
Public finances 61
Excessive deficit procedure against
13 euro-area member states 64
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 5*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*
Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem 16*
Banks 20*
Minimum reserves 42*
Interest rates 43*
Capital market 48*
Financial accounts 52*
Public finances in Germany 54*
Economic conditions in Germany 61*
External sector 68*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*
Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
5The current economic
situation in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
6OverviewEconomic recovery broadens
The incipient global economic recovery that
began in the spring months of 2009 firmed in
the third quarter. The impetus came from the
extensive fiscal stimulus programmes, the ex-
pansionary monetary policy stance and the
inventory cycle. The increased risk appetite in
the financial markets further supported eco-
nomic growth worldwide. Global industrial
output has accelerated markedly in the
second half of the year, and this recovery in
industrial activity has been accompanied by a
considerable expansion in world trade.
Broken down by region, the world economy
again received considerable expansionary
stimuli from the emerging market economies,
especially China. Moreover, the industrialised
countries made their first positive contribu-
tion to global growth since the beginning of
2008. The main factor here was that real
gross domestic product (GDP) in the United
States, Japan and the euro area grew percep-
tibly in the third quarter.
According to the available leading indicators,
the cyclical upturn in the world economy will
continue in the current quarter and in subse-
quent months. All in all, a global recovery
with a more solid foundation therefore ap-
pears to be taking shape, with the indicators
for the major emerging market economies re-
maining more buoyant than those for indus-
trial countries as this report went to press.
Developments in the international financial
markets were likewise characterised by rising
confidence during the reporting period.Global
economy
Financial
market setting

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
7Growing risk appetite, partly as a result of the
brighter economic outlook, helped lift stockmarket prices and drive corporate bond yieldslower. A lot of shares marked year highs inmid-October, while the spreads between highquality corporate bonds and governmentbonds dropped to the level of early 2008. Onthe foreign exchange markets, the euro ap-preciated on a trade-weighted average, withgains against the US dollar and the poundsterling and losses only against the currenciesof several smaller economies.
However, there is still some doubt as to the
sustainability of the upturn in financial mar-kets, particularly as it is not clear whether theupbeat mood is also backed by endogenousfactors or whether it is primarily being drivenby the generous fiscal stimulus programmesand the abundant supply of liquidity world-wide. One reason for caution is that marketvolatility on both sides of the Atlantic pickedup somewhat during the summer monthsand currently remains above its long-termaverage.
The monetary policy environment in the euro
area in the third quarter was characterised bythe return to a moderate growth path andlow inflation rates. Given significant capacityunderutilisation and the only gradual eco-nomic recovery, the outlook for prices alsoremains benign.
In view of this constellation, the Governing
Council of the ECB maintained its expansion-ary monetary policy stance and left its keypolicy rates unchanged from June to Septem-ber. The Eurosystem therefore continues toprovide its counterparties with as much
liquidity as they want at a fixed interest rateof 1% through its main refinancing oper-ations and longer-term refinancing oper-ations. It currently charges interest of 1.75%on its marginal lending facility while continu-ing to pay 0.25% on credit balances under itsdeposit facility.
Euro-area banks’ liquidity situation can cur-
rently be described as extremely good thanksto the Eurosystem’s generous refinancingmeasures and the launch of the coveredbond purchase programme. One indication ofthis is that the allotment volume in thesecond supplementary 12-month refinancingoperation, which was decided at the end ofSeptember, was significantly lower than inthe first transaction of this type at the end ofJune. The number of banks participating inthe September operation was also consider-ably smaller. Another sign of the currentlyvery strong liquidity supply is that interestrates in the euro money market are at histor-ically low levels across all maturities. Ratesmoved only slightly lower even after thesecond 12-month tender had been allotted.Given a more favourable financial market set-ting and improved refinancing conditions forcredit institutions, attention is now increas-ingly focusing on the question of when theEurosystem should initiate a gradual exit fromits non-standard measures.
However, in the euro area bank lending to
the domestic private sector declined on bal-ance during the reporting quarter. This was akey reason why M3 growth remained lowfrom July to September, causing the under-
Monetary
policy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
8lying monetary dynamics – in other words,
the expansion of those monetary aggregates
which are ultimately relevant to inflation – to
slow considerably further. On balance, infla-
tion projections based on monetary data
therefore point to no pronounced risks to
price stability in the medium term.
The German economy advanced with a
marked momentum in the third quarter of
2009. According to the Federal Statistical
Office’s flash estimate, seasonally and
calendar-adjusted real GDP rose by 0.7% in
the third quarter, after having already ex-
panded by 0.4% in the previous three
months. However, output levels remained
very low in the wake of the massive slump in
production in the latter part of 2008 and
early part of 2009. Thus, output was still
4.8% down on the year in calendar-adjusted
terms. Nevertheless, overall capacity utilisa-
tion appears to have picked up perceptibly in
the summer months for the first time in one-
and-a-half years. Although the sustainability
of the current rebound is not yet assured, an
increasing number of enterprises are now
looking to the future with growing confi-
dence – which is partly attributable to the
partial easing of tension on the financial mar-
kets. This is one reason why the hitherto very
moderate pressure on the labour market in
terms of lay-off levels has not increased in re-
cent months.
The brighter international environment has
played a key role in the improvement of the
overall economic situation in Germany. In the
wake of the global shock to confidence trig-
gered by the Lehman insolvency, the Germaneconomy had been hit particularly hard by
the sharp drop in global economic activity
and world trade given the country’s extensive
integration into the world economy and its
specialised manufacturing profile, causing its
export volume to plummet by more than a
fifth in just nine months. In the third quarter,
by contrast, deliveries of German goods to
other countries picked up noticeably. In terms
of the regional breakdown of exports, not
only did demand from Asia continue to point
upwards but exports to European Union
countries, which account for the lion’s share
of German foreign trade, also recovered per-
ceptibly. Moreover, German enterprises were
able to lift their sales of intermediate goods
abroad substantially. This is another indication
that – in global terms – the inventory cycle is
well advanced. In major industrialised coun-
tries, the recovery has recently also been
supported by endogenous market factors,
although the massive, stabilisation measures
have continued to play an important role, as
is evident from the sharp rise in automobile
exports.
Fixed investment rose slightly overall in the
third quarter. This can probably be attributed
in the main to stimuli from the public sector.
By contrast, private investment remained fair-
ly sluggish. Of late, enterprises have bought
more machinery and equipment, although
manufacturing capacity utilisation remained
exceptionally low despite recording a slight
increase in October. Not only was it around
10 percentage points below its long-term
average, it also remained beneath the lows
marked in all previous cyclical downturns
since 1970. Industrial and commercial con-German
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
9struction may have slackened in the third
quarter. Housing construction has not yetmanaged to rise appreciably above the lowlevel of the preceding quarters, although ap-plications for building permits have increasedperceptibly and orders have grown since thebeginning of 2009.
Domestic credit institutions reduced their
overall net lending in the third quarter, mainlyin response to the muted economic environ-ment and low capacity utilisation and less to a
broad supply-side tightening of banks’ creditstandards. Another contributory factor weredistinct net loan repayments by domesticnon-financial corporations.
Seasonally adjusted private consumption in
the third quarter was probably well down onthe preceding three months. This is attestedby the decline in retail sales and the markedrestraint households have recently shown intheir purchases of heating oil. In addition, thegovernment’s environmental premium forscrapping old cars did not stimulate automo-bile sales as strongly in the third quarter as inthe preceding months. Nevertheless, con-sumer spending has held up remarkably wellso far. Had consumers downgraded their in-come expectations in response to the sharplyfallen production levels, this might well haveaggravated the crisis. The fact that this hasnot happened is doubtless due chiefly to thesurprisingly moderate level of redundanciesto date.
The labour market remained extremely robust
in the third quarter of 2009. According tocurrent data, employment declined onlyslightly on the quarter in seasonally adjusted
terms and was actually unchanged over thequarter. In a year-on-year comparison, thenumber of employed persons was down byonly 84,000, or 0.2%, following a statisticalupward revision of earlier data. This contrastsstarkly with the sharp contraction of aggre-gate output by almost 5%.
Part of the strain of adjusting labour input to
the lower output was borne by resorting togovernment-subsidised short-time working.While a year-on-year comparison of the num-ber of employed persons adjusted for thisshort-time working effect would thereforeshow a significantly larger drop in employ-ment, the percentage decline would still bemuch smaller than the fall in aggregate out-put. Contrary to popular notions that short-time working has been a key factor in themoderate fall in employment, other mechan-isms for adjusting working hours to oper-ational requirements must therefore havemade a bigger contribution. These mechan-isms were introduced by employer and labourrepresentatives in recent years and are nowproving very effective during the crisis. Theyinclude working time accounts as well as thepossibility of (temporarily) reducing regularworking hours with a corresponding cut inpay. Moreover, firms have tolerated a cleardecrease in hourly productivity, which is re-flected inter alia in sharply higher unit labour
costs and correspondingly lower profit mar-gins.
While unemployment currently looks unlikely
to rise substantially in the near future, head-counts will probably be increasingly adjusted

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
10to the still cyclically depressed (albeit rising)
output volume. Despite short-time working
and the intensive use of flexible working time
models, this is likely to lead to job losses in
manufacturing and in the transport and logis-
tics sectors, although these could be partly
offset by hiring in other sectors of industry.
In the third quarter of 2009, the drop in pro-
ducer prices slowed further. The disinflation-
ary process that began in the second half of
2008 now appears to have run its course in
some areas, while in other product categories
it is only just starting to gain momentum. The
decline in producer prices for energy and
intermediate goods has now come to a virtual
halt and has, in some cases, even been re-
placed by an upturn, reflecting the global
economic recovery. In the case of finished
products, by contrast, the downward ten-
dency has accelerated, with the exception of
food, where prices stopped falling at the
beginning of the year. Seasonally adjusted
consumer prices remained unchanged on the
quarter.
Public finances are deteriorating dramatically
in the current year. While a balanced budget
was achieved in 2008, supported by favour-
able economic conditions on an annual aver-
age, the deficit is forecast to increase this
year to just over 3% of nominal GDP and
thus exceed the ceiling laid down in the EC
Treaty. This unfavourable development will
continue next year. The debt ratio (forecast to
exceed 75%) will mark a new historic high,
while the deficit ratio will rise to around 5%.
In view of the crisis in the financial and real
sectors and the associated high macroeco-nomic risks, it was justifiable for policymakers
to launch extensive fiscal measures to stimu-
late the economy in addition to allowing the
automatic stabilisers to take effect and grant-
ing direct support to the financial markets.
However, as only a relatively small part of the
deficit forecast for 2010 currently appears to
be cyclical in nature, while a large part of the
stimulus measures will probably prove per-
manent, large deficits and a rapidly rising
debt ratio are likely to persist over the
medium term unless the measures are prop-
erly counterfunded.
In almost all other EU countries, too, the
European Commission’s autumn forecast
points to the prospect of very high deficit
ratios and, in some cases, a veritable explo-
sion in debt ratios. Such a development
would not only entail fiscal and macroecon-
omic problems but would also present mon-
etary policymakers with a serious challenge.
Markets might, for instance, form high infla-
tion expectations on the perception that the
budget situation is unsustainable in the long
term. Meanwhile, an excessive deficit pro-
cedure has been initiated against Germany
and 12 other euro-area countries, and the
European Commission has put forward rec-
ommendations for correcting the excessive
deficits. In these, the Commission has
stretched the rules laid down in the Stability
and Growth Pact to breaking point. A par-
ticular concern are the long deadlines for cor-
recting the deficits granted to countries that
continue to flout the fiscal rules even after an
excessive deficit procedure has been
launched against them. As economic pro-
spects stabilise, it will be vital to adopt a cred-Public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
11ible strategy to rapidly and rigorously correct
the currently dramatic outlook for public fi-nances in many countries, as envisaged in thePact.
Germany has a special responsibility for im-
plementing the European fiscal rules. Add-itional deficit-raising measures in a countryagainst which an excessive deficit procedurehas already been launched are incompatiblewith the Pact. Moreover, the overall economicoutlook has now brightened significantly, anda large part of the expansionary measuresinitiated to date will not take effect until2010. If the necessary fiscal consolidation isnot tackled rapidly and rigorously, the nextdownturn could set in before a soundbudgetary position has been re-established.Overall, further unfunded spending increasesand tax cuts are a problematic signal in thissituation and in view of the large deficit anddebt levels. It is vital that policymakers domore than just pay lip service to the Europeanfiscal rules. As the prospects for publicfinances have improved of late, it would cer-tainly be possible to bring the deficit backbelow the 3% ceiling as early as 2012.From 2011, strict fiscal consolidation is essen-
tial, not least in view of the new nationaldebt rules. Central government, in particular,but also most state governments as well haveveered a very long way off their basic budget-ary course. Yet not only the European butalso the national fiscal rules stipulate, in thelight of past experience, that any unexpectedbudgetary improvements that might resultfrom a more favourable economic develop-ment should be used not to reduce revenuesor increase spending but instead to curb newborrowing. It would be particularly worryingif policymakers, in connection with the newlyadopted debt rule for central government,were to attempt to resort to one-off meas-ures in order to inflate the structural deficit inthe base year 2010 with a view to gaininggreater scope for new borrowing to fundadditional spending in subsequent years byexploiting the fact that the prescribed debtreduction progression is benchmarked to thebase-year level. This would, from the veryoutset, undermine the fundamental legisla-tive intention of the new provisions, which isto effectively curb and curtail the ballooninggrowth in government debt.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
12Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
The world economic recovery, which had
been set in motion in the second quarter,
strengthened further in the third quarter. Not
only the increased risk appetite in the finan-
cial markets but also the extensive economic
stimulus programmes, the expansionary mon-
etary policy and the inventory cycle all played
a role. Global industrial output growth accel-
erated significantly after mid-year and, in
July-August, stood at a seasonally adjusted
21/C252% compared with the average of the
second quarter, in which output had already
risen by 2%.1Output was still down by 63/C254%
on the year, however. The recovery of indus-
trial activity coincided with a perceptible ex-
pansion of global trade, the volume of which
was up 3% in July-August from its second-
quarter figure. In this two-month summer
period, its year-on-year deficit already fell per-
ceptibly to 153/C254%. One of the important fac-
tors here was the increase in the demand for
cars fuelled in many countries by car scrap-
page schemes or other fiscal incentives,
which in many cases triggered sharp increases
in imports of new cars and parts.
Looking at individual regions, global econom-
ic activity was once again given a consider-
able expansionary boost by the emerging
market economies, especially China. In add-
ition, the industrial countries contributed
positively to global growth. The main factor
1These and the following figures on current patterns of
real global trade are from the Netherlands Bureau for
Economic Policy Analysis (Centraal Planbureau, or CPB),
which for a long time has been calculating monthly indi-
cators of the volume of world trade and global trade
prices and, in August 2009, began calculating a global in-
dustrial output series.World
economic
activity still
improving
Global recovery
regionally quite
broadly based

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
13was that the precipitous drop in real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) in the United Statesand the euro area was followed by growth inthe third quarter. In addition, Japan’s econ-omy improved on its considerable pace ofgrowth in the second quarter. According toinitial estimates based on data for severalmajor economies and the euro area, aggre-gate output in the industrial countries re-turned to growth in the third quarter, afterseasonal adjustment, for the first time sinceearly 2008, increasing by
1/C252%. However, it
was still down by 43/C254% on the year.
According to the available information, the
cyclical upturn in the world economy willcontinue in the current quarter and the fol-lowing months. Illustratively, the expectationcomponent of the ifo World Economic Cli-mate Indicator has reached a relatively highlevel. The OECD’s composite leading indicatorfor the world economy (the OECD membersand some major emerging market econ-omies) has been on the rise since early 2009and surpassed the previous year’s level for thefirst time again in August. All in all, a broadlybased global recovery therefore appears to betaking shape, with the indicators for themajor emerging market economies trendingupwards more strongly than those for indus-trial countries as this report went to press.
Given the perceptible revival of global eco-
nomic activity in the period spanning thesecond and third quarters of 2009, thestrength of which had not been expected inthe preceding forecasts, the IMF revised itsgrowth forecast upwards in October, espe-cially for 2010. For the current year, the IMFnow expects global GDP to decline by 1.1%,
compared with -1.4% in the July interim fore-cast. The projection for 2010 was increasedby 0.6 percentage point to +3.1%; however,the global pace of expansion will still remainwell below the average for the previous cycle(+4%). The ground for higher GDP growthnext year has, to some extent, already beenlaid by the quite considerable growth over-hang that appears to be in store for the end
2007 2008 20091151201251301351401452000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
%%
–15–10–50+5+10
Log scale
World trade volumeLog scale
Global industrial outputQuarterly
MonthlyGlobal industrial output
and world trade
130135140145150155160165
–20–15–10–50+5+10Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Lin scale
Year-on year change
Source: Centraal Planbureau (CPB).
Deutsche BundebankFavourable
signals for the
2009 Q4-2010
Q1 period
Upward
revision of IMF
forecast

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
14of 2009. At the same time, the predicted de-
cline in the world trade volume for this year
was reduced slightly to 11.9%. For 2010, the
IMF is expecting world trade to grow by
2.5%, as against 1.0% forecast in July. How-
ever, given the distinctly resurging growth in
foreign trade flows, this appears to be a rela-
tively conservative forecast. The IMF predicts
that macroeconomic output in the industrial
countries – following a 3.4% decline in the
current year – will rise by 1.3% in 2010, with
relatively sharp GDP growth expected for the
United States (+1.5%) and Japan (+1.7%).
For the euro area, the IMF is expecting a rise
of only 0.3%, which, however, is at the lower
end of the current forecast spectrum. Growth
of developing countries and emerging market
economies is expected to accelerate from
1.7% this year to 5.1% next year. The IMFcontinues to see the downside risks as pre-
vailing and especially to see a danger that re-
newed turbulence in the financial markets
could mar the global recovery or that the sup-
ply of bank credit might not suffice to finance
global output growth.
The commodity markets are widely expected
not to have an appreciable adverse impact on
global economic growth next year. During
the third quarter, crude oil prices fluctuated
within a rather narrow band of between
US$65 and US$75 per barrel. One factor at
play here was that the hurricane season,
which in earlier years had often disrupted
production in the Gulf of Mexico, was very
mild in 2009. In October, however, prices
went back up amidst a further brightening of
the global economic outlook. In mid-Novem-
ber a barrel of Brent crude oil was selling for
US$781/C252and3521/C252. The base effect on the
year-on-year oil price movement reversed it-
self in July because oil prices had begun their
rapid descent at the same time a year earlier.
Forward quotations suggest that oil prices
will continue to rise moderately in the months
to come. As regards the other commodities,
the sharp price increases in the March to Au-
gust period were followed by much flatter
growth. In the case of industrial raw mater-
ials, this was because inventory build-up ac-
tivity subsided, particularly in China, and be-
cause of lingering uncertainty about the
strength of the global cyclical recovery. The
sideways movement of the index for food,
beverages and tobacco since mid-year has
been influenced by countervailing move-
ments between, on the one hand, grain and
oilseeds, which tended to become cheaper asWorld market prices for 
crude oil and industrial raw 
materials as well as food, 
beverages and tobacco
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  — 
 = 13  November  or  16  November  2009 
(crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 200980100125150175200250300400500US dollar basis, 2000 = 100, log scale
Crude oil 
(Brent)
Industrial raw materialsFood, beverages 
and tobaccoCommodity
price
movements
calm

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
15a result of good harvests, and, on the other,
beverages, tobacco and sugar, which sawprices rise significantly owing mainly toweather-related output losses.
The renewed increase in energy prices was a
key reason for the perceptible resurgence,after seasonal adjustment, of consumerprices in industrial countries – especially theUnited States – from June onwards. Since thethird quarter, the aforementioned reversal ofthe base effect for energy prices has alsobeen making its presence felt in the move-ment of the industrial countries’ annual infla-tion rate; between July and September, nega-tive year-on-year inflation already narrowedby
1/C252percentage point to -0.6%. During the
fourth quarter, inflation rates will probably re-enter positive territory. Excluding energy andfood, inflation in the industrial countries ranat 1.2% in the third quarter, as against 1.5%a quarter earlier.
In many emerging market economies, the
cyclical recovery, which in some cases had al-ready set in at the beginning of the year, con-tinued in the summer months. It was particu-larly the south and east Asian emerging mar-ket economies that once again expandedtheir output sharply, with China achievingreal year-on-year GDP growth of 9% in thethird quarter, as against +8% a quarter earl-ier. The Chinese economy is still receiving astrong boost from public infrastructure invest-ment being made as part of a comprehensivegovernment fiscal programme. Householdconsumption is also proving to be a key pillarof growth; car purchases were up in the thirdquarter by more than 80% on the year –owing primarily to government financial in-
centives. Recently, recovery has also beendriven for the first time once again by a per-ceptible revival of export business. Consumerprice inflation in China has remained discern-ibly below zero in the past few months andstood at -0.5% in October. India’s economy,the output of which had risen by 6% on theyear in the second quarter, is likely to havemore or less maintained its pace of growth inthe third quarter despite considerableweather-related output losses in agriculture.The rise in the price of foods caused by cropfailure, however, was one of the main reasonswhy inflation rose from 8.9% in the secondquarter to 11.7% in the third.
In Brazil, real GDP is also likely to have risen
sharply in the third quarter, with industrialoutput up 4% on the quarter after seasonaladjustment. However, industrial output wasstill down by 8
1/C252% on the year. According to
available indicators, the cyclical upswing con-tinued to be supported largely by private con-sumption, which was boosted by governmentincentives to purchase cars and other con-sumer durables. In Mexico, the middle of theyear saw the beginning of a distinct cyclicalrecovery owing mainly to a considerable in-crease in car manufacturing. Argentina’seconomy appears to have stabilised in thethird quarter; however, a perceptible cyclicalimprovement does not yet appear to havekicked in. In Brazil and Mexico, consumerprice inflation has tended to diminish furtherin the past few months, reaching 4.5% inboth countries in October. By contrast, the in-flation rate in Argentina rose to 6.5% at lastreport.Inflation rates
in industrial
countries
marked by
reversal of base
effect
Continued
cyclical
improvement
in south and
east Asian
emerging
market
economiesLargely positive
picture in Latin
America

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
16Russia, the major emerging economy to be
hit the hardest by the global economic and fi-
nancial crisis, overcame its cyclical trough in
the third quarter. Negative year-on-year
growth of real GDP narrowed to 9% from
11% according to an interim official estimate.
Manufacturing activity has gone back up dis-
tinctly over the past few months owing in
part to the perceptible expansion of oil pro-
duction that was made possible, above all, by
the launch of a large new oil field in Siberia.
Consumer price inflation in Russia continued
to subside considerably; in October the an-
nual inflation rate stood at 9.8%. This is likely
to have been due not only to households’
very subdued appetite for consumption
throughout the reporting period but also to
the sharp appreciation of the Russian rouble,
which, after its low in February, rose by one-
quarter against the US dollar.
During the third quarter, the US economy re-
turned to a growth track. After aggregate
output had shrunk by a total of 33/C254% in the
preceding four quarters, it rose in the third
quarter of 2009 by just under 1% on the
period after seasonal adjustment. The main
reason was that domestic household final de-
mand grew for the first time in two years –
owing, in particular, to targeted monetary
and fiscal policy stimuli. Household consump-
tion rose by3/C254% on the period in real terms
after shrinking by1/C254% a quarter earlier. Gov-
ernment environment premiums and favour-
able conditions from manufacturers intermit-
tently led to a strong revival of car purchases.
However, consumer spending on other goods
and services also rose perceptibly. This is con-
sistent with the fact that households’ savingratio, after rising to 5% in the second quarter
owing, not least, to income-increasing meas-
ures under the economic stimulus pro-
gramme, went back down to 31/C254%. Resur-
ging asset prices will probably also have given
private consumption a boost. The price cli-
mate remained calm, which is likely to have
had a positive effect on consumer demand.
Although the consumer price index rose in
the third quarter by 0.9% on the quarter
after seasonal adjustment, owing mainly to
higher energy prices, excluding energy and
food this figure was only 0.4%. Owing to a
base effect for, among other things, foods,
the annual rate of inflation for the overall
basket of goods slid somewhat further into
negative territory (to -1.6%). Continuing job
losses put a strain on household consump-
tion, even though their pace has grown no-
ticeably slower. In the June to October period,
the unemployment rate rose by3/C254percentage
point to 10.2%.
Aggregate growth was also supported by pri-
vate gross fixed capital formation. Residential
construction investment grew by 51/C252%,
bringing to an end a 31/C252-year period of con-
traction during which the (nominal) share of
this component in GDP had fallen by around
four percentage points to 21/C252% in early
2009. Factors contributing to this turnaround
include not only tax relief for first-time home
buyers and the stabilisation of residential
property prices but also targeted monetary
policy intervention in the mortgage market to
dampen lending rates. The commercial real
estate markets, however, remained in a state
of tension. Investment in commercial con-
struction, which tends to lag the cycle, wasRecovery
beginning
in Russia
US economy
back on growth
track thanks to
revival of
household
consumer
spending......and gross
investment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
17cut by 21/C254%. Surprisingly, however, firms
slightly increased their investment in plant,equipment and software despite considerablecapacity underutilisation. Firms reduced thepace of inventory depletion, which alsoboosted growth.
It was particularly the increase in cross-border
deliveries of cars and car parts that causedreal foreign trade flows to rise sharply. Since,owing to the revival of domestic demand, im-ports rose even faster than exports, on bal-ance foreign trade put a slight damper onGDP growth – unlike in the preceding quar-ters.
According to a preliminary estimate, the Jap-
anese economy increased the pace of itsgrowth from its second-quarter rate of
3/C254%
on the quarter (after seasonal adjustment) to1
1/C254% in the third quarter. Nonetheless, real
GDP was still down by 41/C252% on the year.
Much like in the United States, aggregategrowth in Japan was broadly based on thedemand side. It is attributable in virtuallyequal parts to foreign trade, inventory move-ments and private domestic final demand.The
3/C254% growth in households’ consumer
spending on the preceding three-monthperiod, however, is particularly likely to havebeen induced by extensive fiscal stimuli.Households were also supported by initialsigns of an improvement in the labour mar-ket. From its all-time high in July, the un-employment rate fell by 0.4 percentage pointto 5.3% in September, while employeewages and salaries grew in real terms by
3/C254%
on the quarter, owing largely to the con-tinued perceptible year-on-year decline inOverall economic output
in industrial countries *
* The United States, Japan, the United King-
dom and the euro area.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 200901.0+
–3.0–2.0–1.00
01.02.0
++
–2.0–1.00
3.02.01.001.02.0
–––++
–3.0–2.0–1.00+1.0
3.02.01.001.0
–––+Seasonally adjusted,
quarter-on-quarter percentage change
Industrial countries
United States
Japan
United Kingdom
Euro areaSlightly
negative
growth
contribution
from foreign
trade
Japan
recovering
at increased
pace

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
18consumer prices – from -1.8% in June to
-2.2% in September. Changes in firms’ inven-
tories also contributed substantially to GDP
growth. In addition, commercial investment
rebounded slightly, whereas the sharp slow-
down in residential housing construction con-
tinued. The public sector was unable to fully
maintain its high level of investment activity
from the second quarter. Although exports of
goods and services continued to grow at an
unrelenting fast pace, a considerable increase
in imports meant that foreign trade, on bal-
ance, did not shape overall economic growth
to the same degree as a quarter earlier.
The UK economy did not yet bottom out in
the third quarter. According to a provisional
estimate, real GDP in the third quarter was
down by just under1/C252% on the quarter after
seasonal adjustment. All major economic sec-
tors contributed to this contraction, which
was, on the whole, only slightly weaker than
in the preceding three-month period. In con-
struction and the other non-energy manufac-
turing sectors, real gross value added, at -1%
and -3/C254% respectively, fell even more sharply
than in the second quarter. Although this re-
sult was affected adversely by maintenance-
related disruptions to oil and gas production,
value added in the more narrowly defined
manufacturing industry continued its decline,
too. Only in services did the slide slow down,
from1/C252% in the second quarter to1/C254%a s
this report went to press. No initial estimate
for the movement of the expenditure com-
ponents of GDP is yet available. However,
there are indications that household con-
sumption may have stabilised in the third
quarter. As in other countries, car scrappageschemes meant that a significantly larger
number of new cars were registered than in
the preceding quarter. Moreover, retailers re-
corded a perceptible increase in the volume
of sales. The labour market continued to have
a retarding effect on consumption. However,
the standardised unemployment rate rose
only slightly, to 7.8% in the July-August
period. The high level of consumer price infla-
tion by international standards subsided dis-
tinctly over the summer months. Owing, in
particular, to the base effect for energy,
which has lasted longer in the United King-
dom, annual inflation fell by 0.7 percentage
point between June and September to 1.1%.
Now that external sources of funds have
dried up, an unavoidable adjustment process
has begun in the new EU member states
(EU-8), with major differences from one
country to another. Nevertheless, economic
activity in the EU-8 continued to stabilise in
the third quarter. The recovery of the indus-
trial sector gained a broader regional footing
after mid-year following a second quarter in
which output growth was carried almost ex-
clusively by the upturn in Poland. On the
whole, industrial output in the July-August
period was3/C254% higher than in the second
quarter, with only Bulgaria posting a decline.
However, since the improvement is associated
with the revival of foreign demand for cars,
the expiration of the environmental pre-
miums in some European countries, including
Germany, is likely to be followed, at least
temporarily, by a decrease in external boosts.
The third-quarter stabilisation of nominal re-
tail sales (excluding cars) relative to the
second quarter in the EU-8 reflects the strongUK economic
activity still
weakCyclical
stabilisation
in the new EU
member states

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
19sales growth experienced in Poland and the
continuing contraction elsewhere. According
to Bundesbank calculations, the region’s
standardised unemployment rate rose from
8.0% in June to 8.3% in September. Con-
sumer price inflation continued to decrease;
since mid-year, the Harmonised Index of Con-
sumer Prices (HICP) has fallen by 1.0 percent-
age point to 2.7% in October.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
In the summer months, the euro area revert-
ed to a moderate growth track after a second
quarter in which the retarding forces had al-
ready diminished noticeably. Real GDP rose in
the third quarter by1/C252% after seasonal ad-
justment compared with a decline of1/C254%i n
the preceding three-month period. However,
it was still down by 4% on the year. The cyc-
lical upturn after mid-year was supported
particularly by two major euro-area member
states, Germany and Italy, with France’s econ-
omy likewise making a positive contribution
to euro-area growth. By contrast, Spain post-
ed negative GDP growth. For the current
quarter, the European Commission is expect-
ing aggregate output in the euro area to rise
by1/C254%; however, this would mean an overall
decline of 4% for 2009 as a whole.
It was particularly in production where
mounting signs of a cyclical revival in the euro
area became visible. Industrial output rose in
the third quarter by 21/C254% (after seasonal ad-
justment) from its low in the second quarter,
yet was still down by 141/C252% from the third
quarter of 2008. Whereas the manufactureof consumer goods, which had been affected
relatively little in the wake of the recession,
stagnated in the third quarter, the production
of intermediate and capital goods – including
cars – and energy was pointing perceptibly
upwards again. This is consistent with a slight
rise in capacity utilisation in the manufactur-
ing industry between July and October from a
very low level, the first such increase since the
first quarter of 2007. The improvement in in-Selected indicators of 
industrial activity
in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009859095100105110115
67707376798285
80859095100105110115120125130130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Capacity utilisation
Log scale
New orders received
by manufacturers 
working on
orders
2005 = 100Log scale
Industrial output
2005 = 100
1994 - 2008
average%
0
Of which
Excluding heavy 
transport
equipmentTotal
July-
AugEconomic slide
ended in Q3
Indicators
of industrial
activity clearly
pointing
upwards

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
20Deuts che Bun desbankLabour markets in the global re cession
The la bour markets in in dustrial countries have 
respon ded to the sharp contra ction in ma croe conomi c 
activity aroun d the turn of 2008-09 to wi dely varyin g 
extents. A seasonally a djuste d comparison of the 
relative decrease in employment with the per centa ge 
decline in GDP for the perio d between the ﬁ  rst quarter 
of 2008 an d the se cond quarter of 2009 reveals a rather 
mixe d pi cture.1 While there have been su bstantial jo b 
losses in Spain an d Irelan d, jo b cuts in a lar ge num ber 
of other countries, in cluding ones whi ch have re corded 
very sharp pro duction shortfalls, have been quite mo d-
erate so far. In Germany an d Bel gium, there were, on 
balan ce, a ctually more people in work in the se cond 
quarter of 2009 than there ha d been in the ﬁ  rst quarter 
of 2008. If the developments in ma croe conomi c activity 
and employment are set in relation to one another, thus 
– so to speak – normalisin g the la bour market response 
to the size of the un derlyin g “sho ck”, then very hetero-
geneous a djustment paths also become apparent. This 
also hol ds true if output per hour worke d is examine d 
for those countries for whi ch correspon ding data are 
availa ble. 
In some cases, a conne ction has been esta blishe d 
between the international discrepan cies in employ-
ment an d pro ductivity tren ds an d government support 
measures, whi ch ena ble enterprises experien cing a 
severe shorta ge of or ders to re duce the workin g hours 
of their employees an d partially offset the resultin g loss 
of earnin gs throu gh transfer payments.2 The short-time 
workin g beneﬁ ts provi ded in Germany are a well-known 
example of this. In contrast to the employment tren d in 
Germany, however, the most re cent expansion of short-
time work is by no means unusual when compare d with 
previous cycles. The stron g decline in the num ber of 
hours worke d per employee in Germany is attri buta ble 
to a mu ch greater extent to the more ﬂ  exi ble provisions 
regarding ne gotiate d workin g hours that have come into for ce over the past few years (see also the com-
ments on pa ge 52 et se q).
Referen ce is also often ma de to the si gniﬁ cance of 
employment prote ction le gislation. Countries su ch as 
the U SA, Irelan d an d the Unite d Kin gdom, in whi ch 
employers fa ce relatively small o bsta cles in terms of 
layin g off staff, have in point of fa ct re corded quite 
signiﬁ cant jo b losses; by contrast, the ﬁ  gures have 
been comparatively low in Germany, Fran ce an d Italy; 
Spain, however, with its rather restri ctive employment 
prote ction le gislation, but a lar ge share of its workfor ce 
employe d on temporary contra cts, is somethin g of an 
exception. Even if – by way of comparison – the OE CD’s 
Employment Prote ction In dex (EPI) is taken as a meas-
ure of the degree of employment prote ction, it is not 
possi ble to o bserve a close link here.
Indications of further possi ble reasons for the different 
labour market responses can be o btaine d by analysin g 
parti cular se ctoral features in in dividual countries. For 
example, there appears to have been a comparatively 
high num ber of jo b losses in those countries experien-
cing difﬁ cult a djustment pro cesses on their real estate 
markets an d, conse quently, also in their constru ction 
sectors. The hefty jo b losses in Irelan d an d Spain can, to 
a lar ge extent, be directly attri bute d to the constru ction 
sector. As a result of the previous misali gnments on the 
real estate markets, a lar ge num ber of jo bs are likely to 
be lost permanently durin g the a djustment pro cess.
Furthermore, it appears that other countries whi ch have 
also re corded substantial jo b cuts in the constru ction se c-
tor have likewise suffere d noti ceable losses in other se c-
tors. These chan ges in employment, whi ch are broa dly 
base d across all se ctors, may in dicate that enterprises 
consi der the un derlyin g drop in a ggregate deman d to 
be a lon ger-term phenomenon. By contrast, those coun-
1 For European countries, the num ber of persons in work given in the 
national a ccounts is use d as a measure of employment. For the U SA, the num ber of employees on non-farm payrolls taken from the BL S’ 
Esta blishment Survey is use d, while for Japan data from the monthly 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
21tries whi ch have re corded only a sli ght overall decline 
in the num ber of persons in work have experien ced job 
cuts primarily in the in dustrial se ctor. This was due, ﬁ rst 
and foremost, to the fall in forei gn deman d for those 
countries’ pro ducts. Given that this – in some instan ces, 
very stron g – drop in deman d may be lar gely deeme d to 
be a temporary development, la bour hoar ding on the 
part of enterprises is un derstan dable in view of the costs 
asso ciate d with layin g off an d hirin g staff. It is certainly 
strikin g that, despite an extremely sharp contra ction in 
industrial output, the two lar ge in dustrial countries of 
Germany an d Japan have, up to now, not re corded any 
or only mo derate employment losses in their e conomies 
as a whole. Espe cially in Germany, the consensus amon g 
wa ge bargainers on the preservation of jo bs is likely to 
have playe d a si gniﬁ cant role. In a ddition to the costs 
assume d by enterprises an d the government, employees 
themselves have borne some of the costs arisin g from 
labour hoar ding by fore goin g part of their wa ges.
The fa ct that e conomies whi ch previously re corded a 
dramati c slump in in dustrial a ctivity are now re coverin g 
at a comparatively rapi d pa ce is likely to be a contri b-
utin g fa ctor in re closin g the international gap in the 
pro ductivity tren d. Moreover, it may be expe cted that 
countries experien cing relatively stron g labour market 
responses will see employment re cover a gain if the 
overall e conomi c upturn continues. However, it remains 
questiona ble whether, in the majority of the countries 
affe cted, jo b losses that are broa dly base d across all 
sectors merely reﬂ  ect a weakness in a ggregate deman d 
– whi ch coul d be quickly surmounte d when e conomi c 
activity improves – or whether they in dicate lastin g 
stru ctural chan ges. At all events, if un deremployment 
continues, the human capital of the unemploye d will 
depre ciate in value, thus re ducing the prospe cts of 
those affe cted of ﬁ nding a new jo b when the e conomy 
picks up a gain.
Labour For ce Survey – whi ch, in some cases, are su bject to seasonal 
adjustment by the Bun desbank – are relevant. — 2 See European Cen-tral Bank, Links between output an d unemployment in the euro area, 
Monthly Bulletin, O ctober 2009, pp 52-54.Real GDP and employment
– 10– 10 – 8 – 6 – 4 – 2 0 + 286420
––––
2007 2008 200992949698100102104
864202
––––+2009 Q2 compared with 2008 Q1 (as a percentage), seasonally adjusted
Change in real GDPChange in
employment
EMUGB
USPTGRFRBE
ATNLDE
IT
DKJP FI
ES
IE
2008 Q1 = 100; seasonally adjusted
EMUUSA
GermanyJapanSpainReal GDP per person in work
2009 Q2 compared with 2008 Q1
Contributions to the change in the number 
of persons in work
Spain Germany EMU Japan USAConstruction sector
Industry
Other 
sectorsPer-
centage 
points

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
22dustrial activity is expected to continue in the
current quarter. Overall orders received rose
in the July-August period by no less than
71/C254% on the quarter. In addition, according
to the EU economic survey the sentiment in
industry in the euro area has improved con-
siderably since its low in March 2009.
The picture being shown by demand-side in-
dicators is still quite heterogeneous. Foreign
trade is likely to have once again contributed
positively to growth in the third quarter.
Nominal exports to non-euro-area countries
rose by 21/C252% in July-August, after seasonal
adjustment, from their level in the second
quarter, whereas imports fell by 2%. The
trade surplus in this two-month period was
higher than at any time since June-July 2004.
Household consumption patterns continuedto be shaped in the third quarter by the pro-
motion of car sales through government pur-
chasing incentives in various member states.
New car registrations, which had already
grown distinctly in the second quarter, were
up by 11/C252% on the quarter and by 73/C254%o n
the year. However, this coincided with a diver-
sion of purchasing power away from trad-
itional retail trade, where real sales increas-
ingly trended downwards (-3/C254%). Although
consumer confidence continued to improve
throughout the reporting period, unfavour-
able assessments still hold the upper hand.
Gross fixed capital formation is likely to have
continued to fall in the third quarter. Euro-
area construction output was down in the
July-August 2009 period by a seasonally ad-
justed 21/C254% on an already depressed second-
quarter level. In addition, the increase in cap-
ital goods production was heavily character-
ised by greater household demand for new
cars and less by orders of machinery and
equipment by euro-area trade and industry.
The euro-area recession, which lasted into
the second and third quarters of 2009, left
distinct traces in the labour market. Experi-
ence suggests that the labour market will still
be fairly slow to bounce back even after the
cyclical recovery has begun. Euro-area em-
ployment fell in the second quarter by 0.5%
on the period, after adjustment for seasonal
and working-day variations, and was down
by 1.8% on the year (see box on pages
20-21). The heaviest year-on-year job losses
were sustained by Spain and Ireland, at 7.1%
and 8.2% respectively. By contrast, negative
employment growth remained relatively limit-
ed in Germany (-0.1%), Italy (-0.9%) and theEuro-area consumer prices
Year-on-year percentage change
2009
Item Q1 Q2 Q3
HICP, total 1.0 0.2 – 0.4
of which
Energy – 6.1 – 10.7 – 11.9
Unprocessed food 2.8 0.8 – 1.2
Processed food 2.1 1.1 0.6
Industrial goods 0.7 0.7 0.5
Services 2.2 2.2 1.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
Demand
indicators
sending
different signalsLabour market
showing
distinct traces
of recession

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
23Netherlands (-0.8%). In September 2009, the
euro-area unemployment rate rose againslightly to 9.7% and was thus one percent-age point higher than a year earlier. However,this obscures major differences among thevarious countries. Nominal labour costs perhour worked increased in the second quarterof 2009 by 1.0%, a rate similar to the preced-ing quarter. After adjustment for calendar-day variations, the year-on-year rate ofchange grew to +4.0%.
On average for the third quarter of 2009,
euro-area consumer prices rose by a seasonal-ly adjusted 0.2% on the quarter and thus at asimilar rate to the preceding quarter. Whileenergy prices rose slightly for the second con-secutive quarter following the sharp down-ward correction which expired in March andservices also continued to grow more expen-sive, the prices of industrial goods stood still.Food prices were subject to countervailingdevelopments: whereas unprocessed foodwas cheaper owing, not least, to favourable
weather conditions, processed food becamemore expensive, on average.
Year-on-year HICP inflation turned around
from 0.2% in the second quarter to -0.4% inthe third, owing mainly to the sharp increasein the prices of energy and foods up untilmid-2008 – when the year-on-year ratereached 3.8% – and the subsequent correc-tions. Excluding the particularly volatile com-ponents, energy and food, annual inflationaveraged +1.3% in the third quarter, com-pared with +1.8% a year earlier. Currentprice trends indicate that such “core infla-tion” and overall inflation will quickly con-verge, with the annual rates having thegreater distance to cover. In October, euro-area consumer prices rose by 0.1% after sea-sonal adjustment. Annual HICP inflationamounted to -0.1%, following -0.3% amonth earlier, and core inflation held steadyat 1.2%.
Despite
moderate rise
in prices......year-on-year
HICP growth
rates
temporarily
negative

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
24Monetary policy and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the money mar-
ket
The macroeconomic setting in the third quar-
ter of 2009 was characterised by low rates of
inflation and an incipient economic recovery.
Given considerable capacity underutilisation
and declining employment, the outlook for
prices remained benign. The September ECB
staff projections see consumer price inflation
rising again slightly for the next two years,
albeit at a low level well within the range of
stability. Longer-term inflation expectations –
according to available survey data – also
remain anchored within the ECB Governing
Council’s definition of price stability of below
but close to 2%. In the reporting quarter,
monetary growth in the euro area also con-
tinued to show a marked decline, mainly be-
cause of persistently weak lending. Against
this backdrop, the Governing Council main-
tained its expansionary monetary policy and
left its key interest rates on hold in the period
from June to September. The Eurosystem
therefore continued to provide its counterpar-
ties with liquidity at a fixed interest rate of
1% through its main refinancing operations
and longer-term refinancing operations. It
charged interest of 1.75% on its marginal
lending facility and continued to remunerate
credit balances at a rate of 0.25% under its
deposit facility.
At375.2 billion, the allotment volume of
the second additional 12-month refinancing
operation, which, at the end of September,
was likewise allotted at a fixed interest rate of
1%, was significantly smaller than that of the
first transaction of this type at the end ofMain refinan-
cing rate
constant at 1%
Reduced
volume for
second
12-month
tender

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
25June ( 3442.2 billion). The number of partici-
pating banks also fell significantly from 1,121for the first 12-month tender to 589. This in-dicates that the general liquidity situation ofeuro-area banks can currently be consideredto be extraordinarily sound as a result of theEurosystem’s generous refinancing measuresand the introduction of a covered bond pur-chase programme. Furthermore, euro moneymarket rates are at a historically low levelacross all maturities. Compared with theinterest rate response after the first 12-monthtender, rates moved down only slightly afterthe second operation of this type had beenallotted.
This applies particularly to the overnight rate
(EONIA). Apart from some short-term increasesresulting mostly from liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operations at the end of the minimumreserve periods, the EONIA has remained al-most invariably at around 0.35 percentagepoint since early July 2009, just about 0.1 per-centage point above the interest rate on theEurosystem’s deposit facility. At the sametime, trading volumes underlying the EONIAwere tending to rise again, albeit with, insome cases, strong volatility.
In the longer-term maturity segment of the
euro-area money market, too, rates werelargely stable at a very low level, after quotedinterest rates had gone down further initiallyat the beginning of the third quarter in con-nection with the first 12-month tender. In theunsecured market segment, the rates for allmaturities up to and including six months arecurrently under the 1% mark and thus belowthe interest rate at which banks can obtainliquidity from the Eurosystem in secured refi-
nancing transactions. The unsecured three-month interest rate (3M Euribor) stands cur-rently at 0.7%, ie more than 0.3 percentagepoint below the rate quoted in early July. Inthe same period, its secured counterpart (3MEurepo) fell by only 0.2 percentage point. Asthis article went to press, the spread betweenboth interest rates, which can be interpretedas a risk indicator for the money market, thusMoney market interest rates
in the euro area
1 Monthly averages. — 2 Only on 8 October 
2008 2.75%. — 3 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month  Eurepo. —   Average  from 
1-16 November 2009.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 200900.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
050100150200Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor1
EONIA1
Minimum bid rate or fixed
interest rate for mainrefinancing operations
Difference between 
unsecured and secured three-month interbank deposit rates
 1, 32
Basis
points%
Deposit rate
Overnight rate
quoted at just
over the
deposit facility
Longer-term
money market
rates down only
slightly

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
26Deutsche BundesbankMoney market management and liquidity needs
During the three reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 8 July and 13 October 2009, euro-area credit
institutions’ need for central bank liquidity deter-
mined by autonomous liquidity factors fell by 55.5 bil-
lion in net terms. The volume of banknotes in circula-
tion, which continued to grow at a strong rate,
recorded a new high during the period under review
when it reached 5775 billion on 7 August 2009 and
absorbed liquidity in the amount of 55.7 billion. Gen-
eral government deposits with the Eurosystem in-
creased slightly by 51.1 billion which also resulted in
liquidity being absorbed. The level of these govern-
ment deposits remained high. If the net foreign
reserves and the other factors are taken together, a
move which eliminates liquidity-neutral valuation
effects, there was, by contrast, a decline of 512.3 bil-
lion in the liquidity needs of banks over the three
maintenance periods. This was mainly caused by Euro-
system purchases of financial assets which are unre-
lated to monetary policy. It should be noted that this
does not include the purchase programme for covered
bonds and foreign exchange swaps as these are classi-
fied as monetary policy operations. The liquidity
needs arising from the minimum reserve requirement
declined by 54.4 billion over the three reserve main-
tenance periods and were met by credit institutions
without any problems.
Around one year after tensions had escalated on the
money market, Eurosystem liquidity management con-
tinued to be focussed primarily on supporting the
functioning of the money market through the ample
provision of liquidity. All refinancing operations con-
tinued to be carried out as fixed-rate tenders with full
allotment with no changes to their maturity structure
and frequency (see table on page 28). This included, in
particular, the allotment of the second twelve-month
tender at the end of September 2009. Additionally, as
part of a purchase programme for covered bonds
(such as Pfandbriefe) agreed at the meeting of the
ECB Governing Council on 7 May 2009, the Eurosystem
began purchasing such securities at the beginning of
July. One of the aims of the programme is to promote
the sustained fall in money market rates and to ease
refinancing conditions for credit institutions and
enterprises. The positive momentum of the purchase
programme was evidenced in the reporting period inthe fact that issues of covered bonds in the euro area
increased perceptibly as well as by the fact that,
according to market participants, narrower spreads
were seen on the secondary market.
In the July-August reserve period, the ample liquidity
supply, in particular as a result of the allotment of the
first twelve-month tender in June 2009 with a value
of5442 billion (the largest volume ever allotted in a
refinancing operation) ensured that the EONIA was
kept low and stable at an average of 0.36%. The only
exception was on the last day of the reserve period
when the Eurosystem carried out a liquidity-absorbing
fine-tuning operation with a volume of 5238 billion
and the EONIA stood at 0.47%. At around 530 billion,
average EONIA turnover was low during the mainten-
ance period. Although credit institutions continually
reduced their liquidity demands in the main and long-
er-term refinancing operations, at an average of 5265
billion, a significantly larger amount of liquidity was
available to them in the reserve period than was re-
quired to meet the regular liquidity needs arising
from autonomous factors such as banknotes and the
reserve requirement.
In the August-September reserve period there was a
continuation of this comparatively stable develop-
ment in the EONIA, with an average rate of 0.35%,
one basis point below the average of the previous
period. The overnight rate continued to be oriented
to the deposit facility rate of 0.25% as a result of the
generous liquidity provision which was provided en-
tirely according to the banks’ demands. Even at the
end of the month there was not the “usual” increase.
Only at the end of the reserve period on 8 September
2009, did the combined effect of the more restricted
interbank trade which is always observable on the last
day of the period and the liquidity-absorbing quick
tender with a volume of 5195 billion result in the
EONIA climbing to 0.54%.
The focus of the 35-day September-October reserve
period was the allotment of the second twelve-month
tender at the fixed rate of 1.00%, the same rate as for
the main refinancing operations. The fact that banks
bid575 billion in the second tender, much less than in
the first twelve-month tender, was viewed by the mar-

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
27kets as a sign of some easing. However, it must be
taken into account that many banks covered them-selves with a significant amount of central bankliquidity in the first tender and will be able to grad-ually make use of this liquidity until June 2010. A cer-tain degree of saturation with respect to twelve-month refinancing, which obviously requires corres-ponding eligible assets, was also evidenced by ahalving in the number of bidders at 589 (comparedwith 1,121 in June). Although the total refinancingvolume after the allocation of this tender increased,at5734 billion it was clearly below the record levels of
almost 5900 billion in early summer. In the remaining
tenders of the reserve period, banks reduced theirliquidity demands – as they had in the run-up to thesecond twelve-month tender – and excess liquidityaveraged 5164 billion for the period (compared with
5189 billion in the previous period). Correspondingly,
recourse to the deposit facility also decreased, aver-aging 5110 billion compared with 5137 billion in the
preceding period and 5185 billion in the period be-
fore this. Thus, in aggregate terms, the banks madeprogress with respect to their liquidity management,meaning that the Eurosystem became somewhat lessactive as an intermediary in the money market. Thispattern was also reflected in the increased EONIAturnover which stood at 536 billion on average in Sep-
tember, compared with an average of 532 billion in
August. In addition, an increase in turnover on EurexRepo’s Euro GC Pooling for overnight money from58.7 billion on a daily average to 59.4 billion in both
months was an indication of a slight revival in theinterbank market, this without taking into accountthe stronger preference for secured O/N transactionswhich intensified during the crisis.
In the case of the second twelve-month tender, a spe-
cial liquidity situation arose at those banks whichwanted to restructure their refinancing from weeklytenders to twelve-month refinancing (the last weeklytender of the month settled on 30 September but thefunds from the twelve-month tender were only avail-able on 1 October). However, this liquidity gap wascomparatively small, with recourse to the marginallending facility of 54.9 billion (particularly when com-
pared with a similar situation in the case of the firsttwelve-month tender, when recourse to overnightcentral bank credit amounted to 529 billion). The fact
that this liquidity gap also coincided with the end ofthe quarter in September was ultimately reflected inan increase in the EONIA to 0.55%. If the two upwardoutliers are excluded – the second was on the last dayof the reserve period – the EONIA was 0.35% on aver-age during this period.
Overall, the generous supply of liquidity ensured that
the unsecured overnight money markets were verystable throughout the entire period under review andEONIA fixings took place largely within a narrowrange.Factors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve
maintenance periods vis-/C224-vis the previous period
2009
Item8 July
to11 Aug12 Aug
to8 Sep9 Sep
to13 Oct
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances due to changesin autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) – 7.7 + 1.7 + 0.3
2 General government deposits with
the Eurosystem (increase: –) + 4.0 + 8.2 – 13.3
3 Net foreign reserves
2– 23.5 – 6.0 – 6.2
4 Other factors2+ 38.8 + 6.5 + 2.7
Total + 11.6 + 10.4 – 16.5
II Monetary policy operations of the
Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refinancing operations – 127.3 – 19.3 + 4.3(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations + 189.1 – 48.6 – 28.5
(c) Other operations – 9.4 + 9.2 + 11.5
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility – 1.0 – 0.0 + 0.0(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 65.4 + 48.4 + 27.1
Total – 14.0 – 10.3 + 14.4
III Change in credit institutions’ current
accounts (I + II) – 2.3 – 0.0 – 2.2
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.2
1For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribu-
tion, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of this MonthlyReport. — 2Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments with no
impact on liquidity.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
28narrowed by just under 0.2 percentage point
to 0.28 percentage point. The depo-repo
spread is therefore almost 1.6 percentage
points below the level recorded immediately
after the intensification of the financial mar-
ket turmoil in autumn 2008.Monetary developments in the euro area
Monetary expansion in the euro area con-
tinued to slow in the reporting quarter. In sea-
sonally adjusted and annualised terms, the
broad monetary aggregate M3 grew by al-
most 1% in the third quarter and was thus
well down on the already weak rate of 2%
recorded in the second quarter. The three-
month average of the annual growth rates ofOpen market operations of the Eurosystem*
Value
dateType of trans-
action 1Maturity
in daysActual
allotment
in5billionDeviation
from the
benchmark 2
in5billionMarginal
rate/fixed
rate
%Allotment
ratio
%Weighted
rate
%Cover
ratio 3Number
of bidders
08.07.09 MRO (FRT) 7 106.4 165.4 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 397
08.07.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 35 38.3 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 86
09.07.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 91 3.0 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 28
09.07.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 189 9.1 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 56
15.07.09 MRO (FRT) 7 100.3 286.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 389
22.07.09 MRO (FRT) 7 88.3 285.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 396
29.07.09 MRO (FRT) 7 94.8 269.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 382
30.07.09 LTRO (FRT) 91 9.5 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 68
05.08.09 MRO (FRT) 7 80.8 262.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 348
11.08.09 FTO (–) 1 – 238.4 – 0.80 100.00 0.70 1.00 159
12.08.09 MRO (FRT) 7 73.6 105.6 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 320
12.08.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 28 30.7 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 90
13.08.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 91 13.0 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 20
13.08.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 182 11.9 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 53
19.08.09 MRO (FRT) 7 76.1 223.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 330
26.08.09 MRO (FRT) 7 77.5 193.7 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 325
27.08.09 LTRO (FRT) 91 8.3 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 35
02.09.09 MRO (FRT) 7 72.1 174.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 286
08.09.09 FTO (–) 1 – 195.1 – 0.80 100.00 0.73 1.00 157
09.09.09 MRO (FRT) 7 93.3 105.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 311
09.09.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 28 10.6 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 45
10.09.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 91 3.2 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 14
10.09.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 182 3.7 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 23
16.09.09 MRO (FRT) 7 87.8 152.8 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 318
23.09.09 MRO (FRT) 7 85.0 163.5 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 332
30.09.09 MRO (FRT) 7 66.8 132.3 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 244
01.10.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 364 75.2 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 589
01.10.09 LTRO (FRT) 77 2.8 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 19
07.10.09 MRO (FRT) 7 62.6 180.1 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 224
08.10.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 98 1.1 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 8
08.10.09 S–LTRO (FRT) 182 2.4 – 1.00 100.00 – 1.00 22
13.10.09 FTO (–) 1 – 169.7 – 0.80 100.00 0.74 1.00 160
*For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations
from 8 April 2009 to 7 July 2009, see Deutsche Bundes-
bank, Monthly Report, August 2009, p 29. — 1MRO:
main refinancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refinan-
cing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-term refi-nancing operation, FTO: fine-tuning operation (+: liqui-
dity providing operation, –: liquidity absorbing opera-
tion). FRT: fixed-rate tender. — 2Excluding (S-)LTROs
allotted in the same week. — 3Ratio of total bids to the
allotment amount.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Further deceler-
ation of
monetary
expansion

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
29M3 showed a further fall to 2.5% between
July and September on the back of 4.1% inthe second quarter, reaching its lowest levelsince the launch of monetary union.
As in the two previous quarters, the fact that,
currently, investments with a maturity of upto two years have a comparatively small inter-est rate advantage compared with overnightdeposits led to shifts from short-term timedeposits remunerated at market rates to themost liquid components of M3. Consequent-ly, there was an extremely large rise in over-night deposits in the reporting quarter, at aseasonally adjusted and annualised three-month rate of 19%. This exceeded the16
1/C252% recorded in the previous quarter,
which was already a high figure. As in thesecond quarter, it was mainly households andnon-financial corporations which invested inovernight deposits. Currency in circulationrose by just under 7
1/C252% compared with an
increase of almost 4% in the previous quar-ter. Overall, the narrow monetary aggregateM1 accelerated further to 17% in the July toSeptember period, compared with 14% be-tween April and June.
Conversely, holdings of other short-term de-
posits diminished by a seasonally adjustedand annualised three-month rate of 10%after having already shrunk by 9% in the firstquarter and 7% in the second quarter. Whiledemand for short-term savings deposits(redeemable at up to three months’ notice)continued to be strong as a result of portfoliorestructuring, it fell far short of offsetting thedecline in short-term time deposits (with anagreed maturity of up to two years) in theComponents and counterparts 
of the money stockin the euro area
1 Calculated  from  the  cumulative  changes 
over 12 months. —  2 Taken in isolation, an 
increase curbs M3 growth. — 3 Not season-
ally adjusted. — 4 Increase: –.
Deutsche Bundesbank2001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 20090481216202428
+++++++
–12–8–40+4+8+12+16+20+24
80060040020002004006008001 0001 0001 2001 200
––––++++++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
... components of the money stock
... counterparts
of which
Net external assets position 3
External
assetsNet external
asset position
External
liabilities 4Growth rate 1 of M3 and
the contributions to growth in ...
Remaining balance
sheet items 2Net externalasset position
Longer-term financialliabilities to othernon-MFIs
 2Credit to theprivate sectorM2 – M1
M3 – M2M1
€ bn%%
M3
M3Highly liquid
M3 compon-
ents in particu-
lar demand
Net reduction
in short-term
deposits other
than overnight
deposits ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
30period under review. The latter fell sharply by
a seasonally adjusted and annualised 27%
after having already fallen by 20% in the
previous quarter. As in the two preceding
quarters, the decline was due mainly to
households. By contrast, the reduction in
short-term time deposits by other financial
intermediaries and non-financial corporations
was not as pronounced as in the second
quarter.
Holdings of marketable instruments fell by
not quite 141/C252% in annualised terms be-
tween July and September, compared with a
51/C252% decrease in the second quarter. In par-
ticular, there was a sharp decline in short-
term debt securities of monetary financial
institutions held by non-banks. This develop-
ment has been evident since the fourth quar-
ter of 2008 and, alongside interest rate and
risk factors, reflects, not least, the Eurosys-
tem’s extensive liquidity-providing operations.
As a result of these, the European banking
system is currently being supplied with ample
liquidity in the maturity segment of up to one
year, and mature debt instruments conse-
quently do not necessarily need to be rolled
over. In the reporting quarter, repo transac-
tions, which mainly result from secured inter-
bank operations, also declined. If this devel-
opment continues, it may be a sign of easing
tensions on the interbank market. Money
market fund shares/units were the only com-
ponent of marketable instruments to show
an overall positive development in the period
under review. Following considerable reduc-
tions in the previous quarter, demand for this
component rose again slightly in the report-
ing quarter.The fact that lending was notably subdued
contributed to the weak underlying monetary
growth in the reporting quarter. The season-
ally adjusted and annualised three-month
rate for loans to domestic private non-banks
was just under -1%, compared with1/C252%i n
the previous quarter. Even taking into ac-
count credit institutions’ securitisation activ-
ities, which typically lead to a statistical
underreporting of banks’ actual lending,
there was a net decrease in loans to the
private sector. After adjustment for this
effect – which had perceptibly less impact in
the reporting quarter – loans to domestic pri-
vate non-banks fell by1/C252% in seasonally ad-
justed and annualised terms in the third quar-
ter, compared with an increase of almost
11/C252% in the preceding three-month period.
With the exception of households, the further
decline in lending affected all sectors of
domestic private non-banks. Lending to other
financial intermediaries, which had driven
credit growth up to a seasonally adjusted and
annualised rate of 23% in the second quarter,
fell by a corresponding rate of just over 8%
between July and September. The volatility of
these movements has to be seen in connec-
tion with the particular role played by other
financial intermediaries in banks’ refinancing
and lending transactions, above all in reverse
repo transactions. In these transactions,
banks issue a securitised loan to a financial
service provider in the other financial inter-
mediaries sector. The financial service pro-
vider then lends the liquidity raised to other
banks against collateral. These transactions
ultimately constitute indirect interbank oper-
ations. A reduction in this type of lending is... and
marketable
instrumentsSubdued
lending to the
private sector
Decline in
lending to
other financial
intermedi-
aries...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
31therefore not per se accompanied by restrict-
ed lending to the private non-banking sector.
At a seasonally adjusted and annualised quar-
terly rate of not quite -2%, there was anotherperceptible decline in loans to non-financialcorporations; in the previous quarter, theyshrank at a corresponding rate of 3
1/C252%. The
current decline was caused mainly by thesharp fall in loans with a maturity of up toone year; the decline in medium-term loans(with a maturity of one to five years) also ac-celerated in the reporting quarter, however.By contrast, there was a clear increase inlong-term loans (with a maturity of over fiveyears).
Meanwhile, the positive development in
loans to households was reinforced. This waschiefly a result of growth in housing loans,which are the most important component ofloans to households in terms of quantity.These increased at a seasonally adjusted andannualised quarterly rate of 2
1/C252% between
July and September, compared with justunder
1/C252% in the second quarter. The low
interest rate level and moderate growth inhouse prices seem to have revived demandfor residential real estate in the euro area. Inthe reporting quarter, consumer loans andother lending to households also grew byalmost 1
1/C252% and 21/C252%, respectively, in sea-
sonally adjusted and annualised terms, com-pared with -3% and just under 3
1/C252% in the
previous quarter.
Since autumn 2008, overall credit provided
by banks in the euro area has been character-ised more by the acquisition of securitisedassets rather than the flows of loans. In the
reporting quarter, banks increased solely theiroverall holdings of securities, principally ofpublic sector issuers. In seasonally adjustedand annualised terms, securitised lending topublic debtors rose by almost 17
1/C252% in the
third quarter, compared with 211/C252% in the
previous three months. This rise can be attrib-uted to both an increase in the financingneeds of the public sector and to the com-paratively high attractiveness of governmentbonds at present owing to the issuers’ goodcredit quality, the high liquidity of these secur-ities, and the spread between short-termrefinancing costs and the yield on longer-term government paper. However, there wasalso an increase in holdings of securitiesissued by the private sector in the euro area,which are generally riskier. These grew at aseasonally adjusted and annualised rate ofalmost 8% in the third quarter, comparedwith more than 10% in the previous quarter.
As in the previous quarter, the reduction in
domestic MFIs’ liabilities to residents outsidethe euro area was more pronounced than thecorresponding reduction in assets in thereporting period. In the third quarter of 2009,the net external assets of the euro-area MFIsector rose by 347.3 billion in seasonally ad-
justed terms and thus, taken in isolation, hadan expansionary effect on monetary growth.
By contrast, monetary growth tended to be
slowed by persistently strong formation ofMFI longer-term financial liabilities. Monetarycapital in the euro area rose by almost 7% inseasonally adjusted and annualised terms onthe back of 8% in the previous quarter.... and
non-financial
corporations
By contrast,
considerable
growth in loans
to households
Significant
securities
acquisitions
by banksPerceptible rise
in banks’ net
external
position
Strong rise
in longer-term
investment at
banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
32Although banks increased their capital and
reserves only slightly in the reporting quarter,
they were evidently in a better position than
in the two previous quarters to raise funds
from non-banks by issuing debt securities
with longer maturities. This may be due, not
least, to the Eurosystem’s covered bond pur-
chase programme, which had a stimulatory
effect on the relevant bond markets. Domes-
tic non-banks’ high uptake of long-term time
deposits also boosted monetary capital.
While households and non-financial corpor-
ations again lent further momentum to the
topping-up of these deposits given their high
medium-term to longer-term yields compared
with interest rates in the short-term segment,
these deposits grew at a much slower pace in
the case of other financial intermediaries.
Since growth of these deposits in the previous
three quarters is to be seen in connection
with asset securitisation via banks’ special-
purpose financing vehicles, this development
may indicate that the significance of such
transactions declined in the euro-area bank-
ing sector in the reporting quarter.
Overall, underlying monetary dynamics – in
other words, those developments in monet-
ary growth which are ultimately relevant to
inflation – have been slowing considerably
since the beginning of the year. M3 growth
was subdued in the quarter under review,
and lending to the domestic private sector
declined on balance. As in the preceding
quarter, inflation forecasts based on monet-
ary data, taken together, indicate that there is
no pronounced risk to price stability for the
next three years. Nevertheless, the dispersion
of the forecast values has increased signifi-cantly on the quarter. This highlights the fact
that there is still a high degree of uncertainty
associated with such inflation forecasts.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
In the third quarter of 2009, domestic invest-
ors considerably reduced their deposits held
by German banks. After growing at a season-
ally adjusted and annualised three-month
rate of 21/C252% in the second quarter, these
deposits fell at a corresponding rate of 2%
between July and September. There were
heterogeneous developments across types of
deposit, however. Short-term time deposits
remunerated at close to market rates (with an
agreed maturity of up to two years), which
had long been becoming considerably less
attractive owing to their declining remuner-
ation, plummeted at a seasonally adjusted
and annualised three-month rate of almost
-51%, the largest fall since the beginning of
monetary union. Households, in particular, re-
duced these balances extremely sharply for
the third consecutive quarter. By contrast,
there was a sharp expansion of holdings of
overnight deposits. Growing at a seasonally
adjusted and annualised quarterly rate of
221/C252%, they were only slightly down on the
previous quarter (26%), with strong growth
rates recorded primarily by non-financial cor-
porations and households. The latter also pur-
chased considerable quantities of short-term
savings deposits (redeemable at up to three
months’ notice), which boosted the growth
of this type of deposit. In seasonally adjusted
and annualised terms, short-term savings de-No medium-
term price risks
from a
monetary
perspectiveNoticeable
reduction in
domestic
investors’
balances at
German banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
33posits increased by more than 16% between
July and September, compared with 91/C252%i n
the second quarter.
Despite the continuing steep yield curve,
which spurred substantial growth in Germanbanks’ long-term deposit business with do-mestic customers in the second quarter, therewere no shifts in favour of long-term deposittypes on balance in the third quarter. Al-though long-term savings deposits (redeem-able at more than three months’ notice) roseby a seasonally adjusted and annualised rateof 15
1/C252% in the third quarter, the quantita-
tively more significant long-term time de-posits (with an agreed maturity of over twoyears) shrank by a similar volume in terms oftheir amount during the same period to acorresponding three-month rate of just over-2%. This rate had been almost 11% in theprevious quarter. This reduction was drivenmainly by other financial intermediaries,which strongly increased their holdings oflong-term time deposits in June, in particular.A clear reduction in these balances was, how-ever, evident as early as July. By contrast,households looking to benefit from the com-parably high yields on these instruments onceagain fuelled very strong demand for thistype of deposit in the reporting quarter.
Following a dynamic seasonally adjusted and
annualised quarterly rise of almost 5
1/C252%i n
overall lending by domestic credit institutionsbetween April and June, primarily as a resultof an extremely sharp increase in securitisedlending to the private sector, there was anobvious net reduction in lending in the thirdquarter. Consequently, the correspondinggrowth rate of all outstanding loans fell to
nearly -1
1/C252% in the reporting quarter. There
were, initially, net redemptions across theboard in July and August; however, Germanbanks began lending to their domestic cus-tomers again in September. The majority ofthis lending was to financial corporations,however.
Loans to the private sector fell at a seasonally
adjusted and annualised quarterly rate ofmore than 2
1/C252% in the third quarter on the
back of 2% growth in the period betweenApril and June. In terms of the maturity spec-trum of loans to private borrowers, it wasagain mainly the short-term segment withmaturities of up to one year which was scaledback.Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2009 2008
ItemJuly to
SepJuly to
Sep
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 34.6 – 12.0
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 63.5 47.8of over 2 years 3.3 – 1.4
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 12.2 – 11.5of over 3 months 3.2 – 2.7
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Loans – 10.8 17.4Securities – 7.0 31.4
to domestic government
Loans 3.6 – 4.5Securities 4.7 – 12.3
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report. — 1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment excluding central government.
Deutsche BundesbankGreat interest
in long-term
savings deposits
again
Perceptible net
reduction in
lending by
German banksDecrease in
loans to the
private sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
34Following marked net redemptions of credit
issued by German banks to domestic non-
financial corporations in the second quarter of
2009, there was a further seasonally adjusted
and annualised 31/C252% reduction in their volume
in the third quarter. Once again, this was due
to short-term loans. They were reduced by
22% in seasonally adjusted and annualised
terms following a reduction at a corresponding
rate of 191/C252% in the second quarter. By con-
trast, positive seasonally adjusted and annual-
ised three-month rates were recorded for
medium-term and long-terms loans with ma-
turities of more than one year and up to five
years, and over five years. While the latter
diminished at a corresponding rate of just
under 1% in the previous quarter, they grew
by 11/C252% in the reporting period. In the current
setting, the increase in long-term loans is likelyto particularly reflect borrower preferences.
This contradicts speculation that supply-side
restrictions are the main reason for subdued
lending to non-financial corporations.1
Unlike lending to non-financial corporations,
lending to households was robust in the third
quarter. In seasonally adjusted terms, all loans
to households rose at a faster rate between
July and September than at any time in the
previous three years. The annualised three-
month rate was, nevertheless, just under 1%
compared with not quite1/C252% between April
and June. As in the previous quarters, this
development was driven primarily by con-
sumer credit, which was issued on a large
scale by regional banks in the reporting
period. In addition, there was a significant
rise in loans for house purchase in the third
quarter.
By contrast, securitised lending to the private
sector fell noticeably in the third quarter as a
result of weak securitisation activity. In sea-
sonally adjusted and annualised terms, it fell
by 81/C252% following a corresponding rate of
over 261/C252% in the previous quarter owing to
extremely strong growth in June.
In contrast to weak private sector lending, the
volume of overall lending to general govern-
ment increased considerably. Despite obvious
reductions towards the middle of the third
quarter, the volume of lending to general gov-
ernment increased between July and Septem-
ber at a faster rate than at any time since theLoans to domestic enterprises
and households
1 End  of  month;  adjusted  for  statistical 
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20092,2502,2802,3102,3402,3702,4002,4302,460
01234Seasonally adjusted
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans 1€ bn
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, Developments in lending to
the German private sector during the global financial cri-
sis, Monthly Report, September 2009, pp 22-24.Further drop
in unsecuritised
lending to
non-financial
corporationsMarked
increase in
loans to
households
Clear reduction
in outstanding
amount of
private sector
securitised
lending
Increased
lending to
general govern-
ment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
35Banking conditions in Germany
1 According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. — 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference 
between the numbers of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the numbers of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the re-sponses given. — 3 Expectations for 2009 Q4. — 4 Reduced scale.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20093.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.510.0
–300+30
–300+30
–60–300+30+60
–60–300+30
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20092.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
603003060
––++
9060300306090
–––+++
2002 02Loans to non-financial corporations Loans to households
% pa
%% pa
%
%%
%Changes in credit standards 2
Average loansRiskier loans
Average loansAverage loansRiskier loans
Riskier loansLoans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 1 year and up to 5 years... with an initial rate fixation of
    over 5 yearsConsumer credit ...
Consumer creditConsumer credit
Loans for house purchaseLoans for house purchaseLoans for house purchase
with an initial rate fixation ofover 5 years and up to 10 years
Loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation
    of over 5 years ...Loans to enterprises ...
... with an initial rate fixation    of up to 1 year ...
... over €1 million... over €1 million
... up to €1 million... up to €1 millionBank interest rates (new business) 1
Changes in loan margins 2, 43
333.54.04.55.05.5
%

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
36third quarter of 2004. In seasonally adjusted
and annualised terms, it increased by 11%. In
July, this growth was initially based solely on an
expansion of unsecuritised loans, while, in Sep-
tember, only securitised lending showed posi-
tive growth. Over the third quarter as a whole,
unsecuritised lending rose at a seasonally ad-
justed and annualised three-month rate of
4%, while the securitised lending grew at a
corresponding rate of 271/C252%.
According to the Bank Lending Survey, weak
domestic lending to the private sector in the
third quarter is likely to have been mainly cyc-
lical. Only a few surveyed bank managers
stated that they had tightened their standards
for loans to non-financial corporations and
these adjustments were made principally on
the basis of risk perception and were driven,
in particular, by industry and firm-specific fac-
tors. The rise in the cost of holding capital
reserves played a certain role only for loans to
large enterprises. However, margins for loans
to enterprises were expanded again signifi-
cantly in the third quarter, irrespective of the
size of enterprise. At the same time, the Bank
Lending Survey showed a marked increase in
enterprises’ borrowing requirements. This is
likely to reflect only a limited actual increase
in the aggregate demand for credit, however.
Shifts within the market to, above all, smaller
institutions less affected by the financial crisis
still seem to be of greater significance for the
German aggregate.2Tensions in the wholesale 
funding of German banks
1 Maturity of up to one week. — 2 Maturity 
of over one week. — 3 Not asked in 2007 
Q3.
Deutsche BundesbankIII IV I II III IV I II III
2007 2008 2009020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
02040
0204060Tensions in the very short-term 
interbank market 1
Tensions in refinancing 
through debt securitiesTensions in the short-term 
interbank market 2
Tensions in the securitisation 
of loans to enterprises and 
housing loans
Tensions in the ability to transfer 
credit risk off-balance-sheetPercentage of German BLS banks 
active in this market
%%%
%%
3Percentage of German BLS banks 
reporting tensions in wholesale 
funding
2Shifts in demand from large to small banks may lead to
the Bank Lending Survey showing an aggregate increase
in demand as the individual data are incorporated into
the calculation of net balances on an unweighted basis
and the number of smaller institutions is greater in the
survey sample in line with the specific circumstances in
Germany.Only slight
tightening
of credit
conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
37As with loans to enterprises, the credit stand-
ards for households were tightened only by avery limited number of banks participating inthe survey. Margin adjustments in this marketsegment also lagged behind those in thecommercial banking segment. With regard tothe relevance of supply-side determinants,the data provided by survey participants inGermany are broadly consistent with the datafor the euro area as a whole.
The survey round for the third quarter of
2009 again contained a number of additionalquestions on the specific impact of the finan-cial market crisis on participating banks’credit supply policy. The responses indicatedthat wholesale funding problems had easednoticeably since the previous quarter. Thiswas especially true of lending in the veryshort-term and short-term money market aswell as lending through debt securities.According to the survey participants, themarkets for securitisations and for the off-balance-sheet transfer of credit risk, whichare used by only a very few German banks,
were still tense in the third quarter. Further-more, almost half of the surveyed banks werestill facing constraints owing to capital restric-tions, which was also reflected in lending insome cases.
Despite the strong expansion of margins re-
ported in the Bank Lending Survey, Germancredit institutions also passed on part of theirreduced refinancing costs to domestic privatecustomers in the reporting quarter. In turn,the cost of loans to enterprises was reducedconsiderably in some cases during the sameperiod. For short-term loans, the reporting in-stitutions charged just 3.3%, or 2.3%, ac-cording to loan volume. At 4.3%, or 4.1%,the cost of long-term loans to domestic non-financial corporations was likewise down onthe quarter at the end of September. Lendingrates for households fell across the board inthe previous quarter; the rate for long-termloans for house purchase still averaged 4.4%at the end of September.
Bank lending
rates continue
to decline

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
38Financial marketsFinancial market trends
Developments in the financial markets in the
third quarter of 2009 were characterised by
growing confidence. Growing risk appetite
due, not least, to a more positive economic
outlook helped lift stock market prices and
drove down corporate bond yields. As a re-
sult, many stock indices recorded year highs
in mid-October, while the spreads of good-
quality corporate bonds over government
bonds dropped to levels last seen at the be-
ginning of 2008. At the same time, the inter-
est rate spreads of other euro-area govern-
ment bonds over German Federal bonds
(Bunds) narrowed perceptibly. At the end of
October, however, consumer confidence
slipped and the deterioration of public
finances in most euro-area countries became
increasingly apparent, dampening sentiment
in the capital markets. Moreover, it is not
clear to what extent the momentum in the
equity and bond markets is being driven by
the generous economic stimulus programmes
and an abundant supply of liquidity around
the world. Thus, some doubt remains as to
the sustainability of the upturn on the finan-
cial markets once the support programmes
have been wound down and the foreseeable
gradual normalisation of the provision of li-
quidity in the euro area begins. On the for-
eign exchange markets, the single European
currency appreciated on a trade-weighted
average. Exchange rate gains were recorded
against the US dollar and the pound sterling,
while the euro depreciated against the cur-
rencies of several smaller economies.Financial
market setting

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
39Exchange rates
The euro-dollar exchange rate, which is often
the focus of market observers’ interest, rose
above all from mid-August onwards, when a
series of upbeat economic reports from the
euro area took the markets by surprise; at the
same time, expectations were not fulfilled
that the US Fed would specify its monetary-
policy exit strategy. After the euro had stabil-
ised temporarily at US$1.43, exchange rates
rose again in September. According to market
participants, during this time the US dollar
was increasingly being used as a financing
currency for carry trades, which put pressure
on its exchange rate. This development was
favoured on the one hand by growing risk
appetite, reflected, for instance, in rising
equity prices on both sides of the Atlantic. On
the other hand, the already low interest rates
on US money market paper slipped further.
Thus, not only did the positive yield spread
offered by corresponding euro-area paper
increase – there was even an interest rate
discount compared with short-term debt
securities from countries like Japan and
Switzerland, which had previously often been
used to finance such currency transactions.
At the end of September, the euro temporar-
ily surrendered some of its gains vis-/C224-vis the
US dollar when the Fed announced that it
would phase out the purchase programmes
for government paper and a number of lead-
ing indicators in Europe proved disappointing.
However, the euro resumed its upward trend
in October after the publication of a very high
US budget deficit, reports of strong inflows
into inflation-protected bonds and the con-tinued expansionary monetary policy in the
United States sparked renewed debate
regarding medium-term inflationary risks. The
euro temporarily stood at US$1.50 – a new
high for the year. Most recently, however, it
depreciated again somewhat, and at the end
of the reporting period the single European
currency was just short of US$1.49, or 7%
above its level at the beginning of the year.
Although the euro-yen exchange rate hardly
changed on balance since the beginning of
the third quarter, it did have to contend with
considerable volatility during the summer
months. The beginning of July saw the euro
initially depreciate markedly against the yen
amidst growing signs in Japan of an unex-
pectedly swift economic stabilisation. The
euro recovered quickly, however, and for sev-
eral weeks range-traded between ¥132 and
¥138. Following the change of government
in Japan, the new finance minister repeatedly
spoke out against intervening in the foreign
exchange market, which again exposed the
yen to appreciation pressure at times. As this
report went to press, the euro again stood at
just under ¥133, which is 5% stronger than
at the beginning of 2009.
During the first half of the third quarter, the
euro continually traded at around £0.86 be-
fore appreciating steadily to £0.94 in mid-
October. This was due, not only, to unfavour-
able economic reports from the United King-
dom. It also became increasingly clear that
the pressure to consolidate the UK’s public-
sector budgets is considerably greater than
had hitherto been assumed. In the light of
the continuing problems facing the British fi-Euro exchange
rate develop-
ments against
the US dollar ...
... against the
yen ...
... and against
the pound
sterling

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
40nancial sector, moreover, debate ensued on
whether the Bank of England would lower
still further the interest rates paid on deposits
from financial institutions. This development
was amplified by the British central bank’s
statements to the effect that the financial cri-
sis had impaired investors’ willingness or abil-
ity to finance the country’s trade deficit,
thereby weakening the pound on a long-term
basis. However, the Bank of England let it beknown that the weak pound would help
make the necessary structural adjustments to
the British economy in order to achieve a
more competitive export sector, and as such
was beneficial to economic recovery. Follow-
ing the announcement of favourable UK la-
bour market figures, the euro relinquished
part of its gains and, as this report went to
press, stood at £0.89, or 7% below its level
at the turn of the year.
Since the beginning of the third quarter, the
euro’s average value vis-/C224-vis the currencies of
21 major trading partners rose 1%, bringing
it to roughly the level at the beginning of
2009. During the last week of October, the
effective exchange rate reached a high for
the year. Indeed, only the figure in December
of last year was – briefly – higher. During the
reporting period, significant exchange-rate
losses were sustained vis-/C224-vis, for example,
the currencies of Poland and of individual
economies such as Norway and Australia,
where the economic recovery has already led
to increases in key interest rates. The euro has
appreciated in real terms, ie taking account
of the inflation differentials between the euro
area and its trading partners. This is having a
negative impact on the international price
competitiveness of euro-area exports.
Securities markets and portfolio
transactions
Long-term government bond yields receded
on both sides of the Atlantic during the sum-
mer months. The GDP-weighted average
yield on ten-year euro-area governmentExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange  rate  at  the  start  of  monetary 
union on 4 January 1999. — 2 As calculated 
by  the  ECB  against  the  currencies  of 
21 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ A S OND J FMAM J J A S ON
2008 20091.201.301.401.501.60
115120130140150160170
0.700.750.800.850.900.951.00
100105110115120125Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.03 1Effective euro
exchange rate
International
bond markets

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
41bonds dipped by slightly more than1/C254per-
centage point since the end of June to 33/C254%,
roughly its level at the beginning of the year.Over the same period, yields on the consider-ably more volatile ten-year US Treasuries de-clined at a markedly slower pace, causing theinterest rate differential between the twoeconomic areas to shrink to
1/C254percentage
point. Japanese government bond yieldswere largely unchanged on balance duringthe reporting period.
The heavy recourse by public-sector issuers to
the bond markets is still not reflected inyields. It has been absorbed by, among otherthings, brisk demand from euro-area creditinstitutions and foreign monetary authorities.Whereas the sharp rise in yields in the UnitedStates at the beginning of the quarter waschecked from mid-August onwards by fallingconfidence indicators, euro-area yieldsslipped continuously. This decline in yields islargely due to lower risk premiums for euro-area bonds versus German governmentbonds. Whilst record spreads over Bunds ofmore than 2
1/C252percentage points were still
recorded in countries such as Ireland andGreece in the first half of 2009, they fellsteadily from June onwards. Most recentlythey widened again somewhat given thepoorer credit assessment of Greek govern-ment bonds. This was due to the reneweddamage to investor confidence caused bysharp corrections of the budget deficit andthe closer monitoring of Greece and Portugalby rating agencies given the lack of strategiesfor lowering the higher government debt. Allin all, however, the yield spread of paper ofother member states over Bunds narrowed by
1/C254percentage point. Lower credit default risk
premiums are consistent with this. Evidently,investors’ aversion to risk is waning, and theyare willing to buy European governmentbonds with less than a first-class rating andwith yields lower than March levels.
Nevertheless, there is still great uncertainty
about further developments on the bondmarkets. In addition to the persistently highYields and credit risk of 
government bonds *
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters and 
Bundesbank  calculations.  —  * Yields  and 
CDS  premiums  of  ten-year  government bonds. — 1 GDP-weighted yield of bonds of 
euro-area  member  states  excluding  Ger-many. — 2 Unweighted standard deviation 
of interest rate spreads of euro-area bonds vis-à-vis Germany.
Deutsche Bundesbank– 60– 60 – 40 – 20 0 + 20 + 40 + 60100806040200
–––––
2005 2006 2007 2008 20093.03.54.04.55.05.5
020406080Dispersion of yield 
differentials vis-à-vis Germany
 2
(scale enlarged)Weekly averages
Current yield
Euro area excluding 
Germany 1
GermanyChanges in the period from 30 Juneuntil 16 November 2009 in basis points
Basis
points%FINL
BEUSAFRDEUK
ESGR
IT
PTAT
IE
CDS premiumYield
Yield
movements in
the euro area
Considerable
uncertainty
about future
yield trends

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
42government borrowing needs, speculation
about central banks’ exit strategies could put
pressure on yields in future. Implied volatility
calculated from options on futures contracts
on long-running government bonds serves as
an indicator of this uncertainty. Although it
receded in the case of Germany and, in par-
ticular, of the United States in the reporting
period, this measure remains above its five-
year average.
The yield curve of German Federal securities
is somewhat flatter than it was at the end of
the second quarter. The spread between ten
and two-year yields is 21/C254percentage points,
which is nevertheless relatively high by histor-
ical standards. Whereas money market rates
for maturities up to 12 months have de-
creased perceptibly again since the end ofJune, yields on short-term German debt
securities have remained virtually unchanged
on the whole. This may have to do with the
high gross issuance of Treasury discount
paper (Bubills) with a maturity of up to
12 months totalling 348 billion in the third
quarter. At the same time, yields for longer-
term paper were just less than1/C254percentage
point lower, causing a modest flattening of
the yield curve.
The financing conditions for enterprises on
the capital markets continued to improve
strongly in the euro area since the end of
June. The yields investors demanded on cor-
porate bonds of all rating categories fell. In
consequence, the spreads of corporate bonds
of the lowest investment-grade category,
BBB, versus government paper with the same
maturity also declined significantly by 204
basis points, sending premiums on better-
quality corporate bonds down to their five-
year average; those for BBB-rated paper are
now only slightly above it. Here, too, market
players’ declining risk aversion seems to have
been a driving force behind the narrowing of
spreads. Enterprises took advantage of the
favourable market setting to tap the inter-
national capital markets. In Europe they
issued three times more debt securities than
in the year-earlier quarter. However, issuance
was down in comparison with the previous
two quarters, which indicates that enterprises
were anticipating their borrowing require-
ments for the year.
In the third quarter of 2009, domestic debt
securities worth 33831/C252billion gross were is-
sued in the German bond market. IssuanceFinancing conditions on the 
European capital market
Sources:  Bloomberg,  Merrill  Lynch  and 
Thomson  Reuters.  —  1 Yield  spread  of 
seven  to  ten-year  euro-denominated  BBB-
rated  corporate  bonds  over  euro-area 
government  bonds  of  similar  maturity. — 
2 Credit default risk premiums for 125 Euro-
pean companies with an investment-grade 
rating.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 2009012345678
012Weekly averages
Per- 
centage 
pointsPer- 
centage 
points
iTraxx Europe 125 2Interest rate spread 
of BBB bonds 1
German yield
curve flatterImproved
financing
conditions for
enterprises
Net redemp-
tions in the
bond market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
43was thus down on both the previous quarter
and the third quarter of 2008. All sectorscontributed to this decrease. With a slight de-cline in redemptions, and taking changes inissuers’ holdings of their own bonds intoaccount, domestic borrowers paid back atotal of 322
1/C252billion to investors. By contrast,
foreign borrowers sold debt securities for 316
billion net in Germany, which was accountedfor solely by euro-denominated paper onbalance. In total, therefore, 36
1/C252billion was
redeemed on the German bond market in themonths July to September, which is unusualfor a third quarter. However, this must beseen in the context of very high issuance inthe previous period and the German Federalgovernment’s still comparatively good cashbalance situation.
During the reporting period, therefore, the
public sector practically did not tap the capitalmarket at all in net terms. In keeping with theGerman government’s issuance planning,new issues and redemptions broadly bal-anced out after the targeted net issue volumefor 2009 had already been reached in the firsthalf-year. As it had done earlier in the year,the Federal government focused more onshort-running debt instruments. For instance,it issued Federal Treasury discount paper(Bubills) with maturities of up to 12 monthsfor312 billion net, and redeemed two-year
Federal Treasury notes (Sch/C228tze) totalling 36
billion. Moreover, the volume of ten-yearFederal bonds (Bunds) outstanding decreasedby313
1/C252billion; by contrast, the German
Federal government sold five-year Federalnotes (Bobls) worth 36
1/C252billion net.1Like
central government, the state governmentswere not active on the bond market on
balance.
As financing conditions on the capital market
continued to ease, domestic non-banks is-sued debt securities (excluding money marketpaper) amounting to 38 billion net in the re-
porting quarter, compared with 314
1/C252billion
in the previous three-month period. This, too,was probably a reflection of an anticipatoryeffect in the first half of 2009. It should alsobe noted, moreover, that domestic enter-prises’ bonds are often issued through finan-cing subsidiaries domiciled outside Germany.In the third quarter, too, enterprises con-tinued to redeem commercial paper ( 32 bil-
lion), albeit with volumes declining over thecourse of the year.
Credit institutions continued to reduce their
capital market debt in the quarter underreview ( 328
1/C252billion). These net redemptions
were mainly made by Pfandbrief banks,which repaid 329 billion net worth of public
Pfandbriefe. Specialised credit institutions,meanwhile, redeemed their own instrumentsin the amount of 32
1/C252billion. By contrast,
smaller amounts of mortgage Pfandbriefeand other bank debt securities were sold ( 32
billion and 31
1/C252billion respectively). Pfand-
brief sales were supported by the Eurosystempurchase programme launched in July. Bondpurchases since then totalled 323
1/C252billion as
this report went to press.
1This means that in the first three quarters of 2009, cen-
tral government raised its debt in capital market instru-
ments with an original maturity of at least two years by
just over 39 billion, while increasing the outstanding vol-
ume of Bubills, which have a maturity of up to one year,
by3661/C252billion to 31061/C252billion.Scarcely any
borrowing
by German
governmentIssues by
non-banks
Net redemp-
tions by credit
institutions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
44On balance, German credit institutions were
the only net buyers of domestic debt secur-
ities ( 341/C252billion). Meanwhile, domestic
non-banks and foreign investors were net
sellers of German interest-bearing instru-
ments ( 3141/C252billion and 3121/C252billion re-
spectively); the latter for the most part con-
cerned paper issued by private-sector bor-
rowers. Activity in foreign debt securities was
characterised by contrary developments; do-
mestic banks sold paper worth 310 billion
net, whilst non-banks added paper totalling
326 billion to their portfolios.
In the stock markets, the broad-based recov-
ery that got underway in the second quarter
continued until mid-October. From the end of
the second quarter, the US S&P 500 index
surged by up to some 20%, while the Euro-pean Dow Jones Stoxx index and the German
CDAX rose slightly more strongly still (23%
and 24% respectively). One of the main
drivers of the stock price increases were
expectations with regard to an end of the
recession, which were supported by positive
economic data in large industrial countries
and emerging market economies. Moreover,
the risk premium investors demanded for
holding equity – which can be determined
using a dividend discount model – dropped
further in the third quarter, returning to its
level prior to the insolvency of investment
bank Lehman Brothers (see chart page 45).2
However, equity price developments were
temporarily weakened after the quarterly
results published by big corporations at the
end of October failed in some cases to meet
analysts’ high expectations. On top of that,
lower consumer confidence in Germany and
the United States dampened stock market
sentiment. As this report went to press, how-
ever, stocks were again trading at levels close
to their highs for the year.
Yet it would be premature to regard stock
market developments, which have been
friendly on the whole since March, as a signal
that the financial and economic crisis has
been overcome. First, positive indicators are a
reflection, not least, of government fiscal
stimulus programmes. Second, stock prices
are likely to have benefited from the high
global liquidity and the lower interest rate
level. The robustness of the recent upturn willInvestment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2008 2009
Item Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents – 3.16 35.58 5.94
Credit institutions 4.36 27.38 – 5.44
of which
Foreign debt securities – 8.43 – 5.38 – 9.86
Non-banks – 7.52 8.20 11.38
of which
Domestic debt securities – 4.08 – 22.89 – 14.42
Non-residents 28.01 35.52 – 12.49
Shares
Residents 1.81 13.32 – 12.92
Credit institutions 2.59 – 2.35 – 8.00
of which
Domestic shares 1.94 – 2.05 – 7.63
Non-banks – 0.78 15.67 – 4.92
of which
Domestic shares – 1.22 11.21 – 5.84
Non-residents 4.79 – 0.65 18.11
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 7.31 – 4.75 12.32
Investment in funds open to the
general public – 2.90 5.07 0.88
of which: Share-based funds – 1.16 2.34 1.29
Deutsche Bundesbank
2Equity risk premiums for banks dropped remarkably
sharply on both sides of the Atlantic. This shows that
stock price increases have outpaced analysts’ estimates
of corporate earnings.Purchase of
debt securities
Strong gains
in the inter-
national stock
markets ...... although
uncertainty
remains high

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
45not be tested until governments and central
banks start to unwind the support measurestaken to combat the crisis. A further reasonfor caution is that uncertainty with regard tofuture stock price developments as gaugedby the implied volatility of options on futuresgrew somewhat on both sides of the Atlanticduring the reporting period, and is currentlystill above its long-term averages.
On the German equity market, new shares
– mostly listed equities – totalling 34
1/C252billion
were issued in the third quarter. Despite thelower real cost of equity capital, share offer-ings were thus down on the previous quarter(38
1/C252billion), although in the second quarter
a capital increase which came about with thegovernment’s help was a contributory factor.In addition, foreign shares were sold in Ger-many for 3
1/C252billion. Only non-resident invest-
ors purchased domestic shares ( 318 billion),
with most of the transactions constitutingportfolio investment. By contrast, domesticcredit institutions and non-banks were netsellers of German equities ( 37
1/C252billion and
36 billion respectively). Both domestic sectors
made hardly any changes to their holdings offoreign stocks.
Domestic investment companies recorded in-
flows of 313 billion during the reporting
quarter thanks to an unusually high inflow tospecialised funds reserved for institutionalinvestors ( 312
1/C252billion). Moreover, funds
open to the general public received smallinflows ( 31 billion), equity-based funds in par-
ticular ( 31
1/C252billion). Bond-based funds,
mixed funds and mixed security-based fundswere also able to sell small volumes of certifi-European and US equity 
markets
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank 
calculations. —  1 Measure  of  the  risk  pre-
mium demanded by investors. Determined using a three-stage dividend discount mod-el, on the basis of three to five-year IBES ex-pectations of profit growth and long-term GDP  growth  expectations  (consensus  fore-cast).
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 2006 2007 2008 20095075100150200
3691215182124
03691215End-of-month levels
31 January 2005 = 100, log scale
Price indices
Dow Jones Euro Stoxx
BanksDow Jones Euro Stoxx
Lin scale
Equity risk premiums 
Dow Jones Euro StoxxDow Jones Euro Stoxx Banks
31 January 2005 = 100, log scale
Price indices
S&P 500
Equity risk premiums 1
S&P 500S&P 500 BanksLin scale%
%20305075100150
S&P 500 BanksStock market
funding and
stock purchases
Sales and
purchases
of mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
46cates. By contrast, investors, faced with ex-
ceptionally low short-term interest rates,
withdrew capital above all from money mar-
ket funds ( 311/C252billion). Sales of foreign mu-
tual fund units in Germany reached 31 billion
net. Mutual fund shares were purchased pre-
dominantly by German non-banks ( 3131/C252bil-
lion), with German banks also increasing their
exposure to mutual funds slightly ( 311/C252bil-
lion). On the other hand, non-resident invest-
ors sold a small amount of German mutual
fund shares ( 31/C252billion).
Direct investment
An aggregation of the above cross-border
portfolio transactions in the third quarter
shows net capital exports of 316 billion. In
addition, outflows of funds through direct
investment totalled 331/C252billion, as against
381/C252billion in the previous three-month
period. A longer-term comparison reveals
that direct investment has decreased notice-
ably during the financial crisis as enterprises
have adopted a generally more cautious
approach in foreign investment, and as debt-
financed company takeovers are now virtually
impossible. In the last 12 months as a whole,
direct investment resulted in net capital ex-
ports of 338 billion. This was only just over
40% of the figures for both 2008 and 2007.
In the reporting period, domestic enterprises
provided their foreign branches with add-
itional capital of 313 billion. They primarily
increased their capital stakes abroad ( 311 bil-
lion) and provided non-resident subsidiaries
with capital by reinvesting earnings ( 351/C252bil-Major items of the balance of
payments
5billion
2008 2009
Item Q3 Q2 Q3
I Current account 1, 2 + 35.1 + 23.8 + 25.4
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 40.2r + 31.7r + 33.0
Services 1 – 7.8 – 3.8 – 9.7
Income 1 + 14.3 + 2.0 + 13.5
Current transfers 1 – 9.0 – 3.3 – 8.6
II Capital transfers 1, 4 – 0.3 + 0.3 – 0.1
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 13.1 – 48.5 – 5.4
1 Direct investment – 8.5 – 8.4 – 3.4
German investment
abroad – 9.0 – 17.5 – 12.8
Foreign investment in
Germany + 0.5 + 9.1 + 9.4
2 Portfolio investment + 39.2 + 6.6 – 16.1
German investment
abroad + 10.0 – 28.3 – 17.1
Shares + 0.9 – 1.4 – 0.0
Mutual fund shares – 2.7 – 1.1 – 1.1
Debt securities + 11.9 – 25.7 – 15.9
Bonds and notes 5 + 9.9 – 28.2 – 18.6
of which
Euro-denominated
bonds and notes + 9.2 – 25.8 – 19.1
Money market
instruments + 2.0 + 2.4 + 2.6
Foreign investment
in Germany + 29.2 + 34.9 + 1.0
Shares + 3.3 – 0.6 + 14.2
Mutual fund shares – 2.1 – 0.0 – 0.6
Debt securities + 28.0 + 35.5 – 12.5
Bonds and notes 5 + 14.9 + 3.7 – 26.0
of which
Public bonds and
notes + 14.9 + 20.8 – 8.3
Money market
instruments + 13.1 + 31.8 + 13.5
3 Financial derivatives 6 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 6.0
4 Other investment 7 – 45.7 – 47.5 + 17.8
Monetary financial
institutions 8 – 35.4 – 10.1 + 25.3
of which: short-term + 7.0 + 9.7 + 11.7
Enterprises and
households – 22.0 – 1.2 – 13.0
of which: short-term – 18.4 – 4.8 + 1.3
General government + 13.2 – 19.5 + 14.9
of which: short-term + 13.4 – 18.1 + 15.1
Bundesbank – 1.4 – 16.8 – 9.4
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values
(increase: –) 9 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 2.3
IV Errors and omissions – 21.7 + 24.4 – 19.8
1Balance. — 2Including supplementary trade items. — 3Special
trade according to the official foreign trade statistics (source:
Federal Statistical Office). — 4Including the acquisition/disposal
of non-produced non-financial assets. — 5Original maturity of
more than one year. — 6Securitised and non-securitised options
as well as financial futures contracts. — 7Includes financial and
trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. — 8Excluding the
Bundesbank. — 9Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankNet exports of
funds through
portfolio invest-
ment and direct
investment
German direct
investment
abroad

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
47lion). Intra-group credit transactions with
branches abroad, by contrast, resulted ininflows of 33
1/C252billion. Two main regional
targets for direct investment were Luxem-bourg ( 36
1/C252billion) and Ireland ( 331/C252billion).
Overall, holding companies ( 35 billion) and,
once again, the financial sector ( 33 billion)
played a significant role in this respect.Foreign firms also increased the financial pos-
ition of their branches in Germany in the thirdquarter ( 39
1/C252billion). On the one hand, funds
were provided in the form of equity capital(34 billion); in this context, the participation
of an Arab sovereign wealth fund in a Ger-man automobile enterprise played an import-ant role. On the other hand, foreign pro-prietors furnished – largely short-term –financial credits ( 34
1/C252billion).Foreign direct
investment in
Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
48Economic conditions
in GermanyMacroeconomic situation
The recovery in the German economy made
marked progress in the third quarter of 2009.
According to the Federal Statistical Office’s
flash estimate, seasonally and calendar-
adjusted real GDP rose by 0.7% in the third
quarter following an expansion of 0.4% in
the preceding three-month period. Owing to
the massive slump in production in the final
quarter of 2008 and first quarter of 2009,
output remained at a cyclically low level,
however. This is also revealed by the fact that
output was as much as 4.8% down on the
year in calendar-adjusted terms. Even so,
overall capacity utilisation is likely to have
increased perceptibly in the third quarter for
the first time in one-and-a-half years.
Although risks still exist with regard to the
sustainability of the current rebound, more
and more enterprises are now looking to the
future with growing confidence – not least
against the backdrop of marked signs of an
easing of tensions in the financial markets.
This is one reason why there has been no
increase over the past few months in the
existing moderate pressure on the labour
market in terms of redundancies.
The brighter international environment has
played a key role in the improved overall
economic situation in Germany. In the wake
of the global shock to confidence triggered
by the insolvency of Lehman Brothers, the
German economy was hit particularly hard by
the sharp downturn in global economic
activity. The reason for this is the country’s
dependence on exports and its specialised
manufacturing profile. Within the space ofCyclical
recovery
strengthened
in Q3
Export as the
primary
stimulus

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
49nine months, its export volume fell by more
than one-fifth. In the third quarter, however,German exports picked up noticeably. In sea-sonally adjusted terms, the value of exportedgoods in the third quarter was 5.4% up onthe preceding three months. There is likely tohave been a similarly sharp increase in realterms. From a regional perspective, the keyfactor was not only that demand from Asiawas continuing on an upward trend; exportsto other EU countries, which account for byfar the largest part of Germany’s foreigntrade, also recovered perceptibly. Germanfirms, in particular, were able to boost theirexport sales of intermediate goods. This sug-gests that – in global terms – the inventorycycle has advanced further. In major industrialcountries, the recovery has recently also beensustained by endogenous market factors,even though large-scale measures to stabilisethe economy have continued to play a majorrole, as is also evident from the sharp rise inmotor vehicle exports.
Imports to Germany also increased sharply
during the reporting period. In seasonally ad-justed terms, the rise in the value of importedgoods was just as large as that in exports. Inreal terms, growth is likely to have been evensomewhat greater. German enterprises gear-ing their plans to renewed growth in outputgave a clear boost mainly to imports of inter-mediate goods. Taken in isolation, importswere dampened by the fact that motorvehicle traders imported fewer new cars inthe first two months of the third quarter thanin the second quarter. This was done in theexpectation that available funds for thegovernment environmental premium would
soon be exhausted.
Fixed investment showed a slight overall rise
in the third quarter. This was probably duechiefly to stimuli from the public sector. Bycontrast, private investment remained fairlysubdued. Firms have been buying moremachinery and equipment again recently,with the growth in imports more than off-setting the continuing decline in domesticsales of capital goods (excluding motorvehicles). Industrial and commercial construc-tion may have slackened in the third quarter,however. Housing construction has not yetpicked up appreciably from the low level ofthe preceding quarters, even though therehas been a perceptible increase in applica-
Overall output
1 Price-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009100102104106108110112
–8–6–4–20+2+42000 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP 1
Year-on-year change%
Lin scale
Imports, too,
growing againFixed capital
formation in
the corporate
sector lacks
stimulus, but
increase in the
public sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
50tions for building permits and in orders since
the beginning of 2009.
Private consumption in the third quarter is
likely to have been well down on the preced-
ing three-month period in seasonally and
price-adjusted terms. This is suggested, first,
by the decline in retail sales and the marked
restraint households have shown recently in
buying heating oil. Moreover, the govern-
ment’s environmental premium for scrapping
old cars did not stimulate motor vehicle sales
as strongly in the third quarter as it did in the
second quarter. Despite this, private con-
sumption has held up comparatively well so
far. Had consumers downgraded their income
expectations in response to the sharply fallen
production levels, they may well have aggra-
vated the crisis. The unexpectedly moderate
level of redundancies to date has undoubted-
ly played a key role in this not occurring.
After adjustment for the effects of the car
scrappage scheme, consumer spending is
likely to have been largely in line with house-
holds’ disposable income. This also means,
however, that private consumption – except
for additional car purchases – did not gener-
ate any positive stimuli.
Sectoral trends
Following a large loss of output since the final
quarter of 2008, industrial production
showed a seasonally adjusted increase for the
first time again in the third quarter of this
year. With a 3.6% rise in output on the quar-
ter, the recovery was, in itself, quite sharp,
although it lagged behind the pace of growthForeign trade by region and category
of goods
Percentage change
2009 Q2Average of
Jul-Aug 2009
compared with
2009 Q1 2009 Q2
seasonally adjusted
ItemEx-
portsIm-
portsEx-
portsIm-
ports
Total – 2.9 – 7.2 4.6 3.3
Countries or group of
countries
Euro-area countries – 4.4 – 4.9 5.5 1.8
Other EU-countries – 1.2 – 1.0 6.6 3.3
of which
New member
states 1 – 1.7 2.2 5.7 0.8
United States of
America – 0.9 – 19.7 – 10.9 – 4.1
Russian Federation – 17.4 – 7.5 3.4 5.5
Japan 0.0 – 14.6 6.2 2.3
South-East Asian
countries 2 4.3 – 6.1 12.6 10.4
China 5.3 – 4.4 7.9 4.8
OPEC countries – 3.4 – 8.2 – 9.0 9.7
Categories of goods
Main categories
Intermediate goods – 3.2 – 8.7 6.6 4.4
Capital goods – 0.6 – 2.8 3.8 – 1.1
Consumer goods – 4.9 – 4.2 2.7 4.6
Energy . – 13.5 . 6.8
Selected categories
Pharmaceutical and
chemical products – 1.1 – 4.1 2.9 5.5
Machinery and
equipment – 7.4 – 16.1 0.6 3.6
Motor vehicles,
trailers and semi-
trailers 5.9 5.2 11.1 – 1.1
Computer, electronic
and optical products
as well as electrical
equipment – 3.0 1.8 6.4 4.7
Basic metals and
fabricated metal
products – 7.8 – 16.0 5.6 2.8
1Excluding Cyprus, Malta, Slovakia and Slovenia, which
now belong to the euro area. — 2Brunei Daressalam,
Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singa-
pore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand.
Deutsche BundesbankDampening
impact of
private
consumption
Sharp increase
in industrial
output from a
low level

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
51in orders and the very well advanced upturn
in business expectations. The fact that pro-duction of goods was 17
3/C254% down on the
year in calendar-adjusted terms highlights is aclear indication that output is still at a de-cidedly low level despite the considerablegrowth.
The biggest advances in the process of stabil-
isation and recovery have been made bymanufacturers of intermediate goods. Thechemicals industry achieved a cyclical turn-around at an early stage, for example, and,since the low at the very beginning of 2009,has already made up one-half of the fall inoutput due to the crisis. Basic metals manu-facturing has been trending upwards sincethe second quarter, with the boosting impactof the scrappage premium also being a factorin this sector, which is a major supplier tothe car manufacturing industry, where theseeffects, naturally enough, were strongest.The boom this created quickly raised car pro-duction by roughly one-quarter comparedwith the low in the first quarter of 2009.Looking to the future, this implies a consider-able potential for a setback, however, asprivate car demand will then be suffering thecounter-effects of purchases brought forwardat home and abroad, and commercial ordersfor motor vehicles are likely to remain weak.In major sub-areas of traditional capital goodsproduction, such as the manufacture ofmachinery and equipment or in electricalengineering (including IT), no more than thebeginnings of a cyclical improvement canbe identified in the pattern of growth atpresent.According to the Ifo Institute surveys, manu-
facturing capacity utilisation rose to 73
3/C254%o f
normal full capacity in October with a smallincrease already having been reported in July.This meant that industrial capacity utilisationwas still at a very low level. This is shown bythe fact that it was not only roughly 10 per-centage points below its multi-year average,but also undershot the lowest point of all thepreceding cyclical downturns since 1970. Atthe end of the period under review, it was theproducers of intermediate goods that wereable to increase their obviously crisis-hit cap-acity utilisation the most. By contrast, follow-ing an even sharper slump, capital goodsproducers (including motor vehicle manu-facturers) made up hardly any ground. Never-theless, capacity utilisation in consumergoods had shown no more than a relativelySectoral profile of the 
recovery process in industry *
* Two-month moving averages; low in each 
case = 100; time lag (in months) in brackets.
Deutsche Bundesbank100110120130140150160170Seasonally adjusted, log scale
Chemical
industry (+3)
Manufacture of 
computer,electronic andoptical products (0)Manufacture
of machineryand equipment (–3)Manufacture
of motorvehicles (+2)Manufacture of 
basic metals (0)
t–15 t+3 t+6 t t–3 t–6 t–9 t–12 t–18
Month before (+) or after (–) the low in
industrial output in April 2009Disparate
sectoral profile
in industry
Somewhat
higher
industrial
capacity
utilisation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
52moderate decline owing to the fact that it is
less cyclically vulnerable and was already pick-
ing up again a little.
Production sector output in the third quarter
of 2009 also benefited from a sharp seasonal-
ly adjusted increase in energy production
compared with the weak second quarter.
Furthermore, construction output in August
and September picked up noticeably from itsrather moderate figures at the beginning of
the third quarter. The robust situation in con-
struction is shown by capacity utilisation
surveyed by the Ifo Institute. In the core
sector of the construction industry, the in-
crease in public sector orders at least partly
offset the declining demand from industrial
investors, and stimulus from the public sector
is also likely to have helped building comple-
tion activities and the finishing trades.
The activities of the wholesale and retail trade
are likely to have declined in the third quarter
on balance. The overall picture was domin-
ated, first, by the negative effects stemming
from traditional retail trade whose sales
showed a fairly sharp seasonally adjusted
decline at the end of the period under review.
Second, there was a marked fall in motor
vehicle sales in the reporting period following
the massive boost to car sales from the
government environmental premium in the
first half of the year. Wholesale trade, on the
other hand, benefited in the third quarter
from the upturn in the production sector.
Growth in real sales of 11/C254% on the quarter
was quite modest, however, compared with
the quite considerable losses in the two pre-
ceding quarters. Business-related services
– judging by the available results of surveys
in this subsector – were also no longer per-
forming as unfavourably as before.
Employment and unemployment
The labour market again proved to be ex-
tremely robust in cyclical terms in the third
quarter of 2009. According to current data,Output in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20099095100105110115120
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10
95100105110115120
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+302005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Log scale
Industry
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Log scale
Construction
Lin Scale
Year-on-year
change%%
Sharp rise
in energy
production
and robust
construction
activityTrade and
services
showing
growth in
business-
related sector,
losses in
consumer-
related sector
Hardly any
decline in
employment
overall, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
53employment showed a fall of 30,000, or not
quite 0.1%, on the quarter in seasonallyadjusted terms and, in fact, remained un-changed over the quarter. After an upwardrevision of earlier statistics, there was only adecline of 84,000, or 0.2%, on the year. Thisstands in striking contrast to the sharp con-traction of aggregate output of almost 5%.
Labour input was adjusted to the lower level
of output partly through government-subsidised short-time working. In the secondquarter, firms were claiming short-time work-ing benefits from the Federal EmploymentAgency for 1.49 million employees. Averageworking hours lost for each employee onshort-time work were just under one-third ofregular working hours. In nominal terms, thiswas the employment equivalent of 474,000employees, or 1.1% of the labour force. Inthe third quarter, relief afforded by this meas-ure – taking expenditure on short-time work-ing benefits as a yardstick – may have beenone-fifth less. Seasonal effects are likely tohave played a part in this, too. A year-on-yearcomparison of the employment figures ad-justed for this short-time working effectwould show a noticeably sharper fall in em-ployment that is more than 1% higher, butthis would still be much smaller than the fallin aggregate output. Probably more signi-ficant in quantitative terms were othermechanisms for adjusting working hours tooperational requirements; these were intro-duced over the past few years by both sidesof industry and are now very much provingtheir worth in the crisis. They include workingtime accounts as well as the possibility of(temporarily) reducing regular working hourswith a corresponding cut in pay. Moreover,
firms have tolerated a clear decrease in hourlyproductivity, which is reflected inter alia in
much higher unit labour costs and corres-pondingly lower profit margins.
In sectoral terms, manufacturing, business-
related services (including temporary employ-ment) as well as transportation and storage,and information and communication haveshown a marked decline in employmentsubject to social security contributions. Com-pared with August 2008, a total of 386,000jobs have been lost in the sectors that wereseverely hit by the crisis. This corresponds to adecline of 3.1%. This contrasts with fairlylarge employment gains in sectors which arewholly or largely publicly financed – healthand social work, and public administration –and hotels and restaurants, and privateservices (a total of 250,000, or 3.2%).Furthermore, there has been a markedincrease of 95,000, or 2.0%, in low-paidpart-time employment.
There was also very little change in the official
unemployment figure in the third quarter of2009. On a quarterly average, 3.47 millionpersons were registered as unemployed inseasonally adjusted terms, which was265,000 more than one year previously. As inthe second quarter of 2009, the seasonallyadjusted unemployment rate was 8.2%. By abroader definition, which also neutralisesintervening changeovers in the labour marketstatistics, the year-on-year rise in unemploy-ment would have been roughly 50% higher,at 424,000. During the same period, thedecline in the number of employed residents
... but reduced
working hoursJob losses in
industry, gains
in services
Hardly any
change in
unemployment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
54was much smaller (-138,000) and there was a
further decrease in the working-age popula-
tion. One explanation for such discrepancies
could be that job losses in industry and in
other sectors especially affected by the crisis
often lead directly to unemployment, while
persons who were previously not in the active
labour take some of the new jobs in the ser-
vices sector. Added to this is the fact that per-
sons registered as unemployed can be in mar-
ginal employment.
As things stand at present, a sharp rise in un-
employment in the near future looks unlikely.
Nevertheless, employment will probably be
adjusted more and more to the now rising,
but still cyclically depressed volume of output.
Despite short-time working and the extensive
use of flexible working time models, this is
likely to lead to job losses in manufacturing
and in the transport and logistics sectors, al-
though these could be partly offset by new
recruitment in other sectors of the economy.
This is suggested at least by various surveys.
According to a special survey by the Institute
for Employment Research (IAB) in the sum-
mer of 2009, only 16% of enterprises and
public authorities (with currently about six
millions employees subject to social security
contributions) have plans to reduce staff,
while 13% of firms (likewise with six million
employees at present) intend to increase
staffing levels.1The remaining 71% of enter-
prises (with 15 million employees) are con-
sidering maintaining their staffing levels over
the next 12 months. According to the
autumn 2009 business survey conducted byLabour market
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
1 Not seasonally adjusted. — 2 Introduction 
of seasonal short-time working benefits at 
the  end  of  2006. —  3 From  January  2005, 
unemployed including persons formerly re-
ceiving social assistance but able to work.
Deutsche Bundesbank38.539.039.540.040.5
05001,0001,500
3.03.54.04.55.0
1,00050005001,000
––++
681012Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Million
0Thou-
sandThou-
sand
Thou-
sand
%
3Employed
2Short-time
workers1
UnemployedYear-on-year change
Year-on-year change
Unemployment rateOct
Oct
Oct–5000+500+1,000
Advance notification
of short-time work1
Oct
1See “Wie Betriebe in der Krise Besch/C228ftigung st/C252tzen”,
IAB-Kurzbericht 18/2009 (German only).Labour market
outlook

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
55the German Chambers of Industry and
Commerce (DIHK), one-quarter of enterprises
are planning to cut back the volume of
employment, 10% would like to expand it,
and two-thirds want to leave it unchanged.
This means that there has been a marked
improvement in the outlook for employment
since the early summer – which is also con-
sistent with the movement in the Ifo Employ-
ment Barometer. The fact that DIHK paints
the overall picture somewhat less positively
than IAB is probably due to the fact that the
DIHK survey is restricted to trade and industry.
Even so, the health and social services sector
– which is, if anything, underrepresented in
this survey – signals an increasing number of
jobs, as does in the Federal Employment
Agency’s statistics on vacancies. The latter
show that there has been no further reduc-
tion in the number of non-government-
assisted jobs over the past three months as a
whole. Nevertheless, a year-on-year decline
of more than one-quarter is reported. Ac-
cording to the quarterly IAB Job Vacancy Sur-
vey, there was a fall in the number of vacan-
cies between the second and third quarters
of 2009, but the decline was down to 16.6%
in year-on-year terms.
Wages and prices
Low capacity utilisation and depressed profit-
ability are increasingly making themselves felt
in negotiated wages and actual earnings. The
Bundesbank’s pay rate statistics show that
the year-on-year increase in negotiated rates
of pay in the third quarter of 2009, at an
average of 2.1%, was somewhat lower thanin the second quarter (2.8%). If collectively
agreed one-off and special payments are ex-
cluded, negotiated pay rates increased by
2.5%, compared with 2.8% in the second
quarter of this year. According to the negoti-
ated wage index of the Federal Statistical
Office, which refers only to basic rates of pay
and does not include civil servants, the year-
on-year increase in July was somewhat higher
at 3.0%.
New collective pay agreements in the past
nine months reflect not only general develop-
ments in the economy but also, in particular,
sectoral and firm-specific features. The new
negotiated payment agreement for Volks-
wagen AG at the end of September does
have large similarities with the agreement in
the metal-working and electrical engineeringNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-
sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2002 03 04 05 06 07 08 200900.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay total
Basic pay 1%
Q1-
Q3
Price pressure
continuing to
easeCollective wage
agreements
with sector-
specific
features

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
56industries in autumn 2008, but is markedly
more generous in some respects. In this case,
it is likely that the earnings from the boom as
result of the car scrappage scheme have
quickly been split up between the enterprise
and its employees. These new firm-level pay
agreements do not make any provision for
the possibility of worse times. Following a pay
freeze in the industrial cleaning trade in
2009, remuneration will increase by a total ofroughly 5% in both of the following years. In
the case of Deutsche Post AG, which is being
affected by a structural decline in letter deliv-
ery, there will be no linear wage increase in
the next two years, only a one-off payment.
On balance, by no means all employees bene-
fited fully from the collectively agreed pay
increases. This was due mainly to short-time
working and the reduction in statutory or
regular weekly working hours, with lower
bonus payments and a temporary suspension
of pay rises as additional factors. Actual earn-
ings fell, in fact, by 0.7% year on year in the
second quarter. On a monthly basis, this cor-
responds to a negative wage drift of 3.4 per-
centage points. This trend is likely to have
continued in the third quarter.
The fall in prices at the upstream stages of
the economy slowed further in the third
quarter of 2009. Seasonally adjusted import
and (domestic) factory prices were down by
no more than 0.3% and 1.5% on the quarter
respectively. Export prices remained un-
changed. Owing to base effects, the year-on-
year decline accelerated to -11.5% for
imports, -7.4% for domestic sales, and
-3.3% in the case of exports. The terms of
trade improved for the fourth quarter in
succession. Seasonally adjusted consumer
prices remained unchanged on the quarter.
The annual CPI inflation rate fell from +0.3%
to -0.3% (HICP: -0.5%), as the sharp season-
ally adjusted price increase of 0.6% in the
third quarter of 2008 dropped out of the
year-on-year figure and no longer offset the
sharp fall of 0.3% in the fourth quarter of
2008. A moderate increase in the year-on-Import, producer and
consumer prices
1 Not  seasonally  adjusted,  quarterly. — 
2 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 200995100105110115
95100105 105110115
95100105 105110115
95100105110
10123
–+++2005 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Consumer prices 2Construction
prices 1Producer prices
of industrial
productsImport pricesLog scale
%
OctStrong negative
wage drift
continues
Price climate
still favourable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
57year rate may be expected again for the
fourth quarter of 2009.
The disinflationary process that began in the
second half of 2008 now appears to have run
its course in some areas, while it is only just
starting to gain momentum in other product
categories. The decline in producer prices for
energy and intermediate goods has now
come to a virtual halt and has, in some cases,
even been superseded by an upturn, reflect-
ing the global economic recovery. In the case
of finished products, however, the decline in
producer prices has been tending to acceler-
ate – with the exception of food, where
prices peaked as early as the beginning of the
year. This is probably due mainly to capacity
overhangs and the earlier sharp fall in the
prices of primary products, which is now
being followed with a time lag by the end
products. Construction prices were back up
to the level before their decline in the second
quarter and were 0.4% up on the year.
Stable consumer prices in the third quarter of
2009 mask diverging underlying patterns.
Quite a sharp increase in the prices of indus-
trial goods contrasted with lower prices for
energy and food. There was a continuation of
the previous quarters’ moderate upward
price trend for services and rents. The fall in
energy prices was due mainly to gas, which
followed crude oil prices with a time lag. By
contrast, the prices of fuel and heating oil
accelerated in line with the current move-
ments in crude oil prices. The fall in food
prices was somewhat weaker than in the
second quarter of 2009. There was a marked
seasonally adjusted fall in the cost of fruit andvegetables (including potatoes). In addition,
prices of dairy products continued to fall. The
marked quarterly rise in the cost of durable
and non-durable goods (excluding energy)
was due, to a considerable extent, to tobacco
products, the prices of which were increased
by the manufacturers in June. Apart from
this, however, there was a further rise in the
retail prices of durables and non-durable
goods despite the more favourable trends at
the upstream stages of the economy.
In October, owing to higher heating oil prices,
the cost of living went up 0.1% in seasonally
adjusted terms; the annual rate of change in
the CPI rose from -0.3% to 0.0% (HICP:
-0.5% to -0.1%). This quite marked increase
in the annual rate is also due to a base effect
caused by the decline in prices in October
2008. The slight trend increase in consumer
prices means that moderately positive annual
rates are likely in the following months.
Orders received and outlook
The Germany economy has made good use so
far of the potential for recovery offered by the
improvement in global economic conditions.
Even so, the unfavourable starting position,
the still underdeveloped basis, as well as a
number of remaining vulnerabilities mean that
the cyclical upturn is not without risks. The
inventory cycle is currently generating major
stimuli which are unlikely to have a growing
impact in the coming months. Nevertheless,
the measures taken in Germany and elsewhere
to stabilise economic activity have probably
not yet fully taken effect, even though theVarying price
trends
depending on
production
stage
Moderate rise
in consumer
pricesYear-on-year
rate no longer
negative in
October
Recovery still
narrowly based

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
58pace of recovery is being retarded per se by
the expiry of some measures, such as the tem-
porary financial incentives to buy a new car
granted in many industrial countries. Added to
this is the possible future loss of momentum in
the countermovement to the shock-like drop
in demand following the insolvency of Lehman
Brothers. This is especially the case as the
necessary correction of structural macroeco-
nomic imbalances in the global economy
might not only dampen activity in the German
economy’ s major export markets abroad but
also lead to changes in the international
monetary framework. Finally, the risk of a still
vulnerable financial system placing a strain on
the process of recovery in the real economy
owing to lagged cyclical effects has not been
entirely eliminated.
The key asset for economic growth in the
coming months will be demand for industrial
goods. Starting from a very low level, this has
achieved a notable momentum in the second
and third quarters of 2009. At a seasonally
adjusted +8.9%, orders grew very sharply in
the third quarter. This followed an increase of
5.5% in the volume of orders in the second
quarter. One exceptional, large armaments
order in the reporting period means that the
underlying pace of the pick-up in demand
was somewhat slower. Nevertheless, the
overall picture includes the fact that orders of
capital goods were on the up, even excluding
this major order and the special demand for
non-commercial private motor vehicles. To-
gether with a very sharp, 10.8% increase in
intermediate goods, the stimuli were thus
broadly based in sectoral terms. Given theDemand for industrial goods 
and construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 20098090100110120130
01020
++
–40–30–20–100
90100110120130
758090
90100110120
8090
90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2005 = 100,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total industrial 
orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Total construction orders%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change%
%Jul-
Aug
Jul-
AugMarked
improvement
in the order
situation in
industry ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
59growth in both domestic and export orders,
this is also been true regionally up to now.
With a more positive order situation again, it
comes as no surpise that business sentimenthas shown a further improvement. Accordingto the latest Ifo and DIHK surveys, businessexpectations have now moved into neutralterritory. Nevertheless, a sectoral breakdownreveals considerable discrepancies. Althoughsuch variations can generally be explained bythe differing amount of progress made in therecovery process, a certain degree of over-statement cannot be ruled out given the factthat the Ifo expectations component is al-ready indicating comparatively high values inthe case of intermediate goods producers.One reason for this is that survey indicatorsgenerally show the balance of trend esti-mates: in the context of cyclical turnaroundsaccompanied by marked synchronicity, thisconstruction can lead to sharp fluctuationsand short transition periods. The movementof the indicator is being additionally accentu-ated at present by the fact that firms’ expect-ations were very depressed at the height ofthe crisis. By contrast, the current businesssituation in industry is still clearly being as-sessed more cautiously, even though it hasshown a marked improvement on the lowlevels of the second quarter.
Enterprises are basing their optimistic expect-
ations about the economy predominantly ona further pick-up in export demand. This isclear from export expectations as reported byIfo and DIHK. In the case of future finaldomestic demand, greater caution is probablybeing “priced in”, even though the leadingindicators are pointing to certain stimulatory
effects in the short term. For example, indus-trial investment demand showed a percep-tible improvement in the third quarter.Domestic firms not only placed orders formore machinery and equipment again butalso commissioned a number of new con-struction projects, including investment in therail infrastructure which is being funded bythe stimulus packages.Indicators of corporate sector 
investment
1 Ratio of gross fixed capital formation to 
corporate gross value added (data for 1991 at  current  prices,  extrapolated  using  the relevant change factors based on the previ-ous  year’s  prices). —  2 Source:  Ifo  Invest-
ment Survey (Spring).
Deutsche Bundesbank1991 95 00 05 200918.018.519.019.520.020.521.021.5
51015202530354045Investment ratio 1
Rationali-
sationExpansion/change in 
production programme
Expansion while maintaining
the production programmeReplacementInvestment motives 2
%H1%... gives further
boost to
business
sentiment
Expectations
of general
economic
activity based
mainly on
exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
60The low level of capacity utilisation plays a
major role for future investment planning,
however. As there will still be a considerable
degree of underutilisation even if the eco-
nomic upturn continues, the traditional close
cyclical link between export demand and
industrial investment could be loosened
somewhat in this phase of the cycle. Accord-
ing to the spring 2009 Ifo survey, investment
was, to quite a large extent, still characterised
in structural terms by the motive of expand-
ing and changing the product programme,
even though replacement and rationalisation
were becoming more important. Germany
also retained its attractiveness as a production
location throughout the crisis: this is demon-
strated, not least, by the fact that, up to now,
far fewer firms have considered investment
focusing on rationalisation than was the case,
say, during the recession of the early 1990s.
Private consumption from the middle of the
year onwards is unlikely to have gone on
buttressing economic activity to the sameextent as did in the first half of 2009. Accord-
ing to the survey data of the consumer re-
search company GfK, consumer sentiment
remained intact overall up to the end of the
period under review, although a number of
sub-indicators, such as income expectations
and the general propensity to purchase,
showed no further improvement in October
on the upturn of the preceding months.
Moreover, the price climate is likely to remain
favourable overall, and the scope for expend-
iture will, in itself, also be increased quite
considerably in 2010, above all, by a number
of fiscal policy measures. Under these circum-
stances, the labour market will assume a key
role. In this context, it is mainly those who
bear responsibility within the enterprises who
will be facing the challenge of fully utilising
and developing the potential for flexibility
that has been created over the past few
years. The success achieved so far, which has
also gained much attention internationally,
should act as an encouragement.Cyclical
retarding
factors still
overshadowing
propensity to
invest
Outlook for
consumption

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
61Public finances* General government budget
Public finances are deteriorating dramatically
in the current year. Whereas a balanced
budget was achieved in 2008, supported by
favourable economic conditions on an annual
average, a deficit of just over 3% of GDP is
now likely. This would exceed the ceiling laid
down in the EC Treaty. Approximately one-
half of this rise is due to the direct impact of
the sharp cyclical downturn. However, this is
still being moderated by the favourable
macroeconomic growth pattern because
gross wages and salaries as well as expendi-
ture on private consumption, both of which
are of particular significance for government
revenue, are experiencing a far less unfavour-
able development than GDP , and growth in
unemployment is likely to remain limited on
an annual average. However, the decline in
revenue from profit-related taxes is likely to
be much greater than economic circum-
stances alone would imply. At approximately
11/C254% of GDP , other factors, especially the
fiscal stimulus packages, have also had a
major impact. Government debt will shoot up
to around 313/C254trillion, with financial market
stabilisation measures already adopted but
not recorded in the deficit also playing an
important role in this respect.
Government revenue is falling markedly in
2009. In addition to the sharp cyclical down-
turn and the extraordinary drop in profit-
*The “General government budget” section starts with
an analysis based on data contained in the national
accounts and on the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent
reporting on budgets of the various levels of government
and social security schemes is based on the budgetary
figures as defined in the government’ s (predominantly
budgetary) financial statistics.Public finances
deteriorating
dramatically in
2009
Revenue ratio
rising despite
a significant
reduction in
receipts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
62related taxes,1the effect of substantial tax
cuts is being felt. Changes to income tax
rates and to the tax depreciation rules con-
tained in the stimulus packages as well as the
additional tax relief measures for enterprises
adopted in July are especially important in
this context. In the area of social contribu-
tions, the lower contribution rate to the Fed-
eral Employment Agency will be virtually
offset by higher average annual rates to the
health insurance fund and public long-term
care insurance scheme. Despite a significant
reduction in receipts on the whole, the rev-
enue ratio will rise perceptibly due to the fact
that the development of the economic struc-
ture is very favourable for public finances as
GDP is declining even more sharply.
However, growth in the expenditure ratio
is much stronger. This primarily reflects the
impact of weak economic activity both
through higher labour market-related expend-
iture and through the denominator effect of
the fall in GDP . This alone accounts for about
three-quarters of the expected increase of
approximately 4 percentage points. Neverthe-
less, even after adjustment for cyclical effects,
the expenditure ratio is still increasing consid-
erably. The additional outlays arising from the
fiscal stimulus packages alone are likely to
come to around1/C252% of GDP in 2009, the
largest areas of spending being the car scrap-
ping incentive, the temporary expansion both
of government investment and of active
labour market policy measures and the one-
off child bonus. In addition, spending on
healthcare, old-age provision and personnel
as well as the rise in child benefit have also
contributed to the increase.Public finances are likely to take another
sharp turn for the worse next year. The debt
ratio (forecast to exceed 75%) will mark a
new historic high, while the deficit ratio will
go up to around 5%. Although GDP is pick-
ing up again, the economic situation is likely
to be an appreciable contributory factor
because the growth structure – unlike in
2009 – is likely to be rather unfavourable for
public finances. The rise in the deficit will,
however, be ascribable mostly to structural
factors. For instance, the exceptionally weak
development in revenue from profit-related
taxes, interpreted as a structural component,
is likely to continue. Furthermore, extensive
deficit-increasing measures are also having an
impact. The new rules adopted in the coali-
tion contract, due to come into effect at the
beginning of 2010, alone could drive the def-
icit up by almost1/C252% of GDP .
The revenue ratio is likely to decline due to
the forecast unfavourable growth structure,
the continued negative growth effects in
profit-related taxes and, above all, to sizeable
cuts in tax and social contribution rates.
These include the greater tax deductibility of
insurance contributions and the renewed
1Entrepreneurial and property income, which is normally
used as a macroeconomic reference variable for revenue
from profit-related taxes, provides only a rough approxi-
mation of the actual tax assessment base. It is therefore
difficult to draw a distinction between cyclically-induced
and other (structural) shortfalls. Pursuant to the standard
cyclical adjustment procedure used in the European Sys-
tem of Central Banks, the development of the macroeco-
nomic reference variable does not account for a consider-
able portion of the expected decline in revenue from this
type of tax and it is therefore not included in the cyclical
component calculated. Neither do the effects of legisla-
tive changes explain tax shortfalls to the extent expected.
See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Development of tax rev-
enue in Germany and current tax policy issues, Monthly
Report, October 2008, pp 33-57.Surge in
expenditure
ratioDeficit could
rise to around
5% of GDP in
2010
Development
of revenue ratio
predominantly
shaped by tax
cuts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
63adjustment to income tax rates adopted as
part of the fiscal stimulus package of January2009. By contrast, the additional tax reliefmeasures now planned for enterprises and inconnection with turnover tax will initiallyhave rather a small impact in comparison. Inthe case of the social security funds, theintention to offset shortfalls in health insur-ance contributions with central governmentfunds should ensure that health insuranceinstitutions will, for the most part, not haveto demand additional contributions in 2010.
By contrast, the expenditure ratio is likely to
increase slightly although economic activitycould have a dampening effect. Greaterspending on healthcare and old-age provisionis the prime cause. Although pensions are notlikely to be raised in mid-2010, not least theeffect of the rise in mid-2009, which was par-ticularly high due to ad hoc interventions in
the pension formula, will still be felt. Theextent of the economic stimulus measures isalso likely to augment. Although a number oftemporary stimulus measures, such as the carscrapping incentive and the one-off childbonus, will have ceased to take effect, gov-ernment investment is still likely to expandconsiderably because plans could only beimplemented to a limited extent in 2009.Finally, sizeable extra spending, in particularan increase in child benefit, has been agreedfor 2010 in the coalition contract.
Given the crisis and the associated high
macroeconomic risks, it was justifiable forpolicymakers to launch extensive fiscal mea-sures to stimulate the economy in addition toallowing the automatic stabilisers to takeeffect and granting direct support to the
financial markets. However, as only a rela-tively small amount of the deficit forecast for2010 currently appears to be cyclical in nat-ure, while a large part of the stimulus mea-sures will probably prove permanent, largedeficits and a rapidly rising debt ratio arelikely to persist over the medium term unlessthe measures are properly counterfunded.
In almost all other EU countries, too, the
European Commission’s autumn forecastpoints to the prospect of very high deficitratios and, in some cases, a veritable explo-sion in debt ratios. Such a developmentwould not only entail fiscal and macroeco-nomic problems but would also pose a chal-lenge for monetary policymakers. Marketsmight, for instance, form high inflationexpectations on the perception that the bud-get situation is unsustainable in the longterm. Not least to safeguard stability-orientedmonetary policy from unsound fiscal policy,the EC Treaty and the Stability and GrowthPact stipulate minimum requirements of fiscalpolicy, which falls under national jurisdiction.Adjustment mechanisms have been envi-saged should such requirements not be ful-filled. The Pact is sufficiently flexible to enablesignificant fiscal stabilisation in times of extra-ordinary crisis. However, the specific policychallenges arise where consolidation is neces-sary. As the past has shown, correcting exces-sive deficits using the agreed procedures hasnot always been plain sailing. Meanwhile, theEuropean Commission has initiated an exces-sive deficit procedure against Germany and12 of the 16 other euro-area countries (seebox on pages 64 and 65). As economic pro-
Expenditure
ratio is likely
to increase
slightly in 2010
Without
consolidation
measures,
high deficits
expected, in the
medium term,
tooComprehensive
consolidation
required in
almost all EU
countries
and ...
... also
envisaged in EU
budgetary rules

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
64Deutsche BundesbankExcessive deficit procedure against 13 euro-area member states
In the EC Treaty, member states of the European Union com-
mitted themselves to avoiding excessive deficits. As a rule,
the deficit and debt levels shall not exceed the reference
values of 3% and 60% of GDP. The objective is to ensure
sound public finances as a precondition for price stability
and sustainable growth. Confidence in the long-term sus-
tainability of public finances is particularly important in
order to anchor inflation expectations at an appropriate
level also in the medium and long term, and thus ease the
task of monetary policy.
The European agreements also establish important minimum
requirements for exiting stimulus measures and for the
necessary consolidation. Pursuant to the Stability and
Growth Pact, the reference value for the deficit ratio may be
exceeded in the case of a severe economic downturn. How-
ever, even in such a situation, the deficit ratio may overshoot
the 3% ceiling only temporarily and must remain close to the
reference value. If the deficit ratio goes above 3% and the
exemption clauses cannot be invoked, or if the debt ratio is
higher than 60% and is not sufficiently diminishing, the
Ecofin Council, at the recommendation of the European
Commission, decides on the existence of an excessive deficit
and puts forward recommendations for correction. The cor-
rection of an excessive deficit should normally be completed
in the year following its identification. However, if there are
special circumstances, this deadline may be extended, as a
rule, by a year. As a benchmark, the structural deficit is to be
reduced annually by at least 0.5% of GDP.
In April and July 2009, the Ecofin Council ruled that excessive
deficits exist in a total of five euro-area countries. Greece,
whose excessive deficit procedure is based on its overstep-
ping of the reference value in 2007 – which it reported retro-
actively, was asked to correct its excessive deficit in 2010.
Malta also ought to record a deficit of less than 3% of GDP
in 2010. The correction deadlines for the other three coun-
tries, which likewise recorded excessive deficits in 2008, were
extended in light of the size of the deficit and in the context
of the extraordinary economic and financial crisis. Spain and
France should comply with the 3% limit again by 2012 at the
latest and Ireland by 2013. After six months, it has to be as-
sessed whether the respective member state has taken effect-
ive action to meet the recommendations. If this is the case,
but unexpected economic developments adversely affect
public finances to a considerable extent, the Council can re-
vise the recommendations, based on the Commission’s ad-
vice. For this reason, on 11 November 2009, the Commissionrecommended extending the deadline for Spain, France and
Ireland by another year. By contrast, in the case of Greece,
the government was found to be largely responsible for the
sharp deterioration in the budgetary situation in 2009. The
Commission therefore advised the Council to establish that
no effective action had been taken. The next step would be
to escalate the procedure and give notice to Greece. For
Malta, the six-month period before the assessment of effect-
ive action is carried out comes to an end in January 2010.
At the same time as recommending revisions for the exces-
sive deficit procedures that were initiated in spring 2009, the
European Commission recommended that the Ecofin Council
decide on the existence of an excessive deficit and put for-
ward recommendations for correction for eight other euro-
area countries. At the end of September, in their semi-annual
notification as part of the European budgetary surveillance
procedure, these countries had reported deficit ratios for
2009 that were well above the reference value and most of
them also breached the debt criterion.1The European Com-
mission recommends a correction deadline of 2013 for
Germany, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, Slovakia and
Slovenia, and a correction deadline of 2012 for Belgium and
Italy.
In the Commission’s opinion, Germany, the Netherlands and
Austria can carry out their fiscal measures in 2010 as planned
and do not have to start consolidation until 2011. If their
structural balances improve by an annual average of1/C252%t o
3/C254% of GDP between 2011 and 2013, these countries would
be able to achieve the required correction on time. For Italy,
Belgium and Slovenia, consolidation efforts on a similar scale
are required, but they need to start in 2010. For the other
countries, which should also start consolidation from 2010,
the recommended improvements vary considerably. They
range from an annual average of 1% of GDP for Slovakia,
11/C254% for Portugal and France, 13/C254% for Spain to 2% for Ire-
land.
By making a distinction with regard to the correction dead-
line and the extent of the annual consolidation, the Commis-
sion’s intention is to propose structural adjustments that are
deemed to be achievable while, at the same time, taking
into account the varying risks for the sustainability of public
finances as a result inter alia of differences in the debt levels.
Against the backdrop of the extraordinary economic and
financial crisis, which is leaving a distinct mark on general
government budgets, and the fact that a year ago the Euro-
1See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2009,
p 10. — 2States the required average annual improvement in the
structural deficit ratio as recommended by the Commission. — 3Inthe case of Malta, the assessment of effective action will be carried
out after 7 January 2010. — 4The Ecofin Council is expected to decide
on the existence of excessive deficits and recommendations for cor-

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
65pean committees themselves called for deficit-increasing
measures to stabilise the economy, a correction deadline ofmore than one year is appropriate in many cases. However,the Commission’s interpretation has severely stretched theflexibility of the Stability and Growth Pact. For Germany, aswell as for other countries, a faster reduction of the high def-icits and a reversal in the development of the debt ratio is de-sirable and possible. For some countries, the scale of consoli-dation recommended by the Commission is not or is barelyabove the minimum requirement of 0.5% of GDP per year,even though the deficit ratios clearly exceed the referencevalue. The mostly high and rapidly growing debt ratios alsoadvocate more ambitious consolidation. It is now up to theEcofin Council to decide on appropriate consolidation re-quirements and thus prevent damage to the fiscal frame-work – a cornerstone of monetary union. It is also vital thatall member states respect the provisions relating to an exces-sive deficit procedure and take suitable measures so thatthey at least achieve the final improvements recommended.
The excessive deficit procedure should be relatively simple,
transparent and focused on rapidly achieving the correction.The Commission’s differentiation of the extent of annualconsolidation or the start date based on other indicators –
such as current account balances – makes the proceduremore complicated and intransparent. The attempt at macro-economic fine-tuning has a detrimental effect on account-ability and weakens the binding force.
Against the backdrop of an economic recovery, rapid and
sustained budgetary consolidation is in each member state’sown best interests. For countries against which an excessivedeficit procedure has been launched, deficit-increasing meas-ures without counterfunding are a step in the wrong direc-tion, however, and are generally incompatible with the regu-lations. It is now essential to achieve sound budgetary pos-itions before the next downturn sets in. Some countries canthus also avoid the threat of risk premiums on interest rates,which would not only tighten the budgetary position butalso impair economic development. Rapid and sustainableconsolidation would not least boost confidence in the long-term sustainability of public finances and thus make a consid-erable contribution to anchoring stability-oriented inflationexpectations. This would make it easier for monetary policy-makers to ensure price stability at low interest rates.
rection on 2 December 2009. — 5Source: European Commission,
Autumn Forecast 2009.Euro-area member states in the excessive deficit procedure
Budget balance as a percentage
of GDP5Debt as a percentage of GDP5
Coun-tryDecision on the
existence of anexcessive deficit in Deadline for correctionStart of
consolida-tionAnnual
consoli-dation re-quirement
2
(as a per-centageof GDP) 2009 2010 2011 2009 2010 2011
GR April 2009 2010 – 12.7 – 12.2 – 12.8 112.6 124.9 135.4
MT July 2009 2010
3 – 4.5 – 4.4 – 4.3 68.5 70.9 72.5
Commission’s proposal
for new correctiondeadline
ES 2013 2010 1
3/C254 – 11.2 – 10.1 – 9.3 54.3 66.3 74.0
FR April 2009)
2013 2010 11/C254 – 8.3 – 8.2 – 7.7 76.1 82.5 87.6
IE 2014 2010 2 – 12.5 – 14.7 – 14.7 65.8 82.9 96.2
Procedure
initiated4inCommission’s proposal
for correction deadline
BE 2012 20103/C254 – 5.9 – 5.8 – 5.8 97.2 101.2 104.0
IT 2012 20101/C252 – 5.3 – 5.3 – 5.1 114.6 116.7 117.8
DE 2013 20111/C252 – 3.4 – 5.0 – 4.6 73.1 76.7 79.7
NL October 2009)
2013 20113/C254 – 4.7 – 6.1 – 5.6 59.8 65.6 69.7
AT 2013 20113/C254 – 4.3 – 5.5 – 5.3 69.1 73.9 77.0
PT 2013 2010 11/C254 – 8.0 – 8.0 – 8.7 77.4 84.6 91.1
SI 2013 20103/C254 – 6.3 – 7.0 – 6.9 35.1 42.8 48.2
SK 2013 2010 1 – 6.3 – 6.0 – 5.5 34.6 39.2 42.7

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
66spects stabilise, it will be vital to adopt a cred-
ible strategy to rapidly and rigorously correct
the currently dramatic outlook for public
finances in many countries.
The European Commission recommends that
the Ecofin Council gives Germany until 2013
to correct its excessive deficit. According to
this recommendation, Germany should not
start the consolidation in 2010 but can imple-
ment the fiscal policy measures as planned.
From 2011, the structural deficit is to be
reduced by an annual average of 0.5% of
GDP . Should economic or budgetary develop-
ment be better than expected, consolidation
is to be stepped up. With regard to the con-
solidation requirements, these recommenda-
tions lag behind central government’s finan-
cial plan of the third quarter of 2009. This
plan also envisaged implementing the deficit-
increasing measures in 2010 that had been
already agreed and not returning to the 3%
ceiling until 2013. However, in the meantime,
the fiscal balance for 2010 has been esti-
mated to be 1% of GDP more favourable
indicating that, if the previously planned con-
solidation path is pursued, the 3% limit could
be met again as early as 2012. A more ambi-
tious goal would also be desirable because
the recommended scale of consolidation,
which is already covered in part by the fact
that temporary economic stimulus measures
are now coming to an end, fulfils only the
minimum requirements of the Pact and
would merely extend the correction period
unnecessarily.
Germany has a special responsibility for
implementing the European fiscal rules, manyof which it initiated itself to ensure the
stability of the euro. Additional deficit-raising
measures in a country against which an
excessive deficit procedure has already been
launched are, as a rule, incompatible with the
Pact, as they can be expected to require new
borrowing. Moreover, the overall economic
outlook has now brightened significantly,
and, if the necessary fiscal consolidation is
not tackled rapidly and rigorously, the next
downturn could set in before a sound bud-
getary position has been re-established. Over-
all, further unfunded spending increases and
tax cuts in 2010 are a problematic signal in
this situation. They hamper and delay the
necessary consolidation process, the compli-
ance with international obligations as well as
national debt rules. Furthermore, they are
not appropriate from an economic perspec-
tive, especially as the bulk of the stimulus
packages to date will take effect in 2010. It is
vital that policymakers, in Germany in parti-
cular, do more than just pay lip service to
European and national fiscal rules and set out
a realistic prospect of consolidating public
finances in the stability programme to be pre-
sented at the end of January.
Budgetary development of central, state
and local government
Tax revenue
In the third quarter of 2009, tax revenue2
was down sharply by 8% on the same quar-
2Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known for the quarter under review.Correction
deadline
recommended
by Commission
for Germany
unambitiousExpansion of
deficit by new
spending
increases and
tax cuts gives
problematic
signal
Steep decline
in tax revenue
in Q3

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
67ter in 2008 (see chart on this page and the
table on page 68). This is attributable to theeconomic downturn and extensive tax reliefmeasures. Income-related taxes felt the bruntof this (-16
1/C252%). Wage tax receipts (-51/C252%)
declined as a result of lower – albeit onlyslightly when compared to GDP – grosswages and salaries. Moreover, at the start ofthe year, tax rates were lowered and theamounts deducted from cash receipts – childbenefit and subsidies for supplementaryprivate pension plans – rose. Massive short-falls were recorded for profit-related taxes(-37
1/C252%). Receipts from corporation tax
plummeted owing to lower advance pay-ments for current profits and, on balance,higher refunds for 2008. Receipts fromassessed income tax likewise decreasedowing to the fall in profits, however, so far,they have been less severely affected. Addedto this were revenue shortfalls as a result oftax refunds following the Federal Consti-tutional Court’s ruling reinstating the stan-dard travel allowance for commuters, and oftax cuts. Lower profit distributions alsoresulted in large declines in revenue frominvestment income tax. However, revenuefrom consumption-related taxes was at aboutthe same level as in 2008 due to the relativelystable development of consumption.
According to the latest official tax estimate, a
sharp drop in revenue is also expected for theyear as a whole (including local governmenttaxes, by -6
1/C252%) although the annual rate
will be boosted by the relatively favourableresults in the first quarter.
3The major factors
behind the decline are shortfalls owing to themeasures to support the economy,
4retroac-tive corrections following the Federal Consti-
tutional Court’s ruling of December 2008reinstating the standard travel allowance forcommuters as well as the rise in child bene-fit,
5which, in total, amounted to 3161/C252bil-
lion. A massive drop in profit-related taxes isalso expected (-17
1/C252%o r 322 billion after
adjustment for legislative changes), thusTax revenue *
* Including  EU  shares  in  German  tax  rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local gov-ernment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 200986420246810121416
––––++++++++Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
3The estimate is based on central government’s current
macroeconomic prognosis. It forecasts for 2009 a rate of
change in real GDP of -5% (May: -6%) and in nominal
GDP of -3.9% (May: -5.3%). In 2010, real growth is
expected to be +1.2% (May: +0.5%) and nominal
growth +1.6% (May: +1.2%).
4Especially lowering the income tax rates, child bonus,
easing depreciation facilities, extending actual taxation in
the case of turnover tax, more lenient counterfinancing
measures from the 2008 business tax reform.
5In the government’ s financial statistics, increasing child
benefit decreases the tax revenue as child benefit is
deducted from wage tax revenue. However, in the
national accounts, which are used as the basis for the
analysis in the first section of this report, child benefit
constitutes a gross item due to its transfer component
and is booked as social expenditure.Large income
tax shortfalls
Revenue from
consumption-
related taxes
stable
Sharp drop in
revenue also
expected for
year as a whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
68reversing the best part of the extraordinary
positive development over the past few years.
Key tax variables, such as gross wages and
salaries and, above all, private consumption,
are developing much more favourably than
nominal GDP , thus dampening the overall
effect of the slowdown in economic activity
on tax revenue. Fiscal drag is playing no role
in the current year.6
Assuming there are no legislative changes,
revenue is expected to fall by a further 21/C252%
in 2010. The tax relief measures already
agreed – which, on balance, will grow over
time – such as shortfalls in the wake of raising
special income tax allowances for contribu-
tions to health and long-term care insurance
schemes in particular, will have an impact
(overall 391/C252billion). Added to this is the factthat revenue from profit-related taxes will
continue to fall as the slump in corporate
earnings in 2009 is likely to take some time to
feed through completely. Furthermore, the
macroeconomic reference variables for wage
tax and consumption-related taxes are also
expected to develop poorly. All in all, how-
ever, forecasting uncertainty is currently very
high.7It should also be taken into account
that the official tax estimate is based on the
legislative status quo , hence the additional
relief measures envisaged by the governmentTax revenue
Q1 to Q3 Q3Estimate
for
2009 1, 2
2008 2009 2008 2009
Year-on-year
changeYear-on-year
changeYear-
on-year
percent-
age
Type of tax 5billion 5billion as % 5billion 5billion as % change
Tax revenue, total 2 375.2 352.8 – 22.3 – 6.0 125.5 115.6 – 9.9 – 7.9 – 6.1
of which
Wage tax 101.6 96.6 – 5.0 – 4.9 34.1 32.2 – 1.9 – 5.6 – 5.2
Profit-related taxes 3 60.2 45.4 – 14.8 – 24.6 18.1 11.3 – 6.7 – 37.3 – 25.0
Assessed income tax 22.9 18.8 – 4.1 – 17.9 8.9 6.7 – 2.1 – 24.2 – 17.9
Investment income
tax 4 23.7 21.2 – 2.4 – 10.3 5.1 4.0 – 1.1 – 21.5 – 14.4
Corporation tax 13.6 5.3 – 8.3 – 60.9 4.1 0.6 – 3.5 – 85.5 – 59.9
Turnover taxes 5 130.5 130.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 44.3 44.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4
Energy tax 24.0 24.7 + 0.7 + 2.8 9.8 9.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.0
Tobacco tax 9.5 9.4 – 0.0 – 0.4 3.6 3.5 – 0.2 – 4.1 + 0.0
1According to official tax estimate of November 2009. —
2Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes. — 3Employee
refunds, grants paid to home owners and investorsdeducted from revenue. — 4Withholding tax on interest
income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earn-
ings. — 5Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6Fiscal drag is usually positive on balance as the loss in
real value for volume-based excise duties is overcompen-
sated by the positive progressive effects for income tax.
However, in 2009 the effects are reversed as the deflator
for households’ consumption expenditure and nominal
average wages are expected to decrease slightly.
7See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Development of tax
revenue in Germany and current tax policy issues,
Monthly Report, October 2008, pp 33-57.Further clear
decline in
revenue
expected
in 2010 ...... and addi-
tional tax relief
measures
announced

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
69for 2010 are not yet included. Shortfalls aris-
ing as a result of raising child benefit andchild tax allowance, adjusting corporate taxa-tion and inheritance tax as well as giving pre-ferential turnover tax treatment to the hoteltrade are expected to be in the range of 36
billion in 2010 (0.2% of GDP or 1.2% of taxrevenue) and amount to 38
1/C252billion over a
whole year.
The forecasts for 2009 and 2010 have both
been revised downwards by 31/C252billion com-
pared with the last official tax estimate fromMay, if the effects of legislative changesadopted in the meantime and revisions to thecentral government estimate of tax shortfallsfollowing the ruling of the European Court ofJustice in the Meilicke case are factored outof the calculations.
8The upward revisions for
consumption-related taxes are smaller thanthe downward revisions for income-relatedtaxes. In comparison with the legislativestatus quo of the third quarter (ie including
the tax relief measures for enterprises fromJuly) and taking the additional tax cutsannounced into consideration, the downwardrevision for 2010 amounts to 33 billion.
In addition to measures to be implemented in
the short term that are mentioned above, thecoalition agreements contain further tax pol-icy announcements. However, complex areas,such as the reform of corporate taxation andof local government funding, are yet to beclearly defined. Future decisions are also sub-ject to a general financing proviso, which,given the goal inter alia of providing further
relief of up to around 320 billion by adjusting
income tax rates, should play a prominentrole in view of the European and national
budgetary rules. Just which components thegeneral reform of the tax system is to includethus remains to be seen. In order to makeincome taxation less complex, reducing thenumber of bands is not sufficient. Incometaxation could be greatly simplified by redu-cing the number of tax subsidies and excep-tions, although experience has shown thatthe challenge here will be pushing throughactual measures against the will of currentprivileged stakeholders. However, so far, themore concrete plans indicate instead anextension of special cases, exemptions andpreferential treatment. Ultimately, theintended tax reforms are to be analysedwithin the context of the overall tax andtransfer system including the social securityfunds and with regard to intergenerationalburden-sharing and the sustainability of pub-lic finances.
Central government budgetThe central government budget recorded a
deficit of 316 billion in the third quarter of
2009, which was 34
1/C252billion higher than one
year earlier. Despite the fact that revenuefrom motor vehicle tax ( 32 billion) payable to
central government since July was includedfor the first time, revenue decreased byalmost 4% ( 34 billion) due to a steep decline
in tax receipts. Growth in expenditure of justover 2% ( 32 billion) lagged somewhat behind
8One particularly relevant legislative change is the intro-
duction of tax relief for enterprises in July. Shortfalls as a
result of the ruling in the Meilicke case have been pushed
back another year as the European Court of Justice is first
expected to issue another ruling in this case. This will
result in considerable additional revenue, especially in
2010 (cumulated for 2009-2010: 331/C252billion).Smaller
revisions com-
pared to May
estimate
Future tax
policy still
unclearMarked rise in
central govern-
ment budget
deficit in Q3

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
70the compensation payments to state govern-
ment for motor vehicle tax. However, account
must be taken of the fact that one-off bur-
dens as a result of recapitalising IKB Bank and
granting state aid pursuant to a court ruling
totalling almost 321/C252billion had to be borne
in the same period of 2008, thus obscuring
additional expenditure elsewhere. Despite
shifting the payout date for turnover tax
resources to the Federal Employment Agency
to the end of the year (resulting in relief of 32
billion a quarter for the first three quarters of
2009), transfers to the social security funds
recorded additional costs of almost 311/C252bil-
lion, predominantly due to higher payments
for the statutory health insurance scheme.
Moreover, investment increased by just short
of31 billion, half of which was for spending
on roads. Expenditure on unemploymentbenefit II was also almost 31/C252billion higher.
By contrast, 31 billion less was paid for inter-
est on debt – mainly as a result of issuing
securities with premiums that are deducted
from current year expenditure but are to be
debited to budgets in the following years.
The second supplementary budget from the
third quarter envisages net borrowing of over
349 billion for central government. At the
end of the third quarter, the deficit amounts
to3241/C252billion. While the central govern-
ment budget has recorded a surplus in the
final quarter of the past few years, this year a
significant deficit is expected, not least owing
to falling tax receipts and changing the pay-
ment date for the regular grant to the Federal
Employment Agency. However, it is becoming
apparent that spending, especially on interest
payments, calls on guarantees and on the
loan to the health insurance fund to offset its
revenue shortfalls in 2009, will be lower than
forecast. Furthermore, according to the tax
estimate, tax revenue is expected to be 33 bil-
lion higher. Overall, the deficit could therefore
lag well behind the budgeted figure.
The draft Federal budget for 2010 proposed
by the previous government in summer envi-
saged a large rise in net borrowing by 337 bil-
lion to 386 billion.9However, the fact that
the macroeconomic outlook has since brigh-
tened, substantially lightens the load on the
Federal budget. Central government’s pay-
ment to offset the Federal Employment
Agency’s deficit is likely to be much lower
than previously estimated ( 320 billion). TheCentral government fiscal 
deficit / surplus
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q415105051015
–––+++
–25–20–15–10–5€ bn Cumulative from start of year
20092009
20082008
20072007Quarterly results€ bn
9See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, August
2009, pp 71-73.High deficit
for 2009 as a
whole ...
... but develop-
ment suggests
results may be
better than
forecast
Despite a
brighter out-
look, exception-
ally high deficit
in 2010 even
before planned
measures

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
71moderate development in spending on inter-
est payments and on calls on guaranteesobserved this year could also continue.According to the latest tax estimate, which,however, does not yet include the tax reliefmeasures announced by the new govern-ment, revenue is also estimated as being 32
billion higher than previously forecast. Thedeficit could thus amount to around 375 bil-
lion.
However, recent coalition agreements show
signs of causing considerable burdens. Theseagreements propose tax cuts and a rise inchild benefit as well as additional expend-iture, firstly, to stabilise health insurance con-tributions
10and, secondly, as a result of rais-
ing saving allowances for recipients of unem-ployment benefit II, of additional agriculturalsubsidies and in connection with educationand research. Against this backdrop, the gov-ernment currently seems to be assuming thatthe original deficit estimate contained in thedraft budget for 2010 will not be significantlyundershot. The borrowing limit as defined inthe old Article 115 of the German Basic Law(Grundgesetz ), which still applies, will thus be
overshot by an extraordinarily large amount.According to a ruling of the Federal Constitu-tional Court from 1989, policymakers mustjustify why increased borrowing is necessaryto avert a distortion of the macroeconomicequilibrium. As there is now an indicationthat growth is likely to be more favourablethan originally forecast in the draft budget,additional debt-increasing measures nolonger appear warranted. The FinancialPlanning Council voiced their opposition toadditional fiscal stimulus programmes as early
as July.
Pursuant to the new debt rule,
11structural
net borrowing (ie adjusted for a cyclical com-ponent and for financial transactions) in thebase year 2010, which the old governmentestimated to be 1.6% of GDP , is to bereduced in equal annual steps between 2011and 2016 at least to the new ceiling of0.35% of GDP . In the current medium-termfinancial plan up to 2013, the consolidationrequirement is covered by global non-specificcost savings growing from 36
1/C252billion in
2011 to 320 billion in 2013. The value for the
cyclical component in the European Commis-sion’s autumn forecast calculated using thecyclical adjustment procedure specified as aguideline for the central government budgetwas substantially lower than in central gov-ernment’s original calculations, also in light ofthe fact that macroeconomic development isnow more favourable. If new borrowingremains at the same level, the structural defi-cit would thus be significantly larger thanassumed to date. Furthermore, owing touncertainties surrounding estimations of thecyclically adjusted budgetary position, itwould therefore seem wise to plan in a safety
10According to the findings of a group of statutory
health insurance estimators, spending by the health
insurance institutions in 2010 is likely to exceed transfers
from the health insurance fund by 371/C252billion. Despite
low inflation rates and a weak general income trend, this
is nevertheless due to the continued sharp growth in
expenditure. Cyclically-induced revenue shortfalls are
thus only partly responsible for the gap in health insur-
ance institutions’ financing, which, strictly speaking,
should be plugged by charging additional contributions.
11See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, May
2009, pp 78-79.Sizeable addi-
tional burdens
owing to
coalition
agreementsConsiderable
consolidation
requirement

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
72margin below the new constitutional ceil-
ing.12
Thus there is no discernible scope for
unfunded, deficit-increasing measures.
Instead, strict central government budget
consolidation is necessary from 2011
onwards. Any unexpected budgetary im-
provements that might result from a more
favourable economic development provide
no additional fiscal scope under national and
international fiscal rules and, not least in the
light of past experience, should be used not
to reduce revenues or increase spending but
instead to curb new borrowing. It would be
particularly worrying if policymakers were to
use one-off measures in order to inflate the
structural deficit in the base year 2010 with a
view to gaining greater scope for new bor-
rowing to fund planned additional spending
in subsequent years by exploiting the fact
that the prescribed debt reduction progres-
sion is benchmarked to the base-year level.
According to the explanatory preamble, the
transitional arrangement was introduced
because the new provisions were not per-
ceived to be achievable straightaway owing
to the central government budget situation in
the second quarter of 2009 and to measures
adopted to overcome the severe recession.
However, renewed deficit expansion is at
odds with this and, from the very outset, is in
danger of undermining the fundamental leg-
islative intention of the new provisions, which
is to effectively curb and curtail the balloon-
ing growth in government debt.
Central government’s off-budget entities
recorded a deficit of just over 31 billion in thethird quarter compared with a surplus of 31/C252
billion in the same period last year. This was
mainly attributable to a deficit of just over
311/C252billion recorded by the Investment and
Redemption Fund, set up as part of the sec-
ond economic stimulus package; the largest
share coming again from the car scrapping
incentive. The outflow of investment funds
for central, state and local government pro-
jects intensified and amounted to 31/C252billion.
By contrast, the Financial Market Stabilisation
Fund recorded a slight surplus, predominantly
due to proceeds from guarantees, for which
again no funds had to be paid out and no
further capital injections were necessary. At
year end, the outflow of funds from off-
budget entities is likely to accelerate and the
overall deficit in 2009 could reach 320 billion.
State government13
The state government budget situation con-
tinued to deteriorate markedly in the third
quarter. The deficit amounted to 36 billion,
after a surplus of 311/C252billion in the same per-
iod last year. Revenue fell by 7%, with the
steep decline in tax revenue (-13%) being
partially curbed by significantly higher other
revenue. The latter is associated with the
transfer of receipts from motor vehicle tax to
12As the new constitutional borrowing limit may be
overshot when drafting the budget only in exceptional
circumstances (and must then be repaid as soon as pos-
sible), extensive consolidation requirements may arise in
the short term if there is no safety margin, thus making it
difficult to maintain a steady fiscal policy course. See
J Kremer and D Stegarescu (2009), Neue Schuldenregeln:
Sicherheitsabstand f/C252r eine stetige Finanzpolitik, in
Wirtschaftsdienst, Vol 89, pp 630 ff.
13The development of local government finances in the
second quarter was outlined in the short articles in the
Bundesbank Monthly Report of October 2009. These are
the most recent data available.Strictly observe
new borrowing
limitOff-budget
entities still
have deficits
High deficit in
Q3 as a result
of steep decline
in tax revenue
and higher
expenditure

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
73central government from July 2009. This
caused state government tax revenue to fallwhereas other revenue rose owing to thefixed amounts (just under 32
1/C252billion per
quarter) that central government paid tostate government in way of compensation.Expenditure continued to record sharpgrowth (4
1/C252%), predominantly due to higher
spending on personnel following the substan-tial wage adjustments in the second quarterand their extension to public sector employ-ees with civil servant status as well as retiredcivil servants.
In the current year, the state government’s
budgetary position has deteriorated by a totalof326 billion compared with the same period
in 2008 and the deficit already amounted to319 billion at the end of September (of which
37 billion for the recapitalisation of BayernLB,
which was allocated to the 2008 budgetaryaccounts). This figure is likely to shoot upfurther by year end. According to the budgetestimates (plus the capital injection intoBayernLB), the deficit could come close tomatching the previous record of just over 330
billion in 2003, following a slight surplus lastyear. Whereas Mecklenburg-Vorpommern,Saxony and Thuringia reported surpluses orclose-to-balance budgets for the first ninemonths, the financial position of most westGerman states deteriorated dramatically.Many of the draft budgets for 2010 pre-sented to date foresee an overshooting of theold borrowing limit, which is still in place, astax revenue continues to decline and net newborrowing rises. The latest tax estimate hasnot revised state government’s tax revenuefor 2010 compared with the May estimatedespite the assumptions of more favourable
macroeconomic development. The estimatedoes not yet include the additional tax reliefmeasures announced by the new govern-ment.
For the five heavily indebted states that are
entitled to consolidation assistance fromcentral government pursuant to the newArticle 143 d of the German Basic Law, inparticular Bremen and Saarland,
14reducing
the structural deficit of 2010 in stages, whichis laid down in section 2 of the Act grantingconsolidation assistance ( Konsolidierungshil-
fengesetz ) would be much more difficult if
the extensive income tax relief measuresannounced for the subsequent years were tobe implemented without counterfundingmeasures for all of Germany. These statesthus also risk losing consolidation assistance.Even on the basis of the 2008 outturns, over-all a number of states would be able to sus-tain a balanced budget from 2020 with nonew borrowing only with extremely stringentexpenditure discipline. The permanent taxrelief measures adopted this year may nowhave exhausted the scope for further states.Given this situation, the Financial PlanningCouncil stressed as early as July that a structu-rally balanced budget requires greater conso-lidation on both the revenue and expenditureside from 2011 onwards.
14The three other states – Berlin, Saxony-Anhalt and
Schleswig-Holstein – have posted lower structural defi-
cits; the consolidation need up until 2020 is therefore
lower.Dramatic rise in
deficit expected
for year as a
whole and
further dete-
rioration in
2010Announced tax
relief measures
without coun-
terfunding
hardly
compatible
with budgetary
rules

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
74Social security funds15
Statutory pension insurance scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme
recorded a deficit of just over 32 billion in the
third quarter of 2009, which was 311/C252billion
higher than one year previously. Total revenue
rose by just under1/C252%. Contribution receipts
increased somewhat more strongly. However,
this was due solely to contributions for recipi-
ents of wage substitutes, especially recipients
of unemployment benefit I and II (+28%), as
well as sickness benefit (+15%). By contrast,
employees’ compulsory contributions stag-
nated, even though contributions relating to
short-time work are also booked in this item.
The rise in unemployment is having a fairly
muted effect on the income of statutory pen-
sion insurance institutions, particularly where
unemployment benefit I is paid out.16The
growth in expenditure accelerated markedly
to almost 3% following the sharp pension
increase of 2.41% in western Germany and
3.38% in eastern Germany in July.
The cumulative deficit for 2009 amounted to
33 billion at the end of September. Owing to
contributions from end-of-year bonus pay-
ments, especially Christmas bonuses, a con-
siderable surplus of a similar size is expected
in the last quarter of 2009. Statutory pension
insurance institutions are therefore likely to
record close-to-balance budgets in 2009.
Although per capita earnings are likely to rise
again, a weaker contribution trend is
expected in 2010 because the level of
employment will decline and a growing num-
ber of unemployed persons will stop receivingunemployment benefit I once the maximum
period of entitlement has been reached.
Furthermore, even though average incomes
are expected to decline in 2009, the pension
guarantee that was approved in spring 2009
prevents a corresponding reduction in pen-
sion payment amounts in mid-2010. Overall,
pension insurance schemes are therefore
likely to post a substantial deficit in 2010.Finances of the
German statutory
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 20095658606264
–20+2+4Quarterly
€ bn€ bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
15The financial development of the statutory health and
public long-term care insurance schemes in the second
quarter of 2009 was outlined in the short articles of the
Monthly Report of September 2009. These are the most
recent data available.
16For each recipient of unemployment benefit I, the Fed-
eral Employment Agency transfers pension contributions
on the basis of 80% of his/her previous gross remunera-
tion. The same rule applies when calculating contribu-
tions for sickness benefit and short-time work. For unem-
ployment benefit II, the assessment base decreases to a
uniform 3205 per month.Weak revenue
development
masked by con-
tributions for
recipients of
wage substi-
tutes
Still largely
balanced result
for 2009 as a
whole, but
deficit foresee-
able in 2010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
75Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a
deficit of 351/C252billion in the third quarter of
2009, compared with a surplus of just over3
1/C252billion a year earlier. This reflects, inter
alia, the strong automatic stabilisation effect
of the Federal Employment Agency. The factthat revenue fell by just over one-quarter isnaturally predominantly due to other factors.For example, the contribution rate was onceagain cut by
1/C252percentage point to 2.8%.
Furthermore, as of 2009, the Federal grant isno longer transferred in monthly instalmentsbut, as a general rule, at the end of theyear.
17After adjustment for these effects, the
amount of revenue collected between Julyand September was 1% down on the year.Expenditure surged by 44%. Spending onunemployment benefit I increased by 37% orjust over 31 billion in line with the rising num-
ber of recipients. Payments for short-timeworking benefits went up by 31 billion and
vocational training costs (including refunds ofsocial security contributions for short-timework made to employers, which are recordedhere) rose by just under 31 billion. However,
following its peak in July, expenditure oncyclical short-time working benefits is declin-ing sharply again. Insolvency benefit pay-ments were up by 3
1/C252billion on the year. In
2009, contributions envisaged for this pur-pose to be paid by employers were set inadvance for the first time and, in view of theunexpectedly large increases in expenditure,the rate set was not sufficient. Consequently,contributions will be raised significantly in2010, as they will have to cover both the lossfor 2009 and expenditure requirements for
2010, which are again expected to be high.
18
The deficit of the Federal EmploymentAgency for the first nine months of 2009came to 315
1/C252billion. Despite rising unem-Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency
1 Excluding central government liquidity as-
sistance. — 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants’ pension fund set up in 2008.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 200968101214
1.82.43.03.64.24.85.46.06.6
–6–4–20+2+4+6Quarterly
€ bn€ bnLog scale
Expenditure, 
total 2Revenue 1
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment
    benefit and short-time    working benefits
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)€ bn
17However, in September 31/C252billion was received for
the purpose of safeguarding liquidity.
18The 2010 contribution rate for insolvency benefit pay-
ments will therefore be raised from 0.1% to 0.41% of
the respective gross wages and salaries.Financial situa-
tion obscured
by negative
special effects
on the revenue
side
Reserves not
yet completely
exhausted in
2009

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
76ployment, a substantial surplus is expected in
the final quarter of 2009 because, firstly, con-
tributions are usually higher at this time of
year (in particular due to Christmas bonuses)
and, secondly, the bulk of the regular Federal
grant will be transferred. Overall, it is there-
fore likely that the Federal Employment
Agency’s reserves will not be completely
depleted in 2009. However, this will happen
in 2010, as unemployment is expected to
increase significantly. The Federal Employ-
ment Agency will then have to rely on consid-
erable financial assistance from central
government.
According to the coalition agreement
between the new governing parties, pay-
ments over and above the regular Federal
grant should in future no longer be provided
as repayable loans for liquidity assistance, but
as grants. This reverses the last reform, which
should have put an end to the previous prac-tice of regularly providing the Federal Employ-
ment Agency with extensive funds from the
Federal budget as needed. Since a contribu-
tion rate of currently 2.8%, following the
recent cuts, and 3.0% from 2011, is not suffi-
cient to structurally cover the Federal Employ-
ment Agency’s expenditure, this would mean
shifting the financial burden from contribu-
tion payers to the taxpayers of today and
tomorrow. This would be appropriate if the
regular Federal grant were smaller than the
Federal Employment Agency’s non-insurance-
related benefits.19However, as these are cur-
rently likely to be largely be on a par, there is
therefore a danger of permanently subsidis-
ing insurance-related benefits.
19This includes above all the Federal Employment Agen-
cy’s reintegration payment to central government to
cover half of the costs of the reintegration and adminis-
tration of unemployed persons receiving the basic wel-
fare allowance.Tax-financed
subsidies for
the Federal
Employment
Agency

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 5*
2 External transactions and positions 5*
3 General economic indicators 6*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and house-
holds, housing loans, sectors of
economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)
in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic households
and non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic government
at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*
5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the Europeanmonetary union 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new business
of German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
VIII Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and
financing of private non-financialsectors 52*
2 Financial assets and liabilities of private
non-financial sectors 53*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009

IX Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit and debt
level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty 54*
2 General government: revenue,
expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus
as shown in the national accounts 54*
3 General government: budgetary
development (as per government’sfinancial statistics) 55*
4 Central, state and local government:
budgetary development (as per
government’s financial statistics) 55*
5 Central, state and local government:
tax revenue 56*
6 Central and state government and
European Union: tax revenue, by type 56*
7 Central, state and local government:
individual taxes 57*
8 German pension insurance scheme:
budgetary development and assets 57*
9 Federal Employment Agency:
budgetary development 58*
10 Statutory health insurance scheme:
budgetary development 58*
11 Statutory long-term care insurance
scheme: budgetary development 59*
12 Central government: borrowing in
the market 59*
13 Central, state and local government:
debt by creditor 59*
14 Central, state and local government:
debt by category 60*
X Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 61*
2 Output in the production sector 62*3 Orders received by industry 63*
4 Orders received by construction 64*5 Retail trade turnover 64*
6 Labour market 65*
7 Prices 66*8 Households’ income 67*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 67*
XI External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 68*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 69*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 70*
4 Services and income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 71*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
6 Capital transfers 71*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 72*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 73*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 73*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 74*
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates
of selected currencies 75*
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in
Stage III of European Economic and
Monetary Union 75*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and indicators of the Germaneconomy’s price competitiveness 76*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
 I Key economic data for the euro area  
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2008          Jan 4.4 10.5 11.6 11.6 10.0 12.8 8.6 4.02 4.48 4.2
         Feb 3.6 10.8 11.5 11.1 9.9 12.7 7.4 4.03 4.36 4.1
         Mar 2.8 9.9 10.1 10.7 9.8 12.4 6.2 4.09 4.60 4.1
         Apr 2.5 10.5 10.5 10.3 10.0 12.2 6.1 3.99 4.78 4.3
         May 2.3 10.2 10.1 10.1 9.5 12.0 6.1 4.01 4.86 4.4
         June 1.6 9.7 9.7 9.7 9.1 11.2 5.2 4.01 4.94 4.8
         July 0.4 9.2 9.3 9.3 9.1 11.0 4.9 4.19 4.96 4.7
         Aug 0.3 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.3 10.9 4.9 4.30 4.97 4.5
         Sep 1.2 9.0 8.7 8.8 8.6 10.2 5.0 4.27 5.02 4.4
         Oct 3.7 9.3 8.7 8.4 7.4 8.8 3.3 3.82 5.11 4.3
         Nov 2.2 8.7 7.7 8.0 7.4 8.4 3.7 3.15 4.24 4.1
         Dec 3.3 8.3 7.5 7.1 6.3 7.0 2.8 2.49 3.29 3.7
2009          Jan 5.2 7.5 6.0 6.5 6.1 6.3 3.6 1.81 2.46 3.9
         Feb 6.2 7.0 5.8 5.7 5.9 5.7 4.4 1.26 1.94 4.0
         Mar 6.0 6.2 5.1 5.3 5.1 4.6 4.1 1.06 1.64 3.9
         Apr 8.4 6.0 4.9 4.6 4.3 3.6 4.1 0.84 1.42 3.9
         May 8.0 5.1 3.8 4.1 3.9 3.0 4.6 0.78 1.28 4.0
         June 9.4 4.9 3.6 3.5 4.2 2.9 5.2 0.70 1.23 4.2
         July 12.2 4.7 3.0 3.1 3.3 1.8 5.1 0.36 0.97 4.0
         Aug 13.6 4.6 2.6 2.5 2.8 1.1 5.5 0.35 0.86 3.8
         Sep 12.8 3.6 1.8 ... 3.1 1.1 5.6 0.36 0.77 3.8
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.36 0.74 3.7
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p 43*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
 
 
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments  r Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period € million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2008          Jan − 23,074 − 8,789 + 19,011 − 23,658 + 11,859 + 37,203 − 6,394 1.4718 112.2 112.9
         Feb + 2,021 + 4,005 + 2,373 − 5,361 + 12,088 − 8,915 + 4,561 1.4748 112.0 112.5
         Mar − 12,524 + 824 + 8,709 − 30,448 + 12,186 + 30,172 − 3,202 1.5527 114.8 115.6
         Apr − 10,983 + 4,924 + 9,088 − 24,158 − 22,124 + 58,628 − 3,257 1.5751 116.3 116.9
         May − 27,790 − 2,245 + 24,806 − 5,355 − 13,269 + 40,701 + 2,729 1.5557 115.8 116.6
         June − 4,061 + 2,207 + 55 − 15,329 + 38,264 − 23,407 + 527 1.5553 115.8 116.5
         July − 8,270 − 150 + 23,718 + 9,597 + 7,053 + 9,336 − 2,268 1.5770 116.2 116.7
         Aug − 15,394 − 7,759 + 10,773 − 11,607 + 11,563 + 8,526 + 2,290 1.4975 113.9 114.1
         Sep − 10,986 − 2,495 + 23,852 − 21,606 + 87,834 − 43,996 + 1,620 1.4370 112.0 112.1
         Oct − 9,122 + 3,159 + 12,793 − 4,811 + 101,749 − 76,161 − 7,985 1.3322 107.9 108.3
         Nov − 17,412 − 4,797 + 12,656 − 53,471 + 39,872 + 26,663 − 408 1.2732 107.1 107.5
         Dec − 5,675 − 249 + 16,091 − 2,839 − 2,278 + 13,356 + 7,853 1.3449 112.4 112.9
2009          Jan − 24,040 − 10,635 + 31,818 − 22,826 − 3,068 + 52,389 + 5,323 1.3239 111.9 112.3
         Feb − 5,371 − 88 + 11,196 − 11,737 + 65,998 − 44,267 + 1,202 1.2785 110.4 110.7
         Mar − 8,588 + 2,986 + 12,746 − 24,259 + 61,644 − 23,789 − 849 1.3050 113.3 113.5
         Apr − 10,160 + 3,972 + 16,074 + 4,829 + 27,079 − 15,984 + 149 1.3190 112.5 112.8
         May − 13,187 + 2,032 + 5,327 + 6,000 + 47,014 − 45,516 − 2,171 1.3650 113.0 113.2
         June + 3,532 + 6,531 − 11,215 − 11,389 + 44,339 − 43,758 − 408 1.4016 114.0 114.2
         July + 10,089 + 12,593 − 9,717 + 8,496 + 4,680 − 19,858 − 3,035 1.4088 113.8 113.7
         Aug − 4,180 − 606 + 183 + 3,819 + 47,558 − 51,373 + 179 1.4268 113.9 113.9
         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.4562 115.2 115.0
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.4816 116.6 116.3
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables XI.12 and 13, pp 75−76. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-21 group. —
4  Based on consumer prices. 
5* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2006 3.0 2.8 3.2 4.9 2.2 4.5 5.4 2.0
2007 2.8 2.9 2.5 4.2 2.3 4.0 6.0 1.6
2008 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.0 0.4 2.9 − 3.0 − 1.0
2008          Q2 1.5 1.9 3.4 2.6 1.4 3.3 − 1.6 − 0.4
         Q3 0.4 1.2 1.4 1.8 0.4 2.9 − 1.0 − 1.0
         Q4 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 2.6 − 1.7 2.2 − 8.0 − 3.0
2009          Q1 − 4.9 − 4.1 − 6.4 − 7.5 − 3.2 0.3 − 9.3 − 6.4
         Q2 − 4.8 − 4.2 − 7.0 − 9.5 − 3.3 − 0.4 − 7.4 − 6.2
         Q3 − 4.1 ... − 4.7 ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2006 4.2 5.0 5.7 10.4 1.4 0.8 2.9 3.6
2007 3.7 2.9 6.0 4.7 1.2 2.3 5.0 2.1
2008 − 1.7 − 0.6 0.0 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 4.2 − 1.5 − 3.3
2008          Q2 1.1 2.6 3.1 2.1 − 0.1 − 2.3 0.6 0.2
         Q3 − 1.4 1.4 0.0 0.7 − 2.0 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 4.1
         Q4 − 8.9 − 7.8 − 7.6 − 7.5 − 8.8 − 7.6 − 7.1 − 10.3
2009          Q1 − 18.5 − 16.5 − 20.5 − 22.2 − 15.8 − 8.2 − 2.6 − 21.3
         Q2 − 18.6 − 17.5 − 20.6 − 23.4 − 15.6 − 11.4 − 1.1 − 22.1
         Q3 e − 14.6 ... 10p − 16.5 − 23.2 − 11.0 − 9.6 p − 2.9 − 17.2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2007 84.2 83.2 87.5 87.3 86.6 76.9 76.6 78.2
2008 83.0 82.9 86.5 84.4 85.8 76.4 ... 75.9
2009 71.3 72.3 72.8 67.7 72.5 70.7 ... 66.7
2008          Q3 82.8 82.1 86.2 84.3 85.9 76.2 ... 75.6
         Q4 81.5 82.4 84.8 81.9 84.1 75.4 ... 75.2
2009          Q1 74.7 75.4 76.2 72.0 76.0 73.4 ... 70.4
         Q2 70.3 70.4 71.8 66.5 71.2 70.3 ... 66.2
         Q3 69.6 71.5 71.1 65.3 70.8 68.3 ... 64.6
         Q4 70.7 72.0 72.1 67.0 72.1 70.6 ... 65.6
 
Unemployment rate 5
 
2006 8.3 8.3 9.8 7.7 9.2 8.9 4.5 6.8
2007 7.5 7.5 8.4 6.9 8.4 8.3 4.6 6.1
2008 7.5 7.0 7.3 6.4 7.8 7.7 6.0 6.8
2009          Apr 9.2 7.8 7.6 8.0 9.2 9.2 11.7 7.4
         May 9.3 7.7 7.6 8.2 9.4 9.2 12.2 7.4
         June 9.4 7.8 7.7 8.4 9.5 9.2 12.2 7.4
         July 9.5 7.8 7.6 8.5 9.7 ... 12.3 ...
         Aug 9.6 7.9 7.6 8.5 9.8 ... 12.5 ...
         Sep 9.7 7.9 7.6 8.6 10.0 ... 13.0 ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2006 2.2 2.3 1.8 1.3 1.9 3.3 2.7 2.2
2007 6 2.1 1.8 2.3 1.6 1.6 3.0 2.9 2.0
2008 7 3.3 4.5 2.8 3.9 3.2 4.2 3.1 3.5
2009          May 8 0.0 − 0.2 0.0 1.5 − 0.3 0.7 − 1.7 0.8
         June − 0.1 − 1.0 0.0 1.6 − 0.6 0.7 − 2.2 0.6
         July − 0.7 − 1.7 − 0.7 1.2 − 0.8 0.7 − 2.6 − 0.1
         Aug − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 1.3 − 0.2 1.0 − 2.4 0.1
         Sep − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.5 1.1 − 0.4 0.7 − 3.0 0.4
         Oct p − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 0.6 − 0.2 1.2 − 2.8 0.3
 
General government financial balance 9
 
2006 − 1.3 0.3 − 1.6 4.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 3.0 − 3.3
2007 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.2 5.2 − 2.7 − 3.7 0.3 − 1.5
2008 − 2.0 − 1.2 0.0 4.5 − 3.4 − 7.7 − 7.2 − 2.7
 
General government debt 9
 
2006 68.2 88.1 67.6 39.3 63.7 97.1 25.0 106.5
2007 65.9 84.2 65.0 35.2 63.8 95.6 25.1 103.5
2008 69.3 89.8 65.9 34.1 67.4 99.2 44.1 105.8
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central for working-day variations. — 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — data are collected in January, April, July and October. — 5  Standardised, as
1  Annual percentage change. — 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. — 6  Including
seasonally adjusted data. — 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted
6*I. Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
I.  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
5.6 3.8 3.4 3.5 1.4 8.5 5.8 4.0 4.1 2006
6.5 3.7 3.6 3.5 1.9 10.4 6.8 3.6 5.1 2007
0.0 2.1 2.0 2.0 0.0 6.4 3.5 0.9 3.6 2008
1.3 2.9 3.2 3.0 0.8 7.3 5.5 1.6 4.0 2008          Q2
− 0.6 2.5 1.9 2.3 0.4 6.8 3.9 0.9 3.3          Q3
− 3.9 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.7 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.9 2.7          Q4
− 6.0 − 1.9 − 4.5 − 4.7 − 4.4 − 5.7 − 8.3 − 3.7 0.9 2009          Q1
− 5.3 − 3.3 − 5.4 − 4.6 − 4.1 − 5.5 − 9.3 − 4.5 − 1.2          Q2
... ... − 3.7 ... ... − 4.9 ... ... − 2.9          Q3
 
Industrial production1,3
 
2.2 − 1.5 7.8 3.1 12.2 6.1 3.9 0.4 2006
− 0.6 − 2.3 5.8 0.1 16.1 7.2 2.0 4.6 2007
− 5.3 − 1.5 1.8 − 4.1 2.7 2.1 − 7.3 4.1 2008
− 2.0 − 5.2 4.1 − 3.6 9.7 6.9 − 5.4 6.4 2008          Q2
2.2 − 0.5 2.6 − 2.3 4.3 2.6 − 6.3 4.1          Q3
− 17.9 − − 6.4 − 3.8 − 6.8 − 12.2 − 8.1 − 16.6 − 0.4          Q4
− 24.7 − − 9.9 − 13.1 − 12.5 − 21.8 − 19.3 − 22.6 − 9.0 2009          Q1
− 21.2 − − 13.0 − 16.1 − 9.7 − 21.6 − 23.2 − 18.6 − 11.1          Q2
p − 17.1 − − 7.8 ... − 7.5 ... − 18.3 ... ...          Q3
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
87.3 80.8 83.6 85.2 81.8 73.6 85.9 81.0 70.0 2007
85.1 79.0 83.4 83.0 79.8 72.0 84.1 79.2 72.0 2008
69.2 69.7 75.9 74.8 72.6 53.7 71.1 70.0 66.3 2009
85.9 78.2 83.6 82.4 79.7 71.5 83.8 79.0 72.3 2008          Q3
83.9 75.9 82.9 81.9 79.0 68.9 82.6 76.4 70.1          Q4
72.6 69.0 77.5 77.2 76.4 53.3 75.2 73.5 69.5 2009          Q1
65.2 65.9 74.6 73.2 70.6 50.9 69.1 69.8 66.7          Q2
67.4 71.0 75.5 73.5 71.5 51.9 69.3 67.9 64.8          Q3
71.6 73.0 76.0 75.2 72.0 58.8 70.7 68.8 64.3          Q4
 
Unemployment rate 5
 
4.6 7.1 3.9 4.8 7.8 13.4 6.0 8.5 4.6 2006
4.2 6.4 3.2 4.4 8.1 11.1 4.9 8.3 4.0 2007
4.9 5.9 2.8 3.8 7.7 9.5 4.4 11.3 3.6 2008
6.1 7.0 3.1 4.7 9.1 10.7 5.6 17.6 5.0 2009          Apr 
6.3 7.2 3.2 4.8 9.2 10.9 5.9 17.9 5.2          May
6.4 7.3 3.3 4.8 9.2 11.2 6.0 18.2 5.3          June
6.5 7.3 3.4 4.7 9.2 11.5 5.9 18.5 5.4          July
6.5 7.2 3.5 4.7 9.1 11.7 5.9 18.8 5.6          Aug 
6.6 7.2 3.6 4.8 9.2 12.0 5.9 19.3 5.9          Sep 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.0 2.6 1.7 1.7 3.0 4.3 2.5 3.6 2.2 2006
2.7 0.7 1.6 2.2 2.4 1.9 3.8 2.8 2.2 2007
4.1 4.7 2.2 3.2 2.7 3.9 5.5 4.1 4.4 2008
− 0.9 3.4 1.5 0.1 − 1.2 1.1 0.5 − 0.9 0.5 2009          May
− 1.0 2.8 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.6 0.7 0.2 − 1.0 0.1          June
− 1.5 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.4 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.8          July
− 0.2 1.0 − 0.1 0.2 − 1.2 0.5 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.9          Aug 
− 0.4 0.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.2          Sep 
− 0.2 − 0.5 p 0.4 p 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.0          Oct 
 
General government financial balance 9
 
1.3 − 2.6 0.5 − 1.6 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 1.3 2.0 − 1.2 2006
3.7 − 2.2 0.2 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 1.9 0.0 1.9 3.4 2007
2.5 − 4.7 0.7 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 1.8 − 4.1 0.9 2008
 
General government debt 9
 
6.6 63.6 47.4 62.2 64.7 30.5 26.7 39.6 64.6 2006
6.6 62.0 45.5 59.5 63.6 29.3 23.3 36.1 58.3 2007
13.5 63.8 58.2 62.6 66.3 27.7 22.5 39.7 48.4 2008
Slovenia from 2007 onwards. — 7  Including Malta and Cyprus from 2008 states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). —
onwards. — 8  Including Slovakia from 2009 onwards. — 9  As a percentage 10  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way
of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey. 
7*I.  Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2008          Feb 58.0 65.1 3.5 − 7.1 2.6 − 16.4 82.6 99.1 − 10.5 − 8.9 − 1.1 − 4.5 4.0
         Mar 153.4 139.3 28.0 14.1 7.4 − 56.5 − 58.1 − 1.6 27.3 5.4 − 2.3 12.9 11.4
         Apr 189.8 166.1 87.4 23.7 11.5 − 77.0 84.0 161.0 17.2 3.9 − 1.5 10.7 4.2
         May 86.1 84.3 16.9 1.8 9.4 − 76.3 − 24.6 51.7 18.7 13.1 − 1.7 15.7 − 8.5
         June 53.5 45.0 − 24.0 8.6 − 3.6 5.7 − 140.1 − 145.8 37.3 8.5 − 0.9 17.6 12.1
         July 98.6 94.8 37.2 3.8 2.8 − 8.9 25.2 34.1 28.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 16.0 14.8
         Aug 16.8 23.7 27.2 − 6.9 − 0.1 − 10.7 15.6 26.3 6.8 − 4.2 − 1.3 − 0.5 12.8
         Sep 38.7 66.4 − 20.9 − 27.8 − 38.0 19.7 12.6 − 7.1 11.1 − 14.8 − 1.3 − 10.8 38.1
         Oct 16.4 23.9 6.9 − 7.6 − 7.1 57.5 − 48.0 − 105.5 − 45.8 − 2.1 2.6 − 66.3 20.0
         Nov 90.0 51.7 33.1 38.4 40.7 10.1 − 85.9 − 96.0 18.9 − 1.0 3.4 − 9.0 25.4
         Dec − 15.0 − 27.3 44.0 12.3 18.9 7.4 − 185.7 − 193.1 38.9 24.6 3.7 11.5 − 0.8
2009          Jan 102.2 32.2 6.7 70.0 56.0 − 107.2 − 37.3 69.9 70.6 31.7 2.1 6.8 30.0
         Feb 25.2 − 8.5 13.8 33.6 37.0 46.0 − 106.2 − 152.2 35.6 13.2 − 0.3 23.8 − 1.2
         Mar 54.5 14.2 12.2 40.3 49.0 − 10.3 − 130.5 − 120.3 13.7 22.9 0.4 1.8 − 11.4
         Apr 76.7 44.2 48.3 32.4 21.2 34.3 41.2 7.0 14.3 15.0 0.1 − 5.3 4.5
         May 32.3 18.9 5.0 13.3 20.7 31.3 − 52.8 − 84.1 55.6 19.2 1.3 23.9 11.1
         June 105.2 34.6 3.1 70.6 47.5 40.4 − 52.1 − 92.5 72.8 20.7 0.8 13.6 37.7
         July − 33.5 − 40.5 − 10.5 6.9 6.2 12.7 − 38.7 − 51.3 26.5 13.3 1.1 9.4 2.7
         Aug − 57.4 − 65.7 − 4.0 8.3 3.5 30.5 − 22.3 − 52.7 35.1 11.4 0.7 16.8 6.3
         Sep 77.9 57.5 6.3 20.4 30.1 − 0.4 − 30.1 − 29.7 17.0 16.7 1.0 − 9.6 9.0
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2008          Feb − 7.9 − 13.2 − 18.2 5.3 8.7 7.1 29.0 21.9 − 8.3 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 6.5 − 0.1
         Mar 44.0 43.5 26.5 0.5 2.7 − 7.9 21.4 29.3 4.2 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.9 7.7
         Apr 49.9 40.4 29.4 9.4 4.9 − 3.2 17.7 20.9 0.2 0.3 − 1.4 1.6 − 0.3
         May − 12.8 − 7.1 − 14.3 − 5.8 − 0.6 5.8 − 6.7 − 12.5 − 12.3 0.1 − 1.4 − 4.3 − 6.8
         June − 16.9 − 4.1 − 24.2 − 12.8 − 11.8 − 1.1 − 32.5 − 31.4 3.6 − 0.3 − 0.8 0.7 4.0
         July 10.1 13.9 2.7 − 3.8 − 3.8 0.1 − 6.8 − 6.9 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 6.9
         Aug 25.7 30.3 25.8 − 4.6 − 4.2 − 10.2 − 5.1 5.1 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.7 2.3
         Sep 1.3 18.6 2.2 − 17.3 − 14.8 34.7 71.4 36.7 − 7.4 − 3.0 − 1.1 − 6.3 2.9
         Oct − 9.9 − 12.8 − 10.7 3.0 1.2 23.2 − 2.8 − 26.0 − 14.2 − 3.1 3.0 − 16.8 2.8
         Nov 7.4 12.0 1.2 − 4.6 − 2.5 − 38.2 − 76.5 − 38.3 − 5.6 0.8 3.7 − 9.9 − 0.3
         Dec 13.7 15.4 30.8 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 31.1 − 24.7 27.3 29.8 3.8 − 18.0 11.7
2009          Jan 36.2 29.7 7.1 6.5 6.9 − 58.9 − 53.5 5.4 1.0 3.7 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.2
         Feb − 9.0 − 6.6 6.7 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 24.7 − 23.0 − 13.6 6.8 − 0.0 − 9.7 − 10.7
         Mar 9.2 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 31.3 − 35.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 2.6 0.8 − 6.8 0.4
         Apr 20.1 13.4 12.0 6.7 4.9 19.7 40.7 21.0 − 8.3 3.9 0.2 − 5.9 − 6.5
         May − 3.2 − 4.1 − 8.5 1.0 5.1 28.5 − 4.9 − 33.4 3.2 2.6 1.5 2.7 − 3.6
         June 15.8 16.1 5.0 − 0.3 1.6 − 27.4 − 23.6 3.8 30.2 13.6 1.0 − 3.0 18.6
         July − 8.5 − 23.3 − 3.6 14.8 1.9 − 25.3 − 31.6 − 6.3 − 7.1 0.9 1.2 − 9.0 − 0.2
         Aug − 27.5 − 18.8 − 6.4 − 8.7 − 3.2 2.0 − 13.2 − 15.2 1.5 1.9 0.8 1.8 − 2.9
         Sep 22.3 18.7 0.5 3.6 6.5 − 6.6 − 28.0 − 21.4 − 11.9 2.9 1.2 − 17.0 0.9
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
20.1 7.1 − 24.8 27.3 − 47.1 5.6 − 52.7 77.0 − 2.6 7.1 11.6 − 21.1 2008          Feb 
11.2 − 15.4 − 73.8 80.5 54.7 4.1 50.5 20.0 5.8 − 0.5 − 1.8 − 4.4          Mar 
− 2.4 3.7 − 94.3 79.1 − 15.8 8.5 − 24.3 95.7 − 0.8 14.9 9.3 − 9.0          Apr 
− 24.0 − 70.7 − 85.8 61.3 28.8 4.3 24.4 36.1 − 3.6 4.5 4.7 15.4          May
37.3 − 38.9 − 23.5 49.5 48.2 6.4 41.8 4.6 − 3.4 − 3.0 − 23.2 0.3          June
− 30.4 62.3 − 28.9 11.0 − 77.7 6.7 − 84.4 98.5 − 9.8 2.9 8.8 6.2          July
5.9 − 22.4 − 15.8 − 0.9 − 52.6 − 2.7 − 49.9 54.2 − 2.5 9.8 14.6 − 7.7          Aug 
4.5 − 14.7 − 57.5 72.0 83.5 1.1 82.4 − 1.5 − 10.1 2.4 − 27.6 10.8          Sep 
65.1 − 46.6 − 101.1 104.3 56.4 41.7 14.7 52.5 − 4.6 5.0 − 1.3 − 7.0          Oct 
69.9 − 32.9 − 44.3 49.6 25.5 4.8 20.7 19.7 4.4 − 12.6 10.1 − 2.8          Nov 
− 66.5 − 49.3 − 69.3 102.5 74.7 19.2 55.5 − 16.3 44.2 − 6.3 − 19.2 − 7.7          Dec 
62.5 − 56.4 − − 81.7 − 64.6 22.1 − 11.9 34.0 − 131.7 45.1 − 6.4 34.8 − 45.6 2009          Jan 
14.0 6.5 − 15.1 − 6.8 4.5 3.6 0.9 − 34.3 23.1 3.4 20.2 − 1.7          Feb 
12.7 17.3 − 0.4 10.7 33.5 4.0 29.5 − 43.2 20.5 11.2 0.9 − 22.4          Mar 
− 14.0 28.9 − 81.7 68.9 81.3 9.3 72.0 − 33.6 21.2 − 0.3 2.3 10.7          Apr 
− 5.9 19.6 − − 5.7 4.2 26.9 2.8 24.1 − 38.7 16.1 − 1.9 0.6 − 8.7          May
20.5 51.6 − 0.8 28.5 90.9 3.0 87.9 − 74.1 11.7 11.1 − 22.9 − 15.9          June
− 54.1 35.1 − − 28.4 − 8.2 6.4 10.5 − 4.1 − 33.5 18.9 − 27.3 16.0 − 8.9          July
− 14.0 − 11.6 − − 36.5 − 15.5 7.3 − 4.3 11.6 − 39.9 17.1 − 7.5 1.1 − 14.6          Aug 
22.4 39.6 − − 1.5 3.2 55.9 − 0.5 56.4 − 60.0 7.3 22.8 − 19.7 − 7.8          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 1.3 − 7.3 2.1 1.5 16.1 − 4.2 19.7 − 2.1 3.9 0.5 − 1.7 2008          Feb 
2.3 23.9 1.4 1.4 5.7 8.8 0.7 − 1.6 0.8 − 1.5 − 1.4          Mar 
− 3.3 29.7 0.4 2.8 20.1 − 13.3 25.2 − 2.7 9.0 − 1.5 3.4          Apr 
2.2 − 7.5 2.1 0.4 10.6 2.8 17.4 − 2.1 0.2 − 0.6 − 7.1          May
− 0.3 − 27.2 0.9 2.2 5.8 8.4 − 4.3 − 2.1 7.9 − 0.1 − 3.9          June
− 2.2 5.1 0.2 2.0 1.6 − 22.4 35.6 − 5.1 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 0.7          July
0.1 2.1 2.4 − 1.0 14.9 1.4 14.1 − 3.2 5.0 − 0.3 − 2.1          Aug 
0.7 24.9 2.1 0.5 17.9 16.3 − 0.8 − 3.3 7.8 − 0.4 − 1.7          Sep 
− 1.4 − 8.6 7.5 10.6 37.5 28.2 13.9 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 3.9 1.8          Oct 
0.2 − 59.5 1.3 1.3 34.2 9.2 9.9 − 1.1 2.8 − 0.8 14.1          Nov 
− 0.0 − 17.3 1.1 5.6 − 2.7 1.5 − 2.2 8.1 − 9.9 − 0.8 0.6          Dec 
0.6 − 31.0 17.5 − 18.2 6.7 57.9 − 47.7 3.8 6.3 − 0.3 − 13.2 2009          Jan 
8.1 − 14.2 1.5 0.7 8.9 17.2 − 23.0 5.3 6.6 0.8 1.9          Feb 
3.2 0.2 − 0.3 1.3 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 19.4 2.8 13.7 − 0.6 − 17.2          Mar 
14.4 7.2 1.3 1.6 26.5 32.1 − 20.8 3.1 4.9 − 0.1 7.3          Apr 
12.0 20.1 0.4 0.1 − 9.9 4.1 − 15.0 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 0.6          May
− 9.2 − 15.5 − 0.3 1.5 − 17.1 20.1 − 33.9 3.7 2.5 − 0.2 − 9.2          June
− 5.8 3.7 − 0.1 3.3 − 24.6 2.2 − 19.0 4.6 − 11.0 − 1.1 − 0.2          July
1.7 − 18.5 1.6 − 1.4 − 10.2 12.8 − 18.0 4.5 − 10.6 − 0.1 1.1          Aug 
− 2.3 20.1 1.6 0.1 9.6 20.5 − 26.1 3.1 11.9 − 0.0 0.2          Sep 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Including national banknotes still in circulation. — M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes
10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2
are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2007          Aug 21,411.9 13,697.9 11,438.9 9,822.7 788.2 828.0 2,259.0 810.6 1,448.4 5,292.5 2,421.6
         Sep 21,633.8 13,807.9 11,561.9 9,923.8 811.3 826.9 2,246.0 810.3 1,435.7 5,265.1 2,560.8
         Oct 22,176.4 14,161.1 11,763.5 10,001.8 885.2 876.5 2,397.6 960.8 1,436.8 5,382.5 2,632.8
         Nov 22,376.3 14,250.3 11,852.4 10,082.5 899.1 870.8 2,397.9 961.6 1,436.3 5,414.0 2,712.1
         Dec 22,316.1 14,376.9 11,982.4 10,145.1 955.1 882.2 2,394.5 972.3 1,422.2 5,274.0 2,665.2
2008          Jan 22,819.9 14,577.7 12,145.2 10,286.4 967.5 891.2 2,432.5 978.8 1,453.7 5,523.8 2,718.5
         Feb 22,954.8 14,626.5 12,201.5 10,342.7 988.4 870.5 2,425.0 969.0 1,456.0 5,562.2 2,766.0
         Mar 22,985.3 14,752.2 12,321.9 10,443.2 1,009.9 868.9 2,430.2 975.7 1,454.6 5,392.0 2,841.1
         Apr 23,174.7 14,935.8 12,485.6 10,517.8 1,043.4 924.4 2,450.2 988.0 1,462.1 5,487.5 2,751.4
         May 23,366.1 15,015.1 12,567.9 10,583.2 1,067.7 917.0 2,447.2 980.4 1,466.8 5,469.4 2,881.5
         June 23,305.2 15,046.4 12,596.7 10,646.6 1,091.4 858.7 2,449.7 992.5 1,457.2 5,302.1 2,956.7
         July 23,299.2 15,144.6 12,686.8 10,701.5 1,108.3 877.1 2,457.8 993.5 1,464.3 5,346.9 2,807.8
         Aug 23,513.2 15,180.1 12,724.8 10,709.0 1,137.6 878.1 2,455.2 987.0 1,468.2 5,501.7 2,831.4
         Sep 23,777.5 15,218.5 12,788.3 10,804.8 1,109.2 874.3 2,430.2 997.3 1,432.8 5,600.3 2,958.8
         Oct 24,460.8 15,272.2 12,844.4 10,860.9 1,148.4 835.0 2,427.9 997.6 1,430.2 5,774.4 3,414.2
         Nov 24,591.2 15,351.8 12,877.7 10,870.3 1,183.8 823.5 2,474.2 995.2 1,479.0 5,659.7 3,579.6
         Dec 24,109.4 15,506.6 12,967.6 10,772.3 1,409.1 786.1 2,539.0 986.3 1,552.7 5,231.1 3,371.7
2009          Jan 24,491.3 15,686.5 13,061.6 10,860.5 1,412.0 789.2 2,624.8 1,001.8 1,623.1 5,385.8 3,419.0
         Feb 24,434.1 15,706.1 13,047.0 10,837.1 1,433.0 776.9 2,659.1 998.4 1,660.7 5,301.6 3,426.4
         Mar 24,154.5 15,734.4 13,035.0 10,815.6 1,449.4 770.0 2,699.4 989.3 1,710.1 5,036.0 3,384.1
         Apr 24,237.2 15,815.5 13,083.4 10,812.5 1,475.4 795.5 2,732.1 1,000.5 1,731.6 5,098.1 3,323.6
         May 23,913.1 15,820.6 13,082.9 10,810.1 1,479.9 792.9 2,737.7 992.8 1,744.9 4,965.5 3,127.0
         June 24,078.2 15,921.1 13,111.9 10,836.8 1,494.4 780.7 2,809.1 1,015.9 1,793.2 4,912.0 3,245.1
         July 24,031.1 15,890.5 13,070.2 10,800.1 1,492.4 777.7 2,820.2 1,016.6 1,803.7 4,874.0 3,266.7
         Aug 23,945.5 15,834.7 13,005.6 10,735.4 1,496.0 774.1 2,829.1 1,021.4 1,807.7 4,861.9 3,249.0
         Sep 23,896.6 15,910.0 13,060.9 10,775.5 1,494.7 790.7 2,849.2 1,011.6 1,837.6 4,782.9 3,203.7
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2007          Aug 5,097.5 3,490.3 2,820.4 2,383.6 141.2 295.6 669.8 401.7 268.1 1,387.0 220.3
         Sep 5,152.6 3,497.4 2,837.2 2,394.9 145.2 297.1 660.2 395.5 264.7 1,423.6 231.6
         Oct 5,138.6 3,490.1 2,836.5 2,399.8 150.4 286.2 653.6 394.0 259.7 1,416.2 232.3
         Nov 5,155.4 3,486.8 2,839.6 2,401.8 151.5 286.3 647.1 392.7 254.4 1,434.8 233.8
         Dec 5,159.0 3,491.7 2,850.6 2,413.7 148.7 288.2 641.1 391.2 249.9 1,432.7 234.6
2008          Jan 5,167.5 3,535.3 2,894.6 2,438.5 145.8 310.3 640.7 387.4 253.3 1,407.0 225.2
         Feb 5,186.3 3,525.7 2,879.9 2,442.3 144.4 293.3 645.8 383.9 261.9 1,427.6 233.0
         Mar 5,222.7 3,565.8 2,919.8 2,456.6 163.7 299.5 646.0 381.6 264.4 1,422.9 234.1
         Apr 5,300.6 3,614.0 2,958.7 2,466.4 161.4 330.8 655.4 386.3 269.0 1,441.3 245.3
         May 5,283.0 3,600.6 2,951.1 2,473.1 162.5 315.5 649.5 381.1 268.4 1,436.0 246.5
         June 5,230.1 3,581.4 2,944.7 2,491.9 162.8 290.0 636.6 380.1 256.6 1,399.5 249.2
         July 5,239.5 3,592.2 2,959.4 2,503.6 162.1 293.7 632.9 380.0 252.9 1,394.5 252.8
         Aug 5,284.5 3,623.9 2,995.2 2,511.9 187.2 296.1 628.8 379.8 249.0 1,410.0 250.6
         Sep 5,383.1 3,627.7 3,016.0 2,530.7 188.4 296.9 611.7 377.3 234.4 1,501.9 253.5
         Oct 5,457.7 3,632.1 3,016.4 2,540.2 186.7 289.5 615.7 379.4 236.3 1,554.5 271.1
         Nov 5,385.6 3,637.4 3,026.4 2,549.0 191.6 285.8 611.1 377.3 233.8 1,463.2 285.0
         Dec 5,310.8 3,642.6 3,035.0 2,529.4 224.5 281.1 607.6 374.9 232.8 1,379.1 289.1
2009          Jan 5,343.8 3,682.0 3,065.9 2,557.6 219.9 288.4 616.1 374.8 241.3 1,367.2 294.6
         Feb 5,315.0 3,672.2 3,058.5 2,544.1 235.8 278.6 613.8 372.8 241.0 1,348.2 294.6
         Mar 5,282.0 3,674.0 3,065.2 2,555.9 235.1 274.3 608.8 368.1 240.7 1,278.5 329.5
         Apr 5,330.0 3,694.6 3,079.0 2,557.4 234.9 286.8 615.6 369.8 245.8 1,319.6 315.8
         May 5,261.9 3,684.9 3,068.7 2,556.8 234.0 277.8 616.2 365.5 250.8 1,292.8 284.3
         June 5,220.8 3,698.7 3,082.9 2,566.5 246.0 270.4 615.8 363.7 252.1 1,270.5 251.6
         July 5,173.5 3,689.5 3,059.0 2,545.9 245.8 267.3 630.6 376.6 254.0 1,238.5 245.5
         Aug 5,149.9 3,660.3 3,038.5 2,532.0 242.9 263.6 621.8 371.0 250.7 1,223.4 266.3
         Sep 5,131.6 3,679.6 3,054.4 2,548.0 242.8 263.6 625.2 368.1 257.1 1,186.5 265.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and other money market paper issued by general government. — 4Euro
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs‘ cash in
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of euro bank-
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills notes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
610.7 8,229.9 7,735.9 7,824.5 2,939.5 1,506.8 167.9 1,739.8 1,360.6 109.9 2007          Aug 
610.5 8,343.9 7,816.0 7,907.6 3,007.5 1,530.6 169.6 1,734.3 1,354.4 111.2          Sep 
613.6 8,564.2 8,051.9 8,130.7 2,974.5 1,627.8 181.4 1,748.7 1,486.1 112.3          Oct 
618.7 8,633.4 8,110.4 8,174.4 3,004.6 1,633.7 193.2 1,749.7 1,479.9 113.3          Nov 
638.6 8,754.4 8,284.4 8,346.7 3,048.7 1,689.7 198.1 1,795.5 1,500.9 113.9          Dec 
623.2 8,811.5 8,308.4 8,390.8 3,024.6 1,744.1 204.6 1,794.3 1,508.0 115.2 2008          Jan 
628.8 8,841.2 8,323.9 8,396.5 2,973.7 1,814.1 205.0 1,783.7 1,505.7 114.4          Feb 
632.9 8,922.3 8,401.0 8,473.1 3,024.7 1,834.5 203.1 1,786.8 1,511.7 112.3          Mar 
641.4 8,998.3 8,477.0 8,548.1 3,002.6 1,922.9 208.1 1,792.2 1,511.3 111.0          Apr 
645.8 9,045.5 8,542.5 8,608.1 3,027.1 1,949.3 208.6 1,805.5 1,508.1 109.6          May
652.1 9,128.6 8,585.2 8,647.2 3,063.1 1,941.1 215.5 1,813.7 1,505.1 108.9          June
658.8 9,106.8 8,587.0 8,660.3 2,986.3 2,031.6 225.1 1,812.9 1,496.2 108.3          July
656.1 9,122.6 8,587.6 8,669.1 2,942.3 2,081.1 233.3 1,810.8 1,494.4 107.2          Aug 
657.2 9,193.0 8,650.5 8,731.7 3,025.4 2,081.6 236.5 1,797.5 1,484.6 106.1          Sep 
698.9 9,356.6 8,746.2 8,831.4 3,049.8 2,151.7 237.6 1,800.6 1,482.7 109.0          Oct 
703.7 9,463.8 8,798.3 8,860.1 3,060.0 2,164.4 239.4 1,796.3 1,487.3 112.6          Nov 
722.9 9,636.0 9,074.4 9,113.3 3,106.0 2,150.9 235.6 1,972.7 1,531.5 116.5          Dec 
712.3 9,760.3 9,114.3 9,170.5 3,184.5 2,039.4 241.3 2,011.1 1,577.0 117.3 2009          Jan 
716.0 9,779.4 9,126.2 9,173.3 3,185.4 1,995.8 250.2 2,024.7 1,600.0 117.2          Feb 
719.9 9,808.8 9,154.3 9,193.2 3,203.6 1,954.1 251.8 2,045.9 1,620.2 117.8          Mar 
729.2 9,873.2 9,234.9 9,272.3 3,253.8 1,940.5 253.4 2,063.4 1,642.5 118.8          Apr 
732.0 9,874.2 9,246.3 9,280.0 3,274.9 1,895.5 252.0 2,080.8 1,656.6 120.2          May
735.0 9,941.7 9,286.4 9,323.6 3,353.0 1,837.3 241.6 2,102.1 1,668.4 121.3          June
745.5 9,882.0 9,279.8 9,322.1 3,347.8 1,796.6 253.8 2,114.7 1,686.8 122.4          July
741.2 9,855.2 9,281.1 9,320.6 3,356.5 1,755.0 257.1 2,125.1 1,703.7 123.2          Aug 
740.6 9,888.3 9,296.0 9,331.4 3,405.4 1,696.2 254.1 2,140.2 1,711.0 124.4          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
165.1 2,524.3 2,451.3 2,377.6 751.4 311.8 32.7 723.2 452.7 105.8 2007          Aug 
164.6 2,551.8 2,476.1 2,400.8 761.4 323.9 33.7 726.2 449.1 106.4          Sep 
165.8 2,549.0 2,474.8 2,400.1 748.5 340.1 36.2 723.3 444.4 107.5          Oct 
167.3 2,592.5 2,509.1 2,430.6 779.5 340.4 39.4 722.4 440.4 108.5          Nov 
172.0 2,634.0 2,554.6 2,473.5 763.6 384.6 42.7 726.2 446.8 109.5          Dec 
167.9 2,628.9 2,548.6 2,476.2 769.4 383.1 45.0 727.3 442.1 109.4 2008          Jan 
169.4 2,638.9 2,559.5 2,487.6 764.9 402.2 45.8 726.2 440.0 108.5          Feb 
170.8 2,645.3 2,564.1 2,492.0 773.5 402.6 45.5 725.5 438.4 106.5          Mar 
173.6 2,650.1 2,574.0 2,498.9 760.6 425.8 46.0 725.6 435.7 105.1          Apr 
174.0 2,671.0 2,591.1 2,508.4 763.8 435.1 46.3 725.8 433.7 103.7          May
176.2 2,671.2 2,589.5 2,502.9 770.0 425.7 47.4 725.3 431.6 102.9          June
178.2 2,676.3 2,596.5 2,512.2 750.5 458.7 49.2 724.8 426.5 102.5          July
177.2 2,688.5 2,608.0 2,522.6 751.6 472.1 50.3 724.0 423.4 101.3          Aug 
177.7 2,698.7 2,618.7 2,532.2 768.0 471.5 51.5 720.9 420.1 100.3          Sep 
188.3 2,742.6 2,664.9 2,580.8 798.6 489.4 52.8 718.1 418.8 103.2          Oct 
189.6 2,760.1 2,685.4 2,592.5 804.1 492.9 54.6 716.3 417.6 106.9          Nov 
195.2 2,799.3 2,728.0 2,632.6 800.8 493.7 54.4 747.3 425.7 110.7          Dec 
177.0 2,819.7 2,748.0 2,657.0 859.6 452.3 53.7 751.4 429.4 110.7 2009          Jan 
177.7 2,834.1 2,754.4 2,660.1 872.0 432.0 52.8 758.1 434.7 110.6          Feb 
179.0 2,821.3 2,740.2 2,650.6 870.1 418.5 52.7 760.7 437.3 111.3          Mar 
180.6 2,854.6 2,759.1 2,667.2 880.6 418.0 52.0 764.7 439.8 112.1          Apr 
180.7 2,860.9 2,753.2 2,661.0 884.4 401.8 51.8 767.2 442.2 113.6          May
182.2 2,856.1 2,755.9 2,666.6 902.2 372.6 50.8 780.8 445.7 114.6          June
185.6 2,840.1 2,747.1 2,663.6 907.2 358.8 50.2 781.5 450.2 115.7          July
184.2 2,832.1 2,748.8 2,667.0 919.1 344.4 49.1 783.3 454.6 116.5          Aug 
184.3 2,830.8 2,750.2 2,671.8 937.9 324.4 47.9 786.2 457.7 117.7          Sep 
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other
banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into liability items“). — 5Excluding central governments’ deposits. — 6In
circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2007          Aug 173.8 231.6 116.1 86.9 3.7 22.5 2.0 0.5 297.6 292.9 705.9 2,789.3 2,109.1
         Sep 195.9 240.5 121.6 89.9 3.7 22.9 1.9 0.5 295.3 290.4 682.2 2,793.8 2,134.0
         Oct 184.3 249.3 127.1 86.5 3.7 23.0 1.8 7.1 293.5 288.5 684.0 2,848.6 2,193.8
         Nov 199.7 259.4 129.8 93.8 4.0 23.0 1.8 6.9 301.8 297.0 696.7 2,841.7 2,196.8
         Dec 150.8 256.9 125.2 94.8 4.4 24.1 1.7 6.7 282.9 278.7 660.4 2,849.2 2,212.1
2008          Jan 168.8 251.8 123.0 90.3 3.9 24.2 1.8 8.7 307.3 303.5 737.2 2,837.2 2,199.4
         Feb 189.0 255.8 122.1 95.0 4.1 24.6 1.7 8.3 314.3 309.9 749.6 2,803.3 2,178.4
         Mar 199.9 249.2 118.5 91.5 5.1 24.4 1.7 8.1 314.0 309.9 742.5 2,809.3 2,200.4
         Apr 197.5 252.7 119.0 94.4 5.2 24.6 1.7 7.9 328.9 322.8 751.3 2,812.4 2,197.1
         May 173.9 263.5 120.8 103.6 5.3 24.5 1.6 7.6 333.3 327.3 755.8 2,844.7 2,226.8
         June 211.2 270.1 124.0 106.9 5.8 24.4 1.6 7.4 330.3 324.5 733.0 2,856.5 2,241.8
         July 180.8 265.7 118.8 107.9 5.8 24.4 1.6 7.2 333.1 329.0 743.2 2,878.2 2,260.8
         Aug 186.7 266.8 117.5 110.3 5.9 24.4 1.6 7.1 343.1 338.3 757.9 2,888.8 2,261.3
         Sep 191.2 270.1 121.1 110.1 5.9 24.6 1.5 6.8 345.6 341.0 731.1 2,906.9 2,267.9
         Oct 256.3 268.9 122.9 107.4 5.8 24.8 1.5 6.6 351.0 347.4 729.8 2,890.9 2,209.9
         Nov 326.2 277.6 129.3 110.2 5.7 24.5 1.5 6.4 336.6 333.4 739.7 2,871.2 2,207.9
         Dec 259.6 263.1 124.2 101.5 4.9 24.7 1.6 6.1 330.1 327.4 726.1 2,828.6 2,224.4
2009          Jan 325.1 264.7 125.7 99.3 5.0 24.6 1.9 8.2 324.0 321.4 759.9 2,824.6 2,194.6
         Feb 339.1 267.0 130.1 96.9 5.2 24.6 2.1 8.0 327.4 324.6 779.9 2,849.0 2,215.6
         Mar 351.8 263.7 134.8 89.1 4.6 24.9 2.5 7.9 338.5 335.5 780.8 2,801.4 2,200.0
         Apr 337.5 263.4 139.8 83.6 4.8 24.9 2.6 7.7 338.2 335.4 781.8 2,811.9 2,196.0
         May 331.5 262.7 137.9 84.6 4.9 25.0 2.8 7.5 336.2 333.4 771.6 2,808.1 2,215.2
         June 352.3 265.8 145.9 80.2 4.6 25.0 2.9 7.3 347.3 344.5 741.7 2,806.0 2,203.2
         July 298.2 261.7 145.9 74.8 4.9 25.5 3.3 7.2 320.0 317.6 758.0 2,807.4 2,206.4
         Aug 272.8 261.8 148.1 72.2 5.1 25.7 3.5 7.1 312.5 308.8 759.3 2,803.8 2,200.4
         Sep 295.2 261.7 154.5 65.7 5.3 25.7 3.7 6.8 335.2 333.0 738.4 2,774.1 2,189.2
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2007          Aug 42.6 104.1 21.6 59.0 2.9 18.9 1.2 0.5 28.4 28.4 26.0 900.4 662.5
         Sep 41.3 109.7 24.1 61.8 2.9 19.3 1.1 0.5 36.3 36.3 22.4 889.3 655.7
         Oct 40.9 108.1 25.7 58.7 2.9 19.3 1.1 0.4 34.6 34.6 21.4 891.6 658.3
         Nov 46.7 115.2 25.4 65.9 3.1 19.3 1.0 0.4 39.7 39.7 21.4 881.2 655.5
         Dec 40.1 120.3 26.1 69.1 3.5 20.3 1.0 0.4 26.6 26.6 21.1 866.9 646.7
2008          Jan 40.0 112.7 23.4 64.5 3.0 20.4 0.9 0.4 42.1 42.1 21.0 873.7 652.8
         Feb 38.7 112.6 23.5 63.9 3.2 20.6 0.9 0.4 45.9 45.9 21.5 862.3 642.2
         Mar 40.8 112.4 23.1 63.2 4.2 20.7 0.9 0.4 46.7 46.7 20.0 854.3 648.3
         Apr 37.5 113.7 22.8 64.5 4.2 20.9 0.9 0.4 55.7 55.7 18.4 859.7 644.1
         May 39.7 122.9 24.3 72.2 4.3 20.8 0.9 0.4 56.0 56.0 17.8 848.4 630.4
         June 39.4 128.8 26.3 75.5 4.8 21.0 0.9 0.4 63.9 63.9 17.7 842.9 626.2
         July 37.3 126.9 23.4 76.7 4.5 21.1 0.8 0.3 58.1 58.1 17.7 842.4 619.3
         Aug 37.3 128.6 24.6 77.1 4.6 21.1 0.8 0.3 63.1 63.1 17.3 846.5 619.4
         Sep 38.0 128.4 25.0 76.4 4.6 21.3 0.8 0.3 70.9 70.9 16.9 845.5 607.4
         Oct 36.6 125.1 25.0 73.2 4.5 21.3 0.8 0.3 69.8 69.8 13.0 853.5 600.2
         Nov 36.7 130.8 28.7 75.7 4.4 21.0 0.8 0.3 71.0 71.0 12.3 854.6 607.1
         Dec 36.7 129.9 32.0 72.0 3.6 21.2 0.8 0.3 61.1 61.1 11.5 819.1 596.4
2009          Jan 37.3 125.4 32.2 67.2 3.6 21.1 1.0 0.4 67.4 67.4 11.1 822.0 575.4
         Feb 45.4 128.6 37.1 65.0 3.9 21.1 1.0 0.4 74.0 74.0 12.0 814.7 563.9
         Mar 48.6 122.2 36.3 59.5 3.4 21.4 1.1 0.5 87.7 87.7 11.4 779.4 542.7
         Apr 62.7 124.6 41.4 56.8 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 92.6 92.6 11.2 782.5 531.5
         May 74.7 125.1 41.0 57.6 3.5 21.3 1.2 0.5 90.9 90.9 10.9 776.7 538.0
         June 65.8 123.7 43.0 54.3 3.2 21.3 1.3 0.6 93.4 93.4 10.7 764.5 521.5
         July 60.0 116.5 40.3 49.4 3.3 21.5 1.4 0.6 82.4 82.4 9.6 754.9 510.6
         Aug 50.2 114.9 41.1 46.6 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.6 71.7 71.7 9.5 755.1 507.7
         Sep 47.9 111.2 42.4 41.7 3.4 21.5 1.6 0.7 83.7 83.7 9.5 734.1 498.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — 6After deduction of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central inter-MFI participations. — 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s
Bank and national central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 8including DM banknotes still in
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with circulation (see also footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution,
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper. — the difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of central
liability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments
1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of
1 year  4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
170.7 86.3 2,532.3 4,592.5 1,382.4 − 31.0 2,834.2 − 3,754.3 7,038.4 8,298.2 5,787.3 244.2 2007          Aug 
190.1 88.9 2,514.8 4,593.1 1,399.2 − 37.7 2,953.2 − 3,827.5 7,133.3 8,389.2 5,782.9 243.7          Sep 
208.3 86.3 2,554.0 4,712.3 1,464.2 − 28.7 3,024.4 − 3,795.9 7,223.1 8,494.4 5,909.3 120.6          Oct 
217.3 90.9 2,533.5 4,731.0 1,462.3 − 19.6 3,110.1 − 3,835.9 7,281.8 8,587.5 5,888.9 122.3          Nov 
217.1 96.3 2,535.8 4,652.1 1,492.7 − 48.0 3,033.6 − 3,901.2 7,429.9 8,685.5 5,968.6 127.8          Dec 
195.8 97.9 2,543.5 4,923.2 1,520.1 − 36.7 3,096.6 − 3,851.1 7,442.4 8,779.7 6,006.0 118.9 2008          Jan 
173.3 98.9 2,531.1 4,983.3 1,519.6 − 30.1 3,144.5 − 3,800.4 7,464.3 8,799.6 5,981.6 114.2          Feb 
165.7 111.7 2,531.9 4,896.2 1,506.7 − 18.8 3,179.9 − 3,852.0 7,537.6 8,870.7 5,970.1 113.8          Mar 
155.7 112.8 2,543.9 5,079.2 1,500.1 − 31.5 3,094.4 − 3,836.8 7,618.1 8,965.9 5,979.6 111.5          Apr 
159.6 125.5 2,559.6 5,134.8 1,488.0 − 40.2 3,158.0 − 3,867.3 7,681.2 9,054.3 5,994.8 110.9          May
151.9 130.3 2,574.3 4,962.7 1,494.4 − 57.5 3,204.7 − 3,914.3 7,727.1 9,071.2 6,023.1 112.0          June
149.1 137.7 2,591.4 5,005.3 1,517.5 − 55.3 3,111.1 − 3,838.3 7,743.1 9,104.9 6,061.7 111.0          July
140.5 137.4 2,610.9 5,119.4 1,528.7 − 47.0 3,143.3 − 3,789.7 7,752.3 9,129.9 6,089.2 109.9          Aug 
146.9 140.3 2,619.7 5,179.1 1,563.9 − 60.8 3,261.2 − 3,876.4 7,832.7 9,195.3 6,118.7 108.8          Sep 
140.4 136.4 2,614.1 5,291.3 1,570.3 − 68.1 3,639.8 − 3,944.0 7,964.6 9,321.2 6,125.3 106.3          Oct 
136.8 137.9 2,596.5 5,166.7 1,609.1 − 68.3 3,768.2 − 3,969.0 8,011.1 9,361.5 6,145.4 109.5          Nov 
138.5 129.1 2,561.0 4,780.5 1,613.4 − 109.5 3,580.9 − 4,035.4 8,094.3 9,417.4 6,294.5 115.1          Dec 
93.7 123.6 2,607.3 5,000.3 1,668.1 − 139.6 3,581.0 − 4,095.9 8,093.0 9,393.7 6,436.5 106.6 2009          Jan 
88.7 126.8 2,633.6 4,862.5 1,670.2 − 115.8 3,565.2 − 4,102.2 8,085.4 9,407.7 6,478.2 103.6          Feb 
66.2 128.8 2,606.4 4,645.9 1,645.3 − 98.9 3,512.6 − 4,131.1 8,085.9 9,399.6 6,448.1 105.5          Mar 
65.8 140.3 2,605.9 4,674.1 1,646.9 − 113.1 3,494.7 − 4,196.5 8,154.7 9,480.1 6,467.4 104.4          Apr 
53.8 145.4 2,608.9 4,516.6 1,657.1 − 117.6 3,334.7 − 4,219.7 8,148.6 9,455.0 6,499.5 107.4          May
38.9 143.7 2,623.3 4,439.4 1,690.1 − 133.3 3,510.1 − 4,310.5 8,177.5 9,448.6 6,569.0 108.7          June
28.5 146.0 2,632.8 4,385.5 1,698.6 − 123.9 3,557.8 − 4,316.9 8,169.2 9,421.2 6,601.2 109.7          July
15.2 144.8 2,643.8 4,310.6 1,709.4 − 104.0 3,557.2 − 4,323.5 8,152.0 9,383.3 6,634.3 109.6          Aug 
10.5 141.4 2,622.1 4,235.9 1,725.4 − 69.3 3,527.7 − 4,378.6 8,146.3 9,371.6 6,644.7 109.8          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
15.5 59.9 824.9 772.0 360.3 − 170.4 656.6 94.4 773.0 1,633.3 1,763.2 2,033.5 − 2007          Aug 
16.8 57.0 815.5 785.8 362.4 − 172.4 676.9 96.1 785.5 1,658.1 1,790.7 2,030.3 −          Sep 
22.8 48.0 820.7 772.9 366.1 − 167.7 670.8 97.5 774.2 1,657.5 1,784.4 2,037.4 −          Oct 
27.4 48.4 805.5 777.4 363.0 − 200.2 680.4 98.6 804.9 1,695.2 1,832.1 2,019.1 −          Nov 
27.0 45.1 794.8 754.6 368.0 − 194.9 682.8 99.5 789.7 1,737.4 1,857.2 2,019.3 −          Dec 
30.2 46.9 796.6 779.2 374.4 − 220.0 668.2 100.2 792.9 1,731.4 1,871.6 2,028.4 − 2008          Jan 
27.2 48.2 787.0 794.7 377.0 − 228.9 674.8 102.4 788.4 1,744.4 1,887.1 2,019.8 −          Feb 
25.0 48.8 780.6 813.3 379.8 − 212.8 676.2 103.7 796.6 1,751.3 1,891.8 2,013.5 −          Mar 
24.7 52.5 782.5 837.1 375.4 − 187.9 692.0 104.1 783.4 1,760.6 1,911.9 2,009.9 −          Apr 
19.6 51.6 777.3 824.7 369.6 − 197.6 693.0 106.3 788.1 1,780.6 1,925.6 1,997.6 −          May
13.3 53.9 775.8 789.2 375.0 − 228.6 698.8 107.2 796.3 1,782.2 1,931.0 2,000.4 −          June
12.2 54.3 775.9 783.7 381.7 − 223.0 702.7 107.4 773.9 1,790.4 1,932.6 2,006.2 −          July
13.7 50.9 782.0 803.1 382.3 − 241.0 724.7 109.8 776.2 1,804.4 1,949.4 2,011.0 −          Aug 
13.5 49.5 782.5 850.4 391.3 − 238.3 747.6 111.8 793.1 1,817.9 1,968.8 2,016.5 −          Sep 
19.2 45.6 788.7 862.4 388.3 − 248.6 776.8 119.3 823.6 1,863.0 2,010.7 2,019.9 −          Oct 
33.2 45.7 775.7 815.4 395.6 − 309.6 786.2 120.6 832.8 1,878.8 2,040.9 2,015.9 −          Nov 
41.9 37.5 739.8 762.8 406.3 − 334.6 785.4 121.8 832.8 1,883.0 2,034.9 2,025.6 −          Dec 
32.7 33.5 755.8 791.6 414.8 − 353.2 770.3 139.2 891.8 1,898.9 2,043.7 2,054.1 − 2009          Jan 
34.5 33.5 746.8 770.8 407.4 − 376.1 778.2 140.7 909.1 1,898.4 2,052.3 2,044.4 −          Feb 
19.3 31.4 728.8 751.2 400.0 − 382.6 813.6 140.4 906.4 1,878.9 2,028.6 2,022.7 −          Mar 
24.5 33.4 724.5 774.4 390.7 − 373.8 797.8 141.8 922.0 1,893.1 2,054.9 2,013.9 −          Apr 
25.8 32.5 718.4 727.4 389.3 − 361.3 767.1 142.2 925.5 1,883.5 2,043.6 2,010.3 −          May
22.0 26.6 715.9 731.4 407.9 − 390.7 747.5 141.9 945.2 1,873.0 2,025.8 2,041.0 −          June
23.3 25.1 706.4 724.8 408.0 − 397.8 751.5 141.8 947.5 1,860.8 2,001.2 2,033.8 −          July
24.7 24.9 705.6 718.3 408.3 − 407.6 762.6 143.4 960.2 1,859.9 1,990.7 2,035.8 −          Aug 
26.3 23.2 684.5 690.3 409.6 − 396.2 769.8 144.9 980.3 1,856.9 1,999.6 2,020.1 −          Sep 
by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the (excluding central governments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on governments’ monetary liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo
banknote circulation in Table III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt
central governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in securities up to 2 years. — 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation, central governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with matur ities
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with of over 2 years, capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2007          Apr 323.6 281.7 145.7 0.5 − 0.3 0.9 614.8 48.2 − 95.2 182.6 797.7
         May 326.1 281.6 150.0 0.3 − 0.5 0.1 620.0 51.3 − 97.2 183.2 803.8
         June 326.4 284.9 150.0 0.3 − 0.2 0.2 625.2 49.1 − 99.4 186.2 811.7
         July 323.0 295.4 150.0 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 631.3 53.9 − 106.4 189.6 821.2
         Aug 316.7 301.7 150.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 639.7 52.3 − 115.8 192.0 832.1
         Sep 317.3 268.7 171.7 0.2 10.7 0.4 1.7 639.2 52.3 − 117.8 192.7 832.4
         Oct 321.9 194.3 262.3 0.3 − 1.6 0.9 637.3 63.7 − 118.0 193.4 832.3
         Nov 327.6 180.2 265.0 0.1 − 0.6 5.1 640.1 55.9 − 123.3 194.4 835.1
         Dec 327.5 173.0 278.6 0.3 − 0.4 2.2 644.6 61.9 − 126.6 196.8 841.9
2008          Jan 343.8 255.7 268.8 0.3 − 1.1 68.4 668.2 46.4 − 116.4 200.9 870.2
         Feb 353.6 173.8 268.5 0.2 − 0.4 0.6 651.7 51.7 − 110.7 202.4 854.5
         Mar 343.3 181.3 268.5 0.1 0.3 0.3 − 653.2 59.7 − 125.0 205.3 858.7
         Apr 349.4 181.5 278.6 0.1 2.6 0.6 0.4 662.1 66.4 − 124.8 207.5 870.3
         May 364.5 174.4 295.0 0.1 − 0.3 0.8 667.6 68.8 − 112.2 208.6 876.6
         June 375.0 172.8 287.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.5 671.4 67.3 − 111.5 208.1 879.7
         July 376.4 185.4 275.4 0.1 − 0.4 0.5 677.2 64.9 − 118.3 212.7 890.3
         Aug 374.5 166.3 299.3 0.1 − 0.3 0.6 686.1 61.3 − 123.0 214.8 901.2
         Sep 376.6 163.5 300.0 0.1 − 0.6 0.7 685.0 61.1 − 121.2 214.0 899.5
         Oct 417.3 174.1 334.3 7.5 5.9 19.9 45.5 684.3 55.2 − 82.6 216.8 921.0
         Nov 549.0 301.6 452.5 12.7 4.2 213.7 2.3 722.1 85.0 78.2 218.6 1 154.4
         Dec 580.5 337.3 457.2 2.7 − 200.9 4.9 731.1 107.8 114.3 218.7 1 150.7
2009          Jan 581.3 219.2 613.6 2.9 − 238.5 3.3 753.1 99.9 100.6 221.5 1 213.1
         Feb 547.4 224.9 551.4 2.1 − 175.4 6.1 740.2 102.7 79.3 222.1 1 137.7
         Mar 512.7 224.3 472.4 1.6 − 95.5 4.0 741.5 110.1 41.4 218.6 1 055.5
         Apr 508.0 230.5 443.1 1.1 − 57.8 3.7 747.3 139.0 13.3 221.6 1 026.6
         May 512.4 239.7 426.9 0.7 − 42.7 3.1 757.5 141.9 13.7 220.8 1 021.0
         June 487.9 238.8 400.6 0.7 − 22.3 2.1 759.8 141.7 − 15.8 217.9 1 000.0
         July 457.1 221.4 504.9 1.3 − 119.7 9.9 763.1 137.9 − 65.1 219.2 1 102.0
         Aug 433.6 94.1 694.0 0.3 2.8 185.1 22.1 770.8 133.9 − 103.9 216.9 1 172.8
         Sep 427.6 74.8 645.4 0.3 8.4 136.7 18.5 769.1 125.7 − 110.4 216.9 1 122.7
         Oct 421.4 79.1 616.9 0.3 14.3 109.6 12.9 768.8 139.0 − 113.1 214.7 1 093.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2007          Apr 82.7 128.2 103.9 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 167.1 0.1 104.2 43.2 210.4
         May 83.4 130.6 107.1 0.2 − 0.1 0.0 168.3 0.1 109.2 43.5 212.0
         June 83.6 124.0 108.7 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 170.6 0.1 101.4 44.1 214.8
         July 82.7 125.1 108.8 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 171.8 0.1 99.7 45.0 216.8
         Aug 81.1 135.4 104.9 0.1 − 0.0 − 173.9 0.1 102.6 44.9 218.8
         Sep 81.1 125.0 114.2 0.2 4.1 0.3 0.6 174.1 0.1 104.4 45.2 219.6
         Oct 82.4 93.2 142.9 0.2 − 0.9 0.2 173.5 0.1 98.8 45.2 219.6
         Nov 84.6 78.3 139.0 0.0 − 0.4 1.5 174.1 0.0 80.0 45.9 220.5
         Dec 84.6 73.2 133.6 0.3 − 0.3 0.7 175.2 0.1 68.7 46.7 222.1
2008          Jan 91.5 102.1 134.6 0.1 − 0.6 26.4 180.6 0.1 73.7 46.9 228.1
         Feb 96.0 60.8 130.6 0.0 − 0.2 0.1 176.2 0.0 63.3 47.7 224.1
         Mar 90.8 59.8 122.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 − 177.5 0.1 46.9 48.6 226.3
         Apr 92.9 76.7 109.9 0.0 1.5 0.5 − 179.7 0.0 52.4 48.6 228.7
         May 99.6 75.7 112.7 0.0 − 0.2 0.2 181.0 0.0 57.9 48.6 229.8
         June 104.4 73.5 112.8 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 182.7 0.1 58.9 49.1 231.8
         July 102.8 79.4 107.2 0.0 − 0.1 0.1 183.6 0.1 55.9 49.5 233.2
         Aug 99.6 70.8 111.9 0.0 − 0.1 0.0 185.5 0.0 46.5 50.1 235.7
         Sep 100.6 76.7 105.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 185.7 0.1 46.2 50.2 236.2
         Oct 114.4 74.8 118.6 0.9 3.6 10.1 8.6 186.2 0.2 55.9 51.2 247.5
         Nov 138.6 103.6 163.2 2.7 2.0 88.8 1.1 198.9 0.3 68.7 52.3 339.9
         Dec 146.9 105.1 158.5 2.0 − 84.2 1.1 197.9 0.2 77.2 52.0 334.0
2009          Jan 141.2 72.4 198.1 2.4 − 91.5 1.2 195.8 4.1 68.5 52.8 340.2
         Feb 132.9 79.4 178.5 1.3 − 77.9 2.2 185.0 2.5 71.4 53.2 316.1
         Mar 135.3 72.9 147.8 1.2 − 51.9 1.7 185.3 9.6 55.7 52.9 290.1
         Apr 142.9 74.7 122.8 0.7 − 38.9 1.6 186.3 14.6 46.2 53.4 278.7
         May 150.7 87.5 111.9 0.1 − 24.1 1.3 189.1 26.2 56.3 53.3 266.5
         June 145.7 95.0 103.4 0.7 − 15.4 0.6 189.3 32.3 54.3 52.8 257.4
         July 138.0 81.0 141.5 0.6 − 49.4 4.5 190.2 23.5 40.4 53.2 292.8
         Aug 128.6 47.6 189.1 0.1 0.8 70.1 4.9 192.0 23.5 23.6 52.2 314.2
         Sep 126.0 40.6 178.0 0.1 2.9 51.8 4.3 192.3 23.6 23.4 52.2 296.4
         Oct 124.2 37.3 175.9 0.2 4.9 49.4 3.0 192.5 23.7 22.4 51.5 293.3
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity purchase programme. — 4From Aug. 2009, includes liquidity absorbed as a
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap operations. — 5From
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the
lidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulatio n. In
of the Bundesbank. — 1Figures are daily averages for the reserve mainte- accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
nance period ending in the month indicated. — 2Source: ECB. — 3From the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in
Aug. 2009, includes liquidity provided under Eurosystem’s covered bond circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of
14*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 2.0 − 7.0 + 11.1 + 0.5 − − 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 5.2 + 2.0 + 10.5 2007          Apr 
+ 2.5 − 0.1 + 4.3 − 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.2 + 3.1 − 2.0 + 0.6 + 6.1          May
+ 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.3 + 0.1 + 5.2 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 3.0 + 7.9          June
− 3.4 + 10.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 6.1 + 4.8 − 7.0 + 3.4 + 9.5          July
− 6.3 + 6.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − + 8.4 − 1.6 − 9.4 + 2.4 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 0.6 − 33.0 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.3          Sep 
+ 4.6 − 74.4 + 90.6 + 0.1 − 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 + 11.4 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 5.7 − 14.1 + 2.7 − 0.2 − − 1.0 + 4.2 + 2.8 − 7.8 − 5.3 + 1.0 + 2.8          Nov 
− 0.1 − 7.2 + 13.6 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − 2.9 + 4.5 + 6.0 − 3.3 + 2.4 + 6.8          Dec 
+ 16.3 + 82.7 − 9.8 − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 66.2 + 23.6 − 15.5 + 10.2 + 4.1 + 28.3 2008          Jan 
+ 9.8 − 81.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − − 0.7 − 67.8 − 16.5 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 1.5 − 15.7          Feb 
− 10.3 + 7.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 1.5 + 8.0 − 14.3 + 2.9 + 4.2          Mar 
+ 6.1 + 0.2 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 8.9 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 11.6          Apr 
+ 15.1 − 7.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.4 + 12.6 + 1.1 + 6.3          May
+ 10.5 − 1.6 − 7.1 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 3.1          June
+ 1.4 + 12.6 − 12.5 − 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.0 + 5.8 − 2.4 − 6.8 + 4.6 + 10.6          July
− 1.9 − 19.1 + 23.9 − 0.0 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 8.9 − 3.6 − 4.7 + 2.1 + 10.9          Aug 
+ 2.1 − 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 1.7          Sep 
+ 40.7 + 10.6 + 34.3 + 7.4 + 5.9 + 19.3 + 44.8 − 0.7 − 5.9 + 38.6 + 2.8 + 21.5          Oct 
+ 131.7 + 127.5 + 118.2 + 5.2 − 1.7 +193.8 − 43.2 + 37.8 + 29.8 +160.8 + 1.8 + 233.4          Nov 
+ 31.5 + 35.7 + 4.7 − 10.0 − 4.2 − 12.8 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 22.8 + 36.1 + 0.1 − 3.7          Dec 
+ 0.8 − 118.1 + 156.4 + 0.2 − + 37.6 − 1.6 + 22.0 − 7.9 − 13.7 + 2.8 + 62.4 2009          Jan 
− 33.9 + 5.7 − 62.2 − 0.8 − − 63.1 + 2.8 − 12.9 + 2.8 − 21.3 + 0.6 − 75.4          Feb 
− 34.7 − 0.6 − 79.0 − 0.5 − − 79.9 − 2.1 + 1.3 + 7.4 − 37.9 − 3.5 − 82.2          Mar 
− 4.7 + 6.2 − 29.3 − 0.5 − − 37.7 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 28.9 − 28.1 + 3.0 − 28.9          Apr 
+ 4.4 + 9.2 − 16.2 − 0.4 − − 15.1 − 0.6 + 10.2 + 2.9 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 5.6          May
− 24.5 − 0.9 − 26.3 − 0.0 − − 20.4 − 1.0 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 29.5 − 2.9 − 21.0          June
− 30.8 − 17.4 + 104.3 + 0.6 − + 97.4 + 7.8 + 3.3 − 3.8 − 49.3 + 1.3 + 102.0          July
− 23.5 − 127.3 + 189.1 − 1.0 + 2.8 + 65.4 + 12.2 + 7.7 − 4.0 − 38.8 − 2.3 + 70.8          Aug 
− 6.0 − 19.3 − 48.6 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 48.4 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 8.2 − 6.5 − 0.0 − 50.1          Sep 
− 6.2 + 4.3 − 28.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 27.1 − 5.6 − 0.3 + 13.3 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 29.6          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.7 − 6.8 + 8.2 + 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 2007          Apr 
+ 0.7 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.4 + 1.6          May
+ 0.1 − 6.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 7.8 + 0.6 + 2.8          June
− 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.9 + 2.0          July
− 1.6 + 10.3 − 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 2.0          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 10.4 + 9.3 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.7          Sep 
+ 1.3 − 31.9 + 28.7 + 0.1 − 4.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 2.2 − 14.9 − 3.8 − 0.2 − − 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 18.8 + 0.7 + 0.9          Nov 
− 0.0 − 5.2 − 5.5 + 0.2 − − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 11.3 + 0.8 + 1.6          Dec 
+ 6.9 + 28.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.4 + 25.6 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.2 + 6.0 2008          Jan 
+ 4.5 − 41.3 − 4.0 − 0.1 − − 0.4 − 26.3 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.8 − 4.0          Feb 
− 5.2 − 1.0 − 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 0.9 + 2.2          Mar 
+ 2.1 + 16.9 − 12.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 + 2.4          Apr 
+ 6.7 − 1.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.3 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 1.1          May
+ 4.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 2.0          June
− 1.7 + 5.9 − 5.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 1.4          July
− 3.2 − 8.6 + 4.7 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 9.4 + 0.6 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 1.0 + 5.9 − 6.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4          Sep 
+ 13.8 − 1.9 + 13.5 + 0.8 + 3.6 + 10.0 + 8.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.7 + 0.9 + 11.4          Oct 
+ 24.2 + 28.8 + 44.6 + 1.9 − 1.6 + 78.6 − 7.5 + 12.7 + 0.1 + 12.8 + 1.1 + 92.4          Nov 
+ 8.3 + 1.5 − 4.6 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 8.5 − 0.3 − 5.9          Dec 
− 5.7 − 32.7 + 39.5 + 0.4 − + 7.3 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 4.0 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 6.1 2009          Jan 
− 8.3 + 7.0 − 19.5 − 1.0 − − 13.6 + 0.9 − 10.8 − 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.3 − 24.0          Feb 
+ 2.3 − 6.4 − 30.7 − 0.2 − − 26.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 7.2 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 26.0          Mar 
+ 7.6 + 1.8 − 25.1 − 0.5 − − 12.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 5.0 − 9.5 + 0.5 − 11.4          Apr 
+ 7.8 + 12.8 − 10.9 − 0.6 − − 14.8 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 11.6 + 10.1 − 0.2 − 12.2          May
− 5.0 + 7.5 − 8.5 + 0.5 − − 8.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 9.1          June
− 7.7 − 13.9 + 38.1 − 0.0 − + 34.1 + 3.8 + 0.9 − 8.9 − 13.9 + 0.4 + 35.4          July
− 9.3 − 33.5 + 47.6 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 20.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 16.8 − 1.0 + 21.5          Aug 
− 2.6 − 7.0 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 − 18.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 17.9          Sep 
− 1.8 − 3.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 3.1          Oct 
this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. — 6Remaining items in the
value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial
monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the statement of the Bundesbank. — 7Equal to the difference between the
percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the factors. — 8Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in
euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. 
which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other
15*II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month  1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2009 Mar                  6 1,840.8 217.7 156.8 13.1 143.7 136.0 21.0 21.0 −
                              13 1,829.4 217.6 155.3 13.2 142.0 144.1 20.3 20.3 −
                              20 1,822.5 217.6 154.3 13.2 141.1 143.6 17.4 17.4 −
                              27 1,803.1 217.5 152.4 13.2 139.1 140.8 17.0 17.0 −
         Apr                  3 3 1,836.4 3 241.7 3 158.6 14.4 3 144.2 3 151.3 17.2 17.2 −
                                9 1,827.8 241.7 158.1 14.4 143.7 142.1 17.9 17.9 −
                              17 1,840.1 241.7 157.0 14.4 142.7 139.4 19.4 19.4 −
                              24 1,824.0 240.8 157.9 14.4 143.6 125.3 20.4 20.4 −
         May                 1 1,799.2 240.8 157.1 14.3 142.8 125.3 20.5 20.5 −
                                8 1,795.1 240.8 159.3 16.2 143.1 123.1 21.4 21.4 −
                              15 1,764.2 240.8 159.0 16.8 142.3 121.4 20.6 20.6 −
                              22 1,736.9 240.8 159.3 17.0 142.3 103.7 19.1 19.1 −
                              29 1,799.6 240.8 158.0 17.0 141.0 103.0 18.1 18.1 −
         June                 5 1,747.8 240.8 156.6 17.0 139.6 99.6 18.8 18.8 −
                              12 1,726.6 240.7 162.3 17.0 145.3 90.9 18.4 18.4 −
                              19 1,719.7 240.7 161.7 17.0 144.7 74.5 17.5 17.5 −
                              26 1,997.3 240.6 159.7 17.2 142.5 75.1 17.8 17.8 −
2009 July                 3 3 1,911.6 3 232.1 3 158.9 16.8 3 142.0 3 66.5 18.3 18.3 −
                              10 1,888.9 232.1 160.4 16.8 143.6 69.0 19.5 19.5 −
                              17 1,875.7 232.1 159.6 16.8 142.8 62.9 20.6 20.6 −
                              24 1,867.8 232.1 159.6 16.8 142.8 62.6 19.9 19.9 −
                              31 1,854.1 232.1 159.6 17.1 142.5 61.2 18.7 18.7 −
         Aug                  7 1,835.9 232.1 158.0 17.0 141.0 60.8 17.5 17.5 −
                              14 1,801.8 232.1 158.4 17.1 141.3 61.3 17.9 17.9 −
                              21 1,798.4 232.1 158.4 17.1 141.3 56.9 17.2 17.2 −
                              28 1,821.4 232.1 197.2 57.9 139.3 59.3 17.4 17.4 −
         Sep                  4 1,819.5 232.1 196.3 58.0 138.2 58.9 17.0 17.0 −
                              11 1,802.5 232.0 198.1 63.3 134.8 58.2 16.3 16.3 −
                              18 1,793.0 232.0 196.7 63.3 133.4 59.1 15.6 15.6 −
                              25 1,790.2 231.9 196.3 63.6 132.7 58.1 15.0 15.0 −
         Oct                  2 3 1,844.6 3 238.2 3 194.4 3 62.9 3 131.5 3 52.3 15.1 15.1 −
                                9 1,802.7 238.2 193.7 62.9 130.8 48.9 15.4 15.4 −
                              16 1,801.4 238.2 194.3 62.9 131.5 47.7 15.0 15.0 −
                              23 1,786.1 238.2 195.0 63.1 131.9 44.1 15.3 15.3 −
                              30 1,779.0 238.2 194.7 63.2 131.5 43.0 16.4 16.4 −
         Nov                  6 1,773.7 238.1 193.0 61.8 131.2 42.6 16.5 16.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2007          Dec 3 483.7 3 62.4 3 30.1 2.4 3 27.7 7.1 0.3 0.3 −
2008          Jan 415.5 62.4 30.4 2.4 28.0 6.9 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 432.2 62.4 30.8 2.4 28.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 453.4 3 65.1 3 30.0 2.3 3 27.6 4.5 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 439.6 65.1 31.1 2.3 28.7 8.1 0.3 0.3 −
         May 439.2 65.1 30.2 2.5 27.6 14.5 0.3 0.3 −
         June 447.2 64.9 3 30.3 2.5 3 27.8 12.2 0.3 0.3 −
         July 435.9 64.9 29.1 2.5 26.6 9.4 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 449.0 64.9 29.1 2.5 26.7 10.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 519.7 3 68.8 3 31.1 2.6 3 28.5 3 39.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 591.6 68.8 34.5 2.6 31.9 50.5 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 577.1 68.8 34.8 3.3 31.5 61.1 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 612.9 3 68.2 3 31.0 3.3 3 27.7 63.3 0.3 0.3 −
2009          Jan 560.5 68.2 28.7 3.3 25.5 46.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 547.5 68.2 29.0 3.3 25.7 45.3 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 539.7 3 75.7 3 32.1 3.5 3 28.6 3 50.7 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 540.5 75.7 32.7 3.5 29.2 42.0 0.3 0.3 −
         May 555.9 75.7 32.3 4.7 27.6 37.5 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 628.3 3 73.0 31.7 4.5 27.2 3 30.8 0.3 0.3 −
         July 572.3 73.0 31.8 4.7 27.1 25.3 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 571.2 73.0 41.6 15.1 26.5 24.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 577.7 3 74.9 3 41.9 16.3 3 25.6 3 21.6 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 557.2 74.9 42.5 16.6 25.9 16.9 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other
 claims on
 euro-area
 credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/
refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  1 
Eurosystem 2
 
696.8 244.1 452.2 − − 0.5 0.0 29.1 286.2 37.4 259.7 2009 Mar                  6
680.8 227.7 452.8 − − 0.3 0.0 28.8 288.2 37.4 256.9                               13
680.1 226.1 452.8 − − 1.2 0.1 29.5 289.5 37.4 253.0                               20
661.9 230.0 430.7 − − 1.1 0.0 32.0 290.6 37.4 253.4                               27
669.6 238.1 430.7 − − 0.8 0.0 33.1 3 291.9 37.4 3 235.6          Apr                  3
667.9 237.6 428.5 − − 1.8 0.0 33.6 293.9 37.4 235.2                                 9
681.7 249.4 432.2 − − 0.1 0.0 32.0 292.8 37.4 238.7                               17
676.4 244.1 432.2 − − 0.1 0.0 31.4 294.0 37.4 240.3                               24
655.0 233.2 419.1 − − 2.8 0.0 27.9 294.1 36.8 241.6          May                  1
653.4 234.2 419.1 − − 0.0 0.0 26.5 292.4 36.8 241.5                                 8
627.3 229.6 397.6 − − 0.1 0.1 24.9 292.8 36.8 240.5                               15
619.1 221.3 397.6 − − 0.1 0.1 25.4 294.7 36.8 238.1                               22
680.6 276.8 403.5 − − 0.2 0.0 25.9 296.6 36.8 239.8                               29
632.9 227.6 403.6 − − 1.7 0.0 24.1 298.2 36.8 240.2          June                  5
611.0 302.1 308.7 − − 0.2 − 23.9 300.6 36.8 242.0                               12
618.9 309.6 308.7 − − 0.5 0.0 24.0 301.0 36.8 244.7                               19
896.8 167.9 728.6 − − 0.3 0.0 24.5 301.6 36.8 244.4                               26
834.6 105.9 728.6 − − 0.1 0.1 23.1 302.2 32.3 3 239.7 2009 July                  3
808.0 106.4 701.5 − − 0.1 0.0 23.0 301.7 36.2 239.0                               10
801.9 100.3 701.5 − − 0.1 0.0 22.8 301.2 36.2 238.4                               17
789.8 88.3 701.5 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 305.6 36.2 237.8                               24
775.7 94.8 680.8 − − 0.2 0.0 24.3 306.6 36.2 239.5                               31
761.6 80.8 680.7 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 308.8 36.2 236.7          Aug                  7
727.5 73.6 653.6 − − 0.2 0.0 22.6 311.5 36.2 234.2                               14
729.8 76.1 653.6 − − 0.1 0.0 23.0 312.6 36.2 232.2                               21
712.1 77.5 634.4 − − 0.1 0.0 22.1 313.1 36.2 231.8                               28
706.7 72.1 634.4 − − 0.1 0.1 23.3 315.4 36.2 233.6          Sep                  4
689.3 93.3 595.9 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 316.6 36.2 231.7                               11
683.8 87.8 595.9 − − 0.1 0.0 24.7 317.5 36.2 227.4                               18
681.0 85.0 595.9 − − 0.1 0.0 26.4 319.1 36.2 226.2                               25
734.3 66.8 667.4 − − 0.1 0.0 24.7 3 320.8 36.2 3 228.6          Oct                  2
694.6 62.6 631.9 − − 0.1 0.0 24.0 322.9 36.2 228.9                                 9
691.4 62.3 629.0 − − 0.1 0.0 22.2 324.2 36.2 232.3                               16
679.6 50.5 629.0 − − 0.1 0.0 21.1 325.4 36.2 231.2                               23
672.3 49.4 622.7 − − 0.1 0.1 19.9 323.5 36.2 234.8                               30
669.9 46.9 622.7 − − 0.1 0.1 20.2 324.1 36.2 233.2          Nov                  6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
268.0 133.1 134.8 − − 0.1 − 13.1 − 4.4 3 98.4 2007          Dec 
172.7 47.0 125.7 − − 0.0 − 17.3 − 4.4 120.9 2008          Jan 
178.7 59.0 119.7 − − − − 18.5 − 4.4 137.1          Feb 
213.1 98.4 103.5 11.2 − 0.0 − 20.6 − 4.4 3 115.4          Mar 
192.5 80.1 112.4 − − 0.0 − 19.9 − 4.4 118.1          Apr 
184.5 71.2 113.2 − − 0.1 − 19.9 − 4.4 120.2          May
192.4 86.5 105.9 − − 0.0 − 18.4 − 4.4 124.3          June
184.5 75.5 109.0 − − 0.0 − 20.3 − 4.4 122.9          July
180.4 76.6 103.8 − − 0.0 − 22.9 − 4.4 136.8          Aug 
223.5 69.2 153.5 − − 0.8 − 25.2 − 4.4 3 127.2          Sep 
297.1 107.2 186.4 − − 3.5 − 38.5 − 4.4 97.4          Oct 
263.3 101.4 159.7 − − 2.2 − 23.5 − 4.4 120.9          Nov 
277.7 75.3 201.6 − − 0.8 − 22.0 − 4.4 3 146.0          Dec 
245.4 74.4 169.2 − − 1.8 − 3.9 − 4.4 162.9 2009          Jan 
219.4 75.4 143.4 − − 0.6 − 4.4 − 4.4 176.4          Feb 
186.7 71.6 114.6 − − 0.6 − 5.0 − 4.4 3 184.6          Mar 
194.6 83.6 110.6 − − 0.4 − 6.0 − 4.4 184.8          Apr 
225.0 121.5 103.4 − − 0.2 − 5.9 2.1 4.4 172.6          May
273.5 71.6 201.6 − − 0.3 − 6.5 4.4 4.4 3 203.8          June
231.8 48.8 182.9 − − 0.1 − 4.5 6.5 4.4 194.6          July
220.9 45.9 175.0 − − 0.1 − 6.0 8.5 4.4 192.4          Aug 
205.6 33.0 168.8 − − 3.8 − 6.8 10.6 4.4 211.6          Sep 
212.9 35.1 177.7 − − 0.1 − 6.8 11.6 4.4 186.8          Oct 
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month  1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2009 Mar                  6 1,840.8 746.0 315.6 179.4 135.6 − − 0.6 0.3 − 130.4 122.2 8.2
                              13 1,829.4 746.3 306.6 244.2 61.8 − − 0.6 0.3 − 132.7 124.4 8.3
                              20 1,822.5 745.8 293.0 228.6 63.9 − − 0.5 0.3 − 145.2 136.9 8.4
                              27 1,803.1 745.8 263.8 218.5 45.1 − − 0.2 0.2 − 155.6 147.4 8.2
         Apr                  3 5 1,836.4 752.8 268.4 189.6 78.5 − − 0.2 0.2 − 151.3 143.1 8.2
                                9 1,827.8 762.1 253.9 232.1 21.5 − − 0.2 0.3 − 155.8 147.2 8.6
                              17 1,840.1 756.6 278.4 256.3 21.9 − − 0.2 0.3 − 149.8 141.3 8.5
                              24 1,824.0 752.7 280.4 249.1 31.1 − − 0.2 0.4 − 152.3 143.9 8.4
         May                 1 1,799.2 759.2 241.7 173.9 67.8 − − 0.0 0.4 − 164.9 156.7 8.2
                                8 1,795.1 759.5 264.1 188.8 75.3 − − 0.0 0.4 − 139.1 130.7 8.4
                              15 1,764.2 758.0 239.4 217.8 21.6 − − 0.0 0.3 − 142.9 134.7 8.2
                              22 1,736.9 758.2 222.3 206.7 15.6 − − 0.0 0.2 − 149.5 141.1 8.3
                              29 1,799.6 761.4 271.0 247.9 23.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 159.2 151.2 8.1
         June                 5 1,747.8 763.5 235.8 206.9 28.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 145.0 136.7 8.3
                              12 1,726.6 762.8 224.9 213.5 11.3 − − 0.1 0.2 − 152.9 144.9 8.0
                              19 1,719.7 760.8 226.3 213.5 12.7 − − 0.0 0.2 − 159.8 150.3 9.5
                              26 1,997.3 762.1 504.5 268.2 236.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 161.3 153.4 7.9
2009 July                 3 5 1,911.6 768.7 484.3 168.3 316.0 − − 0.0 0.3 − 116.8 109.1 7.8
                              10 1,888.9 770.3 427.4 271.8 155.5 − − 0.0 0.3 − 132.6 124.7 7.9
                              17 1,875.7 770.4 419.4 229.5 189.9 − − 0.0 0.3 − 142.8 132.4 10.3
                              24 1,867.8 768.4 389.8 194.5 195.3 − − 0.0 0.3 − 167.2 157.2 10.1
                              31 1,854.1 772.8 394.8 186.1 208.7 − − 0.0 0.3 − 151.7 141.6 10.1
         Aug                  7 1,835.9 775.0 404.1 182.1 222.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 124.6 114.5 10.2
                              14 1,801.8 772.8 375.0 264.2 110.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 123.4 113.3 10.0
                              21 1,798.4 768.3 381.3 221.1 160.2 − − 0.0 0.2 − 125.2 114.5 10.7
                              28 1,821.4 767.2 345.5 202.9 142.6 − − 0.0 0.2 − 145.3 134.6 10.7
         Sep                  4 1,819.5 770.0 339.7 199.6 140.1 − − 0.0 0.2 − 145.3 134.6 10.7
                              11 1,802.5 769.2 331.9 243.0 88.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 138.4 127.7 10.7
                              18 1,793.0 767.5 325.2 236.2 89.0 − − 0.0 0.2 − 145.7 134.4 11.4
                              25 1,790.2 766.1 306.5 189.8 116.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 160.7 145.0 15.7
         Oct                  2 5 1,844.6 770.9 368.9 218.3 150.6 − − 0.0 0.2 − 151.8 140.8 10.9
                                9 1,802.7 772.3 321.3 176.5 144.8 − − 0.0 0.2 − 152.3 138.4 13.9
                              16 1,801.4 770.9 322.0 254.0 68.0 − − 0.0 0.3 − 158.3 144.4 13.9
                              23 1,786.1 768.7 300.3 219.6 80.7 − − 0.0 0.4 − 167.4 153.1 14.2
                              30 1,779.0 771.6 277.3 189.5 87.8 − − 0.0 0.4 − 182.3 173.9 8.3
         Nov                  6 1,773.7 773.8 309.8 180.9 128.9 − − 0.0 0.5 − 146.0 137.5 8.4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2007          Dec 5 483.7 183.8 109.5 64.0 4.9 40.6 − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
2008          Jan 415.5 176.2 42.6 42.4 0.2 − − − − − 0.8 0.0 0.8
         Feb 432.2 177.1 54.3 54.2 0.2 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Mar 5 453.4 179.0 70.1 69.3 0.8 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 439.6 181.4 53.4 53.3 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.0 0.7
         May 439.2 182.0 50.5 50.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         June 447.2 183.8 56.0 55.1 0.9 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         July 435.9 186.0 41.2 40.9 0.4 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
         Aug 449.0 185.1 50.6 50.5 0.1 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.3
         Sep 5 519.7 185.3 111.5 65.8 45.7 − − − − − 0.7 0.1 0.6
         Oct 591.6 197.1 146.4 48.4 98.0 − − − − − 7.9 0.2 7.7
         Nov 577.1 198.1 138.3 52.5 85.7 − − − − − 2.9 0.1 2.8
         Dec 5 612.9 206.6 166.9 100.7 66.3 − − − − − 1.1 0.2 0.9
2009          Jan 560.5 184.7 127.2 49.3 77.8 − − − − − 2.6 2.2 0.5
         Feb 547.5 185.2 106.6 54.2 52.4 − − − − − 12.5 11.9 0.6
         Mar 5 539.7 186.5 100.0 53.1 46.9 − − − − − 15.7 15.4 0.3
         Apr 540.5 189.5 80.0 48.3 31.7 − − − − − 30.8 30.2 0.6
         May 555.9 190.0 87.2 71.1 16.1 − − − − − 36.8 36.2 0.5
         June 5 628.3 190.6 176.7 75.1 101.5 − − − − − 23.7 23.4 0.4
         July 572.3 192.9 120.7 44.5 76.2 − − − − − 23.9 23.5 0.4
         Aug 571.2 191.6 107.4 46.2 61.2 − − − − − 24.0 23.5 0.4
         Sep 5 577.7 191.5 109.7 76.1 33.6 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
         Oct 557.2 192.6 86.5 50.7 35.9 − − − − − 24.0 23.6 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2According to the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro bank-
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states notes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation
(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-
ter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     On
to non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reporting
area residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/
denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
204.7 − 0.2 10.1 10.1 − 5.4 180.1 − 176.6 71.7 2009 Mar                  6
211.5 0.2 10.3 10.3 − 5.4 167.5 − 176.6 72.0                               13
208.0 2.6 8.9 8.9 − 5.4 164.6 − 176.6 72.0                               20
207.2 2.6 8.5 8.5 − 5.4 165.1 − 176.6 72.2                               27
209.2 5 3.1 5 10.4 5 10.4 − 5.6 5 159.9 − 5 203.0 72.6          Apr                  3
200.0 2.9 11.3 11.3 − 5.6 160.0 − 203.0 73.1                                 9
197.4 1.4 12.2 12.2 − 5.6 162.7 − 203.0 72.9                               17
184.2 1.7 10.6 10.6 − 5.6 160.4 − 203.0 72.8                               24
179.9 2.9 9.1 9.1 − 5.6 159.8 − 203.0 72.8          May                  1
178.0 1.5 11.4 11.4 − 5.6 159.6 − 203.0 72.8                                 8
171.0 2.7 10.7 10.7 − 5.6 157.8 − 203.0 72.8                               15
154.7 2.0 11.9 11.9 − 5.6 156.8 − 203.0 72.8                               22
156.4 1.8 11.3 11.3 − 5.6 156.7 − 203.0 73.0                               29
152.2 5.1 8.5 8.5 − 5.6 156.0 − 203.0 73.0          June                  5
131.8 3.2 11.2 11.2 − 5.6 158.1 − 203.0 73.0                               12
118.7 3.5 10.2 10.2 − 5.6 158.8 − 203.0 73.0                               19
117.9 5.4 7.3 7.3 − 5.6 157.2 − 203.0 73.0                               26
107.8 5.3 8.5 8.5 − 5.4 5 153.7 − 5 187.8 73.0 2009 July                  3
123.2 4.8 10.3 10.3 − 5.4 153.8 − 187.8 73.0                               10
109.5 3.7 11.9 11.9 − 5.4 151.6 − 187.8 73.0                               17
107.0 4.4 12.4 12.4 − 5.4 152.1 − 187.8 73.0                               24
98.3 3.2 14.0 14.0 − 5.4 152.8 − 187.8 73.0                               31
98.3 3.1 12.2 12.2 − 5.4 152.0 − 187.8 73.0          Aug                  7
98.8 3.6 12.0 12.0 − 5.4 149.7 − 187.8 73.0                               14
91.3 3.0 12.8 12.8 − 5.4 150.0 − 187.8 73.0                               21
93.4 3.4 12.2 12.2 − 46.3 147.1 − 187.8 73.0                               28
94.1 1.8 12.7 12.7 − 46.3 148.7 − 187.8 73.0          Sep                  4
89.3 2.1 12.1 12.1 − 51.5 147.0 − 187.8 73.0                               11
83.4 3.2 11.0 11.0 − 51.5 144.6 − 187.8 73.0                               18
85.7 3.0 10.7 10.7 − 51.5 145.0 − 187.8 73.0                               25
76.3 3.9 8.8 8.8 − 5 50.9 5 147.6 − 5 192.3 73.0          Oct                  2
78.9 4.6 8.1 8.1 − 50.9 149.0 − 192.3 73.0                                 9
70.9 4.0 9.3 9.3 − 50.9 149.7 − 192.3 73.0                               16
69.7 2.5 11.0 11.0 − 50.9 150.1 − 192.3 73.0                               23
65.8 4.5 8.1 8.1 − 50.9 152.8 − 192.3 73.0                               30
61.8 3.3 9.5 9.5 − 50.9 152.9 − 192.3 73.0          Nov                  6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
14.0 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.3 5 13.1 99.5 5 55.0 5.0 2007          Dec 
18.4 0.0 2.6 2.6 − 1.3 13.3 100.2 55.0 5.0 2008          Jan 
19.4 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 14.1 102.4 55.0 5.0          Feb 
21.7 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.3 10.7 103.7 5 58.1 5.0          Mar 
21.2 0.0 4.3 4.3 − 1.3 10.2 104.1 58.1 5.0          Apr 
21.2 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.3 11.3 106.3 58.1 5.0          May
19.6 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.3 12.5 107.2 5 57.4 5.0          June
22.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 12.2 107.4 57.4 5.0          July
24.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.3 13.1 109.8 57.4 5.0          Aug 
24.7 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 1.3 5 15.1 111.8 5 62.2 5.0          Sep 
21.7 11.9 3.8 3.8 − 1.3 14.8 119.3 62.2 5.0          Oct 
16.1 13.5 3.0 3.0 − 1.3 15.9 120.6 62.2 5.0          Nov 
9.2 18.4 2.5 2.5 − 1.3 16.9 121.8 5 63.1 5.0          Dec 
6.9 13.4 0.1 0.1 − 1.3 17.0 139.2 63.1 5.0 2009          Jan 
7.5 7.6 0.2 0.2 − 1.3 17.7 140.7 63.1 5.0          Feb 
7 . 5 0 . 0−−− 1 . 4 5 11.6 140.4 5 71.5 5.0          Mar 
8.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 1.4 12.1 141.8 71.5 5.0          Apr 
8.7 0.1 0.5 0.5 − 1.4 12.6 142.2 71.5 5.0          May
9.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 1.3 5 12.4 141.9 5 66.6 5.0          June
6.7 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 1.3 12.2 141.8 66.6 5.0          July
8.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 11.9 12.4 143.4 66.6 5.0          Aug 
8.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.0 5 13.2 144.9 5 67.6 5.0          Sep 
8.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.0 12.9 146.5 67.6 5.0          Oct 
 
bank-note issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro banknotes
circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabil ity
shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which related to banknote issue“. — 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including
corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference DM banknotes still in circulation. — 4Source: ECB. — 5Changes are due
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according to mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004 6,617.4 15.1 2,174.3 1,750.2 1,122.9 627.3 424.2 306.3 117.9 3,358.7 3,083.4 2,479.7 2,223.8
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2007          Dec 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008          Jan 7,574.1 14.1 2,506.6 1,798.8 1,240.4 558.5 707.8 454.1 253.7 3,530.9 3,084.8 2,585.0 2,297.3
         Feb 7,596.6 13.6 2,512.7 1,806.7 1,250.0 556.7 706.0 450.6 255.5 3,521.3 3,079.8 2,577.1 2,306.5
         Mar 7,641.7 14.2 2,516.2 1,818.8 1,262.4 556.4 697.4 442.9 254.5 3,561.3 3,095.9 2,593.5 2,316.4
         Apr 7,725.9 13.9 2,520.4 1,824.8 1,264.1 560.7 695.6 445.9 249.7 3,609.6 3,145.8 2,632.0 2,323.2
         May 7,729.1 14.1 2,540.8 1,844.9 1,274.1 570.9 695.8 436.6 259.3 3,596.2 3,130.8 2,620.8 2,326.7
         June 7,688.7 13.8 2,556.9 1,855.1 1,281.7 573.3 701.8 436.9 265.0 3,576.9 3,098.7 2,604.6 2,333.7
         July 7,675.4 14.2 2,532.5 1,833.9 1,263.1 570.8 698.6 430.6 268.1 3,587.8 3,110.1 2,616.3 2,341.6
         Aug 7,744.7 14.2 2,556.0 1,860.3 1,284.2 576.2 695.7 427.4 268.3 3,619.5 3,137.0 2,645.3 2,344.2
         Sep 7,896.2 13.7 2,614.7 1,918.3 1,351.8 566.6 696.3 431.1 265.2 3,623.3 3,134.6 2,657.2 2,354.8
         Oct 8,030.2 15.4 2,670.4 1,962.1 1,399.6 562.5 708.3 453.2 255.1 3,627.7 3,135.2 2,653.3 2,357.7
         Nov 7,985.4 15.1 2,705.1 1,995.0 1,408.3 586.8 710.1 462.5 247.6 3,633.0 3,134.5 2,657.2 2,362.4
         Dec 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009          Jan 7,906.4 14.0 2,676.9 1,975.0 1,382.5 592.5 701.9 465.2 236.7 3,677.6 3,189.7 2,706.2 2,375.7
         Feb 7,846.4 13.9 2,649.2 1,950.8 1,357.1 593.7 698.4 466.0 232.4 3,667.8 3,183.1 2,702.3 2,368.3
         Mar 7,777.1 13.9 2,611.1 1,923.6 1,312.9 610.7 687.4 458.5 228.9 3,669.6 3,193.6 2,716.4 2,383.4
         Apr 7,802.2 15.3 2,584.9 1,902.2 1,295.0 607.1 682.7 454.9 227.8 3,690.1 3,216.1 2,730.5 2,385.5
         May 7,685.1 15.8 2,537.1 1,869.2 1,263.7 605.5 667.9 444.2 223.7 3,680.5 3,198.6 2,714.9 2,384.7
         June 7,710.6 15.0 2,601.5 1,943.5 1,333.1 610.4 658.0 436.9 221.2 3,694.3 3,211.7 2,725.6 2,388.3
         July 7,619.1 14.0 2,558.6 1,890.7 1,277.0 613.7 667.8 448.3 219.5 3,685.1 3,205.7 2,706.7 2,372.4
         Aug 7,590.2 14.0 2,563.6 1,886.5 1,270.3 616.2 677.2 458.7 218.4 3,655.8 3,183.7 2,691.4 2,361.6
         Sep 7,519.3 13.9 2,512.6 1,862.7 1,253.1 609.6 649.9 432.3 217.6 3,675.2 3,199.7 2,705.4 2,375.4
 Changes 1
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.4
2003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.4
2004 207.5 − 2.1 68.9 22.5 9.5 13.1 46.3 15.8 30.5 44.1 17.5 − 0.4 − 1.2
2005 197.2 0.1 101.8 13.2 25.7 − 12.5 88.6 50.5 38.1 59.7 14.2 37.2 15.5
2006 349.0 1.1 76.2 − 2.4 25.2 − 27.6 78.6 17.3 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 509.7 1.5 210.1 132.5 153.3 − 20.8 77.6 41.6 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.6 53.1
2008 322.2 − 0.1 187.8 167.0 130.1 36.9 20.8 35.1 − 14.4 140.5 102.8 131.1 65.7
2008          Jan − 31.3 − 3.7 − 33.0 − 63.9 − 65.9 2.0 30.9 31.6 − 0.7 35.9 26.2 32.1 10.5
         Feb 33.0 − 0.5 6.4 8.0 9.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 3.5 1.9 − 7.9 − 4.1 − 6.9 10.1
         Mar 66.1 0.6 3.9 12.3 12.5 − 0.1 − 8.4 − 7.7 − 0.7 44.0 18.4 18.3 11.7
         Apr 81.6 − 0.3 5.4 8.0 2.8 5.2 − 2.6 2.2 − 4.8 49.9 50.6 39.1 7.3
         May 5.2 0.2 22.9 20.5 10.2 10.2 2.5 − 7.1 9.6 − 12.8 − 14.3 − 10.6 4.0
         June − 25.4 − 0.4 23.5 14.5 7.6 6.8 9.0 3.3 5.8 − 16.9 − 30.6 − 14.8 7.8
         July − 1.1 0.4 − 8.5 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 6.3 3.2 10.1 11.4 11.7 7.8
         Aug 52.5 − 0.0 29.2 32.1 27.0 5.1 − 2.9 − 3.2 0.2 25.7 24.2 26.4 0.4
         Sep 132.4 − 0.5 58.4 57.9 67.6 − 9.7 0.5 3.7 − 3.2 1.3 − 3.5 10.7 9.2
         Oct 59.4 1.7 54.7 43.3 47.9 − 4.6 11.5 22.1 − 10.6 − 9.9 − 6.9 − 11.0 − 4.6
         Nov − 10.3 − 0.4 44.8 42.6 18.3 24.3 2.2 9.6 − 7.4 7.4 0.9 5.6 6.4
         Dec − 39.8 2.7 − 20.0 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 17.2 − 9.6 − 7.6 13.7 30.6 30.4 − 4.8
2009          Jan − 33.5 − 3.8 − 5.1 − 15.4 − 21.8 6.4 10.3 12.1 − 1.8 36.2 27.8 20.9 16.5
         Feb − 74.5 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 24.2 − 25.4 1.2 − 2.9 0.8 − 3.7 − 9.0 − 5.1 − 2.5 − 6.7
         Mar − 57.8 0.1 − 37.4 − 26.9 − 44.1 17.2 − 10.5 − 7.3 − 3.2 9.2 13.9 17.4 18.4
         Apr 20.6 1.4 − 26.7 − 21.5 − 17.9 − 3.6 − 5.2 − 3.7 − 1.6 20.1 22.4 13.9 2.2
         May − 79.4 0.5 − 38.0 − 23.4 − 27.9 4.6 − 14.6 − 10.5 − 4.1 − 3.2 − 13.7 − 11.9 2.1
         June 27.3 − 0.8 64.3 74.4 69.4 4.9 − 10.1 − 7.2 − 2.9 15.9 14.9 12.4 4.9
         July − 93.3 − 1.1 − 42.9 − 52.7 − 56.1 3.3 9.8 11.4 − 1.6 − 8.5 − 5.2 − 18.1 − 15.1
         Aug − 9.6 0.0 6.0 − 3.5 − 6.0 2.5 9.5 10.6 − 1.1 − 27.5 − 20.9 − 14.3 − 9.8
         Sep − 71.9 − 0.1 − 51.7 − 24.5 − 17.9 − 6.6 − 27.2 − 26.4 − 0.7 20.0 16.6 14.6 14.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001
265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 806.4 645.6 163.6 2003
255.9 603.8 423.0 180.8 275.3 140.6 61.9 134.7 25.7 109.0 897.8 730.4 171.4 2004
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007          Dec 
287.6 499.9 357.1 142.8 446.1 309.7 141.2 136.4 25.9 110.5 1,307.3 1,006.0 215.2 2008          Jan 
270.6 502.7 353.4 149.3 441.5 302.8 135.7 138.7 26.1 112.7 1,326.0 1,022.5 223.1          Feb 
277.1 502.5 350.9 151.5 465.4 326.3 140.3 139.1 26.2 112.9 1,327.0 1,035.8 223.0          Mar 
308.7 513.8 355.9 158.0 463.8 326.7 143.2 137.1 26.0 111.1 1,347.9 1,061.0 234.1          Apr 
294.2 509.9 350.7 159.3 465.4 330.3 146.5 135.1 26.0 109.1 1,342.9 1,054.7 235.2          May
270.9 494.1 349.4 144.7 478.3 340.1 158.3 138.1 26.2 111.9 1,303.5 1,013.6 237.6          June
274.7 493.8 349.6 144.2 477.7 343.1 161.9 134.6 26.0 108.7 1,299.8 1,011.4 241.2          July
301.1 491.7 349.0 142.8 482.4 349.9 167.7 132.6 26.4 106.2 1,316.1 1,027.0 239.0          Aug 
302.4 477.5 344.8 132.7 488.7 358.9 175.9 129.8 28.0 101.8 1,401.2 1,106.2 243.3          Sep 
295.6 481.9 346.7 135.2 492.5 363.1 182.5 129.3 28.3 101.1 1,455.9 1,166.6 260.8          Oct 
294.8 477.2 344.2 133.0 498.5 369.2 186.6 129.4 28.6 100.8 1,357.6 1,078.6 274.7          Nov 
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7          Dec 
330.5 483.5 344.3 139.2 487.9 359.7 182.0 128.3 26.1 102.1 1,256.5 991.4 281.4 2009          Jan 
334.1 480.8 342.4 138.3 484.7 356.1 175.8 128.5 25.9 102.7 1,233.9 974.1 281.6          Feb 
333.0 477.1 338.1 139.0 476.0 348.8 172.5 127.2 25.5 101.7 1,169.9 916.9 312.7          Mar 
345.0 485.6 340.5 145.1 474.1 348.6 171.9 125.5 24.8 100.7 1,213.3 961.0 298.7          Apr 
330.1 483.7 336.6 147.0 481.9 353.8 172.1 128.1 24.4 103.7 1,184.7 933.9 267.1          May
337.3 486.1 336.5 149.7 482.5 357.3 178.2 125.2 22.7 102.5 1,165.0 912.3 234.8          June
334.3 499.0 348.5 150.5 479.4 352.3 173.5 127.1 23.6 103.5 1,132.8 882.1 228.8          July
329.8 492.4 342.9 149.5 472.1 347.1 170.4 124.9 23.7 101.2 1,107.4 856.8 249.5          Aug 
330.0 494.3 340.0 154.3 475.4 349.0 172.6 126.4 23.6 102.8 1,069.0 822.5 248.7          Sep 
Changes 1
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 116.2 98.5 − 41.5 2003
0.9 17.8 − 17.0 34.9 26.6 8.2 3.1 18.4 0.0 18.4 111.4 100.5 − 14.7 2004
21.7 − 23.0 − 14.3 − 8.6 45.5 27.4 2.1 18.2 4.6 13.5 57.7 31.6 − 22.2 2005
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.9 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.7 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.9 136.8 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.3 − 16.8 − 11.5 37.7 42.3 40.4 − 4.6 1.6 − 6.1 − 35.6 − 3.7 29.7 2008
21.6 − 5.8 − 3.6 − 2.2 9.7 4.4 9.9 5.3 − 0.1 5.4 − 12.6 − 10.3 − 17.9 2008          Jan 
− 17.0 2.8 − 3.7 6.5 − 3.8 − 6.2 − 5.0 2.4 0.2 2.2 28.6 24.6 6.4          Feb 
6.7 0.1 − 2.4 2.5 25.6 25.2 5.4 0.4 0.2 0.2 21.5 30.8 − 3.9          Mar 
31.8 11.5 4.7 6.8 − 0.7 1.3 3.8 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.8 16.5 20.9 10.2          Apr 
− 14.6 − 3.8 − 5.2 1.4 1.5 3.5 3.2 − 2.0 0.0 − 2.0 − 5.6 − 6.8 0.4          May
− 22.6 − 15.8 − 1.3 − 14.6 13.7 10.7 12.3 3.0 0.2 2.8 − 33.2 − 34.6 1.6          June
3.9 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 2.2 3.4 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 − 6.0 − 4.1 2.8          July
26.0 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 1.5 3.9 4.0 − 2.3 0.3 − 2.6 − 4.4 − 3.1 1.9          Aug 
1.6 − 14.2 − 4.1 − 10.1 4.8 7.8 7.2 − 3.1 1.6 − 4.7 71.0 66.2 2.1          Sep 
− 6.4 4.0 1.8 2.3 − 2.9 − 1.9 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 7.4 15.8          Oct 
− 0.8 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 2.2 6.5 6.4 4.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 75.4 − 65.3 13.2          Nov 
35.2 0.2 − 0.2 0.3 − 16.9 − 15.0 − 10.7 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 33.1 − 29.2 − 3.1          Dec 
4.4 7.0 1.3 5.6 8.3 8.8 6.1 − 0.5 − 1.7 1.2 − 51.7 − 47.8 − 9.1 2009          Jan 
4.2 − 2.7 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 3.9 − 4.1 − 6.7 0.3 − 0.3 0.5 − 24.6 − 20.6 − 13.7          Feb 
− 1.0 − 3.5 − 4.2 0.7 − 4.7 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 38.9 − 35.7 9.3          Mar 
11.7 8.5 2.4 6.1 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 40.3 41.5 − 14.5          Apr 
− 14.0 − 1.8 − 3.8 2.0 10.5 7.8 2.4 2.8 − 0.5 3.2 − 6.2 − 6.7 − 32.6          May
7.5 2.5 − 0.2 2.6 1.0 3.7 6.3 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 17.0 − 19.5 − 35.0          June
− 3.0 12.9 12.0 0.9 − 3.3 − 5.2 − 4.6 1.9 0.9 1.0 − 31.7 − 29.5 − 9.1          July
− 4.4 − 6.7 − 5.6 − 1.0 − 6.6 − 4.5 − 2.6 − 2.1 0.1 − 2.2 − 9.5 − 9.7 21.5          Aug 
0.5 2.0 − 2.9 4.8 3.3 1.9 2.3 1.5 − 0.1 1.5 − 38.3 − 34.1 − 1.9          Sep 
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims.
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004 6,617.4 1,528.4 1,270.8 257.6 2,264.2 2,148.5 646.2 898.9 239.9 603.5 515.5 71.9 8.8
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2007          Dec 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008          Jan 7,574.1 1,734.4 1,393.6 340.7 2,628.1 2,514.1 770.0 1,193.6 476.6 550.5 441.2 74.1 22.1
         Feb 7,596.6 1,736.2 1,395.6 340.6 2,638.4 2,525.9 768.8 1,209.6 491.5 547.6 439.2 73.7 19.1
         Mar 7,641.7 1,759.3 1,432.8 326.5 2,644.7 2,524.5 769.7 1,211.0 492.4 543.8 437.5 79.3 26.3
         Apr 7,725.9 1,790.8 1,439.8 351.1 2,649.4 2,535.5 758.9 1,236.8 517.2 539.8 434.8 76.4 23.7
         May 7,729.1 1,785.2 1,443.6 341.6 2,670.6 2,550.5 761.5 1,252.7 533.4 536.3 432.8 80.4 26.1
         June 7,688.7 1,764.2 1,448.9 315.3 2,670.8 2,551.5 768.8 1,249.3 530.1 533.4 430.7 79.8 27.1
         July 7,675.4 1,749.7 1,439.1 310.6 2,675.9 2,557.0 746.2 1,283.0 563.6 527.9 425.6 81.7 27.3
         Aug 7,744.7 1,753.3 1,446.9 306.3 2,688.1 2,569.2 748.7 1,296.8 577.6 523.6 422.5 81.6 27.1
         Sep 7,896.2 1,832.7 1,529.1 303.5 2,698.0 2,573.6 758.0 1,296.4 578.4 519.2 419.2 86.4 34.4
         Oct 8,030.2 1,913.9 1,642.3 271.6 2,734.7 2,620.5 786.9 1,312.8 598.0 520.8 417.8 77.6 28.8
         Nov 7,985.4 1,862.4 1,595.7 266.7 2,757.2 2,645.5 804.3 1,317.8 603.6 523.4 416.7 75.0 25.6
         Dec 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009          Jan 7,906.4 1,794.4 1,533.3 261.1 2,817.1 2,701.2 857.7 1,304.6 557.0 539.0 428.6 80.7 33.6
         Feb 7,846.4 1,760.2 1,509.8 250.4 2,821.6 2,714.6 882.6 1,287.7 534.4 544.3 433.9 73.4 25.7
         Mar 7,777.1 1,693.9 1,456.2 237.6 2,805.6 2,699.1 879.3 1,272.1 515.8 547.8 436.6 73.2 26.8
         Apr 7,802.2 1,701.3 1,458.7 242.6 2,823.8 2,716.8 895.8 1,269.8 509.3 551.1 439.1 74.4 25.4
         May 7,685.1 1,678.3 1,445.4 232.9 2,824.1 2,711.3 898.8 1,257.5 494.8 555.0 441.5 74.2 26.0
         June 7,710.6 1,695.3 1,469.0 226.3 2,832.4 2,716.6 918.7 1,238.2 461.7 559.7 445.1 73.2 26.0
         July 7,619.1 1,641.3 1,417.8 223.4 2,816.2 2,706.5 922.3 1,218.7 442.0 565.5 449.7 73.2 24.7
         Aug 7,590.2 1,635.5 1,414.6 220.8 2,808.1 2,707.6 933.8 1,203.1 424.4 570.8 454.3 73.7 25.8
         Sep 7,519.3 1,603.4 1,381.3 222.1 2,806.8 2,706.2 953.3 1,177.9 398.2 575.1 457.4 76.2 26.5
 Changes 1
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.4
2002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.6
2003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2004 207.5 62.3 42.9 19.5 53.5 64.9 26.3 25.5 − 8.3 13.1 14.7 − 9.3 − 0.4
2005 197.2 32.8 26.9 5.9 65.0 75.5 69.4 7.3 − 6.9 − 1.2 2.9 − 8.0 0.5
2006 349.0 105.5 81.5 24.0 123.0 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.5 4.4
2007 509.7 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.2 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.7 5.6
2008 322.2 66.4 121.8 − 55.3 162.4 173.2 38.8 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2008          Jan − 31.3 − 61.6 −101.1 39.5 − 6.8 − 4.2 0.4 0.4 − 1.3 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 2.5 1.9
         Feb 33.0 3.0 2.4 0.6 10.8 12.2 − 0.9 16.1 14.9 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 3.0
         Mar 66.1 26.4 38.4 − 12.0 7.6 − 0.7 1.5 1.6 1.2 − 3.7 − 1.6 5.9 7.3
         Apr 81.6 32.6 7.9 24.8 4.7 10.6 − 11.1 25.8 24.7 − 4.1 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 2.3
         May 5.2 − 1.2 4.0 − 5.2 19.2 15.0 2.6 15.9 16.3 − 3.5 − 2.1 2.1 0.5
         June − 25.4 − 18.0 5.9 − 23.9 0.6 1.3 7.4 − 3.3 − 3.2 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.4 1.0
         July − 1.1 − 1.7 3.0 − 4.7 5.1 5.4 − 22.7 33.6 33.5 − 5.6 − 5.1 1.9 0.3
         Aug 52.5 5.4 11.4 − 6.0 10.3 11.2 1.9 13.6 13.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 0.4
         Sep 132.4 76.2 80.5 − 4.2 8.4 3.7 8.8 − 0.7 0.6 − 4.4 − 3.3 4.0 7.2
         Oct 59.4 67.6 103.9 − 36.3 32.0 44.4 27.1 15.7 18.9 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.0 − 6.2
         Nov − 10.3 − 36.2 − 29.9 − 6.3 27.7 29.9 17.5 9.8 7.8 2.6 − 1.1 − 2.3 − 3.3
         Dec − 39.8 − 26.1 − 4.6 − 21.5 42.7 44.4 6.4 26.2 − 3.5 11.8 8.1 − 1.6 − 3.0
2009          Jan − 33.5 − 42.8 − 57.3 14.5 16.7 12.4 47.1 − 38.5 − 42.1 3.8 3.8 5.8 11.2
         Feb − 74.5 − 35.2 − 24.4 − 10.8 4.6 13.2 24.8 − 16.9 − 22.7 5.3 5.3 − 7.1 − 7.8
         Mar − 57.8 − 60.9 − 49.1 − 11.8 − 15.1 − 14.8 − 2.6 − 15.8 − 18.5 3.5 2.8 0.1 1.2
         Apr 20.6 6.5 1.7 4.8 17.9 17.2 33.2 − 19.3 − 23.6 3.3 3.1 1.1 − 1.4
         May − 79.4 − 14.7 − 5.8 − 8.9 1.7 − 4.5 3.5 − 11.9 − 14.1 3.9 2.4 0.3 0.7
         June 27.3 17.2 23.7 − 6.5 8.3 5.3 19.9 − 19.3 − 33.1 4.7 3.6 − 0.8 0.3
         July − 93.3 − 54.0 − 51.1 − 2.9 − 16.1 − 10.1 3.5 − 19.4 − 19.7 5.8 4.6 0.0 − 1.3
         Aug − 9.6 − 5.1 − 2.6 − 2.4 3.6 1.3 11.7 − 15.6 − 17.6 5.3 4.5 0.6 1.1
         Sep − 71.9 − 33.1 − 34.3 1.2 − 11.5 − 11.6 19.5 − 35.4 − 26.2 4.3 3.1 2.5 0.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) −
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 2001
74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
59.8 9.8 3.3 2.7 43.8 41.4 14.8 31.5 1,554.8 116.9 577.1 329.3 317.2 2004
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.8 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 2006
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 2007
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 2007          Dec 
49.6 18.9 2.3 1.8 40.0 37.4 42.1 28.8 1,644.1 190.6 679.2 430.8 386.7 2008          Jan 
52.3 23.6 2.3 1.8 38.7 37.1 45.9 29.0 1,631.9 189.7 694.5 431.8 389.0          Feb 
50.7 23.0 2.3 1.8 40.8 37.6 46.7 27.2 1,622.3 188.1 703.1 447.5 390.9          Mar 
50.4 23.5 2.3 1.8 37.5 35.3 55.7 25.4 1,628.2 195.8 729.3 442.8 404.2          Apr 
52.0 24.6 2.3 1.8 39.7 36.7 56.0 24.6 1,629.9 201.4 716.8 444.5 401.5          May
50.5 23.4 2.3 1.8 39.4 37.8 63.9 23.8 1,641.4 217.1 679.2 442.6 402.9          June
52.0 25.5 2.3 1.7 37.2 35.2 58.1 23.5 1,644.8 222.2 674.8 443.6 405.0          July
52.3 26.4 2.3 1.7 37.3 36.3 63.1 23.2 1,655.8 224.7 687.9 448.7 424.6          Aug 
49.7 25.5 2.3 1.7 38.0 37.5 70.9 22.4 1,642.2 219.9 741.6 445.3 443.0          Sep 
46.5 21.8 2.3 1.7 36.6 35.5 69.8 18.6 1,637.0 214.5 747.9 453.9 454.4          Oct 
47.1 23.9 2.3 1.7 36.7 34.4 71.0 17.5 1,655.9 242.5 713.2 448.2 460.1          Nov 
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5          Dec 
44.6 19.7 2.4 1.8 35.2 33.0 67.4 15.9 1,614.6 215.8 697.5 462.3 437.1 2009          Jan 
45.2 19.3 2.5 1.8 33.6 32.7 74.0 15.4 1,604.9 211.4 686.7 441.5 442.1          Feb 
44.0 18.2 2.5 1.8 33.2 32.0 87.7 14.8 1,580.2 201.3 664.6 447.9 482.5          Mar 
46.5 21.0 2.5 1.9 32.6 32.0 92.6 14.4 1,579.0 203.6 697.7 430.2 463.3          Apr 
45.7 19.9 2.5 1.9 38.5 36.5 90.9 14.1 1,574.2 196.6 646.6 425.4 431.7          May
44.7 19.1 2.5 1.9 42.6 40.6 93.4 13.6 1,571.0 185.5 652.1 441.8 411.0          June
46.0 19.7 2.5 1.9 36.6 34.6 82.4 12.4 1,565.9 181.1 647.3 441.5 412.0          July
45.3 19.2 2.5 1.9 26.8 25.0 71.7 12.2 1,570.3 177.8 626.3 443.6 422.6          Aug 
47.1 19.2 2.5 1.9 24.4 22.7 83.7 12.2 1,543.3 171.9 599.7 442.8 427.4          Sep 
Changes 1
− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001
− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002
− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.1 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003
− 8.3 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 72.9 − 14.8 21.5 − 10.5 12.2 2004
− 7.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.0 4.7 0.2 39.3 − 9.4 22.4 14.4 18.5 2005
− 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.2 0.3 34.3 21.7 32.1 27.9 29.2 2006
8.1 13.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.4 48.7 49.1 42.9 59.1 2007
− 7.5 0.7 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.3 − 32.4 50.7 1.7 39.2 61.1 2008
− 4.4 − 3.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.9 15.4 0.2 6.7 8.3 22.8 2.6 − 10.6 2008          Jan 
2.9 4.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.3 3.9 0.2 − 8.9 − 0.7 21.1 1.0 1.8          Feb 
− 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 0.0 2.3 0.7 0.8 − 1.8 − 3.5 − 1.5 17.9 16.9 1.9          Mar 
− 0.3 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 9.0 − 1.8 5.5 7.7 23.5 − 3.9 12.0          Apr 
1.6 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 1.4 0.2 − 0.8 1.6 4.5 − 12.8 1.8 − 2.9          May
− 1.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 1.1 7.9 − 0.8 14.0 15.8 − 34.1 4.1 0.9          June
1.6 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 5.8 − 0.3 4.5 5.7 − 5.8 1.5 1.4          July
− 0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 1.1 5.0 − 0.3 2.9 2.3 0.6 3.3 25.1          Aug 
− 3.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.7 1.3 7.8 − 0.8 − 20.8 − 5.0 44.7 − 4.9 21.6          Sep 
− 4.9 − 5.0 0.1 0.0 − 1.4 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 29.2 − 5.5 − 26.6 3.8 16.8          Oct 
0.9 2.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 1.1 2.8 − 1.1 21.6 28.1 − 26.6 − 4.3 5.7          Nov 
1.3 1.3 0.1 0.0 − 0.1 0.4 − 9.9 − 1.1 − 26.9 − 9.0 − 23.1 17.3 − 12.8          Dec 
− 5.5 − 5.7 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.8 6.3 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 17.7 11.9 − 3.2 − 9.5 2009          Jan 
0.7 − 0.3 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.3 6.6 − 0.5 − 9.5 − 4.7 − 13.0 − 20.8 − 6.5          Feb 
− 1.1 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 13.7 − 0.6 − 13.0 − 9.9 − 9.5 8.9 18.7          Mar 
2.4 2.7 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 0.4 4.9 − 0.4 − 3.3 2.3 31.4 − 18.2 − 18.2          Apr 
− 0.5 − 0.9 0.0 0.0 5.9 4.4 − 1.7 − 0.3 4.5 − 6.9 − 39.6 3.1 − 32.3          May
− 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 0.0 3.8 4.1 2.5 − 0.5 − 3.4 − 11.1 6.2 16.4 − 19.4          June
1.3 0.6 0.0 0.0 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 11.0 − 1.2 − 4.9 − 4.4 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 1.5          July
− 0.5 − 0.4 0.0 0.0 1.7 1.9 − 10.6 − 0.3 6.2 − 3.3 − 18.2 2.5 12.4          Aug 
1.8 − 0.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.3 11.9 0.0 − 27.8 − 6.8 − 26.6 0.2 14.9          Sep 
2Excluding deposits of central governments. — 3In Germany, debt paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2009          Apr 1,977 7,864.9 63.9 3,198.8 2,325.1 831.9 4,020.3 549.1 2,705.8 1.2 747.2 169.1 412.9
         May 1,976 7,746.9 89.1 3,126.9 2,244.9 846.0 3,991.0 538.4 2,698.1 1.1 735.2 160.3 379.6
         June 1,967 7,771.9 93.2 3,172.8 2,287.9 850.3 4,001.7 539.6 2,697.6 1.0 748.0 158.1 346.2
         July 1,965 7,681.0 69.4 3,122.4 2,236.4 852.9 3,991.8 518.3 2,711.9 1.0 741.6 157.2 340.1
         Aug 1,962 7,663.2 75.1 3,113.4 2,224.8 857.4 3,945.6 492.2 2,703.0 1.0 731.4 157.7 371.4
         Sep 1,951 7,591.8 102.0 3,012.1 2,130.9 854.1 3,950.5 500.9 2,695.9 1.0 734.7 157.1 370.0
Commercial banks 5
2009          Aug 276 2,280.6 32.5 941.9 793.6 142.2 1,080.2 248.5 624.2 0.5 200.6 76.2 149.8
         Sep 276 2,252.9 61.4 876.4 731.5 141.0 1,089.2 256.1 621.8 0.4 203.8 76.0 149.9
   Big banks 6
2009          Aug 5 1,349.8 22.2 590.9 497.2 89.1 548.5 142.9 277.0 0.3 121.6 69.5 118.7
         Sep 5 1,329.3 49.2 534.4 443.6 88.1 555.8 153.5 273.8 0.3 122.8 69.3 120.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2009          Aug 168 744.7 8.2 246.4 193.4 51.5 458.4 78.5 303.2 0.1 77.4 6.4 25.4
         Sep 168 736.6 10.5 237.7 185.3 51.2 459.7 74.3 304.5 0.1 79.7 6.4 22.4
   Branches of foreign banks
2009          Aug 103 186.2 2.2 104.6 103.0 1.6 73.3 27.1 44.0 0.0 1.7 0.3 5.8
         Sep 103 187.0 1.7 104.4 102.7 1.7 73.8 28.3 43.5 0.0 1.4 0.3 6.9
Landesbanken
2009          Aug 10 1,508.8 4.7 709.6 528.5 170.3 695.2 97.0 450.1 0.1 137.7 27.8 71.5
         Sep 10 1,495.2 5.2 704.4 522.9 170.5 687.6 93.8 445.8 0.1 138.1 27.4 70.6
Savings banks
2009          Aug 432 1,063.6 21.0 273.4 102.3 165.3 732.6 63.2 574.1 0.3 94.7 18.9 17.7
         Sep 431 1,060.5 18.8 269.4 98.8 165.8 735.7 64.2 575.5 0.3 95.5 18.9 17.7
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2009          Aug 2 258.5 0.1 166.1 119.6 46.0 64.5 14.8 20.3 0.0 29.1 14.8 13.0
         Sep 2 257.9 1.0 165.5 120.3 44.9 63.9 15.1 20.0 0.0 28.3 14.8 12.8
Credit cooperatives
2009          Aug 1,181 680.5 14.2 196.0 76.5 114.3 439.5 34.5 349.2 0.1 55.4 11.0 19.9
         Sep 1,171 679.6 13.5 193.3 72.4 116.1 441.9 35.5 350.7 0.1 55.6 11.0 19.8
Mortgage banks
2009          Aug 18 790.5 0.5 282.1 178.6 101.2 490.8 9.7 361.9 − 119.1 1.3 15.7
         Sep 18 774.0 0.6 267.9 165.6 100.5 488.4 10.0 359.6 − 118.7 1.3 15.8
Building and loan associations
2009          Aug 25 191.8 0.1 55.9 37.0 18.9 123.3 1.5 109.8 . 12.0 0.4 12.2
         Sep 25 192.7 0.1 56.0 37.1 18.9 124.0 1.5 110.4 . 12.2 0.3 12.2
Special purpose banks
2009          Aug 18 888.9 2.0 488.4 388.6 99.3 319.5 23.0 213.4 − 82.9 7.3 71.5
         Sep 18 879.0 1.5 479.2 382.3 96.5 319.7 24.7 212.3 − 82.6 7.3 71.2
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2009          Aug 150 829.6 21.0 337.8 275.9 61.0 428.8 74.0 276.5 0.2 75.6 6.3 35.8
         Sep 150 821.2 15.9 329.6 269.1 59.8 433.7 78.7 275.4 0.1 77.0 6.3 35.6
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2009          Aug 47 643.4 18.8 233.2 172.9 59.4 355.5 46.9 232.5 0.1 74.0 6.0 30.0
         Sep 47 634.2 14.3 225.2 166.4 58.2 360.0 50.4 231.9 0.1 75.6 6.0 28.7
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan respective items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see T able
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities IV.12). — 2Included in time deposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
2,187.0 381.8 1,805.2 3,128.4 1,032.6 553.9 841.0 144.9 560.4 445.7 140.6 1,645.2 363.3 541.0 2009          Apr 
2,163.6 336.1 1,827.5 3,076.2 1,037.9 525.8 811.1 138.1 564.3 448.1 137.2 1,643.9 355.0 508.2          May
2,188.4 364.6 1,823.8 3,084.8 1,058.6 500.5 823.3 137.8 569.0 451.8 133.5 1,638.2 374.1 486.4          June
2,116.7 347.1 1,769.6 3,070.6 1,066.7 475.4 824.4 134.1 574.8 456.5 129.2 1,633.5 373.3 487.0          July
2,096.2 340.9 1,755.3 3,045.4 1,062.9 463.2 813.2 119.8 580.2 461.1 125.9 1,639.4 373.8 508.4          Aug 
2,046.0 348.8 1,697.2 3,047.6 1,081.8 443.0 813.8 126.1 584.6 464.2 124.4 1,611.6 373.9 512.7          Sep 
Commercial banks 5
749.0 219.1 529.9 1,003.2 481.7 201.8 170.4 44.7 126.4 95.8 22.9 224.1 122.0 182.3 2009          Aug 
720.2 216.7 503.5 1,008.9 490.0 194.7 172.7 50.6 127.7 97.2 23.9 220.4 122.1 181.4          Sep 
Big banks 6
455.4 141.8 313.7 534.6 233.0 113.4 106.2 40.2 73.8 68.0 8.2 182.0 78.2 99.7 2009          Aug 
432.7 135.6 297.0 539.6 234.8 115.5 105.3 46.2 74.6 68.9 9.4 178.5 78.2 100.3          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
165.4 50.3 115.1 423.0 225.7 76.1 54.0 4.4 52.6 27.8 14.5 42.2 37.8 76.4 2009          Aug 
160.3 50.6 109.7 422.6 232.1 67.5 55.6 4.4 53.1 28.3 14.3 41.9 37.8 74.1          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
128.2 27.1 101.1 45.6 22.9 12.3 10.2 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 6.0 6.3 2009          Aug 
127.2 30.5 96.8 46.7 23.1 11.7 11.7 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 6.1 7.0          Sep 
Landesbanken
464.9 53.4 411.5 418.2 79.0 117.4 205.6 70.8 13.9 12.7 2.4 468.3 72.7 84.7 2009          Aug 
455.4 58.6 396.8 417.7 87.2 110.8 203.6 70.2 13.8 12.5 2.3 465.4 72.7 84.0          Sep 
Savings banks
205.2 20.6 184.6 715.1 293.2 55.7 14.8 − 276.9 216.4 74.5 34.0 57.6 51.8 2009          Aug 
204.5 22.2 182.4 712.2 294.0 52.6 14.8 − 278.1 217.3 72.6 33.0 57.6 53.2          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
133.5 27.3 106.2 35.7 7.6 9.2 16.6 2.4 − − 2.3 61.2 11.1 17.0 2009          Aug 
131.8 27.1 104.7 36.2 8.8 8.7 16.5 3.3 − − 2.3 62.2 11.1 16.5          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
109.8 3.7 106.1 469.5 190.8 66.1 27.7 − 162.2 135.5 22.7 31.6 39.5 30.2 2009          Aug 
108.4 5.3 103.1 469.2 191.8 63.0 27.9 − 164.3 136.4 22.2 31.1 39.6 31.4          Sep 
Mortgage banks
231.2 5.5 225.7 186.7 4.4 6.0 175.9 − 0.4 0.4 0.0 334.2 18.0 20.3 2009          Aug 
226.1 8.5 217.6 186.4 4.3 5.8 175.9 − 0.4 0.4 0.0 322.6 18.0 20.9          Sep 
Building and loan associations
28.3 1.9 26.4 126.1 0.4 2.0 122.7 − 0.3 0.3 0.7 7.8 7.3 22.3 2009          Aug 
29.9 3.2 26.7 126.5 0.4 2.0 123.1 − 0.3 0.3 0.8 6.4 7.3 22.5          Sep 
Special purpose banks
174.3 9.4 164.9 90.9 5.9 5.0 79.5 1.9 − − 0.4 478.2 45.6 99.9 2009          Aug 
169.7 7.4 162.3 90.4 5.3 5.4 79.4 2.0 − − 0.4 470.5 45.6 102.8          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
285.7 91.3 194.4 362.2 167.1 85.4 81.4 19.5 19.9 19.7 8.4 80.4 42.4 58.8 2009          Aug 
277.7 87.5 190.1 362.5 175.3 74.4 84.5 16.1 20.3 20.0 8.1 78.1 42.5 60.5          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
157.5 64.2 93.4 316.6 144.1 73.1 71.2 19.5 19.9 19.6 8.3 80.4 36.4 52.6 2009          Aug 
150.4 57.1 93.4 315.8 152.2 62.7 72.8 16.1 20.2 20.0 7.9 78.1 36.4 53.5          Sep 
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
securities. — 5Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal
”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the banks
banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG , majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. 
Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG and Deutsche Postbank AG. — 7Sum
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,6 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks banks loans  5 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  7 
End of year or month *
 
1999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2008          Apr 13.5 53.9 1,739.3 1,207.2 − 31.3 500.8 1.9 3,058.8 2,677.9 1.2 2.0 377.7
         May 13.7 50.2 1,763.7 1,220.9 0.0 33.2 509.5 1.9 3,043.7 2,676.2 1.2 3.2 363.2
         June 13.3 54.7 1,773.8 1,224.3 0.0 37.2 512.3 1.9 3,011.5 2,681.9 1.1 3.6 324.8
         July 13.6 41.2 1,766.2 1,218.9 − 37.5 509.8 1.9 3,018.8 2,690.2 1.1 2.8 324.8
         Aug 13.7 48.2 1,785.7 1,232.3 − 38.9 514.6 1.9 3,045.3 2,692.1 1.1 2.9 349.3
         Sep 13.4 68.5 1,823.5 1,279.2 0.0 38.0 506.3 1.9 3,044.8 2,698.6 1.0 2.5 342.7
         Oct 14.6 51.4 1,884.6 1,343.9 0.0 39.3 501.4 1.9 3,045.1 2,703.4 1.0 2.3 338.4
         Nov 14.4 54.7 1,914.5 1,349.3 0.0 57.6 507.6 1.9 3,044.6 2,705.5 1.1 2.0 336.1
         Dec 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009          Jan 13.5 51.8 1,893.6 1,327.3 0.0 54.5 511.8 1.9 3,097.3 2,718.9 1.1 3.1 374.3
         Feb 13.4 54.4 1,865.5 1,299.3 0.0 52.2 514.0 1.9 3,091.2 2,709.8 0.9 3.2 377.2
         Mar 13.5 54.1 1,835.7 1,255.7 0.0 35.9 544.2 1.7 3,101.4 2,720.6 0.9 3.7 376.2
         Apr 14.9 48.5 1,819.9 1,243.3 0.0 32.5 544.1 1.7 3,124.3 2,725.1 0.9 5.4 392.9
         May 15.4 73.3 1,771.0 1,187.2 0.0 29.3 554.6 1.6 3,106.5 2,720.5 0.9 5.8 379.3
         June 14.6 78.1 1,840.0 1,251.2 0.0 26.3 562.4 1.6 3,121.8 2,724.0 0.8 3.7 393.3
         July 13.5 55.4 1,811.6 1,219.6 0.0 24.6 567.4 1.7 3,116.5 2,720.1 0.8 5.3 390.3
         Aug 13.6 61.2 1,801.7 1,207.4 0.0 22.9 571.3 1.7 3,094.1 2,703.8 0.7 4.8 384.8
         Sep 13.5 88.1 1,751.1 1,163.2 0.0 19.0 568.9 1.8 3,110.3 2,714.8 0.7 7.0 387.9
Changes *
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.7
2003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2004 − 2.1 − 5.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 22.1 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 35.0 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 39.2
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2008          Apr − 0.3 − 15.7 + 24.0 + 18.7 − + 1.6 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 49.8 + 11.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 38.4
         May + 0.2 − 3.6 + 24.6 + 13.9 + 0.0 + 1.9 + 8.8 − 0.0 − 15.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 14.5
         June − 0.4 + 4.5 + 10.0 + 3.3 − + 4.0 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 32.1 + 5.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 38.1
         July + 0.3 − 13.6 + 7.6 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.8 + 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0
         Aug + 0.1 + 7.1 + 25.4 + 19.3 − + 1.3 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 26.6 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 24.5
         Sep − 0.3 + 20.2 + 37.8 + 46.9 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 8.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 6.5
         Oct + 1.3 − 17.1 + 61.1 + 64.7 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 4.9 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.3
         Nov − 0.2 + 4.8 + 38.0 + 13.6 − + 18.3 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.4
         Dec + 3.0 + 47.8 − 51.3 − 49.7 − − 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 23.2 − 9.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 31.7
2009          Jan − 3.9 − 50.8 + 31.9 + 29.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 26.2 + 20.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 6.4
         Feb − 0.1 + 2.6 − 28.1 − 28.0 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 9.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Mar + 0.0 − 0.3 − 29.8 − 43.6 − − 16.3 + 30.1 − 0.2 + 9.2 + 9.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0
         Apr + 1.5 − 5.5 − 15.9 − 12.4 − − 3.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 22.8 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 16.7
         May + 0.5 + 24.7 − 45.4 − 52.6 − − 3.2 + 10.5 − 0.1 − 16.9 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 12.8
         June − 0.9 + 4.8 + 69.0 + 64.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 7.9 − 0.0 + 15.8 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 14.0
         July − 1.1 − 22.6 − 28.4 − 31.6 − − 1.8 + 5.0 + 0.1 − 5.4 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 1.5 − 3.1
         Aug + 0.1 + 5.7 − 9.9 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 22.4 − 16.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 5.5
         Sep − 0.1 + 26.9 − 51.3 − 44.9 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 15.9 + 10.7 − 0.0 + 2.2 + 3.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfol ios
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as prior to maturity). — 5From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly (see also footnote 3). — 6Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic building and loan associations. — 7Excluding debt securities arising from
banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to the exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 8). — 8Including
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 5). — 4Up to December 1998, 9Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities, registered
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,9,10  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,15 
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims  8 loans  5 Total 11,12  12,13  bills 14 loans  5 Total 13,16  bonds  18 loans  5   Period enterprises posits  11 posits  17 
End of year or month *
 
37.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008
− 50.4 111.0 1,439.6 132.6 1,306.9 0.0 42.7 2,620.8 779.4 1,178.8 539.8 122.8 33.1 2008          Apr 
− 50.2 110.8 1,443.2 133.5 1,309.6 0.0 42.5 2,636.4 782.6 1,193.5 536.3 124.0 33.1          May
− 49.2 106.7 1,448.6 134.8 1,313.8 0.0 41.6 2,646.4 793.1 1,194.4 533.5 125.4 32.9          June
− 49.7 110.5 1,438.6 122.5 1,316.1 0.0 41.9 2,644.7 768.2 1,221.5 527.9 127.1 32.5          July
− 49.3 110.2 1,446.4 124.6 1,321.8 0.0 42.3 2,660.4 771.9 1,236.7 523.6 128.1 32.5          Aug 
− 48.4 108.2 1,528.8 151.4 1,377.4 0.0 42.0 2,676.0 784.7 1,242.4 519.3 129.6 32.3          Sep 
− 48.1 108.8 1,641.8 162.0 1,479.7 0.0 43.2 2,719.2 812.8 1,252.5 520.8 133.1 32.3          Oct 
− 47.8 108.4 1,595.2 155.9 1,439.3 0.0 43.2 2,748.8 832.8 1,257.9 523.4 134.7 32.2          Nov 
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3          Dec 
− 46.9 115.6 1,532.6 155.0 1,377.6 0.0 41.9 2,799.9 884.4 1,242.7 539.0 133.8 31.9 2009          Jan 
− 46.5 116.4 1,509.5 159.0 1,350.4 0.0 42.0 2,820.0 912.1 1,231.8 544.3 131.9 31.8          Feb 
− 46.4 119.5 1,455.9 138.3 1,317.7 0.0 40.6 2,817.3 914.0 1,226.4 547.8 129.1 30.9          Mar 
− 45.5 119.1 1,458.0 153.2 1,304.8 0.0 39.6 2,839.6 932.2 1,231.1 551.1 125.2 31.1          Apr 
− 44.7 110.6 1,444.8 121.6 1,323.1 0.0 38.3 2,837.0 935.4 1,224.4 555.1 122.1 31.2          May
− 44.2 108.4 1,467.8 117.4 1,350.4 0.0 37.6 2,847.3 956.0 1,213.1 559.7 118.5 31.1          June
− 43.8 107.5 1,417.1 119.2 1,297.9 0.0 37.2 2,819.9 954.4 1,185.6 565.5 114.4 31.2          July
− 43.5 108.0 1,413.9 125.7 1,288.2 0.0 36.9 2,801.5 962.4 1,157.0 570.8 111.2 42.0          Aug 
− 43.2 107.7 1,380.6 129.9 1,250.7 0.0 36.3 2,810.6 987.1 1,139.7 575.1 108.6 42.2          Sep 
Changes *
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001
− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002
− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
− 1.1 + 3.0 − 9.6 + 41.3 + 2.9 + 38.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 62.0 + 24.4 + 25.9 + 13.1 − 1.5 + 1.2 2004
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007
− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008
− − 0.5 + 0.1 + 8.0 − 9.7 + 17.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 18.7 − 7.2 + 28.8 − 4.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 2008          Apr 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 15.6 + 3.1 + 14.7 − 3.5 + 1.2 − 0.0          May
− − 1.0 + 0.3 + 5.5 + 1.3 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 9.9 + 10.5 + 0.9 − 2.9 + 1.4 − 0.2          June
− + 0.5 + 4.4 + 3.0 − 9.7 + 12.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 24.9 + 27.1 − 5.6 + 1.7 − 0.5          July
− − 0.4 − 0.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 + 11.6 − + 0.4 + 15.7 + 3.8 + 15.2 − 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.0          Aug 
− − 1.0 − 2.0 + 82.3 + 26.8 + 55.5 − − 0.3 + 15.5 + 12.8 + 5.7 − 4.4 + 1.4 − 0.2          Sep 
− − 0.3 + 0.5 + 113.0 + 11.1 + 101.9 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 43.2 + 28.1 + 10.1 + 1.5 + 3.5 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 30.7 − 3.3 − 27.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 34.3 + 20.0 + 10.1 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0          Nov 
− − 0.6 + 2.8 − 12.7 − 17.4 + 4.7 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 33.5 + 1.8 + 19.2 + 11.8 + 0.6 + 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.3 + 4.4 − 49.9 + 16.5 − 66.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 18.5 + 49.7 − 33.5 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 2009          Jan 
− − 0.3 + 0.7 − 23.1 + 4.0 − 27.1 − + 0.1 + 20.2 + 27.7 − 10.9 + 5.3 − 2.0 − 0.1          Feb 
− − 0.6 + 3.2 − 53.6 − 20.7 − 32.8 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 3.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 + 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9          Mar 
− − 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 14.9 − 13.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 22.3 + 34.9 − 12.0 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.2 − 2.6 − 9.8 − 31.6 + 21.8 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 2.6 + 3.0 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.0          May
− − 0.4 − 2.2 + 23.0 − 4.3 + 27.3 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 10.3 + 20.6 − 11.3 + 4.7 − 3.7 − 0.1          June
− − 0.4 − 0.8 − 50.6 + 1.9 − 52.5 − − 0.4 − 27.4 − 1.7 − 27.4 + 5.8 − 4.1 + 0.1          July
− − 0.3 + 0.5 − 3.3 + 6.4 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.0 + 8.0 − 17.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0          Aug 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 34.3 + 4.3 − 38.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 24.7 − 17.4 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.2          Sep 
including subordinated liabilities. — 10Up to December 1998, excluding endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. — 15Up to
liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loan
funds. — 11Up to December 1998, including time deposits with terms of associations and money market funds. — 16Since the inclusion of building
less than one month. — 12Including liabilities arising from monetary policy and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
operations with the Bundesbank. — 13Up to December 1998, excluding loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 17Excluding deposits under savings and
time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Own acceptances loan contracts (see also footnote 16). — 18Including liabilities arising from
and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998, including non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks banks loans  4 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2008          Apr 0.4 1,466.2 1,140.2 829.7 310.6 16.7 309.3 2.0 939.4 535.3 226.2 309.1 17.7 386.5
         May 0.4 1,457.7 1,118.4 805.0 313.5 21.5 317.8 2.1 945.1 544.8 229.9 314.8 18.5 381.8
         June 0.5 1,453.6 1,108.0 790.9 317.1 28.3 317.2 1.9 929.1 526.2 194.2 332.0 19.3 383.6
         July 0.6 1,445.9 1,096.0 766.6 329.5 32.2 317.7 1.9 929.5 533.3 196.0 337.3 18.2 378.0
         Aug 0.5 1,444.6 1,093.5 754.7 338.8 32.5 318.6 2.0 949.7 554.6 203.1 351.5 17.3 377.8
         Sep 0.4 1,521.0 1,171.1 814.7 356.4 32.1 317.8 2.0 967.1 569.7 203.4 366.3 18.5 378.9
         Oct 0.8 1,571.1 1,232.6 859.9 372.7 27.3 311.3 2.0 990.1 597.4 208.6 388.8 17.0 375.6
         Nov 0.7 1,509.6 1,181.4 807.5 373.9 21.5 306.7 2.0 961.6 574.4 183.8 390.5 12.8 374.4
         Dec 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009          Jan 0.4 1,433.6 1,122.7 743.9 378.8 14.8 296.1 1.9 915.4 541.1 153.8 387.3 12.2 362.1
         Feb 0.4 1,416.2 1,111.4 733.1 378.3 12.2 292.6 1.9 905.6 529.5 141.1 388.4 11.3 364.7
         Mar 0.5 1,357.7 1,058.2 686.2 372.0 10.0 289.5 1.9 880.9 514.4 135.4 379.1 9.8 356.6
         Apr 0.4 1,378.9 1,081.8 713.6 368.2 9.2 287.9 1.9 896.0 530.1 147.2 382.9 11.6 354.3
         May 0.4 1,355.9 1,057.7 691.4 366.3 6.7 291.4 2.0 884.5 516.3 143.5 372.8 12.3 355.9
         June 0.5 1,332.8 1,036.7 653.2 383.5 8.2 287.8 2.0 879.9 513.5 142.6 370.9 11.6 354.7
         July 0.4 1,310.8 1,016.8 639.5 377.3 8.6 285.5 2.0 875.4 510.3 136.8 373.5 13.8 351.3
         Aug 0.3 1,311.7 1,017.4 647.4 370.0 8.3 286.1 3.1 851.5 491.7 130.6 361.1 13.1 346.6
         Sep 0.4 1,261.1 967.7 608.1 359.6 8.1 285.2 3.0 840.2 482.3 125.6 356.7 11.1 346.8
Changes *
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.3
2002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2004 − 0.1 + 128.3 + 89.4 + 95.3 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 37.6 − 0.1 + 65.8 + 29.5 + 31.7 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 31.1
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2008          Apr − 0.0 + 17.7 + 20.7 + 16.9 + 3.8 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 2.9 + 6.6 − 0.3 + 6.8 − 2.0 − 7.4
         May + 0.1 − 6.8 − 20.0 − 25.0 + 5.0 + 4.8 + 8.4 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 9.2 + 3.6 + 5.5 + 0.8 − 4.6
         June + 0.0 + 2.8 − 3.5 − 10.7 + 7.2 + 6.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 12.4 − 14.9 − 34.8 + 20.0 + 0.9 + 1.5
         July + 0.2 − 9.2 − 13.5 − 25.2 + 11.7 + 3.9 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 4.3 − 1.1 − 6.0
         Aug − 0.1 − 15.5 − 16.4 − 20.7 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 11.5 + 4.7 + 6.9 − 1.1 − 3.4
         Sep − 0.1 + 65.8 + 67.5 + 53.7 + 13.7 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 9.2 + 8.9 − 1.5 + 10.3 + 1.1 − 0.7
         Oct + 0.4 + 9.5 + 21.6 + 19.2 + 2.5 − 5.0 − 7.2 + 0.0 − 10.3 + 3.6 − 1.1 + 4.7 − 2.0 − 11.8
         Nov − 0.2 − 53.9 − 43.8 − 46.5 + 2.8 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 12.5 − 7.4 − 10.3 + 2.9 − 4.2 − 0.9
         Dec − 0.3 − 31.8 − 19.9 − 22.1 + 2.2 − 5.9 − 6.0 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 25.2 − 27.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 − 2.0
2009          Jan + 0.1 − 39.9 − 34.8 − 39.1 + 4.2 − 0.8 − 4.2 + 0.1 − 15.8 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.9 − 0.7 − 9.7
         Feb − 0.0 − 19.3 − 13.5 − 12.0 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 13.6 − 13.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.8
         Mar + 0.1 − 42.4 − 37.7 − 38.1 + 0.4 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 9.8 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.7
         Apr − 0.1 + 18.4 + 21.3 + 26.0 − 4.7 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 13.0 + 14.5 + 11.6 + 2.9 + 1.5 − 3.0
         May − 0.0 − 14.1 − 10.9 − 14.3 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 6.3 − 2.9 − 1.1 − 1.8 + 0.8 + 8.4
         June + 0.1 − 23.9 − 21.2 − 38.2 + 17.0 + 1.0 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.0
         July − 0.0 − 21.8 − 19.9 − 13.7 − 6.1 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 5.0 − 3.4 − 5.8 + 2.4 + 2.2 − 3.8
         Aug − 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.7 + 9.7 − 5.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 10.9 − 6.4 − 5.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 3.7
         Sep + 0.1 − 43.7 − 43.5 − 35.9 − 7.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 − 3.9 − 0.8 − 2.0 + 1.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 4). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills a nd bills
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)
in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciary
loans  4 prises  5 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4 Total Total  7 term  7 term loans  4   Period deposits  6 deposits  6 
End of year or month *
 
13.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 2001
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 2008
24.5 49.7 830.8 216.1 614.7 501.7 113.1 0.3 334.1 98.2 236.0 139.0 97.0 2.8 2008          Apr 
24.4 49.8 823.2 230.4 592.7 481.1 111.6 0.3 326.0 94.4 231.6 131.7 99.9 2.8          May
24.4 49.7 769.2 230.7 538.5 431.6 106.9 0.3 313.9 101.2 212.7 114.2 98.5 2.7          June
23.7 49.8 746.6 198.8 547.7 439.8 107.9 0.3 328.7 100.7 228.0 130.9 97.2 2.6          July
24.4 49.9 748.0 171.6 576.5 465.4 111.1 0.3 337.6 103.8 233.8 136.4 97.4 2.6          Aug 
24.7 48.6 815.2 258.3 556.9 436.1 120.8 0.3 323.3 101.1 222.2 125.6 96.6 2.5          Sep 
26.3 49.2 780.1 243.5 536.6 415.1 121.5 0.3 325.3 103.6 221.7 117.9 103.8 2.7          Oct 
26.5 49.0 752.0 254.4 497.6 369.7 127.9 0.3 307.8 103.7 204.1 101.4 102.7 2.6          Nov 
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5          Dec 
25.9 50.9 737.2 253.1 484.1 359.6 124.6 0.3 306.8 123.8 183.0 82.4 100.7 2.6 2009          Jan 
26.1 49.4 733.1 251.7 481.4 356.7 124.6 0.3 279.9 100.5 179.4 78.5 100.9 2.5          Feb 
24.1 49.5 705.4 266.8 438.7 315.7 122.9 0.3 273.0 103.7 169.3 71.3 98.0 2.5          Mar 
24.2 50.0 729.0 228.6 500.4 378.6 121.8 0.3 288.8 100.4 188.4 91.5 96.9 2.4          Apr 
23.8 49.7 718.8 214.4 504.4 353.6 150.8 0.3 239.2 102.5 136.7 72.1 64.7 2.3          May
23.3 49.7 720.6 247.2 473.4 321.9 151.5 0.3 237.5 102.5 135.0 70.9 64.1 2.1          June
23.2 49.7 699.5 227.9 471.7 321.9 149.8 0.3 250.7 112.3 138.3 73.2 65.1 2.0          July
32.9 49.6 682.3 215.3 467.1 321.8 145.2 0.3 243.9 100.5 143.4 79.7 63.7 2.0          Aug 
32.5 49.3 665.4 218.9 446.5 304.7 141.9 0.2 237.0 94.7 142.3 76.1 66.2 2.0          Sep 
Changes *
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002
− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
+ 0.7 − 1.5 + 19.8 − 6.1 + 25.9 + 21.1 + 4.8 + 0.1 + 13.0 + 5.4 + 7.6 + 22.8 − 15.2 − 0.3 2004
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006
− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007
+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008
+ 0.2 − 0.2 + 38.2 − 14.2 + 52.4 + 51.3 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 5.9 − 2.8 + 8.6 + 9.6 − 0.9 − 0.0 2008          Apr 
− 0.1 + 0.0 − 3.7 + 16.2 − 19.9 − 20.7 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 10.3 − 5.7 − 4.5 − 7.2 + 2.7 − 0.0          May
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 48.9 + 1.0 − 49.9 − 47.8 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 10.8 + 7.0 − 17.9 − 17.0 − 0.9 − 0.1          June
− 0.7 − 0.1 − 23.6 − 32.2 + 8.5 + 7.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 14.4 − 0.6 + 15.0 + 16.6 − 1.6 − 0.0          July
+ 0.7 − 0.4 − 11.1 − 29.7 + 18.6 + 16.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 6.4 + 2.1 + 4.2 + 5.4 − 1.1 − 0.0          Aug 
+ 0.4 − 1.7 + 59.5 + 85.7 − 26.2 − 35.3 + 9.1 − 0.0 − 17.7 − 3.1 − 14.6 − 12.7 − 1.9 − 0.1          Sep 
+ 1.6 − 0.8 − 61.4 − 22.2 − 39.2 − 40.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 13.0 + 0.1 − 13.2 − 13.3 + 0.1 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.2 + 0.1 − 26.4 + 11.0 − 37.3 − 44.0 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 10.4 + 2.9 − 13.3 − 13.5 + 0.2 − 0.1          Nov 
− 1.0 − 2.6 − 38.1 − 31.8 − 6.3 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 7.6 − 9.8 + 2.2 + 3.4 − 1.2 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.3 + 4.6 + 18.3 + 32.1 − 13.8 − 12.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 14.2 + 30.4 − 16.3 − 14.8 − 1.4 + 0.1 2009          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 27.4 − 23.4 − 4.0 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 0.1          Feb 
− 1.6 + 0.8 − 17.5 + 17.9 − 35.4 − 35.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 4.0 − 7.1 − 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 22.5 − 37.8 + 60.3 + 60.8 − 0.5 − + 14.8 − 3.3 + 18.1 + 19.8 − 1.6 − 0.1          Apr 
− 0.9 + 0.1 − 36.3 − 11.5 − 24.9 − 23.8 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 10.5 + 3.1 − 13.6 − 14.3 + 0.7 − 0.1          May
− 0.5 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 32.8 − 30.9 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.1          June
− 0.1 − − 21.0 − 19.4 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 9.8 + 3.4 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.1          July
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 15.1 − 12.8 − 2.3 + 1.6 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 5.6 − 11.7 + 6.1 + 6.9 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug 
− 0.4 + 0.0 − 12.2 + 4.7 − 16.9 − 14.6 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 5.5 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 2.9 − 0.1          Sep 
4From 1999, no longer included in loans and deposits (see also footnote terms of less than one month. — 7Up to December 1998, excluding time
2). — 5Up to December 1998, including working capital supplied to deposits with terms of less than one month. 
branches abroad. — 6Up to December 1998, including time deposits with
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to general government to enter- to enterprises and households  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month *
 
1999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2008          Apr 3,058.8 2,679.1 366.6 332.5 331.7 0.8 34.1 32.8 1.2 2,692.3 2,212.7
         May 3,043.7 2,677.4 363.1 332.6 331.5 1.1 30.5 28.4 2.1 2,680.7 2,201.4
         June 3,011.5 2,683.0 371.0 338.9 337.8 1.1 32.1 29.6 2.5 2,640.5 2,178.7
         July 3,018.8 2,691.2 374.4 340.5 339.9 0.6 34.0 31.8 2.1 2,644.3 2,184.7
         Aug 3,045.3 2,693.2 369.9 335.0 334.3 0.7 34.9 32.8 2.1 2,675.4 2,218.7
         Sep 3,044.8 2,699.6 378.5 345.9 345.0 0.9 32.6 31.1 1.6 2,666.2 2,221.6
         Oct 3,045.1 2,704.4 374.5 337.9 337.5 0.4 36.7 34.8 1.9 2,670.6 2,225.5
         Nov 3,044.6 2,706.6 375.8 341.3 340.9 0.4 34.5 32.9 1.6 2,668.8 2,226.4
         Dec 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009          Jan 3,097.3 2,719.9 395.2 353.9 353.2 0.7 41.4 39.0 2.4 2,702.0 2,260.4
         Feb 3,091.2 2,710.7 386.9 344.0 343.6 0.5 42.8 40.1 2.8 2,704.3 2,266.9
         Mar 3,101.4 2,721.5 410.5 368.3 367.9 0.4 42.2 39.0 3.3 2,690.9 2,256.7
         Apr 3,124.3 2,726.0 408.5 362.5 362.1 0.4 46.0 41.0 5.0 2,715.8 2,276.8
         May 3,106.5 2,721.4 401.9 360.4 359.5 0.9 41.4 36.5 5.0 2,704.6 2,263.1
         June 3,121.8 2,724.8 401.8 362.3 362.0 0.3 39.5 36.0 3.4 2,720.0 2,274.1
         July 3,116.5 2,720.9 387.8 336.5 336.1 0.3 51.3 46.4 4.9 2,728.7 2,281.7
         Aug 3,094.1 2,704.5 367.4 321.9 321.7 0.3 45.5 40.9 4.6 2,726.7 2,280.6
         Sep 3,110.3 2,715.5 383.3 337.5 337.2 0.3 45.8 39.1 6.7 2,727.1 2,279.4
Changes *
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2004 + 3.3 − 36.0 − 31.7 − 30.5 − 29.7 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 3.2 + 1.9 + 35.0 + 15.6
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2008          Apr + 49.8 + 11.6 + 7.3 + 2.8 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 4.4 + 4.6 − 0.2 + 42.5 + 35.6
         May − 15.1 − 1.8 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 4.5 + 0.8 − 11.5 − 11.3
         June − 32.1 + 5.6 + 7.9 + 6.2 + 6.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 40.0 − 22.6
         July + 6.8 + 7.7 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.2 − 0.4 + 3.4 + 5.6
         Aug + 26.6 + 2.1 − 4.6 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 31.2 + 34.1
         Sep − 0.5 + 6.4 + 8.7 + 10.9 + 10.7 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 9.2 + 2.8
         Oct + 0.4 + 4.8 − 3.1 − 7.1 − 6.6 − 0.5 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 + 3.0
         Nov − 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.9
         Dec + 23.2 − 9.6 − 2.8 − 3.8 − 5.6 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.6 + 26.0 + 26.9
2009          Jan + 26.2 + 19.8 + 21.0 + 15.1 + 16.7 − 1.5 + 5.8 + 4.4 + 1.4 + 5.2 + 3.9
         Feb − 6.1 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 9.8 − 9.6 − 0.2 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3 + 6.5
         Mar + 9.2 + 9.7 + 23.6 + 24.2 + 24.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 14.4 − 11.3
         Apr + 22.8 + 4.5 − 2.0 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 3.7 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 24.9 + 20.2
         May − 16.9 − 4.6 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 10.4 − 12.9
         June + 15.8 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 2.8 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 15.1 + 10.7
         July − 5.4 − 3.9 − 14.1 − 25.9 − 25.9 + 0.0 + 11.8 + 10.3 + 1.5 + 8.6 + 7.5
         Aug − 22.4 − 16.4 − 20.4 − 14.5 − 14.4 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 5.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 1.1
         Sep + 15.9 + 10.7 + 15.9 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks’ portfoli os
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From 1999, breakdown of securities by medium
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
lending  2,5 
prises and households  1,2 to general government  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  6 term  7 loans  8 Total Total term  6 term  7 loans  8   Period Securities  5 ities 5,9 claims  10 
End of year or month *
 
1,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
1,991.6 211.9 1,779.7 221.1 45.9 479.6 323.0 34.0 289.0 156.6 − 4.5 2008          Apr 
1,995.2 212.1 1,783.2 206.2 45.7 479.3 322.3 33.5 288.8 157.0 − 4.5          May
1,995.9 213.3 1,782.6 182.8 44.7 461.8 319.8 32.4 287.3 142.0 − 4.5          June
2,001.8 213.3 1,788.4 182.9 45.2 459.7 317.8 32.1 285.7 141.9 − 4.5          July
2,009.9 215.6 1,794.3 208.8 44.9 456.7 316.2 31.7 284.6 140.5 − 4.4          Aug 
2,009.8 215.4 1,794.4 211.9 44.0 444.6 313.7 31.0 282.8 130.9 − 4.4          Sep 
2,020.3 218.1 1,802.1 205.3 43.6 445.0 311.9 29.8 282.1 133.2 − 4.5          Oct 
2,021.5 218.7 1,802.8 204.9 43.3 442.4 311.3 29.9 281.4 131.2 − 4.5          Nov 
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5          Dec 
2,022.5 222.9 1,799.5 238.0 42.5 441.6 305.3 29.7 275.6 136.3 − 4.4 2009          Jan 
2,024.7 225.8 1,799.0 242.2 42.2 437.4 302.4 29.2 273.2 135.0 − 4.4          Feb 
2,015.5 224.4 1,791.1 241.1 42.0 434.3 299.2 28.8 270.4 135.1 − 4.4          Mar 
2,023.4 229.0 1,794.4 253.5 41.1 439.0 299.5 29.2 270.3 139.4 − 4.4          Apr 
2,025.2 230.2 1,795.0 237.9 40.3 441.5 300.2 30.4 269.8 141.4 − 4.4          May
2,026.3 233.0 1,793.3 247.8 39.9 445.9 300.4 30.8 269.6 145.5 − 4.3          June
2,036.3 236.7 1,799.5 245.5 39.5 447.0 302.1 31.8 270.3 144.9 − 4.3          July
2,039.9 237.1 1,802.9 240.7 39.2 446.1 302.0 31.9 270.1 144.1 − 4.3          Aug 
2,038.3 237.2 1,801.0 241.1 38.9 447.7 300.9 32.5 268.4 146.8 − 4.3          Sep 
Changes *
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002
+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 10.7 + 0.2 + 10.5 + 4.9 + 3.6 + 19.4 − 13.8 − 0.9 − 12.9 + 34.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 2004
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 4.0 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 31.6 − 0.5 + 7.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 6.9 − + 0.0 2008          Apr 
+ 3.7 + 0.2 + 3.5 − 14.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 − − 0.0          May
+ 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 23.3 − 1.0 − 17.4 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.5 − 14.8 − − 0.0          June
+ 5.5 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 1.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 8.3 + 2.4 + 5.8 + 25.9 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.1 − 0.9 − 12.0 − 2.4 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 9.6 − − 0.1          Sep 
+ 9.6 + 1.8 + 7.8 − 6.6 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 2.3 − + 0.1          Oct 
+ 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.0 − + 0.0          Nov 
− 3.8 + 2.3 − 6.1 + 30.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 1.0 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.5 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 4.2 − − 0.0 2009          Jan 
+ 2.3 + 2.8 − 0.6 + 4.2 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 10.2 − 3.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.1 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 7.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 12.3 − 0.9 + 4.7 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 4.3 − + 0.0          Apr 
+ 1.8 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 14.8 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 1.9 − − 0.0          May
+ 0.8 + 2.6 − 1.8 + 9.9 − 0.4 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 4.1 − − 0.0          June
+ 10.0 + 3.8 + 6.2 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.6 − − 0.0          July
+ 3.7 + 0.3 + 3.4 − 4.8 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 2.0 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.6 − 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.6 − − 0.0          Sep 
and long-term lending no longer possible. — 6Up to December 1998, 1999, of more than five years. — 8From 1999, no longer included in lending
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than four years; (see also footnote 2). — 9Excluding debt securities arising from the
from 1999, more than one year up to and including five years. — 7Up to exchange of equalisation claims (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of four years and more; from securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *x
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- corpor-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2007 2,289.0 1,166.7 1,101.3 914.4 186.8 1,259.7 306.2 145.4 41.3 47.0 135.7 33.2 65.4 101.4
2008          Sep 2,355.0 1,161.4 1,097.1 911.0 186.1 1,329.2 304.3 158.6 43.8 47.8 134.7 35.1 71.5 138.9
         Dec 2,357.5 1,157.4 1,093.4 907.1 186.3 1,332.6 302.8 157.4 56.1 52.1 138.9 34.6 74.0 127.6
2009          Mar 2,383.5 1,150.8 1,087.5 901.5 186.0 1,363.1 301.2 160.9 61.7 62.8 131.0 34.0 74.5 161.5
         June 2,388.5 1,149.7 1,087.4 899.6 187.7 1,365.5 300.9 160.4 62.7 63.4 128.8 34.8 74.7 173.3
         Sep 2,375.6 1,149.2 1,092.1 900.2 191.9 1,346.7 300.7 155.4 63.1 62.7 126.2 36.0 73.6 165.7
 Short-term lending
2007 301.7 − 8.6 − 8.6 261.6 4.6 46.2 4.4 8.5 52.0 3.1 7.2 52.1
2008          Sep 345.2 − 8.6 − 8.6 305.3 4.7 53.2 5.0 9.1 50.4 3.8 6.9 85.5
         Dec 335.5 − 8.4 − 8.4 294.8 4.5 51.4 5.4 10.4 54.7 3.1 7.4 70.9
2009          Mar 368.0 − 8.7 − 8.7 328.1 4.8 54.6 6.5 15.2 48.9 3.4 7.6 106.1
         June 362.2 − 8.8 − 8.8 322.3 4.8 51.5 6.2 15.8 46.8 3.7 7.8 109.2
         Sep 337.3 − 8.8 − 8.8 296.9 4.8 46.4 5.4 15.1 44.0 3.9 7.3 98.4
 Medium-term lending
2007 207.7 − 32.2 − 32.2 141.5 10.4 22.3 2.2 5.6 13.1 2.9 12.5 17.4
2008          Sep 215.4 − 30.8 − 30.8 152.5 10.7 25.4 1.8 5.9 13.7 3.1 14.0 17.5
         Dec 222.0 − 30.3 − 30.3 159.1 10.9 27.1 2.7 6.6 13.8 3.1 14.5 18.0
2009          Mar 224.4 − 31.4 − 31.4 160.0 11.3 29.0 3.4 8.2 13.2 2.9 14.5 16.9
         June 233.0 − 31.6 − 31.6 167.1 11.5 31.6 3.6 8.8 13.2 3.0 14.6 21.0
         Sep 237.2 − 32.0 − 32.0 169.6 11.6 32.2 4.0 8.8 13.4 3.3 14.1 21.7
 Long-term lending
2007 1,779.6 1,166.7 1,060.5 914.4 146.0 856.5 291.2 76.9 34.7 33.0 70.6 27.2 45.7 31.9
2008          Sep 1,794.4 1,161.4 1,057.7 911.0 146.7 871.3 288.8 80.1 37.0 32.9 70.5 28.1 50.7 35.9
         Dec 1,800.0 1,157.4 1,054.6 907.1 147.5 878.7 287.5 78.9 48.0 35.2 70.4 28.4 52.1 38.6
2009          Mar 1,791.1 1,150.8 1,047.3 901.5 145.8 875.1 285.1 77.2 51.8 39.4 68.9 27.7 52.4 38.5
         June 1,793.3 1,149.7 1,047.0 899.6 147.4 876.2 284.5 77.3 52.9 38.8 68.8 28.0 52.2 43.0
         Sep 1,801.0 1,149.2 1,051.3 900.2 151.1 880.2 284.3 76.8 53.8 38.9 68.8 28.8 52.2 45.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2008          Q3 + 20.6 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 19.2 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 3.0 + 10.8
         Q4 − 1.7 − 3.2 − 3.5 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 4.2 + 0.7 + 4.4 − 0.5 + 2.5 − 12.8
2009          Q1 + 25.0 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.4 − 1.6 + 29.5 − 1.6 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 2.0 − 7.5 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 33.8
         Q2 + 4.9 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 2.2 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 10.1
         Q3 − 13.2 − 0.7 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 3.0 − 19.2 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.7 + 1.3 − 1.1 − 7.6
 Short-term lending
2008          Q3 + 7.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 6.3 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 8.5
         Q4 − 8.7 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 9.5 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 4.5 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 14.6
2009          Q1 + 31.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 32.1 + 0.3 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 5.8 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 33.9
         Q2 − 5.6 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 5.6 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.6
         Q3 − 24.9 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 25.3 − 0.1 − 4.4 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 10.9
 Medium-term lending
2008          Q3 + 2.0 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.7
         Q4 + 4.6 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 + 5.5 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.5
2009          Q1 + 1.9 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0
         Q2 + 8.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.0
         Q3 + 4.3 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.7
 Long-term lending
2008          Q3 + 11.5 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 3.0
         Q4 + 2.4 − 3.2 − 2.8 − 3.5 + 0.7 + 4.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.2
2009          Q1 − 8.2 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.4 − 1.5 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1
         Q2 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 4.5
         Q3 + 7.4 − 0.7 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 3.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 2.6
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations 1Excluding fiduciary loans. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including the
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer goods. —
always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and housing
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balances
on wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
690.3 165.0 46.2 197.5 386.6 58.2 1,015.2 791.6 223.7 129.3 17.2 14.0 3.5 2007
698.8 167.1 49.0 198.4 382.4 58.6 1,012.3 789.5 222.8 130.4 17.9 13.5 3.3 2008          Sep 
691.9 169.4 51.7 190.2 381.4 58.2 1,011.4 787.3 224.0 132.1 17.1 13.5 3.3          Dec 
676.8 183.9 51.9 168.0 378.3 58.2 1,007.2 783.0 224.2 134.7 16.2 13.2 3.2 2009          Mar 
667.5 181.2 50.7 171.3 380.3 55.7 1,010.3 783.4 226.8 137.2 16.1 12.7 3.1          June
663.9 180.9 50.0 172.3 379.7 55.1 1,015.9 788.1 227.8 140.3 16.2 13.0 3.3          Sep 
Short-term lending
88.0 13.0 13.0 23.3 35.7 9.4 39.2 4.0 35.2 2.5 17.2 0.8 0.0 2007
91.4 13.6 14.7 23.7 35.0 9.9 39.2 3.9 35.3 2.4 17.9 0.7 0.0 2008          Sep 
91.4 13.4 17.0 19.3 35.4 9.4 39.7 3.9 35.8 2.8 17.1 1.0 0.0          Dec 
85.7 12.9 16.6 16.2 35.8 10.0 39.1 3.9 35.2 3.0 16.2 0.8 0.0 2009          Mar 
81.0 12.0 15.5 16.4 35.5 9.8 39.2 3.9 35.3 3.1 16.1 0.7 0.0          June
76.5 11.5 15.1 15.8 34.6 9.2 39.7 4.0 35.7 3.0 16.2 0.7 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
65.7 7.4 7.5 17.7 27.4 3.7 65.4 21.7 43.6 35.8 − 0.7 0.0 2007
71.2 8.7 8.5 19.5 26.8 3.9 62.3 20.1 42.2 34.4 − 0.6 0.0 2008          Sep 
73.3 8.2 9.2 21.3 26.7 4.0 62.3 19.5 42.8 35.1 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
71.9 8.3 9.8 20.0 26.5 4.1 63.9 20.1 43.8 36.7 − 0.5 0.0 2009          Mar 
71.3 7.9 10.3 20.8 26.8 4.1 65.4 20.1 45.2 38.1 − 0.5 0.0          June
72.1 8.3 10.5 21.9 27.2 4.0 67.0 20.4 46.6 39.6 − 0.6 0.0          Sep 
Long-term lending
536.6 144.7 25.7 156.5 323.5 45.1 910.6 765.8 144.8 90.9 − 12.5 3.4 2007
536.2 144.7 25.8 155.1 320.6 44.8 910.9 765.5 145.3 93.6 − 12.2 3.3 2008          Sep 
527.2 147.8 25.6 149.7 319.3 44.8 909.4 763.9 145.4 94.2 − 11.9 3.2          Dec 
519.1 162.7 25.6 131.8 316.0 44.1 904.3 759.0 145.2 95.0 − 11.8 3.2 2009          Mar 
515.2 161.3 24.8 134.2 318.1 41.9 905.7 759.4 146.3 96.0 − 11.4 3.0          June
515.3 161.1 24.4 134.6 317.9 41.9 909.2 763.7 145.5 97.7 − 11.7 3.3          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 1.0 − 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 2008          Q3
+ 2.0 + 0.5 + 2.4 − 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 6.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 2009          Q1
− 5.5 − 2.2 − 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2          Q2
− 4.5 − 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 5.7 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2          Q3
Short-term lending
+ 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 2008          Q3
+ 2.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
− 2.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 2009          Q1
− 3.7 − 0.6 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
− 5.2 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 1.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2008          Q3
+ 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 1.6 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2009          Q1
+ 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
+ 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.1 2008          Q3
− 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.3 − − 1.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.0 − − 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
− 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 − − 0.1 − 0.1 2009          Q1
− 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.8 + 2.6 + 1.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.5 − − 0.4 − 0.2          Q2
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.5 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 1.6 − + 0.3 + 0.2          Q3
loans, even in the form of instalment credit. — x As of December 2008, the individual sectors. As the resulting breaks could only be statistically adjusted
data are collected according to the Federal Statistical Office’s "Classification in part, the data from 2008 Q4 onwards are not fully comparable with those
of Economic Activities", Edition 2008 (WZ 2008). The changeover from the from preceding quarters. 
"old" to the "new" classification resulted in many changes within the
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2006 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 289.5 673.3 11.7 661.6 586.5 97.5 37.8 30.4 11.2
2007 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 418.9 706.5 22.8 683.7 555.4 118.4 36.4 35.0 22.6
2008 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2008          Oct 2,719.2 812.8 1,252.5 534.6 717.9 32.8 685.1 520.8 133.1 32.3 35.6 63.3
         Nov 2,748.8 832.8 1,257.9 540.2 717.6 33.5 684.1 523.4 134.7 32.2 34.8 68.9
         Dec 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 530.6 745.6 32.6 713.0 535.2 135.4 32.3 34.4 59.3
2009          Jan 2,799.9 884.4 1,242.7 493.9 748.8 32.7 716.1 539.0 133.8 31.9 34.2 65.7
         Feb 2,820.0 912.1 1,231.8 477.0 754.8 32.7 722.1 544.3 131.9 31.8 34.1 73.0
         Mar 2,817.3 914.0 1,226.4 469.1 757.3 32.4 724.9 547.8 129.1 30.9 34.1 86.4
         Apr 2,839.6 932.2 1,231.1 469.7 761.4 32.9 728.4 551.1 125.2 31.1 34.0 91.9
         May 2,837.0 935.4 1,224.4 461.0 763.4 33.7 729.7 555.1 122.1 31.2 34.6 91.4
         June 2,847.3 956.0 1,213.1 436.9 776.2 33.4 742.8 559.7 118.5 31.1 34.7 93.6
         July 2,819.9 954.4 1,185.6 409.5 776.1 33.7 742.4 565.5 114.4 31.2 35.1 81.1
         Aug 2,801.5 962.4 1,157.0 390.8 766.2 33.1 733.1 570.8 111.2 42.0 35.2 72.7
         Sep 2,810.6 987.1 1,139.7 374.1 765.5 32.4 733.2 575.1 108.6 42.2 35.4 83.5
Changes *
2007 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 + 127.5 + 33.0 + 11.0 + 22.0 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 + 3.3 + 9.9
2008 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 + 114.5 + 42.1 + 10.0 + 32.0 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 36.7
2008          Oct + 43.2 + 28.1 + 10.1 + 13.0 − 2.9 + 0.6 − 3.5 + 1.5 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6
         Nov + 34.3 + 20.0 + 10.1 + 7.6 + 2.5 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 5.7
         Dec + 33.5 + 1.8 + 19.2 − 8.8 + 27.9 − 0.9 + 28.9 + 11.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.7
2009          Jan + 18.5 + 49.7 − 33.5 − 36.7 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.4
         Feb + 20.2 + 27.7 − 10.9 − 16.9 + 6.0 + 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 7.4
         Mar − 3.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 − 7.9 + 1.8 − 0.3 + 2.1 + 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 13.4
         Apr + 22.3 + 34.9 − 12.0 − 16.1 + 4.1 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5
         May − 2.6 + 3.0 − 6.5 − 8.5 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 3.9 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.5
         June + 10.3 + 20.6 − 11.3 − 24.1 + 12.8 − 0.3 + 13.1 + 4.7 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.2
         July − 27.4 − 1.7 − 27.4 − 27.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 5.8 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 12.6
         Aug − 7.0 + 8.0 − 17.2 − 18.7 + 1.5 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 8.4
         Sep + 9.1 + 24.7 − 17.4 − 16.7 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 10.8
Domestic government End of year or month *
2006 134.4 26.7 104.0 51.1 52.9 2.1 50.8 2.1 1.6 28.2 0.8 −
2007 158.5 28.0 127.7 71.9 55.8 3.7 52.1 1.4 1.5 27.6 4.5 −
2008 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
2008          Oct 160.4 27.2 130.7 75.2 55.5 4.5 51.0 1.1 1.4 24.3 4.4 −
         Nov 164.9 30.5 131.9 77.4 54.5 4.3 50.2 1.1 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
         Dec 164.7 34.2 127.8 75.4 52.5 3.6 48.8 1.2 1.5 24.2 3.9 −
2009          Jan 158.4 33.3 122.3 69.8 52.5 3.7 48.8 1.3 1.4 24.1 3.9 −
         Feb 161.1 38.0 120.2 67.4 52.8 3.9 48.9 1.5 1.5 24.0 3.9 0.2
         Mar 154.1 37.2 113.7 61.9 51.9 3.4 48.5 1.7 1.5 24.1 3.9 0.1
         Apr 156.6 42.0 111.3 59.7 51.6 3.6 48.0 1.7 1.5 24.1 3.9 1.1
         May 161.5 42.5 115.7 63.9 51.8 3.8 48.0 1.8 1.5 24.1 3.9 2.2
         June 164.1 44.9 115.8 64.5 51.3 3.6 47.7 1.9 1.5 24.0 3.9 3.5
         July 151.0 41.6 105.8 54.1 51.7 3.9 47.9 2.1 1.5 24.1 3.9 2.2
         Aug 139.8 42.2 93.8 52.7 41.1 3.9 37.3 2.2 1.5 34.7 3.9 3.8
         Sep 133.7 43.6 86.4 45.3 41.1 3.9 37.1 2.3 1.5 34.9 3.9 1.8
Changes *
2007 + 23.5 + 1.2 + 23.0 + 20.8 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 2.6 −
2008 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.5 + 5.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.0
2008          Oct − 5.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 5.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Nov + 6.9 + 3.3 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 −
         Dec − 0.3 + 3.7 − 4.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
2009          Jan − 6.3 − 0.9 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 2.8 + 4.7 − 2.1 − 2.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Mar − 7.0 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 5.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Apr + 2.4 + 4.7 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 4.9 + 0.5 + 4.4 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2
         June + 2.6 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.3
         July − 13.1 − 3.4 − 10.0 − 10.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.3
         Aug + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.6
         Sep − 6.0 + 1.4 − 7.5 − 7.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
 
2006 2,260.2 721.0 858.8 238.4 620.4 9.6 610.8 584.5 95.9 9.6 29.5 11.2
2007 2,420.6 752.0 997.7 347.0 650.7 19.0 631.7 554.0 116.9 8.8 30.5 22.6
2008 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2008          Oct 2,558.8 785.6 1,121.8 459.5 662.4 28.4 634.0 519.7 131.6 8.0 31.2 63.3
         Nov 2,583.8 802.3 1,126.0 462.9 663.1 29.2 633.9 522.2 133.3 8.0 30.9 68.9
         Dec 2,616.7 800.5 1,148.3 455.2 693.1 29.0 664.1 534.0 133.9 8.1 30.5 59.3
2009          Jan 2,641.5 851.1 1,120.4 424.0 696.3 29.0 667.3 537.7 132.4 7.8 30.3 65.7
         Feb 2,658.9 874.1 1,111.6 409.6 702.0 28.8 673.2 542.8 130.4 7.8 30.2 72.8
         Mar 2,663.2 876.8 1,112.7 407.2 705.4 29.0 676.4 546.2 127.6 6.8 30.2 86.3
         Apr 2,683.0 890.1 1,119.7 410.0 709.7 29.3 680.4 549.4 123.7 7.0 30.1 90.9
         May 2,675.4 892.9 1,108.7 397.1 711.6 29.9 681.7 553.3 120.6 7.1 30.7 89.2
         June 2,683.2 911.1 1,097.3 372.4 724.9 29.9 695.1 557.8 117.0 7.1 30.8 90.2
         July 2,668.9 912.8 1,079.8 355.4 724.4 29.9 694.5 563.5 112.8 7.2 31.2 78.9
         Aug 2,661.7 920.2 1,063.2 338.1 725.1 29.3 695.8 568.5 109.7 7.2 31.3 68.9
         Sep 2,676.8 943.5 1,053.3 328.8 724.5 28.4 696.0 572.9 107.1 7.3 31.4 81.7
Changes *
2007 + 157.7 + 30.3 + 137.6 + 106.8 + 30.8 + 9.4 + 21.4 − 30.5 + 20.2 − 0.7 + 0.7 + 9.9
2008 + 199.1 + 48.1 + 154.0 + 109.4 + 44.6 + 10.0 + 34.6 − 20.0 + 17.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 36.7
2008          Oct + 48.7 + 27.9 + 15.7 + 18.2 − 2.5 + 0.7 − 3.2 + 1.6 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6
         Nov + 27.4 + 16.7 + 6.5 + 3.8 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 1.8 + 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.7
         Dec + 33.8 − 1.9 + 23.2 − 6.8 + 30.0 − 0.2 + 30.2 + 11.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 9.7
2009          Jan + 24.8 + 50.6 − 27.9 − 31.1 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.4
         Feb + 17.4 + 23.0 − 8.8 − 14.4 + 5.7 − 0.2 + 5.9 + 5.2 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.2
         Mar + 4.0 + 2.7 + 0.4 − 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 3.3 − 2.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.4
         Apr + 19.9 + 30.2 − 9.6 − 13.9 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 3.3 − 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.6
         May − 7.6 + 2.6 − 10.9 − 12.8 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 3.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.6
         June + 7.7 + 18.2 − 11.4 − 24.7 + 13.3 − 0.1 + 13.4 + 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.9
         July − 14.3 + 1.7 − 17.4 − 16.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 5.6 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 11.3
         Aug − 7.2 + 7.4 − 16.6 − 17.3 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 5.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 10.0
         Sep + 15.1 + 23.3 − 9.9 − 9.3 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 4.3 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 12.8
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2006 874.9 256.1 594.1 122.8 471.3 3.2 468.1 4.5 20.2 9.1 20.0 11.2
2007 961.9 264.9 672.9 178.6 494.3 5.5 488.8 3.9 20.1 8.3 21.5 22.6
2008 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.3
2008          Oct 1,049.5 293.9 732.4 225.5 506.9 8.4 498.5 3.8 19.4 7.8 22.5 63.3
         Nov 1,052.3 292.4 736.6 229.6 507.0 8.2 498.9 3.8 19.4 7.8 22.3 68.9
         Dec 1,073.5 292.6 757.7 223.7 534.0 7.7 526.3 3.8 19.3 7.8 22.0 59.3
2009          Jan 1,091.9 321.5 747.2 208.8 538.4 8.2 530.1 3.9 19.3 7.5 21.8 65.7
         Feb 1,098.3 323.5 751.5 207.1 544.3 8.4 536.0 4.1 19.3 7.5 21.8 72.8
         Mar 1,106.1 318.9 763.7 217.1 546.6 8.6 538.0 4.3 19.2 6.7 21.7 86.3
         Apr 1,120.1 313.6 782.9 232.5 550.5 9.0 541.5 4.4 19.1 6.9 21.6 90.9
         May 1,106.5 305.7 777.2 225.7 551.5 9.2 542.2 4.5 19.2 7.0 21.5 89.2
         June 1,116.0 319.8 772.3 208.2 564.1 9.1 555.0 4.7 19.3 7.0 21.5 90.2
         July 1,100.5 313.2 763.1 199.9 563.2 9.1 554.0 4.9 19.3 7.1 21.8 78.9
         Aug 1,093.6 311.2 758.0 194.2 563.8 9.1 554.7 5.0 19.4 7.1 21.8 68.9
         Sep 1,109.2 326.3 758.1 195.5 562.6 8.5 554.1 5.1 19.6 7.2 21.9 81.7
Changes *
2007 + 84.8 + 8.1 + 77.6 + 53.9 + 23.7 + 2.3 + 21.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.5 + 9.9
2008 + 110.4 + 27.0 + 84.4 + 45.0 + 39.3 + 2.1 + 37.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 36.7
2008          Oct + 10.4 + 13.2 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.6
         Nov + 5.0 − 1.5 + 6.5 + 4.4 + 2.0 − 0.2 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 5.7
         Dec + 22.1 + 0.2 + 22.0 − 5.0 + 26.9 − 0.5 + 27.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.7
2009          Jan + 18.4 + 28.8 − 10.5 − 14.9 + 4.4 + 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 6.4
         Feb + 6.5 + 2.0 + 4.3 − 1.7 + 6.0 + 0.2 + 5.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.2
         Mar + 7.4 − 4.5 + 11.9 + 9.9 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.4
         Apr + 15.1 + 12.5 + 2.6 − 1.3 + 3.9 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 4.6
         May − 13.5 − 7.9 − 5.7 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.6
         June + 9.4 + 14.1 − 4.9 − 17.6 + 12.6 − 0.2 + 12.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9
         July − 15.5 − 6.5 − 9.2 − 8.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 11.3
         Aug − 6.9 − 2.0 − 5.1 − 5.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 10.0
         Sep + 15.6 + 15.1 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 12.8
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2006 1,385.3 464.9 450.3 81.7 307.4 61.1 14.6 264.7 245.7 30.1 198.6 16.9
2007 1,458.7 487.1 472.1 83.9 320.9 67.2 15.0 324.8 300.7 41.7 234.3 24.7
2008 1,543.2 507.8 491.8 85.1 336.5 70.3 16.0 390.6 367.2 50.4 281.0 35.8
2009          Apr 1,562.9 576.5 558.4 98.7 377.3 82.5 18.1 336.8 315.8 35.1 251.5 29.2
         May 1,568.9 587.2 568.5 99.8 384.8 84.0 18.7 331.5 310.6 34.1 247.9 28.7
         June 1,567.2 591.3 572.5 98.8 388.6 85.0 18.8 325.0 304.6 32.3 244.5 27.9
         July 1,568.5 599.6 580.3 103.2 391.3 85.8 19.3 316.8 296.7 31.6 238.3 26.9
         Aug 1,568.2 609.0 589.9 105.7 397.8 86.4 19.2 305.2 285.5 29.6 230.7 25.2
         Sep 1,567.7 617.2 598.0 105.5 404.4 88.1 19.2 295.2 276.3 28.1 224.5 23.7
Changes *
2007 + 72.9 + 22.2 + 21.8 + 2.2 + 16.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 60.0 + 54.9 + 11.6 + 35.6 + 7.8
2008 + 88.7 + 21.1 + 19.5 + 1.2 + 15.2 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 69.7 + 66.6 + 9.4 + 46.1 + 11.1
2009          Apr + 4.8 + 17.7 + 17.9 + 5.2 + 10.1 + 2.6 − 0.2 − 12.2 − 11.7 − 2.5 − 8.5 − 0.7
         May + 6.0 + 10.5 + 9.9 + 1.1 + 7.3 + 1.6 + 0.6 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 0.6
         June − 1.7 + 4.1 + 4.0 − 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 6.4 − 6.0 − 1.8 − 3.4 − 0.8
         July + 1.2 + 8.2 + 7.7 + 4.3 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 8.2 − 7.9 − 0.7 − 6.2 − 1.0
         Aug − 0.3 + 9.4 + 9.6 + 2.5 + 6.5 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 11.5 − 11.2 − 1.9 − 7.6 − 1.7
         Sep − 0.5 + 8.2 + 8.2 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 10.0 − 9.2 − 1.5 − 6.2 − 1.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
 
 
 
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2006 134.4 41.9 2.1 6.2 33.6 0.0 9.5 18.0 5.4 2.5 10.0 0.1 18.5
2007 158.5 38.3 1.9 3.1 33.2 0.0 8.2 27.9 6.0 11.2 10.6 0.1 19.1
2008 164.7 34.8 2.3 3.7 28.9 0.0 6.6 28.2 6.9 9.9 11.3 0.1 17.3
2009          Apr 156.6 32.0 0.7 3.2 28.1 0.0 6.6 30.1 10.3 9.1 10.6 0.2 17.0
         May 161.5 36.5 1.6 6.7 28.2 0.0 6.6 27.3 6.8 9.7 10.7 0.2 17.0
         June 164.1 40.6 2.0 10.5 28.0 0.0 6.6 30.9 10.5 9.8 10.4 0.2 17.0
         July 151.0 34.6 1.4 4.9 28.2 0.0 6.6 26.6 8.8 7.2 10.4 0.2 17.0
         Aug 139.8 25.0 1.3 6.3 17.4 0.0 17.3 26.0 7.0 8.4 10.4 0.2 17.0
         Sep 133.7 22.7 1.3 3.9 17.5 0.0 17.4 28.0 9.6 7.9 10.3 0.2 17.0
Changes *
2007 + 23.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.6 + 8.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8
2008 + 8.5 − 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6
2009          Apr + 2.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 3.2 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 4.9 + 4.4 + 0.8 + 3.5 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 2.8 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         June + 2.6 + 4.1 + 0.5 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.3 − − 0.1
         July − 13.1 − 6.0 − 0.6 − 5.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2 − 1.7 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Aug + 0.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.8 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Sep − 6.0 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month *
 
19.1 115.6 149.2 6.4 142.7 580.0 571.1 8.9 75.7 0.5 9.5 − 2006
24.1 168.4 156.4 13.5 142.8 550.1 542.4 7.7 96.8 0.5 9.0 − 2007
23.4 231.5 159.2 21.3 137.9 530.2 523.1 7.1 114.6 0.3 8.5 − 2008
21.0 177.5 159.2 20.4 138.9 545.0 537.2 7.8 104.6 0.1 8.5 − 2009          Apr 
20.9 171.3 160.1 20.7 139.4 548.8 540.8 8.0 101.4 0.1 9.2 −          May
20.4 164.2 160.8 20.8 140.0 553.2 544.9 8.2 97.7 0.1 9.3 −          June
20.0 155.5 161.2 20.7 140.5 558.6 550.2 8.4 93.5 0.1 9.4 −          July
19.7 143.9 161.3 20.2 141.1 563.6 555.0 8.5 90.3 0.1 9.4 −          Aug 
18.9 133.3 161.9 20.0 141.9 567.7 559.0 8.7 87.5 0.1 9.6 −          Sep 
Changes *
+ 5.0 + 52.9 + 7.1 + 7.1 + 0.0 − 29.9 − 28.7 − 1.2 + 20.6 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 2007
+ 3.1 + 64.4 + 5.3 + 7.9 − 2.6 − 19.9 − 19.3 − 0.6 + 17.8 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2008
− 0.5 − 12.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 3.2 + 2.9 + 0.2 − 3.8 − + 0.1 − 2009          Apr 
− 0.2 − 6.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 3.8 + 3.6 + 0.2 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 −          May
− 0.5 − 7.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 4.4 + 4.2 + 0.2 − 3.7 − + 0.1 −          June
− 0.4 − 8.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 5.4 + 5.2 + 0.2 − 4.2 − + 0.1 −          July
− 0.3 − 11.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 5.0 + 4.9 + 0.1 − 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          Aug 
− 0.8 − 10.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 4.2 + 4.0 + 0.2 − 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          Sep 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
30.5 11.5 12.7 3.4 3.0 0.3 44.0 7.8 29.7 6.0 0.6 0.0 2006
37.8 12.3 19.5 3.6 2.5 0.3 54.5 7.7 38.1 8.4 0.3 0.0 2007
42.5 14.3 22.0 3.9 2.2 0.2 59.2 10.7 39.8 8.4 0.3 0.0 2008
40.1 16.8 16.7 4.0 2.6 0.4 54.3 14.2 30.8 8.9 0.4 0.0 2009          Apr 
43.4 19.8 16.7 4.1 2.7 0.4 54.4 14.4 30.9 8.8 0.4 0.0          May
40.4 17.9 15.7 4.0 2.7 0.4 52.3 14.5 28.5 8.8 0.5 0.0          June
39.6 17.7 14.9 4.2 2.9 0.4 50.1 13.6 27.0 8.9 0.5 0.0          July
41.9 19.6 15.0 4.3 3.0 0.4 46.8 14.3 22.9 9.0 0.5 0.0          Aug 
38.4 18.1 12.9 4.3 3.0 0.4 44.6 14.5 20.6 8.9 0.6 0.0          Sep 
Changes *
+ 7.4 + 0.9 + 6.8 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 10.5 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 2007
+ 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2008
− 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − − + 0.3 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2009          Apr 
+ 3.2 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          May
− 3.0 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 2.1 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          June
− 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 − − 2.2 − 0.9 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          July
+ 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 3.3 + 0.7 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Aug 
− 3.5 − 1.4 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          Sep 
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2006 594.9 586.5 487.4 384.4 99.1 89.8 8.3 6.4 13.2 107.6 97.5 70.5 10.0
2007 563.8 555.4 446.0 354.6 109.4 101.4 8.4 6.1 14.2 130.7 118.4 64.5 12.3
2008 544.1 535.2 424.8 344.0 110.4 103.2 8.9 6.3 14.9 150.8 135.4 59.6 15.4
2009          May 564.3 555.1 441.5 356.0 113.5 106.4 9.2 6.6 0.4 137.2 122.1 60.8 15.0
         June 569.0 559.7 445.2 358.1 114.5 107.3 9.3 6.6 0.4 133.5 118.5 61.2 15.0
         July 574.8 565.5 449.8 361.7 115.7 108.3 9.3 6.7 0.6 129.2 114.4 61.8 14.8
         Aug 580.2 570.8 454.3 365.2 116.5 109.1 9.4 6.8 0.5 125.9 111.2 62.5 14.7
         Sep 584.6 575.1 457.4 367.0 117.7 110.3 9.5 6.8 0.5 124.4 108.6 63.3 15.8
Changes *
2007 − 31.0 − 31.1 − 41.4 − 28.8 + 10.3 + 11.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 . + 22.4 + 20.1 − 6.7 + 2.2
2008 − 19.7 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 11.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 . + 20.1 + 17.0 − 4.9 + 3.2
2009          May + 3.9 + 3.9 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 3.5 − 3.1 + 0.9 − 0.4
         June + 4.7 + 4.7 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 3.7 − 3.7 + 0.4 + 0.0
         July + 5.9 + 5.8 + 4.6 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 4.3 − 4.1 + 0.7 − 0.2
         Aug + 5.4 + 5.3 + 4.5 + 3.4 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 . − 3.3 − 3.1 + 0.6 − 0.1
         Sep + 4.4 + 4.3 + 3.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.5 − 2.6 + 0.9 + 1.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
 
 
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  5 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total bonds  1 deposit 1 year 2 years 2 years Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 securities securities
End of year or month *
 
2006 1,636.2 392.5 41.1 301.5 30.9 68.3 118.3 1,449.5 1.8 0.2 0.8 0.7 51.4 1.2
2007 1,659.1 375.7 54.2 305.1 51.2 109.6 147.5 1,402.0 1.9 0.1 1.1 0.7 53.6 1.4
2008 1,640.1 395.9 50.7 314.1 64.0 162.6 153.3 1,324.2 2.3 0.2 1.3 0.8 52.5 1.6
2009          May 1,595.8 390.7 50.6 317.1 59.3 108.0 158.3 1,329.5 1.6 0.1 0.8 0.7 48.0 2.1
         June 1,590.3 390.8 49.4 319.9 58.7 102.4 150.3 1,337.5 1.5 0.1 0.7 0.7 47.9 2.1
         July 1,585.7 396.4 49.2 322.0 60.4 101.3 147.6 1,336.8 1.4 0.1 0.6 0.7 47.8 2.1
         Aug 1,591.9 398.7 49.1 326.2 65.3 103.4 143.7 1,344.8 1.3 0.1 0.6 0.7 47.5 2.1
         Sep 1,564.5 391.6 48.2 312.8 64.5 100.2 140.1 1,324.2 1.2 0.0 0.5 0.7 47.2 2.0
Changes *
2007 + 21.7 − 17.5 + 12.9 + 3.6 + 20.2 + 40.7 + 32.3 − 51.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.0
2008 − 17.0 + 18.2 − 3.7 + 9.0 + 12.8 + 53.1 + 5.8 − 75.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.1
2009          May − 0.9 + 1.7 + 0.3 − 9.1 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 1.5 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5
         June − 5.5 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 2.7 − 0.7 − 5.6 − 8.0 + 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0
         July − 4.6 + 5.6 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 1.8 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Aug + 6.2 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 4.2 + 4.9 + 2.1 − 3.9 + 8.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0
         Sep − 27.4 − 7.1 − 0.9 − 13.5 − 0.8 − 3.2 − 3.5 − 20.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 4Bonds denominated in non-euro-area currencies. — 5Non-negotiable
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also
Report, are not specially marked. — 1Including debt securities denominated Table IV.10, footnote 2). 
in foreign currencies. — 2Issue value when floated. — 3Including floating
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tracts
ber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- entered
of Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2008 25 188.4 39.8 0.1 13.4 29.4 68.9 11.9 11.0 0.2 25.2 120.0 6.5 7.5 7.3 97.6
2009          July 25 191.0 36.6 0.1 18.7 29.8 69.2 12.1 12.0 0.2 28.0 119.1 6.7 7.6 7.3 7.0
         Aug 25 191.8 37.0 0.1 18.9 29.7 69.5 12.1 12.0 0.3 28.0 119.3 6.8 7.8 7.3 6.7
         Sep 25 192.7 37.1 0.0 18.9 29.7 69.9 12.3 12.2 0.3 29.6 119.7 6.9 6.4 7.3 7.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          July 15 139.9 22.0 0.0 14.2 19.0 54.5 11.0 7.3 0.1 24.0 78.2 6.5 7.6 4.7 4.3
         Aug 15 140.7 22.4 0.0 14.4 19.0 54.7 11.0 7.3 0.1 24.2 78.4 6.6 7.8 4.7 4.1
         Sep 15 141.4 22.3 0.0 14.6 18.9 55.2 11.1 7.4 0.2 25.8 78.6 6.7 6.4 4.7 4.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          July 10 51.1 14.6 0.0 4.5 10.8 14.8 1.1 4.7 0.1 4.0 40.9 0.2 − 2.6 2.6
         Aug 10 51.1 14.6 0.0 4.5 10.8 14.8 1.0 4.7 0.1 3.8 41.0 0.2 − 2.6 2.5
         Sep 10 51.3 14.7 0.0 4.4 10.8 14.8 1.2 4.7 0.1 3.9 41.0 0.2 − 2.6 2.7
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts  9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2008 24.2 2.7 6.6 50.7 38.2 48.1 24.3 4.2 9.9 3.9 14.0 10.1 7.6 10.2 8.4 0.5
2009          July 2.0 0.0 0.5 4.5 2.9 4.1 1.7 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.4 11.2 7.7 1.0 0.0
         Aug 2.0 0.0 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.2 11.3 7.8 0.9 0.0
         Sep 2.1 0.0 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.4 1.4 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.3 11.2 7.7 1.0 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          July 1.3 0.0 0.3 3.1 1.8 2.9 1.1 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.2 7.0 4.1 0.7 0.0
         Aug 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.5 2.3 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.9 7.0 4.1 0.6 0.0
         Sep 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.5 2.5 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.2 1.1 7.0 4.0 0.7 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2009          July 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.4 1.1 1.2 0.6 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.3 4.2 3.6 0.3 0.0
         Aug 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.7 0.3 0.0
         Sep 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.2 3.7 0.3 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
with
foreign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to market
foreign foreign Balance paper, and foreign paper,
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2006 53 213 1,743.7 711.6 635.5 194.1 441.4 76.1 897.7 671.8 18.5 17.9 653.3 226.0 134.3
2007 52 218 2,042.4 813.8 743.1 238.6 504.5 70.7 1,066.8 811.4 21.6 20.7 789.8 255.3 161.8
2008 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 19.2 610.3 194.9 159.5
2008          Nov 54 226 1,970.8 810.0 748.3 253.6 494.7 61.7 983.3 758.8 23.2 22.2 735.6 224.5 177.5
         Dec 56 226 1,715.5 730.7 669.1 244.9 424.2 61.6 825.3 630.4 20.2 19.2 610.3 194.9 159.5
2009          Jan 56 231 1,816.9 759.6 701.4 257.6 443.8 58.2 880.2 678.9 22.8 21.8 656.0 201.3 177.1
         Feb 56 231 1,797.0 725.5 668.8 252.6 416.2 56.8 855.8 659.1 25.1 24.0 634.0 196.7 215.7
         Mar 56 230 1,718.0 715.1 659.8 257.7 402.0 55.3 801.5 614.9 21.5 20.4 593.5 186.6 201.4
         Apr 56 230 1,786.9 753.9 698.6 276.3 422.3 55.3 815.6 633.6 24.7 23.7 608.9 182.1 217.4
         May 56 228 1,723.8 722.6 670.3 266.7 403.5 52.3 780.3 607.2 23.6 22.6 583.6 173.1 220.9
         June 55 224 1,680.2 715.4 666.5 260.9 405.7 48.8 760.5 588.8 20.9 19.9 567.9 171.6 204.4
         July 54 223 1,627.0 683.2 636.3 252.0 384.4 46.9 740.7 576.2 20.9 19.8 555.4 164.4 203.2
         Aug 54 225 1,586.8 663.4 617.1 248.1 369.0 46.3 720.8 555.7 21.5 20.5 534.2 165.1 202.6
Changes *
2007 − 1 + 5 +406.5 +132.8 +136.4 + 44.5 + 91.9 − 3.6 +240.6 +196.1 + 3.1 + 2.9 +192.9 + 44.5 + 33.1
2008 + 4 + 8 −359.4 − 98.5 − 89.3 + 6.3 − 95.5 − 9.2 −256.8 −190.7 − 1.5 − 1.6 −189.3 − 66.1 − 4.1
2008          Nov − 1 − 2 −129.0 − 57.9 − 56.3 − 20.7 − 35.6 − 1.7 − 56.9 − 35.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 35.6 − 21.3 − 14.2
         Dec + 2 − −165.3 − 48.6 − 49.9 − 8.7 − 41.2 + 1.3 −101.6 − 83.6 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 80.5 − 18.0 − 15.0
2009          Jan − + 5 + 30.8 + 3.0 + 7.5 + 12.8 − 5.3 − 4.5 + 11.8 + 15.2 + 2.7 + 2.6 + 12.5 − 3.3 + 16.0
         Feb − − − 25.7 − 35.9 − 34.4 − 5.0 − 29.4 − 1.5 − 28.3 − 22.9 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 25.1 − 5.4 + 38.6
         Mar − − 1 − 37.2 + 4.0 + 4.8 + 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 28.0 − 24.1 − 3.6 − 3.6 − 20.5 − 3.9 − 13.2
         Apr − − + 61.7 + 37.0 + 37.2 + 18.6 + 18.6 − 0.2 + 8.9 + 14.5 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 11.3 − 5.6 + 15.7
         May − − 2 − 27.3 − 17.6 − 15.2 − 9.6 − 5.6 − 2.5 − 15.0 − 10.8 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 9.8 − 4.1 + 5.3
         June − 1 − 4 − 43.6 − 6.5 − 3.0 − 5.9 + 2.9 − 3.5 − 20.6 − 19.3 − 2.7 − 2.7 − 16.6 − 1.2 − 16.5
         July − 1 − 1 − 53.9 − 32.5 − 30.6 − 8.9 − 21.7 − 2.0 − 20.1 − 12.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 12.7 − 7.4 − 1.2
         Aug − + 2 − 32.2 − 17.4 − 16.9 − 3.9 − 13.0 − 0.5 − 14.4 − 16.0 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 16.7 + 1.6 − 0.4
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2006 40 142 761.2 341.9 262.8 124.1 138.7 79.1 347.3 218.7 38.0 36.4 180.7 128.6 72.1
2007 39 120 590.8 267.8 202.4 104.8 97.5 65.5 263.9 176.0 37.8 36.8 138.1 87.9 59.0
2008 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 41.6 154.3 71.3 82.2
2008          Nov 39 118 611.9 255.9 193.0 87.4 105.6 62.9 280.6 204.4 43.8 43.2 160.6 76.2 75.4
         Dec 38 116 594.9 244.9 183.1 85.5 97.6 61.8 267.8 196.5 42.2 41.6 154.3 71.3 82.2
2009          Jan 38 115 580.6 244.3 184.1 78.6 105.5 60.2 272.4 199.6 43.5 43.0 156.1 72.7 64.0
         Feb 38 115 573.5 241.0 180.0 77.2 102.9 60.9 270.4 199.4 43.5 43.0 155.9 71.0 62.1
         Mar 38 113 560.7 227.1 168.1 75.8 92.3 59.0 264.4 194.3 43.1 42.6 151.2 70.1 69.2
         Apr 38 113 552.1 229.9 172.0 74.2 97.8 57.9 266.9 195.0 43.5 42.9 151.5 71.9 55.2
         May 37 112 533.6 220.1 165.1 74.3 90.7 55.0 261.4 191.7 43.1 42.5 148.7 69.7 52.1
         June 37 111 530.3 218.2 163.8 75.0 88.8 54.4 260.4 190.8 42.4 41.8 148.4 69.7 51.7
         July 37 112 526.5 208.9 155.0 72.3 82.7 54.0 260.8 191.3 41.9 41.3 149.4 69.6 56.7
         Aug 37 112 523.9 211.8 158.0 71.6 86.4 53.8 257.1 189.7 41.0 40.5 148.8 67.4 55.0
Changes *
2007 − 1 − 22 −155.7 − 64.1 − 55.8 − 19.3 − 36.5 − 8.3 − 79.1 − 38.8 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 38.6 − 40.4 − 12.5
2008 − 1 − 4 − 0.2 − 24.2 − 19.8 − 19.3 − 0.5 − 4.4 + 1.1 + 17.5 + 4.4 + 4.8 + 13.2 − 16.4 + 22.9
2008          Nov − − 1 − 6.3 − 10.5 − 10.3 − 3.2 − 7.2 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 3.7 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 2.5 + 3.0
         Dec − 1 − 2 − 6.3 − 4.3 − 6.0 − 1.9 − 4.1 + 1.6 − 9.1 − 4.2 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 4.9 + 7.1
2009          Jan − − 1 − 24.3 − 6.6 − 2.6 − 6.9 + 4.3 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 18.5
         Feb − − − 8.2 − 3.9 − 4.5 − 1.5 − 3.0 + 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.7 − 2.0
         Mar − − 2 − 6.3 − 10.3 − 10.0 − 1.3 − 8.6 − 0.4 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 7.4
         Apr − − − 9.8 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 + 5.1 − 1.4 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 14.1
         May − 1 − 1 − 13.5 − 7.2 − 5.6 + 0.2 − 5.8 − 1.5 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 2.9
         June − − 1 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4
         July − + 1 − 3.8 − 9.3 − 8.8 − 2.7 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 5.0
         Aug − − − 1.7 + 3.4 + 3.3 − 0.7 + 4.0 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 1.7
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign ies.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provision al;
branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report , are
from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given country of domicile
have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign subsidiar-
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IV  Banks
  
  
  
  
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,442.7 984.9 398.5 586.4 457.8 53.8 49.3 46.2 4.6 4.1 403.9 181.5 27.8 91.7 2006
1,723.7 1,191.0 547.7 643.3 532.7 55.3 51.2 47.5 4.1 3.9 477.4 186.0 29.2 103.5 2007
1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 34.6 8.5 8.0 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2 2008
1,668.4 1,195.4 572.8 622.6 472.9 47.2 39.7 37.7 7.5 6.8 425.8 136.3 35.0 131.2 2008          Nov 
1,446.1 1,070.4 554.3 516.1 375.7 45.0 36.5 34.6 8.5 8.0 330.7 126.6 35.6 107.2          Dec 
1,539.5 1,099.3 534.7 564.6 440.2 49.7 40.5 37.9 9.1 8.5 390.6 136.0 36.2 105.2 2009          Jan 
1,474.1 1,032.8 530.2 502.6 441.2 48.6 43.2 41.8 5.3 4.7 392.7 138.2 36.2 148.5          Feb 
1,393.5 987.3 515.3 472.0 406.2 51.7 46.8 44.2 4.9 4.3 354.5 141.0 36.2 147.4          Mar 
1,449.1 1,031.9 526.2 505.7 417.2 47.0 42.2 41.5 4.7 4.1 370.3 146.9 36.5 154.3          Apr 
1,393.7 990.9 522.3 468.6 402.8 43.9 39.3 38.5 4.5 4.0 359.0 148.5 35.9 145.6          May
1,344.9 968.0 517.0 451.1 376.8 41.4 36.9 36.3 4.5 3.9 335.5 158.1 35.7 141.6          June
1,285.1 913.1 479.5 433.6 372.0 40.1 35.6 35.1 4.4 3.9 331.9 157.0 35.9 149.1          July
1,250.3 875.2 465.5 409.7 375.1 38.3 33.8 33.4 4.4 3.9 336.8 157.8 35.8 142.9          Aug 
Changes *
+ 359.0 +243.9 +149.2 + 94.7 +115.1 + 1.5 + 2.0 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 +113.6 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 41.7 2007
− 304.0 −139.7 + 6.5 −146.3 −164.3 − 10.3 − 14.7 − 12.9 + 4.4 + 4.1 −153.9 − 59.4 + 6.5 − 2.4 2008
− 126.3 − 73.1 − 42.0 − 31.1 − 53.3 − 4.1 − 5.7 − 4.5 + 1.6 + 1.7 − 49.2 − 14.6 + 0.6 + 11.3 2008          Nov 
− 156.0 − 86.3 − 18.5 − 67.8 − 69.7 − 2.2 − 3.2 − 3.1 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 67.5 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 0.2          Dec 
+ 43.2 − 2.1 − 19.5 + 17.5 + 45.3 + 4.7 + 4.1 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 40.6 + 9.4 + 0.6 − 22.5 2009          Jan 
− 70.3 − 68.8 − 4.5 − 64.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 + 2.7 + 3.9 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.0 + 42.4          Feb 
− 49.9 − 28.2 − 14.9 − 13.3 − 21.7 + 3.2 + 3.6 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 24.9 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 10.0          Mar 
+ 51.2 + 42.4 + 10.9 + 31.5 + 8.7 − 4.8 − 4.6 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 13.5 + 6.0 + 0.3 + 4.2          Apr 
− 28.3 − 23.9 − 4.0 − 19.9 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 2.9 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.1          May
− 48.8 − 22.4 − 5.3 − 17.1 − 26.3 − 2.5 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 23.8 + 9.6 − 0.3 − 4.1          June
− 60.1 − 55.2 − 37.5 − 17.7 − 4.9 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 7.1          July
− 29.3 − 35.1 − 14.0 − 21.2 + 5.8 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 0.8 − 0.2 − 3.5          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
557.3 329.4 121.5 207.9 227.9 40.8 33.0 31.6 7.8 7.7 187.1 87.9 40.0 76.0 2006
437.3 270.1 118.2 151.9 167.2 37.1 30.3 29.5 6.8 6.7 130.1 69.5 28.6 55.4 2007
453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 23.6 8.7 8.6 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9 2008
463.8 283.8 134.1 149.6 180.0 32.8 23.7 23.4 9.1 9.0 147.2 61.1 29.8 57.3 2008          Nov 
453.7 277.7 145.1 132.7 176.0 32.8 24.1 23.6 8.7 8.6 143.2 57.7 30.5 52.9          Dec 
435.9 260.8 128.4 132.4 175.1 33.5 24.8 24.1 8.7 8.6 141.6 58.5 31.1 55.2 2009          Jan 
430.5 259.6 131.0 128.6 170.9 33.5 24.9 24.4 8.6 8.6 137.4 58.7 31.1 53.1          Feb 
423.2 259.3 129.8 129.4 164.0 33.6 25.1 24.7 8.6 8.5 130.3 57.2 29.8 50.5          Mar 
416.5 247.9 124.2 123.6 168.6 33.5 24.9 24.5 8.6 8.5 135.2 56.8 29.0 49.8          Apr 
402.5 242.5 121.6 121.0 160.0 33.3 24.9 24.2 8.4 8.3 126.7 55.2 28.5 47.4          May
403.0 240.1 122.3 117.8 162.9 33.7 25.3 24.6 8.4 8.3 129.2 54.2 28.7 44.5          June
397.5 236.2 120.5 115.7 161.3 31.5 23.0 22.6 8.5 8.4 129.9 55.0 28.9 45.0          July
394.9 235.3 122.7 112.5 159.7 30.8 22.4 21.8 8.4 8.3 128.9 55.2 28.0 45.8          Aug 
Changes *
− 109.3 − 53.9 − 3.4 − 50.5 − 55.4 − 3.7 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 51.7 − 18.3 − 11.4 − 16.7 2007
+ 12.1 + 4.8 + 26.9 − 22.1 + 7.3 − 4.3 − 6.3 − 5.9 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 11.6 − 11.8 + 1.9 − 2.4 2008
− 4.6 − 0.3 + 3.3 − 3.6 − 4.3 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.0 2008          Nov 
− 1.9 − 2.1 + 10.9 − 13.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 3.4 + 0.7 − 1.7          Dec 
− 25.0 − 20.3 − 16.7 − 3.6 − 4.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.4 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.6 2009          Jan 
− 6.1 − 1.5 + 2.6 − 4.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.4          Feb 
− 2.9 + 1.7 − 1.1 + 2.9 − 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.6          Mar 
− 7.5 − 11.8 − 5.6 − 6.2 + 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 1.1          Apr 
− 10.6 − 3.8 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 6.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 6.7 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.8          May
+ 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.7 − 3.1 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 2.9          June
− 5.5 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 1.6 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6          July
− 1.9 − 0.7 + 2.2 − 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 1.0          Aug 
are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, Treasury discount non-negotiable debt securities. — 5Issues of negotiable and
paper and other money market paper, debt securities. — 3Including non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. — 6Including
own debt securities. — 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
 
 
 
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
 
 
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( € billion)
 
2009          Mar 11,066.1 221.3 0.5 220.8 221.6 0.8 0.0
         Apr 11,012.5 220.3 0.5 219.7 220.8 1.1 0.0
         May 10,861.0 217.2 0.5 216.7 217.9 1.2 0.0
         June 10,931.5 218.6 0.5 218.1 219.2 1.1 0.0
         July 10,826.6 216.5 0.5 216.0 216.9 0.9 0.0
         Aug 10,822.7 216.5 0.5 215.9 216.9 1.0 0.0
         Sep 10,710.1 214.2 0.5 213.7 214.7 1.1 0.0
         Oct  p,8 10,617.5 212.4 0.5 211.8 212.8 1.0 ...
         Nov  p ... ... ... 210.2 ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( € million)
2009          Mar 2,670,696 53,414 192 53,222 53,440 218 12
         Apr 2,658,673 53,173 192 52,982 53,272 290 1
         May 2,630,810 52,616 192 52,425 52,771 346 1
         June 2,653,695 53,074 191 52,883 53,161 278 0
         July 2,607,617 52,152 190 51,962 52,185 223 1
         Aug 2,608,650 52,173 189 51,984 52,236 252 7
         Sep 2,566,298 51,326 188 51,138 51,456 318 0
         Oct  p 2,549,967 50,999 188 50,812 51,032 220 0
         Nov  p 2,523,110 50,462 187 50,275 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central
settlement day of the main refinancing operation immediately following Bank on the application of minimum reserves. — 5Average credit balances
the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly of the credit institutions at the national central banks. — 6Average credit
discussion of the monetary policy stance is scheduled. — 2Article 3 of the balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pur- allowance. — 8The total number of deficiencies was not available when
suant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the this report went to press. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing Base rate
operations operations as per Base
Mar- Mar- Discount rate
ginal ginal Rate as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Applicable Civil Transition
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Act  1 from Code  2 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 − 4.50 2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 1999 Jan                1 2.50 2002 Jan                1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 − 3.25          May                1 1.95          July                1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 − 4.50 2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 − 3.50          June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 2000 Jan                1 2.68 2003 Jan                1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 − 4.00          Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          May                1 3.42          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25          Sep                1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 − 4.25          Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 − 4.50 2001 Sep                1 3.62          July                1 1.13
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 − 4.75 2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 − 5.25          June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2002 Jan                1 2.71 2005 Jan                1 1.21
         June               28 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          to          July                1 1.17
         Sep                  1 3.50 − 4.50 5.50 2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Apr                3
         Oct                  6 3.75 − 4.75 5.75          Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
          Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95
2001 May               11 3.50 − 4.50 5.50          Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Aug                31 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Sep                18 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          July               1 3.19
         Nov                  9 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00   
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75   
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 − 2.50 3.50 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         June                 6 1.00 − 2.00 3.00          July               1 0.12
1Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the 2 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable. —  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2009 Okt               21 49,803 49,803 1.00 − − − 7
         Okt               28 48,660 48,660 1.00 − − − 7
         Nov          4 46,201 46,201 1.00 − − − 7
         Nov                11 51,250 51,250 1.00 − − − 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2009 Okt               14 7,741 7,741 1.00 − − − 28
         Okt               29 3,284 3,284 1.00 − − − 91
         Nov                11 2,536 2,536 1.00 − − − 27
         Nov                12 10,794 10,794 1.00 − − − 91
         Nov                12 782 782 1.00 − − − 182
Source: ECB. — *Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2009 to allotted or collected. 
include Slovakia. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One-week One-month Six-month Nine-month Twelve- Three-month
Overnight money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds month funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2009          May 0.63 0.25 − 1.05 1.27 1.15 − 1.42 0.78 0.79 0.88 1.28 1.48 1.57 1.64
         June 0.62 0.20 − 1.40 1.21 1.00 − 1.34 0.70 0.82 0.91 1.23 1.44 1.54 1.61
         July 0.27 0.15 − 0.55 0.94 0.77 − 1.12 0.36 0.39 0.61 0.97 1.21 1.33 1.41
         Aug 0.28 0.20 − 0.50 0.81 0.69 − 0.95 0.35 0.35 0.51 0.86 1.12 1.24 1.33
         Sep 0.30 0.23 − 0.55 0.72 0.61 − 0.85 0.36 0.34 0.46 0.77 1.04 1.16 1.26
         Oct 0.30 0.23 − 0.60 0.68 0.59 − 0.77 0.36 0.35 0.43 0.74 1.02 1.14 1.24
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2009          Jan  3 4.16 3.10 3.49 4.11 5.22 4.72 4.93 8.72 7.22 6.22 5.10 4.89 4.89
         Feb 3.98 3.17 3.18 4.00 5.14 4.75 4.91 8.61 7.27 6.21 4.75 4.59 4.74
         Mar 3.78 3.06 2.82 3.87 4.92 4.63 4.78 8.43 7.08 6.07 4.40 4.28 4.48
         Apr 3.54 3.11 2.52 3.84 4.70 4.49 4.65 8.19 7.00 5.92 4.10 3.98 4.25
         May 3.38 3.04 2.37 3.70 4.59 4.45 4.56 8.09 6.92 5.84 4.00 3.84 4.12
         June 3.25 3.07 2.21 3.65 4.50 4.40 4.46 7.98 6.91 5.79 3.91 3.72 4.00
         July 3.07 3.03 1.99 3.53 4.31 4.32 4.36 7.82 6.79 5.70 3.73 3.59 3.81
         Aug 2.94 3.01 1.91 3.39 4.23 4.25 4.28 7.81 6.74 5.65 3.65 3.50 3.73
         Sep 2.82 3.01 1.82 3.40 4.20 4.25 4.24 7.80 6.78 5.63 3.62 3.44 3.69
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2009          Jan  3 1.02 3.28 3.90 3.52 2.88 4.08 1.26 2.24 3.81 3.76
         Feb 0.90 2.62 3.40 3.23 2.49 3.98 1.10 1.61 3.21 3.89
         Mar 0.80 2.24 2.97 3.07 2.31 3.87 0.93 1.36 2.97 3.30
         Apr 0.66 2.01 2.70 2.87 2.22 3.75 0.77 1.15 2.64 3.07
         May 0.61 1.89 2.42 2.71 1.98 3.62 0.74 1.08 2.39 3.11
         June 0.56 1.86 2.38 2.57 1.95 3.52 0.63 1.04 2.18 2.57
         July 0.52 1.86 2.41 2.62 1.86 3.38 0.57 0.82 2.48 2.93
         Aug 0.50 1.72 2.32 2.64 1.64 3.23 0.54 0.71 2.06 2.93
         Sep 0.48 1.61 2.28 2.52 1.60 3.12 0.52 0.69 2.09 2.73
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
period drafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2009          Jan  3 10.13 8.66 8.27 7.03 8.63 4.86 4.37 4.77 4.92 5.00 4.43 5.44 5.23
         Feb 10.15 8.35 8.06 6.65 8.49 4.60 3.97 4.54 4.80 4.89 4.08 5.03 5.16
         Mar 9.94 8.05 7.51 6.51 8.31 4.38 3.65 4.34 4.61 4.72 3.83 4.72 5.05
         Apr 9.71 8.05 7.43 6.50 8.27 4.22 3.38 4.21 4.55 4.68 3.54 4.69 4.90
         May 9.62 8.08 7.87 6.44 8.17 4.12 3.22 4.15 4.50 4.58 3.60 4.71 4.90
         June 9.54 7.83 7.30 6.36 8.03 4.07 3.12 4.12 4.51 4.58 3.54 4.76 4.95
         July 9.30 8.02 7.67 6.49 8.04 4.02 3.03 4.09 4.54 4.54 3.35 4.77 4.91
         Aug 9.26 8.17 7.96 6.53 7.96 4.06 3.00 4.10 4.54 4.45 3.21 4.74 4.82
         Sep 9.30 8.05 7.72 6.48 7.90 3.95 2.81 4.05 4.48 4.41 3.14 4.66 4.71
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2009          Jan  3 5.65 4.73 5.46 5.24 3.52 3.95 4.58
         Feb 5.38 4.32 5.25 4.96 3.12 3.51 4.23
         Mar 5.08 4.03 5.06 4.74 2.85 3.22 3.87
         Apr 4.72 3.82 5.01 4.60 2.55 3.34 4.01
         May 4.64 3.73 5.01 4.52 2.49 3.22 3.98
         June 4.55 3.64 4.86 4.49 2.57 3.08 3.71
         July 4.34 3.57 4.79 4.32 2.38 2.89 3.90
         Aug 4.24 3.42 4.68 4.24 2.32 2.81 3.83
         Sep 4.24 3.36 4.55 4.16 2.09 2.85 3.62
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. —
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 2008/48/EC, 3 Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2009 to include Slovakia. 
which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Sep 4.46 301,246 2.45 178,637 4.69 123,174 4.44 23,230
         Oct 4.51 324,343 2.45 177,619 4.63 123,846 4.46 23,132
         Nov 4.42 326,660 2.45 177,052 4.24 123,000 4.51 23,011
         Dec 4.26 326,679 2.45 179,319 3.63 118,097 4.45 22,976
2009          Jan 3.98 307,958 2.46 179,112 2.95 116,231 4.43 23,192
         Feb 3.82 292,932 2.45 179,096 2.57 113,302 4.43 23,084
         Mar 3.71 278,398 2.45 179,828 2.15 109,282 4.42 23,274
         Apr 3.56 261,337 2.45 180,758 1.86 110,298 4.39 23,265
         May 3.42 251,435 2.44 182,163 1.72 107,732 4.36 23,269
         June 3.32 240,427 2.44 183,008 1.52 101,792 4.25 23,871
         July 3.10 226,909 2.43 184,056 1.30 101,908 4.17 24,569
         Aug 2.91 211,060 2.43 185,213 1.20 102,191 4.03 25,351
         Sep 2.75 196,659 2.42 186,698 1.09 99,264 3.99 25,666
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          Sep 6.28 5,536 4.82 24,989 5.06 924,467 10.60 69,363 5.79 64,216 6.23 313,147
         Oct 6.31 5,429 4.86 24,654 5.07 923,312 10.64 68,244 5.84 64,177 6.24 313,766
         Nov 6.31 5,430 4.87 24,457 5.06 923,919 10.33 66,351 5.83 64,131 6.24 313,811
         Dec 6.13 5,528 4.84 24,239 5.06 921,188 10.15 70,489 5.77 64,751 6.22 312,381
2009          Jan 5.81 5,418 4.77 23,857 5.03 918,498 9.60 68,437 5.66 64,234 6.16 311,940
         Feb 5.54 5,385 4.73 23,698 5.02 917,848 9.21 68,721 5.63 64,058 6.14 312,266
         Mar 5.34 5,628 4.65 25,121 5.01 914,717 9.16 69,930 5.56 65,236 6.10 310,908
         Apr 5.06 5,584 4.57 25,145 4.98 915,839 8.93 68,006 5.58 66,027 6.01 313,261
         May 4.97 5,586 4.54 25,160 4.97 916,289 8.76 67,806 5.54 66,445 5.99 313,661
         June 4.86 5,605 4.49 25,260 4.95 916,103 8.98 69,625 5.49 66,936 5.98 313,433
         July 4.64 5,645 4.44 25,362 4.93 917,085 8.74 67,655 5.44 67,784 5.95 314,065
         Aug 4.56 5,590 4.41 25,463 4.92 919,804 8.67 67,279 5.41 68,040 5.94 313,043
         Sep 4.51 5,668 4.38 25,576 4.91 920,688 8.67 69,223 5.36 68,845 5.94 312,417
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Sep 6.46 187,397 5.70 130,018 5.26 538,193
         Oct 6.36 185,410 5.78 133,883 5.30 540,775
         Nov 6.00 186,446 5.57 135,699 5.24 541,915
         Dec 5.52 188,252 5.30 138,069 5.04 544,529
2009          Jan 4.94 185,671 4.81 140,169 4.82 545,349
         Feb 4.69 182,528 4.55 140,944 4.70 545,925
         Mar 4.51 183,679 4.30 139,786 4.55 543,946
         Apr 4.18 178,062 4.02 142,202 4.40 541,091
         May 4.13 177,190 3.93 142,644 4.36 541,981
         June 4.09 174,044 3.87 142,643 4.27 539,830
         July 3.92 164,009 3.76 144,430 4.18 542,592
         Aug 3.85 162,055 3.72 144,119 4.15 543,900
         Sep 3.87 160,309 3.65 144,405 4.10 542,515
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by interest rates may always be calculated either as annualised agreed intere st
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of th e
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- documents, guarantees and credit insurance. — 2Data based on monthly
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- balance sheet statistics. — 3Secured and unsecured loans for home
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis purchase, including building and home improvements; including loan s
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as well as
sample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are for their own account. — 4Consumer credit is defined as loans granted for
not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. —
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
Banking statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). — oThe statistics on out- purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. — 6Including
standing amounts are collected at the end of the month. — 1The effective overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          Sep 2.05 476,817 4.48 53,916 4.98 2,022 3.39 1,391 2.59 419,923 4.03 100,148
         Oct 2.09 491,911 4.49 74,919 4.85 2,624 3.66 1,760 2.64 418,584 4.13 103,108
         Nov 2.02 510,118 3.89 50,889 4.88 2,623 3.87 1,873 2.54 417,459 4.22 106,825
         Dec 1.85 508,140 3.21 52,012 4.44 2,583 3.75 2,291 2.42 425,527 4.19 110,599
2009          Jan 1.77 529,633 2.67 48,906 4.08 3,415 3.81 2,143 2.33 429,238 4.11 110,567
         Feb 1.55 550,800 1.94 29,935 3.37 2,015 3.40 1,968 2.24 434,504 4.02 110,493
         Mar 1.38 558,216 1.46 30,369 2.97 1,746 3.15 2,911 2.08 437,140 3.91 111,178
         Apr 1.13 576,843 1.32 27,496 2.69 1,611 3.08 3,059 1.98 439,565 3.79 112,039
         May 1.03 587,516 1.34 25,817 2.17 1,663 2.88 2,893 1.85 441,968 3.67 113,497
         June 0.94 591,673 1.29 25,435 2.28 1,293 2.74 2,592 1.82 445,518 3.55 114,481
         July 0.88 599,922 1.45 28,372 2.29 2,077 2.77 2,947 1.79 450,019 3.41 115,616
         Aug 0.84 609,242 1.18 21,694 2.14 1,393 2.83 2,866 1.62 454,401 3.25 116,343
         Sep 0.82 617,596 1.01 19,325 2.02 1,584 2.61 2,779 1.61 457,520 3.14 117,556
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Sep 2.58 183,927 4.47 52,263 5.39 899 5.27 290
         Oct 2.41 193,441 4.17 60,137 4.87 205 4.88 396
         Nov 2.14 193,041 3.41 54,007 4.61 433 5.04 271
         Dec 1.66 194,621 2.60 65,240 4.02 480 4.24 470
2009          Jan 1.31 202,948 1.91 69,444 3.45 843 4.34 463
         Feb 1.16 197,847 1.39 43,602 2.93 367 3.83 421
         Mar 1.03 203,071 1.10 50,263 2.63 480 4.02 1,149
         Apr 0.81 209,654 0.89 50,849 2.57 358 3.68 538
         May 0.81 211,660 0.77 43,357 2.32 412 3.41 395
         June 0.61 217,069 0.78 42,875 1.77 279 2.11 917
         July 0.55 222,639 0.54 46,924 2.22 356 2.91 1,713
         Aug 0.53 228,457 0.46 34,238 1.75 326 3.63 792
         Sep 0.51 234,141 0.42 38,890 1.78 325 2.91 565
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer credit with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2008          Sep 7.60 6.08 1,064 5.71 2,555 8.80 2,219 5.72 6,795 6.24 994 5.64 1,934
         Oct 7.66 5.86 1,181 5.76 2,656 8.70 2,285 5.88 7,576 6.05 1,337 5.61 2,171
         Nov 7.55 5.43 922 5.66 2,289 8.63 2,049 5.19 5,288 5.90 972 5.52 1,420
         Dec 7.02 4.76 1,217 5.47 2,086 8.19 1,947 4.39 7,051 5.51 1,360 5.15 1,966
2009          Jan 7.47 5.10 1,202 5.48 2,204 8.74 2,101 3.73 7,060 5.24 1,475 5.19 2,145
         Feb 7.18 5.12 878 5.17 2,649 8.46 2,173 3.15 5,204 5.08 1,155 4.99 1,538
         Mar 6.95 4.74 1,171 5.06 3,180 8.19 2,765 3.01 6,416 4.82 1,467 4.90 2,192
         Apr 6.99 4.41 1,510 5.30 3,112 8.28 2,485 2.68 7,353 4.65 1,773 4.79 2,329
         May 6.94 5.10 904 5.08 2,915 8.24 2,247 2.67 5,699 4.78 1,307 4.75 2,020
         June 6.79 5.20 1,484 4.99 3,097 8.19 2,347 2.65 6,020 4.66 1,419 4.83 2,407
         July 7.02 5.52 1,242 5.15 3,184 8.25 2,607 2.49 6,809 4.73 1,468 4.84 2,800
         Aug 7.19 5.55 1,187 5.28 2,401 8.24 1,958 2.38 5,529 4.62 1,119 4.82 1,825
         Sep 7.03 5.32 1,322 5.10 2,294 8.20 2,007 2.17 6,690 4.61 1,043 4.60 2,043
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of deposits with an business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 2008/48/EC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa % pa € milion % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Sep 11.98 48,076 5.45 6.24 2,129 5.50 1,979 5.17 5,610 5.21 4,418
         Oct 12.01 46,486 5.42 6.34 2,488 5.43 2,431 5.15 6,336 5.12 4,437
         Nov 11.88 43,669 5.27 6.07 1,995 5.20 2,363 5.03 5,064 5.01 4,024
         Dec 11.82 47,477 4.96 5.38 2,476 4.84 2,918 4.83 5,566 4.73 4,200
2009          Jan 11.42 45,056 4.83 4.97 3,251 4.58 3,343 4.73 6,197 4.77 3,970
         Feb 11.19 44,553 4.58 4.38 2,370 4.33 2,749 4.58 5,336 4.60 3,395
         Mar 11.16 45,902 4.42 4.19 2,787 4.12 3,343 4.40 6,831 4.49 4,609
         Apr 10.97 43,989 4.34 3.86 3,150 4.01 3,521 4.37 7,455 4.54 4,272
         May 10.87 43,269 4.29 3.80 2,616 3.93 3,031 4.35 6,547 4.47 4,000
         June 10.85 45,907 4.31 3.73 2,654 3.88 3,410 4.39 7,491 4.53 4,261
         July 10.58 44,140 4.31 3.56 3,374 3.89 3,747 4.45 8,321 4.54 4,424
         Aug 10.58 43,846 4.28 3.47 2,931 3.87 2,812 4.46 6,269 4.51 3,767
         Sep 10.61 45,022 4.22 3.38 2,256 3.81 2,587 4.37 5,904 4.45 4,060
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Sep 7.26 85,079 6.46 10,688 6.12 1,091 5.54 1,557
         Oct 7.01 83,629 6.46 10,578 5.96 1,131 5.36 1,487
         Nov 6.68 85,604 5.95 8,719 5.78 989 5.14 1,435
         Dec 6.35 84,891 5.25 10,536 5.61 1,438 5.08 1,828
2009          Jan 5.77 83,490 4.55 9,429 5.31 1,151 5.07 1,351
         Feb 5.63 84,220 4.15 9,245 5.12 1,036 4.84 1,105
         Mar 5.65 84,903 3.83 12,529 4.95 1,198 4.69 1,333
         Apr 5.21 82,312 3.60 11,605 4.85 1,204 4.48 1,488
         May 5.24 81,653 3.52 10,634 4.83 1,078 4.41 1,139
         June 5.14 82,602 3.36 11,556 4.82 1,090 4.61 1,392
         July 5.01 76,756 3.36 11,383 4.73 1,398 4.54 1,680
         Aug 4.86 77,358 3.26 8,654 4.80 990 4.43 1,155
         Sep 5.05 76,051 3.28 11,593 4.72 986 4.35 1,283
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2008          Sep 5.70 87,137 5.63 3,353 5.73 4,378
         Oct 5.65 87,732 6.10 3,297 5.45 4,254
         Nov 4.91 65,292 5.38 2,289 5.04 3,060
         Dec 4.35 80,446 4.82 4,972 4.92 6,563
2009          Jan 3.63 78,532 5.00 3,051 4.69 3,788
         Feb 3.26 63,830 4.79 1,959 4.53 3,225
         Mar 3.09 73,340 4.23 2,283 4.50 3,512
         Apr 2.84 67,171 4.22 2,706 4.47 3,480
         May 2.84 58,465 3.98 2,404 4.47 2,783
         June 2.93 69,989 4.33 2,229 4.69 4,190
         July 2.74 70,243 3.85 3,615 4.52 4,734
         Aug 2.80 54,832 4.18 1,771 4.40 3,281
         Sep 2.26 59,658 4.23 2,479 4.06 3,451
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Corporate debt debt building market
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities (non-MFIs) ities  2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€ million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,399 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,571 111,281 35,848 75,433 − 68,946
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 46,940 − 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 69,809 − 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 − 13,723 − 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 32,978 − 157,940
2006 243,496 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 141,117 125,425 68,893 56,532 − 118,071
2007 217,249 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 126,979 − 37,503 96,476 − 133,979 − 254,752
2008 68,838 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 2,699 − 2,263 68,049 − 70,312 − 71,101
2009          July − 1,726 − 13,516 − 5,412 1,714 − 9,818 11,790 18,918 1,394 17,524 − − 20,644
         Aug 14,171 11,863 8,576 − 477 3,764 2,308 − 5,930 − 3,895 − 2,035 − 20,101
         Sep − 18,998 − 20,844 − 31,580 4,737 5,999 1,846 − 7,047 − 2,937 − 4,110 − − 11,951
 
 
 
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
purchases shares  8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,678
1998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,353
€ million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,003 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 82,665 17,575 65,091 − 2,252 − 14,714 12,462 84,918
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 24,077 9,061 15,018 4,757 11,323 − 6,566 19,322
2007 − 1,426 10,053 − 11,478 − 46,867 − 6,702 − 40,165 45,440
2008 − 20,864 11,326 − 32,190 27,739 − 23,079 50,818 − 48,604
2009          July 2,578 433 2,145 − 2,319 − 3,853 1,534 4,897
         Aug 193 1,536 − 1,343 − 5,687 − 4,355 − 1,332 5,880
         Sep 2,420 2,669 − 249 − 4,910 213 − 5,123 7,330
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8Excluding shares of public limited
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at investment companies; at issue prices. — 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  residents;  transa ction  val-
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and ues. — 10Domestic and foreign shares. — 11Up to end-1998, excluding
Treuhand agency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs) syndicates debt securities debt securities  2 
Gross sales  3 
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,370
1997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,813
1998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€ million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009          June 133,515 91,241 6,572 5,120 22,117 57,432 8,701 33,573 −
         July 102,197 63,855 5,708 4,335 27,550 26,261 5,390 32,953 −
         Aug 136,456 112,360 2,541 3,153 28,950 77,716 1,754 22,343 −
         Sep 115,962 74,322 3,395 3,054 27,960 39,913 6,430 35,210 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  4 
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,582
1997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,413
1998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€ million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 69
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −
2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −
2009          June 43,303 22,363 2,467 2,795 6,299 10,802 6,353 14,587 −
         July 30,701 17,804 3,496 3,199 5,183 5,926 4,209 8,689 −
         Aug 22,510 13,990 923 1,580 4,552 6,935 1,119 7,401 −
         Sep 27,033 10,736 2,201 2,360 1,691 4,484 4,885 11,412 −
Net sales  5 
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,951
1997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,181
1998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€ million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,208
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,750
2008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,607
2009          June − 143 − 14,659 2,651 − 5,626 − 930 − 10,754 4,190 10,326 − 234
         July − 23,837 − 10,917 2,040 − 2,687 − 246 − 10,024 2,685 − 15,606 − 2,574
         Aug 16,322 6,800 190 − 3,210 8,387 1,433 873 8,649 −
         Sep 11,032 − 1,398 585 − 12,543 − 7,432 17,992 4,515 7,915 − 758
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Treuhand agency. — 3Gross sales means only initial sales of newly issued
Capital market statistics on p 21 ff. — 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. — 4Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. — 5Gross
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
VII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public Other bank bonds Public managed special purpose
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe (non-MFIs) syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,359
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€ million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009          July 3,345,641 1,859,909 153,102 328,407 506,934 871,466 216,510 1,269,222 38,293
         Aug 3,361,962 1,866,708 153,291 325,197 515,321 872,899 217,383 1,277,871 38,293
         Sep 3,372,995 1,865,310 153,876 312,654 507,889 890,891 221,898 1,285,787 37,534
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-September 2009 
1,365,314 864,394 59,948 160,672 208,760 435,014 28,956 471,963 21,369    less than 2
730,334 448,375 56,471 82,493 125,383 184,030 36,807 245,152 4,086 2 to less than 4
447,724 229,451 19,022 35,793 59,836 114,798 35,553 182,721 5,303 4 to less than 6
293,190 154,507 12,203 18,137 33,418 90,749 11,079 127,602 2,973 6 to less than 8
163,679 56,795 5,230 10,243 27,065 14,257 3,413 103,471 273 8 to less than 10
63,405 29,427 984 2,293 18,882 7,269 14,567 19,411 1,764 10 to less than 15
59,508 19,176 19 1,539 13,025 4,593 734 39,598 701 15 to less than 20
249,842 63,188 − 1,485 21,519 40,184 90,788 95,867 1,064 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 1,040,769
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 1,258,042
€ million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009          July 175,166 − 1,000 260 31 1 − − 1,059 − 87 − 146 869,712
         Aug 176,134 968 1,022 85 13 − − 30 − 59 − 63 871,600
         Sep 175,797 − 338 336 63 3 − − 505 − 216 − 18 903,456
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. — 1Including ber 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock market segment was closed down on
shares issued out of company profits. — 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises listed on the Open Market.
Market (the introduction of which marked the end of the division of organ- Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the Herausgebergemein-
ised trading segments into an official and a regulated market on 1 Novem- schaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate issued by German German
more than 9 more than 9 bonds German- bond iBoxx CDAX share
and including and including (non- managed index index € Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.69
1998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.39
1999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 3.2 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.0 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 4.6 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.32
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 4.9 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009          July 3.3 3.2 3.1 3.3 3.5 4.0 5.2 4.0 121.69 100.65 283.77 5,332.14
         Aug 3.2 3.1 3.1 3.3 3.4 3.8 4.7 3.8 122.50 100.76 293.69 5,464.61
         Sep 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.3 3.2 3.8 4.8 3.6 122.68 101.01 306.86 5,675.16
         Oct 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.2 3.2 3.7 4.7 3.7 123.20 100.68 292.17 5,414.96
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2End of year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
 
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutual
pur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
Period
DM million
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€ million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,002
2001 97,077 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,266 96,127 10,251 2,703 85,876 17,563 951
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 680
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,793
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 43,172 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 23,637 35,094 14,676 5,221 20,418 18,416 8,078
2007 55,022 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 41,586 51,083 − 229 4,240 51,312 37,346 3,939
2008 697 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 8,608 6,517 − 16,625 − 9,252 23,142 17,860 − 5,820
2009          July 7,248 4,175 778 − 1,247 2,128 − 432 3,397 3,073 8,172 586 404 7,586 2,669 − 924
         Aug 1,118 570 − 165 − 150 − 406 392 735 548 1,452 308 579 1,144 − 31 − 334
         Sep 5,971 8,458 272 − 180 593 − 296 8,186 − 2,487 5,347 470 339 4,877 − 2,826 624
1Including public limited investment companies. — 2Book values. — fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to end-1988 recorded
3Residual. — 4Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by under shares). — The figures for the most recent date are provisional;
residents; transaction values. — 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic revisions are not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
VIII  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  € billion
2007 2008 2009 
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households 1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 42.5 85.9 121.0 16.5 38.4 6.4 14.6 12.9 87.1 9.4 15.9
Money market paper 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2
Bonds 24.9 − 49.5 − 3.8 − 8.4 − 27.7 14.4 0.8 3.5 − 22.4 21.4 5.1
Shares − 5.0 − 16.5 − 45.5 − 2.5 − 12.0 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 9.0 − 33.0 − 2.0 − 1.0
Other equity 2.9 2.9 3.0 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.8
Mutual funds shares − 6.5 24.8 5.6 − 5.0 8.1 13.2 7.4 1.9 − 17.0 9.1 5.1
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 66.1 69.4 41.1 17.5 18.3 12.3 8.9 10.5 9.4 11.8 9.0
Short-term claims 2.1 1.1 0.3 0.2 0.4 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Longer-term claims 64.0 68.3 40.8 17.3 17.9 11.9 9.2 10.4 9.4 11.7 8.9
Claims from company
pension commitments 10.3 4.3 7.3 1.1 1.1 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.9 1.9 1.9
Other claims  3 − 4.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.7
Total 131.3 116.9 125.8 18.9 25.6 47.0 31.0 21.7 26.2 51.9 36.0
  II Financing
Loans − 5.1 − 18.9 − 15.4 − 3.2 − 3.6 − 9.8 0.9 − 1.1 − 5.4 − 7.5 2.5
Short-term loans − 5.4 − 1.2 1.2 − 0.9 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 0.6 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.1
Longer-term loans 0.3 − 17.7 − 16.6 − 2.3 − 4.6 − 9.1 0.9 − 1.6 − 6.8 − 7.1 2.6
Other liabilities − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.2 0.2
Total − 5.5 − 19.3 − 15.4 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 9.8 1.0 − 1.1 − 5.4 − 7.3 2.7
Corporations
I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 28.3 72.0 20.8 18.1 30.1 6.1 − 15.3 33.7 − 3.7 13.8 0.3
Money market paper 8.9 − 20.3 − 14.3 − 11.5 − 10.4 11.7 − 28.4 − 13.4 15.7 − 6.8 − 3.2
Bonds − 7.9 −109.6 − 2.7 − 45.1 − 40.3 − 52.5 − 0.6 9.8 40.6 − 32.9 − 33.6
Financial derivatives 1.4 45.2 14.4 16.6 16.7 10.5 8.3 0.0 − 4.4 − 1.6 − 0.3
Shares 11.2 56.9 128.8 14.4 21.4 16.5 69.1 15.8 27.3 18.2 43.0
Other equity 55.6 16.7 22.8 25.7 − 11.0 11.5 19.0 − 6.4 − 1.3 12.0 6.3
Mutual funds shares − 8.1 − 3.2 − 7.8 2.0 1.7 − 3.9 − 2.5 5.9 − 7.3 − 3.3 − 9.7
Loans 17.0 − 1.0 32.1 15.1 − 26.3 4.2 11.4 7.8 8.7 − 2.4 − 4.7
Short-term loans 11.3 − 5.6 27.4 7.5 − 20.6 − 1.2 14.3 6.6 7.7 − 2.6 − 5.5
Longer-term loans 5.8 4.6 4.7 7.5 − 5.8 5.4 − 2.9 1.1 1.1 0.2 0.8
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 1.4 1.0 0.4 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Short-term claims 1.4 1.0 0.4 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 56.4 113.2 − 53.7 4.5 71.8 19.7 − 12.1 − 34.8 − 26.6 − 22.8 − 12.1
Total 164.2 171.0 140.8 39.9 54.1 24.0 49.0 18.6 49.2 − 25.7 − 14.0
  II Financing
Money market paper 0.8 18.6 3.6 − 0.2 8.4 9.5 − 6.5 0.4 0.2 − 13.5 − 8.3
Bonds 12.9 − 11.4 6.0 − 2.4 − 3.2 − 2.5 1.6 1.5 5.4 3.5 6.5
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 5.7 6.8 3.6 0.5 1.6 0.9 1.4 0.7 0.5 1.9 0.3
Other equity 33.0 26.7 13.6 10.7 8.9 6.6 3.0 1.0 2.9 3.2 − 0.4
Loans 72.2 47.1 69.0 7.8 12.9 − 4.5 19.4 22.8 31.3 11.3 − 15.6
Short-term loans 30.9 16.8 16.3 − 5.1 − 1.1 − 5.8 14.7 0.1 7.4 − 0.3 − 12.6
Longer-term loans 41.3 30.3 52.7 13.0 14.1 1.3 4.7 22.7 23.9 11.5 − 3.1
Claims from company
pension commitments 8.2 1.3 2.9 0.3 0.3 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Other liabilities − 5.4 13.7 1.4 1.7 2.9 9.8 − 0.1 6.0 − 14.3 13.9 − 2.2
Total 127.5 102.8 100.0 18.5 31.8 20.5 19.7 33.2 26.6 21.1 − 19.1
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
52*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
VIII  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2007 2008 2009 
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Households 1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,534.8 1,620.8 1,737.5 1,582.4 1,620.8 1,627.2 1,642.0 1,650.6 1,737.5 1,746.8 1,763.6
Money market paper 2.0 1.7 1.6 1.8 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.4 1.3
Bonds 376.0 354.6 338.3 369.2 354.6 374.1 357.3 333.5 338.3 346.9 357.4
Shares 350.6 364.1 163.1 373.5 364.1 314.9 293.1 251.9 163.1 138.5 148.6
Other equity 205.0 184.1 176.7 203.8 184.1 184.6 187.2 194.2 176.7 187.2 188.8
Mutual funds shares 515.3 545.6 497.2 538.8 545.6 535.7 539.9 527.9 497.2 495.9 519.4
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 1,118.9 1,187.9 1,228.9 1,169.7 1,187.9 1,200.1 1,209.0 1,219.5 1,228.9 1,240.7 1,249.8
Short-term claims 79.7 80.8 81.1 80.4 80.8 81.2 81.0 81.1 81.1 81.2 81.4
Longer-term claims 1,039.2 1,107.1 1,147.7 1,089.3 1,107.1 1,118.9 1,128.0 1,138.4 1,147.7 1,159.5 1,168.5
Claims from company
pension commitments 250.8 255.1 262.4 254.0 255.1 256.9 258.7 260.5 262.4 264.3 266.2
Other claims  3 46.7 42.6 39.8 43.7 42.6 41.9 41.2 40.5 39.8 39.6 39.0
Total 4,400.1 4,556.4 4,445.5 4,537.0 4,556.4 4,537.0 4,529.9 4,480.0 4,445.5 4,461.2 4,534.0
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,557.0 1,538.6 1,523.2 1,542.2 1,538.6 1,527.4 1,528.3 1,527.2 1,523.2 1,515.9 1,520.7
Short-term loans 80.2 78.9 80.0 77.9 78.9 78.1 78.1 78.7 80.0 79.6 79.5
Longer-term loans 1,476.8 1,459.7 1,443.2 1,464.3 1,459.7 1,449.3 1,450.2 1,448.6 1,443.2 1,436.3 1,441.2
Other liabilities 9.6 8.8 9.4 11.0 8.8 10.2 9.9 10.3 9.4 10.6 10.9
Total 1,566.6 1,547.3 1,532.6 1,553.2 1,547.3 1,537.6 1,538.2 1,537.5 1,532.6 1,526.4 1,531.6
Corporations
I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 411.3 477.0 507.4 447.3 477.0 474.7 470.0 502.6 507.4 517.4 517.6
Money market paper 35.3 27.1 10.9 26.2 27.1 30.1 7.7 0.7 10.9 1.4 1.5
Bonds 133.6 82.5 86.2 72.7 82.5 31.4 33.2 45.3 86.2 51.8 22.4
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 905.8 1,029.3 654.0 1,000.1 1,029.3 929.0 942.9 870.2 654.0 591.3 684.0
Other equity 316.9 294.3 299.5 339.2 294.3 305.4 327.5 331.9 299.5 328.0 335.8
Mutual funds shares 106.5 109.5 67.9 107.6 109.5 81.0 81.0 85.3 67.9 62.9 58.5
Loans 164.4 179.1 208.9 189.0 179.1 186.1 198.2 204.8 208.9 211.6 210.1
Short-term loans 120.1 130.1 151.4 133.6 130.1 129.9 142.0 145.4 151.4 150.9 148.4
Longer-term loans 44.3 49.1 57.5 55.4 49.1 56.2 56.3 59.4 57.5 60.7 61.8
Claims on insurance
corporations  2 42.8 43.8 44.2 43.3 43.8 43.9 44.0 44.1 44.2 44.3 44.4
Short-term claims 42.8 43.8 44.2 43.3 43.8 43.9 44.0 44.1 44.2 44.3 44.4
Longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 447.9 500.4 583.1 489.7 500.4 521.4 538.2 571.4 583.1 595.6 519.2
Total 2,564.6 2,743.1 2,462.2 2,715.3 2,743.1 2,602.9 2,642.6 2,656.3 2,462.2 2,404.3 2,393.4
  II Liabilities
Money market paper 17.9 36.5 40.2 28.2 36.5 46.0 39.6 44.9 40.2 26.7 18.4
Bonds 91.1 82.2 96.8 84.2 82.2 82.3 78.9 81.6 96.8 102.5 106.1
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,336.7 1,564.3 963.5 1,544.3 1,564.3 1,322.0 1,266.1 1,154.1 963.5 814.4 948.4
Other equity 636.9 663.6 677.2 654.7 663.6 670.1 673.2 674.2 677.2 680.3 679.9
Loans 1,348.7 1,408.0 1,486.8 1,391.7 1,408.0 1,404.1 1,429.6 1,454.7 1,486.8 1,504.9 1,486.5
Short-term loans 370.2 396.5 406.4 388.3 396.5 384.4 399.6 397.3 406.4 404.9 390.0
Longer-term loans 978.5 1,011.5 1,080.5 1,003.4 1,011.5 1,019.8 1,029.9 1,057.5 1,080.5 1,100.0 1,096.4
Claims from company
pension commitments 214.2 215.5 218.4 215.2 215.5 216.2 216.9 217.7 218.4 219.1 219.8
Other liabilities 386.3 431.2 473.5 422.9 431.2 438.2 448.4 456.5 473.5 534.2 454.9
Total 4,031.8 4,401.2 3,956.3 4,341.2 4,401.2 4,179.0 4,152.6 4,083.7 3,956.3 3,882.1 3,914.0
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 2Including private supplementary pension funds. — 3Including accumulated interest-bearing
pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes and surplus shares with insurance corporations. 
53*VIII  Financial accounts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit / surplus 1
2003 − 87.2 − 39.6 − 32.7 − 7.1 − 7.7 − 4.0 − 1.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.4
2004 − 83.5 − 52.0 − 27.9 − 2.4 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
2005 − 74.0 − 47.4 − 22.5 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
2006 p − 37.8 − 34.5 − 11.3 + 3.0 + 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2
2007 p + 4.9 − 18.9 + 4.6 + 8.3 + 10.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4
2008 p + 1.1 − 14.1 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3
2007          H1  p + 4.6 − 10.4 + 3.8 + 3.9 + 7.2 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.6
         H2  p + 0.1 − 8.7 + 0.8 + 4.4 + 3.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.3
2008          H1  p + 7.3 − 7.0 + 3.6 + 5.7 + 4.9 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.4
         H2  p − 6.3 − 7.2 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
2009          H1  pe − 17.3 − 11.5 − 6.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2003 1,383.5 847.9 435.3 111.5 5.3 63.9 39.2 20.1 5.2 0.2
2004 1,453.6 889.5 459.7 116.3 4.2 65.7 40.2 20.8 5.3 0.2
2005 1,524.0 935.3 481.9 120.0 2.7 68.0 41.7 21.5 5.3 0.1
2006 1,571.0 970.7 491.5 122.4 1.7 67.6 41.7 21.1 5.3 0.1
2007 1,577.7 977.9 492.9 120.2 1.6 65.0 40.3 20.3 4.9 0.1
2008 pe 1,644.5 1,006.7 531.8 118.7 1.5 65.9 40.3 21.3 4.8 0.1
2007          Q1 1,575.6 975.0 492.4 121.5 1.4 66.9 41.4 20.9 5.2 0.1
         Q2 1,594.2 997.6 488.5 121.5 1.5 67.0 41.9 20.5 5.1 0.1
         Q3 1,572.8 977.4 488.7 119.9 1.6 65.3 40.6 20.3 5.0 0.1
         Q4 1,577.7 977.9 492.9 120.2 1.6 65.0 40.3 20.3 4.9 0.1
2008          Q1  pe 1,597.1 988.8 503.1 118.3 1.6 65.2 40.4 20.5 4.8 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,632.8 996.8 530.1 118.7 1.6 65.9 40.2 21.4 4.8 0.1
         Q3  pe 1,626.8 995.0 526.7 117.6 2.0 65.2 39.9 21.1 4.7 0.1
         Q4  pe 1,644.5 1,006.7 531.8 118.7 1.5 65.9 40.3 21.3 4.8 0.1
2009          Q1  pe 1,675.8 1,028.0 540.6 119.5 1.6 68.0 41.7 21.9 4.8 0.1
         Q2  pe 1,726.4 1,073.3 545.4 120.2 1.4 71.1 44.2 22.5 4.9 0.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. — 1Unlike rate agreements. The half-year figures correspond to the deficit / surplus
the fiscal balance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined according to the national accounts. — 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on
in the Maastricht Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit / surplus as shown in the national accounts *
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit / Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2003 961.9 481.8 396.3 83.9 1,049.2 594.2 169.2 64.3 33.9 187.6 − 87.3 889.3
2004 957.7 481.3 396.5 79.9 1,041.2 592.0 169.6 62.4 31.7 185.5 − 83.5 888.0
2005 976.1 493.2 396.5 86.4 1,050.3 597.0 168.9 62.6 30.3 191.5 − 74.2 900.5
2006 p 1,016.4 530.6 400.0 85.8 1,054.5 598.4 167.9 65.5 32.4 190.3 − 38.1 941.9
2007 p 1,065.3 576.3 399.8 89.2 1,060.7 596.8 168.4 67.3 34.3 193.9 + 4.7 988.2
2008 p 1,091.8 592.6 408.1 91.1 1,090.8 607.4 172.1 67.1 37.4 206.8 + 1.0 1,013.4
as a percentage of GDP
2003 44.5 22.3 18.3 3.9 48.5 27.5 7.8 3.0 1.6 8.7 − 4.0 41.1
2004 43.3 21.8 17.9 3.6 47.1 26.8 7.7 2.8 1.4 8.4 − 3.8 40.2
2005 43.5 22.0 17.7 3.9 46.8 26.6 7.5 2.8 1.4 8.5 − 3.3 40.2
2006 p 43.7 22.8 17.2 3.7 45.4 25.7 7.2 2.8 1.4 8.2 − 1.6 40.5
2007 p 43.9 23.7 16.5 3.7 43.7 24.6 6.9 2.8 1.4 8.0 + 0.2 40.7
2008 p 43.7 23.7 16.4 3.7 43.7 24.3 6.9 2.7 1.5 8.3 + 0.0 40.6
Percentage growth rates
2003 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.6 − 6.1 + 2.2 . + 1.1
2004 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 6.4 − 1.1 . − 0.1
2005 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 4.4 + 3.2 . + 1.4
2006 p + 4.1 + 7.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 4.6 + 7.0 − 0.6 . + 4.6
2007 p + 4.8 + 8.6 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 6.0 + 1.9 . + 4.9
2008 p + 2.5 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 2.8 + 1.8 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 9.1 + 6.6 . + 2.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. data (without affecting the fiscal deficit / surplus). This information can still
In the Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share be found on the Bundesbank’s website. — 1Taxes and social contributions
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT revenue. 
54*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cial
transac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  4 Taxes tions  5 Total  4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2002 p 554.7 441.7 20.5 610.4 173.3 226.8 66.1 38.7 11.3 − 55.8 457.7 466.0 − 8.3 927.7 991.8 − 64.1
2003 pe 547.0 442.2 21.5 614.2 174.0 235.0 65.6 36.3 10.0 − 67.2 467.6 474.4 − 6.8 925.2 999.1 − 73.9
2004 pe 545.9 442.8 24.1 610.4 173.4 236.9 64.8 34.3 9.6 − 64.5 469.7 468.6 + 1.1 926.8 990.2 − 63.4
2005 pe 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 pe 590.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 35.3 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 988.2 1,003.8 − 15.6
2007 pe 644.8 538.2 17.7 644.2 182.2 250.0 66.2 34.6 9.5 + 0.6 475.3 466.4 + 8.9 1,025.6 1,016.1 + 9.5
2008 pe 668.5 561.2 13.0 677.6 187.3 259.9 67.3 36.3 18.6 − 9.1 485.2 478.1 + 7.1 1,057.9 1,059.9 − 2.0
2007          Q1 p 149.4 122.3 2.8 164.5 42.7 64.9 25.5 5.3 3.4 − 15.1 112.2 115.6 − 3.4 238.4 256.9 − 18.5
         Q2 p 158.5 136.9 3.0 144.5 43.9 58.4 10.0 6.7 2.5 + 14.0 119.0 116.3 + 2.7 253.8 237.0 + 16.7
         Q3 p 155.4 131.6 3.6 160.5 44.2 59.8 21.3 8.6 1.6 − 5.1 116.2 115.6 + 0.6 248.2 252.8 − 4.6
         Q4 p 179.6 147.6 7.9 172.9 49.7 65.1 9.1 12.7 1.9 + 6.7 126.9 117.8 + 9.1 283.0 267.2 + 15.7
2008          Q1 p 160.0 130.8 3.0 164.5 43.7 65.5 24.7 5.3 2.0 − 4.5 114.1 119.4 − 5.3 250.4 260.2 − 9.8
         Q2 p 166.1 143.5 2.1 151.5 44.9 61.4 11.1 7.2 1.7 + 14.6 120.6 120.1 + 0.5 263.0 247.9 + 15.1
         Q3 p 159.7 137.2 1.3 167.1 45.9 62.6 21.2 9.0 1.5 − 7.4 118.6 118.9 − 0.3 254.5 262.2 − 7.7
         Q4 p 180.5 149.3 6.4 192.4 51.2 68.7 10.0 13.5 13.3 − 11.9 130.4 121.7 + 8.7 287.0 290.2 − 3.3
2009          Q1 p 157.0 128.9 1.8 175.7 45.9 67.4 22.8 5.0 10.0 − 18.7 117.9 122.3 − 4.4 251.2 274.4 − 23.1
         Q2 p 154.4 130.4 3.3 169.2 47.2 60.4 10.7 7.4 16.9 − 14.8 120.5 125.5 − 5.0 251.4 271.2 − 19.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- are estimated. — 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded
istical Office. — 1Including subsidiary budgets but excluding the Post Office here is influenced in part by statistical changeovers. — 4Including discrep-
pension funds. Unlike the annual figures based on the annual calculations ancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local govern-
of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not include muni- ment. — 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
cipal special purpose associations and various special accounts. — 2The of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. — 6Including Fed-
latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors eral Government liquidity assistance to the Federal Labour Of fice. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2002 240.8 273.5 − 32.7 228.8 258.0 − 29.2 147.0 150.0 − 3.0
2003 239.6 278.8 − 39.2 229.2 259.7 − 30.5 142.1 149.9 − 7.8
2004 233.9 273.6 − 39.7 233.5 257.1 − 23.6 147.0 150.1 − 3.1
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 pe 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 249.8 260.1 − 10.3 161.1 157.4 + 3.7
2007 pe 277.4 292.1 − 14.7 275.9 267.5 + 8.4 171.3 162.4 + 8.9
2008 pe 292.0 303.8 − 11.8 278.8 278.0 + 0.8 176.9 169.0 + 7.9
2007          Q1 p 61.1 74.6 − 13.6 63.5 66.5 − 3.0 35.4 37.6 − 2.1
         Q2 p 69.7 64.4 + 5.3 67.6 61.9 + 5.7 40.4 37.3 + 3.1
         Q3 p 68.3 76.8 − 8.5 66.2 64.1 + 2.1 42.5 39.7 + 2.8
         Q4 p 78.3 76.3 + 2.0 77.7 74.0 + 3.7 51.0 46.1 + 4.9
2008          Q1 p 64.1 75.6 − 11.5 67.7 67.7 − 0.1 37.3 37.4 − 0.1
         Q2 p 73.0 68.3 + 4.7 70.7 64.2 + 6.5 42.7 39.7 + 3.0
         Q3 p 71.2 82.7 − 11.4 67.3 66.3 + 1.0 43.8 41.1 + 2.7
         Q4 p 83.7 77.3 + 6.4 72.1 78.6 − 6.5 51.0 49.0 + 2.0
2009          Q1 p 65.8 76.8 − 11.0 65.3 75.9 − 10.6 36.3 39.3 − 3.0
         Q2 p 71.3 68.6 + 2.7 66.1 67.9 − 1.8 40.7 41.9 − 1.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the data from the Federal Stat- city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure based
istical Office. — 1The Bundesbank’s profit is included only up to the max- on the annual calculations of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly
imum amount of €3.5 billion that is to be assigned to the core budget. Rev- figures do not include various special accounts and municipal special pur-
enue over and above this amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund pose associations. 
for Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including the local authority level of the
55*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union Memo item
Supplementary
central govern-
Balance of ment grants, state
Central State Local untransferred government’s share
Period Total Total government  1 government European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 of energy tax
2002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 18,560 52,490 + 51 22,321
2003 442,238 390,438 214,002 155,510 20,926 51,673 + 127 22,067
2004 442,838 386,459 208,920 157,898 19,640 56,237 + 142 21,967
2005 452,078 392,313 211,779 158,823 21,711 59,750 + 16 21,634
2006 488,444 421,151 225,634 173,374 22,142 67,316 − 22 21,742
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2007          Q1 122,550 104,537 53,928 43,916 6,693 13,313 + 4,700 5,362
         Q2 136,963 118,090 65,298 49,069 3,724 18,217 + 655 5,408
         Q3 131,495 113,712 61,592 46,875 5,246 17,882 − 99 5,524
         Q4 147,236 129,215 70,929 51,699 6,587 23,138 − 5,117 5,348
2008          Q1 131,507 111,845 56,179 47,660 8,006 14,148 + 5,513 5,272
         Q2 143,006 122,931 66,952 51,585 4,394 19,614 + 461 5,324
         Q3 137,454 117,861 65,380 48,667 3,814 19,715 − 122 5,503
         Q4 149,216 131,545 72,178 52,500 6,867 23,712 − 6,042 5,411
2009          Q1 p 128,787 109,674 55,941 46,212 7,521 13,289 + 5,824 5,154
         Q2 p 130,491 113,442 65,247 46,653 1,541 17,397 − 347 5,140
         Q3 ... 108,572 62,354 42,335 3,883 ... ... 5,048
2008          Sep . 45,542 25,080 18,994 1,467 . . 1,834
2009          Sep . 42,125 24,068 16,715 1,342 . . 1,683
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- cruing to the EU from central government tax revenue. — 3Including local
bank calculations. — 1Before deducting supplementary central government government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg. — 4Differ-
grants, shares in energy tax revenue and compensation for the transfer of ence between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by the
motor vehicle tax to central government, which are remitted to state govern- state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table IX. 6) a nd
ment. — 2Custom duties and shares in VAT and gross national income ac- the amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes  7 taxes  7 duties taxes
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2003 414,846 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,609 18,713 2,877 24,409
2004 409,517 159,104 123,896 5,394 13,123 16,691 137,366 104,715 32,651 5,661 84,554 19,774 3,059 23,058
2005 415,355 161,960 118,919 9,766 16,333 16,943 139,713 108,440 31,273 6,218 83,508 20,579 3,378 23,042
2006 446,139 182,614 122,612 17,567 22,898 19,537 146,688 111,318 35,370 7,013 84,215 21,729 3,880 24,988
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,034 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2007          Q1 110,577 43,694 30,464 829 5,434 6,966 42,037 32,624 9,413 153 17,377 6,354 962 6,040
         Q2 125,236 55,351 32,244 8,191 6,224 8,693 41,001 30,642 10,359 1,705 20,694 5,493 992 7,145
         Q3 120,644 48,742 31,416 7,299 5,571 4,456 42,612 31,724 10,888 1,850 20,750 5,671 1,019 6,932
         Q4 137,361 56,912 37,649 8,709 5,700 4,854 43,986 32,532 11,454 3,267 26,868 5,318 1,010 8,146
2008          Q1 118,847 49,649 32,793 3,668 4,727 8,462 44,294 33,488 10,806 297 17,515 6,114 980 7,002
         Q2 130,829 60,000 34,700 10,398 4,821 10,080 41,890 30,645 11,244 1,636 20,700 5,676 927 7,898
         Q3 125,510 52,135 34,063 8,878 4,086 5,109 44,338 32,705 11,633 1,690 20,888 5,442 1,017 7,648
         Q4 140,312 58,699 40,340 9,741 2,235 6,384 45,468 33,951 11,517 3,161 27,200 4,705 1,080 8,767
2009          Q1 116,731 50,001 33,975 2,971 4,399 8,657 43,087 34,234 8,853 − 36 17,361 5,351 966 7,057
         Q2 120,543 48,503 30,481 9,141 342 8,539 43,424 35,176 8,248 1,499 21,085 5,186 846 7,102
         Q3 115,567 43,486 32,150 6,732 592 4,011 44,365 35,717 8,649 1,346 22,427 3,023 920 6,994
2008          Sep 48,814 25,169 10,508 8,898 4,724 1,038 14,267 10,558 3,709 3 7,306 1,729 341 3,272
2009          Sep 45,186 21,103 10,067 7,861 2,249 926 15,025 12,189 2,836 1 7,834 918 305 3,061
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. — 1This sion plans. — 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
total, unlike that in Table IX. 5, does not include the receipts from the equal- non-assessed taxes on earnings. — 5The allocation of revenue to central,
isation of burdens levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular interv als, is
to central and state government), real property taxes and other local govern- regulated in section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percen t-
ment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. — 2Respective age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2008:
percentage share of central, state and local government in revenue: wage 54.4:43.6:2. The EU share is deducted from central government’s share. —
tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and non-assessed 6Respective percentage share of central and state government for 2008:
taxes on earnings 50:50:-, withholding tax on interest income 44:44:12. — 19.9:80.1. — 7 For the breakdown, see Table IX. 7. 
3After deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pen-
56*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
  
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes   
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inher- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and itance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax  2 city tax tax Other tax  2 buildings tax Other  3 Total tax taxes
2002 42,192 13,778 10,403 8,327 . 5,097 2,149 1,548 7,592 4,763 3,021 3,200 33,447 23,489 9,261
2003 43,188 14,094 10,280 8,870 . 6,531 2,204 1,442 7,336 4,800 3,373 3,205 34,477 24,139 9,658
2004 41,782 13,630 10,108 8,751 . 6,597 2,195 1,492 7,740 4,646 4,284 3,105 38,982 28,373 9,939
2005 40,101 14,273 10,315 8,750 . 6,462 2,142 1,465 8,674 4,791 4,097 3,018 42,941 32,129 10,247
2006 39,916 14,387 11,277 8,775 . 6,273 2,160 1,428 8,937 6,125 3,763 2,904 49,319 38,370 10,399
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2007          Q1 4,540 2,916 2,949 4,504 . 1,647 416 406 2,636 1,828 1,150 740 12,126 9,541 2,408
         Q2 9,230 3,462 3,249 1,912 . 1,997 493 352 2,206 1,606 1,006 675 13,432 10,457 2,841
         Q3 9,904 3,774 2,875 2,049 . 1,319 509 322 2,098 1,860 1,043 670 12,701 9,404 3,147
         Q4 15,281 4,103 3,277 1,866 . 1,392 541 408 1,958 1,659 1,004 698 13,142 10,714 2,317
2008          Q1 4,668 2,547 3,192 4,540 . 1,547 626 394 2,590 1,676 1,087 761 12,956 10,330 2,444
         Q2 9,570 3,267 3,502 1,950 . 1,594 479 338 2,290 1,461 1,301 624 13,813 10,850 2,815
         Q3 9,807 3,649 3,059 2,078 . 1,464 488 343 2,050 1,398 1,361 632 13,634 10,281 3,184
         Q4 15,203 4,111 3,392 1,911 . 1,655 533 396 1,912 1,193 1,022 579 12,065 9,577 2,364
2009          Q1 p 4,777 2,365 3,191 4,502 . 1,560 594 372 2,284 1,165 1,144 758 12,021 9,370 2,452
         Q2 p 10,059 3,560 3,057 1,999 . 1,569 478 363 2,114 1,131 1,334 608 11,447 8,433 2,860
         Q3 9,883 3,499 2,638 2,096 1,907 1,582 488 335 0 1,297 1,123 604 ... ... ...
2008          Sep 3,444 1,148 1,443 496 . 487 172 117 649 444 429 207 . . .
2009          Sep 3,523 1,072 1,244 509 667 536 170 113 − 23 435 300 207 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundes- ment. Postings to state government shown thereafter relate to the booki ng
bank calculations. — 1For the sum total, see Table IX. 6. — 2As of of cash flows. — 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax revenue is attributable to central govern-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit / and other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total payments insurance  3 surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003 229,371 156,510 71,447 231,362 196,038 15,178 − 1,991 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,862
2004 7 231,684 156,535 71,680 233,011 198,587 14,258 − 1,327 5,158 4,980 19 41 118 4,834
2005 229,428 156,264 71,917 233,357 199,873 13,437 − 3,929 1,976 1,794 16 42 123 4,888
2006 241,231 168,083 71,773 233,668 200,459 13,053 + 7,563 10,047 9,777 115 46 109 4,912
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2007          Q1 56,177 37,771 18,118 58,275 50,369 3,279 − 2,098 7,955 7,585 215 46 108 4,889
         Q2 59,068 40,501 18,180 58,595 50,282 3,432 + 473 8,890 8,573 165 48 103 4,881
         Q3 57,996 39,494 18,115 59,054 50,633 3,470 − 1,058 8,025 7,598 265 45 117 4,868
         Q4 62,926 44,452 18,136 59,159 50,638 3,475 + 3,767 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008          Q1 57,611 39,028 18,241 58,952 50,795 3,473 − 1,341 10,730 9,459 1,095 46 130 4,792
         Q2 60,574 41,958 18,241 59,346 50,714 3,482 + 1,228 11,923 10,267 1,466 61 128 4,704
         Q3 59,525 40,769 18,215 60,124 51,418 3,539 − 599 11,727 10,421 1,128 50 127 4,690
         Q4 64,495 45,851 18,231 60,100 51,301 3,548 + 4,395 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009          Q1 58,681 39,891 18,500 60,105 51,554 3,633 − 1,424 14,902 14,699 15 56 132 4,618
         Q2 60,812 42,140 18,384 60,263 51,410 3,626 + 549 15,280 15,082 15 59 124 4,593
         Q3 59,783 41,142 18,364 61,841 52,869 3,580 − 2,058 13,647 13,428 40 60 119 4,585
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension and proceeds. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government
insurance scheme. — *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for cash benefits. — 3Including long-term care insurance for pensioners until
the mining, railway and maritime industries. — 1The annual figures do not 2004 Q1. — 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year
tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. In- or quarter. — 5Including cash. — 6Excluding loans to other social security
cluding financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending funds. — 7 Revenue includes proceeds from the disposal of equity interests. 
57*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
of which of which loans
from
Unemploy- Measures central
Contri- ment sup- Western Eastern Job promo- Western Eastern financed Deficit / govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total  3 port 4,5 Germany Germany tion  5,6 Germany Germany by levies  7 surplus ment
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 2,215 − 5,623 5,623
2003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 1,948 − 6,215 6,215
2004 50,314 47,211 1,674 54,490 29,746 21,821 7,925 16,843 9,831 7,011 1,641 − 4,176 4,175
2005 52,692 46,989 1,436 53,089 27,654 20,332 7,322 11,590 7,421 4,169 1,450 − 397 397
2006 55,384 51,176 1,123 44,162 23,249 17,348 5,901 9,259 6,185 3,074 1,089 + 11,221 0
2007 42,838 32,264 971 36,196 17,356 13,075 4,282 8,370 5,748 2,623 949 + 6,643 −
2008 38,289 26,452 974 39,407 14,283 10,652 3,631 8,712 6,222 2,490 920 − 1,118 −
2007          Q1 9,932 7,738 78 10,044 5,321 3,971 1,350 2,032 1,370 662 408 − 113 −
         Q2 10,837 7,910 303 9,383 4,598 3,440 1,157 2,089 1,423 666 259 + 1,454 −
         Q3 10,366 7,765 232 8,357 3,910 2,979 931 1,985 1,363 622 160 + 2,010 −
         Q4 11,703 8,851 357 8,412 3,528 2,684 843 2,264 1,591 674 122 + 3,292 −
2008          Q1 8,714 5,955 83 11,295 4,299 3,183 1,116 2,088 1,473 615 327 − 2,581 −
         Q2 9,690 6,931 211 10,367 3,739 2,761 978 2,182 1,556 626 255 − 677 −
         Q3 9,330 6,317 272 8,648 3,245 2,442 804 2,053 1,462 592 149 + 683 −
         Q4 10,555 7,248 409 9,098 3,001 2,267 733 2,389 1,731 657 189 + 1,458 −
2009          Q1 6,283 5,248 192 10,396 4,723 3,556 1,167 2,318 1,688 630 480 − 4,113 −
         Q2 6,490 5,421 261 12,391 5,563 4,376 1,187 2,893 2,193 700 491 − 5,901 −
         Q3 6,853 5,316 250 12,480 5,465 4,439 1,026 3,026 2,325 701 630 − 5,626 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Excluding central government schemes. 6Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabili-
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- tation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agen-
solvency compensation to employees. — 3From 2005, including a compen- cies, compensation top-up payments and business start-up grants. —
satory amount or a reintegration payment to central government. — 4Un- 7Promotion of winter construction and insolvency compensation for em-
employment benefit and short-time working benefit. — 5Including contri- ployees. 
butions to the statutory health, pension and long-term care insurance
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit /
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2002 139,707 136,208 . 143,026 46,308 23,449 23,407 11,492 9,304 7,561 8,019 − 3,320
2003 141,654 138,383 . 145,095 46,800 24,218 24,301 11,819 9,409 6,973 8,206 − 3,441
2004 144,279 140,120 1,000 140,260 47,594 21,811 22,955 11,263 8,281 6,367 8,196 + 4,020
2005 145,742 140,250 2,500 144,071 48,959 25,358 23,096 9,928 8,284 5,868 8,303 + 1,671
2006 149,929 142,183 4,200 148,297 50,327 25,835 23,896 10,364 8,303 5,708 8,319 + 1,632
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,763 156,130 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,889 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,429
2007          Q1 36,437 35,693 − 37,147 12,948 6,687 6,123 2,670 1,918 1,525 1,879 − 710
         Q2 39,316 37,306 1,250 38,299 12,893 6,862 6,163 2,697 2,160 1,510 1,930 + 1,017
         Q3 37,939 37,138 − 38,068 12,750 6,897 6,062 2,552 2,199 1,451 1,987 − 129
         Q4 41,987 39,829 1,250 40,384 12,363 7,313 6,481 2,797 2,378 1,527 2,618 + 1,602
2008          Q1 37,937 37,136 − 39,010 13,410 7,084 6,409 2,711 2,011 1,643 1,898 − 1,073
         Q2 40,361 38,491 1,250 40,232 13,387 7,339 6,434 2,728 2,292 1,644 2,021 + 129
         Q3 39,185 38,338 − 39,733 13,012 7,215 6,415 2,660 2,271 1,602 2,045 − 548
         Q4 44,387 41,838 1,250 42,165 12,913 7,588 6,812 2,894 2,461 1,672 2,704 + 2,222
2009          Q1 42,502 39,324 3,833 41,432 14,154 7,463 6,969 2,797 2,095 1,822 1,977 + 1,069
         Q2 42,540 40,464 1,239 42,400 14,092 7,652 6,810 2,857 2,392 1,779 2,083 + 140
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally employment. — 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. — 4Including den-
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Ex- tures. — 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying
cluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including admin is-
scheme. — 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time trative expenditure on disease management programmes. 
58*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit /
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2002 16,917 16,714 17,346 2,363 8,014 4,151 962 837 − 428
2003 16,844 16,665 17,468 2,361 8,183 4,090 951 853 − 624
2004 16,817 16,654 17,605 2,365 8,349 4,049 925 851 − 788
2005 17,526 17,385 17,891 2,409 8,516 4,050 890 875 − 366
2006 17,749 17,611 18,064 2,437 8,671 4,017 862 886 − 315
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 350
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2007          Q1 4,301 4,265 4,591 624 2,191 1,014 212 238 − 290
         Q2 4,469 4,432 4,528 595 2,192 993 213 231 − 59
         Q3 4,440 4,403 4,617 623 2,226 1,012 216 213 − 177
         Q4 4,813 4,761 4,608 626 2,218 1,015 217 209 + 204
2008          Q1 4,421 4,381 4,681 641 2,229 1,022 210 255 − 261
         Q2 4,597 4,563 4,703 634 2,251 1,025 221 230 − 106
         Q3 5,167 5,133 4,872 665 2,280 1,089 218 234 + 295
         Q4 5,583 5,535 4,884 662 2,293 1,103 219 220 + 698
2009          Q1 5,110 5,082 4,970 676 2,284 1,104 215 274 + 139
         Q2 5,275 5,253 4,977 662 2,308 1,100 217 248 + 298
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. — 1The final annual figures do not tally 2Since 2005 including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of
with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. — income subject to insurance contributions). — 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in 13 Central, state and local government: debt by
the market creditor *
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Social
market market End of year Bundes- Credit security Foreign
Period Gross  2 Net loans deposits or quarter Total bank institutions funds Other  1 creditors  pe 
2002 + 178,203 + 24,327 + 2,221 + 22 2002 1,277,667 4,440 536,900 137 238,390 497,800
2003 + 227,483 + 42,270 + 1,236 + 7,218 2003 1,358,137 4,440 530,700 341 301,956 520,700
2004 + 227,441 + 44,410 + 1,844 + 802 2004 1,430,582 4,440 544,200 430 306,912 574,600
2005 + 224,922 + 35,479 + 4,511 + 6,041 2005 1,489,029 4,440 518,500 488 312,201 653,400
2006 + 221,873 + 32,656 + 3,258 + 6,308 2006 1,533,697 4,440 496,900 480 329,177 702,700
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 457,000 476 312,265 766,200
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,700 510 323,240 800,700
2007          Q1 + 68,285 + 4,600 + 12,649 − 11,200 2007          Q1 1,538,621 4,440 513,900 480 320,701 699,100
         Q2 + 54,415 + 22,020 + 5,792 + 27,209          Q2 1,556,684 4,440 504,600 480 319,864 727,300
         Q3 + 51,413 − 20,291 − 4,783 − 27,450          Q3 1,535,253 4,440 489,000 480 307,833 733,500
         Q4 + 40,882 + 667 − 12,571 + 6,541          Q4 1,540,381 4,440 457,000 476 312,265 766,200
2008          Q1 + 69,510 + 10,443 + 12,306 − 705 2008          Q1 1,541,759 4,440 467,300 475 305,344 764,200
         Q2 + 52,618 + 7,478 + 4,872 + 10,289          Q2 1,554,151 4,440 462,200 506 291,906 795,100
         Q3 + 53,933 − 2,231 − 10,736 − 12,088          Q3 1,547,336 4,440 431,900 506 298,490 812,000
         Q4 + 57,296 + 10,519 + 447 + 11,541          Q4 1,564,590 4,440 435,700 510 323,240 800,700
2009          Q1 + 66,560 + 20,334 − 2,256 − 7,856 2009          Q1 p 1,594,621 4,440 426,500 514 322,167 841,000
         Q2 + 96,270 + 46,283 − 2,791 + 26,434          Q2 p 1,646,307 4,440 430,400 520 325,647 885,300
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  -  Finance Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 
Agency. — 1 Including the Financial  Market  Stabil- Office. — * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1 Calculated 
isation Fund (SoFFin) and the Investment and Repay- as a residual. 
ment Fund. — 2 After deducting repurchases. 
59*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
IX Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category *
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2003 1,358,137 36,022 246,414 153,611 12,810 471,115 . 396,832 341 34,163 6,711 119
2004 1,430,582 35,722 279,796 168,958 10,817 495,547 . 379,984 430 53,672 5,572 84
2005 1,489,029 36,945 310,044 174,423 11,055 521,801 . 366,978 488 62,765 4,443 88
2006 1,533,697 37,834 320,288 179,940 10,199 552,028 . 356,514 480 71,889 4,443 82
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 476 74,988 4,443 76
2008          Q2 1,554,151 39,655 328,980 168,938 9,816 586,050 . 343,931 506 71,761 4,443 72
         Q3 1,547,336 42,816 332,792 177,594 9,415 579,969 701 326,582 506 72,445 4,443 74
         Q4 1,564,590 44,870 337,261 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 510 82,781 4,443 73
2009          Q1 p 1,594,621 70,315 341,169 177,859 9,436 586,340 3,413 320,494 514 80,564 4,443 74
         Q2 p 1,646,307 99,170 353,904 174,146 9,490 600,012 3,185 310,665 520 90,699 4,443 73
Central government 7,8,9,10,11
2003 767,713 35,235 87,538 143,425 12,810 436,181 . 38,146 223 7,326 6,711 118
2004 812,123 34,440 95,638 159,272 10,817 460,380 . 34,835 333 10,751 5,572 83
2005 886,254 36,098 108,899 174,371 11,055 510,866 . 29,318 408 10,710 4,443 87
2006 918,911 37,798 103,624 179,889 10,199 541,404 . 30,030 408 11,036 4,443 82
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 408 10,928 4,443 75
2008          Q2 957,909 37,136 101,932 168,938 9,816 585,794 . 38,496 438 10,845 4,443 71
         Q3 955,678 40,316 105,361 177,594 9,415 579,713 701 26,980 438 10,644 4,443 74
         Q4 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 448 10,674 4,443 72
2009          Q1 986,530 64,653 104,571 177,859 9,436 586,225 3,413 24,804 448 10,605 4,443 74
         Q2 1,032,813 95,758 113,060 174,146 9,490 599,898 3,185 21,634 448 10,680 4,443 72
State government
2003 423,737 787 154,189 .... 244,902 4 23,854 . 1
2004 448,672 1,282 179,620 .... 228,644 3 39,122 . 1
2005 471,375 847 201,146 .... 221,163 3 48,216 . 1
2006 481,850 36 216,665 .... 209,270 2 55,876 . 1
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008          Q2 481,875 2,519 227,048 .... 195,189 3 57,116 . 1
         Q3 478,495 2,500 227,430 .... 190,560 3 58,001 . 1
         Q4 483,875 4,075 231,577 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009          Q1 p 492,771 5,661 236,599 .... 184,415 6 66,090 . 1
         Q2 p 497,725 3,411 240,844 .... 177,307 12 76,149 . 1
Local government 12
2003 107,857 . 77 . . 734 . 104,469 106 2,471 . .
2004 112,538 . − . . 812 . 108,231 86 3,410 . .
2005 116,033 . − . . 466 . 111,889 77 3,601 . .
2006 118,380 . − . . 256 . 113,265 70 4,789 . .
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008          Q2 114,367 . − . . 256 . 110,246 65 3,800 . .
         Q3 113,163 . − . . 256 . 109,042 65 3,800 . .
         Q4 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009          Q1 p 115,320 . − . . 114 . 111,276 60 3,870 . .
         Q2 p 115,769 . − . . 114 . 111,725 60 3,870 . .
Special funds 7,8,9,13
2003 58,830 − 4,610 10,185 . 34,201 . 9,315 8 512 . .
2004 57,250 − 4,538 9,685 . 34,355 . 8,274 8 389 . .
2005 15,367 . − 51 . 10,469 . 4,609 − 238 . .
2006 14,556 . − 51 . 10,368 . 3,950 − 188 . .
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008          Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical trast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the joi nt issu-
Office. — *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. — 1Including ance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
Treasury financing paper. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own secur- special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. — 8On 1
ities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term January 2005 central government assumed joint responsibility for the debts
notes. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes and cash advances. In- of the German Unity Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special
cluding loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans fund is recorded under central government. — 9On 1 July 2007 central
from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities arising from the in- government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Specia l
vestment assistance levy. — 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded
claims. — 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance under central government. — 10From December 2008, including debt of
with the London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing con- the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin). — 11From March 2009, in-
struction and liabilities arising from housing construction by the former cluding debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. — 12Including debt
GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection with the of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures
return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to have been estimated. — 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June 2007),
their home country; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. — 7In con- German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. 
60*IX Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2007   2008   2009
  2006   2007   2008   2006   2007   2008   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2000=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 112.0 114.0 114.2 5.4 1.8 0.2 1.4 2.7 6.4 0.6 − 8.5 − 20.3 − 23.6
Construction 78.5 79.2 81.9 − 1.0 0.8 3.5 − 3.6 3.0 6.8 3.2 0.7 − 6.1 − 2.9
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel and
restaurant services, transport
and storage  1 109.3 112.5 114.3 2.3 2.9 1.5 1.4 2.5 3.6 1.6 − 1.5 − 6.0 − 6.9
Financing, renting and business
services  2 110.3 115.6 117.5 3.9 4.8 1.6 3.9 2.3 2.4 1.4 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.8
Public and private services  3 104.4 106.6 108.6 1.2 2.1 1.9 2.2 1.5 2.0 2.1 2.0 0.4 0.3
Gross value added 107.4 110.5 112.0 3.1 2.9 1.4 2.1 2.3 3.7 1.5 − 2.0 − 6.9 − 8.0
Gross domestic product  4 106.3 108.9 110.3 3.2 2.5 1.3 1.5 2.1 3.4 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.4 − 7.1
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 102.9 102.6 102.9 1.3 − 0.3 0.4 − 1.2 0.8 0.9 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.5
Government consumption 103.1 104.8 107.0 1.0 1.7 2.1 1.2 1.2 2.4 2.2 2.3 2.6 2.3
Machinery and equipment 111.0 123.2 127.3 11.8 11.0 3.3 10.7 4.5 7.2 5.8 − 3.0 − 20.1 − 23.4
Premises 86.2 86.2 88.4 4.6 0.0 2.6 − 4.6 1.5 5.8 2.7 0.3 − 5.6 − 2.9
Other investment  6 127.6 135.9 143.2 8.9 6.5 5.3 8.6 6.5 4.7 5.6 4.7 6.9 6.7
Changes in inventories  7  8 . . . − 0.2 0.0 0.4 0.8 − 0.2 0.0 0.3 1.7 0.4 − 0.9
Domestic use 100.1 101.1 102.9 2.2 1.0 1.7 0.9 1.1 2.3 1.8 1.7 − 1.1 − 2.5
Net exports  8 . . . 1.0 1.5 − 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.3 − 0.4 − 3.3 − 5.4 − 4.8
Exports 152.6 164.0 168.7 13.0 7.5 2.9 3.1 6.0 7.6 4.2 − 5.7 − 17.2 − 20.5
Imports 134.6 141.1 147.1 11.9 4.8 4.3 2.2 4.5 5.7 5.8 1.2 − 7.3 − 12.5
Gross domestic product  4 106.3 108.9 110.3 3.2 2.5 1.3 1.5 2.1 3.4 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.4 − 7.1
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,356.3 1,375.4 1,409.7 2.3 1.4 2.5 1.0 3.0 3.3 3.0 0.8 − 0.1 0.2
Government consumption 426.3 435.6 451.8 1.6 2.2 3.7 2.0 2.9 4.6 3.8 3.6 5.1 4.5
Machinery and equipment 178.4 196.5 201.8 10.6 10.2 2.7 9.8 3.7 6.3 5.3 − 3.5 − 21.1 − 24.4
Premises 217.9 231.5 245.0 7.1 6.3 5.8 0.7 4.3 8.9 6.4 3.4 − 3.4 − 1.9
Other investment  6 26.6 27.5 27.9 4.7 3.4 1.6 3.7 2.0 2.1 1.6 0.7 − 2.0 − 1.8
Changes in inventories  7 − 12.7 − 10.0 3.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,192.6 2,256.5 2,340.1 3.3 2.9 3.7 3.1 3.0 4.5 4.3 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.4
Net exports 132.5 171.7 155.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,054.9 1,139.5 1,179.4 14.4 8.0 3.5 3.2 6.5 8.2 5.3 − 5.5 − 19.2 − 23.0
Imports 922.5 967.8 1,023.7 14.9 4.9 5.8 2.5 6.1 8.0 9.4 − 0.1 − 12.1 − 18.3
Gross domestic product  4 2,325.1 2,428.2 2,495.8 3.7 4.4 2.8 3.4 3.4 4.8 2.8 0.2 − 5.0 − 5.9
IV Prices (2000 = 100)
Private consumption 108.5 110.5 112.8 1.0 1.8 2.1 2.2 2.2 2.4 2.6 1.3 0.0 − 0.3
Gross domestic product 106.1 108.1 109.8 0.5 1.9 1.5 2.0 1.3 1.4 1.4 2.0 1.6 1.3
Terms of trade 99.8 100.2 99.4 − 1.3 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.6 − 2.2 1.6 3.0 3.7
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,149.0 1,180.9 1,225.1 1.7 2.8 3.7 2.7 3.7 3.7 4.1 3.5 1.0 − 0.1
Entrepreneurial and property
income 629.1 659.4 661.0 11.4 4.8 0.2 3.7 3.6 7.8 − 0.2 − 9.8 − 18.6 − 20.7
National income 1,778.1 1,840.3 1,886.0 4.9 3.5 2.5 3.0 3.7 5.1 2.5 − 0.9 − 6.5 − 7.4
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,374.4 2,477.7 2,537.0 4.7 4.4 2.4 3.6 3.1 4.4 2.7 − 0.4 − 5.1 − 5.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2009. — 1In- products). — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. — 6In-
cluding communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate tangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertain-
activities, renting and business services. — 3Including care-at-home servi- ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. — 7Including net in-
ces. — 4Gross value added plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on crease in valuables. — 8 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
61*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector  * 
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
Motor basic metals electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2005=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 5.56 8.76 85.69 33.96 35.37 2.78 13.58 12.15 10.82 12.48 12.34
Period
2004 96.8 105.2 99.7 96.0 96.8 94.9 99.6 95.9 98.2 91.7 94.7 95.7
2005 99.7 99.5 100.1 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.6 99.8 99.5 99.6
2006 105.4 105.8 101.0 105.8 107.1 106.0 107.3 101.7 107.3 112.9 107.5 102.6
2007 111.6 108.9 98.2 113.1 114.6 114.9 108.4 105.8 114.0 124.4 119.4 109.7
2008 111.5 108.3 95.6 113.4 114.2 116.8 104.0 104.4 114.4 128.8 124.5 104.5
2008          Jan 106.4 78.4 104.8 108.4 112.3 107.3 101.9 102.8 111.8 122.7 108.4 104.4
         Feb 109.4 85.0 97.8 112.1 114.1 115.1 107.3 100.2 114.6 125.8 115.6 116.7
         Mar 121.0 100.3 105.2 123.9 125.9 128.2 117.5 109.1 127.3 140.6 133.7 124.7
         Apr 114.2 110.2 99.7 115.9 119.0 119.2 107.1 101.5 119.9 127.6 124.0 116.6
         May 111.1 114.5 92.8 112.7 117.2 114.2 97.0 100.6 117.7 126.2 119.4 106.5
         June 116.2 120.4 87.1 118.9 120.3 124.8 106.3 102.6 122.7 133.8 134.2 114.8
         July 113.2 122.6 89.0 115.0 119.2 116.7 95.0 104.3 118.5 131.2 126.5 104.9
         Aug 106.0 117.7 85.7 107.3 113.9 103.8 90.0 103.5 112.8 125.9 113.7 84.2
         Sep 117.6 125.1 89.6 120.0 119.2 125.8 115.7 107.7 119.9 135.9 129.4 113.9
         Oct 115.7 123.2 98.0 117.1 117.4 119.2 113.3 111.6 117.6 133.0 125.9 104.4
         Nov 112.1 116.9 97.5 113.3 108.8 119.6 111.8 108.7 109.4 133.5 126.5 100.9
         Dec 95.5 84.9 99.8 95.7 82.6 107.6 84.7 99.6 80.1 109.7 136.3 61.6
2009          Jan 86.8 58.8 105.0 86.7 87.3 81.3 85.3 99.8 83.0 96.2 87.4 67.5
         Feb 85.8 67.5 92.3 86.3 86.6 82.8 85.1 95.0 82.0 96.4 90.2 65.9
         Mar 96.3 103.0 91.7 96.3 93.5 97.1 92.8 102.1 87.1 103.9 104.1 84.5
         Apr  r 88.4 116.3 82.2 87.3 87.1 83.3 83.6 98.7 80.8 91.3 87.0 70.3
         May  r 91.4 116.6 80.9 90.8 90.5 88.9 83.3 98.0 83.7 93.7 89.3 83.5
         June  r 96.0 122.5 85.2 95.3 94.6 95.7 83.9 98.4 88.4 98.6 95.2 91.1
         July  x r 94.0 125.0 85.7 92.9 95.9 88.5 79.9 99.8 88.0 98.8 86.3 83.5
         Aug  x r 88.5 120.6 81.7 87.1 93.1 78.0 74.1 98.2 85.1 96.0 79.0 65.0
         Sep  x p 102.4 128.7 84.6 102.6 102.1 102.3 97.3 105.6 95.3 108.9 101.1 103.1
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2004 + 2.4 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 3.8 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 7.1 + 4.4 + 3.6
2005 + 3.0 − 5.4 + 0.4 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 8.8 + 5.1 + 4.1
2006 + 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.9 + 6.2 + 7.4 + 6.4 + 7.6 + 2.1 + 7.7 + 13.1 + 8.0 + 3.0
2007 + 5.9 + 2.9 − 2.8 + 6.9 + 7.0 + 8.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 11.1 + 6.9
2008 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 4.3 − 4.7
 
2008          Jan + 5.8 + 7.3 + 1.7 + 6.2 + 4.7 + 9.2 − 0.8 + 4.0 + 4.5 + 11.2 + 9.8 + 4.3
         Feb + 5.3 + 9.0 + 0.4 + 5.6 + 5.0 + 8.2 − 2.0 + 1.5 + 5.0 + 9.2 + 8.3 + 7.5
         Mar + 3.9 − 3.7 + 2.1 + 4.4 + 4.7 + 5.9 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 6.4 + 9.9 + 7.7 + 2.1
         Apr + 5.2 − 2.3 + 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 9.3 + 3.6 − 3.1 + 7.0 + 9.9 + 10.7 + 6.6
         May + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 2.6 + 3.2 − 5.5 − 4.1 + 4.2 + 8.2 + 3.7 − 2.7
         June + 2.0 − 0.4 − 4.8 + 2.8 + 2.2 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 7.1 + 9.3 − 2.1
         July − 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.7 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 6.1 − 1.0 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 3.6 − 6.6
         Aug + 1.4 + 0.9 − 5.8 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 3.7 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 3.3 + 6.3 + 5.6 + 0.7
         Sep − 1.5 − 1.6 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.8 + 0.5 − 5.8 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 6.6
         Oct − 3.7 − 2.3 − 5.0 − 3.6 − 3.7 − 3.9 − 6.6 − 1.8 − 3.2 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 12.4
         Nov − 7.2 − 1.1 − 9.6 − 7.4 − 9.4 − 6.9 − 7.5 − 3.5 − 10.0 − 5.1 − 2.5 − 17.3
         Dec − 11.4 − 4.0 − 9.0 − 12.0 − 18.9 − 9.6 − 14.9 − 2.0 − 20.6 − 11.5 − 0.5 − 31.6
2009          Jan − 18.4 − 25.0 + 0.2 − 20.0 − 22.3 − 24.2 − 16.3 − 2.9 − 25.8 − 21.6 − 19.4 − 35.3
         Feb − 21.6 − 20.6 − 5.6 − 23.0 − 24.1 − 28.1 − 20.7 − 5.2 − 28.4 − 23.4 − 22.0 − 43.5
         Mar − 20.4 + 2.7 − 12.8 − 22.3 − 25.7 − 24.3 − 21.0 − 6.4 − 31.6 − 26.1 − 22.1 − 32.2
         Apr  r − 22.6 + 5.5 − 17.6 − 24.7 − 26.8 − 30.1 − 21.9 − 2.8 − 32.6 − 28.4 − 29.8 − 39.7
         May  r − 17.7 + 1.8 − 12.8 − 19.4 − 22.8 − 22.2 − 14.1 − 2.6 − 28.9 − 25.8 − 25.2 − 21.6
         June  r − 17.4 + 1.7 − 2.2 − 19.8 − 21.4 − 23.3 − 21.1 − 4.1 − 28.0 − 26.3 − 29.1 − 20.6
         July  x r − 17.0 + 2.0 − 3.7 − 19.2 − 19.5 − 24.2 − 15.9 − 4.3 − 25.7 − 24.7 − 31.8 − 20.4
         Aug  x r − 16.5 + 2.5 − 4.7 − 18.8 − 18.3 − 24.9 − 17.7 − 5.1 − 24.6 − 23.7 − 30.5 − 22.8
         Sep  x p − 12.9 + 2.9 − 5.6 − 14.5 − 14.3 − 18.7 − 15.9 − 1.9 − 20.5 − 19.9 − 21.9 − 9.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- duction sector in the base year 2005. — xProvisional; adjusted in advance by
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
statistics", Tables II.9 to II.11. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, Quarterly Production Survey. 
version 0.2.8. — 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the pro-
62* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
 X Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
of which
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
total  
  
2004 93.6 + 6.7 94.4 + 8.5 92.9 + 6.8 94.5 − 0.7 101.2 − 3.3 92.3 + 0.2
2005 99.7 + 6.5 99.7 + 5.6 99.7 + 7.3 99.8 + 5.6 99.7 − 1.5 99.8 + 8.1
2006 110.7 + 11.0 113.9 + 14.2 109.4 + 9.7 105.3 + 5.5 108.4 + 8.7 104.3 + 4.5
2007 123.0 + 11.1 125.2 + 9.9 123.2 + 12.6 111.9 + 6.3 110.3 + 1.8 112.5 + 7.9
2008 115.5 − 6.1 121.2 − 3.2 112.9 − 8.4 108.1 − 3.4 103.5 − 6.2 109.7 − 2.5
 
2008          Sep 113.9 − 7.6 122.0 − 3.4 108.8 − 11.1 112.2 − 3.7 114.9 − 4.0 111.2 − 3.6
         Oct 105.3 − 17.3 114.8 − 9.8 98.5 − 23.4 109.2 − 9.3 110.6 − 22.7 108.8 − 3.5
         Nov 98.4 − 25.6 102.7 − 24.5 94.5 − 28.7 106.4 − 5.6 103.6 − 8.7 107.4 − 4.4
         Dec 85.4 − 31.0 83.3 − 29.4 86.0 − 34.5 90.6 − 7.4 82.2 − 12.3 93.4 − 5.8
2009          Jan 81.1 − 35.2 86.0 − 34.5 75.7 − 38.6 95.9 − 13.6 83.0 − 20.5 100.3 − 11.4
         Feb 79.2 − 37.3 78.3 − 38.3 77.3 − 39.2 96.6 − 19.0 78.3 − 22.9 102.8 − 17.9
         Mar 89.0 − 34.4 86.5 − 38.0 89.3 − 34.2 98.1 − 16.4 88.2 − 24.2 101.5 − 13.7
         Apr 79.9 − 35.5 82.4 − 35.8 77.1 − 37.7 87.8 − 15.0 80.6 − 24.3 90.3 − 11.6
         May 83.1 − 31.5 84.3 − 34.9 81.4 − 31.6 89.1 − 12.3 82.9 − 18.5 91.2 − 10.3
         June 89.5 − 26.5 91.6 − 29.5 87.9 − 26.1 90.8 − 13.2 87.6 − 18.3 91.8 − 11.5
         July 89.6 − 24.3 91.6 − 28.5 87.3 − 22.6 96.6 − 13.1 84.6 − 13.6 100.7 − 12.9
         Aug 84.2 − 24.1 87.8 − 25.7 80.6 − 24.0 92.7 − 16.4 77.0 − 19.5 98.0 − 15.5
         Sep  p 94.8 − 16.8 96.5 − 20.9 92.7 − 14.8 101.4 − 9.6 108.5 − 5.6 99.0 − 11.0
from the domestic market  
  
2004 96.4 + 4.9 95.9 + 7.0 96.9 + 4.8 95.7 − 3.5 103.0 − 6.1 93.4 − 2.6
2005 99.7 + 3.4 99.7 + 4.0 99.6 + 2.8 99.7 + 4.2 99.7 − 3.2 99.7 + 6.7
2006 109.0 + 9.3 113.3 + 13.6 106.4 + 6.8 103.4 + 3.7 111.0 + 11.3 100.9 + 1.2
2007 118.7 + 8.9 124.7 + 10.1 115.8 + 8.8 107.0 + 3.5 109.6 − 1.3 106.1 + 5.2
2008 113.1 − 4.7 121.8 − 2.3 107.5 − 7.2 103.9 − 2.9 107.1 − 2.3 102.9 − 3.0
 
2008          Sep 114.8 − 3.1 123.2 + 0.2 108.6 − 6.1 109.9 − 2.4 120.7 + 1.0 106.4 − 3.6
         Oct 106.6 − 12.8 114.7 − 10.0 100.0 − 16.8 105.5 − 4.4 114.6 − 1.5 102.6 − 5.3
         Nov 97.0 − 24.3 101.4 − 27.6 92.2 − 23.9 102.7 − 6.9 110.9 − 6.1 100.0 − 7.1
         Dec 82.8 − 27.7 81.1 − 30.6 83.3 − 28.6 87.6 − 5.4 85.7 − 9.1 88.2 − 4.1
2009          Jan 85.3 − 28.6 87.2 − 32.8 82.9 − 26.6 89.7 − 15.8 86.3 − 21.7 90.8 − 13.8
         Feb 80.6 − 32.8 77.8 − 39.3 81.5 − 28.8 89.2 − 20.6 80.6 − 23.6 92.0 − 19.7
         Mar 89.8 − 31.2 85.9 − 38.7 92.9 − 26.2 91.1 − 19.6 88.8 − 25.4 91.9 − 17.5
         Apr 81.6 − 32.5 82.4 − 36.3 81.1 − 31.0 80.9 − 18.3 79.6 − 27.9 81.3 − 14.7
         May 84.1 − 27.8 83.3 − 35.6 85.2 − 22.0 81.8 − 15.6 83.9 − 18.2 81.1 − 14.7
         June 87.4 − 27.0 91.0 − 30.6 85.3 − 24.8 82.3 − 18.0 86.6 − 19.9 80.9 − 17.4
         July 94.0 − 19.8 92.7 − 28.9 96.3 − 11.0 87.6 − 16.7 84.8 − 17.2 88.5 − 16.5
         Aug 87.1 − 22.2 89.5 − 27.0 84.7 − 18.4 88.8 − 17.7 82.8 − 13.0 90.7 − 19.0
         Sep  p 92.6 − 19.3 97.2 − 21.1 87.7 − 19.2 97.8 − 11.0 117.9 − 2.3 91.2 − 14.3
from abroad  
  
2004 91.0 + 8.6 92.6 + 10.4 89.9 + 8.6 93.1 + 2.8 99.3 + 0.1 90.9 + 3.8
2005 99.7 + 9.6 99.7 + 7.7 99.7 + 10.9 99.8 + 7.2 99.6 + 0.3 99.8 + 9.8
2006 112.2 + 12.5 114.6 + 14.9 111.5 + 11.8 107.5 + 7.7 105.7 + 6.1 108.1 + 8.3
2007 126.8 + 13.0 125.7 + 9.7 128.5 + 15.2 117.3 + 9.1 111.0 + 5.0 119.5 + 10.5
2008 117.6 − 7.3 120.6 − 4.1 116.7 − 9.2 112.6 − 4.0 99.9 − 10.0 117.1 − 2.0
 
2008          Sep 113.1 − 11.3 120.6 − 7.2 109.0 − 14.2 114.6 − 5.1 109.0 − 9.2 116.5 − 3.6
         Oct 104.1 − 21.1 114.9 − 9.6 97.4 − 27.6 113.2 − 13.9 106.5 − 37.4 115.7 − 1.7
         Nov 99.7 − 26.5 104.1 − 20.7 96.1 − 31.6 110.4 − 4.2 96.2 − 11.7 115.5 − 1.7
         Dec 87.7 − 33.4 85.7 − 28.2 87.9 − 37.8 93.8 − 9.4 78.7 − 15.5 99.1 − 7.6
2009          Jan 77.5 − 40.4 84.7 − 36.3 70.7 − 45.8 102.6 − 11.4 79.7 − 19.1 110.7 − 9.2
         Feb 78.0 − 40.9 78.8 − 37.3 74.4 − 45.3 104.5 − 17.5 75.9 − 22.3 114.7 − 16.2
         Mar 88.3 − 36.9 87.2 − 37.3 86.8 − 39.2 105.6 − 13.2 87.5 − 23.0 112.0 − 10.0
         Apr 78.4 − 38.0 82.5 − 35.1 74.3 − 42.0 95.3 − 11.7 81.6 − 20.4 100.2 − 8.7
         May 82.2 − 34.6 85.4 − 34.1 78.8 − 37.4 96.9 − 9.2 81.9 − 18.7 102.3 − 6.1
         June 91.4 − 26.1 92.3 − 28.2 89.8 − 26.9 99.9 − 8.4 88.6 − 16.6 103.9 − 5.7
         July 85.8 − 28.0 90.4 − 28.1 81.0 − 30.2 106.4 − 9.5 84.4 − 9.5 114.2 − 9.5
         Aug 81.7 − 25.7 85.9 − 24.0 77.7 − 27.8 96.9 − 15.1 71.1 − 26.0 106.0 − 12.0
         Sep  p 96.8 − 14.4 95.8 − 20.6 96.3 − 11.7 105.3 − 8.1 99.1 − 9.1 107.6 − 7.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *For explan- statistics", Tables II.13 to II.15. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
atory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Seasonally adjusted business version 0.2.8. 
63* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2005 99.9 − 0.8 99.9 − 2.3 99.9 − 7.2 99.9 + 2.3 99.9 − 5.2 99.8 + 0.8 99.8 + 2.3 99.9 − 0.9
2006 105.1 + 5.2 106.6 + 6.7 104.3 + 4.4 109.6 + 9.7 101.7 + 1.8 103.6 + 3.8 109.0 + 9.2 101.6 + 1.7
2007 114.0 + 8.5 112.6 + 5.6 98.5 − 5.6 123.2 + 12.4 108.5 + 6.7 115.4 + 11.4 120.7 + 10.7 113.8 + 12.0
2008 113.4 − 0.5 114.8 + 2.0 94.4 − 4.2 127.9 + 3.8 116.7 + 7.6 112.0 − 2.9 123.3 + 2.2 111.5 − 2.0
 
2008          Aug 115.9 + 1.8 113.0 + 4.5 93.5 − 9.1 125.7 + 16.1 114.4 − 3.9 119.0 − 0.7 125.1 + 13.4 116.2 − 4.8
         Sep 131.2 + 3.6 136.2 + 16.2 113.5 + 3.5 150.4 + 23.3 139.8 + 18.6 126.1 − 7.7 140.1 + 12.2 129.9 − 4.3
         Oct 109.3 − 16.1 110.0 − 10.9 94.0 − 5.5 116.6 − 17.8 123.9 + 7.2 108.6 − 21.0 121.0 − 6.6 104.1 − 27.8
         Nov 92.3 − 11.8 95.5 + 3.7 88.5 + 10.5 104.7 + 3.2 80.9 − 7.8 89.0 − 24.4 105.4 − 6.1 80.8 − 24.8
         Dec 93.6 − 7.8 99.7 − 5.2 79.5 − 12.3 105.4 − 7.0 126.5 + 14.1 87.2 − 10.7 108.0 − 2.5 85.1 − 12.0
2009          Jan 75.0 − 19.2 72.7 − 26.7 57.6 − 20.8 84.9 − 31.5 66.1 − 13.0 77.5 − 10.0 83.4 − 28.3 74.1 − 4.5
         Feb 76.9 − 13.4 74.8 − 20.6 70.0 − 13.4 74.4 − 28.5 87.3 − 4.4 79.0 − 4.9 78.0 − 22.0 78.7 − 2.7
         Mar 113.4 − 11.8 109.2 − 15.3 95.7 − 9.7 114.6 − 15.0 121.7 − 24.2 117.8 − 8.0 111.6 − 13.1 122.8 − 11.1
         Apr 113.5 − 5.7 101.7 − 21.4 105.3 + 13.6 98.2 − 37.7 105.5 − 11.0 125.8 + 13.2 101.8 − 25.6 128.8 + 11.3
         May 115.8 − 2.6 106.4 − 5.9 96.3 − 0.8 105.6 − 14.7 132.2 + 16.2 125.5 + 0.4 111.1 − 9.8 128.8 + 4.0
         June 130.0 − 4.2 110.4 − 19.8 108.3 − 2.3 104.7 − 34.2 134.5 + 6.3 150.3 + 12.4 119.2 − 18.0 150.0 + 9.7
         July 123.8 − 7.1 110.1 − 8.4 107.9 + 3.8 106.7 − 17.1 126.3 − 1.6 138.1 − 5.9 112.3 − 13.9 142.2 − 4.2
         Aug 118.3 + 2.1 110.1 − 2.6 97.1 + 3.9 115.7 − 8.0 120.9 + 5.7 126.9 + 6.6 117.0 − 6.5 128.6 + 10.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclu- X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Excluding housing construction
sive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement orders. 
"Seasonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.20. — oUsing the Census
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
 
 
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
Retail trade
of which:  by enterprises’ main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco  2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2000  3 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
change change change change change change change change
Period % % % % % % % % 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100 2005 = 100
2005 99.9 + 1.8 99.8 + 0.8 100.0 + 3.0 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 7.8 99.9 − 1.9 99.9 + 4.6 99.5 + 1.6
2006 4 101.0 + 1.1 100.1 + 0.3 100.1 + 0.1 102.4 + 2.4 102.3 + 2.3 103.4 + 3.5 102.1 + 2.2 106.8 + 7.3
2007 4 99.4 − 1.6 97.2 − 2.9 99.5 − 0.6 103.6 + 1.2 110.1 + 7.6 98.5 − 4.7 104.2 + 2.1 100.6 − 5.8
2008 5 101.5 + 2.1 96.6 − 0.6 100.8 + 1.3 105.1 + 1.4 116.5 + 5.8 99.8 + 1.3 106.5 + 2.2 96.2 − 4.4
 
2008          Sep  5 101.0 + 3.1 95.4 − 0.2 97.6 + 2.5 116.9 + 1.8 108.7 + 4.8 99.0 + 0.5 105.2 + 2.7 94.4 − 6.9
         Oct 105.6 + 2.0 99.9 − 0.6 102.8 + 1.6 119.3 + 1.6 121.3 + 5.1 104.7 + 0.1 109.3 + 0.8 98.4 − 8.3
         Nov 105.8 + 1.1 101.0 + 0.0 102.3 + 2.2 109.7 + 3.7 130.0 + 5.6 107.0 + 2.1 110.1 + 1.1 93.6 − 11.9
         Dec 120.0 + 2.9 115.5 + 2.2 116.6 + 3.8 129.6 + 2.1 174.9 − 2.0 107.5 + 2.2 123.0 + 6.3 83.5 − 13.0
2009          Jan 91.9 − 1.9 88.2 − 2.2 91.4 − 2.0 87.8 − 1.7 119.8 − 1.2 85.4 − 2.7 105.3 + 1.4 75.9 − 12.7
         Feb 87.7 − 3.0 83.7 − 3.2 89.7 − 2.3 79.2 − 4.3 97.5 − 2.0 85.3 − 3.6 100.1 + 1.0 95.6 + 3.9
         Mar 101.3 − 0.8 96.8 − 0.4 101.6 − 1.6 102.1 + 4.6 107.2 − 8.9 107.1 − 0.4 110.0 + 4.0 117.7 + 7.3
         Apr 102.0 + 1.1 96.9 + 1.0 102.6 + 0.7 114.3 + 7.1 94.9 − 12.9 108.4 + 5.1 109.9 + 3.6 110.1 + 4.9
         May 99.6 − 2.0 94.6 − 1.7 103.3 + 1.5 103.9 − 8.0 90.2 − 7.6 102.1 + 0.2 106.7 + 4.3 105.2 + 2.3
         June 95.0 − 2.4 90.2 − 2.1 97.2 − 1.0 96.2 + 0.5 97.3 − 7.8 97.2 + 1.4 106.0 + 2.5 106.0 + 4.4
         July 98.5 − 1.4 94.5 − 0.1 98.3 − 1.4 103.8 + 2.9 102.6 − 4.4 101.2 + 3.4 111.0 + 3.1 100.5 + 2.3
         Aug 95.7 − 3.8 91.4 − 3.0 99.1 − 0.7 94.3 − 4.9 100.4 − 4.5 97.4 + 0.6 106.1 + 3.8 90.7 + 2.6
         Sep  e 96.2 − 4.8 91.6 − 4.0 94.0 − 3.7 111.3 − 4.8 103.0 − 5.2 99.8 + 0.8 105.8 + 0.6 95.4 + 1.1
Source of the unadjustded figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding justed using retail price indices including value-added tax. — 4Expansion of
value-added tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement "Sea- the reporting population to include new entities; in January 2006 and Jan u-
sonally adjusted business statistics", Tables II.23. — oUsing the Census ary 2007; statistical breaks in reporting population eliminated by
X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1In stores. — 2Including stalls and chain-linking. — 5From January 2008 figures are provisional and particular-
markets. — 3Figures at current prices excluding value-added tax and ad- ly uncertain in recent months owing to estimates for missing reports. 
64* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employment  1 Employees  1 employment  2 Persons Unemployment  7 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-
manu- ment pro- going  vo-
factur- Short- motion cational
ing Con- time schemes further
Annual change Annual sector  3 6,7 Annual Vacan- workers  5 struction  4 training  7 
percent- change, Unemploy- cies,  7 
Thou- Thou- Thou- age Thou- thou- ment rate thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands 7,8  in % sands
Germany  
  
2006 39,074 + 0.6 + 238 34,682 + 0.6 5,249 710 67 52 146 4,487 − 374 10.8 564
2007 39,724 + 1.7 + 650 35,288 + 1.7 5,301 714 68 43 149 3,776 − 711 9.0 9 621
2008 40,277 + 1.4 + 553 35,845 + 1.6 10 . 706 102 40 171 3,268 − 508 7.8 569
2008          Oct 40,842 + 1.2 + 491 5,319 714 71 46 188 2,997 − 437 7.2 571
         Nov 40,796 + 1.1 + 430 36,329 + 1.3 5,303 710 130 46 199 2,988 − 390 7.1 539
         Dec 40,555 + 0.9 + 371 5,271 697 270 44 201 3,102 − 304 7.4 503
2009          Jan r 39,924 r + 0.6 r + 233 5,229 671 574 36 190 3,489 − 171 8.3 485
         Feb r 39,931 r + 0.5 r + 204 35,560 + 0.6 5,219 666 1,082 31 197 3,552 − 66 8.5 506
         Mar r 39,994 r + 0.3 r + 125 5,196 11 676 1,259 25 207 3,586 + 78 8.6 507
         Apr r 40,132 r + 0.2 r + 82 5,165 11 688 1,518 20 215 3,585 + 171 8.6 495
         May r 40,224 r + 0.1 r + 26 35,773 + 0.2 5,137 11 690 1,534 17 229 12 3,458 12 + 175 12 13  8.2 490
         June r 40,266 r − 0.1 r − 28 5,115 11 696 1,433 15 228 3,410 + 250 8.1 484
         July r 40,226 r − 0.2 r − 67 5,096 11 698 ... 13 213 3,462 + 252 8.2 484
         Aug r 40,267 r − 0.2 r − 81 35,915 − 0.2 5,092 11 705 ... 14 1114 201 3,472 + 276 8.3 486
         Sep 15 40,552 15 − 0.3 15 − 104 5,100 ... ... 14 914 218 3,346 + 266 8.0 486
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 814 228 3,229 + 232 7.7 479
Western Germany    o  
  
2006 . . . . . 4,650 525 54 10 101 3,007 − 240 9.1 436
2007 . . . . . 4,684 529 52 9 103 2,486 − 521 7.5 9 489
2008 . . . . . 10 . 527 80 7 118 2,145 − 341 6.4 455
2008          Oct . . . . . 4,684 532 59 7 130 1,990 − 275 6.0 460
         Nov . . . . . 4,669 529 110 7 137 1,985 − 239 6.0 432
         Dec . . . . . 4,640 521 223 6 139 2,059 − 172 6.2 400
2009          Jan . . . . . 4,604 . 462 6 132 2,306 − 76 6.9 382
         Feb . . . . . 4,594 . 910 6 138 2,348 + 1 7.0 394
         Mar . . . . . 4,571 . 1,064 5 145 2,379 + 108 7.1 390
         Apr . . . . . 4,543 . 1,318 5 151 2,400 + 184 7.2 378
         May . . . . . 4,519 . 1,332 4 162 12 2,334 12 + 194 12 13  6.9 371
         June . . . . . 4,499 . 1,244 4 161 2,319 + 245 6.9 370
         July . . . . . 4,483 . ... 4 151 2,368 + 248 7.0 372
         Aug . . . . . 4,480 . ... 14 314 141 2,389 + 281 7.1 374
         Sep . . . . . 4,486 . ... 14 314 150 2,307 + 265 6.9 376
         Oct . . . . . ... . ... 14 214 156 2,229 + 239 6.6 372
Eastern Germany    +  
  
2006 . . . . . 599 185 13 42 44 1,480 − 134 17.3 129
2007 . . . . . 617 185 16 33 46 1,291 − 190 15.1 9 133
2008 . . . . . 10 . 179 21 33 53 1,123 − 167 13.1 113
2008          Oct . . . . . 636 182 12 40 58 1,007 − 162 11.8 111
         Nov . . . . . 634 181 20 40 62 1,003 − 151 11.8 107
         Dec . . . . . 631 176 48 37 62 1,043 − 133 12.2 103
2009          Jan . . . . . 625 . 105 30 59 1,182 − 94 13.9 103
         Feb . . . . . 626 . 158 25 59 1,204 − 66 14.1 112
         Mar . . . . . 624 . 177 20 61 1,207 − 29 14.2 116
         Apr . . . . . 622 . 184 16 64 1,185 − 13 13.9 117
         May . . . . . 618 . 186 13 67 12 1,124 12 −1 9 12 13  13.3 119
         June . . . . . 616 . 175 11 66 1,091 + 5 12.9 113
         July . . . . . 613 . ... 9 61 1,094 + 4 12.9 112
         Aug . . . . . 612 . ... 14 814 60 1,082 − 5 12.8 112
         Sep . . . . . 614 . ... 14 714 68 1,040 + 1 12.3 109
         Oct . . . . . ... . ... 14 514 72 1,000 − 7 11.8 107
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Annual 8Relative to the total civilian labour force. — 9From January 2007, vacan-
and quarterly figures: averages; annual figures: calculated by the Bundes- cies for seasonal workers are included only if they are based on non-speci fic
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. — oExclud- employer requirements. — 10From January 2008, based on Nace Rev.2 de-
ing West Berlin. — +Including West Berlin. — 1Workplace concept; aver- finitions, previously based on Nace Rev.1. — 11Provisional up to adjustment
ages. — 2Including active proprietors; monthly figures: end of month. — to the figures of theency annual overall survey. — 12From May 2009,
3Enterprises with at least 50 employees. — 4The figures refer to enter- unemployed excluding persons formally on the books of private
prises from Nace Rev.2 items 41.2, 42, 43.1 and 43.9. — 5Number within a employment agencies. — 13From May 2009, calculated on the basis of new
given month; from January 2009, results for Germany contain data from labour force figures. — 14Annualised data from the Federal Employment A-
operational reports, which cannot be assigned to a region. — 6Employees in- gency based on information received so far. — 15Initial preliminary esti-
volved in job creation schemes; up to December 2008 including employees in- mate by the Federal Statistical Office. 
volved in structural adjustment measures (SAM). — 7Mid-month level. —
65* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
 X Economic conditions  in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices  of Raw Materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  1 rents  3 rents  3 index  2 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2005 = 100 2000 = 100 2005 = 100 2000 = 100
Index level  
  
2005 8 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 8 100.0 98.8 100.0 100.0 139.5 105.4
2006 9 101.6 101.9 100.3 108.5 101.0 101.1 102.4 9 105.4 107.1 101.8 104.4 163.9 131.5
2007 10 11  103.9 105.9 101.7 112.8 103.9 102.2 109.3 106.8 118.2 103.0 105.1 166.6 143.7
2008 106.6 112.7 102.5 123.6 105.8 103.5 113.0 112.7 121.2 104.8 109.9 217.1 150.3
 
2007          Dec 105.6 110.4 102.2 115.8 106.4 102.8 108.1 130.9 103.1 106.6 199.6 138.2
2008          Jan 105.3 112.1 101.9 118.4 104.3 103.0 108.9 130.9 103.8 107.5 201.2 153.3
         Feb 105.8 112.0 102.3 118.8 105.3 103.1 111.5 109.5 131.6 104.2 108.6 210.6 163.1
         Mar 106.3 112.6 102.5 121.5 105.7 103.2 110.2 131.5 104.3 108.9 216.5 160.5
         Apr 106.1 113.0 102.6 122.6 104.2 103.3 111.2 126.8 104.5 109.8 225.1 157.7
         May 106.7 113.0 102.4 126.9 105.0 103.4 112.5 112.2 125.5 105.1 112.1 258.8 159.6
         June 107.0 113.1 102.3 129.3 105.3 103.5 113.3 126.4 105.5 113.6 278.3 162.8
         July 107.6 113.4 101.8 131.0 107.1 103.6 115.5 127.0 106.0 114.3 279.8 160.6
         Aug 107.3 112.9 102.2 127.1 107.0 103.7 114.0 114.9 124.1 105.9 113.6 254.8 156.4
         Sep 107.2 112.6 102.9 127.9 105.9 103.8 115.2 119.9 105.8 112.7 232.7 150.8
         Oct 107.0 112.8 103.2 124.9 105.6 103.9 115.2 115.3 105.1 109.1 180.2 133.3
         Nov 106.5 112.0 103.1 119.9 105.6 104.0 114.0 113.3 110.8 104.3 106.0 142.7 126.9
         Dec 106.8 112.7 103.0 114.8 108.3 104.0 112.4 107.8 103.1 102.2 107.3 114.6
2009          Jan 106.3 113.3 102.7 117.4 106.0 104.1 111.1 105.9 102.9 101.7 112.8 114.9
         Feb 106.9 113.3 103.4 117.4 107.1 104.3 114.4 110.5 106.6 102.9 101.6 112.1 116.2
         Mar 106.8 112.8 103.7 116.0 106.7 104.4 109.7 104.5 102.5 101.2 118.8 113.8
         Apr 106.8 112.3 103.9 116.2 106.8 104.5 108.2 103.4 102.4 100.4 125.8 120.1
         May 106.7 111.7 103.7 116.8 106.7 104.5 114.2 108.2 103.0 102.3 100.4 139.6 123.2
         June 107.1 112.1 103.9 119.1 106.9 104.6 108.1 103.8 102.4 100.8 160.7 125.8
         July 107.1 110.7 103.3 116.0 108.8 104.7 106.5 p 103.7 102.2 99.9 150.1 123.9
         Aug 107.3 109.5 103.8 118.2 108.7 104.8 114.4 107.0 p 102.3 102.5 101.2 163.2 131.3
         Sep 106.9 109.2 104.4 116.4 107.3 104.8 106.5 p 100.3 102.4 100.3 152.0 126.4
         Oct 107.0 109.0 104.7 116.2 107.3 104.9 ... ... ... ... 161.7 127.9
Annual percentage change  
  
2005 8 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 9.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.1 8 + 4.4 − 0.9 + 0.9 + 3.4 + 37.6 + 9.4
2006 9 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 8.5 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 2.4 9 + 5.4 + 8.4 + 1.8 + 4.4 + 17.5 + 24.8
2007 10 11  + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 10.4 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 9.3
2008 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 0.8 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 4.6 + 30.3 + 4.6
 
2007          Dec + 3.1 + 7.5 + 1.3 + 8.5 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 1.9 + 18.1 + 0.9 + 2.7 + 34.2 + 1.4
2008          Jan + 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.7 + 9.3 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 18.4 + 1.4 + 4.1 + 51.1 + 10.4
         Feb + 2.8 + 7.8 + 0.9 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 3.0 + 3.2 + 16.9 + 1.6 + 4.8 + 48.1 + 15.0
         Mar + 3.1 + 8.6 + 0.8 + 9.8 + 2.8 + 1.4 + 3.9 + 16.7 + 1.6 + 4.6 + 46.6 + 10.3
         Apr + 2.4 + 7.3 + 0.9 + 9.6 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 4.7 + 13.3 + 1.5 + 4.8 + 45.3 + 5.8
         May + 3.0 + 7.9 + 0.8 + 12.8 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 3.1 + 5.3 + 11.5 + 1.9 + 6.9 + 67.3 + 6.0
         June + 3.3 + 7.6 + 0.9 + 14.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 6.2 + 11.7 + 2.2 + 7.9 + 69.4 + 9.6
         July + 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.6 + 15.1 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 8.2 + 7.8 + 2.6 + 8.3 + 62.0 + 9.8
         Aug + 3.1 + 7.4 + 1.1 + 13.0 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 7.7 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 8.3 + 52.8 + 10.5
         Sep + 2.9 + 6.4 + 1.1 + 12.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.9 − 5.4 + 2.5 + 7.0 + 31.2 + 5.5
         Oct + 2.4 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 9.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 7.3 − 10.8 + 1.8 + 2.8 − 3.4 − 7.4
         Nov + 1.4 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 4.7 − 14.9 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 29.4 − 7.7
         Dec + 1.1 + 2.1 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 4.0 − 17.6 + 0.0 − 4.1 − 46.2 − 17.1
2009          Jan + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 − 19.1 − 0.9 − 5.4 − 43.9 − 25.0
         Feb + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.9 − 19.0 − 1.2 − 6.4 − 46.8 − 28.8
         Mar + 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.2 − 4.5 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 20.5 − 1.7 − 7.1 − 45.1 − 29.1
         Apr + 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.7 − 18.5 − 2.0 − 8.6 − 44.1 − 23.8
         May + 0.0 − 1.2 + 1.3 − 8.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.5 − 3.6 − 17.9 − 2.7 − 10.4 − 46.1 − 22.8
         June + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 4.6 − 17.9 − 2.9 − 11.3 − 42.3 − 22.7
         July − 0.5 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 11.5 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 7.8 p − 18.3 − 3.6 − 12.6 − 46.4 − 22.9
         Aug + 0.0 − 3.0 + 1.6 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 6.9 p − 17.6 − 3.2 − 10.9 − 35.9 − 16.0
         Sep − 0.3 − 3.0 + 1.5 − 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 7.6 p − 16.3 − 3.2 − 11.0 − 34.7 − 16.2
         Oct + 0.0 − 3.4 + 1.5 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... − 10.3 − 4.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; HWWI Index of World Market Prices. — September 2005, increase in tobacco tax. — 9From October 2006, increase
1Electricity, gas and other fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation based on data in the prices of tobacco products. — 10From January 2007, increase in the
provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Net rents. — 4Excluding standard rate of VAT and in insurance tax from 16% to 19%. —
value-added tax. — 5For the euro area, in euro. — 6Coal and crude oil. — 11 Introduction of university tuition fees in some federal states. 
7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. — 8From
66* X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
X Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change % € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2001 902.0 2.1 590.0 3.6 353.8 4.1 943.9 3.8 1,389.5 3.9 130.9 6.2 9.4
2002 908.2 0.7 591.9 0.3 367.7 3.9 959.6 1.7 1,402.8 1.0 139.3 6.4 9.9
2003 908.3 0.0 589.0 − 0.5 378.3 2.9 967.2 0.8 1,431.8 2.1 147.2 5.6 10.3
2004 914.6 0.7 603.3 2.4 378.2 − 0.0 981.5 1.5 1,454.5 1.6 151.4 2.9 10.4
2005 912.1 − 0.3 602.4 − 0.2 378.6 0.1 981.0 − 0.1 1,481.0 1.8 155.6 2.7 10.5
2006 926.2 1.6 604.7 0.4 378.1 − 0.1 982.8 0.2 1,516.2 2.4 160.0 2.8 10.5
2007 957.8 3.4 623.0 3.0 372.8 − 1.4 995.9 1.3 1,541.1 1.6 165.7 3.6 10.8
2008 995.8 4.0 642.7 3.2 374.4 0.4 1,017.1 2.1 1,588.2 3.1 178.5 7.7 11.2
2008          Q1 231.0 4.1 149.7 3.3 94.6 0.4 244.3 2.2 396.4 3.6 58.4 6.8 14.7
         Q2 240.8 4.0 152.1 3.1 93.2 0.2 245.3 2.0 394.1 3.9 42.1 9.1 10.7
         Q3 248.3 4.4 164.7 3.9 93.3 0.2 258.0 2.5 395.6 3.5 37.5 8.5 9.5
         Q4 275.6 3.5 176.3 2.4 93.2 0.8 269.5 1.8 402.2 1.3 40.5 6.9 10.1
2009          Q1 232.4 0.6 148.4 − 0.9 98.1 3.7 246.5 0.9 397.5 0.3 59.8 2.4 15.0
         Q2 239.3 − 0.7 149.9 − 1.4 100.0 7.3 250.0 1.9 394.1 0.0 41.3 − 1.7 10.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2009. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees’ contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. — 4Net wages and salaries
  
  
  
9 Pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
on a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
on an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change
2001 102.0 2.0 101.9 1.9 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 101.8 1.8
2002 104.6 2.6 104.5 2.6 104.5 2.2 104.4 2.2 103.2 1.3
2003 106.7 2.0 106.6 2.0 106.8 2.2 106.9 2.4 104.5 1.3
2004 107.9 1.2 108.0 1.3 108.1 1.3 108.6 1.6 105.1 0.6
2005 108.9 0.9 109.1 1.1 109.1 0.9 109.7 1.0 105.4 0.3
2006 109.9 1.0 110.5 1.2 110.0 0.8 110.7 0.9 106.4 0.9
2007 111.2 1.2 111.9 1.3 111.6 1.5 112.3 1.5 108.1 1.6
2008 114.3 2.8 115.1 2.8 114.9 3.0 115.9 3.2 110.5 2.3
2008          Q2 106.1 1.7 106.8 1.8 107.0 3.3 115.6 3.3 107.3 2.2
         Q3 117.1 2.9 117.9 3.0 117.4 2.9 116.4 3.2 110.0 2.7
         Q4 129.0 3.6 129.9 3.7 129.2 2.9 116.7 3.2 120.7 2.1
2009          Q1 108.2 3.1 109.0 3.1 108.8 2.7 117.9 2.8 103.9 0.0
         Q2 109.0 2.7 109.8 2.8 110.0 2.7 118.8 2.8 106.5 − 0.7
         Q3 119.5 2.1 120.4 2.1 120.4 2.5 119.4 2.5 . .
2009          Mar 108.2 2.9 109.0 3.0 109.3 3.0 118.4 3.1 . .
         Apr 108.4 2.7 109.2 2.7 109.4 2.8 118.5 2.8 . .
         May 109.5 2.8 110.3 2.9 110.5 2.8 118.9 2.8 . .
         June 109.1 2.7 109.9 2.7 110.0 2.6 119.1 2.6 . .
         July 139.2 2.2 140.2 2.2 140.6 2.6 119.2 2.5 . .
         Aug 109.1 0.9 109.8 0.9 110.2 2.5 119.3 2.5 . .
         Sep 110.3 3.1 111.1 3.1 110.4 2.5 119.5 2.6 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. — (13 thmonthly salary payment) and retirement provisions). — 3Source:
2Excluding one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2009. 
special payments, such as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses
67*X Economic conditions in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
XI External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2008 2009
Item 2006  r) 2007  r) 2008  r) Q4 r) Q1 r) Q2 r) June  r) July r) Aug
Current account − 10,206 + 10,650 − 143,270 − 32,209 − 37,999 − 19,815 + 3,532 + 10,089 − 4,180A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,396,356 1,516,507 1,581,023 379,461 307,821 312,282 109,354 117,345 93,876
Imports (fob) 1,385,655 1,470,519 1,592,387 381,348 315,559 299,748 102,823 104,753 94,482
Balance + 10,697 + 45,986 − 11,365 − 1,887 − 7,737 + 12,535 + 6,531 + 12,593 − 606
2 Services
Receipts 441,215 491,762 509,886 127,989 108,759 113,321 38,785 42,686 41,059
Expenditure 399,622 443,460 469,248 120,907 108,302 105,969 36,294 38,265 38,389
Balance + 41,592 + 48,304 + 40,637 + 7,081 + 458 + 7,352 + 2,490 + 4,422 + 2,669
3 Income + 17,271 + 2,775 − 74,431 − 11,707 − 2,329 − 24,747 − 4,725 − 371 + 1,710
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 91,590 91,291 88,832 26,971 25,717 20,808 9,226 4,298 4,680
Transfers to non-residents 171,361 177,705 186,942 52,666 54,106 35,765 9,991 10,852 12,633
Balance − 79,771 − 86,415 − 98,112 − 25,696 − 28,391 − 14,956 − 765 − 6,553 − 7,954
Capital account + 9,137 + 5,037 + 10,001 + 1,681 + 1,384 + 2,377 + 224 + 613 + 635B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 9,107 − 1,239 + 163,925 + 41,540 + 55,760 + 10,186 − 11,215 − 9,717 + 183C)
1 Direct investment − 160,216 − 72,894 − 189,046 − 61,121 − 58,822 − 560 − 11,389 + 8,496 + 3,819
By resident units abroad − 417,577 − 481,212 − 326,522 − 46,794 − 100,117 − 92,811 − 15,204 − 9,542 − 16,185
By non-resident units in the euro area + 257,364 + 408,320 + 137,472 − 14,329 + 41,295 + 92,252 + 3,816 + 18,038 + 20,004
2 Portfolio investment + 188,706 + 151,259 + 350,520 + 152,685 + 129,870 + 98,113 + 42,040 − 2,974 + 53,445
By resident units abroad − 519,829 − 436,689 + 8,981 + 166,127 + 71,182 − 41,110 − 14,778 − 6,480 − 30,884
Equity − 156,090 − 64,203 + 101,796 + 54,067 + 38,147 − 9,372 − 12,524 − 6,390 − 4,389
Bonds and notes − 300,513 − 291,518 − 95,350 + 62,777 + 56,070 − 11,664 + 2,742 + 308 − 21,239
Money market instruments − 63,224 − 80,967 + 2,534 + 49,283 − 23,035 − 20,074 − 4,996 − 398 − 5,256
By non-resident units in the euro area + 708,533 + 587,950 + 341,541 − 13,441 + 58,688 + 139,224 + 56,818 + 3,506 + 84,329
Equity + 246,612 + 157,934 − 124,839 − 96,671 − 51,284 + 49,162 + 37,875 + 33,830 + 45,108
Bonds and notes + 481,318 + 367,109 + 250,034 − 23,728 + 90,389 + 38,369 + 8,818 − 45,477 + 22,495
Money market instruments − 19,397 + 62,907 + 216,347 + 106,958 + 19,581 + 51,693 + 10,125 + 15,152 + 16,727
3 Financial derivatives − 610 − 64,577 − 65,723 − 13,342 − 5,296 + 20,319 + 2,299 + 7,654 − 5,887
4 Other investment − 35,697 − 9,943 + 72,106 − 36,142 − 15,667 − 105,258 − 43,758 − 19,858 − 51,373
Eurosystem + 29,166 + 69,367 + 290,013 + 118,193 − 73,999 − 96,302 − 45,576 − 13,506 − 9,882
General government + 8,888 + 6,647 + 16,113 + 8,902 − 10,174 + 1,208 − 4,421 + 4,071 − 840
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 38,425 + 78,482 − 130,817 − 171,082 + 123,705 + 560 + 626 + 4,589 − 11,479
Long-term − 55,584 − 112,467 − 226,748 − 45,817 − 19,558 − 38,188 − 20,941 − 5,904 + 6,192
Short-term + 17,156 + 190,945 + 95,933 − 125,263 + 143,262 + 38,747 + 21,567 + 10,493 − 17,671
Other sectors − 35,327 − 164,438 − 103,210 + 7,844 − 55,199 − 10,722 + 5,614 − 15,012 − 29,172
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 1,290 − 5,087 − 3,934 − 540 + 5,676 − 2,430 − 408 − 3,035 + 179
Errors and omissions + 10,179 − 14,448 − 30,659 − 11,014 − 19,145 + 7,253 + 7,459 − 986 + 3,362D
* Source: European Central Bank.  
  
68*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
XI External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Financial account Capital trans-
fers and
of which acquisition/
disposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errors
on current Foreign trade Current action and non-financial
Period account trade  1 items  2 Services  3 Income transfers assets Total  4 value  5 Omissions
DM million
1995 − 42,363 + 85,303 − 4,294 − 63,985 − 3,975 − 55,413 − 3,845 + 50,117 − 10,355 − 3,909
1996 − 21,086 + 98,538 − 4,941 − 64,743 + 1,052 − 50,991 − 3,283 + 24,290 + 1,882 + 79
1997 − 17,336 + 116,467 − 7,875 − 68,692 − 4,740 − 52,496 + 52 + 6,671 + 6,640 + 10,613
1998 − 28,696 + 126,970 − 8,917 − 75,053 − 18,635 − 53,061 + 1,289 + 25,683 − 7,128 + 1,724
1999 − 49,241 + 127,542 − 15,947 − 90,036 − 22,325 − 48,475 − 301 − 20,332 + 24,517 + 69,874
2000 − 68,913 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,302 − 54,666 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 11,294
2001 + 830 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 21,382 − 52,526 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 22,994
€ million
1999 − 25,177 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 11,415 − 24,785 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 35,726
2000 − 35,235 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,335 − 27,950 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,775
2001 + 424 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 10,932 − 26,856 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 11,757
2002 + 42,973 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,019 − 27,517 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,313
2003 + 40,931 + 129,921 − 11,142 − 34,497 − 15,067 − 28,283 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,515
2004 + 102,889 + 156,096 − 16,447 − 29,341 + 20,431 − 27,849 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 19,660
2005 + 114,650 + 158,179 − 14,036 − 25,677 + 24,896 − 28,712 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 16,354
2006 + 150,913 + 159,048 − 13,106 − 13,985 + 46,105 − 27,148 − 252 − 174,977 + 2,934 + 24,316
2007 + 191,267 + 195,348 − 9,818 − 13,312 + 50,643 − 31,594 + 134 − 237,280 − 953 + 45,879
2008  r + 165,227 + 178,353 − 12,102 − 12,682 + 44,746 − 33,088 − 90 − 205,398 − 2,008 + 40,260
2006          Q4 + 54,836 + 45,892 − 3,569 + 1,336 + 14,900 − 3,722 − 115 − 37,493 + 642 − 17,228
2007          Q1 + 47,739 + 48,239 − 2,677 − 1,918 + 15,171 − 11,076 + 145 − 49,877 + 100 + 1,993
         Q2 + 42,110 + 48,183 − 2,276 − 1,739 + 2,957 − 5,015 + 364 − 82,845 − 1,359 + 40,371
         Q3 + 43,409 + 50,181 − 2,668 − 9,499 + 14,524 − 9,128 + 306 − 26,896 − 347 − 16,819
         Q4 + 58,009 + 48,745 − 2,198 − 156 + 17,992 − 6,374 − 681 − 77,662 + 653 + 20,335
2008          Q1  r + 49,481 + 50,940 − 3,274 − 877 + 14,848 − 12,156 + 518 − 60,618 − 1,165 + 10,619
         Q2  r + 42,390 + 53,169 − 2,739 − 3,656 + 762 − 5,146 + 324 − 79,466 − 889 + 36,752
         Q3  r + 35,078 + 40,229 − 2,670 − 7,778 + 14,324 − 9,027 − 289 − 13,065 + 1,630 − 21,724
         Q4  r + 38,278 + 34,015 − 3,419 − 370 + 14,812 − 6,759 − 643 − 52,248 − 1,584 + 14,613
2009          Q1  r + 20,805 + 27,506 − 3,168 − 3,752 + 13,412 − 13,193 + 34 + 2,954 + 321 − 23,793
         Q2  r + 23,846 + 31,686 − 2,718 − 3,770 + 1,963 − 3,315 + 305 − 48,524 + 41 + 24,373
         Q3  p + 25,373 + 32,980 − 2,798 − 9,655 + 13,490 − 8,644 − 150 − 5,423 + 2,269 − 19,800
2007          Apr + 13,579 + 14,818 − 586 − 302 + 1,650 − 2,000 + 144 − 23,343 − 1,215 + 9,620
         May + 10,156 + 16,889 − 1,208 − 1,243 − 3,464 − 817 + 293 − 30,764 − 657 + 20,315
         June + 18,375 + 16,476 − 481 − 194 + 4,771 − 2,197 − 73 − 28,738 + 513 + 10,436
         July + 15,120 + 17,780 − 951 − 3,119 + 4,412 − 3,003 + 373 − 2,283 + 121 − 13,210
         Aug + 10,338 + 14,183 − 813 − 4,681 + 4,669 − 3,020 − 54 − 1,911 − 21 − 8,373
         Sep + 17,951 + 18,218 − 905 − 1,699 + 5,442 − 3,105 − 14 − 22,702 − 447 + 4,764
         Oct + 17,766 + 18,851 − 814 − 2,283 + 5,511 − 3,499 − 13 − 31,405 + 309 + 13,652
         Nov + 21,035 + 19,423 − 809 + 184 + 5,828 − 3,591 − 224 − 26,429 + 339 + 5,618
         Dec + 19,207 + 10,472 − 574 + 1,943 + 6,652 + 715 − 444 − 19,828 + 5 + 1,064
2008          Jan  r + 15,395 + 17,066 − 972 − 899 + 4,048 − 3,848 + 447 − 2,085 − 311 − 13,756
         Feb  r + 16,537 + 17,105 − 1,395 + 487 + 5,412 − 5,072 + 217 − 26,980 − 349 + 10,226
         Mar  r + 17,550 + 16,769 − 906 − 465 + 5,388 − 3,235 − 146 − 31,553 − 504 + 14,149
         Apr  r + 15,262 + 19,037 − 869 − 327 − 631 − 1,947 − 64 − 16,002 − 1,089 + 804
         May  r + 7,943 + 14,371 − 1,072 − 2,259 − 2,777 − 321 + 407 − 36,999 + 913 + 28,648
         June  r + 19,185 + 19,761 − 798 − 1,070 + 4,170 − 2,878 − 19 − 26,466 − 713 + 7,300
         July  r + 11,436 + 14,139 − 908 − 3,340 + 4,500 − 2,955 − 123 + 3,118 + 1,225 − 14,431
         Aug  r + 8,170 + 10,814 − 1,043 − 2,927 + 4,584 − 3,258 − 47 − 3,021 − 82 − 5,102
         Sep  r + 15,472 + 15,276 − 719 − 1,512 + 5,241 − 2,814 − 120 − 13,162 + 487 − 2,190
         Oct  r + 14,948 + 16,666 − 972 − 2,146 + 5,208 − 3,808 − 199 − 16,613 − 3,373 + 1,864
         Nov  r + 9,471 + 10,010 − 1,706 − 53 + 4,993 − 3,772 − 84 − 5,037 − 269 − 4,350
         Dec  r + 13,859 + 7,339 − 741 + 1,829 + 4,611 + 821 − 360 − 30,598 + 2,058 + 17,098
2009          Jan  r + 2,403 + 7,083 − 1,145 − 2,718 + 3,470 − 4,287 − 48 + 19,505 + 2,245 − 21,860
         Feb  r + 7,127 + 8,873 − 1,101 − 309 + 4,934 − 5,269 − 83 + 2,594 − 271 − 9,637
         Mar  r + 11,275 + 11,550 − 921 − 725 + 5,008 − 3,637 + 164 − 19,145 − 1,652 + 7,705
         Apr  r + 5,700 + 9,657 − 691 − 695 − 290 − 2,281 + 317 − 14,761 − 590 + 8,744
         May  r + 4,394 + 9,688 − 1,224 − 682 − 2,416 − 973 + 99 − 7,901 + 342 + 3,408
         June  r + 13,752 + 12,341 − 803 − 2,394 + 4,669 − 61 − 112 − 25,861 + 288 + 12,221
         July  r + 11,616 + 14,309 − 1,245 − 3,246 + 4,474 − 2,676 − 171 − 1,137 − 92 − 10,307
         Aug + 4,372 + 8,069 − 849 − 4,299 + 4,506 − 3,055 − 7 − 4,809 + 743 + 443
         Sep  p + 9,385 + 10,602 − 704 − 2,110 + 4,510 − 2,913 + 28 + 523 + 1,618 − 9,936
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, the account of residents and deduction of goods returned. — 3Excluding
exports fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods the expenditure on freight and insurance included in the cif import
for/after repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted figure. — 4Financial account balance including change in reserve assets.
via supplementary trade items. — 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for Capital exports: − . — 5 Increase: − . 
69*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
XI External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2009
Country / group of countries  2006  2007  2008 r May r Jun r Jul r Aug r Sep p Jan / Aug  r 
All countries  1 Exports 893,042 965,236 984,249 516,867 60,120 67,272 69,910 59,253 70,046
Imports 733,994 769,887 805,896 435,297 50,432 54,931 55,601 51,184 59,444
Balance + 159,048 + 195,348 + 178,353 + 81,570 + 9,688 + 12,341 + 14,309 + 8,069 + 10,602
I Exports 657,325 726,518 743,452 384,549 45,125 50,075 50,569 43,792 ...European countries
Imports 512,568 541,650 582,703 312,681 36,769 40,577 39,804 36,117 ...
Balance + 144,757 + 184,867 + 160,749 + 71,868 + 8,356 + 9,497 + 10,765 + 7,675 ...
Exports 564,864 623,837 632,953 330,384 38,896 43,224 43,046 37,556 ... 1 EU member states (27)
Imports 423,731 449,691 478,050 258,120 30,335 33,961 32,939 29,882 ...
Balance + 141,133 + 174,147 + 154,903 + 72,263 + 8,561 + 9,263 + 10,107 + 7,674 ...
Euro-area (16) Exports 385,273 421,570 427,137 226,570 26,711 29,684 29,175 24,967 ...
countries Imports 293,126 307,188 327,207 177,189 20,561 23,238 22,574 20,127 ...
Balance + 92,147 + 114,383 + 99,930 + 49,381 + 6,151 + 6,446 + 6,601 + 4,840 ...
of which
Austria Exports 49,512 52,813 53,841 31,529 3,647 4,087 4,149 3,707 ...
Imports 30,301 32,091 33,148 18,890 2,359 2,431 2,642 2,060 ...
Balance + 19,211 + 20,722 + 20,693 + 12,640 + 1,289 + 1,656 + 1,507 + 1,647 ...
Belgium and Exports 51,141 55,397 56,629 30,409 3,501 3,944 3,788 3,543 ...
Luxembourg Imports 36,263 39,455 43,215 21,030 2,494 2,836 2,707 2,522 ...
Balance + 14,878 + 15,942 + 13,414 + 9,378 + 1,008 + 1,107 + 1,081 + 1,020 ...
France Exports 85,006 91,665 96,859 53,292 6,467 7,255 6,494 5,915 ...
Imports 62,102 62,873 66,710 36,721 4,159 4,889 4,303 4,137 ...
Balance + 22,904 + 28,792 + 30,149 + 16,571 + 2,307 + 2,366 + 2,191 + 1,777 ...
Italy Exports 59,348 64,499 64,003 33,002 3,928 4,327 4,558 2,956 ...
Imports 41,470 44,694 45,962 26,533 3,192 3,337 3,527 2,743 ...
Balance + 17,878 + 19,805 + 18,040 + 6,469 + 736 + 990 + 1,031 + 213 ...
Netherlands Exports 56,531 62,948 65,644 36,172 4,151 4,644 4,589 4,156 ...
Imports 60,750 61,951 72,083 38,164 4,133 5,083 4,914 4,702 ...
Balance − 4,219 + 997 − 6,439 − 1,993 + 19 − 439 − 326 − 546 ...
Spain Exports 41,775 47,631 43,704 19,865 2,435 2,610 2,632 2,101 ...
Imports 19,832 20,687 21,631 12,846 1,620 1,705 1,536 1,241 ...
Balance + 21,943 + 26,944 + 22,073 + 7,019 + 815 + 905 + 1,096 + 860 ...
Other EU member Exports 179,591 202,267 205,816 103,813 12,184 13,540 13,871 12,589 ...
states Imports 130,605 142,503 150,843 80,931 9,774 10,723 10,366 9,755 ...
Balance + 48,986 + 59,764 + 54,972 + 22,882 + 2,410 + 2,817 + 3,506 + 2,834 ...
of which
United Exports 64,726 69,760 66,788 34,425 3,995 4,499 4,988 4,156 ...
Kingdom Imports 40,832 41,966 44,261 21,914 2,815 2,913 2,883 2,570 ...
Balance + 23,895 + 27,794 + 22,527 + 12,512 + 1,180 + 1,586 + 2,105 + 1,586 ...
Exports 92,461 102,680 110,499 54,165 6,229 6,851 7,523 6,236 ... 2 Other European
Imports 88,837 91,960 104,653 54,560 6,434 6,616 6,865 6,235 ... countries
Balance + 3,625 + 10,721 + 5,846 − 395 − 205 + 235 + 658 + 1 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 34,782 36,373 38,990 22,630 2,596 2,813 3,037 2,490 ...
Imports 25,227 29,822 31,161 18,765 2,225 2,191 2,529 2,042 ...
Balance + 9,556 + 6,551 + 7,829 + 3,865 + 370 + 622 + 508 + 449 ...
II Exports 234,139 237,139 249,568 136,125 15,480 17,663 19,828 15,886 ...Non-European
Imports 220,745 227,569 235,187 128,769 14,380 15,154 16,586 15,783 ... countries
Balance + 13,393 + 9,570 + 14,381 + 7,356 + 1,100 + 2,510 + 3,242 + 103 ...
Exports 16,617 17,575 19,700 11,007 1,270 1,352 1,489 1,246 ... 1 Africa
Imports 16,734 16,457 20,572 9,224 1,037 1,103 1,205 1,218 ...
Balance − 117 + 1,118 − 872 + 1,783 + 234 + 249 + 285 + 28 ...
Exports 104,154 100,769 101,952 50,495 5,471 6,543 6,944 5,409 ... 2 America
Imports 72,163 71,276 72,939 41,104 4,842 4,943 4,883 4,616 ...
Balance + 31,991 + 29,493 + 29,013 + 9,391 + 629 + 1,600 + 2,062 + 793 ...
of which
Exports 77,991 73,327 71,467 35,218 3,829 4,812 4,792 3,391 ... United States
Imports 49,197 45,993 46,060 27,070 3,269 3,050 3,157 2,867 ...
Balance + 28,795 + 27,334 + 25,407 + 8,148 + 560 + 1,761 + 1,635 + 524 ...
Exports 106,991 111,691 120,300 70,179 8,194 9,107 10,777 8,677 ... 3 Asia
Imports 128,942 136,411 138,663 76,589 8,315 8,881 10,301 9,747 ...
Balance − 21,951 − 24,721 − 18,363 − 6,410 − 120 + 226 + 476 − 1,070 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 22,978 23,709 27,591 14,888 1,725 1,806 2,226 1,581 ...
Imports 6,295 6,444 7,957 3,381 455 363 465 540 ...
Balance + 16,682 + 17,265 + 19,634 + 11,507 + 1,270 + 1,443 + 1,762 + 1,042 ...
Japan Exports 13,886 13,022 12,806 6,904 770 872 1,072 797 ...
Imports 24,016 24,381 23,087 11,808 1,330 1,476 1,403 1,319 ...
Balance − 10,130 − 11,359 − 10,281 − 4,904 − 560 − 604 − 331 − 522 ...
Exports 27,478 29,902 34,096 22,787 2,748 3,071 3,487 3,064 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 49,958 56,417 59,378 34,832 3,700 4,042 4,860 4,457 ... of China  2 
Balance − 22,479 − 26,515 − 25,282 − 12,045 − 952 − 971 − 1,373 − 1,392 ...
Exports 31,619 32,284 32,609 17,622 2,049 2,299 2,838 2,190 ... Emerging markets
Imports 36,113 35,357 32,783 17,615 1,845 2,066 2,386 2,271 ... in South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 4,494 − 3,073 − 175 + 7 + 204 + 233 + 452 − 82 ...
Exports 6,377 7,104 7,616 4,444 544 661 617 554 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,906 3,425 3,013 1,852 187 227 197 202 ... polar regions
Balance + 3,471 + 3,679 + 4,603 + 2,591 + 357 + 435 + 420 + 352 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, region. Excluding repair and maintenance operations from January 200 7 on-
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of wards. — 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indo-
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by Thailand. 
70*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
XI External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
2004 − 29,341 − 35,302 + 3,870 + 1,328 − 260 + 5,349 − 4,325 − 1,363 + 986 − 989 + 21,420
2005 − 25,677 − 36,317 + 6,356 + 1,622 − 1,203 + 3,688 + 177 − 1,638 + 3,086 − 1,285 + 26,182
2006 − 13,985 − 32,771 + 5,690 + 2,185 − 1,861 + 3,736 + 9,037 − 1,795 + 3,885 − 685 + 46,790
2007 − 13,312 − 34,324 + 6,730 + 2,854 − 2,167 + 3,310 + 10,285 − 1,966 + 2,875 + 449 + 50,194
2008 − 12,682 − 34,646 + 7,802 + 3,916 − 2,129 + 2,338 + 10,036 − 1,585 + 2,277 + 654 + 44,092
2008          Q1 − 877 − 6,010 + 1,634 + 884 − 704 + 559 + 2,759 − 426 + 538 + 654 + 14,193
         Q2 − 3,656 − 8,686 + 1,849 + 656 − 359 + 595 + 2,288 − 338 + 576 + 132 + 630
         Q3 − 7,778 − 14,722 + 2,205 + 804 − 795 + 645 + 4,084 − 319 + 807 − 331 + 14,655
         Q4 − 370 − 5,228 + 2,114 + 1,572 − 271 + 539 + 904 − 503 + 357 + 199 + 14,613
2009          Q1 − 3,752 − 5,926 + 2,020 + 837 − 1,167 + 625 − 141 − 361 + 255 + 599 + 12,813
         Q2 − 3,770 − 8,741 + 1,751 + 819 − 379 + 618 + 2,161 − 262 + 392 + 145 + 1,818
         Q3 − 9,655 − 15,141 + 1,040 + 716 + 52 + 611 + 3,068 − 268 + 491 − 384 + 13,874
2008          Nov − 53 − 1,146 + 548 + 449 − 21 + 159 − 42 − 145 − 1 + 30 + 4,963
         Dec + 1,829 − 461 + 865 + 557 − 39 + 198 + 709 − 217 + 323 + 119 + 4,492
2009          Jan − 2,718 − 1,495 + 574 + 193 − 1,336 + 146 − 800 − 136 + 15 + 168 + 3,302
         Feb − 309 − 1,768 + 778 + 284 + 143 + 168 + 85 − 109 + 149 + 203 + 4,730
         Mar − 725 − 2,662 + 667 + 359 + 25 + 311 + 574 − 116 + 91 + 228 + 4,781
         Apr − 695 − 2,309 + 713 + 361 − 218 + 215 + 543 − 94 + 167 + 55 − 345
         May − 682 − 2,848 + 580 + 234 + 0 + 200 + 1,151 − 78 − 94 + 45 − 2,461
         June − 2,394 − 3,584 + 458 + 224 − 161 + 202 + 467 − 90 + 320 + 45 + 4,624
         July − 3,246 − 4,578 + 506 + 251 − 140 + 175 + 541 − 101 + 298 − 135 + 4,609
         Aug − 4,299 − 5,917 + 240 + 257 + 239 + 221 + 661 − 96 + 96 − 125 + 4,631
         Sep − 2,110 − 4,645 + 294 + 207 − 47 + 215 + 1,866 − 71 + 97 − 124 + 4,634
1From January 2001, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
2004 − 27,849 − 16,694 − 14,249 − 12,672 − 2,444 − 11,156 − 3,180 − 7,976 + 435 − 1,095 + 1,529
2005 − 28,712 − 17,588 − 16,264 − 14,687 − 1,324 − 11,124 − 2,926 − 8,198 − 1,369 − 3,419 + 2,050
2006 − 27,148 − 14,512 − 14,900 − 13,356 + 388 − 12,637 − 2,927 − 9,710 − 252 − 1,947 + 1,695
2007 − 31,594 − 16,264 − 18,662 − 16,890 + 2,398 − 15,329 − 3,005 − 12,324 + 134 − 2,036 + 2,170
2008 − 33,088 − 16,805 − 19,545 − 17,556 + 2,739 − 16,283 − 3,122 − 13,161 − 90 − 1,784 + 1,694
2008          Q1 − 12,156 − 8,480 − 8,306 − 7,650 − 174 − 3,676 − 781 − 2,896 + 518 − 270 + 788
         Q2 − 5,146 − 774 − 4,836 − 4,310 + 4,061 − 4,371 − 781 − 3,591 + 324 − 361 + 685
         Q3 − 9,027 − 4,843 − 4,416 − 3,998 − 427 − 4,185 − 781 − 3,404 − 289 − 368 + 79
         Q4 − 6,759 − 2,709 − 1,987 − 1,598 − 721 − 4,051 − 781 − 3,270 − 643 − 785 + 142
2009          Q1 − 13,193 − 9,041 − 8,553 − 7,844 − 488 − 4,151 − 762 − 3,390 + 34 − 400 + 434
         Q2 − 3,315 + 510 − 2,100 − 1,645 + 2,611 − 3,825 − 753 − 3,072 + 305 − 300 + 605
         Q3 − 8,644 − 5,039 − 4,122 − 3,600 − 917 − 3,605 − 753 − 2,851 − 150 − 352 + 202
2008          Nov − 3,772 − 2,608 − 2,230 − 2,096 − 378 − 1,164 − 260 − 904 − 84 − 123 + 40
         Dec + 821 + 2,620 + 2,657 + 2,799 − 37 − 1,800 − 260 − 1,539 − 360 − 524 + 164
2009          Jan − 4,287 − 2,682 − 2,650 − 2,330 − 32 − 1,604 − 255 − 1,349 − 48 − 121 + 73
         Feb − 5,269 − 4,075 − 3,737 − 3,553 − 338 − 1,194 − 255 − 939 − 83 − 121 + 38
         Mar − 3,637 − 2,284 − 2,165 − 1,961 − 119 − 1,353 − 251 − 1,101 + 164 − 159 + 323
         Apr − 2,281 − 950 − 2,053 − 1,920 + 1,103 − 1,331 − 251 − 1,080 + 317 − 102 + 419
         May − 973 + 331 − 1,354 − 1,266 + 1,685 − 1,304 − 251 − 1,053 + 99 − 90 + 190
         June − 61 + 1,129 + 1,307 + 1,541 − 178 − 1,190 − 251 − 939 − 112 − 108 − 4
         July − 2,676 − 1,395 − 1,111 − 872 − 285 − 1,281 − 251 − 1,030 − 171 − 115 − 56
         Aug − 3,055 − 1,928 − 1,546 − 1,369 − 382 − 1,128 − 251 − 877 − 7 − 98 + 91
         Sep − 2,913 − 1,716 − 1,465 − 1,359 − 251 − 1,196 − 251 − 945 + 28 − 140 + 168
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
71*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
XI External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2008 2009
Item 2006 2007 2008 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 472,902 − 695,904 − 241,260 + 124,301 + 46,047 − 75,293 + 41,407 + 33,401 − 11,272 + 19,278
1 Direct investment  1 − 101,409 − 131,177 − 106,813 − 22,532 − 9,387 − 17,466 − 12,839 + 1,271 − 4,867 − 9,244
Equity capital − 73,971 − 49,448 − 60,334 − 13,185 − 18,737 − 13,439 − 10,907 − 3,041 − 2,881 − 4,985
Reinvested earnings  2 − 32,868 − 36,741 − 27,648 − 6,648 − 6,738 − 2,845 − 5,446 − 957 − 2,247 − 2,242
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors + 5,430 − 44,988 − 18,831 − 2,699 + 16,088 − 1,182 + 3,513 + 5,269 + 262 − 2,017
2 Portfolio investment − 158,251 − 145,507 + 27,871 + 74,375 − 7,073 − 28,272 − 17,123 − 16,241 − 1,488 + 605
Shares 3 + 6,505 + 23,056 + 39,177 + 13,973 + 571 − 1,410 − 44 − 1,378 + 1,369 − 36
Mutual fund shares  4 − 23,638 − 41,586 − 8,606 + 13,612 − 136 − 1,147 − 1,135 − 3,073 − 548 + 2,487
Bonds and notes  5 − 133,723 − 105,260 − 20,195 + 20,659 − 13,433 − 28,150 − 18,587 − 9,405 − 4,350 − 4,832
Money market instruments − 7,396 − 21,718 + 17,496 + 26,131 + 5,925 + 2,435 + 2,642 − 2,385 + 2,042 + 2,985
3 Financial derivatives  6 − 6,179 − 85,939 − 25,559 + 10,204 + 2,912 + 709 − 5,964 + 1,049 − 5,031 − 1,983
4 Other investment − 209,996 − 332,327 − 134,751 + 63,837 + 59,274 − 30,305 + 75,065 + 47,413 − 630 + 28,282
MFIs  7,8 − 207,666 − 224,876 − 73,931 + 67,403 + 104,777 + 1,597 + 71,039 + 22,356 + 1,398 + 47,285
Long-term − 71,625 − 96,840 − 144,313 − 19,313 − 70 − 15,926 + 18,192 + 3,617 + 6,341 + 8,234
Short-term − 136,041 − 128,036 + 70,382 + 86,716 + 104,847 + 17,523 + 52,846 + 18,738 − 4,942 + 39,051
Enterprises and households − 27,888 − 50,152 − 19,021 + 13,275 − 15,463 + 3,149 − 2,163 + 3,810 − 2,288 − 3,686
Long-term − 23,810 − 46,973 − 18,697 − 266 − 1,029 + 3,323 − 10,852 − 5,214 − 6,124 + 486
Short-term  7 − 4,078 − 3,179 − 324 + 13,541 − 14,433 − 174 + 8,689 + 9,024 + 3,837 − 4,172
General government + 1,068 + 8,425 + 2,801 − 1,148 + 4,972 − 15,679 + 14,173 + 12,152 − 1,979 + 3,999
Long-term + 7,497 + 309 − 334 + 338 − 348 − 389 − 30 − 14 − 15 − 1
Short-term  7 − 6,428 + 8,117 + 3,135 − 1,486 + 5,320 − 15,289 + 14,203 + 12,166 − 1,964 + 4,000
Bundesbank + 24,488 − 65,724 − 44,600 − 15,692 − 35,012 − 19,372 − 7,982 + 9,096 + 2,238 − 19,316
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase:-) + 2,934 − 953 − 2,008 − 1,584 + 321 + 41 + 2,269 − 92 + 743 + 1,618
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 297,925 + 458,624 + 35,862 − 176,549 − 43,092 + 26,769 − 46,830 − 34,538 + 6,463 − 18,755
1 Direct investment  1 + 45,552 + 41,211 + 14,526 + 4,309 + 1,430 + 9,058 + 9,426 − 1,324 + 6,032 + 4,718
Equity capital + 31,044 + 32,101 + 12,406 + 992 + 3,730 − 451 + 4,087 + 188 + 3,843 + 56
Reinvested earnings  2 + 86 − 305 + 4,336 + 1,507 + 2,578 + 693 + 964 − 134 + 573 + 525
Other capital transactions
of foreign direct investors + 14,422 + 9,415 − 2,217 + 1,810 − 4,878 + 8,816 + 4,375 − 1,378 + 1,616 + 4,137
2 Portfolio investment + 145,974 + 297,880 + 15,997 − 38,001 − 3,300 + 34,878 + 1,022 − 16,727 + 21,758 − 4,009
Shares  3 + 19,824 + 39,189 − 49,282 + 2,919 − 8,210 − 595 + 14,151 + 4,841 + 1,991 + 7,319
Mutual fund shares + 8,079 + 3,939 − 5,822 − 2,699 + 292 − 46 − 635 − 924 − 334 + 624
Bonds and notes  5 + 120,901 + 203,298 + 23,258 − 45,276 − 17,650 + 3,740 − 25,950 − 30,279 + 13,321 − 8,993
Money market instruments − 2,830 + 51,454 + 47,843 + 7,055 + 22,268 + 31,779 + 13,456 + 9,635 + 6,780 − 2,959
3 Other investment + 106,400 + 119,533 + 5,340 − 142,857 − 41,223 − 17,167 − 57,278 − 16,487 − 21,327 − 19,464
MFIs  7,8 + 59,305 + 73,218 − 58,481 − 154,863 − 21,117 − 11,648 − 45,741 − 7,313 − 20,672 − 17,756
Long-term − 13,092 − 14,195 + 11,592 + 4,911 − 3,539 − 3,816 − 4,565 − 518 − 4,639 + 592
Short-term + 72,397 + 87,413 − 70,073 − 159,774 − 17,578 − 7,832 − 41,176 − 6,795 − 16,033 − 18,348
Enterprises and households + 48,588 + 38,001 + 43,262 + 16,060 − 8,406 − 4,316 − 10,799 − 5,070 − 6,253 + 524
Long-term + 29,705 + 18,493 + 23,339 + 6,831 − 3,005 + 316 − 3,400 − 402 − 2,371 − 627
Short-term  7 + 18,883 + 19,508 + 19,924 + 9,229 − 5,401 − 4,632 − 7,399 − 4,668 − 3,882 + 1,151
General government − 206 − 3,034 + 6,207 − 7,705 + 11,738 − 3,820 + 711 − 1,884 + 4,508 − 1,914
Long-term + 835 − 2,759 − 1,189 − 15 − 492 − 972 − 180 − 2 − 188 + 10
Short-term  7 − 1,040 − 276 + 7,396 − 7,690 + 12,230 − 2,848 + 891 − 1,882 + 4,697 − 1,924
Bundesbank − 1,287 + 11,349 + 14,351 + 3,651 − 23,439 + 2,617 − 1,449 − 2,220 + 1,090 − 318
III Financial account balance  9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 174,977 − 237,280 − 205,398 − 52,248 + 2,954 − 48,524 − 5,423 − 1,137 − 4,809 + 523
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including retained statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9Financial account balance including change
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. — 7The trans- in reserve assets. 
72*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
XI External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
in the
Inter- Liabilities
national arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from external
Fund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
 
 
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-
national claims on
Monetary Other residents
Fund and claims on Claims in other Net external
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area position Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 less
or month Total Total rights reserves (net)  2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2008          May 200,042 92,387 62,311 2,518 27,558 350 104,777 2,528 24,450 175,592
         June 206,618 95,220 64,930 2,495 27,796 350 108,553 2,495 23,498 183,120
         July 203,949 93,722 64,108 2,468 27,146 350 107,259 2,617 25,121 178,827
         Aug 217,137 93,048 62,296 2,539 28,213 350 121,103 2,636 26,641 190,496
         Sep 215,889 99,936 68,808 2,623 28,504 350 112,975 2,628 26,756 189,133
         Oct 183,398 97,415 62,655 2,773 31,987 350 83,214 2,419 38,598 144,801
         Nov 213,908 104,612 70,131 3,476 31,005 350 106,395 2,551 33,778 180,130
         Dec 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009          Jan 258,620 109,963 78,633 3,462 27,869 350 145,706 2,601 21,988 236,631
         Feb 275,770 113,507 81,893 3,455 28,159 350 159,318 2,594 16,983 258,786
         Mar 274,458 107,809 75,726 3,463 28,620 350 163,681 2,618 7,527 266,931
         Apr 272,318 105,577 73,476 3,482 28,619 350 163,774 2,618 8,538 263,781
         May 261,878 107,375 75,646 4,599 27,130 350 151,664 2,490 9,175 252,703
         June 290,738 104,691 72,955 4,493 27,243 350 183,052 2,645 10,121 280,617
         July 282,460 104,931 72,586 4,694 27,651 350 173,956 3,222 7,900 274,560
         Aug 291,882 115,309 72,998 15,186 27,124 350 171,719 4,506 8,972 282,910
         Sep 314,396 116,785 74,913 16,268 25,604 350 191,035 6,227 8,641 305,756
         Oct 292,775 119,584 77,320 16,163 26,101 350 166,341 6,500 9,038 283,737
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
73*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
XI External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2005 409,493 97,333 312,160 179,738 132,422 125,497 6,925 548,107 65,557 482,550 375,114 107,436 73,270 34,166
2006 450,228 117,723 332,505 190,300 142,205 134,057 8,148 624,790 95,019 529,771 408,907 120,864 79,900 40,964
2007 509,178 162,654 346,524 196,178 150,346 139,842 10,504 651,736 111,543 540,193 405,674 134,519 82,979 51,540
2008 553,466 173,255 380,211 227,055 153,156 140,521 12,635 710,506 147,242 563,264 427,011 136,253 79,982 56,271
2009          Apr  r 570,991 199,246 371,745 232,020 139,725 126,864 12,861 717,170 156,142 561,028 434,980 126,048 67,204 58,844
         May  r 568,249 193,775 374,474 232,669 141,805 128,808 12,997 716,091 150,574 565,517 438,179 127,338 68,567 58,771
         June  r 572,560 193,969 378,591 232,597 145,994 133,025 12,969 723,731 149,907 573,824 437,431 136,393 78,288 58,105
         July  r 568,103 193,205 374,898 230,395 144,503 131,664 12,839 722,354 145,322 577,032 440,607 136,425 77,377 59,048
         Aug  r 568,689 197,749 370,940 231,817 139,123 126,358 12,765 723,037 151,162 571,875 440,942 130,933 71,347 59,586
         Sep 574,827 200,336 374,491 231,347 143,144 130,654 12,490 726,903 149,300 577,603 442,522 135,081 77,293 57,788
Industrial countries 1
 
2005 362,704 95,847 266,857 167,314 99,543 94,278 5,265 508,106 63,924 444,182 364,680 79,502 60,907 18,595
2006 396,649 115,269 281,380 174,784 106,596 100,541 6,055 570,675 93,560 477,115 389,770 87,345 66,210 21,135
2007 452,354 160,666 291,688 180,564 111,124 103,104 8,020 591,015 110,291 480,724 384,794 95,930 69,347 26,583
2008 489,431 171,387 318,044 207,807 110,237 101,003 9,234 646,454 145,045 501,409 404,820 96,589 68,150 28,439
2009          Apr  r 511,206 197,957 313,249 212,093 101,156 91,838 9,318 652,831 154,131 498,700 412,866 85,834 57,120 28,714
         May  r 508,006 192,482 315,524 212,470 103,054 93,605 9,449 651,782 148,546 503,236 416,218 87,018 58,097 28,921
         June  r 511,916 192,583 319,333 212,234 107,099 97,723 9,376 659,533 147,987 511,546 415,388 96,158 67,821 28,337
         July  r 507,191 191,886 315,305 210,182 105,123 95,822 9,301 657,355 143,297 514,058 418,291 95,767 67,069 28,698
         Aug  r 507,537 196,499 311,038 211,545 99,493 90,270 9,223 657,353 149,032 508,321 418,560 89,761 60,660 29,101
         Sep 512,865 198,842 314,023 211,252 102,771 93,787 8,984 661,218 147,224 513,994 419,027 94,967 66,281 28,686
EU member states 1
 
2005 270,808 91,882 178,926 108,523 70,403 66,156 4,247 414,377 60,186 354,191 300,022 54,169 41,305 12,864
2006 308,720 108,982 199,738 121,929 77,809 72,902 4,907 479,025 86,343 392,682 332,871 59,811 45,202 14,609
2007 364,105 154,644 209,461 127,080 82,381 75,942 6,439 490,004 105,022 384,982 319,539 65,443 46,262 19,181
2008 398,833 164,762 234,071 151,391 82,680 75,192 7,488 539,153 137,208 401,945 334,298 67,647 46,190 21,457
2009          Apr  r 419,958 190,009 229,949 154,114 75,835 68,436 7,399 557,761 144,328 413,433 352,879 60,554 38,819 21,735
         May  r 418,898 185,106 233,792 155,758 78,034 70,551 7,483 559,399 140,229 419,170 357,304 61,866 39,889 21,977
         June  r 421,945 184,967 236,978 155,565 81,413 74,004 7,409 566,676 139,582 427,094 357,098 69,996 48,515 21,481
         July  r 419,114 184,256 234,858 155,428 79,430 72,081 7,349 563,452 134,972 428,480 358,485 69,995 48,185 21,810
         Aug  r 419,337 188,520 230,817 155,834 74,983 67,685 7,298 561,802 140,511 421,291 357,127 64,164 42,062 22,102
         Sep 423,275 191,323 231,952 154,724 77,228 70,165 7,063 564,789 138,343 426,446 357,666 68,780 47,042 21,738
of which:  Euro-area member states 2
 
2005 175,532 59,160 116,372 69,048 47,324 44,369 2,955 332,261 29,443 302,818 268,483 34,335 25,225 9,110
2006 207,868 77,056 130,812 79,901 50,911 47,614 3,297 369,648 38,878 330,770 292,178 38,592 28,340 10,252
2007 251,718 118,112 133,606 79,745 53,861 49,537 4,324 368,088 56,632 311,456 269,865 41,591 28,964 12,627
2008 281,518 130,226 151,292 96,968 54,324 49,408 4,916 418,021 81,703 336,318 292,893 43,425 29,768 13,657
2009          Apr  r 293,678 143,294 150,384 101,503 48,881 43,941 4,940 441,102 86,876 354,226 314,153 40,073 26,526 13,547
         May  r 293,584 142,959 150,625 101,711 48,914 43,961 4,953 443,533 86,121 357,412 317,555 39,857 26,328 13,529
         June  r 293,314 141,657 151,657 101,679 49,978 45,026 4,952 450,397 86,678 363,719 321,540 42,179 28,993 13,186
         July  r 290,436 141,595 148,841 100,625 48,216 43,310 4,906 449,952 83,904 366,048 323,774 42,274 28,662 13,612
         Aug  r 292,911 145,397 147,514 100,749 46,765 41,840 4,925 450,366 88,594 361,772 321,996 39,776 25,819 13,957
         Sep 296,775 148,812 147,963 99,968 47,995 43,262 4,733 453,973 88,348 365,625 323,093 42,532 28,830 13,702
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2005 46,789 1,486 45,303 12,424 32,879 31,219 1,660 40,001 1,633 38,368 10,434 27,934 12,363 15,571
2006 53,579 2,454 51,125 15,516 35,609 33,516 2,093 54,115 1,459 52,656 19,137 33,519 13,690 19,829
2007 56,824 1,988 54,836 15,614 39,222 36,738 2,484 60,721 1,252 59,469 20,880 38,589 13,632 24,957
2008 64,035 1,868 62,167 19,248 42,919 39,518 3,401 64,052 2,197 61,855 22,191 39,664 11,832 27,832
2009          Apr 59,785 1,289 58,496 19,927 38,569 35,026 3,543 64,339 2,011 62,328 22,114 40,214 10,084 30,130
         May 60,243 1,293 58,950 20,199 38,751 35,203 3,548 64,309 2,028 62,281 21,961 40,320 10,470 29,850
         June 60,644 1,386 59,258 20,363 38,895 35,302 3,593 64,198 1,920 62,278 22,043 40,235 10,467 29,768
         July 60,912 1,319 59,593 20,213 39,380 35,842 3,538 64,999 2,025 62,974 22,316 40,658 10,308 30,350
         Aug 61,152 1,250 59,902 20,272 39,630 36,088 3,542 65,684 2,130 63,554 22,382 41,172 10,687 30,485
         Sep 61,962 1,494 60,468 20,095 40,373 36,867 3,506 65,685 2,076 63,609 23,495 40,114 11,012 29,102
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in January 2007, including Bulgaria and Romania. — 2From January 2007,
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in including Slovenia; from January 2008, including Cyprus and Malta; f rom
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases January 2009, including Slovakia. — 3All countries that are not regarded as
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- industrial countries. 
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table XI.7. — 1From
74*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
XI External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2007          Dec 1.6703 1.4620 10.7404 7.4599 163.55 8.0117 9.4319 1.6592 0.72064 1.4570
2008          Jan 1.6694 1.4862 10.6568 7.4505 158.68 7.9566 9.4314 1.6203 0.74725 1.4718
         Feb 1.6156 1.4740 10.5682 7.4540 157.97 7.9480 9.3642 1.6080 0.75094 1.4748
         Mar 1.6763 1.5519 10.9833 7.4561 156.59 7.9717 9.4020 1.5720 0.77494 1.5527
         Apr 1.6933 1.5965 11.0237 7.4603 161.56 7.9629 9.3699 1.5964 0.79487 1.5751
         May 1.6382 1.5530 10.8462 7.4609 162.31 7.8648 9.3106 1.6247 0.79209 1.5557
         June 1.6343 1.5803 10.7287 7.4586 166.26 7.9915 9.3739 1.6139 0.79152 1.5553
         July 1.6386 1.5974 10.7809 7.4599 168.45 8.0487 9.4566 1.6193 0.79308 1.5770
         Aug 1.6961 1.5765 10.2609 7.4595 163.63 7.9723 9.3984 1.6212 0.79279 1.4975
         Sep 1.7543 1.5201 9.8252 7.4583 153.20 8.1566 9.5637 1.5942 0.79924 1.4370
         Oct 1.9345 1.5646 9.1071 7.4545 133.52 8.5928 9.8506 1.5194 0.78668 1.3322
         Nov 1.9381 1.5509 8.6950 7.4485 123.28 8.8094 10.1275 1.5162 0.83063 1.2732
         Dec 2.0105 1.6600 9.2205 7.4503 122.51 9.4228 10.7538 1.5393 0.90448 1.3449
2009          Jan 1.9633 1.6233 9.0496 7.4519 119.73 9.2164 10.7264 1.4935 0.91819 1.3239
         Feb 1.9723 1.5940 8.7406 7.4514 118.30 8.7838 10.9069 1.4904 0.88691 1.2785
         Mar 1.9594 1.6470 8.9210 7.4509 127.65 8.8388 11.1767 1.5083 0.91966 1.3050
         Apr 1.8504 1.6188 9.0110 7.4491 130.25 8.7867 10.8796 1.5147 0.89756 1.3190
         May 1.7831 1.5712 9.3157 7.4468 131.85 8.7943 10.5820 1.5118 0.88445 1.3650
         June 1.7463 1.5761 9.5786 7.4457 135.39 8.9388 10.8713 1.5148 0.85670 1.4016
         July 1.7504 1.5824 9.6246 7.4458 133.09 8.9494 10.8262 1.5202 0.86092 1.4088
         Aug 1.7081 1.5522 9.7485 7.4440 135.31 8.6602 10.2210 1.5236 0.86265 1.4268
         Sep 1.6903 1.5752 9.9431 7.4428 133.14 8.5964 10.1976 1.5148 0.89135 1.4562
         Oct 1.6341 1.5619 10.1152 7.4438 133.91 8.3596 10.3102 1.5138 0.91557 1.4816
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative rates. — 2Average from 13 January to
exchange rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference 29 December 2000. 
exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. —
12 Irrevocable euro conversion rates in Stage III of European Economic and Monetary Union
As of Country Currency ISO currency code Euro 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
75*XI External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
E U R O S Y S T E M
Monthly Report
November 2009
XI  External  sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-21  1 EER-41  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
23 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
23 terms the deflators labour terms Non-
based on of gross costs of based on Euro- euro- selected
36 36 56 consumer domestic national consumer area area industrial
Zeit Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 6 countries  4 countries  5 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.0 95.8 96.5 96.4 95.8 97.7 99.5 95.6 97.7 98.1 98.0 97.6
2000 86.8 86.4 85.7 85.5 87.8 85.8 91.6 97.2 85.1 91.0 92.8 91.8 90.8
2001 87.5 87.1 86.5 84.8 90.1 87.0 91.4 96.0 85.9 90.5 92.9 91.3 90.8
2002 89.9 90.4 89.6 87.9 94.7 91.0 92.1 95.2 88.5 91.1 93.6 92.0 91.9
2003 100.5 101.6 100.5 98.7 106.7 102.0 95.6 94.2 97.5 94.9 97.3 96.6 96.9
2004 104.3 105.5 103.6 102.7 111.2 106.0 96.1 93.1 100.1 95.3 98.8 98.2 98.6
2005 103.3 104.6 102.6 101.2 109.7 104.1 94.9 91.7 99.2 93.6 98.9 97.4 97.3
2006 103.7 105.0 102.4 100.7 110.1 103.9 94.0 90.2 99.1 92.4 99.1 97.2 96.8
2007 107.9 109.0 105.8 103.8 114.3 107.2 95.4 89.5 103.6 93.5 101.7 99.2 98.7
2008 113.0 113.6 110.4 109.2 120.0 111.1 96.0 88.1 107.2 p 93.7 103.5 100.1 99.6
2006          Feb 101.1 102.5 100.9 99.1 106.8 100.9 93.5 90.6 97.5 91.9 98.2 96.1 95.4
         Mar 101.9 103.4 107.6 101.7 98.4 96.4 95.7
         Apr 103.0 104.6 108.8 102.9 98.9 97.0 96.3
         May 104.0 105.5 102.8 101.2 110.5 104.5 94.2 90.4 99.3 92.7 99.2 97.4 97.1
         June 104.2 105.7 111.1 105.0 99.2 97.6 97.5
         July 104.5 106.1 111.3 105.2 99.4 97.7 97.5
         Aug 104.6 106.0 103.0 101.5 111.3 105.1 94.1 90.0 99.6 92.6 99.2 97.4 97.2
         Sep 104.4 105.7 111.1 104.7 99.0 97.2 96.9
         Oct 103.9 105.2 110.5 104.1 99.2 97.2 96.8
         Nov 104.6 105.8 103.0 100.9 111.2 104.7 94.2 89.8 100.1 92.5 99.7 97.6 97.3
         Dec 105.7 106.7 112.5 105.6 100.3 98.1 97.8
2007          Jan 105.0 106.2 111.6 104.9 100.3 98.1 97.6
         Feb 105.5 106.7 103.8 101.6 112.0 105.2 95.0 90.1 101.5 93.1 100.5 98.3 97.8
         Mar 106.3 107.3 112.9 105.9 100.7 98.4 98.0
         Apr 107.3 108.6 113.9 106.9 101.4 99.0 98.6
         May 107.5 108.7 105.5 103.4 113.8 106.8 95.5 89.8 103.3 93.6 101.6 99.1 98.5
         June 107.1 108.3 113.3 106.3 101.4 98.8 98.2
         July 107.8 109.0 114.1 107.1 101.9 99.2 98.6
         Aug 107.3 108.4 105.9 103.5 113.9 106.7 95.4 89.3 103.7 93.4 101.3 98.7 98.3
         Sep 108.4 109.5 114.9 107.6 102.0 99.4 98.9
         Oct 109.6 110.7 116.0 108.4 102.6 99.8 99.1
         Nov 111.2 112.2 108.1 106.7 117.8 110.1 95.9 88.7 106.0 93.8 103.6 100.8 100.3
         Dec 111.5 112.2 117.8 109.8 103.5 100.5 99.9
2008          Jan 112.2 112.9 118.5 110.4 103.6 100.5 99.9
         Feb 112.0 112.5 110.2 108.7 118.4 110.0 96.6 88.7 107.7 94.4 103.5 100.2 99.6
         Mar 114.8 115.6 121.8 113.4 104.6 101.5 101.2
         Apr 116.3 116.9 123.4 114.5 105.0 101.6 101.3
         May 115.8 116.6 113.1 112.3 122.7 113.9 97.5 88.2 110.8 95.0 105.0 101.5 101.1
         June 115.8 116.5 122.7 113.8 104.9 101.2 100.7
         July 116.2 116.7 123.2 114.1 105.3 101.3 100.9
         Aug 113.9 114.1 111.5 110.0 120.3 111.2 96.5 87.8 109.0 p 93.8 104.0 100.1 99.3
         Sep 112.0 112.1 118.7 109.4 102.9 99.2 98.5
         Oct 107.9 108.3 115.4 106.4 100.5 97.3 96.8
         Nov 107.1 107.5 106.7 105.7 114.5 105.6 93.4 87.8 101.3 p 91.6 100.3 97.1 96.7
         Dec 112.4 112.9 120.3 111.0 102.5 99.6 99.4
2009          Jan 111.9 112.3 119.9 110.4 102.2 99.4 99.2
         Feb 110.4 110.7 109.3 109.3 118.6 109.1 94.2 88.2 102.6 p 93.0 101.1 98.9 98.8
         Mar 113.3 113.5 121.6 111.7 102.3 99.9 99.8
         Apr 112.5 112.8 120.5 110.6 102.3 99.6 99.2
         May 113.0 113.2 110.4 110.1 120.9 110.9 p 95.3 p 88.5 104.9 p 93.9 102.5 99.7 99.3
         June 114.0 114.2 122.0 112.0 103.0 100.3 100.0
         July 113.8 113.7 121.9 111.5 102.8 99.9 99.6
         Aug 113.9 113.9 ... ... 122.0 111.7 ... ... ... ... 103.0 100.1 99.7
         Sep 115.2 115.0 123.5 112.7 103.5 100.6 100.2
         Oct 116.6 116.3 124.6 113.6 104.1 101.1 100.7
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of based on the trade in manufactured goods between 1999 and 2001 and
the currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the reflect third-market effects. Where price and wage indices were not
German economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure available, estimates were used. — 2ECB calculations. This group includes
used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see not only the countries belonging to the EER-21 group (see footnote 1) but
Monthly Report, November 2001, pp  51-65, May 2007, pp  32-37 and May also Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
2008, p  40). For details of the methodology see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russian
September 2004, pp  69-72 as well as the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  2, Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. —
which can be downloaded from the ECB’s website (www.ecb.int). A decline 3Annual and quarterly averages. — 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. — 1ECB calculations including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus
are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral and Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia) as well as the non-euro-area
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: countries (Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Unit ed
Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Hong Kingdom and United States). — 5Euro-area countries and countries
Kong, Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, belonging to the EER-21 group. — 6Owing to missing data for the deflator
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United of total sales, China is not included in this calculation. — 7Euro-area
States. The weights used in these calculations during the period shown are countries and countries belonging to the EER-41 group (see footn ote 2). 
76*XI  External sector

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic and
statistical publications by the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-
cated, these publications are available
in both English and German, in printed
form and on the Bundesbank’s web-
site.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Communication Div-
ision. For a small fee to cover costs, a
file which is updated monthly and
contains approximately 40,000 time
series published by the Bundesbank
can be obtained on magnetic tape cas-
sette or CD-ROM from the Division
Statistical data processing, math-
ematical methods. Orders should be
sent, in writing, to one of the ad-
dresses listed on the reverse of the title
page. Selected time series can also be
downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2008 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2009 Monthly Report.
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009

Monthly Report articles
December 2008
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2009 and 2010
– The euro ten years on – the German economy
in monetary union
January 2009
– Bank Lending Survey: an interim assessment
and current developments
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2007
– The Basel Framework in practice – implement-
ing the Basel advanced approaches in Ger-
many
February 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2009
– German balance of payments in 2008
– Price convergence in the euro area
– Cashless payments in Germany and the role of
the Deutsche Bundesbank
April 2009
– Wage setting in Germany – new empirical find-
ings
– Short-term forecasting methods as instruments
of business cycle analysis
May 2009
– The current economic situation in GermanyJune 2009
– Outlook for the German economy – macroeco-
nomic projections for 2009 and 2010
– Growth effects of permanently high energy
prices: recent evidence for Germany
– The development and determinants of euro
currency in circulation in Germany
July 2009
– Corporate earnings and share prices
– Demographic change and the long-term
sustainability of public finances in Germany
– Recent developments in German and European
retail payments
August 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2009
– Developments in lending to the German pri-
vate sector during the global financial crisis
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2008
– Amendments to the new EU Capital Require-
ments Directive and the Minimum Require-
ments for Risk Management
October 2009
– The development of government investment
– Firm-level and aggregate output volatility
November 2009
– The current economic situation in Germany
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)
5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,
November 19962
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 19972
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19992
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20032
Die Europ/C228ische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und W/C228h-
rungsunion, April 20052
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20062
European economic and monetary union,
April 2008
Special Statistical Publications*o
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, January 200932 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, September 20092, 4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
July 20082, 4
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2008,
June 20094
5 Extrapolated results from financial statements
of German enterprises 1994 to 2003, March
20064
6 Ratios from financial statements of German
enterprises 2004 to 2005, February 20084
7 Erl/C228uterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis f/C252r die
Zahlungsbilanz, March 20092
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2005
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics,
April 20091, 4
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2009
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, June 20082
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2009
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Available in German only.
3Solely available on the website, updated at half-yearly
intervals. Only the sections “Preliminary remarks“,
“Monthly balance sheet statistics”, “Borrowers’ statis-
tics“, “External positions report” and “Customer classifi-
cation” are available in English.
4Available on the website only.*Unless stated otherwise, these publications are avail-
able on the Bundesbank’s website in German and Eng-
lish.
oNot available on the website.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
EUROSYSTEM
Monthly Report
November 2009
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Studies
22/2009
Do we really know that flexible exchange rates
facilitate current account adjustment? Some new
empirical evidence for CEE countries
23/2009
More or less aggressive? Robust monetary policy in
a New Keynesian model with financial distress
24/2009
The debt brake: business cycle and welfare conse-
quences of Germany’s new fiscal policy rule
25/2009
Price discovery on traded inflation expectations:
Does the financial crisis matter?
26/2009
Supply-side effects of strong energy price hikes in
German industry and transportation
27/2009
Coin migration within the euro area
28/2009
Efficient estimation of forecast uncertainty based
on recent forecast errors
29/2009
Financial constraints and the margins of FDI
30/2009
Unemployment insurance and the business cycle:
Prolong benefit entitlements in bad times?
31/2009
A solution to the problem of too many instruments
in dynamic panel data GMMSeries 2
Banking and Financial Studies
10/2009
The dark and the bright side of liquidity risks:
evidence from open-end real estate funds in
Germany
11/2009
Determinants for using visible reserves in German
banks – an empirical study
12/2009
Margins of international banking: Is there a prod-
uctivity pecking order in banking, too?
13/2009
Systematic risk of CDOs and CDO arbitrage
14/2009
The dependency of the banks’ assets and liabilities:
evidence from Germany
15/2009
What macroeconomic shocks affect the German
banking system? Analysis in an integrated micro-
macro model
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 20092
2a Solvabilit/C228ts- und Liquidit/C228tsverordnung, Feb-
ruary 20082
*Discussion Papers which appeared from 2000 onwards
are available on the website.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

